To the Reader.
(...)minated, and him self decyphered, by the infallyble word of God: he
now (I say) doubles and tryples his inventions, (as by the sequel shall
appear) twenty times ten fold, to subvert and overthrow the true
professors of the same Wherefore, as in a myrrour, I deliver this unto thee,
(gentle and loouing Reader) manifesting by this my emulation, most of his ledger
demaynes, against God, and our lawful Kings and Governors. Farewell.

L. Ramsey.

The Practice of the Devil.
I Satan most cursed, and child of perdition,
Envy hate and malice, the time that is present:
Spytefully complaining, in every condition,
Against all the world, and all States resident:
For putting down the Pope, my Vicar superintendent,
Oh England, England, thou bring me in a rage,
By Preaching true Doctrine, in this thy latter age.
But seeing that from Heaven, for pride I was cast,
Down into the Helles, in pains perpetual:
Assure then your selves, as long as time shall last,
Like a roaring Lion, aun Tiger tyrannycall:
I will poison your hearts, with sects diabolical,
With Atheists, with Papists, with Epicures and Scribes,
As Caine and Beniamyne, were horror to the Tribes.
I will raise up Sedicion, Lust and self Love,
Wylfulnesse and Ignorance, and carnal affection:
That God and all Verity, I will seek to reprove,
Reuerting their minds, to devilish subjection:
By slaundering and lying, to breed such infection,
That all honest meaning, both of young and old,
Shall clean be perverted, and void of all hold.
Anabaptists and Arrians, shall every where associate,
Pelagians and Libertines, in like shall bear a sway:
Usurers and dissemblers, by clusters shall accumulate,
That none shall trust other, before the latter day:
Treason, theft, and murder, shall one an other slay.
By Magic and Witchery, I mind you so to trouble,
That one sin before, shall now be ten double.
Parasites and Flatterers, I will make so to abound,
That Truth shall be defaced, and stand aloof behind:
Avarice and Covetousness, shall compass every ground,
That few shall have credit, freendship to find,
Wauerers and Neuters shall houer in the wind,
That Sycophants and brablers, pre-eminence shall have,
To predicate and iudicate, before the wise and grave.
Hypocrisy, I know my Child to be assured,
To live in all Ages, he has Will sufficient:
In all kinds of Religion, he is well inured,
A Doctor in all Arts, to propone an argument:
Square Cappe and Typpet, the fellow shall be decent,
To creep in among them, he practices to endeuer,
That I the Devil his father, may extol him for ever.
Blasphemy and Perjury, shall be mates for the rout,
Flattery and lying, shall be counted great courtesy:
With Whordome, I will infect the world throughout,
And that shall be Love, cloked with great honesty,
Drunkenness and Gluttony, shall be counted great temperancy.
Covetousness Wisdom, Wantonness but Youth,
These are my practices, to blot or dym the Truth.
Infamy and slander, shall run from place to place,
Against Gods Preachers, or professors of the same:
Terming them Puritans, if ought they have of Grace,
Exclayming of their lyberties, to hinder their good name:
All that ever is right, I will bring out of frame.
For the malice I bear, to England at this season,
I will stir up unspeakable, diverse kinds of Treason.
By Magic and Sorcerie, such practice I will work,
Respecting no degree, if of God he do smell:
More cruel then the Tiger, more diuellishe then the Turk,
More madder then Saul, more vile then Iezabell:
More stubborn then Pharao, more false then Achytophell.
More traitor then Judas, more unnatural then Caine,
More villain then Absalon, which by Ioab was slain.
More Tyrant then Antyochus, or any of his kind,
As Herodeor Nero, that tyrant most odious:
With Phalaris and Domitian, with thousands I could find,
That to God in this world, have been most opprobrious:
But yet in respect of my mind malicious,
They are all but counterfeyts, to that which I intend,
For the spyte that I bear, to the world in the end.
Like a roaring Lion, I rampe, stamp, and stare,
Watching just hour, my pray to obtain:
Arise Infidelytie, void of all care,
Arise Hypocrisy, thy Father to maintain:
Arise Suspicion, and all Ceremonies vain,
Arise up rank heresies, against God and his Christ,
Arise my Papists, and defend the Pope your Priest.
Arise up Dunce and Dorbell, and stand to your Sacrament,
And spare for no Logic, their natures to alienate:
Of Bread into Flesh, I think it convenient,
And Wine into Blood, quick for to translate:
I might be more siner, with transubstanciate.
But ye know my meaning, my own sweet Boys,
I speak to you Papists, to revive my joys.
Peter Lombardus, and Thomas of Aquyne,
Eckius and Anselm, Prelates of some trust:
Arise I say quickly, with your doctrine Serpentine,
And fill me the world, with your rank Rebel rust:
Your Books does remain, though your bodies be dust.
Whereby that some seed, in this time may grow,
To the praise of your father, which full well ye do know.
Arise up Hyldebrand, for now it is hye time,
To poison the world, by one mean or other:
Thrust in all helps, slander, lie, and crime,
Play as Alphoncius, played vy his own Brother:
Stryke out their brains be it Father or Mother,
As Cayne did Abell, and I will you reward,
With wild fire and Brimstone, or else it shall go hard.
Arise up Becker, Traitor to thy King,
Sweat, swear and swell, against all those proceedinges:
That faith, light or rise, by any means bring.
Resist it betymes, and I will further your speedinges:
And what I can do, to hinder their feedinges,
Assure your selves, as Satan is my name,
An adversary I am, and will perform the same.
Arise up Dun^s^^, Wolston, and Gooderick,
Arise up all ye Scorpious of Rome:
Arise up Benedick, Frauncis, and Domynick,
Arise up all the Papisticall some:
Out with your Portises, and defend my kingdom?
Your Grayelles, and A^^yueners, Legendare and all,
Cross, Cope, and Candlesstick, is else like to fall.
Beswinge them with holy Water, and ring out your Bells,
Blind them with Pardons, disple down their sins:
Bleare them with Idols, and many things else,
As Dirge, Mattens, and Mass, for scabbes and sore shinnes:
Some of Requiem some of Scala cali, not worth two pinnes,
Yet out with them, though I am driven to that need,
That all will be to little, now to do the deed.
Stand to it Stapleton, Dorman and Harding*
And Rastall that rakehell, to mainteyne my order:
Bonner and Gardener, are worth the regarding,
For keeping my Articles, so long in this border:
Do Story, Story, thou art worthy of Recorder,
Thou stoodst to it stoutly, against God and King.
And at Tiborne desperately, gave me an offering.
Friar Forest, and all his merry mates,
Did yield me the like, with heart and good will:
They pulled of their Cowles, and hanged all save the pates,
In the honor of me, and thought it not ill:
And Sir Thomas More, likewise at Tower hill,
Lost there his head, for denying the King,
To do supreme head, and for no other thing.
What should I speak, what feats have been wrought,
By Hypocrites and Papists, my Children natural:
What Rebellion and sedicion, by them has been sought,
Against King and Realm, it is known in general:
Lincolneshyre, and Yorkshyre, were first the original,
And then came the West parts, with courage lustily,
To defend the Mass, and the grounds of Papistry.
But now alas, their cloyning is so spide,
That no way but fly, quite over the Sea:
In England but a few, in respect I can hide:
The Gospel so be wrayes their obscured knauerie.
But yet some do escape, by the mean of Hypocrisy,
And bears it out braglie, and little will say,
For few words is best, they hope for a day.
And those that are fled, out of Countries foil,
Have friendship priuelie to their contentation,
And watch for the vauntage, to come to some spoil,
Greeting by Letters, their whole generation,
By subtle cyphering, is their demonstration,
Alluring the rest, to stand to their hope,
That the day is coming to have again their Pope.
Well, I will help, and reason to you know,
To plant in these plaintiues, with all that I can:
With all devise possible, to seek to overthrow,
All true obedience, and fidelity from man:
Therefore mark what I say, and mark what I scan,
By Hypocriste and pollycie, as I said before,
I will augment my kingdom, twice as much more.
One thousand years, in captivity I was,
And so restrained from my liberty and will:
That nothing to my purpose, I could bring to pass,
Which now makes me hungry, to work double ill:
Respecting no person, but all I would kill,
By all devise possible, to infect them with evil,
Lo, this is my practice, being Satan the devil.
Wherefore my own Boys, ye Papists in general,
Masculine and* Feminine, of either kind and gender:
Work for your Father, and his kingdom infernal,
That double torments, for your pains I may render:
Blase out my benefits, that they be not slender,
Kingdoms I can give, beauty and renown.
To as many as before me, will stoop and fall down.
Regard not these Preachers, but sclaunder them as thus,
That they be but men, and preach for lucres sake:
Again, how they are proud, and too too covetous,
Vicious, lascivious, and can both mar and make:
Praters and liars, which nothing do but crak^
And how that their Wives are like ^their degre^,
Like Curtizans of Venice, for ought that all men sees.
Their Children are by Law, called ^llegitymats,
Hold in that Law to prove their Marriage vile:
And seek by all means, their doings to contaminate.
To bring in contempt, and Gods v^^ to exile:
Be crafty my B^^s, these Prote^^t to beguile.
Be Usurers among them, and do what ye can,
Against right and reason, to hurt every man.
I charge my fair Papists. (...) and birth (...)
That has Vicaridge (...) in th^^ ^^ds to bestow^:
To give it those (...) which knows not (...) B^^
Nor yet can discern the (...) from the Crow
They are Curates good enough, they s^^nd but for a show,
To mumble out the matter, of that which comes next,
Making men believe, that their lies in the ^ent.
Then let the learned sort, of the Papists and do use ane,
Powder so their Phrases, with reasons sophistical:
Alleging ancient custom, and what tofore has been,
From Fathers unto Fathers, and Bishops pontifical:
From Council to Council, and laws Canonycall,
To say it must be thus, and that stands with (...).
Though Scripture to the contrary, co^mau^ds that to draw.
And ever keep in corners, a Psalter of Saint Mary,
A Challice and a Pare, for Mass if need require:
A Crewsible and a Stone, called Superaltary,
A Ship for your Franckencense, and a Pan for your Fire:
A Saints bell beside, to ring all in the Quire,
That when the blessed Host, shall come over his head,
The very body of Christ, a lie in form of bread.
As for Vestments and Coapes, excuse them by pretense,
That Cushins and Curtens, of them ye will make:
If ye chance to be spied, ye see that the offense,
Is but a hundred Marks, for our God in a Cake:
Ye shall be borne withal beside, for your friends sake,
The penalty is not great, I think it not too much,
Because that I do know, my Papists are too rych.
Externlie be covetous, and cappe to every Dog.
Give openly to the poor, that all the world may see:
In secrets be as gentle, as any ravening Hog,
And for love give nothing, but all for vain glory:
Exclude the Scriptures, and bid them read the story
Of Robin hood, and Guye, which was both tall and stout,
And Beuis of Southampton, to seek the matter out.
With these and such like, persuade them day by day,
To read and learn, yea perfectly by heart:
The Scriptures will but breed, great heresies, so say,
And make them to despair, in searching every part:
Bid them follow their vocation, and that is Plough and Cart,
For Tinckers and Cobblers, it is nothing convenient,
To desire to know the weight of Gods commandment.
Make their burdens heavy, and yours to be but light,
As the Pharasies did, to whom was cried woe:
And more then this, ye must call the black all whight,
And the white the black, with other lyings more:
And how that sprites do walk, if one do cry but boe,
And that Souls in purgatory, for pardon still do cry,
For a thousand days and od, and say it is no lie*
For other kind of Ceremonies, that holy is to name,
As holy Water, holy Bread, holy Fire, holy Oil:
Holy Beads holy Candle, holy Smoke, holy Flame,
Holy Ground, holy Church, holy Sanctuary soil:
Holy Bells, holy Banners, holy Horse, holy Moyle,
These are the common people to induse.
By the reason that long time, has brought them out of use.
But if the world change, as you look that it should,
And as my Magicians, by Art so does hope,
Assure your selves Villains, and thereof be bold,
These Ceremonies shall up, by the power of the Pope:
Yea, and the Sacrament too, shall be hanged in a Rope,
Over the hye Alter, as it was wont to be,
And honored as God, both with cap and knee.
Munkes, Nuns and Friars, black, white, and graie,
Chanons, Anckres, and Anckresses, all shall up again:
Pilgrimages, and Chapels, standing by the hie way,
Crosses, single and double, for Saint Jones to be plain:
Gang days, and Procession, with other trifles vain,
Displing and Confession, for our stunes in Lent,
All must up again, my Papists has so meant.
Practice, prate and Conjure, play Siluesters part,
Or Hildebrand that hell hound most execrable:
Poison Prince, or King, and consume them by Art,
As diverse have been stirred, by the Romish rabble:
Flatter, lie, and cogge, at every man's Table,
Having blind Prophecies, and whisper in their ear,
That ere long we shall have, great change of this gear.
Hang together like burres, against these prating Protestants,
Charge them to live ill, and out of all good order:
Term them breeders of sects, and painted Presscians,
And how they Preach for money, in every border:
Seek Scriptures against them, and many a false Recorder,
Beelie them in corners, yet flatter to their face,
Till just time shall serve, their state to disgrace.
Your nature of it self, has practices unspeakable,
As occasion serves, so prosecute your minds:
And I your old Father, will be to you as favorable,
And work by all means, to further your kinds:
Seem Angels of light, which all the world blindes,
But be very Woolues, if need do so require,
That once again in time, we may have our desire.
Persecute these Protestants, as long as ye have breath,
Ye see in security, they lull them selves a sleep:
Fraught with all idleness, and great fears of death,
Tymerous and weak, faint hearted like Sheep,
Breakers of promise, no touch they will keep,
The Papist is more constant, for all their protestation,
And so give it out, to every Congregation.
These and such sclaunders, on them ye must raise.
As carnal cauyllers, to maynteyne their affection:
Like flatterers and dissemblers, in these latter days,
Not seeing their selves, but all others correction:
Proud puffed Prelates, which stands upon election,
Precise Hypocrites, rebukers of others works,
When secretly them selves, are worse then any Turks.
Thus ye must handle, your cloynings by clouting,
And whisper in corners, this world will not last:
In every honest thing, make you a doubting,
To turn all good meanings, as a iugling cast:
That thing that is to come, say you it is past.
As the Resurrection, the chief hope and joy:
Like Saduces and Epicures, seek you it to annoy.
I speak to you Papists, which are of some calling,
Settled in security, no Law to detect you:
Face out these Protestants, with facing and bralling,
Calling them beggars, and why should they correct you:
Ye have Statute against them, if they once suspect you.
Or call you Papists, either though Papists ye be:
Suffer no such crime, against your Hypocrisy.
Other means there is, and mark my practice well,
Link with them in Marriage, much for honors sake:
Your Sons with their Daughters, for a thing that I smell,
Your Daughters with their Sons, iu^ ioynter to take:
This conjunction copulative, I my self will make,
Knowing that the Woman, within a year or twain,
Will turn my new Gospeller, to old custom again.
As Iezabell did Achab, oh my own Deuile,
As the Amonites and Edomytes, caused the wise Solomon,
To commit Idolatry, and the hie God to despise,
So let your Daughters be the like patron:
And to make them deleeue, there is no God to Mammon,
Drawing their minds; both at ^ed and at board,
Clean from the truth, and to deny the Lord.
Also I charge you, to succor help and inde;
All obscure Papists, yea, Traitors in effect:
Blind Chaplains in your hyntes, you need not be afraid,
The Laws has that charity, that none shall you correct.
Let Scholemaisters likewise all yonglings infect,
And keep them in their house, your Family to teach,
To ^out, ^eare, and mock, those that truth do preach.
And within your lyberties, if any tyrant dwell,
That praties of the Testament, either old or new:
Remove me that fellow, and say he is a rebel,
A Jack, a busy body, of the little flock or crew:
Join so your friendship, whatsoever then ensew,
That twenty for one, may then be on your side,
Your knaueries to maintain, and your treasons to hide.
And then your abilities, your credife shall advance,
Your friendship by Marriage, shall complaint qualify:
That in twenty miles compass, without it be a chance,
None shall dare say, once against your Papistrie:
Marry some will think that you are Apostasy,
Because in times past, ye were great professors,
And now are become, even my own successors.
And I will about to Rome, and to Spain,
And stir up your Pope, great part for to take:
With Galleys, with Men, to help to maintain,
His friends in all parts, for me the Devils sake:
In every Princes Court, some spies I will make,
To see and not see, till time shall be meet,
Then Letters within Letters, shall trot about the street.
Bulls, curses, and Pardons, in cornors shall be lost,
And Images of wax, in dunghyls shall be found:
Coniuring to consume, the best in every cost,
To frustrats the truth, and vice for to abound:
And eke the professors, to have them hanged or drowned,
This is my intent, and to this I set my hand,
Like a Devil incarnate, to poison every Land.
And specially this England, which clearly has exilde,
The Pope my own Boy, and all his supreme power:
As Monks, Nuns, and Friars, whose lying has beguilde,
Every Christian Realm, time day and hour:
Altering all sweet things, to intolerable sower,
These I say are void, which now makes me so mad,
That thousands I will revenge, if it be to be had.
Respecting no man, for this ye do know,
That Christ I assaulted, and little could prevail:
He was too strong for me, when it came to the shows,
His power was so great, I began for to quail:
He had me anoide, and I turned my tail*
But as for the rest, that now are here behind,
Are less in the spirit, and more shall know my mind.
For I see that all men, given to self love,
And affection so rules, nowo in every condition:
That easily I may enter, and my practice prove,
In every Estate, without fear or Commission:
And most I know by text are children of perdicion,
Then have among my own, given me by providence,
Reproved by God, for their beastly insolence.
Hardened is their hearts, more obstinate then Pharao,
That they cannot repent, so stony is their hearts:
As traiterous as Judas, as tyrannous as Nero,
As letcherous as Goats, more vile in all parts:
Babylonicall Hoores, mates for all Martes,
Liars, flatterers, defilers of Virginity,
Breakers of wedlock, detesters of Divinity.
Fraught with vain glory, far beyond measure,
Pufte up with pride, excessive in Apparel:
Covetous as Devils, insaciate in Treasure:
As malicious as Mahound, more ready to quarrel,
As dronken as Bacchus, sitting on a Barrel:
As poison as Adders, as gentle as curre Dogs,
As filthy as carrion, as rausnous as Hogs.
These are one sort of the Babylonicall kind,
An other more finer, their pray to allure:
Adulate creepers, in corners far behind,
Soothing those things, which is lykest to endare:
Well seen in Palmestrie, and in Physic sure,
To whisper with the Feminine, of Venus and her ginnes,
Proving their complexion, not for their Husbands skins.
In the blind world, as the Heretics do it call,
Then took I most ease, my mischeefes to prefarre:
The Popes Traditions, by force of Laws canonical,
Did always fight for me, all godliness to mar:
I let them burn and hang, and seek them where they ware,
While I lay at mine ease, in hell with flaming fires,
With Popes, Bishops, and Munks, with fat grow head Friars,
And of every sort some, I need not them to name,
Of both kinds and genders, of hye and low degree:
Many a mynsing Nun, and many a noble Dame,
In hell is now resident, which dines and suppes with me:
As Semiramis and Cleopatra, which lived all in glory,
Flora and Lais, gyrles of such report,
That since their time, the proudest may come short.
What shall I speak of Nemroth, buylding so hie,
That God he moude to wrath, by his great ambition:
A Tower for to rear: he meant to touch the Sky,
The wonder of the world, a large and great commission:
What should I speak of Pharao, the like proved condition,
Which through the red Seas, his power so would lead,
In the spite of God, which all does excende.
Holophernes and Herod, had like aspiring minds,
And diverse other, which in Stories I have read:
The Devil is not ignorant, of his own proper kinds,
Which God threw down, and made their doings dead:
Innumerable there have been, as before I said,
Which in working mischief, in this world did excel,
That now take reward, with me the Devil of hell.
Wherefore my own Boys my council now observe,
And my practices also put in execution:
And rich I can make you, if that your turn will serve,
By giving you liberty, by my institution:
To oppress, to extort, without restitution,
To powle, pill, and pinch, by force power and might,
By hook, crook, and council, be doing day and night.
Let all things be common, goods, maid, and wife,
Take time while time is, there is no resurrection:
Be not beastly cowards, but stir up all strife,
To Princes and Rulers, be in no subjection:
A fig for the Laws, pass for no correction,
Stir up sedition, rebellion and filthy lies,
And swear it out like tyraunts, for God he has no eyes.
Search about for sects, of all sorts and kinds,
Mainteyne your affections, make Scriptures but a cloak:
Let that be your Religion, that best please your minds,
Stand upon self will, and by craft seek to choke
Simple honest men; if argument they provoke,
And say they have no skill, truth to understand,
But if they will receive, let them takte at your hand.
Loose no kind of credit, in your spiritual function,
Say that you be called, as plainly does appear:
Bind the people whole to some old Iniunction,
That has not been in print, this forty, or fifty year:
Tell them you are Lords, over Town and Sheare,
Strive with them for tithes, to keep them in good awe,
To keep their heads occupied, in following of your Law.
And then may you the whiles, preach and teach your fill,
And call them rascal rebels, which no order will keep:
Forbid them Communion, seek their souls to kill,
Like a raging Woolfe among the simple Sheep:
And when the poor does cry, be you fast a sleep,
Yet speak you to the parish, their charity to extend,
But take you all and give nothing, to neither foe nor friend.
And where you are constrained, to preach once a quarter,
Or else to hyre one four times in the year:
Preach me such stuff, as includes no great matter,
As works for to justify, when says is nothing near:
All out of Apoerypha, let your words appeers,
Or else by vain fables, as Ovid or Horace,
To beautify your sentence, like a glorious Ass.
Meddle not with Christ, nor with his holy Passion;
Nor yet with faith, neither say it is unsearchable:
Come not near Election, nor Gods Predestination,
It is no meat for Mowers, to be talked at their table:
And how the new Testament, is all inscrutable.
Put them in a fear to drive them from the love,
For running into errors, your argument to prove.
And some of you be gentle, and subtle as the Fox,
Hold in with the rychest, and ducke at every word:
That if the time should change, and God again in box,
Ye were an honest man, and thereof take record:
Play on both hands, for that will best accord,
To prevent the times, howsoever they fall out,
And you to have the place, of that you go about.
Marry not in any wise, for that is greatest charge.
But borrowe of your neighbors, as I will you assign:
And against those that do marry, speak somewhat large,
Their children to be bastardes, and breed unlawful line:
Their Wives to be Peacockes, or Mistress new divine,
These terms ye must have, Virtue to disgrace,
While you like usurpers, may creep into their place.
Suffer all sclaunder, against God and his truth,
And praise the old fashion, in king Arthurs days:
Of Abbaies, of Monasteries, how it is great rueth,
To have them plucked down, and so the eldest says:
And how it was merry, when Robin hoods plays,
Was in every Town, the Morris and the fool,
The May poll, and the Drum, to bring the Calfe from school.
With Megge, Madge, and Marian, about the poll to dance,
And Stephen that tall stripling, to lead Volans dale:
With roging Gangweeke, a goodly remembrance,
With Banners all a flaunt, with Cakes, Cheese, and Ale:
With beads in every hand, our Prayers stood by tale,
This was a merry world, talk among your meany,
And then of good Eggs, ye might have twenty for a penny.
With this and such paultrie, when ye see time and place,
And the people apt, this way to be fead:
Step in for a vauntage, and exclude Gods grace,
Let the blind lead the blind, this text I have read:
For in keeping them blind, without clear discerning,
Ye make them subject, and reserve your own learning,
Ye see and you know, that all is not clear,
Because that some profit on them does depend:
As Aduent, Lent, and rynging all the whole year,
Organs and singing, I know not to what end:
Images in Glass windows, and none will it amend,
Crisome cloth and offeringes, still they do stand,
Because they bring profit, my Boys to this Land.
Bishoprics and Benefices, my own Child the Pope.
Enlarged unto thousands, and still they do stand:
And made them Lord Bishops, because they should not slope,
Where Christ had no sea, nor money in his hand:
When Caesar should have custom, in Scripture it is scand,
Peter went a fishing, money in fish to find,
To pay the full duty, as Christ had him assignde.
But go you a fleashing, ye have no such power,
But yet gather money, for that will help at need:
Ye see and ye know, at this present hour,
That all the packes of Prelates are covetous in deed:
For some of them I know, so much in wealth exceed.
That Usurers they be, and yet do serve the cure,
These be old Boys, to make their living sure,
Corn masters beside, and learn to buie and sell,
Thus ye must blase them, and perchance say true:
But whether it be or no, I the Devil of hell,
Do teach you to practice, their names to subdue:
Be busy among them, both with old and new,
And you shall have my blessing, for all your lewd works,
Among all Reprobates, Infidels and Turks.
Out upon Luther, Wycklese, and Zwynglius,
For they wrought my spoil, by their predycation:
Out upon Caluyne, and Oecolampadius,
Out upon Tyndale, and all his generation:
Out upon Bale for by his demonstration,
The whole Realm of England, received such light,
That world without end, I bear them all spite.
Ye out of all Protestants, all Papists now cry,
And specially those that set out large Books:
As the Bible and Testament, or the holy Euangelie,
A pockes light upon them, that on them often looks:
They have caught my son, the Pope in such hooks,
That in England now he is little regarded,
But as by Antichrist, is often rewarded.
Bale with his Pageant of Popes, has set them so out.
Their whole lives and trades, and all their conditions:
The Image of Iniquity, has rypt every dout.
That the Pope is known, the father of Superstitions:
Caluy^ne again, with his Book of Institutions,
Has so unabled the Popes cannon laws,
That all that is Romish, is not worth two strawes.
Yea and diverse others, against him have written,
As Fox in his Book, that Monuments he calls:
Which the Popes guts out of his belly has bitten,
By arguments strong, has thrown the Popes bralles:
But by fire and faggot, I sought all their falls,
And will do still, my malice to satisfy,
Against these Heretics, which do vex me daily.
Farewell my Babes, and new borne Apostates,
Farewell my Papists, and whoremonger villains:
Farewell all Epicures, and all dronken balde pates,
Farewell my Chaplains, most filthy fountains:
Farewell my dissembling knaves, that heaps like mountains
Farewell my Hypocrites, fraught with adulation,
For I must to hell, to prepare your damnation.
FINIS.
Laurence Ramsey.

Imprinted at London for Tymothie Rider, and are to be sold at the little
North door of Paul's Church, at the sign of the black Boy, by Henry Kyrkham.


