TWENTY NINE LECTVRES OF THE CHVRCH; Very necessary for the consolation and
support of Gods Church, especially in these times:

Wherein is handled, first, in general concerning first, the Name; secondly,
the Titles; thirdly, the Nature, fourthly, the division of the true Church:

Secondly, of the visible Church; first, the Definition secondly, the Causes;
thirdly, the Members; fourthly, the Marks and Notes; fifthly, the Government;
sixthly, the Privileges; seventhly, the Adversaries; eighthly, the Authority:

And lastly, the application of it to all Churches in the World so far as
they are known to us.

By that Learned and Faithful Preacher, Master JOHN RANDALL, Bachelor of
Divinity, Pastor of Saint Andrews Hubbart in little Eastcheape, London, and
sometimes Fellow of Lincoln College in Oxford.

Published by the Coppie perfected and given by the Author in his life time;
carefully preserved and adorned with Notes in the Margent, by the late
faithful Minister of Christ, Master William Holbrooke.

Glorious things are spoken of Thee, O City of God.

Psalm. 87.3. London, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Nathanael Newbery, at the
Star in Pope's Head Alley. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, TRVLY RELIGIOUS, AND MY much honored Friend, Mr.
Richard Knightly, of Preston-Capes, in the County of Northampton, Esquire, and
one of his Majesty's Justices of Peace in the same County, Grace and peace be
mulplied, etc.
Worthy Sir,
IT is a Proverb no more common than true, that True Love will creep where it
cannot go; as appears in that fact of Mary Magdalen, who wishing well to the
person of Christ, she washes his feet; yea, it will begin below at the
ground, to ascend up to the top; as Zacheus when he climbed the figtree to get
the sight of Christ. Love to Christ will show it self by a love of his Church,
and ascend to him in heaven, by speaking a good word for it, and seeking and
procuring her welfare here on earth. Matthew. 28.
It is that spiritual Temple to which Christ has promised his perpetual
presence during the time of this world. And it is the duty of every Christian,
so far as in him lies, to further the building thereof, according to that of
Chrysostom Hom. in Act. 8. (...), that every one of the faithful ought to
edify the Church. Jf they can do naught else, yet let them imitate David's
pattern, Psalm. 51.18. And hearken to his precept, Psalm. 122.6 Suitable to the
practice of the Jews in the building of the Temple; some did give one gift,
some another, some did labor in hewing, squaring, others in bringing, and
bearing them to the raising up of the structure. But especially is the burden
of this work laid upon the shoulders of Ministers, which like Bezaleel and
Aholiab, are fitted and furnished of God for this work, and have the cure and
care thereof committed to them. Now the Lord has not given to all alike, but
to some more, some less; yet all for the good of his Church. To the Author of
this Treatise he had given more than ordinary gifts, as his works already
published do show. He had the honor to be a wise Master Builder, to be like
those builders in Nehem. 4.17. with one hand he wrought in the work, with the
other he held a weapon, as you shall see apparently in this Treatise, wherein
he does confirm professed truths, and confute opposite errors. It pleased
God, whilst he was living, to make him an happy instrument of staying many in
the Church, who were ready to fall from it, and to gain many in, which by
seducements had been drawn away. And as God gave such success to his Labors
when he was alive; So, J trust, they shall find the same, though he be dead, if
read with a single eye. I dare assure you it is not the Treatise of any other,
but of him, whose labors need not fear the Light. It was perfected by his
own hand in his life, and given to a near, and dear friend of mine, who
rests in the Lord, who had hoped to have published it in his life, but being
called away ere he could effect it, J have endeavored to help to bring it
forth to light, and J do here dedicate it to your Worship, whose worthy care
and earnest desire I know is, so far as in you lies, to further the good of
the Church. J might say much of your worth to the world, but those that do not
know you, will think I flatter; those that do, will think J say too little.
But what Solomon says of the virtuous woman, Prou. 31. vlt. so I of you, your
own works praise you in the gates. And as Boaz said to Ruth, Ruth 3.11.
so may J of you, changing the words a little; All the people, not only of
that place where you live, and I was borne, but all the people of that country
know you to be a virtuous Gentleman. Go on, good Sir, stand for God, and he
will stand for you, honor him, and as he has, so he will honor; and what
service J may do you by my prayers, or otherwise, you shall be assured of. The
Lord bless you and yours, and all your ample and religious kindred.

Your Worships in any thing J may, to be commanded Ithiel Smart.

THE FIRST LECTVRE OF THE CHVRCH.
Your Question is, What is a true visible Church.

Having spoken of God in the first place, and of Christ in the second place; it
now follows in the third place, that we speak of the Church, wherein we will
stand upon these two general Points: First, an Introduction to prepare the way
to the question; secondly, we will descend to the question it self.

First, the Introduction, First, the order of the question is natural:
and that consists of two branches; first, we will show, that the order of the
question is very natural: secondly, that the matter is of great weight and
importance. First, the order of the questions amongst themselves, and so our
work and manner of proceeding is very natural, and that first in respect of
God, First, in respect of God in the first question.
in the first question; and secondly in respect of Christ, in the second
question; and thirdly in respect of all the three questions laid together.

First, in respect of God; for our faith having been first informed and
instructed concerning God himself, the Author and worker of all; it is then
in the next place to be informed touching his works, and amongst them first
and principally of the first and chiefest of them all, that is, the Church. For
the Church is Gods own special workmanship, formed by his own hand,
separated as a peculiar people to his own Majesty, consecrated to his own
worship and service, gathered by his own Word, purchased by his own Son,
quickened and directed by his own Spirit, and ordained from all eternity, in
his own secret Council, to be partakers of his own glory. Besides, of all
the works that God exercises toward his Creatures, the greatest and best are
they that God exercises toward his Church, as Election, Calling,
Justification, Sanctification, Glorification, etc. Yea further, whatsoever God
does work besides in the administration of the World, he does it respectively
to his Church, for the good and benefit of his chosen. There being then such a
near conjunction betwixt God and the Church, and the Church carrying the
precedence above all other of Gods works that are; who sees not, that the
doctrine concerning the Church does very closely depend upon the Doctrine
concerning God; and therefore having been informed and instructed in the
Doctrine concerning God, it follows naturally that we now be instructed in the
Doctrine concerning the Church.

^econdly, in re^ect of Christ.
Secondly, the order is as natural in respect of Christ in the second question;
for there is a more immediate and far nearer communion betwixt the Church and
Christ in particular, then betwixt the Church and God in general: for Christ
is the King, the Church is the Subject; Christ is the purchaser, the Church his
possession; he is the Shepherd, they his Sheep; he is the Vine, they the
Branches; he is the Head, they his Body; he is their Husband and they are his
Spouse: and therefore except we will dis-sunder these whom God has joined most
nearly together, after we have spoken of Christ, it follows next and
immediately that we speak of his Church. You heard in the second question,
that Christ was incarnate, and that he was a fit Mediator betwixt God and
Man. Now in this third question we are to hear, who they are for whom he was
incarnate, and for whose sake he does accomplish this work of Mediation, and
those are the Church. And therefore in respect of the Doctrine of Christ
handled in the second question, it follows naturally, that now in this third
question we do handle the Doctrine of the Church.

Thirdly, Thirdly, in respect of all the three questions together.
in respect of all the three questions compared and laid together, the order is
very natural; join them all together, and they sweetly and orderly express
the sum of all Religion. God does save his Church by Jesus Christ. God is the
Author that saues: Christ is the Instrument or means by whom he saues: the
Church is the subject or matter to be saved: God purposed to save his Church,
but not without the mediation of Christ: Christ came to save the Church, but
not without warrant from God: the Church is saved, but not without God, nor
without Christ, but by God in Christ, according to that in 2. Cor. 5.9. God was
in Christ reconciling the world to himself: where God is set down in the
first place, Christ in the second, and in the third the reconciled world, that
is, the Church. So you see the first branch of the Introduction, the order of
the questions in themselves, and so our order to be very natural.

The second branch is this, The matter of the question is of great importance.
that the matter of the question is of great weight and importance. For first,
the right knowledge and understanding of the true Church is very profitable,
and of necessary use: and secondly, the ignorance or mistaking of it is
exceeding dangerous and hurtful.

First, the knowledge and understanding of it is very profitable and of
necessary use, and that in many respects; first, for direction; secondly, for
confirmation; thirdly, for confutation; and fourthly, for consolation.

And first for direction; First, for direction.
for on the one side generally most men are endued with this principle, that
they ought to join themselves to the true Church, or else they can have no
salvation. And on the other side, generally all Heretics and Schismatikes do
challenge to themselves the name of the Church, as if they were the true Church
and none else. What is to be done in this uncertainty? We must search the Word
of God: first, learn there what the true Church of God is, and that is the
only right Assembly that safely and boldly thou may join thy self unto.
Therefore for direction this question is very profitable.

Secondly for the confirmation of our faith.
Secondly, for the confirmation of our faith: for howsoever the Word and the
Spirit are the best and most sufficient witnesses, that the Faith we embrace
is the true saving Faith; yet our weakness requires also some outward
witness to testify the same unto us; the best and only witness in this kind
is the true Church, which is the Pillar of Truth. Therefore we must first know
what this true Church is, and then finding that it does embrace the same Faith
with us, and we the same with it, we are thereby certainly assured that we are
in the right Faith.

Thirdly, for the confuting of Adversaries.
Thirdly, the knowledge of the true Church is profitable and necessary for the
confuting of Adversaries: for the Papists on the one side, and the Brownists on
the other, do lay hard against us, that either we are no Church, or at least a
false Church; therefore it is most necessary for us to know what the true
Church is, that so we may discern them, and to justify our own Church, and
our standing in it against all the oppositions.

Fourthly, for consolation.
Fourthly, it is necessary for consolation and comfort of conscience: for what
greater comfort to a Christian soul, then to know that it rests in the bosom
of Gods own Church? I must first therefore know what this Church is, before
ever I can attain to any sound comfort in this Case. Therefore in these
respects the question is very profitable, The ignorance and mistaking of the
true Church is exceeding dangerous in four respects.
and of great weight and importance.

Secondly, the ignorance and mistaking of the true Church is exceeding
dangerous and hurtful: for first many men are careless and wretchlesse, and
will not join to any Church at all; ask them the cause, they will answer,
partiality to our own cause, without traducing them, or flattering our
selves; nor will I wittingly conceal any of Gods Truth from you upon any
sinister affection or respect whatsoever. It is your duty also to travel with
me in this business faithfully and conscionably, both by prayer to God, and
all other our best endeauours, with this reach always in our eye, that every
one of us be found members, even of the Church, living members, even of the
true Church of God: for as it is of riches, it is comfortable speaking of them
when we have a part in them; so it is of the Church much more: It is sweet and
comfortable to speak of it then, when we know ourselves to have our parts
therein. And thus much for the Introduction to prepare us to the religious and
sanctified handling of the question.

Now we come to the question it self; in the handling whereof, first, some
general Points art to be laid down: secondly, Four general points
concerning the Church.
we are to come to the particular matter. The general Points are these: First,
of the name; secondly, of the titles; thirdly, of the nature; fourthly, of the
division of the true Church, and so we will make a passage into the true
visible Church.

1. The name.
First, we will begin with the name. Church is a word that we have at the second
hand from the Saxons, for they called it Kirk, the very ancient sound and
pronunciation whereof many of our Nation in the Northern parts retain to this
day: Vide Field lib. 1. p. 12. 15. 16.
but it seems to be fetched originally from the Greek; for as they call the
Sabbath day (the time wherein God is worshipped, (...), the Lords, that is, the
Lords day, Revel. 1.10. Musculus 555. Bullinger.
so the place too for the Lords public service. Musc. 555. Bulling. But this
is not so used in the Scriptures: and therefore seeing we are to speak of
religious matters, it is good to speak as the Scripture speaks; we will
therefore insist only upon the name that the Scripture expresses it by. In
the former Testament the Original signifies a Company or Congregation, as in
Exodus 16.1. (...): Deuteronomy. 5.22. (...) and 33.4. (...). And when it is so called,
it is intended by way of excellency of the Church, as that being the assembly
of assemblies, the most excellent Assembly in the World. In the new Testament
it is called (...), as Matthew. 16 18. which signifies a calling, or a company
called forth from amongst the rest, according to the custom of the Athenians,
where certain men were called forth by the voice of a Crier from the rest, by
some special meeting and business; and so the holy Ghost seems to translate
it from a civil sense and use to a religious; intending another manner of
Crier and calling then was in Athens. And it does not only signify the company
so called, but also the place where they are assembled for public and
religious exercises; which I cannot say that it so signifies in Scripture, but
in use of speech amongst us, and in some Ecclesiastical Histories, Piscat. on
1. Cor. 11.18, 22. Muscul. page 556. Hyper. Method. 527. 528. When God tied his
presence to a material building, as in the former Testament, the Temple might
more properly be called the Church; but now that he is tied to a spiritual
building only which are the faithful, it is not so properly called so: but
yet Synagogue signifies as well the place as the company Luke 7 5. And by a
figure we may call the place by the name of that it contains: This I speak to
justify the use of the word Church amongst us; though as I said I cannot see
that it signifies so in Scripture.

The word (...) Congregation intends in the sense of the holy Ghost three
things; (...) intends three things.
that there is a company of them, whether many or few, there must be a
congregation:

Four divisions of callings.
We will make four divisions of Callings: First, there is a general calling
and a particular calling: Secondly, there is an extraordinary, and an ordinary
calling. Thirdly there is an inward, and an outward calling: Fourthly, there is
an effectual, and a not effectual calling.

First, general and particular.
First, there is a general and a particular calling. A general, that is, when
God does proffer the means of salvation to a whole City or a Nation, or to
the whole world, as it is Act. 17.30. but now God admonishes all men every
where to repent, or else when God only gives to some particular men some
general or confused notice of saving grace. A particular calling is, when God
tenders occasions and a means of grace, in some particular manner to some
particular persons, coming nearer to sin, and dealing more directly with
sin. Examples we have of this Psalm. 31.6. David says, thou have taught me
wisdom in the secret of mine heart: And such a calling had the Iaylor Act.
16.31. there God deals particularly and directly with sin, Believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved. Now if this particular Calling be
apprehended and laid hold upon when God tenders it, then we are saved; if not,
it increases our condemnation.

Secondly, extraordinary and ordinary.
The second division of Callings is extraordinary and ordinary. Extraordinary
calling is when God calls men, even many times without means, or by some
by-meanes, or by weak means not tending or at least not sufficient, usually
to such effects, or else by some rare and strange means, as when Paul was
called by a voice from heaven. Act. 9.3. An ordinary calling is when the means,
time, place, and effect of grace is such as they are usually wont to be in
that case: if any of them be away it is extraordinary in that respect; yet if
the means be ordinary, that is the preaching of the Word, the calling is
ordinary too, because God ordinarily seconds the preaching of his Word with the
work of the Spirit as we may see Act. 10.44. while Peter yet spoke the Word,
the holy Ghost fell on all them that heard him, and Act. 2.41.

Thirdly, out^ard and in^ard.
The third division of callings. There is an outward and an inward calling. An
outward calling is when the means are outward, as by the Word, Sacraments,
Corrections, Blessings, Miracles, the works of Creation and providence, the
Edicts of the Magistrates or State wherein we live, the natural conscience,
and the common gifts of the Spirit, all which of themselves only go to the
outward man, and procure an external obedience to Gods call. Examples might be
given of every one of these; and this is it our Savior speaks of Matthew. 22.24.
Many are called but few are chosen. An inward calling is when the means and
the working of them enters into the very Spirit and inmost affections of a man,
and this is only by the Spirit of regeneration, when God by his Spirit works
with the outward means in our calling. Such a calling had Lidia, Act. 16.14.
while she heard Paul preach, the Lord opened her heart, etc. The outward
calling without this inward only leaves us without excuse, and aggrauates our
damnation oft-times in the Church visible: the inward calling without the
outward is available to salvation, as in the Church invisible. But both
together are more comfortable and effectual as in the living members of the
Church visible.

Fourthly, there is an effectual, Fourthly, effectual and not effectual.
and a not effectual calling: A calling effectual is, when the means of
grace is both tendered powerfully unto us: and when it is truly received and
embraced and continued in unto the end, Math. 9.9. there was an effectual
calling when as our Savior called Matthew, and he arose presently and
followed him; and this calling is proper only to the elect. A not effectual
calling is, when the means of grace which are able to save us are offered unto
us of God, but we do not accept of them, nor yield unto them. Calling not
effectual five ways.
A calling may be not effectual diverse ways, as Mat. 8.34. or Foelix that
would hear Paul another time, Act. 24.26. or Agrippa, Act. 26.28. thou have
persuaded me almost to become a Christian, says he to Paul; or and singleness
of heart: And thus it was with the foolish Virgins Matthew. 25.3 And thus it was
also with Simon the Sorcerer Act. 8.13.21. he made an outward profession of
faith, he believed and was baptized, verse 13. but his heart was not right in
the sight of God, verse. 21. Demas 2. Tim. 4.10. that forsook Religion and
embraced this present world: and these are in all the Reprobate, yea many of
them are in some of the elect for a time.



To come to the note. All that are of the Church are called of God to the
obedience of his will: here are three things to be considered. First, they are
called, there is the work; secondly, they are called of God, there is the
Author of the work; And thirdly, to the obedience of his will, there is the
end of the work. First the Church of God is called, for so the Apostle 1. Cor.
1.2. speaking of the Church calls them Saints by calling, or as it is in the
original called Saints, and Rom 8 28. called of his purpose, Act. 2.39. even
as many as the Lord God shall call, that is, his whole Church, Romans 8.30. whom
he predestinate them also he called: So ye see the Church is a called
company; now whether God deal mildly or roughly, drawing us or leading us, yet
still it is a calling, the work is the same. Secondly, the Author of this
calling, that is God 1. Cor. 1.9. God is faithful who has called you, and in
this respect he is said to be the caller, as it is in the original: Now
whether God call immediately by himself, or by means, whether the calling be
outward or inward all is done by God, the author is the same still. Thirdly, the
end of this calling is, to the knowledge and obedience of Gods will 1 Thessalonians
4.7. God has not called us to uncleanness but to ^sse. Now holiness consists
in knowledge and obedience: It is true that the furthest end of our calling is
to be made partakers of his glory, but the immediate end of our calling is to
virtue and grace, as they are joined in the 2. Pet: 1.3. through the
acknowledgement of him that has called us to glory and virtue: and hence it is
that our whole state and profession is called our calling as in Ephesians. 4.1. walk
worthy of the vocation whereunto ye were called: yea for this end it is called
an holy calling, 2 Timothy 1.9. and it is so called first in respect of the
caller, who is holy: secondly, in respect of the work, our calling which is
holy; Thirdly, in respect of the means, which are ho^y: ^ourthly in respect of
the end we are called to, which is holiness: Fifthly, in respect of the effect
which is holy; those that are truly and effectually called being by that
calling changed and made holy Saints.



The Reasons of the p^int are these: Matthew. 20. from 1. to 7. verse, they that
go into the vineyard must be hired, and who shall hire and bid them go, but
the master of the Vineyard: Now Gods Church is the Vineyard, and God is the
Master, and therefore none can call but he. In Matthew. 22.2.3, etc. the wedding
is prepared, the Ghests must come, but first they must be bidden and called,
and by whom must they be called and bidden, but by the Bridegroomes Father,
even God himself that makes the Feast? for that is meant by the Parable: God
the Father marries us to his Son Christ, he prouides joy, and peace of
Conscience for us, which is a continual Feast, and to this Feast we must be
bidden, we must not come till we are called, and none must call us but God who
is the Master of the Feast; so that we must have a calling from God to this
business.







The uses are many, by the brimme of hell ready to be swallowed up of
destruction. It is true that in the estate of innocence we were first of Gods
Church; and then by the Serpents voice, we became of the Sinagogue of Satan.
But now in the estate of corruption, we are first of the Sinagogue of Satan,
and afterward when God calls us, we are of his Church; and except the Lord be
pleased to call us we would live and dye in our sins, and be ^amned for them
as the Devils be. And this is it that our Savior says in John 6.44. no man
can come unto me except my Father which sent me draw him. Now here God
performed a double work for us: First, he delivers us out of Satan's bonds,
and then he incorporates us into his own Family, even as a great man that
delivers a Captive out of the slavery which he is in, and then aduanceth him to
attend on his own Person. Thus does God in the effectual calling of every one
of us, First, he delivers us out of Satan's clutches, and then he incorporates
us into his own Family to attend upon his own Person; both these are wrought
together in our effectual calling.

Ezekiel speaks, that then he should reach out his hand to us, and that he
should call after us, when we run away from him; even when we our selves
would perish, he will not let us perish, but calls to us, sends after us,
comes to us, and has a familiar conference with us, as in Isai. 1. Come now,
let us reason. etc. then first he shows us our misery and the danger that we
are in, that we are miserable, poor, and blind, and naked, Revel. 3.17. then
he chides us for our wretchlesnesse, Why will thou dye, when I would have thee
to live? and then in the next place he tenders us better courses, and persuades
us to intertaine them, I counsel thee to buy of me gold, etc. as in that
Revel. 3.18. Thus does God deal with every one of us when he does effectually
call us, either at one time or another in the course of our life. Many
circumstances might amplify the mercy of God to us in this kind; as that first
God does call us by so many and sundry means, by the Word and by the
Sacraments, by his Blessings and by his Corrections, so that if one prevail
not, another shall; if fair means will not, foul shall. Secondly, he does
use these means continually, all the day long he stretches out his arms to
us, early and late, day and night, in season and out of season, renewing his
call to day and to morrow, and so continually still drawing us on. Thirdly, he
does it earnestly, calling, commanding, beseeching us, that we would be
advised by his Ministers; and this he does with such serious obtestations, as
we love heaven, and fear hell, and as we would escape damnation, that we would
be advised by him. Thus earnestly God deals with us, and so he had need,
partly because the matter is so hard, and partly because we are so dull.
Fourthly, he does often work violently with us, haling, drawing, plucking us
out of the fire of hell, even as a man that is plucked violently out of the fire
when he is in danger to be burnt, and knows not of it: so God pulls us out
of our sins, and out of our vanities, and will not let us go till he
prevail with us. Lastly, God does this particularly and only to the chosen,
to them and to none other, the rest he leaves as dross in the dreggs of their
filthiness; but God fines these, and fetches them out as pure Gold for the
Lords Temple.

Ps. 18.44. as soon as they hear they shall obey me. And let us follow the
example of Samuel, 1. Sam. 3.3. when God calls the first time, must we deny to
come? no, we must come as he did; and so the second and the third time; let our
ears be open to hear still, and obey Gods Call. Shall he in mercy call me,
and shall I like a Beast, nay like a Devil, refuse to come? No, let us be
thankful for it, it is a precious Jewel, and let us take heed we do not
relinquish our Calling, let us not look back; for no man that puts his
hand to the Plough, and looks back, is fit for the Kingdom of God.

Pet. 1.5, 9, 10. And if we do these things we shall never fall.

sanctification, by the Word and Sacraments, and by the Spirit; therefore we
are a true Church. This they cannot deny. Ainsworth, and others amongst
themselves confess, that they had their Calling here, yea their effectual
Calling, and they will not say but theirs is a true Calling; therefore so is
ours, and so our Church a true Church. Yea, but say they, this calling is
extraordinary. I answer, What is extraordinary in it? The means are ordinary,
as the Word preached, read, and conferred on; the Sacraments administered, and
Prayers offered up to God. It is extraordinary when we are called without
means, or by rare and strange means: but the means here are ordinary;
therefore the calling is so too. Besides, many thousands in our Church have a
true and effectual Calling; The means is daily powerful through Gods mercy,
either to win, or to confirm, not a few, but many thousands; therefore the
commonnesse of it proves it to be ordinary. Yea, but say they, It is so in the
Church of Rome too; many are called there, and yet that is no true Church. It
is strange that they will blind themselves so wilfully, and not discern
betwixt things that so notoriously differ. For first, in the Church of Rome,
few, or none are converted; here in our Church are many. Secondly, they have
only a general call to a confused notice of God; we to the particular and
precise knowledge of every Article and Point of Religion, needful to
salvation. Thirdly, they have not the means, the Word truly preached, nor read
in a known Tongue; we have. Therefore it is strange that they should once
open their mouths to make such an absurd comparison.

The second Lecture of the Church.
NOw in the second place we are to speak of the titles given to the Church;
The second general thing concerning the Church are the titles.
there is no great difference betwixt the name, and the title of a thing; for
sometime the name is called the title, and the title the name: yet as it is
with persons of great place and quality; they have their names and their
titles too; as, Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, etc. Paul, there is his name;
an Apostle, etc. there is his title: and so it is generally with all things of
any great note, they have their names whereby they are ordinarily called, and
their titles whereby some extraordinary or special matter is attributed to
them, and affirmed of them. So in the matter in hand, concerning the Saints, or
company of the faithful, the name (Church) does propound them barely or simply
to our understanding. The titles raise us up to the consideration of some
further matter in the nature and state of the Church then the name does import:
and therefore having spoken of the name, now we are to speak of the titles of
the Church.

There are many worthy and goodly titles ascribed to the Church, as it is said,
Psalm. 87.3. Goodly and glorious things are spoken of thee, Oh City of God.
Many, as being much variety of matter to be considered in the estate of the
Church; and glorious, as every title commending the grace, beauty, and glory of
the Church after a special manner. Many titles given her for three reasons.
And the Lord does adorn her with these many glorious titles for many causes;
what is wanting in some may be supplied by the rest. The titles are of two
sorts.
They are of two sorts: First, some are absolute that concern the Church
simply in it self. Secondly, some are not so absolute, but respective, which
concern the Church, as i^ has reference to something else.

First, absolute without reference to any thing else.
First, some are absolute, without reference to any thing else; First, a garden.
the first is in the former Testament, Cant. 4.12. It is called a Garden
enclosed, a Spring shut up, a Fountain sealed up. Here two titles are given to
it; first, it is called a Garden: for as in a Garden grows many fragrant and
goodly flowers, pleasant to the eye, and sweet and comfortable to the smell: so
in the Church many goodly graces like fragrant flowers do grow and flourish;
the Word and the Sacraments, Faith and Obedience, Justification and
Sanctification, etc. these spiritual flowers cast a wondrous pleasing sight
upon the eye, and a sweet smell to the nostrils of every spiritual man that is
able to see into, and discern them. Yea, the Lord himself makes this Garden
as his walking place, delighting and solacing his Majesty with the sweet odors
of the fruits of this Garden, that is, the graces and beauty of this Paradise.
Secondly, a spring or foun^aine.
Secondly, it is called a Spring or Fountain; first, because as a Spring has
water in it, so the Church has water, excellent water, even the water of life.
This is it our Savior speaks of, Ioh. 7.38, 39. He that believes in me, out of
his belly shall flow Rivers of water of life: this spoke he of the Spirit,
which they that believed in him should receive. These waters are the spiritual
gifts and graces which God bestows upon his Church. Secondly, it is called a
Spring or a Fountain, because as a Fountain has water, so it has clear
water: so the waters in the Church, the gifts and graces of Gods Spirit
wherewith it is adorned, are clean and pure, not stained with puddle and dirt
of sin and error. Thirdly, as a Spring or Fountain has waters in it self
at the first hand, and has it not derived to them by any channels or secondary
means: so the gifts and graces of the Church, they have them conferred upon
them immediately from Christ himself, who is the Fountain of the Gardens, as
in that Cant. 4.15. And there is one common adiunct affirmed of each of these
titles, A Garden enclosed, a Spring shut up, or a Fountain sealed up. And this
is added, to show the priuatenesse, or seueralnesse of it in it self, that it
is hedged in, or shut up. This shows, first, the special protection of God
over his Church or People; He hedges, and walls, and incloseth them in, and
seals and shuts them up, so that nothing can come at them to work their
annoyance. Secondly, this intends a separation betwixt them and the World;
first, a separation of them from the World, that they may not communicate with
them in their corruptions, in their manners and fashions, but that they may
continue within the compass of their own society. Secondly, a separation of
the World from them, that they cannot communicate in their pleasant fruits and
pure waters; profane and graceless people, they can have no part in the gifts
and graces of Gods Spirit, they are restrained only to the Church, and to the
chosen. So much of that place out of the old Testament.

The other place is in the new Testament. In the 1. Pet. 2.9. Thirdly, a chosen
generation, a royal Priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people set at
liberty.
Ye are a Chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, a Holy Nation, a Peculiar
People set at liberty, etc. First, they are a chosen Generation: there are many
other generations in the World; yea, but they are rejected, these are chosen.
Secondly, a royal Priesthood: there was another Priesthood; yea, but that was
serviceable and mean, these are a Royal, Princely, Divine Priesthood.
Thirdly, a holy Nation: there are other Nations, but they are profane and
wicked; these are holy, separated, and sanctified by Gods Spirit. Fourthly, a
peculiar People: there are other People; yea, but they are of the common
fashion, fit for all companies and courses; these are a peculiar people,
reserved only to themselves and to their Religion, and to their God. So much
of those titles that are absolute, and concern the Church simply in it self.

Two sorts of titles which concern the Church are respective, as it has
reference to some other thing else, and these are of five sorts: First, such as
are given to the Church in respect of God, and they are, First, Gods Mountain.
Secondly, the City of God. Thirdly, the house of God.
The second sort are respective titles, such as concern the Church, as it has
reference to some other thing else; and these are either, first, such as have
reference to God; or secondly, such as have reference to Christ; or thirdly,
such as have reference to the faithful; or fourthly, such as have reference to
the World; or fifthly, such as have reference to the Truth.

First, those titles that are given to the Church in respect of God, are many;
Isai. 2.2. Micha. 4.1. it is called Gods Mountain, because God has set it up
in an high and eminent place, as a City on an hill; and also because he has
stablished it so strongly, that as the Mountain of God it shall stand fast for
ever. So in Psalm. 87.3. it is called The City of God, because he built it, and
made their walls, and repaires the breaches, making them Laws, granting them
Privileges, maintaining their Charter, and ruling and governing them by his
own Ordinances. In the 1. Tim. 3.15. it is called, The House of God; as being
the place where his own honor dwells, conuersing daily with his people, and
carefully providing for them, as a Master of a Family for his household.
Fourthly, the Temple of God.
In the 1. Cor. 3.17. it is called, The Temple of God; It is more then a house,
a holy house, even as the Lord that dwelles in it is holy. Lastly, it is called
1. Pet. 2.10. Fifthly, the people of God.
The People of God, and that by a special and mutual appropriation both of
them that are his Church to him, and of him to them; he being their God, loving
and favoring them above all others; and they being his people, consecrated
wholly and entirely to him and his worship: so peculiar they are to God, that
they are his Inheritance, Isai. 19.25. all others are servants and underlings,
and not Gods Inheritance. And so much for those titles that have reference to
God.

Now, secondly, Secondly, such as have reference to Christ, and they are,
First, his love. Secondly, his sister.
follow those that have reference to Christ, and they are many too; first, it
is called his Love Can. 4.1. namely as Christ loving her dearly above his own
life; and as the Church loving him dearly above all the world besides: And
Can. 4.9. the Church is called his Sister, as partaking together, he with her
of the same flesh and blood by nature, and she with him adopted into the
fellowship and state of Gods Children, as he himself is the Son of God. So
in the same verse she is called the Spouse of Christ, he marries her unto
himself in righteousness, Thirdly, the spouse of Christ.
and in Judgment, and in mercy and compassion, as the Prophet shows us, Hos
2.19.20. Fourthly, a Queen.
And thereupon she obtains the Title of a Queen, Ps 1.45 19. and good
reason, she being married to the King of Kings, the Lord Jesus. In Ioh. 10.27.
the Church is said to be his sheep, Fifthly, his sheep
as he feeding and ruling them, like a faithful shepherd, and they as good
sheep hearing, following, and obeying him, and none other. Ephesians. 1.23. she is
called his Body, Sixthly, his body.
as he like a perfect head conueying life and Spirit into them; and they like
living members receiving this life, and performing their several Offices both
to him, and one to another. Many other Titles there are of the like kind, all
tending to show not a Communion only (as my Beloved is mine, Seventhly, My
Beloved is mine, and I am his.
and I am his) but an union rather, as they being one with him, and he with
them; their sins are his by Imputation, and so his righteousness is theirs:
yea they are called Christ. Eighthly, Christ.
1. Co. 12.12. so much of the second sort of Titles.

The third sort are given with reference to the faithful, as in Micah. 4.8.
Thirdly, such as are given with reference to the faithful, and these are,
First, the Tower of the flock. Secondly, the Mother of us all.
It is called the Tower of the flock, as who should say all the flock of
Christ resorts to the Church as to a strong hold or Tower, and if they recover
that, there is perfect safety, so says the Prophet, Isa. 14.32. The Lord has
stablished Sion, and the poor of his people shall trust in it: So in Gal.
4.26. she is called the mother of us all, she is a fruitful mother, having
many Children, not the mother of one Nation only, as Agar, but of all nations
in the world: and she is a very loving mother, giving her children suck out of
her own breasts the two Testaments, and thereby nourishing and bringing them
up, till they be of greater strength, yea till they be of a perfect and full
age in Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, such as are given with reference to the world in gener^ll, and these
^r^ first, the s^bstance of the World; secondly, the joy of the whole earth;
The fourth sort of Titles are given with reference to the world in general;
and in this respect the Church is called the substance of the World. Isa. 6.13.
So long as the holy seed stands, so long the World stands; when it decays the
substance is gone, and the World perishes: so in this respect the Church is
called the joy of the whole earth, Lam. 2.10. when the Church thriues the whole
earth is the better for it; howsoever many men grudge at this; when the Church
prospers, yet they should rejoice at it, themselves having no right to any
blessing on earth, but by their fellowship. In this respect also it is called a
Lilly amongst thorns, Thirdly, a Lilly amongst thorns.
Can. 2.2. which shows two things, first, the great and goodly grace and
beauty of the Church, how far it exceedes all the Congregations in the world
besides, as the Lilly, that is far more glorious then Solomon in all his
Royalty, exceedes the brambles, the bushes, and thorns; And secondly it
shows also the tenderness of the Church, much ado to be hatched, and easily
hurt in the world, even as the Lilly is amongst the thorns; Fifthly, are such
as have reference to the truth of God, and these are, First, the pillar and
ground of truth.
and so it shows the harshnesse and troublesomenesse of the world to the
Church, that are like pricking thorns, and scratching Brambles to her.

The last sort of Titles are such as have reference to the truth of God, and in
this respect the Church is called The Pillar and ground of Truth, 1. Tim. 3.15.
we must not take it as the Papists do, as if the truth were b^ilt on the
Church, and the Church were the foundation of that, for Christ alone is the
foundation, and the Truth is rather the foundation of the Church, Mat. 16.18.
Upon this Rock (says Christ) will I build my Church, that is, upon this Truth
(which Peter had professed of Christ before) will I build my Church; therefore
we must expound it thus, The Pillar and ground of Truth, that is, the
supporter, and vpholder, and maintainer of it, to keep it in sure and safe
custody, that neither Satan, nor all his instruments should ever be able
utterly to overthrow it, but that it shall live and abide in the hearts of the
faithful for ever, and in this sense the Church is called a Candlestick,
Secondly, a Candlestick.
Revel. 1.20. not as being the foundation of the Light, but the bearer up, and
holder forth of the Light of Gods Truth to the view of the world: and so much
of the last sort of Titles.

Now that we have past over the Titles given to the Church, and showed them in
their several ranks, we will draw them into a head, in an observation, and
that is this: Namely, That the Church of God, (that is, the Company Esdras
5.22. etc. And I had a desire to reason again, and I began to talk with the
most High again; And I said, Oh Lord, of every Forest of the Earth, and of
all the Trees thereof, Thou have chosen Thee one only Vineyard; and of all the
Lands in the World thou have chosen thee one Pit; and of all the flowers of
the ground thou have chosen thee one Lilly, etc. In Exodus 19.5. God says to
the Jews, and so to the whole Church, that they should be his chief Treasure
above all people; as if many Pearls and precious Stones were enameled in
beaten Gold, and framed together into one body, would not this be a glorious
body? But such is the Church in the eyes and acceptance of God. God does more
highly esteem of the Church, then of all the World besides; all the rest are
but trash, and dross, and dung; the Lord sets nothing by them in comparison of
the Church, Isai. 4.5. The Lord shall create upon every place of mount Sion,
and upon the assemblies thereof, a Cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of
a flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a defense, that is, the
glory of God, and the glory of all the world; the whole body, and every part
thereof is glorious, yea, glory it self; all other pomp and glory without the
glory of the Church, is baseness, and smoke, and misery. See the glorious
estate of the Church as it was shadowed in the Law, Exodus 25.8.9. by the
Sanctuary or Tabernacle. The Church of God shadowed in the law by the sanctuary
or tabernacle in eight things.
First, there was the Arc, verse 10. Secondly, there was the Testimony put
into the Ark. Verse. 16. Thirdly, there was the Mercy-seate, Verse. 17. Fourthly,
the Cherubins, Verse. 18. Fifthly, God speaking from betwixt the Cherubins, ver.
22. Sixthly, the Table, Verse. 23. Seventhly, the Shewbread, Verse. 30. Lastly,
the golden Candlestick, Verse. 31. These did all figure out the glorious estate
of the Church under the Gospel. There was the Arc, that is, God himself; and
have not we the same God? There was the Testimony in the Arc, which was a
witness, or evidence of Gods presence, that he ever was, and would be present
there; And so we have the Word and the Sacraments to witness Gods continual
presence with us. There was the Mercy-seate; and what was, that, but Jesus
Christ, the Mediator, whom we have? There were the Cherubins; And have not we
Angels in the Church, that are ministering Spirits for our good? There was God
speaking out of the Mercy-seate; And have not we the Word of God directing and
instructing us? Vide Piscat. in Exo. 25.
There was a Table; And have not we a solemn Inuitation to the feast of peace
of Conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost, which God has prepared for the
faithful? Pro. 9.1.2. There was the Shewbread; A^ what figured that but Gods
people; because they always and before God? Lastly, there was the golden
Candlestick with seven branches which signified the manifold gifts and graces
of Gods Spirit, which he bestows upon his Church: And if the Church was thus
glorious being shadowed under the Law, how much more glorious is it now in the
time of the Gospel? The Apostle making the comparison in Hebr. 12. shows
plainly, that the Church now, in the time of the Gospel, is far more
glorious, then in the time of the Law. In the 22, 23, and 24 verses, he says,
But ye are come to Mount Sinai, the City of the living God, the celestial
Jerusalem; And to the Company of innumerable Angels; And to the Congregation
of the first borne, which are written in heaven; And to God the judge of all;
And to the Spirits of just and perfect men; And to Jesus the mediator of the
new Testament; And to the blood of sprinckling that speaks better things then
that of Abel. See how glorious the Church is here: for here is whatsoever may
make up a perfect glory. And thus glorious and beautiful is Gods Church,
look upon her which way soever ye will, either within or without: If ye look
upon her within, why then it is said, Ps. 45.13. the Kings Daughter is all
glorious within. If without, it is said in the same Psalm. Her garments are
all of broidered gold. You shall see her glory further in these four things:
First, in her profession; secondly, in her practice; thirdly, The glory of the
Church in four things: First, in the profession. Secondly, in her practice.
in her order; fourthly, in her unity. First, in her profession, it is a
glorious profession; for they renounce and disclaim all other Religions, and
profess the only pure and glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ. So secondly, in
regard of their practice, it is glorious and beautiful; for they are religious
to God, wise to themselves, charitable to their brethren, merciful to all,
depending on God, believing in Christ, obeying his Spirit, praying, blessing,
exhorting, instructing, comforting both themselves and others, making
conscience of all their ways, having and keeping themselves unspotted of
filthiness and uncleanness, and of the corruptions of the times wherein they
live, and offering their souls and bodies a clean, pure, and glorious
sacrifice to God in Christ; Thirdly, in her order.
so their practice is glorious. Thirdly, for their order, they are glorious and
gracious, Psalm. 68.24, 25. They have seen (O God) thy goings the goings of my
God, and my King which are in the Sanctuary. The Singers going before, the
Players of Instruments after; In the midst were the maids playing with the
timbrels. This was but in a shadow, much more is it so in the true Church. Cant
4.2. the Church is compared to a flock of Sheep, which go up in good order
from the washing. Now we must understand this spiritually; for it is not the
orderly standing in the Church, but when every one keeps his own rank, not
being rebellious, nor meddling in other men's business, not loose nor negligent
in their own place, but every one is careful to do his duty imposed on him;
the superiors they rule with modesty, the underlings they obey reverently,
and Christ himself as their King keeps them all within their compass. The
Apostle, 1. Cor. 12. in the whole Chapter speaking of this order, shows what
an excellent thing it is, even as it is in the body of a man; there is the
eyes, and the hands, and the feet, etc. Now shall the foot say to the head, I
am above thee; or the eye to the hand, I have no need of thee? no, but every
member keeps his rank, and is careful to do the office imposed upon it: and
so it is in the Church; and therefore in this respect it is a glorious Church,
Romans 12.3, 4. Fourthly, in her unity.
etc. Fourthly, in respect of their unity, Psalm. 122.2, 3. The Prophet says,
that Jerusalem is built as a City, that is compact, or at unity together in
it self; meaning, that Gods Church, the heavenly Jerusalem, whose members are
all knit together by a near union, being one body, having one Lord, one Faith,
one Baptism, Ephesians. 4 5 6. having a sweet and loving communion all of them
with Christ their Head, and each of them with another: Behold, says the
Prophet, what a goodly thing it is for brethren to dwell together in unity.
Psalm. 133.1, 2, 3. So the Church, ye see, is blessed and beautiful for the
unity that is amongst the members: for they pray, and give thanks to God one
for another; they rejoice for the good one of another, and are sorrowful and
mourn for the hurt one of another. And so much for the proof of the Point.

The Reasons of the Point, why they are so beautiful and Psalm 144.15. Blessed
is the people whose God is the Lord. They have God to be their Lord: First, in
respect of God, he promising and performing to them, that he will be their
God, and giving them many tokens of his love. Secondly, in respect of
themselves, they being his by covenant and obedience; and therefore they are
blessed and glorious, because God is their Lord.

Secondly, Christ is theirs, and they are his: as it is in Cant. 6.2. I am my
Welbeloueds, and my Well-beloved is mine; and together with Christ God has given
them all things, Rom 8.32. Christ is theirs, and whatsoever else may make for
their blessedness or glory is conferred with him. Jesus Christ is present in
his Church, and he inlightens them with his glory, Revel. 21.9. and therefore
they are glorious; He washes them with his own blood, and therefore they are
gracious; He clothes them with his righteousness, and therefore they are
beautiful; He couers, and imputes not their sins, therefore they are
blessed, Psalm. 32.1, 2. yea, they being his own body, therefore as his
natural body was far more excellent then any man's else, so his mystical
body, the assembly of the Saints, is far more glorious then all the World
besides.

Thirdly, Gods Spirit he teaches them a gracious carriage,

Fourthly, they are most beautiful and glorious, because all the living
members of the Church are new Creatures; Gods Image is repaired in them, that
wisdom and righteousness and holiness is renewed in them, which they had in
their first Creation. If Adam had continued in his innocence, and so all his
posterity till now: what a glorious Sight and company would they have been?
Adam, and so many of his posterity as are of the Church of God, are in some
measure renewed to Gods Image, as it was at the first: And therefore what a
glorious and blessed assembly is the Church of God, the assembly of the Saints.

The uses of this point are these: First, it shows the love of God to his
Church and people, and his delight in them; First, his love to them, in that,
first, he is pleased to communicate his own beauty and graces to them: to
make them beautiful he fastens on them many pledges of his favor, he
vouchsafes them his protection, blessing, grace, and salvation, all his
promises, both for this life, and that which is to come, yea, and that for them
alone: he thinks nothing too good for them, he affords them his own presence,
and the comforts thereof; he bestows his own Son upon them, and all his
merits and benefits; he gives them his own Spirit, and all the gifts and
graces, and operations of the same: What should he do more for his Vineyard,
as he speaks in Isai. 5. and what could he do more for his Church, to make
up the perfection of her Beauty, Psalm. 87.2. The Lord loves the gates of Sion,
more then all the habitations of Jacob. Secondly, his love appears to them, in
that he accepts of them as if they were perfectly glorious, for they are but
men (I speak of such members as most concern our selves; for the Angels are
members too) and therefore though God give them never so much, they can receive
it but in some measure, so far as they are capable of it. Besides, they have
many sins, wants, and infirmities, the least whereof (if it were straightly
stood upon) in the censure of justice, would deface all their glory, and cut
them off from all their grace, and blessedness: but the Lord passes by, and
winkes at these blemishes, beholding them in the face of Christ, couers all
their defects with the Mantle of love, and ouerspreads them with the white Robe
of Christ's righteousness, and freely forgiues them all their sins, so that
nothing may impeach their blessed and glorious estate. Secondly, God delights
in his Church, being so beautiful and glorious, as he himself says, Psalm.
132.14. This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have a delight
therein. And Psalm. 45.11. The King shall have pleasure in thy beauty. God
delights in their persons, graces, welfare, and obedience; all their prayers,
blessings, meditations, true and holy endeavors, are a sweet smelling
sacrifice in the nostrils of God, wherewith he is well pleased in Christ, Cant.
7.1, 2.

The second use. Is the Church so gracious and so glorious? David professes
his love to Gods Church, Psalm. 26.8. Oh Lord, I have loved the habitation of
thine house, and the place where thine honor dwells. And Psalm. 84.1.10. Oh
Lord of Hoasts, how amiable are thy Tabernacles; and, A day in thy Courts is
better then a thousand elsewhere. And so likewise we should show our love to
her, in bewailing her desolations, as Jeremy does; Lament. 1.4. the ways of
Sion lament, etc. And Lament. 2.6, 7. and 5.17, 18. Therefore our heart is
heavy for these things; our eyes are dim, because of the mountain of Sion,
which is desolate. And so we should show our Love to her, in bewailing our
absence from it, as David does, Psalm. 42.4. when I remembered these things, I
poured out my very heart, because I had gone with the multitude, and lead them
into the House of God, etc. Thus David laments his absence from Gods Church;
and thus should we do, when by persecution, or any other such let, we are
forced to be absent. Secondly, we must labor to be of it: For so we have a
special Commandment, Deu. 12.5, 6. But you shall seek the place which the
Lord your God shall choose out of all your Tribes, to put his Name there, and
there to dwell, and thither shall thou come, and thou shall bring thither thy
burnt offerings, etc. And this was the only desire of the Prophet David's
heart, Psalm. 27.4. that he might dwell in the House of the Lord all the days
of his life. And Psalm. 84.2. his Soul longs and faints for the Courts of the
Lord; and in verse 10. he preferres it before all other states whatsoever; A
day in thy Courts is better then a thousand elsewhere; I had rather be a
doore-keeper in the House of the Lord, then to dwell in the Tabernacles of
wickedness. Thus did David delight in it, and desire continually to be of it,
and so should we, for then it is a sweet and comfortable thing to speak of
the blessedness and glory of it, when we have our parts in it; And we should
not only join our selves to it, but we should also labor to bring others to
it, we should say as it is prophesied of the Church in these last days, Isai.
2.3. Come, let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the House of the God
of Jacob. He will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths, Genesis
9.27. Cant. 8.8.



to be members of the true Church, that surely they are Gods dearlings, such
as are precious and glorious before him: first, here is comfort against their
sins, that they shall be done away as if they had never been; and though they
be as red as scarlet, yet they shall be made as white as snow. Secondly, here
is comfort against their wants, and defects, and infirmities; thou can not
pray, nor perform any other good duty as thou ought; yea, but thou art a
member of that blessed and glorious Church, whereof Christ Jesus is the Head;
and therefore all thy wants and infirmities are covered and supplied by the
perfection of Christ. Thirdly, here is comfort against temptation, and against
the Devil and all his power; for thou art a member of the true Church, which
is like to Mount Sion that cannot be removed, but shall stand fast for ever and
ever; the Gates of Hell, nor all the power of the Devil shall ever prevail
against thee; the Lord for his own glory, which he has set upon us, will
never see us overthrown. Lastly, here is comfort for us against all the
reproaches of men, that howsoever we be as the off-scowring of the world in
their unjust censures, yet in Gods sight, who judges according to the truth,
we are beautiful and glorious. And therefore let this suffice to give us
content against all the scoffs and nicknames in the world; If we be so
blessed and beautiful in Gods eyes, what need we care though we be
contemned in the world.

The fifth Use is matter of terror to the world, that persecute Act. 9. they
shall never have good success: yea, secondly, they shall be punished with the
fierce and full vengeance and wrath of God, because they resist the Lord, and
oppose his glorious and anointed Ones.

Isai. 53. they look only on the outward man, and indeed there is nothing to
be seen but deformity and misery; but if they could look within, there is
perfect glory. Yea, but say they, this is but your words, we can see no such
glory in the Church, but we can see a great deal of sin and misery among
you, why do you then face it out thus? I answer, we must understand it with
these limitations: First, it cannot be discerned but with a spiritual eye,
and therefore the world cannot see it, because they want this eye to discern
it withal. Secondly, it is understood of the Church, as they are considered in
their Head Christ, and not as they are considered by themselves. If they
consider the Church thus, they shall perceive perfect glory, Christ himself
being perfectly glorious, and he couers, and supplies our wants and
deformities, and presents us as glorious to God his Father. Thirdly, it is so
rather in our desires and Gods account, then in actual possession. Fourthly,
we have not th^s glory and blessedness here, but only in the beginnings of
it, we have some grace, and some beauty, and some glory here, but it is to be
perfected in heaven, when there shall be a new Jerusalem, Revel. 21.2. and then
Christ shall present us a glorious Body unto God his Father without spot or
wrinckle, Ephesians. 5.27. which because some have attained to already, and the
rest shall surely obtain hereafter, and have some beginnings of it here
already, it may therefore be justly said, in respect of some of her parts now,
and of all hereafter; Thou art all fair my Love, and there is no spot in thee.
Thus you see how beautiful the Church is, and blessed, and glorious, though
the world be blind, and can see no such thing in her. And so much concerning
the second general Point propounded to be handled in the Doctrine of the
Church.

The third Lecture of the Church.
THe third general Point propounded to be handled in the Doctrine of the
Church, The third general thing concerning the Church is the nature of it.
is the Nature of the Church: for so the order of teaching requires, that when
once we do know the name of a thing, what it is called, and the titles that
it is graced withal; then it follows, that we should search out the nature
of the thing that is thus called, and thus entitled. For the names and titles
of things may, and are oft-times imparted to others. But the nature of every
thing is proper to it self, and cannot be communicated to any thing else. And
therefore howsoever the name and titles set it forth unto us, and make us
esteem of it, yet the nature will more fully express it, and make us the
highlier to esteem of it. The name bearing diverse significations, in ordinary
method ought to be divided first, and defined after. But because the whole
nature of the thing may be aptly enough comprehended in one general
description; and because the division has a more near dependence with that
which follows, making a ready step and passage thereunto, we will first
define therefore the nature of the Church, and then proceed in the next place
(according to our order set down) to divide it into several kinds and
branches.

The nature of the Church is thus described. Vid Reynolds, These. p 642. and
Rhem. Ves^^m. 1. Tim. 3 10. The nature of the Church described by three things.
The Church of God, in the true general nature thereof is the whole company of
Gods chosen both in heaven and earth: where they are described by three things.
First, by the efficient cause of their being of the Church, Gods electing or
choosing them. Secondly, by their number, the whole Company. Thirdly, by the
places where they are, in heaven and in earth.

First, by the efficient cause.
First, by the efficient cause of their being of the Church: for the principal
reason why any man is a true member of the true Church, is, because God has
chosen him to it: First, to salvation and glory, as the end; secondly, and
consequently to be of the Church, as the means to the end. Therefore the Church
ofttimes is called Gods chosen, Psalm. 33.12. Even the people whom he has
chosen for his inheritance: And in Psalm. 132.13. The Lord has chosen Sion;
that is, his Church. And Romans 8.33. The Apostle speaking of the Church, calls
them by that express name, Gods chosen: And hence it is, that the Faith of
Gods Church is called the Faith of Gods chosen; Titus 1.1. And therefore they
are called The first borne, whose names are written in heaven, Heb. 12.23.
Which what is it else, but to be written in the Book of life? That is to be
Gods chosen. It is true, that it is much more agreeable to the name of the
Church to be defined by their Calling, rather then by their Choosing, as in
the first Lecture, because they are a Company called: But yet it is more
agreeable to the right nature of the Church to be defined by their choosing,
rather then by their Calling, and that for these Reasons: first, many of the
Church are chosen, that are not yet called, as Paul an Elect vessel before his
conversion, and yet not called; and so all the Elect before their conversion:
nay, many are chosen that shall never be called; as the Angels which belong to
the Church too, and are a part of it. And therefore the Church in the nature of
it is to be described by their choosing, and not by their Calling. Secondly,
many are Called that are not chosen, so says our Savior; and therefore if we
should describe them by their Calling, we should make such to be of the nature
of the true Church which are not chosen, and so are no true members of Christ,
nor shall ever enter into the heavenly Jerusalem. Thirdly, those which are
chosen are called too; their Election and choosing is the cause of their
Calling, and not their Calling the cause of their choosing, Rom 8.30. whom he
predestined, them also he called. Therefore in these respects, it is
fittest, and most agreeable to the nature of the Church, to be described by
their election, rather then by their Calling. And so much of the first part of
the Description, namely, the efficient Cause of their being.

The second thing they are described by is their number the whole company, etc.
Which we mus^ understand thus. Secondly by their number.
First, that all that are of the Church are God, chosen, and none else, and
that all that are chosen are of the Church, none excluded: as who should say,
the whole company of Gods chosen, all these, and none but these. Here may be an
exception made; for you will say. Are the elect of the Church, before they are
Called? Yes sure, in the purpose and account of God, though they be not so in
their own account, nor in the account of the World; though they be not as yet
actually assembled to the Church, yet they are in the way, and first or last
they shall certainly have an effectual Calling, whereby they shall be made
actually of the Church, both in faith, and in their own knowledge and account.
And secondly, we must understand, that all those together make up one Church:
the whole Company of God. Chose^ ^s his Church; as they are considered all
together, as members of one body, and incorporated into one society or
Company, and not as they are members apart. And also, so ^ll tog^^her, as that
all the chosen of all times, and places, and kinds, make up one only Church. So
much of the second part, the number they are described by.

The third thing they are described by, Thirdly, by the places where they are.
is the places where they are, in heaven and in earth. And so we do first fetch
in all Gods Saints, whether living or departed, whether fighting on earth or
triumphing in heaven: As also, secondly, the Angels that have kept their
habitation in heaven, are all comprehended together, as so many several parts
of the Church to make up the whole Body; The holy Angels are part of the true
Ch^, proved and (...) doctrine.
So ye have the particular heads of the Description expounded and enlarged,
the whole company of Gods chosen in heaven and in earth. Now that the holy
Angels are parts of the true Church, because ye shall not think that it is a
devise of mine own brain, ye shall see that the Apostle uses the same
words, Ephesians. 1.10. That in the fullness of time, he might gather together in one
all things, both which are in heaven, and which are in earth: And Ephesians. 3.15. Of
whom is named the whole family both in heaven and in earth. And, Col. 1.20. To
reconcile to himself through him, I say, all things which are in heaven, and
which are in earth. All which places must be understood not only of the Saints
departed that rest in heaven, but also with reference to the holy Angels in
heaven that fell not, who having a benefit by Christ the mediator, as well as
we, are therefore to be seated with us in the society and body of the Church.

Heb. 12.22, 23. But ye are come to Mount Sion, etc. and to the innumerable
company of Angels. Where the Apostle speaking of the Church, takes the holy
Angels as Limbs of that Body, and members of that Company. And Revel 19.10.
The Angel tells John, I am thy fellow Servant, one of thy Brethren; I have the
testimony of Jesus, the Spirit of Prophecy: I am thy fellow Servant: as who
should say, A fellow of the same House and Family with us, that is, the Church:
A Brother, as having the same Father, God; and the same Mother, the heavenly
Jerusalem, that is, the Church: having the testimony of Jesus: that is,
communicating in the same gifts and graces of the Spirit, as the Spirit of
Prophecy, which is peculiar to the Church only, as 1. Cor. 12. So we see by
express Scripture, that they are members as well as we. Secondly, by
necessary deduction and consequence. First, the Angels are elect, 1. Tim. 5.21,
and therefore they are parts of the Church. Secondly, Christ is their Head,
Col. 2.10. ye are complete in him (that is in Christ) who is the head of all
principalities and Powers: therefore they must be parts of his Body, Which is
his Church. Thirdly, the Angels peep and pry into the mysteries of our
redemption by Jesus Christ, 1. Pet. 1.12. therefore except we will make them
busi-bodies, to pry and meddle with that which they have not to do in, which
is utterly against their wisdom and uprightness, they must needs be parts
and members of the true Church; and so much of the Proofs.

The Reasons are these, First the Church is the most excellent,

Secondly, the Church is that fullness of Christ, that fills Ephesians. 1.23. If
the Angels be left out, where is that fullness?

Thirdly, it is against the bountifulness of Christ, and

Fourthly, the evil Angels that fell away are a part of the Math. 25.41. Go ye
cursed into everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels: As who
should say, as you had your part with them here in sin, so you shall have a
part with them in punishment: now if the evil Angels be a part, yea a great
part of the Church malignant, then the good Angels must needs be a part, yea a
great part too, of the gracious and glorious Church of God.

Fifthly, they must needs be a part and members of the true Church, because
they have many necessary Employments in the Church about the faithful. It is
said of them, Heb. 1.14. that They are ministering Spirits sent forth to
minister for their sakes that shall be heirs of Salvation. And in Luke 15.10.
that They rejoice over one sinner that conuerteth, etc. And Ps. 91.12. It is
said, that They bear us in their hands. And Math. 24.30. that At the last day
they shall gather the Elect together from the four winds. Now therefore they
must needs be parts and members of the true Church, that so they may minister
to us the more cheerfully, and rejoice over us the more affectionately, and
bear us in their hands the more charily, and gather us together at the last
day the more earnestly; as knowing they do it not as Servants and slaves,
altogether for others, but somewhat respectively for themselves, for the
advancement o^ the good of that body, whereof themselves are members.

of us! What Care and endeavor must there be in us to lead Angels lives in
all holiness, pureness and innocence; seeing the holy, pure, and innocent
Angels are our fellows, and parts of ^he same body with us!

The second Use is for matter of comfort to as many of

The third Use shows us the disablenesse of the Angels Job 4.18. He laid folly
on his Angels, meaning the good Angels, they are not upright in regard of Gods
perfect justice: but when God beholds them in the face of Christ, whose
righteousness is as pure as the eyes of the Lord himself, then they find
favor with him. If so be then that they be not able to merit their own
salvation, but must be saved by Jesus Christ; then consequently it is folly in
men to repose any trust in themselves for their salvation, or to pray to them,
or to worship them: no invocation or worship is due to the^, no, they utterly
disclaim it as robbery against God, they being not Gods, but Gods servants;
and disparagement to our selves, they being but fellow-seruants and members of
the same body with us, Revel. 19.10.

That Christ is Mediator for the Angels, and how?
yet this hinders not but that he may be a Mediator for the Angels too: for it
is no where denied in Scripture, though the other only be expressly affirmed.
The Case is thus; Their estate differs from ours in many kinds, and the
mediation must be answerable to the estate of the parties that are mediated
for; and therefore Christ's mediation for them in some maine circumstances is
diverse from ours too, and it differs in two maine things; first, in the work;
secondly, in the means. First, in the work; There is not the same work done
for them, as for us, as Redemption: for they never fell, and therefore need no
Redeemer; we are fallen, and therefore he is the Mediator for us; he must
redeem us, else we can have no salvation. Secondly, it differs in the means,
for that is not the same: for whereas some of the Angels fell as well as we,
The Angels fall was personal.
that was but a personal fall, only chargeable on them that did fall: but
when Adam fell, besides his personal sin, it was the common sin of all
mankind, we being all wrapped in Adams loins; and therefore he that was to
mediate for us, was to take our very nature on him, and to be incarnate, that
so according to the course of Gods Justice, the same nature that sinned might
be punished, and make satisfaction for our sins. These be the differences
betwixt us and them in regard of the work, and the means of it. But yet they
also have their part in Christ, and in his mediation, so far as is agreeable
to their estates, and that in two respects; first, The Angels have their part
in Christ's mediation in four things, in respect of things done to us, which
redound to them.
in the things done to us, which redound to them; secondly, in the things done
more directly to themselves. First, the things done to us that redound to them;
for first, by this mediation done for us, their knowledge is advanced, Ephesians.
3.10. To the intent (says the Apostle) that now unto Principalities and Powers
in heavenly places might be known by the Church, the manifold wisdom of
God. Now this is a singular Luke 15.10. how much more then when a door is
opened for many sinners to come to salvation by. Thirdly, by this means Tim.
5.21. And in diverse things done more directly to themselves.
they are called Elect Angels, and that no doubt in Christ in whom we were
elected, Ephesians. 1.4. for the work being The firstborn of every Creature,
Colos. 1.15. because every Creature had their being by him. Thirdly, their
fellows fell; and their confirmation in the estate of Grace, that they neither
shall nor can fall away, is because they are vpheld by Christ, and by his
mediation they have assurance that they shall never fall; else in reason these
might have fallen as well as the other, the other being as excellent, and
having freewill as well as they; and therefore if these had not been vpheld by
Christ, they had fallen Cor. 15.24. then shall the blessed Angels triumph over
the wicked Spirits: for as the evil Angels, though they be damned already, yet
they are not fully and perfectly tormented till after the Judgment day; for
then they shall have it in full measure, they shall be then stowed under the
hatches, and as it were fettered in the Dungeon: so the good Angels, though
they be already glorified, yet their glory is not fully perfected till the
last day; when our glory is perfected, then shall theirs be perfected also.
And so much for the first Point, That Angels are parts and members of the true
Church.

That part of Gods Church and chosen which consists of men, and they are partly
in heaven, partly in earth. First, those that are in heaven.
Now we come to that part of Gods Church and chosen, which consists of men, and
is found amongst them; for that does first, more nearly, and properly concern
our selves; secondly, it tends more directly to the opening of the question
propounded. And because these are partly in heaven, and partly on earth, we
will God willing speak of both. And first we will speak of that part of the
Church which is in heaven; secondly, of that part on earth; and thirdly, of
both together. First of those in heaven; that part of Gods Church which is in
heaven, are the souls of the just and perfect men that have finished their
pilgrimage, and departed this life.

Ioh. 14.2, 3. He will go and prepare a place for us, that where he is, there
we may be also: but he is in heaven; therefore there must we be too, that is
the place of receipt for the faithful after this life. So likewise it is his
prayer, Ioh. 17.24. Father, I will that those whom thou have given me, be with
me even where I am, that they may behold my glory. You shall see this likewise
by example. Whither went Helias at his departure? He was carried up into
Heaven, 2. King. 2.11. and whither went Lazarus but into Abraham's bosom? Luke
16.22. by which is meant Heaven. And whither went the Thief upon the Cross
after his departure, but into Paradise? Luke 23.43. And surely this is the Lure
and bait which God holds forth unto us, to provoke and draw us to come to him,
and to obey his will, Matthew. 5.10, 12. Blessed are they that suffer persecution
for righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Rejoice and be
glad, for great is your reward in Heaven. And Luke 18.22. Sell all that thou
have, and distribute to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in Heaven. And
this is true, that Heaven is the place of receipt for all the faithful after
this life, not only in respect of their souls, but also in respect of their
bodies too, though in a diverse manner; the soul never dying, presently after
it is departed out of the body, as the soul of Lazarus, Luke 16.22. the body
dying and turned to dust, yet it shall be raised again at the last day by the
power of the Lord Jesus Christ, and so united to the soul, and placed in
Heaven. Job 19.26. Though after my skin worms devour this body, yet shall I
see God in my flesh. And both these are verified in Christ already, his soul
went presently into Heaven, his body after his resurrection. So that Heaven is
the place of receipt for all Gods chosen, of their souls presently after their
departure, and of their bodies after the resurrection.

The Reasons of the Point are these. First, Heaven is Gods Psalm. 16.11. there
God has stored up for us the good things which he has promised us; therefore
that is the place we must go to.







grant once that there is a Purgatory, and then Masses and Dirges, and many
such trumperies will follow. Let us therefore know, that Gods Chosen which are
departed this life are in heaven, and let us account better of them, then to
think they are in any such place.



Heb. 11.13, 14, 15, 16. They were strangers and pilgrims here, which did
declare plainly, that they did seek another Country, even Heaven it self.
And let your hope and affections be in Heaven whilst ye are here on earth,
Col. 3.1, 2, 3. If ye be risen with Christ (says the Apostle) seek those
things which are above, etc. Let your conversation be in Heaven, Phil. 3.10 And
as your treasure is in heaven* so let your hearts be there also, Math. 6.20.
And as for this earthly Tabernacle of our body, let us not pamper it, nor
please it, nor delight in it, nor admire it; but let us be content to lay it
down cheerfully, sighing and desiring to be clothed with our house which is
from Heaven, 2. Cor. 5.1, 2. And surely if we would think of this place
whither we are going, our hearts would be in Heaven before we come thither,
like as a man that is gone a great journey, and is far from his house, yet
still his mind and his heart is at home and still his thoughts run upon
that, because there is his Comfort, there be knows he shall have rest from
all his Travels; and therefore thither he posts, And so we must do.



The fourth Lecture of the Church.
THe third general Point which we propounded to be handled, before we came to
the handling of the Question was concerning the nature of the Church which we
defined in this wise, To be the whole company of Gods Chosen in heaven and in
earth. We showed, that that part of Gods Church which is in heaven, contained
as well Angels as men, and therefore we spoke of them by themselves, and proved
that the Angels were a part of Gods Church as well as men: then we came to
speak of that part of Gods Church which consists of men; and in handling this
Point, we propounded three things to be spoken too; First, to speak of that
part of Gods Church consisting of men which are in heaven by themselves:
Secondly, of those which are in earth by themselves. Thirdly, of both those
which are in heaven, and which are in earth together. Concerning the first, we
have spoken and showed, that Heaven is the place of receipt for all Gods chosen
after their departure out of this life.

Now we are to speak of the second, namely, Secondly, those which are in earth.
that part of Gods Church, consisting of men which are on earth, and so to
proceed to the third Point. And first of that part of Gods Church on earth.
For although there be the same chosen now in heaven, which sometime were on
earth, and the same now in earth, which sometime shall be in heaven; so that
the Church or Chosen in heaven do not make a several Church by themselves,
nor those in earth a several Church by themselves, but both together make one
and the same Church: yet because there are some particular considerations
incident to that in heaven, which they on earth have not yet attained to; and
likewise some other particular considerations incident to that on earth, which
they in heaven have already passed from, therefore each of them is to be
handled by it self; and therefore having spoken of that part of Gods Church
which is in heaven before, now we are to speak of that on earth. I shall not
need to define this on earth, because it is apparently defined before in the
general: for if that were the whole company of Gods Chosen in heaven and in
earth, then this must needs be the whole company of Gods Chosen living on
earth.

that God ever had; secondly, that he has now; and thirdly, that he shall have
to the worlds end a Company, etc. First, God always had. In matters of fact,
examples are fittest and strongest proofs; this being then a matter of fact
already done, it is best to be proved by examples taken out of Histories of
several times: we will begin with the first beginning; God had his Church in
Paradise. How prove you that? Why first there was God, the Preacher; secondly,
there was our first Parents Adam and Eve, the hearers; and thirdly, there was
the Word and Commandment, Genesis 2.16, 17. There is the Doctrine of salvation,
and the strict form and manner of worship prescribed by God, which he will be
honored by. Now what is here wanting to the full being of a true Church? For
here is a Pastor, and a People, and the Word, and such a Word as is fitting for
their salvation: Therefore in Paradise God had his Church. Also out of Paradise
God still had his Church: for there is still the same Preacher God; the same
hearers, Adam and Eve; the Doctrine of salvation, though not the same it was
before; yet here is that Doctrine of salvation fitting their present state and
condition, a Doctrine of repentance, and of punishment of sin, and specially
the Doctrine of the Gospel, a Doctrine of Faith in Christ, Genes. 3.16. The
Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head: so here God had his Church
still. Hyper. 535.
To pass from them to Abel; there was Abels sacrificing, and his Faith, and
there was Gods presence and acceptance, as we may see, Genesis 4.4. compared with
Heb. 11.4. Now where these are, there is a true Church. Afterward in the time
of Seth it is said, Genesis 4 25. that then men began to call upon the Name of the
Lord; that is, men did then begin more zealously to worship God: so here God
had his Church still. Let us pass from Seth to Enoch; It is said of him, that
he walked with God, believed in God, and that he pleased God, Genes. 5.24. Heb.
11.5. Now where there are men walking with God, believing in him, and pleasing
him, there is a true Church. So in the time of Noah, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
and in the time of the Patriarchs, God had his Church still, Heb. 11.6, 7,
etc. to the end of the Chapter; there the succession of the Church in the
faithful is set down, as it were of purpose to prove this Point which we have
in hand, namely, that God had a Church from the beginning of the world. To
prove this Point further, we will omit to speak of the flourishing times of
the Church (for of them there is no question, there being then not embracers
only of the heavenly truth, but professors too in great number) and we will
instance in those times that were most obscure, when there was the least
likelihood of a Church; and if we can prove that God had his Church in those
times, then the Point will be proved, that God has always had a Church. We
will therefore instance in them; first, at the Flood, when all flesh had
corrupted their ways, Genesis 6.12. and that the earth was filled with cruelty,
Verse. 13. yet in that desperate time there was found Noah, a just and upright
man in that generation, Verse. 9. So God had his Church then. Let us pass from
these times, and come to the bondage and slavery of the Children of Israel in
Egypt when Gods peculiar people were in the hands of a most profane,
idolatrous, and cruel Nation, so that they had neither liberty, nor time, nor
means of Gods true worship; yet as there was a light in Goshen, when palpable
darkness was over all the Land of Egypt besides; so when all the World was
overwhelmed with gross ignorance, sin, and error, yet then God had his
Church: amongst the Israelites there were some Midwiues fearing God, Exodus
1.21. and there were some that cried, and prayed, and sighed to God, and were
heard of him, Exodus 2.23, 24. So God had his Church in those times. Likewise in
the days of Elias, when the Church was brought to a low ebb, the Prophet
could see no more left but himself (and yet he had eyes to discern it) yet he
was a true worshipper of God, Vogel. 751.
and so God had his true Church then, if there had been no more then he, 1.
King. 19.10. But the Lord saw seven thousand more that were true worshippers,
and had not bowed their knee to Baal, verse. 18. In this desperate time when
they killed Gods Prophets, and brake down his Altars, and sought the life of
Elias, yet in this very time God had his Church, and a flourishing one too in
his eyes, though men could not discern it. Afterward in that general
Apostasy, when Israel and Judah were both fallen from God; yet here is a true
Church still; here was one out of a City, and two out of a Tribe to worship
God, Ier. 3.13, 14. So in the Captivity of Babylon, when the Church is quite
overwhelmed as it were, Jerusalem was so distressed, Religion defaced, all
turned into a miserable desolation, so as there was never the like: Is there
any sorrow like unto my sorrow (says the Prophet, speaking in the behalf of
the Church, Lam. 1.12.) yet then God had his Church, there were both teachers
and embracers, as Jeremy, Haggai, Zechariah, and Daniel, and many others. At
our Saviors coming in the flesh, when the Law and the Temple, Priests and
people, the Church and Commonwealth were utterly corrupted and defiled, yet
still God had his Church; there was Zachary and Elizabeth, Joseph and Marie,
Simeon and Anna, true beleeueres and right worshippers of God. Lastly, in the
height of the pride of Antichrist, the abomination of desolation standing in
the holy place for many hundred years, when all the Nations in the earth were
made drunk with the Cup of fornications by the Whore of Babylon, the Synagogue
of Rome, yet God had some from time to time that lothed her golden Cup; some
that were not defiled with her fornications, but kept themselves pure Virgins,
and a chaste Spouse to the Lord Jesus Christ, sweetly embracing his saving
truth. And so much for proof of the first part of the observation, That God
always had a Church and company of chosen people, etc.

The second part is, that as God ever has had, so he now has a Church, etc. I
shall not need to speak much for proof of this point; for it cannot be
denied, but that (blessed be God) there be many flourishing Churches at this
day in Germany, France, England and Scotland; many in all these places that
worship God in Spirit and Truth; yea under Popery no doubt but there are many
true Christians: yea even amongst the Turks, and Jews, and Infidels I doubt
not, but that there are ye^ remaining some that worship God with us: no
question but there are some sparks of fire amongst those burnt ashes; some
polished stones of these decayed Churches; some gold amongst all that dross;
some that serve the Lord, amongst so many thousand servants of sin and slaves
of Satan; we have many instances now at this day of some that live under
Popery, and amongst the Jews, that profess our Religion. So the second part
is proved, that God now has his Church and chosen people.

The last part, and shall have to the worlds end, etc. We cannot prove this
point by examples as we did the former, because it is not yet thoroughly
fulfilled; yet we have as sure proofs for it, as examples; we have Gods own
Word for it, and that which God has spoken is as sure, as if it were already
done; and therefore the Prophets deliver many predictions in the Preterperfect
Tense, as if they were already done, because of the certainty of it. I say we
have Gods Word for proof of this point, Psalm. 132.13, 14. For the Lord has
chosen Sion, and loves to dwell in it, saying, this is my Rest for ever, here
will I dwell, etc. God will dwell and rest and that for ever in his Church; as
himself is for ever, so his Church is for ever. So Math. 28.20. I am with you
ever, even to the worlds end. It is more then if he had said, I will be with
you, etc. It is as much as if he had said thus; As sure as I am actually
present with you now, so I will still continue unto the very end of the world.
And whereas in respect of his bodily presence it was nor so, because he was to
ascend into heaven; yet by his Spirit he is with us effectually to all saving
purposes, Ioh. 14.16. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, verse. 17. even the Spirit of
Truth, etc. And whereas there are many opposers of Gods Church, men and Devils,
and many times they have a great hand over the Church; yet they are still
bridled and curbed, and the Church still so protected and defended, that the
gates of Hell shall never prevail against it, that is, utterly to disanull it,
Math. 16.18. There are many other proofs for this Point, but because we shall
speak of them in the Reasons, therefore we will pass to them.

The Reasons of the point (that God ever had, now has, and shall have a Church
to the worlds end) are these.

Psalm. 132.11, 12. The Lord has sworn in Truth to David, and will not shrink
from it, saying, of the fruit of thy Body will I set up thy throne for ever. He
has sworn it, and will not shrink from it, that is, he will not recant:
which although it be typically spoken of David and his seed, yet in truth and
substance of it, it is intended of Christ and his Church. The same promise is
renewed, Ier. 33.17, 18. where it is said, that David shall never want a man to
sit upon the Throne of the house of Israel. And in the 20. and 21. verses, it
is said, If ye can break my Covenant of the day, and my Covenant of the
night, then my Covenant may be broken with David my Servant. Giving us to
understand, that his promise is irreuocable; so long as there is day, or so
long as there is night on the earth, so long the Lord will have his Church on
earth; his Word and his Promise cannot be broken; no, says our Savior, Heaven
and Earth may fail, but my Word shall never fail: therefore he having passed
his Word for the continuance of his Church for ever, it shall continue for ever
in despite of all her adversaries.

Secondly, the saving Truth and doctrine of salvation

The third Reason is taken from Gods Fatherly Care over

Fourthly, he does preserve his Church on earth for the Isa. 6.13. and
therefore, so long as the world stands, they cannot be utterly destroyed.

Fifthly, the Church on earth is the Nurserie for heaven;

Sixthly, there must be a continual war betwixt the Genesis 3.15. betwixt the
wicked and the godly; therefore as the wicked, seed of the Serpent and the seed
of the Woman, Genesis 3.15. betwixt the wicked and the godly; therefore as the
wicked, the Serpents seed, shall be always on earth; so likewise the faithful,
the woman's seed, shall be always on earth too.

Caine is ancient being of the malignant Church; but his Parents, the Church in
Paradise is ancienter. Eve and Adam harkened to the voice of the Serpent, and
so committed sin soon after the Creation; yet there was a time before their
fall, when they believed, and rested on God and his Word, and were righteous.
The Devil is a Lier from the beginning, yet Gods Truth was in the beginning
before that ^ie; else it could not have been perverted with his Lie. This
serves, first, to stop the mouth of all Gainsaiers, and adversaries of Gods
Church, that Charge us with nouelty, to be a new sect, and challenge
antiquity to themselves, that they are the ancient and true Church, which are
both lies, for they are the nouellists, not we. We are from the beginning,
before they had any being; so that we are more ancient then they, and their
religion is nouelty, and a new Sect. Secondly, it may serve to confirm us in
the undoubted assurance of the Truth, and of that Faith and Religion which we
profess. That which is most ancient is most true, as being immediately and
originally from the pure Fountain, the pure hands of God himself, who is the
ancient of days. And contrarily, all Religions which are less ancient, are
from some corrupt Channels, degenerate from the original sincerity. Now our
Religion which we profess is most ancient and most pure; and therefore let all
contrary Doctrines and Religions hide their heads, and be ashamed of
themselves, and yield the pre-eminence of pure Truth to our Religion that is
most true and rightly ancient.

beginning of the world, so it shall continue by succession to the end of the
world, as it was before all other Congregations, so it shall see the rising and
fall of all other Congregations; but it self shall continue one and the same
by a continual succession: where the Fathers are gone, there Children shall
stand up in their steads, and so Childrens Children to the worlds end. There
shall be many changes and alterations from time to time, yet still there shall
be a Church in all these changes. If the Church fail in Paradise, it shall be
found out of Paradise: If Israel fall away, yet Judah shall stand: If the Jews
be cast off, yet the Gentiles shall be taken in: Though Popery, Turcisme, and
Iudaisme, and Paganism abound and fill the world, and are up in Arms against
the Church, yet there are some corners in the world that God has reserved to
shelter his Church in, wherein they shall be preserved both from their
persecution and infection.

The third Use, Is matter of Comfort to the faithful; Psalm. 102.28. they may
be afflicted, persecuted, and distressed on every side; yet they shall never be
forsaken, nor given over utterly as a prey to their enemies. If the wicked
murder some of them, yet God will have some of them remain still: let
persecutours draw out the blood of Gods Children as long as they will or can,
yet still there shall be found some that will offer themselves to their bloody
hands for the maintenance of Gods Truth: as some are taken away, God will still
send them a new supply. So then it is Comfort to them in regard of themselves,
that they shall never perish.

Secondly, it is comfort to them in regard of their posterity, and of the
Church after them; they need not say on their deathbeds as worldlings do, What
shall become of my Children and goods after I am gone; they need not say so of
their spiritual goods; let God alone with them, leave them to him, the
faithful seed shall be preserved and vpholden by his Fatherly providence to
the worlds end, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against them. And as
for the Truth of God, the Gospel and the graces of the Spirit, which
themselves are seized on in their life time, God will dispose of them to the
right heirs, heirs of his own begetting add raising up; he will find heirs
for them successively from age to age to the last end. Then Christ Jesus
himself shall come, and he shall stand last; upon the earth, and so the
Church shall be the first and the last; The first Adam, the first man on earth,
beginning the Church on earth; And the second Adam, the last man upon the
earth, finishing it up by his personal presence, having continued and
maintained it by his own power from the first beginning to the worlds end. And
shall the Church have an end then? No, though all things be then at an end,
yet the Church shall not yet be at an end: but as it is for ever here, so it
shall continue for ever in heaven too, and that in a far safer, and happier,
and more glorious estate, then ever it did in this world, Psalm. 102.28.

Psalm. 2.1. Yet I will tell them what they shall prevail in; they shall prevail
thus far to make the Church more in number, and more zealous for God, and
constant in his truth, contrary to their end. For behold, when they have done
what they can against the faithful, when they have burnt them to ashes, God
will raise out of those very ashes a new seed to call upon his Name, and the
blood of the Saints shed shall fatten the Church, and make it more fruitful,
and be a cause of the greater increase of the Faithful. It is a vain thing
therefore for them to threaten them, and to say (as many times they do) that
they will root out these Professors. It is more then they can do, nay it is
more then the Devil (their good Master) can do himself, and therefore let
them never think to do it.

Fifthly, this teaches us not to Judge of the Church by

Now we come to speak of the third Point, namely, Thirdly, of those which are
in heaven and earth both together.
of the Church of God, consisting of men in heaven and in earth together. I
will describe it by certain qualities and circumstances, such as may present
and make it plain to every man's view. And because it is an Article of our
Faith, and now that we are entered into it, it is needful to speak of all that
is necessary for us to believe concerning this Point; The matter of this
reduced to six Heads, all raised out of the Article of the Creed, I believe
the holy Catholic Church.
therefore we will fetch these qualities from that Article in the Creed that
concerns the Church; I believe the holy Catholic Church: and I will reduce
all the matter we are here to speak of to these six Heads; First, that the
Church is one; secondly, that it is holy; thirdly, that it is Catholic;
Fourthly, that it is joined to Christ; Fifthly, that they have a Communion one
with another; and sixthly, that they are known only to God and themselves; and
all these are raised out of the Article in the Creed. That it is one, therefore
it is said the Church, not Churches; and the Nicen Creed which was penned after
this says, I believe one. That it is holy and Catholic, so it is said in
express words: that it is joined to Christ, and that they have a Communion
among themselves; both these are intended when it is said, they are a Communion
of Saints. Lastly, that they are known only to God and themselves. How is
this gathered hence? Why thus; because it is said, I believe it. Now that which
we believe is not seen; and therefore this Article must not be expounded of a
visible Church, as the Papists would have it.

First Head, It is but one.
Now first of the first note; It is but one; for so the Nicen Creed for
plainness sake ads this particle, one. We will draw it into an observation,
and that is this, namely, That all the faithful that ever were, or shall be
either in heaven or in earth, do make up but one only Church. It is proved
thus. The Scripture, when it speaks of the true Church in the general true
nature of it, speaks in the singular number, Ephesians. 5.27, 32. that he might make
it a glorious Church, etc. This I speak concerning Christ, and concerning his
Church. And Math. 16.18. upon this Rock will I build my Church. It is true
that the Scripture speaks sometime in the plural number of Churches, as the
Apostle Paul 1. Cor. 11.16. we have no such custom, nor the Churches of God;
but then it speaks of particular visible Congregations: but of the general
Catholic Church it speaks always in the singular number, as being but one,
and so expressly ascribes oneness to it, Cant. 6 8. Christ says to his
Church, My Love, my Dove, etc. Ephesians. 4.4. there is one body, etc. The Church
has a threefold oneness; it is one in it self, it is one with Christ, and it
has an oneness amongst the members. In this place we speak but of the
oneness it has in it self; of the other two we shall speak in their due
place. The Church has a threefold oneness.
That it is one in it self, therefore it is called the house of God, not
houses; the temple of God, not temples; as in the time of the Law there was but
one Tabernacle, and afterward but one Temple, whereto all the people came,
Leuitic. 17.3, 4. Deuteronomy. 21 5. and 16.2. 2. Chron. 2.4. so now there is but one
only Church of the faithful.

Ephesians. 4.4, 5. there are many reasons heaped together; there is but one
Spirit, therefore but one Church, as there is but one soul, and therefore but
one man. There is but one hope, at which all Gods people jointly aim, and
therefore they are one corporation; one Lord, and therefore one family; one
Faith, which is the life of the Church, and if there be but one life, then
there can be but one Church; one Baptism, and therefore but one Promise and
Covenant, which all do make to God as one man.

Secondly, the Church is the Body of Christ, Ephesians. 5.23.

Thirdly, they have all one Shepherd, and therefore they Ioh. 10.16.

Fourthly, they are all partakers of one Bread, and therefore Cor. 10.17.

Fifthly, all the differences that are betwixt them are abolished Ephesians. 2.14.
Gal. 3.28.

The Uses are these. First, this teaches us the unchangeableness Adam was
saved by before the Flood, and Noah in the Flood, and Abraham before the Law,
and David under the Law, and the Apostles whilst Christ was on earth; the same
says are we and all the faithful saved by from Christ's ascension till his
return to Judgment. And therefore that is a damnable doctrine that some hold,
that every man shall be saved by his own Religion, whatsoever it be, if he
be zealous in it: no, diverse Religions make diverse Churches; but there is but
one Church to be saved, and therefore but one Truth and Religion to be saved by.

Ephesians. 4.3. Beware of factions and divisions, either of making or following
them: for they are the very bane of this oneness of the Church; and take heed
of pride and singularity, for that is the common Mother and Nurse of
dissensions and rents in the Church; and do not receive the Word with respect
of persons, as when one says, I am of Paul, another, I am of Apollos, etc.
What is Paul? and what is Apollos? but Ministers by whom ye believe. They
teach one Faith; they preach one and the same Christ crucified; they have
received one and the same ministration; therefore embrace them all as one
Ministry of one and the same Church. What if God bestow diverse gifts on diverse
persons, and one more excellent then another? Will thou abuse Gods gifts to the
making of rents and factions in the Church? No, thou must know that thou art
bound to profit the more by him that has more gifts, and to glorify God the
more for them, and not to dote upon them, and maintain Sects by them: for that
is not the end why God gives them, but it is the malice of the Devil that does
thus abuse them to a wrong end.

for they make but one Church, and therefore can have but one Head. Some of the
Jesuits having been pressed with this Argument, and not knowing how to answer
it, have affirmed, that the Pope is Head of the Church in heaven; so gross and
blasphemous have they been. So the Turks and the Jews that erect Churches of
their own, and have no fellowship with this Church, they are not the true
Church, nor have any part in this oneness of the Church; and whatsoever they
are that have no part in this Church, they are none of Gods Church, but of the
Synagogue of Satan.

Fourthly, Difference of circumstances do not cut off from the true Church;
as, First, of states.
this teaches that difference in matters of circumstance Secondly, of times.
difference of times do not cut off from the true Church, before the Law,
under the Law, and after the Law; the first and the last Churches all are one.
Thirdly, Thirdly, of persons.
nor the difference of Persons, Jews and Gentiles, bond and free, male and
female, poor and rich, all are one in Christ Jesus. Fourthly, Fourthly, of
place.
nor yet difference of place, Jerusalem, Antioch, Corinth, England, France,
Denmark; yea Paradise, Earth and Heaven, all are but one Church. Fifthly,
Fifthly, of ceremonies.
nor yet difference of Ceremonies, some worshipping at one time and place, some
in one habit, some in another; so long as all worship in Spirit and Truth, they
are but one Church. Sixthly, Sixthly, of judgment in Points not absolutely
fundamental.
no nor yet difference of judgment, in Points not absolutely fundamental, do
not cut off from the true Church; so long as all hold Christ Jesus, he is the
head-corner-stone that knits them all together into one building. So much of
the oneness of the Church it self.

Second Head; The Church is holy.
The second Note or quality of the Church is. That it is holy. We will draw it
into an observation, as we did the former, and that is this, Namely; That the
whole Company of the faithful both in heaven and in earth are a holy Company
and every part and member thereof is holy; 1. Pet. 2.9. They are called a holy
nation; and in the fifth Verse, a holy Priesthood. And it is said of Jerusalem,
that it is a holy City; not that in heaven only, Reuelat. 21.2. but that on
earth too, Math. 4.5. And in Ephesians. 5.27. the Church is said to be holy and
without blame, etc. And hence it is, that those which are parts and members of
the Church are called Saints, and Saints on earth, as Psalm. 16.3. And so the
whole Congregation is called the Congregation of Saints, Psalm. 89.5. And their
Head and Ruler is the King of Saints; and they are not holy in profession
only, for so are hypocrites too, that are no part of the true Church; but they
are holy indeed, they are truly sanctified; therefore the Apostle calls them
holy brethren Heb. 3.1. And this Holiness is partly imputed, Heb. 10.10. We
are sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ. And Colos. 1.21,
21. And partly inherent, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. Now the very God of peace sanctify
you throughout, etc. this is begun here, but not perfected till we have put off
this body of sin.

Ioh. 17.17. sanctify them with thy truth, etc. Jude. 1. sanctified of God the
Father, etc. and therefore they are holy.

Cor. 1.2. sanctified in Christ Jesus; and in the thirtieth verse he is said to
be their sanctification. And Ephesians. 5.25.26. Christ gave himself for his Church,
that he might sanctify it.

makes them holy, 1. Cor. 6.11. but now ye are sanctified by the Spirit of our
God, and Romans 15.16.

Fourthly, the Word whereby they are gathered, and the Pet. 2.21. It is called
the holy Commandment, and therefore they must needs be holy.

Fifthly, the effects which they feel in themselves are Jude 20. therefore
they are holy.

Sixthly, they are chosen to Holiness. 1. Pet. 1.2. and therefore

Seventhly, they are regenerate and borne again to Holiness; Ioh. 3.9. and
Ephesians. 2.9. we are created in Christ Jesus to good works: and therefore must
needs be holy.

The uses are these: First, this shows the essential difference

Secondly, this should teach us to labor for Holiness, heaven, nor by faith
here on earth, Psalm. 15.1, 2, etc. The Prophet asks this Question; Lord, who
shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, or who shall rest in thy holy Mountain? The
answer is; even he that walks uprightly, and works Righteousness, and
speaks the Truth in his heart. Revel. 21.27. There shall enter no unclean
thing into the heavenly Jerusalem: there, if ever we will see God with Joy and
Comfort, we must labor for a pure heart, and pure hands. It should teach us
therefore, First, to take heed of sin, and to avoid it, for it is
filthiness and uncleanness, as opposite to Holiness, as darkness is to
light, and Satan to God himself. Let every one that calls on the Name of the
Lord, (that is, every member of the true Church) depart from iniquity; let
them leave their lying, and swearing, and covetousness, and labor to fly
from the corruptions that are in the world through lust, and resist the
inticements of the Devil, and fight against the rebellions of their own
hearts, and not suffer their corruptions to break forth, but to root them
out; put off your shoes, for you stand on holy ground; lay by your sins and
wicked affections, for the Church is a holy Church, that you are members of;
the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are; defile not your selves with
sin and uncleanness therefore; remember what God says, Ier. 11.15. What
should my Beloved tarry in my house, seeing they have committed an abomination.
As if he should say; I have no room for them in my house, if they commit
abomination. And Psalm. 50.16. What have thou to do (says God to the wicked)
to take my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed. Therefore
say with the Church in the Canticles, Chap. 6.5. I have put off my coat, how
then shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? And as
it teaches us to fly sin, so in the second place it teaches us to follow
that which is good; Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
etc. think on those things, Phil. 4.8. Give your selves to holy meditations
and conferences, frequent good companies and exercises, use the means of
holiness, be conversant in hearing and reading the Word, and receiving the
Sacrament, and be frequent and earnest in Prayer to God for the Spirit of
sanctification, that he may make your hearts, minds, wills and affections,
and lives holy and unblameable; that so as you profess your selves to be
Saints, so you may live like Saints.

Lastly, this may serve for reproof of the graceless and John 3.
that they must be either Saints or Devils, either of the seed of God, or of
the Devil. And therefore let them know, that as they scoff at us unjustly, so
the Lord from heaven does most justly deride them, and will one day laugh at
their destruction, and this is to them a token of perdition, and a most
certain token too, because they are not only without holiness themselves,
but they hate it, and deride it in others: but to us it is a sign of
salvation, both that we are endued with holiness, and also that we suffer
persecution for it, Heb. 3.3. The Apostle uses this word very gravely, which
they do so deride, he calls them holy Brethren. And therefore in the second
place, let us be so far from being daunted by their scoffing at us, as that
it may rather encourage us to be more holy. Let us say as David did to Michal,
when she scoft at him for dancing before the Arc, Am I vile in thine eyes for
this? I will be yet more vile. So let us say, Does our holiness displease you?
I will be yet more holy. Let us therefore labor by prayer to God, and all good
endeavor not only to begin, but to grow on from grace to grace, from one
measure of holiness to another, notwithstanding their scoffs, that so at last
we may be fit to enter into that holy place whereinto none unholy nor unclean
thing shall enter.

The fifth Lecture of the Church.
Having entered into the Point concerning the Church of God in heaven and in
earth together, we showed, that in as much as it is an Article of our Faith to
believe the Catholic Church, that therefore it was needful that we should
understand, and speak of it out of that Article of the Creed which concerns
the Church. That Article says, I believe the holy Catholic Church, the
Communion of Saints, etc. Wherein I noted six things, whereby the Church was
marked out. First, that it is one, for so says the Nicen Creed, and so this
Article intendes when it says Church, and not Churches; secondly, that it is
holy; thirdly, that it is Catholic, so it is said in express words; Fourthly
that they are joined to Christ; And fifthly, that they have a Communion amongst
themselves, both these are intended where it is said they are a Communion of
Saints; sixthly and lastly, that they are known only to God and themselves,
and this is intended, when it is said, I believe it. We have past through two
of these adjuncts (for so I call them) first that the Church is one; and
secondly, that it is holy: The third Head, It is Catholic.
now we are to come to the third Adiunct Catholic; The Church of God is
Catholic.

In handling of this Point, we will first show, how this word, Catholic, has
been wronged; secondly, we will right it; and thirdly, we will draw such
observations from thence as it will fitly minister. First, how this word
Catholic has been wronged,


First, it has been much wronged for many hundred years, and that by many;
First, by those in the Romish Church; Secondly, by some of our own Church.
First, First, by those in the Romish Church three ways.
it has been wronged and corrupted exceedingly by those of the Romish Church,
and that in these respects; first, in that they falsely challenge it, and
appropriate it to themselves alone. Secondly, in that they boast of it as their
Crown and glory. Thirdly, in that they put their confidence in it, that
because they have this name, therefore they are undoubtedly the true Church,
and in certain state of salvation.

First, the word is wronged, in that they of the Romish

Secondly, it is wronged by them, in that they boast and

Thirdly, they wrong it, Rhemists in Act. 11 and Bristow in his mo^es and
demands. 2. Cor. 3.5.
in that they put much confidence in this name, that because they are so
called, therefore says Bristow and the Rhemists, we are the undoubtedly true
Church, and in certain state of salvation: for this is one of the Pillars of
Popery; the very names of the Church, and Catholic, they are the two pillars
that Popery builds upon. But it is to be considered, that the name makes not
the man to be such as he is called, but on the contrary because a man is such
an one as the name imports, therefore he is so called. As for example, A
Father or a Master is not such an one, because he is so called; but because he
is a Father or a Master, therefore he is called so. Therefore we must first
examine our selves, whether we are such as the name imports, and then we may
have Comfort in our States whether we be so named or not; if the name be upon
us without cause, we are nothing the nearer to salvation. If it be on us upon
good cause, then we may have comfort in our state; not for the name, but
because we are such as the name signifies: so that the name is no way any
matter of confidence to build our salvation on.

Secondly, it is wronged by some four ways.
In the second place it is somewhat wronged by some amongst us too; not that we
either mistake it as the Papists do, nor malign it as they say we do, but
occasionally by their error on the one side we run into another on the
otherside; because they advance it too high, we debase it too low.





cacolicke cartholike: but these are distempered spirits, not seasoned with
grace and modesty, as it were to be wished.

Act. 11.26. they of the Church of Antioch were first called Christians: yet
let not this name be suppressed; for to be called Catholics has been a matter
of long continuance, and understanding it for the members of the Catholic
Church, it is a reverent and an honorable style. Thus we see how this name
has been wronged, first, by them of the Romish Church; secondly, by some
amongst us.

Now secondly, we are to right the Word, Secondly, the word Catholic righted,
in regard whereof three things are to be considered of.
and restore it to the original sense, that so we may frame us to a reverent
and sober estimation of it, and neither esteem of it too much nor too little:
and to this end, first therefore we will consider of the antiquity of the
Word; secondly, we will show the right meaning of it; and thirdly, the common
received use of it.

First, consider the antiquity of it; First, the antiquity of it.
this word is not found in any of the books of Scripture, only it is found in
the preface of the Epistles of James, Peter, John and Jude; Vid. Fulke, ibidem.
there they are called Catholic Epistles, which is a Greek word, and
signifies general; which prefaces, whether they be Scripture or not is
uncertain, they may be so, and they may not; yet certain it is that the name
is very ancient. But come to the Creed, and there this word is plainly found,
and that as an adiunct of the Church: I cannot say that it was the Apostles
own doing, but surely it was very near to the Apostles times. So likewise it
is found in the Nicene Creed, and also in Athanasius Creed, Morney de ecclesia,
p. 13. 14. etc. 19. ad 25. and 29. vid. Rainold. conclus. 650. 671 Secondly,
the right meaning of it. Oecumenius.
and there he applies it to the Faith. The Faith professed by the Catholic
Church, is the Catholic Faith. So we see that the word is very ancient.

Secondly, to right it, we are to consider the right meaning of the word,
Catholic, which is, general or universal; for so the Ancients expound the
Prefaces to the general Epistle of Peter, and the general Epistle of James,
as directed not to any particular Nation or City, as Paul did his Epistle to
the Romans, but generally and universally to all the faithful, or to the
faithful generally dispersed, which indeed is plain in those Epistles of
James, Peter and Jude, and in the first Epistle of John, but not in the two
last Epistles of John, they being directed to one single person. So that the
meaning of the word Catholic Church, is general or universal, dispersed
far and wide over the face of the whole earth. Ipsa est ecclesia catholica,
vnde and (...) graece appellatur, quae per totum arbem terrarum diffunditur.
Aug. epist. 170. ad Seuerinum.
In the Primitive Church they used the name Catholic to be equivalent to the
name Christian; so that this was an usual speech amongst them, Christian is my
name, and Catholic is my Sur-name: so that the word is ancient, and the right
meaning of the word is gathered hence, Rhemists in 1. Ioh. 2.6. Morney de
ecclesia. 23. Thirdly, the common received use of the word. Vniuersalis
ecclesia, est Jerusalem, ciuitas Dei viui, quae continet ecclesiam primitiarum
circumscript^m in coelis. Isychius in Leuit. lib 4. cap. 14 Catholica veraciter
illa est, quae ab omnibus perfidis and eorum successoribus and consortibus,
sincera, pura, and immaculata communione diuisa est. Gelasius ad Anast. Aug.
Eusebius. hist. eccl. applies Catholic, both to the whole Church through ehe
world, and to particular Churches too. Vid. Field, lib. 1. p. 16. and 26. and
l. 2. 56. Thirdly, the observations from it.
that whereas before Christ's coming the Church was national, containd only in
Jury; now after Christ's coming and ascension, both Jews and Gentiles, and all
Nations were to receive the Faith, and so to become one general Church, and so
it was called Catholic, that is generally or universally dispersed over the
face of the whole earth; and so much of the right meaning of the word.

Thirdly, to right the word, we are to consider the common received use of the
word. It is such as degenerates from the right meaning and first antiquity of
it, and yet with construction it is allowable enough. The Ancients used this
word Catholic, for true believing, as distinguishing from Heretics and false
believing; so that Catholic Church was as much to say, as a true believing
Church: and so from the Church to a particular member, a Catholic, that is, no
Heretic, but a right believer: and that speech which was so common in the
Primitive Church, Christian is my name, and Catholic is my Sur-name, shows
that none all that while were called true Catholics, but true Christians.
Austin has this saying; The very name of Catholic, says he, contains me in
the lap of the Church; that is, as if I should say, The very name of Christian
contains me within the lap of the Church, that is, it is one motive amongst
some others to keep me in the lap of the Church, not that the name is
sufficient only, but I knowing my self to be of the true Church, one motive
amongst others that contains me in it, is the name of Christian, etc. And this
is Austins meaning. So you have seen how this word has been wronged, and how
it is righted.

Now we will here take it in the right meaning, and first antiquity of it, and
so draw such observations as shall fitly follow upon it, which is the third
general Point to be spoken to. Therefore when we say, the Catholic Church,
it intends two things: first, that the Church is generally dispersed through
the world; secondly, that every true believer wheresoever or whatsoever he is,
he is a member of the true Church.

We will draw it into an Observation, and that is this; Ps. 72.8. His Dominion
shall be from Sea to Sea, and from the River to the end of the Land. This
indeed is typically spoken of David and his Kingdom, but it is applied to
Christ and his Kingdom of Grace, which is his Church. And so this was promised
to our Savior Christ by his Father, Psalm. 2.8. I will give thee the Heathen
for thine inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for thy possession.
What is Christ's heritage and possession, but the Church? but his possession
shall reach to the utmost parts of the earth, and therefore his Church must
reach as far, to all places and people that believe, even to the farthest
parts of the earth. So likewise our Savior himself foreshewes it, Matthew.
8.11. Many shall come from the East and West, and sit down with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven. Many shall come, that is, there
shall be a general confluence from the East and West, that is, from all
places in the World; And what shall they do? They shall sit down with
Abraham, etc. that is, they shall believe in Christ, as Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob did, and so become members of the same Church of God, as they were. So
ye see how far the Kingdom of heaven inlargeth it self. And Ioh. 10.16.
Other sheep I have also (says our Savior) which are not of this Fold, them
also must I bring, and they shall hear my Word, and there shall be one
Sheepfold and one Shepherd. Other sheep I have, let them wander where they
will in Deserts or unknown Mountains, Faith they have, and therefore sheep;
sheep they are, and therefore have Christ for their Shepherd, and his Church
the Sheep-fould that they belong to; and as he promises to bring them to his
sheepe-fould, so he effects, first, by himself, Ephesians. 2.14. He is our peace
(says the Apostle) which has made of both one, and has broken the stop of
the partition wall; the partition wall is pulled down, and now Gentiles, and
all sorts of people come to be members of the Church: so likewise ^e effects
it by his Ministers, Mark. 16.15, 16. Go ye into all the World, and preach
the Gospel to every Creature: he that shall believe and be baptized, shall be
saved; but he that will not believe shall be damned: where he both offers
means of salvation by his Ministers to all, Go and preach the Gospel to every
Creature; and blesses the means, some shall believe and be saved, and also
associates them all that ever shall believe, what or wheresoever they are, to
the saved, that is, to his Church, unto whom only salvation belongs, Psalm. 3.
last Verse. I will give you one particular instance to the Point (that the
Church is general of all believing persons, and of all places) in the case of
Cornelius, Act. 10.1, 12, 34, 35. he was a Gentile, and a Heathen, and
accounted unclean; yet his prayers and his alms were accepted of God, which
they could not have been unless he had believed. And Peter in a Vision saw a
great sheet let down from heaven with four corners, which signified the
four quarters of the World, and in it were all manner of creeping beasts: and
the meaning of the Vision was this, that God would extend his Church to all
parts of the World, and bring some of all Nations into it. So that the Vision
was not only for Cornelius, but generally to signify, that the Church should
be of all Nations, and so Peter confesses in these 34. and 35. Verses; Of a
truth, says he, I do now perceive that God is no accepter of persons, but in
every Nation he that fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted of
him. The Rule is pregnant, and precisely to the Point, Gal. 3.28. There is
neither Jew nor Grecian, bond nor free, male nor female, but ye are all one in
Christ Jesus. And so they shall be raised at the last day, Matthew. 24.31. The
Angels shall gather the bodies of the Elect from all quarters and corners of
the World; then there must needs have been a Church in all Corners of the
World, and so they shall be found in heaven after the Resurrection, Revel. 7.9.
for there the Apostle John says, I beheld, and lo, a great multitude which no
man could number of all nations, and people, and tongues stood before the
Throne, and before the Lamb, praising God, and Revel. 21.13. So the Church is
Catholic, generally dispersed over the face of the whole world, and every
believing man is a true member of it.

The Reasons are these. First, God is the Lord and Ruler

Secondly, Gods mercy and Christ's merits requires it, Tim. 2.4. that is, all
sorts of men, of all places. So likewise Christ's merits require it, for that
was for the sins of the whole world, 1. Ioh. 2.2. that is, for some of every
part of the world.

Thirdly, God is glorified in the highest degree only in

Fourthly, Satan's Kingdom is general, and every wicked

Fifthly, the Church is thus general, to leave the wicked without excuse, so
that no nation shall be able to pretend justly, that they were utterly debarred
from salvation; now no man able to say, that the Church of God never was
amongst their Nation, nor that none amongst them were saved; No, God shall stop
their mouths with many Instances of every man's own Nation, when he shall
say, Why, here is a member of my Church even of thy own Nation; and why
might not thou have been so too?



Hos. 1.9. they are Loammi, not Gods people, now they are the only people that
are excepted against, as not being of Gods Church. And whereas they envy the
Gentiles, that they should have any part in God, because they were once barred
from the Church, and hated of God, and therefore they think they should be so
for ever: But alas now they must know, that now the partition wall is broken
down, and that Christ Jesus has made all one; and that every people is Judah,
and every faithful man is a Priest and a Sacrifice, and every place is the
Temple, and has spiritual Altars for a clean sacrifice to be offered on, and
that now is come to pass that which the Prophet foretold, Mal. 1.10, 11. that
in the place where it was said unto them ye are not my people, it shall be said
unto them, ye are the Sons of the living God. And as it is Matthew. 18.20. That
where two or three are gathered together in the Name of Christ, he is in the
midst of them. And as our Savior says, Ioh. 4.24. God is a Spirit, and they
that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and Truth. And that now is
fullfilled the saying of Isaiah, Isai. 54.1. which he foretold, that the Barren
has more Children then the fruitful woman; that is, that there should be more
Gentiles of the Church, then ever there were Jews. And as it reproues them, so
it reproues the Donatistes, that would have no Church, but in Africa, no
Church but theirs; somewhat like unto the humor of the Separatists at this
day, that would have no Church but theirs. Principally it reproues the Papists,
that would have no Church but that of Rome; affirming, that they that are not
of the fellowship of that Church, are in the certain estate of damnation. But
this is against the nature of the Catholic Church to be restrained within
them. And let not them take upon them to restrain that which God has
enlarged; but as they brag of Peter, so let them learn to be ruled by God as
Peter was, Act. 10.15. not to account those unclean, whom God accounts and
calls clean. And therefore seeing God has so far enlarged his bounty, that he
has purified the whole world, so that some of all parts and places should be
members of his Church; for shame let them not scantle his goodness, and
pollute all other Churches as unclean, except their Church: But let them leave
all others to God, and let them labor to see that themselves be purified, lest
(as I said before of the Jews) they prove themselves of all other Churches to
be none of Gods Church.

The second Use is for Instruction, teaching us what so pure and sound, but
that which is general, that which is scattered over all the world. It is true
that a particular Church may be called Catholic, that is, a right believing
Church; or Catholic, that is, a part of the Catholic; but properly and
rightly it is not so. Also there may be a Catholic visible Church, that is,
all the particular parts of the visible Church being considered in one common
Notion in the mind: But it is most truly and properly affirmed of the
invisible Church; for that is the Catholic Church, which is holy and
Apostolic, which in the true sense contains only those that are truly
sanctified, and built on the foundation of the Apostles doctrine. Thus you see
what Church to repute Catholic, namely, that which is general, scattered and
dispersed over all the world, and not any particular Church, much less may any
one particular man be called properly Catholic. And therefore it is a vain
brag of the Papists, to say, that their Church is Catholic. It is a particular
Church. For first, it is not generally dispersed over all the world, and
besides there was a time when there were other Christian Churches, at Jerusalem
and Antioch, etc. before ever their Church was; and therefore there was a time
when theirs was not Catholic, and so not Catholic now, because that which is
Catholic, Sheldon.
is one and the same at all times. I say not in one place, but those that
profess the same true faith that others did, are still the Catholic Church. A
Priest of their own has well answered them, that so long as they were
governed by general Councels, they might be called Catholics; But now seeing
they are governed by one man, (namely the Pope) it is fitter that they be
called of him Papists. And so much for the second Use.

Quod semper, quod vbique, quod ab omnibus. Vincent. lib. 3. and 24. Object.
I answer, first, Yes, every fundamental Point was always held by all the
faithul, else they were not faithful, if they were cut off from the foundation;
so that howsoever in smaller matters, as of Ceremonies and circumstances and
such like, some differences and some errors were betwixt those that were
faithful, yet in the maine substance there was none at all. Secondly, I say,
all times are not alike; for the means and occasions of knowledge of some
fundamental Points, in that cleerenesse as they should be known, the light
of salvation breaking out every day more clearly then other; Therefore it is
sufficient if they all believed the same things that we do, so far as they
did and might attain to the knowledge of them; or if they were ignorant of
some, yet it is sufficient that they followed the rest, and did not oppose
against that which they knew not, but did renounce and repent of their
ignorance, and this their very repentance of their ignorance is an
acknowledgement of such Truths as they were ignorant of. By this it appears
plainly, that the faith of the Church of Rome is not Catholic, because none
of those Points wherein they differ from us have been universally held, no nor
spoken by the faithful as Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, Transubstantiation,
Justification by works, worshipping of Images, and such like. But they will
say, If our faith be not Catholic, controversy be decided by that other
adiunct in the Nicen

Fourth point, That the Church is a communion of Saints, whereby two things are
affirmed: First, that the Church has a communion with, or is joined to Christ,
which is the fourth quality.
and respited us to those times of the Gospel, wherein the Church is made
Cathol^ke.

Now we come to the fourth Point, that is, That the Church is a Communion of
Saints; whereby two things are affirmed; first, that the Church, (that is, the
faithful) has a Communion with Christ; secondly, that they have a Communion
one with another; both which we may see in the. 1. John 1.3 that ye also may
have fellowship with us, and that our fellowship may be also with the Father,
and with his Son Jesus Christ. And Romans 12.5. So we being many are one body
in Christ, and every one, one another members. First, of the Communion the
faithful have with Christ their Head, which is the fourth Point. We will draw
it into an observation, and that is this, namely, joint and mutual communion
with Jesus Christ: he and we are brethren, Heb. 2.11. It is a joint communion,
because all together do participate therein; and it is mutual, because all
the faithful partake in it in Christ, and Christ with every one of them. The
proofs of the Point are these, 1. Cor. 1.9. God is faithful by whom ye are
called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. 1. Ioh. 1.3.
That ye may also have fellowship with us, and that our fellowship may also be
with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ: and both these, our communion
with him, and his with us, are by right, Cant. 6.2. I am my Welbeloueds, and my
Well-beloved is mine: and likewise by possession, 1. Ioh. 4 13. We dwell in him,
and he in us. And this communion is so near and entire, that it passes into a
plain union; so that the faithful and Christ are made one, as we may see,
Ioh. 17.21. That they all may be one, as thou O Father art in me, and I in
thee, even that they may be also one with us. Gal. 3.28. For ye are all one in
Christ Jesus. Now we must know, that this union is spiritual, 1. Cor. 6.17. He
that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit. It is true, that we are bone of his
bone, and flesh of his flesh, but it is in a spiritual manner. To open the
matter more fully and distinctly; the communion being of him with us, and of us
with him, let us consider of each severally, that so it may be the more
perfectly discerned: and first, First, Christ's communion with us in two
particulars: First, in regard of our selves, in four respects.
let us consider of his communion with us, and that in these two particulars;
first, in regard of our selves; secondly, in regard of those things that belong
unto us. First, in regard of our selves, for we are his, 1. Cor. 3.23. Ye are
his. Now we are his, first, because we were given unto him of God, Ioh. 17.2.
And secondly, because we have given our selves Cor. 8.5. but gave your own
selves first to the Lord, 6.13. give your selves unto God. And thirdly, because
1. Cor. 6.14, 20. Ye are not your own, for ye are brought with a price. And
fourthly, because he has seized on us already for his own by his Spirit.
Romans 8.9. The Spirit of God dwells in you: if any man has not the Spirit of
Christ, the same is not his. 1. Ioh. 4.13. We dwell in him and he in us,
Secondly, he communicates with us in respect of the things that belong to us,
which consists in these things:
because he has given us of his Spirit. Secondly, he communicates with us, in
respect of those things that belong unto us, and are ours, he taking them as
his own, as first he took our flesh and nature, Heb. 2.14. Secondly, our
infirmities, Heb. 4.13. Matthew. 8.17. Thirdly, our sufferings and punishment,
Isai. 53.4. He was wounded for our transgressions. 1. Pet. 3.18. for Christ
has once suffered for sin, the Fourthly, our sins, 1. Pet. 2.24. Who his
own self bare our sins in his body on the Tree. Romans 8.34. Who is also at
the right hand of God making request for us, Revel. 8.3.4. He is that Angel
that offers up the prayers of the Saints, and the sweet savor of them ascends
up to God out of his hand; thus he communicates with us.

Secondly, we communicate with him; First, in regard of himself, he is ours
two ways:
Secondly, we communicate with him, and that first, in regard of himself;
secondly, in regard of the things that are his. First, in regard of himself,
he being ours, Romans 1.3. Jesus Christ our Lord. 1. Tim. 1.1. of God our
Savior, and of our Lord Jesus Christ our hope. Ephesians. 2.14. our peace. And
Isai. 9.6. Unto us a Son is given: and secondly, as having given us the
pledge of his Spirit in assurance, that he is wholly ours, as if it were
underhand and Seal, 2. Cor. 1.22. who has sealed us, Secondly, we communicate
with him in regard of all the things that are his; as, First, what he had.
Secondly, what he did.
and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts. So in the second place we
communicate with him, in regard of all the things that are his, as his wised^e,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption, 1. Cor. 1.30. Take it thus:
first, whatsoever he had, Godhead, Manhood, body, blood, life, spirit,
office, nature, person, all is ours. Secondly, whatsoever he did, his
preaching, praying, miracles, conuersing with men, sending his Spirit, his
resurrection, ascension, sitting on Gods right hand, his coming to Judgment,
all is ours. Thirdly, whatsoever he suffered, contempt, hunger, Thirdly, what
he suffered.
stripes, reproaches, death, hell, Gods wrath, all is ours. Fourthly, Fourthly,
what he has obtained by his doings and sufferings. How these things are to be
understood. This communication with Christ in the things that are his, drawn
into two heads.
whatsoever he has obtained by his doings and sufferings, life, mercy, grace,
glory, all is ours, Romans 8.32. We have all things together with him, etc. He
is the heir, and we are fellow-heyres, Romans 8 17. yet this is to be understood
in some different sort; the things wherein we communicate with him, are in him
without stint, but they are not so in us, but in some degree or measure. We
will reduce this communion to these two Heads; for howsoever we have right to
all that is Christ's, yet we communicate in them in a diverse manner; we
communicate in some things by way of merit, and in some other things by way of
power: first, some things are communicated to us by way of merit, First, in
some things by merit.
procuring the things to us that are duee to him, and these are ours by
imputation, as glory, Ioh. 17.22, 23. And the glory thou have given me, I have
given them, etc. and this is our justification. Secondly, Secondly, in other
things by power.
other things are communicated to us by way of power, effecting the like in us,
and this is ours by actual infusion and possession, as the Spirit, Romans 8.2.
and life, Gal. 2.20. Thus I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, etc. And
this is our sanctification. For the first, Christ purchases and merits
forgiveness of sins and righteousness, and glory for us, and this we
communicate in by imputation for our justification. For the second, Christ by
his power infuseth into us his Spirit and life, and makes us spiritual Kings
and Priests to God his Father, and this is actually ours for our
sanctification: so we are made holy by his holiness, not only because it is
impudent to us for our justification, but also because it is infused to us for
our sanctification.

Ephesians. 1.22, 23. As the head conueyes spirit and life to all the members, so
does Christ convey spirit and life to all the faithful: and this is it the
Apostle speaks, Romans 8.2. The law of the spirit of life which is in Christ
Jesus, has freed me from the law of sin and death.

Ephesians. 5.23. therefore as in the estate of marriage the husband and the wife
are one flesh; so in the estate of this spiritual marriage, Christ and the
faithful are one, Ephesians. 5.30. and 1. Cor. 6.17.

Reasons on Gods part: First, his election.
Thirdly, there are particular reasons for this; first, on Gods part; secondly,
on Christ's part; thirdly, on our part. First, on Gods part, his election aimed
at this communion; He chose us to be made like unto the Image of his Son,
Romans 8.29. and 1. Pet. 1.2. Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the
Father unto sanctification of the Spirit, through obedience and sprinckling of
the blood of Christ. Secondly, his covenant. Thirdly, his free gift of Christ
to us. Fourthly, his Love.
Secondly, his Covenant is so, Deuteronomy. 23.13. that we shall be one with him, and
he with us. Thirdly, he has confirmed this by his free gift of Christ to us,
and us to Christ, as I showed before. Fourthly, the Fountain of all is his
love to us; God so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten
Son, etc.

Reason on Christ's part.
Fourthly, the particular Reason on Christ's part, is his exceeding great love
toward us, Gal. 2.20. who has loved me, and given himself for me.

Reasons on our part: First, our faith.
Fifthly, there are particular reasons on our part: first is our Faith; for by
Faith we believe in him, and are ingrafted into him, and made partakers of him,
Heb. 3.14. Secondly, our covenant.
Secondly, we did covenant it in Baptism, and we do daily renew it, that we
will be one with him, Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. Thirdly, it is confirmed on our parts
by gifts, Thirdly, by gifts.
we consecrating our selves, and all we have or are, into his power and mercy.
Fourthly, our love is another reason, Fourthly, our love. Fifthly, our
necessity.
for that makes it a true union where it is truly planted, Ephesians. 3.17. Where
love is linked with Faith. Fifthly, our necessity so requires it: for we
cannot bring forth any good fruit except we be, and abide in Christ, Ioh. 15.4.

The means of this communion which is betwixt Christ and the Faithful is,
first, the Spirit; secondly, the Word; Three means of this communion; First,
the Spirit. Secondly, the Word. Thirdly, the Sacraments.
thirdly, the Sacraments, 1. Cor. 10.16. The Cup of blessing which we bless,
is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? etc.

The Uses of this Point are these: First, here is matter of Romans 12.5. and the
Apostles had a communion with Christ, when there was no Pope. Yea, but say
they, Christ is not present with us now in earth, but the Pope he is the Head
of the Church on earth; and except we have fellowship and communion with him,
we can have none with our Head in heaven. I answer, though Christ be absent
in body, yet he has left us his substitute, that is, his Spirit which is his
true deputy of his own appointing (and not the Pope) as Ioh. 14.16, 17. and
Ioh. 16.7. and he alone it is that works this union, making us one with
Christ, and Christ one with us. 1. Cor. 6.17.

The second Use is to teach us, what a blessed estate and fellowship with Jesus
Christ, they are fellows, yea fellow-heires with him in grace here, and glory
hereafter. And here is our Patent Royal under the broad Seal of Heaven and
Earth for our Interest that we have in God, A Christians Patent Royal under
the broad Seal of heaven for his interest, First, in God. Secondly, in the
promises. Thirdly, in the offices and benefits of Christ. Fourthly, in full and
final glorification. A Christians acquittance general against all pleading of
sin, and every thing that is against us.
because we partake with Christ Jesus the Son of God; and therefore we must
needs partake with God, and have Communion with him too. So likewise for the
promises of God; by this I know I have right and interest in all the promises
of God; because we are his, and he is ours, in whom they are all yea and
Amen, 2. Cor. 1.20. So likewise we have right and Interest into all his
Offices, Kingdom, Priesthood, and Prophecy, and all the benefits of the same,
Justification, Sanctification, Salvation, yea our full and final
glorification; because we are his, and he and all his is ours. Here likewise
is our answer and general Acquittance against all the pleadings of Sin,
Satan, Death, Hell, Damnation, Law, Justice, and accusing Conscience: here is
our Answer to them all; I am Christ's, and he is mine, and therefore if you
have any thing to say against me, go to him, he will answer for me, nay he
has answered for me already; and therefore ye can have nothing against me
that can hurt me; there is no Condemnation to me, for I am in Christ Jesus.
So likewise we see here on the contrary, what a miserable and fearful case
all others are in, that are out of the true Church, whether they be of no
Church, or a false Church; whether not yet assembled, or cut off; and that
either by withdrawing themselves, or else cast justly out; for being without
the Church they are without Christ; and being without Christ they are without
God, and so without life, and without hope, and without comfort, and without
grace and salvation; yea, they are the very prey and slaves of sin, and the
Devil, and eternal confusion, as having no privilege nor bar against them,
specially if they be such as persecute the Church.

Does Christ Jesus live in thee by his Spirit? Art thou joined to him? Do
thou believe in him, obey him, submit thy self to his ordinances and
directions? Does thy heart tell thee upon good ground, that thou art one with
him, and he with thee? then thou art one of the Church; then thou art a chosen
vessel, else thou art but a Reprobate, 2. Cor. 13.5. prove your selves whether
ye are in the says (says the Apostle) Examine your selves; know ye not your
own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be Reprobates. The
Papists not feeling this Communion with Christ, that he is in them (as none
can feel it by their Doctrine) cannot be in the estate of Grace; for
wheresoever it is, surely it may be felt by the Spiritual man.

Fourthly, this teaches us that if we have fellowship Phil. 3.10. It is
impossible that we should Communicate with him in the sweet, but that we must
taste of the sour also; though indeed afflictions are not sour, but to the
outward man; they are sweet to the inward man; the spiritual man rejoices in
affliction, because they b^ing forth the sweet fruit of Righteousness. Heb.
12.11. Therefore as we look to be partakers with Christ in his glory; so let
us partake with him in his afflictions, and these afflictions shall tend to our
greater glory.

Lastly, here is matter of Comfort to us, in our hearing, with commiseration as
the sufferings of Christ, and they are already overcome by his sufferings; and
therefore seeing they are regarded of God as the sufferings of Christ, Act.
9.4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, says our Savior; and seeing he does
so pity us in them, how can we but look for a good end of them? Let us
therefore comfortably suffer with Christ, bearing his marks upon us here, that
so we may Reign with him in glory hereafter.

The sixth Lecture of the Church.
The second thing affirmed concerning the communion of Saints, and that is the
communion which the Saints have one with another, and this is the fifth quality.
THe fourth quality whereby the Church is described in that Article of the
Creed concerning the Church, is, that it is called a communion of Saints, which
carries a double sense, and imports a double communion; one with Christ the
Head, the other with the members. Of that which passes betwixt the members and
Christ the Head, you have heard already: now in the next place we are to
speak of the communion the members have one with another. It is here advisedly
to be recalled to mind, what Church it is that we here speak of, that is,
the Church of chosen men both in heaven and earth; for so it was propounded to
be spoken to in the entrance upon this Point; and secondly, every one of these
six adjuncts in that Article of the Creed concerning the Church, agrees to
each, both to the chosen men in heaven, as well as to the chosen men on earth.
For first, the Church of chosen men in heaven is one with that on earth;
secondly, they are holy also, though not in a truer sense, yet in a higher
degree, for they have attained to the perfection of that holiness, which these
on earth have but in a small measure. Thirdly, they are Catholic too, as well
as we, consisting of all Nations, People and Kinreds, as Revel. 7.9. Fourthly,
they in heaven have a communion with Christ their Head, as well as we on earth,
and that in a more special manner then we have; for Christ is present with
them, not only by his Spirit, as he is with us, but also he is bodily
present with them, which we do not yet enjoy, therefore they have a more
special communion with him then we yet have. Fifthly, they have a communion
with us, Calvin instit. lib. 4. cap. 5 1. 2. Morney de eccles. page 8.
and we with them, so far as is agreeing and fitting to both our estates.
Sixthly, they also are known only to God, and to themselves and not certainly
to any else; and this also in a further sense to them then to us, because they
know it not only particularly every one of himself as we do, but generally
they know, that all there amongst them are members, which amongst us is nothing
so, we know but every one for himself to be a member. So we see, that these
six adjuncts agree to the Church of chosen men in heaven as well as on earth:
yea further, most of these agree to the elect Angels too, for they have an
unity amongst themselves, and so are one, also they are holy; and so like wise
they having Christ to be their Head as we have, no doubt but they have a
communion with Christ, and Christ with them: and when our Savior says, Luke
15.10. that they rejoice over a sinner that is converted; it is plain that
they have a communion with us also. But because the Article says, a communion
of Saints, and not of Angels, therefore we will restrain it to holy men, and
not extend it to the holy Angels. And further we must understand, that
howsoever all these may be truly affirmed of the Saints in heaven, as well as
on earth, yet because they are more sensible in earthly Saints then in
heavenly, therefore they are most usually affirmed, and generally understood of
those on earth. These things thus premised, to set the article upright in its
own due sense and understanding (specially in this fifth adiunct, because we
shall have special use of it) we proceed now to the Point.

We will draw it into an Observation, and that is this; The whole Church of
God, and all the parts and members of it, have a mutual Communion and
fellowship one with another. For proof of this point, I will omit such places,
that prove both this and the former Communion, as, Romans 12.5. and 1. Ioh. 1.3.
and I will come to such particular places as prove this point. Psalm. 122.3.
Jerusalem is built as a City that is compact together in it self. We must
understand, that David speaks here as a Prophet, and under the Law; somewhat
darkely, and under a shadow. The substance is this: the City, is the Church of
God; Jerusalem, the spiritual and heavenly Jerusalem; the building, that is,
the laying together of these living stones, that is, the faithful into this
living Church; compact together, etc. there is the fellowship that they have,
and do exercise one toward another. So that the meaning is this; The whole
Church of God is a living City consisting of living stones, and they are
compact together, they do yield mutually that help and good one to another
which they can. And so is this shadow plainly now revealed under the light of
the Gospel, as we may see, Ephesians. 2.21, 22. In whom all the building coupled
together grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord. In whom ye also are built
together to be the habitation of God by the Spirit. All the building, that is,
the whole company of the faithful; are coupled together, that is, fast linked
and joined together one with another in goodly order and proportion; grows to
an holy Temple, that is, make up one Church or Temple, not material, but
spiritual, as Verse. 22. for God to dwell in by his Spirit, and this the
Ephesians particularly had experience in; In whom ye also are built together
to be the habitation of God by the Spirit. And 1. John 1.7. If we walk in the
light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another. Here this
Communion is in plain terms named and expressed. Who are they that walk in
the light, but the faithful only, that are in Christ? Christ, the light of
the World.
Who is the light of the World? Whosoever are such, there is a mutual
fellowship and Communion betwixt them.

The Point is large, and therefore requires a large explication: and also it is
a Point of excellent use, and has not been handled to the full by any Divine;
therefore I will stand the more upon it. That which I purpose: to speak
hereof, I will reduce to these three heads: Three things concerning this
communion;
First I will show what manner of Communion this is; Secondly, wherein it
consistes; Thirdly, how far forth it is to be extended and enlarged.

First, what manner of union it is. It is spiritual, First, what it is, it is
spiritual.
answerable to that which they all have with Christ their Head; for look how
they Communicate with their Head Christ, such is their Communion one with
another; but that is a spiritual Communion, and so is this. And it is
spiritual in many senses; First, In how many senses it is spiritual.
as the Spirit being the Author and cause of this fellowship, whence it
proceeds; by one Spirit we are all baptized into one body, says the Apostle;
1. Cor. 12.13. Cor. 12.13. later end of the Verse; and have been all made to
drink into one Spirit. Lastly, it is spiritual, in regard that all those
things

The second point is, wherein this Communion consists. Two things wherein this
communion consists, and that in two things; First, a communion of state, and
that in diverse respects.
It consists in two things; First, in a certain Communion of state which they
have: Secondly, in a Communion of practice which they exercise. First, they
have a Communion of state, and here we have many things to consider; For
first, they have a Communion of state in respect of their substance of state,
they have all one Calling; Ephesians. 4.1. they are all called to be Saints, that
is, they are all and every Children, Gal. 3.26. the sons of God through faith
in Christ, and they are all, and every one of them members of Gods Church.







Tit. 1.4.







Ninthly, they have all the same end to aim at; the same Matthew. 25.34. and the
same Crown of Righteousness. 2. Tim. 4.8. and the same glory. 1. Pet. 5.1.

Lastly, the whole Course of their salvation, from the beginning Jude. 3. And
thus they have a Communion of state in these respects.

Secondly, they have a Communion of practice, that is, Secondly, this communion
consists in a communion of practice.
they exercise and practice this Communion; I will make it plain by this
comparison. Servants of one Family, and members of one and the same City or
corporation, as they have a Communion of state which all partake in, the same
laws, and the same Privileges. etc. so also if they willingly Communicate
with each other for the mutual help and benefit one of another, then they
have a Communion of practice too; and this Communion is general and particular.

First general, And this is, first, general.
they all alike participate in the same rights and dangers, benefits and
Crosses; they worship alike; they pray alike; they love, and hear, and
receive, and use, and believe, and do, and suffer alike, and handle the means
alike, and profit alike, though with some difference of measure, or other
circumstance, or smaller matter; yet in effect and substance it is the same: as
they have the same way of Salvation, so the same steps are trodden by them all
in that way: as they have the same enemies, so they manage the same Fight,
fighting together against their enemies Philip. 1.27. under the same Captain
Jesus Christ, with the same weapons, Ephesians. 6.11. the whole armor of God. Take
them any way outwardly or inwardly, they have a Communion of practice. Take
them outwardly, they all make the same profession, Act. 2.42.46. they continued
in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship, etc. And they continued daily with one
accord in the Temple. Take them inwardly, and they have all the same heatt, and
the same mind; Act. 4.32. And the multitude of them that believed were of one
heart, and of one Soul, etc. so that which way soever you take them, they have
a Communion of practice, as well as of state. It is true that sometime they
fail in the performance of these things through their own weakness and
Satan's malice; but yet this is their reach, and desire, and true endeavor.

Secondly, it is particular,
Secondly, as they have a Communion of practice in general, so likewise they
have it in particular; as every one has a several portion by himself, so
they do not keep it to themselves, And this diverse ways.
but are still in a readiness to employ it to the Common good of the rest. And
this diverse ways, first, in regard of their gifts it is so; secondly, for
their wants; thirdly, for their doings; fourthly, for their sufferings; fifthly,
for their affections; Lastly in regard of themselves and all they have, they
do employ all for the good of the rest, and so have a Communion of practice in
particular.

First, in regard of gifts.
First, in regard of their gifts; if they have the gifts of a Pastor, or of a
Ruler, each having proper gifts, they do willingly Communicate the benefit of
them to the good of the rest, Non tollitur gratiarum diversitas, nec
conuellitur ordo politicus. Calu.
Ephesians. 4.11, 12. He gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the repairing of the Saints,
and for the work of the Ministry, and for the edification of the body of
Christ: And Romans 12.6. Seeing we have gifts that are diverse, according to the
grace that is given unto us, whether we have prophecy, let us prophecy, etc. As
if he should say; Seeing we have such gifts, let us use them to the good of
Gods Church. And 1. Cor. 12.7. The spirit is given to every man to profit
withal: so then Gods children have gifts bestowed on them, not for themselves
only, but for the good of the rest. 1. Cor. 13.5. Love seeks not her own
things; they seek not their own good, but the good of the whole Church.

Secondly, in regard of their wants, and that diverse ways.
Secondly, in regard of their wants, they have a Communion of practice in
particular, and that diverse ways; First, for outward necessities, as means of
maintenance; Act. 4.32. to the 35. men sold their possessions, and gave to
every one as they had need, and they had all things common; here was a loving
Communion, and an equal distribution, that Gods Spirit had persuaded their
hearts unto. Secondly, they have a Communion in the sins one of James, Chap.
5.16. and entreats him to give him direction, what he shall do; his brother
he reproues him for his sin, he counsels, directs, and exhorts him to
Repentance and newness of life; he prays with him and for him, for the
forgiveness of his sin, and for better grace; this the Apostle teaches us,
Gal. 6.1. And so in offenses done against our Brethren, we must confess them
to our brother who^ we have offended, and repent of them, and he must forgive
them, as we may see, Matthew. 18.15. Luke 17.4. so here is a Communion in To.
15.1.2.3. we which are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and
not to please ourselves, etc. And Gal. 6.2. bear ye one another burden: as
if he should say, condescend to his weakness, and bear it as your own
burden; And Colos. 3.13. Thirdly, this communion of practice in particular, is
in respect of their doings.
forbearing one another. Thirdly, there is a Communion of practice which they
exercise in particular, in their doings; every one framing his particular
Carriage both publicly and privately, not for himself only, but for the good
of the whole Company or some part thereof; thus did the Apostle. 1. Cor. 10.35.
Even as I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the
profit of many that they might be saved. And in the 1. Cor. 9.10. he became a
Jew to the Jew, that he might win them: and to them which were under the
Law, as though he were under the Law, that he might win them. And this also
is that which he exhorts to, Romans 14 19. Let us follow those things which
concern peace, and wherewith we may edify one another. Fourthly, in respect
of their sufferings.
Fourthly, there is this communion in their sufferings also; for they take
notice of the afflictions of their brethren, they remember the afflictions of
Joseph, they comfort them, pray for them, admonish them, yea they join with
them (if occasion so require) in their afflictions, and suffer with them: so
says the Apostle, Heb. 10.33, 34. They became companions of them which were
tossed to and fro, and sorrowed with him for his bonds, and suffered with joy
the spoiling of their goods. And in the 2. Ti. 2.10. the Apostle says, he
suffered all things for the elects sake. Fifthly, Fifthly, in respect of their
affections.
there is a communion of practice in their affections, They rejoice with them
that rejoice, and they weep with them that weep, Romans 12.15. They rejoice at
the welfare of Gods children, they sorrow and grieve at their harms, even as
if themselves did partake with them, Heb. 13.3. Remember them that are in
bonds, even as you your selves were in bonds. Sixthly, in respect of
themselves, and all they have.
Lastly, there is a communion in themselves and all that they have, even in
their lives; they think not their lives to dear for the good of their
brethren. And this is it the Apostle says, Phil. 2.17. That though he be
offered up upon the sacrifice and service of their faith, yet he is glad, and
rejoices with them all. And Romans 9.3. the same Apostle wishes himself to be
separate from Christ for his brethren the Israelites: not that he did wish
himself to be out of the love and favor of God in Christ (for that were
sinful so to wish) but this is a kind of hyperbolicall speech, spoken in the
highest degree, to show forth his great love to them; as if he should say, such
is my great love to my brethren, that if my life, or any thing I have could
redeem them, I would part from it. Wheresoever is any failing in any one of
these, so far forth it is sin in the offender.

Thirdly, the extent of this communion.
The third thing considerable in this communion is, how far forth it is to be
extended or enlarged, and that is in general to all duties, times, places,
persons; but yet with these due circumstances and cautions: Cautions herein to
be observed.
First, that whatsoever we do herein, we must do it deliberately with good
advise and discretion; we must do it seasonably, taking Psalm. 1.3. is
compared to the Tree planted by the Rivers of waters, that brings forth his
fruit in due season. Secondly, as we must do it seasonably, so we must do it
Matthew. 22.39. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; that is, thy self
first, and then thy brother as heartily as thy self. Thirdly, we must do it
also with an eye to Christ, and to Matthew. 10.41, 42. We must receive a Prophet
in the name of a Prophet, and a righteous man in the name of a righteous man;
and if we give but a Cup of cold water to a Disciple in the name of a
Disciple, we shall not loose our reward. We must give it in the name of Christ,
and we must do it as unto Christ. Philem. 4.5, 6. the Apostle gives thanks
to God for the love and faith which Philemon had toward the Lord Jesus, and
toward all Saints; that which Philemon did to the poor Saints, he did it with
an eye to the Lord Jesus, and the Religion they did profess. Fourthly, these
duties Gal. 6.6. We must make them partakers of all our goods. It is an
hyperbolical speech, noting that we are especially bound to them. Secondly,
Ministers to their fellow-Ministers are tied in a special band, Gal. 2.9.
James, and Cephas, and John, when they knew of the grace which was given unto
me (says the Apostle Paul) they gave unto me and Barnabas the right hand of
fellowship. So in the third place, to those with whom we communicate in their
goods and things, Romans 15.26, 27. If the Gentiles be made partakers of their
spiritual things, their duty is to minister to them in their carnal things.
Fourthly, to those that are in temptation or tribulation; we must have an
especial care to minister comfort unto them, Revel. 1.9. I John, even your
brother and companion in tribulation, and in the Kingdom and patience of Jesus
Christ. 2. Cor. 1.7. As ye are partakers of the sufferings, so shall ye be
also of the consolation. We must be companions and partners with them in their
sufferings. Acts 4.34, 35. they sold their possessions, and distributed to
every one according to their need: and Acts 5.4. Whilst it remained,
appertained it not to thee (says Peter to Ananias) and after it was sold, was
it not in thine own power? They made all things common, that is, in use, not
in possession; for it was their own before they sold it, and before they gave
it, and they did it voluntarily, not by constraint: so that we must not bring
in this communion of possession, but of use only. As for example, a man has a
house, now he communicates the use of this house to another, but yet keeps
the possession to himself. Lastly, this communion reaches to the Saints in
heaven too; This communion extends to the Saints in heaven.
for no doubt they in general pray for us, and we in general give thanks
for them: the general state of each requires this duty, but in particular
neither do they pray for us, nor we give thanks for them; therefore he that
extends this further, does that which is prejudicial both to their state and
ours. And so much for the proofs and opening of the Point.

The Reasons are of five sorts. first, in respect of God.
The Reasons why there is such a communion are these: first, there are
particular Reasons in respect of God; secondly, in respect of Christ; thirdly,
in respect of the spirit; fourthly, in respect of the faithful themselves; and
lastly, there are Reasons in respect of the adversaries to the faithful.

that is done when all the faithful join together to lift at it, as with one
shoulder, as it is in Zeph. 3 9. for so the word Consent, in that place does
signify in the Original; and with one mind and mouth, as the Apostle
speaks, Romans 15.6. And this not only in one particular place or assembly, but
generally in all places, in all the assemblies of the Saints both here in
England, and also in France and Germany, and all other places where the name of
the Lord is called upon; for the faithful in all places do in effect and for
substance the same duties to God, it is fit that the worship of God should be
soundly, effectually, and sufficiently performed. Now that it may be thus
performed, there must be this communion amongst the faithful. The second
particular Matthew. 6.9. And the faithful they are all brethren, Matthew. 23.8, 9.
and therefore as brethren that have one Father, they are to hold and exercise
this communion.

Secondly, in respect of Christ; and first as he is the head, The second sort
of reasons in respect of Christ.
the faithful they are the body or members, Ephesians. 4.15, 16. grow up in him
(says the Apostle) which is the head, that Now look what communion there is
betwixt the members that belong to one head, the same is amongst the faithful.
Secondly, he is the head cornerstone, and we Pet. 2.7. Now look as the head
cornerstone makes all the building hang fast together, so we are fastened
together in Christ. Thirdly, Ioh. 17.20, 21. that they may be one, as the
Father and himself are one, and therefore it cannot but be effected.

Thirdly, it is so in respect of the Spirit; The third reason in respect of the
Spirit.
we communicate in one and the same Spirit, 1. Cor. 12.4. and 11.13. there are
diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit. And Verse. 11. all these things
works the selfsame Spirit. And Verse. 13. For by one Spirit we are all
baptized into one body, etc. One and the same Spirit dwells and works in
all the faithful, and this is one reason of their near communion. The Heathen
accounted it a near fellowship and friendship for one soul to be in two
bodies: but this is a far nearer communion then that; this is a nearer
communion then that of man and wife; for they twain are one flesh, but these
are all one Spirit. For look how it is betwixt us and our Lord Jesus, as we
are joined to him, so proportionably are we joined one with another. But we are
one Spirit with him, 1. Cor. 6.17. so we are only one Spirit amongst our
selves; so that in respect of the Spirit the faithful have a mutual communion
amongst themselves.

Fourth sort of reasons are in regard of the faithful them selves, in diverse
respects.
The fourth Reason is, in respect of the faithful themselves, and that in many
respects; first, because of our necessities; every member of the Church has
need of every grace, but no one is capable of every grace in himself, at least
not to receive and distribute too; and therefore there Philem. Verse. 5.

Fifrh sort of reasons are in regard of our adversaries.
Fifthly and lastly, there is this communion in respect of our Adversaries, and
first for defending our selves; for being strongly united together as one man,
they cannot overcome and oppugning the enemies, who band themselves together
against them; and therefore they are to set themselves all together as with one
heart against their adversaries: otherwise they will be so far from
ouercomming them, as that they will be overcome of them. And so much for the
Reasons why there is such a mutual communion amongst the faithful.

The Uses of the Point are these. First, this teaches every David and other of
the Saints were so much grieved, when they were deprived of this blessed
communion: though they were never deprived of this inward communion, yet it was
their grief, and the very breaking of their hearts, when they were deprived of
this outward fellowship. And no marvel also though they did so rejoice, when
they could come to Gods House to be partakers of this fellowship; for then
they could reach out their hands to partake of the pledges of Gods love
sensibly.

Secondly, as this teaches us to labor to be one of this only, but to be as
we are called, and to practice as we profess; that as we profess to have a
communion of state, so we may have a communion of practice also. And this is it
which the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4.3. Keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond
of peace: As who should say, As thou have found that favor with God, that thou
art associated by a calling to the Church, and the communion thereof, so let it
be thy chief and principal endeavor to maintain and keep that unity and
communion, Phil. 1.27. Continue in one spirit and in one mind: as if he should
say, Flinch not from it, but as you have this communion, so stand in it, and
maintain it. Things to be done that we may maintain this communion.
And that we may so do, we must take heed, first, that we separate nor cut off
our selves, nor be drawn from this communion; this is forbidden, Heb. 10.25,
39. Not forsaking the fellowship we have amongst our selves, as the manner of
some is. And in the 39. Verse; But we are not they which withdraw our selves
unto perdition. If we separate, we cut off our selves from the body, and so
from the head too, and then we have no part in Christ (for he is a head to
none but his own body) nor in God, nor in the Spirit, nor in any of the
promises and privileges and graces that belong to this society. And therefore
this is a special matter that every one of us is to take heed of, namely, that
we entertain not the least thought of leaving the Church; though we doubt of
the truth of it, yet we must These. 3.6. the faithful are commanded to
separate themselves from every brother that walks inordinately, or by
contention, for the Church has nothing to do with such, so says the Apostle,
1. Cor. 11.16. nor by any other misdemeanour. then to trouble that communion,
or to interrupt that fellowship. Lastly and principally, we must take heed
that Cor. 5.4. When ye are gathered together, etc. And this is it that is
commended in the Church at Jerusalem, Act. 2.42. that they continued in the
Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and breaking of bread and prayer, Matthew.
18.22. Where two or three (says our Savior) are gathered together in my name,
there I am in the midst of them: he promises his special presence to this
communion and society; therefore we must be careful to join with such
assemblies, for there is no better way to continue this communion then this.
And as we must come to these places our selves, so we must call upon one
another to do so too; for so it was prophesied, that the faithful should do
in the last days, Isai. 2.3. that they should say, Come, let us go up to the
Mountain of the Lord to the House of the God of Jacob, etc. and we must also
rejoice at such occasions, when we hear that men come willingly to the house
of the Lord, as the Prophet David did, Psalm. 122.1.

Thirdly, here is matter of examination, whereby we Trials whether we practice
this communion.
let us examine our selves upon this point; do we use the means of Salvation
Jointly, and particularly, and continually? Do we willingly bring our selves
and our Families, to partake David speaking of the members of this Communion,
says, Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall come williegly at the time of Assembling:
And do we profit by these means? Have they the same effect in us, as they
have in Gods Saints? If they have, Romans 1.11. that did long to be with the
Romans? And why did he so long? Why, because he had some spiritual gift to
bestow amongst them; if it be thus with thee, then thou art a member of this
Communion. This is that our Savior commands Peter, Luke 22.32. When thou art
converted, strengthen thy Brethren; as if he should say, Make Phil. 4.14. And
this also he Commandes, To. 12.13. that they distribute to the necessities of
the Saints, and that they give themselves to hospitality. And Heb. 13.16. To
do good, and to distribute forget not* for with such sacrifices God is well
pleased. And this is the charge that the Apostle wills Timothy to lay upon Rich
men, that They be Rich in good works, ready to distribute. And this he
commends in them of Macedonia, That beyond their power they were willing, and
prayed us with great instance, says the Apostle 2. Cor. 8.3, 4. that we would
receive the grace and fellowship of the ministering which is toward the Saints.
And Romans 15.26, 27. And Act. 4. Men sold that they had and distributed
Fourthly, we must examine our selves in regard of our affections. Are we like
minded to them? Do we suffer when they suffer? Have we a fellow-feeling of
the afflictions and miseries of our fellow members? If we have; then we are
fellow members with them. 1. Cor. 12.26. If one member suffer, all suffer with
it: This is a lively token of a liuing-member, if they have a feeling of the
sufferings of their fellow members; every liuing-member of the Church has the
Bowels of compassion, Colos. 3.12. moved with a lively feeling of the miseries
of others, else they are no living, but rotten and dead members. Fifthly, we
must examine our selves, whether we pray Psalm. 122.6. pray for the peace of
Jerusalem. Sixthly, we must examine Heb. 3.13. Provoke one another daily. And
Heb. 10.24, 25. Let us consider one another to provoke unto love, and to good
works, not forsaking the fellowship that is amongst our selves. If we do
exhort one another thus, this is a sign we are of this fellowship, and a
means to continue us, that we forsake not this fellowship. Seventhly, we must
examine our selves whether we Romans 12.13, 15. The last Rule that we must
examine our selves by, is this; Cor. 10.24. If we look not every one on our
own things, but every man also on the things of other men, Philip. 2.4. If we
labor to profit others as well as our selves, this is a true Note that we are
true and liuing-members of the Church of God.

The fourth Use. Here is matter of Comfort to us that member of the Church; and
therefore thou art prayed for of all the Faithful, and God will hear their
prayers for thee. Lastly, Art thou deprived of Gods House, by Travel, or
sickness, or persecution? Yet here is thy Comfort, thou art there in Spirit,
and thy cause there in some kind is as effectually handled, as if thou were
there bodily present, as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 5 4. When you are gathered
together, and my Spirit, etc. No distance of place, though it be as far as
heaven from earth, dissunders this Communion, nor debarres us the benefit of
it, the Spirit being every where. So that the prayers of Gods Church (though I
be never so far off) are as effectual for me, as if I were there my self,
so I be there in Spirit.

Teaching two things.
First, of whom we are to expect good; not from profane men, but from godly
Romans 1.11, 12. desires to be among the Romans; Why? that he might do them
good; that is true, he might do them good indeed; but could they, being but
newly converted, do him that was so great an Apostle any good? Yes, that they
might, and therefore he desires to be with them, that he might be comforted
together with them, through their mutual faith, both his and theirs. Specially
we should desire their prayers, so did the Apostle Romans 15.30. and Heb. 13.18.
Pray for us, says he. Have they need of our prayers? Then much more have we
need of theirs: yea, the wicked themselves desire the prayers of the faithful,
Exodus 9.28. Pharaoh desires the prayers of Moses and Aaron to God for him; they
receive this benefit from the Communion of the faithful, though they give
nothing to it; that the faithful pray, and are heard for them, as Job was for
his friends, Job 42.8. Secondly, this teaches us also, to whom we are to do
good, namely, to the David says, Psalm. 16.3. My welldoing extends to the
Saints that are on earth. And this is it the Apostle teaches us Gal. 6.10. Do
good to all, especially to the Household of faith. Likewise it teaches us to
separate our selves from all profane and wicked men, 2. Cor. 6.17. Come out
from amongst them, and separate your selves, says the Lord, and touch none
unclean thing. etc.

Lastly, this may serve to control the pride of the Romish

The seventh Lecture of the Church.
WHereas the Argument we treat of is the Church, we turned aside to expound
the Article in the Creed which concerns the Church: I believe the holy
Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints; and there as you have heard, we
found six Adjuncts or Epithites that the Church is qualified withal: First,
that it is one; secondly, that it is holy: thirdly, Catholic: fourthly, that
they have a Communion with Christ; fifthly, that they have a Communion one with
another; Sixthly and lastly, that they are known only to God and themselves.
The five former are plainly laid down in the Article, of which you have also
heatd; The sixth and last, whereof we are now to speak, is not plainly laid
down, but yet it is directly employed in the words: for if you ask me how this
clause grows from the Article? I answer; Because it is said, I believe the
Church, etc. Now if it were a known manifest thing to the eye, and to the
outward sense, then it were not so properly said to be believed; for faith is
of things not seen, Heb. 11.1.



First, known to God, proved.
First, God knows them, Mala. 3.16. God has a book of Remembrance written
before him of those that are his, John 10.14. I know mine, says our Savior.
And in Ioh. 13.18. he says. I know whom I have chosen. 2. Tim. 2.19. The Lord
knows who are his. This the Apostle referres to Gods own secret Counsel, to
know who are his, Revel. 3.1, 4. The Lord says to the Church of Sardy, I know
thy works, for thou have a name that thou live, but art dead: and Verse 4.
Thou have a few names yet in Sardy which have not defiled their Garments, etc.
so that they are known to God by name, thou have a few names in Sardy, etc.

Secondly, to themselves.
Secondly, they are known to themselves, 1. Ioh. 3.14.19. We know we are
translated from death to life, because we love the brethren; and we know that
we are of the Truth, and shall before him assure our hearts. And 1. Ioh. 4.13,
16. Hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given
us of his Spirit; and we have known, and believed the love that God has in
us. Here you must not understand it, as if they did certainly know each other
to be so, as that I should know you, or you me certainly to be of this
number; but that all know the nature of their state, and particularly every one
of their own Consciences assure them, that they for their parts are of it.

Thirdly, none but God and themselves know it.
Thirdly, none but God and they know it, Romans 2.28, 29. Revel. 2.17. He is not a
Jew which is one outward; neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the
flesh: But he is a Jew which is one within, and the Circumcision is of the
heart in the spirit. Here is a plain exception against all outward shows and
testifications whatsoever, as altogether insufficient to make any certain
proof to the world, who are the true Circumcision, and Jews indeed; that is,
who are truly sanctified, and right members of the Church; and it is restrained
to the heart, which God alone and themselves know. It is as much as if he had
expressly said, They are only known to God and to themselves, 1. King.
19.10, 18. compared with Romans 11.3, 4. the Prophet Heliah complains that he
was left alone: he saw no Church at that time, and yet the holy Ghost says,
that there were then seven thousand which had not bowed their knee to Baal. If
any could have discernd them, then the Prophet might, that was their Teacher:
but he knew no such, no, nor scarce any that professed to be such; therefore
only God and themselves knew it. So much for the proof of the Point.

The Reasons are these: First, that whereby they are

Secondly, that whereby true Believers are distinguished

Thirdly, Sin is a secret thing in an Hypocrite, and therefore

Fourthly, there are certain inward graces in the heart especially Gods love
and favor to a man, and the forgiveness of his sins, is a close Secret, not
to be discerned outwadly, only these are known to God that gave them, and to
them that have them, Reu. 2.17.

The uses are these, first, this serves to refute those that hold this opinion,
that we that are of the Church may know others to be so too, and that take upon
them to affirm, that such and such shall be saved. Where God has said it, we
may boldly affirm it too, as of David, Abraham, Peter, Paul, etc. but we must
meddle no further, leave the rest to God; we may say of others, that we are
persuaded that they are Gods; but we cannot say, that we know it to be so,
Ioh. 21.21, 22. when Peter would inquire of another what he should do; Our
Savior answers him, What is that to thee follow thou me. For the exceptions
made out of 1. Ioh. 3.10. where the children of God are said to be known, and
the children of the Devil; Whosoever does not righteousness is not of God,
etc. And that in the 2. Ioh. 1. where the Apostle calls the Lady he wrote to,
Elect Lady. And in the 1 Thessalonians. 1.4. knowing beloved (says the Apostle) that
ye are Elect of God. These, and such like places are thus answered; that either
this is spoken out of a Charitable persuasion, or else it is spoken so of all,
because some are so, (for that seems to be the case, 1. These. 1.4.) or if he
had any certain knowledge of any particulars, it was by divine Revelation; we
cannot say therefore out of a certain knowledge, that any particular man is a
true member of the Church. Only this we may say, that we are persuaded upon
good grounds he is so.

Matthew. 7.19.20. Again, this refutes three other errors of Popery, that do
directly contradict these three branches of the Observation: First, they make
Predestination to be contingent, and so they say, God himself does not
precisely know who are his; for if Predestination do depend upon man's will,
that if man will he shall be saved, then God knows nothing till he see what man
will do. Secondly they deny certainety of salvation, and so the faithful
themselves cannot know themselves to be Gods; they will have no man say
certainly of himself that he shall be saved; and yet they will say it of
others, that they are saved. And that is the third error which contradicts the
third branch of this Observation, in that they say, the Church is always
visible, and so generally others may know who are true members of the Church as
well as themselves. But we see all these errors are here refuted by this
Doctrine, wherein we have taught and proved, that the faithful are only
known to God and themselves, and to none other. But if any man ask me, How
then shall we love one another, and do good one to another as Brethren, if we
know not who are Brethren. I answer, we must persuade our selves of others,
that they are Gods upon good grounds, and good hope, because we see the fruits
of faith and Repentance, and love in them, so far as can outwardly be
discerned; therefore we must be persuaded they are Gods, and so we must love
them, and do good to them as Brethren.

The third Use teaches us, that if every one may know Abba Father, that is,
which makes us go to God as to our father, and to call upon him as our father:
for that same Spirit bears witness to our Spirits, that we are the Children of
God, Romans 8.15, 16. And in the 1. Cor. 2.11, 12. What man (says the Apostle)
knows the things of man, save the Spirit that is in man; even so the things
of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God: now we have received not the
Spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the
things that are given us of God. The Apostle says, no man knows the things of
God, that is, the secrets of God, but the Spirit of God. Now this is one of
Gods secrets, to know whether we are Gods; therefore having this Spirit, we
may know our selves to be Gods. And that we may further seal this unto our
selves, let us labor to make our Election sure unto our selves, by walking in
good works, striving against sin, and working the works of Holiness, and
Righteousness, and obedience to God, which are the fruits of the Spirit of
God, and so shall we assure our hearts that we are Gods.

And so much be spoken of this last Adiunct, and also of the Article.

The fourth general Head in this question, which is the division of the
Church, which is partly of the name, partly of the thing it self. First, of
the name.
Now we come to the fourth general Head propounded to be handled in the
Doctrine of the Church, and that is the division of the Church. Now the
division of the Church is partly of the name, and partly of the thing it self.
First, of the name; The name is doubtful, and carries many significations, yea
and many contrary significations, and therefore is to be divided accordingly.
In the largest sense it may be applied to any multitude or company of people
whatsoever; whether in case of Religion, or not in case of Religion; and the
original word both Hebrew and Greek in the old and new Testament will bear
it. In the old Testament, Ezekiel. 32.22. there the name is applied to Ashur and
his company, to a company of men not in case of Religion. And the same is
applied, Deuteronomy. 33.4. in case of Religion to the Congregation of Jacob, that is,
to the Church of God. Nay further, that name is extended to those that
maliciously oppose the Church of God, and oppose Religion, Psalm. 26.5. I have
hated the assembly (or Church) of the wicked. So that the Hebrew word in the
old and new Testament bears it as well for a company, not in case of Religion,
as for a company in case of Religion. So likewise the Greek word Ecclesia in
the new Testament bears it in this general sense, as Act. 19.32. where it is
applied to a disordered assembly in a case of mutiny; The assembly (that is,
the Church) was out of order. And in the Act. 2.47. the same word is applied to
the company of Believers, that is, to the Church of God; The Lord added to the
Church. So we see how this word has been applied in the old and new
Testaments, to any multitude or company of people whatsoever, either in case,
or not in case of Religion. Yea, but yet it is restrained in ordinary use of
speech, and so has been for many years, unto a company of people as
professing some certain Religion: whatsoever Religion it be, the Church is
accordingly so called; for there is a true Religion, and every Church that
imbraceth that Religion is a true Church. And again, there are false
Religions, and they that embrace any of them are false Churches; so every
Church receives her denomination from the Religion she embraces. As for
example, we call those Jews which are borne Jews; but those only are of the
Jewish Church, which embrace the Jewish religion; so that if a Jew borne do
embrace the Christian religion, he is not of the Jewish Church; though he be of
the Jewish Nation, yet he is of the Christian Church. So likewise if a man be
a Christian borne, and yet join with the Jewish Church in their religion, he
is not of the Christian, but of the Jewish Church; and so it is of all others.
So then the name of Church and Religion are in some sense yoke-fellowes, all
Churches receiving denomination from the Religion they profess. Now then
Religion being as the form of the Church, giving it name and being, therefore
look what Religion it is that the Church professes, and such is the Church to
be reputed. There is a true Religion, and every Church embracing and
professing the same, is to be reputed a true Church, as the reformed Churches.
There are many false Religions, and every Church professing such Religion, are
false Churches: as the Churches of the Heathen that worship false Gods, and so
embrace false Religions. And so the Churches of the Saracens, that erect and
set up Mahomet against Christ; and of the Jews that deny the coming of the
Messiah in the flesh, are false Churches. But there are some Churches that
embrace party Religions, in part true, and in part false: yea, what Church is
so pure, that is not tainted with some error? and what Church is there so
impure, that professes not some notable heavenly Truths? We must therefore
consider what truths and what errors they hold, and so the truth will be soon
decided. Without Christ there is no salvation, and so no true Church, 1. Ioh.
5.12. He that has the Son, has life; and he that has not the Son of God,
has not life. If ye ask me, whether one and the same Church may not be a
true Church, in respect of some in it professing the truth; or in respect of
some fundamental truths professed in it; and yet a false Church in respect of
some professing falsehood in it, or in respect of some fundamental truths
overthrown in it? I answer; Surely it may, till such time as the false Church
has gotten the vpper-hand, and makes laws for her errors, and against the
others truths, with sentence of abandoning all those out of their Church which
do hold the truths. So it was with the Church of Rome before the Council of
Trent. And thus it was with the Church of Sardy, Revel. 3.1, 4. she had a name
to live, but was dead: and yet in the fourth Verse the Lord says, He has a
few names in Sardy, etc. Therefore take this for a Rule, Whatsoever Church
embraces Christ Jesus God and Man, the only means of salvation, is a true
Church, though tainted with many errors besides; and on the contrary,
whatsoever Church believes not this is a false Church, though it hold many
other excellent truths besides. So much of the division of the name of the
Church.

Secondly, of the thing it self.
Now we come to speak of the division of the thing it self, that is, of Gods
Church; which is not so to be understood, as if God had so many several kinds
of Churches: for the Church (as I have showed before) is one and the same from
the beginning of the world to the end: that Church of God which was in the
beginning, and remains now, and shall continue to the worlds end, is but one
and the same Church; therefore when we mention the division of the Church it
self, we mean not that it is severally divided into diverse and several
kinds, but distinguished in it self, in diverse and sundry respects; and
principally for these, first, in respect of the bounds and limits, Three ways
how the Church is distinguished.
or compass of it; secondly, in respect of the several portions belonging to
it, in the several estates that it is ordained unto; thirdly, in respect of
the outward state of it to the world, sometimes known, sometimes unknown.

First, it is distinguished in it self, in respect of the bounds and compass
of it, and so it is either universal or particular; universal, that is, Into
universal,
the whole company of Gods chosen both in heaven an earth. But this has no
limits, but is dispersed far and wide over the face of the whole earth, and
reaches to heaven it self. But because I have spoken of this before, both in
the Adiunct Catholic, and also in handling the general nature of the Church,
therefore I will trust your memories for that Point, and not speak more here
of it. In the next place a particular Church, that is, or particular.
every particular company of the faithful, or at least of those that are called
to the profession of the faith, which being several by themselves, of several
times and places, are but particular Churches. But because we shall speak
more properly of this, when we come to speak of the visible Church; therefore
we will respit it till then.

Secondly, it is distinguished in it self, Secondly, it is distinguished into
the Church Militant and Triumphant. What the Militant Church is, defined.
in respect of the several portions that belong unto it, in the several
states that it is ordained to, and they are two. The first is on earth, or in
this life, and that is a fighting or warfare: and the second is in heaven, in
the life to come, crowned and triumphing. And accordingly the Church is divided
into the Church Militant, and the Church Triumphant. To begin with the first,
the Church Militant is the Congregation of the faithful on earth, that do
continually exercise a spiritual warfare against sin and Satan, and all the
adversaries of God, and of his Religion. Mark the parts of the definition; I
say, it is a Congregation of the faithful that do thus fight; for though
Hypocrites, and sometimes those that do persecute the Gospel do fight the
Lords Battles and so in a general sense may be reputed parts of this Militant
Church, yet that is but colourably and outwardly for some sinister respect, not
in truth and singleness of heart, nor in true hatred of sin, nor in a true
desire to obey God, and to advance his Kingdom and glory. And therefore to
speak properly, none are true parts of this Church Militant, This warfare is
spiritual in three respects.
but the faithful only. Secondly, I say, it is a spiritual warfare, and that
in many respects: First, it is spiritual in respect of the end of it; for
though sometimes the adversaries Mat. 13. he and his are always up in arms
against us, therefore we must be so against them. And take this for a Rule,
that look whenever we intermit out fight, we do so far forth for the
time suffer our selves to be overcome; if once we start aside, the enemy gets
the more vantage of us. Lastly, it is general against all the adversaries of
God and of his Religion: for Satan and all his forces bend themselves against
God, and against his Church; and therefore the faithful must bend all their
forces against Satan, and all the adversaries of Gods Church. God promised to
Abraham, Genesis 12.3. that he would bless them that bless him, and curse them
that curse him. And so must all Abraham's seed, the faithful, do for God; as
they must love all that love God, so they must fight against all that fight
against God.

A question may be demanded here, That the good Angels are parties of this
Church Militant in some sense, though no^ parts of it.
Whether the good Angels be not also parts of this Church Militant? I answer:
They are parties in this business in some sense; for though the enemies cannot
annoy them, and therefore they need not, neither do they fight for themselves,
yet do they fight for us as true guardians and assistants, and as Gods
Instruments and Messengers to succor us, or to disclose and destroy our
enemies, and their enterprises against us. They are heavenly Soldiers, not
only in general as the Stars and all the Host of Heaven are; but in
particular assisting us in our spiritual warfare, and that personally, and by
their office; they comfort us in our temptations, as they did our Savior
Christ, Matthew. 4.11. after his temptation. And so Luke 22.43. they comforted
Christ in his agony, there appeared an Angel from heaven comforting him. And
Psalm. 34.7. the Angels are said to pitch their tents round about them that
fear God. So that the Angels are not only about us, but they pitch their tents
about us to fight for us, and they do also deliver us. So then in some sense
they are parties in this warfare; yea, but yet because they are out of the
danger of the enemies that they cannot annoy them, therefore they cannot
properly be said to be any part of the militant Church.

Secondly, the Church Triumphant, what is that? What the Church Triumphant is.
That is the Congregation of Saints in heaven, that have already finished their
warfare, and overcome their enemies, and do now reign and triumph in glory
together with Jesus Christ in his Kingdom. But because I have spoken of this
Point before, therefore I will not now stand upon it; only we will here show
some differences betwixt the Church Militant, and the Church Triumphant; and so
come to an observation arising from hence.

The differences are these following.

The Church Militant. The Church Triumphant. Eight differences between the
Church Triumphant and Militant.
1. The Church Militant is of Men only. 1. The Church Triumphant is of Angels
too. 2. The Church Militant is on earth. 2. The Church Triumphant is in heaven.
3. The Church Militant is subject to sin, error and misery. 3. The Church
Triumphant is free from them all. 4. The Church Militant is running in the
race. 4. The Church Triumphant has attained the Goal. 5. The Church Militant
are Saints in hope. 5. The Church Triumphant are Saints in possession. 6. The
Church Militant has need of the means, the Word and the Sacraments, etc. 6.
The Church Triumphant has attained to her perfection and end. 7. The Church
Militant children under years, heirs by promise. 7. The Church triumphant are
of full age seized on their inheritance. 8. The Church Militant is like Christ
crucified concerning infirmity. 8. The Church Triumphant is like Christ,
exalted and invested into glory.

Pharaoh and his Host, they must pass through the Red Sea, they must wander
in the Wilderness many years, and sustain hunger and thirst; they must war
with their enemies, even whole Nations by the way. All this they must do
before they can enter into this earthly Canaan: even so it is with us in our
passage to the heavenly Canaan. We must meet with many enemies, and sustain
and undergo many miseries, as the Apostle says, Through many afflictions we
must enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Act. 14.12. What are afflictions, but
assaults, troubles, temptations and fights? Why, through these we must enter,
and through many of these, says the Apostle; we shall meet with many of them
here in this life; yea, we must pass through them, says the Apostle; there is
a necessity of it, it is unavoidable. The end we seek after, is Gods
Kingdom; why, this is the way thither (says the Apostle) these are the Pikes
you must pass through, even many afflictions. So in the 2. Tim. 3.12. the
Apostle says, that all that will live godly in Christ shall suffer
persecution. All those that look to triumph in heaven, must live godly in
Christ Jesus; now all that will do so shall suffer persecution whether they
will or not, 2. Cor. 4.17. For our light afflictions, which are but for a
moment, cause unto us a far more excellent, and an eternal weight of glory:
not that our afflictions do cause it by way of efficacy or merit; for the
Apostle says, Romans 8.18. that the afflictions of this present life are not
worthy of the glory which shall be revealed to us. What is the meaning then of
this place? It must be understood by way of order and consequence, that
afflictions must of necessity go before, or else the eternal weight of glory
cannot follow after, Reuelat. 2.10. Ye shall have tribulation, but be thou
faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the Crown of life. As if he
should say, Thou shall have trials and tribulations, but be thou faithful and
fight, and thou shall have the Crown of life. And the promise of life is
restrained only to those that overcome, Revel. 2.7, 11, 17. And hence it is,
that the whole course of the faithful is called the Fight of Faith, 1. Tim.
6.12. Fight the good fight of Faith, lay hold on eternal life: As who should
say, Whosoever thou art that have faith, fight for it, or else thou shall never
lay hold on eternal life, never receive the end of thy faith, which is the
salvation of thy soul. And Matthew. 20.21, 22. the Mother of Zebedeus children
came to Christ, and besought him that her two sons might sit, one at his
right hand, and the other at his left in his Kingdom: But Jesus answered and
said, Ye ask ye know not what; Are ye able to drink of the Cup that I
shall drink of, etc. that is, Can ye participate with me in my afflictions?
Showing plainly, that we can never come to heaven to partake with him in
glory, unless first we drink of his Cup, and partake with him here in
affliction. And so much for the proof of the Point.

Luke 24.26. Ought not Christ to suffer these things, and so to enter into his
glory. And therefore it must be so with us his members: for shall we think to
speed better then he; therefore seeing he suffered first, and so entered into
his glory; so must we too. For if we fuffer with him, then we shall also
reign with him, 2. Tim. 2.12. and if we be first made conformable to his
death, so shall we be also to his Resurrection, Phil. 3.10, 11. And if we
partake with him in his sufferings; so certainly shall we partake with him in
his glory, 1. Pet. 4.13, 14. And Luke 22.28, 29. Our Savior says, Ye that
have continued with me in my Temptations, I appoint unto you a Kingdom, even
as my Father has appointed unto me a Kingdom.

Ioh. 16.33. In the world ye shall have afflictions.

Tim. 2.5, 6. And if we cannot be crowned in earth except we fight and
strive, much less in heaven; And if we do fight, then certainly we shall be
crowned, as the Apostle there shows, 2. Tim. 4.7, 8.

Pet 5.8. Your adversary the Devil like a Roaring Lion walks about seeking
whom he may devour: he is still bruising our heel. Genesis 3.

Fifthly, our own corruption does necessarily require it, Gal. 5.17. The flesh
Iusteth against the Spirit, etc. And secondly, our Corruptions must be
vanquished and subdued, and mortified, else we can never enter into Gods
Kingdom, 1. Cor. 15, 50. Flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God,
neither can corruption inherit incorruption: therefore we must endure many
conflicts here, before we can come to Gods Kingdom.

Sixthly, for the Trial and exercise, and increase of Gods Iam. 1.2, 3, 4.

Seventhly, by this means God seasons our hearts with

Lastly, Our Joys in heaven shall have the better relish to

The uses of the Point are these. First, this teaches us that troubled and
turmoild: But alas, poor Souls, it is their bane and misery, it makes them
utterly unfit and incapable of a Crown, and so depriues them of all true
happiness. If thou have no affliction, but that all is at peace within thee,
then the strong man, the Devil, has thee in full and quiet possession, Luke
11.21. Therefore let us not envy such, though they be at rest and quiet, and
we in trouble and affliction; for though in show their estate seem better then
ours, yet in Truth our estate is better then theirs. Put the case we were at
Sea, tossed with many waves up and down, and yet were sure to come to a Haven,
where we should have all things our hearts could desire: and put the case also
we should see others on the shore at peace, never like to attain to that
Haven, would we envy them. So though we pass through the waves of this
world, and the wicked stand on the shore in peace, yet we have no cause to
envy them, or to think their case better then ours: For we are passing
through these waves to the Haven of eternal glory, which they shall never
attain unto.

And in it five things.
that afflictions and temptations befall us here, as the Apostle exhorts,
Pet. 4.12. Dearly beloved, think^ it not strange concerning the fiery Trial
which is amongst you, to prove you, as though some strange thing were come unto
you. We must not think it strange; for it is the usual estate of all the
faithful: so that God deals no otherwise with us, then with his dearest
Saints. A Christian when he comes first into the School of Christ, is like a
Scholar when he goes first to School, that thinks it strange for to be
beaten; yea, but if he will be a Scholar, he must be beaten; And so if we be
Scholars in the School of Christ, we must look for afflictions. This is our
portion allotted unto us, therefore let us not think it Jonah did; But we
must willingly, and cheerfully offer our selves unto the Lord for such
employments in this service, as it shall please him to make us fit for; and
though we endure many blows, yet we must stand to it, for it is Gods service.
Thirdly, seeing Matthew. 5.11, 12. Blessed are you (says our Savior) when men
revile you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you for my
sake falsely; rejoice and be glad for great is your reward in Heaven. So the
Apostles, Act. 5.41. went from the Council rejoicing, that they were accounted
worthy to suffer for Christ's Name. And to this the Apostle exhorts us, Iam.
1.12. My Brethren count it exceeding joy, when ye fall into diverse Temptations.
Fourthly, as we must not take it heavily, but rejoice in it, Joshua encouraged
the people to war, because they fought the Lords Battails.

Now to fit us, and to help and direct us in this warfare, What to be
considered of f^r the fitting, helping, and directing of us in this warfare.
Consider these particulars: First, what enemies they are that we fight
against. Our enemies are many, even a world of enemies, the Dragon and all his
Angels, the World and all her Children and Darlings, the flesh and all the
wisdom and sense thereof (for all that is enmity against God) Sin, Ephesians.
6.12. We wrestle not against flesh and blood (that is not only against flesh
and blood, but against Principalities and powers against worldly Governors, the
Princes of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickednesses, which
are in high places. Mark how the Apostle sets them out in all their Terror and
power, marching as it were with their Colors displaied in all their Ruff and
Bravery. And this he does, not to dismay or discomfort us, but to encourage us,
and to whet us on, that we seeing how many, and how strong and how resolute our
enemies be, we Ephesians. 6.11. And specially we must labor to be furnished with
these two parts of this Armor, Prayer and Watchfulness: nothing is more
necessary to a Soldier in time of war then watchfulness; for if he fall,
asleep, his enemy comes and kills him; or else if his Colonel comes and
finds him, he kills him. Therefore the Apostle, 1. Pet. 5.8. exhorts us to
watchfulness, Be sober and watch; for your adversary the Devil, like a
roaring Lion, walks about seeking whom he may devour. But what kind of
watching is this? This is not to watch with a Bille on our Revel. 2.10. Be
thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the Crown of life. And we
must resist even unto blood, Heb. 12.4. we must fight till we stand up to the
knees in blood, and not yield to sin; we must fight till we overcome; we
must not only fight, but we must fight so long, so hard, so happily, that we
may overcome. But how shall we overcome if we fight till death, if we die in
the fight? I answer; We may overcome for all that: for that death is but to
the outward man; It is the Spirit and inward man that overcomes, and
therefore Revel. 2.1. Fourthly, we must consider what helps and forces we
have on our sides, surely more then are against us; we have such an Army, that
all the world cannot yield the like, we have God and Christ, and the holy
Spirit, and all the holy Angels to help us; we have the prayers and
wel-wishings of all the faithful in heaven and earth; we have the Word, the
Sacraments, the examples of Christ himself, and all the faithful to encourage
us. And who would not fight, having all these to fight for him and with him?
And who would or can doubt of the victory, seeing we have all the powers and
forces of heaven and earth to assist us, and to take part with us? Only the
powers of hell are against us, and how can they hurt us? Fifthly, and lastly, we
are to consider with

The third Use is for singular comfort to all Gods children, Rom: 8.34, 35. We
are more then Conquerors: he does not say, ye shall be, but you are already
more then Conquerors through him that loved us.

Lastly, this shows us how much we gratify Satan and wrong the Lord, when we
yield unto sin, we betray him and his cause, and his glory (as much as in us
lies) into his enemies hands; yea we fight against God for Satan; He that is
not with me (says our Savior) is against me: yea, we wrong our selves
exceedingly, leaving the glorious and honorable Colors of the Lord that made
us, and fighting under Satan's Banner. And so much for this Point and for this
Lecture.

The eighth Lecture of the Church.
IN handling the division of the Church, which was the fourth general Head, I
showed that it was partly of the name, partly of the thing it self. Of the
name we spoke fully. For the division of the thing it self I showed you that
it must not be understood so, as if God had many kinds of Churches, for the
Church is but one as I have formerly proved: But this division is a
distinction, which puts a difference betwixt one and the same Church in one
respect, and betwixt the same Church in another respect. We considered of it,
as it was distinguished in three respects. First, in respect of the bounds and
compass of it: and so we showed that there was a general, and a particular
Church. Of the general we had before spoken; of the particular we were
hereafter to speak, when we come to speak of the visible Church. Secondly,
it was considered in respect of the several portions and states allotted to
us, and that was twofold; the first in this world, which is a fight or warfare:
the second is in the world to come, which is a Crown or Triumph. In the first
respect the Church is called the Church Militant; In the second, the Church
Triumphant; of this we spoke the last time.

Now we are to speak of the division of the Church in the third respect, A
third division of the Church into visible and invisible.
And that is in respect of the outward state of it in this world: and so it is
visible, and sometime seen unto the world; and invisible, sometime not seen
to the world. The Church of God does sometime attain to such a flourishing and
prosperous estate in this world, as that first her members are many in number;
secondly, they have an outward form of settled Government; thirdly, their
Religion is countenanced, at least not violently opposed by the State and
Authority where they live; Fourthly, they make open profession of their faith
and Religion; Fifthly, they have public and solemn Assemblies at ordinary and
seasonable times, and in due and convenient place, where the Ministers teach
the Word, and where the people hear the Word preached, and where the
Sacraments are administered and Discipline executed, (at least in some measure)
and that without danger and without prohibition. I say, the Church does
oft-times attain to this state even in this world, and then it is called
visible. On the other side, sometimes it is brought to such a low and
distressed estate, that scarce any of these are found there, but rather all
quite contrary. First, their number is small; secondly, they have no such
outward form of government settled amongst them, at least not so exercised, as
that thereby the world should take notice of them, that they are such a holy
Society; thirdly, they and their Religion is distasted, disgraced, derided,
hated and persecuted even to the very death; Fourthly, their profession is
secret; Fifthly, their assemblies and meetings for Religious exercises are
seldom or none at all, or at least very private, at such uncertain times, and
in such privy and close places as they can light upon, and that are best and
fittest for their own safety; Lastly, they are deprived and debarred of the
public use of the ministry of the word, and of the Sacraments and discipline:
And in this case it is called an Invisible Church. So you see in general how
the state stands between the Church visible and invisible; Now we are to speak
of them in particular.

Of the Church invisible, and of the inuisibilitie of it in five senses.
First, of the Church invisible. The Church of God is said to be invisible in
these five Senses: First, it is invisible, because it is not seen nor
acknowledged by the men of the world, neither is it possibly to be discerned by
the sense of Church say they, must be so notoriously visible, that there must
be a great number of them, and they must make open profession of their Faith,
and must carry themselves so, as that every man and woman may know that they
are the Church, and that every one may know which is the true Church whereunto
he is to join himself. Opposite to this we say, the Church is sometimes
invisible, in these respects before set down. So howsoever there may be
always a Church, yet it cannot be always so notoriously known to all the
world.

Further we must consider, The Church signifying the universal company of Gods
chosen in heaven and earth, in this sense it is invisible actually and
potentially.
that the Church does sometime signify the universal Company of Gods chosen in
heaven and in earth; sometime only the Company of Believers on earth. When it
signifies the universal Company of Gods chosen in heaven and earth, in this
sense it is simply invisible and that both actually, that is, it is not seen,
and also potentially, that is, it cannot be seen, as in the first, second, and
third senses we have showed. For first, neither can the natural man see them;
nor secondly can their graces be seen; neither thirdly can the greatest and
chiefest part of them be seen being already in heaven. Secondly, Secondly, the
Church signifying the company of believers in earth is invisible simply, or
after a sort.
when the Church signifies the company of Believers on earth, it is invisible,
either simply, or after a sort; simply, and so there is no Church on earth
invisible, but in the first and second senses only; or else after a sort, that
is, as opposed to famous visiblenesse, generally pretended by the Papists;
namely, that there is a great multitude always openly professing the true
Religion, and that in such outward show, state and carriage, that it is, or may
be generally known to be the true Church, and that any faithful man may
point with his finger to such a Congregation, and say boldly, This is the true
Church; and so may see and know which is that holy Society amongst men, where
he may safely, and where he must join himself for his salvation. And in this
sense, that is, as opposite to the Popish Church, the true Church is sometimes
(though not always) invisible, which is partly in the Fourth and Fifth senses
above specified. So that the Church even then when it is after a sort
invisible, is also after a sort visible too; that is, it is invisible, because
it is not easy and plain to be discerned; and visible, because it is
discerned by some, though hardly: and so consequently those Papists that make
the visiblenes of the Church to be sometimes such, that it can hardly be known,
agree with us in the thing directly, though they differ in the phrase and
manner of Speech.

General aduertisements concerning the Church invisible and visible.
Now I will give you some general aduertisements here concerning the Church
invisible and visible, whereby you may the better conceive and understand the
whole business: first you must know that the Church invisible is the whole

Differences between the universal invisible, and the universal visible
Church.
1. The invisible conteines all good Wheat without chafe. 1. The visible
conteines good and bad, Wheat and chafe together. 2. The invisible is partly
in heaven. 2. The visible only on earth. 3. The invisible is of all times and
places from the beginning to the end of the world. 3. The visible is only of
certain times and places asunder. 4. The invisible has many sheep belonging
to it, that are not yet brought into the fold. 4. The visible has many within
the fold, that profess to be sheep, yet indeed are Wolves. 5. Against the
invisible the Gates of hell shall never prevail. 5. Against the visible they
may, and do prevail in a sore measure, sometimes utterly rooting it out in
some particular places, as we see in the Churches of Ephesus, and the second
and third Chapter of the Revelation. They may prevail against the visible
Church, to the horrible defiling and destroying of them: But so they cannot do
against the invisible Church, for that is out of their Reach.

The second advertisement is this, That the invisible

The third aduertisment is, that those that are of the

The fourth Advertisement is this: How we are to understand some things that
are affirmed of the Church in the Scripture; for it is spoken of in diverse
senses in the Scripture: as first, some things are affirmed of the visible
Church only, which cannot be understood of the invisible; as that in Matthew.
13.47, 48. where the Kingdom of heaven, that is, the visible Church, is
compared to a Net, which gathers both good and bad fish; for the invisible
universal Church, containing only the Elect, has no bad fishes in it.
Again, some things are affirmed of the invisible Church only, which cannot be
affirmed of the visible Church, as that in Cant. 4.7. Thou art all fair my
Love, and there is no spot in thee. No visible Church but has many spots;
therefore this is to be understood of the invisible only. And so likewise that
which I have spoken of heretofore, that they are known only to God and
themselves, is to be understood of the invisible Church only. Again, some
things of both, and that in many respects: First, some things which are
principally spoken of the visible Church, are abusiuely applied to the
invisible universal Church, the whole taking denomination of the greater part,
as Matthew. 8.12. The children of the kingdom shall be cast out. This is spoken
principally of the visible Church of the Jews that should be cast off; and yet
is applied abusiuely to the invisible, to the children of the Kingdom, whereas
none of them can be cast off, but shall certainly be saved. So Revel. 3.1, 4.
in the first Verse, the Lord says to the Church of Sardy, Thou have a name
that thou live, but art dead. Here is a dead Church, yet in the fourth Verse
the Lord says, Thou have a few names in Sardy which have not defiled their
garments, etc. Here is a living Church, how is this to be understood? This is
spoken principally of the visible Church, that it is a dead Church, but is
abusiuely applied to the invisible Church which was amongst them, the whole
taking denomination of the greater part. And Romans 10.21. compared with Romans
11.1. In the tenth Chapter and last verse, Israel is said to be a disobedient
and gainsaying people. In the eleventh Chapter and first Verse they are said to
be Gods people, which is to be understood as the place before. Some things are
principally affirmed of the invisible Church, but analogically are applied to
the visible Church, as the whole taking denomination from the better part. As
for example, If I come into the Barn, and see a heap of Corn among the
chafe, I may say truly, It is a heap of Corn, though the most of it be
chafe, naming it from the better part. And in this sense when the visible
Church receives her denomination from the better part, the Church may be
called the Body of Christ, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. compared with 1. Cor. 12.27.
Saints, holy, Catholic, the Pillar of Truth, etc. these are principally
affirmed of the Church invisible, but proportionally applied to the Church
visible, Vid. Zanch. in Hos. 2.8.9. p. 51.
the whole receiving denomination of the better part.

may lie hidden, and not be outwardly discerned. And so consequently if it may
be in such a state, in such places, and at such times, much more is it so at
other places and times, where there is no such probability of a Church. And
this strikes home at the Papists, that will have the outward face of the true
Church so notoriously apparent and visible to the world. But as I have showed,
in such places, and at such times where it has been most like to have been,
even then and there the true Church may be hidden, and not apparent to the
World. This I will prove in the case of the Church of Israel in Elias time, 1.
King. 19.10. where the Prophet complains of such a scarcity of the faithful
in his days, as that he says, be himself was left alone. If there had been
a Church any where in those times, surely it should have been in Israel, where
the best means were: but there was no outward appearance of a Church, and
shall we think then it was any where else? So likewise in the 2. Chron. 15.3.
Israel had been for a long time without a true God, without a Priest to teach,
without Law; then they had no true visible Church of God amongst them. And if
it were not to be found in Israel, where should it be found? The Papists will
reply, in Judah; if not with Israel; Judah prevailed against Israel, because
they stayed upon the Lord God of their Fathers, as we may see in the 2. Chron.
13.18. Well, yet they were bad enough too, as we may see in the 2. Chron.
14.3, 5. they had their strange Gods, and their Images and high places, and
Groves in all their Cities which Asa took away. But yet if it were thus with
Israel, that they had no outward face of a true Church, might it not be so with
Judah too, and so in other Churches: yea, we will prove that it was so with
Judah afterward, as we may see in the 2. Chron. 28.23, 24.25. where it is said
of Ahaz, that he sacrificed to the gods of Damascus, and to the gods of the
King of Aram, he brake the vessels of the House of God, shut up the doors of
the House of the Lord, and made him Altars in every corner of Jerusalem, and in
every City of Judah he made high places to burn Incense to other Gods, etc.
So Judah was worse then Israel, nay, then the very Heathen that were before
them, as we may see 2. Chron. 33.9. where it is said, that Manasseh made
Israel to err, and to do worse then the Heathen whom the Lord had cast out
before them. So you see here was no outward face of a Church, neither in Judah,
nor in Israel; if not in them, where could there be any? Who could now point
with his finger, and say, I know which is the true Church of God, whereunto I
may, and must join my self? If it were so with them that were the natural
branches, then there is no privilege for any other Church, but that it may be
so with them too. But the Papists will object, that this was so under the Law
only, but it shall not be so under the Gospel; or if it be so sometimes,
yet it shall not be so often to the end of the world. I say, I will prove that
the state of the Church was so also under the Gospel, and shall be so, not
sometimes only, but often to the end of the world, that there shall be no
outward face of a true Church, Revel. 12.6, 14. the woman is said there to be
fled into the wilderness, which is meant of the Church, that at several times
to the worlds end shall be driven to live in Desert and forlorn places; how
then shall men see it, and take notice of it, and join with it, when it is in
such a secret place? So in the Revel. 13.7, 8. The Beast made war with the
Saints and overcame them, and power was given unto him over every Kindred and
Nation, and Tongue. Therefore all that dwell upon the earth worship him, whose
names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb: Where was the outward
face of a Church in these times? And in the 2. These. 2.3, 4, 5. the Apostle
shows, that Antichrist shall come, and sit in Gods Temple, as God, etc. The
Devil shall be so cunning, that he shall set up Antichrist in Gods Temple,
that is, in Gods Church, where there has been an outward face of a Church
continued for many years, and yet he shall not be known but to be God, but
only to those that are spiritually-minded; for he shall sit as God, so that
then there shall be no outward face of a true Church there. So likewise that in
Luke 18.8. proves this Point, where our Savior says, When the Son of man
comes, shall he find faith on the Earth? If faith be so scarce to be found,
which is the life of the Church, where then shall the Church be found? But
where shall he not find faith? In India, or in Rome only? No not only in one
or two places, but not in the earth. And who shall not find it? The Son of
Man. When the Son of Man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? Then the
Church is not so palpable, as that it may be outwardly discerned to the worlds
end. And this is it that Austen and the Fathers mean, August. in Ps. 10
Hierom. cont. Lucif.
when they compare the Church to the Moon, that is sometimes in an eclipse so
darkened that it cannot be seen. So we see we have the consent of the Fathers
too against the Papists. And so much for the proof of the Point.

The Reasons are many, and they all strengthen one another, especially the
first three must be laid together, else they are not sufficient apart to prove
the Point.

Noah's Family. Now that which few do (except it be some notorious thing or
person) is little obseruable to the World.

the poor receive the Gospel. Now that which poor and mean Ones do, is
generally neglected, not taken notice of, except it be some notorious exploit,
and therefore,

Herod did after Christ, Matthew. 2.13. not to be members of it. And hence it
is, that they are so hardly discerned.

Fourthly, their Persecutors many times bring them to Eliah the Prophet, the
Prophets were slain with the sword, 1. King. 19.10. and that was the reason of
the scarcity of the faithful in those times. And so it was in Dioclesians
time, all the Christians that were found were put to death, their bodies were
burnt, and their Temples were overthrown; where was the face of the Church at
this time? Persecution had brought it to this low scantling, that it was not to
be discerned. And this is shadowed to us in Matthew. 8.24. by the ship that our
Savior and his Disciples were in, that was covered with waves, so that it was
hardly to be discerned, yet it sanke not: so is the state of the Church of God
in this world, that sometimes it is covered with the waves and rage of
persecutors, like to be swallowed up, hardly to be discerned, but yet it lives.

Fifthly, sometimes Heresies and Schisms arise in the Arius with his Heresy
ouer-spread the whole world; in so much that the World did wonder at it self
to see it self become an Arian, as the Ecclesiastical History sets it down.
Where could a man say now, This is the true Church, whereunto I must join?

Sixthly, those that make profession to be, and indeed Matthew. 26.56. they all
forsook him, and fled like fearful men: where was the face of the Church
then?

Seventhly, Counterfeits and Deceivers are very cunning, Christ, 1. Cor. 11.13,
14. and Mat. 24.24. our Savior says, that false Christ's and false Apostles
shall arise, and shall show great signs and wonders, so that if it were
possible, they shall deceive the very elect. So that the true Church shall not
be so easily discerned, because of these deceivers.



Reu. 12.4, to 14. who drove the Woman into the wilderness, but the great red
Dragon the Devil?



Lastly, God has passed his promise only for the perpetuity Matthew. 16.18. The
gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church to overcome it, and to
destroy the being of it; but any thing else they may do to it, they may deface
it, suppress it, banish it, drive it into a narrow Corner, but they shall
never overcome it: they may and do destroy the perpetuity of the visiblenesse
of it, but the perpetuity of the being of it they shall never destroy. Thus
far God has promised and tied himself, and so far we may expect and look
for it, and no further. So much for the reasons.

The Uses are these; First, this serves to refute those Papists visibility,
headship, and that at Rome. Bellarmine tends directly hereto, and they labor
to prove it with all their power, and it stands them upon; for if this does not
stand, the whole form of their Church falls to the ground. For whereas they
say, the true Church is always notoriously visible; and therefore their Church
being so, is the true Church: We say and have proved, that the true Church of
God is sometime brought into such straights, that the outward face thereof does
not at all, or at least does hardly appear; and therefore it will follow, that
if their Church have, and shall be always notoriously visible, then theirs is
not the true Church. Their exceptions be of small moment if they be well
considered; I will stand but upon two or three of the chief; Exceptions of
Papists out of the fifth of Matthew for the visibilitie of the Church answered.
They allege out of the fifth of Matthew and the fourteenth Verse, That the
Church is the light of the World; now the light is always seen, therefore the
Church is always seen. I answer; This is spoken personally to the Disciples,
Ye are the light of the world; and it is to be extended to the Ministers of the
Gospel, in regard of the Duty of Holiness to be practiced by them, that they
should not walk offensiuely to the World; but rather to provoke them to the
practice of holiness, by the light of their good example. How does this serve
then to prove the continual visiblenesse of the Church? Besides I say, that a
Light may be eclipsed for a time, and yet be a Light still. The Moon is a
Light, and yet not always visible; for sometimes it is eclipst, and yet then
it is as good a Light as when it is in her full brightness; and therefore if
this were to be understood of the Church, it does not prove that it is always
visible because it is a Light. Further I say, that by that reason their life
(for that is as well if not chiefly understood by the Light, as verse. 16.) is
also without error too, as well as their Doctrine; and that always, which is
not so. Lastly, if it do give Light always, yet it is but to those that are
in the house, verse 15. that is, to those that are members of the Church, and
that we easily grant: but what is this to prove the notorious visiblenesse of
the Church to the world?

The second exception out of Mat. 18.17.
Secondly, they allege the eighteen of Matthew and the seventeenth verse. where
our Savior says, Tell the Church; and therefore there must be always a
visible Church. Mark, says Campian, here is a remedy for a disease; now the
disease remains always; and therefore the remedy must always remain. I
answer: It is true, it is a remedy for those that lie in such a state there
spoken of, and in some sense it is always performed, even when two or three
are joined together in the faith; though there be no known visibility, they
may tell one another; for it is not here meant, that they shall appeal to Rome.

The third exception out of Romans 10.10.
Their third exception is this: but, say they, they that believe (be they few or
many) must make profession of their faith, else they cannot be saved, Romans
10.10. now if they must always make profession, then they are always seen,
and so the Church is alwayies visible. I answer: It is true; they must profess
always, and so they do, except it be in time of their infirmity, But must
they do it to all the world? No, they may do it among themselves always,
though there be but two or three of them; yea, and when they are many, they
may do it to the eye of the World too, if there be no certain danger in it;
yea, though there be certain danger in it, yet if they have a calling to it,
they are resolute even to die for the profession of it, and that is as much
profession as is required. And yet because their number is but few, and that
they live in certain places, and are in this case for the most part obscure
and simple men, therefore it is not possible that any such general notice
should be taken of them; and those that do hear of them, or see them, are
usually little moved by their example, at least they are seldom persuaded
that they are the true Church, and so join with them. Therefore there is no
such perpetual notorious visiblenesse of the Church, as they would have. We
will return upon them with these two Points, and choke them with these two
bones.. First, we ask them where the Church shall be when Antichrist comes?
for they themselves confess, that in Antichrists time there shall be a
desolation of the Church; therefore by their own confession it may, and shall
be sometimes invisible. Yea, but say they, ours is the true Church still,
though it be then obscured: and we say then that Antichrist is come, and our
Church obscured, therefore by their own reason, our Church is the true Church.
The second is from their Church which they have here among us; they have a
Church here among us, here be Papists, and Masses, Arch-priests and Priests,
this themselves will not deny, nay, they boast of it sometimes; yet is their
Church visible among us? They will not affirm it, at least they will not say
it is visible in their sense, that is, that the world may take notice of it,
neither was it ever countenanced nor tolerated in our State, so that in our
sense and to us it is invisible, and so may our Church be to them.

The second Use is for admonition; to admonish us that Church outwardly; this
is for earthly States and Kingdoms, we must not dream of a temporal
Kingdom here, for Christ's Kingdom is spiritual, not of this World. The
Papists they say, that it must be as glorious outwardly as any kingdom in the
world: but we must take heed that we be not carried away with shows, with the
looks of the Whore, for Gods Kingdom comes not with observations.

Elias, poor, man saw none left with whom he might join, but God saw many
thousands. What if all be so desolate (as it was in his time) that thou can
see none of Gods Church but thy self, that thou can see no visible society
of men in the world that thou can safely join withal? yet know God has his
Church, happily many thousands, though they make little profession for the
time, that never bowed their knee to Baal. Therefore let us not judge by sight,
but by faith, and let this comfort and satisfy us in the most desperate times
that are.

The last Use is for satisfaction to the Papists demands, Luthers time; or what
is become of all our Ancestors that were members of the Romish Church? For
answer to the first, we ask them, Where shall the Church be in Antichrists
time; that is when they think Antichrist shall be? They answer, it shall be
much obscured then. But shall there be a Church then or not? Yes, no doubt but
there shall: else their own Pillar of the Churches perpetuity falls to the
ground. Why then might not our Church be a true Church in the days of Popery
(whom we call Antichrist) though it were much obscured? We had a Church amongst
them that did profess our Religion (though much obscured by them) even before
Luthers time. To the second demand concerning our Fathers that lived in their
Church, what is become of them (say the Papists) are they damned? We answer,
many of them, though they lived amongst them, were of the invisible Church; for
the rest we leave them to stand or fall to their own Master; yet we have
great hope of many that were members of their Church, that lived before the
Council of Trent, and before the Order of the poisoning Jesuits came up. And
so much for answer to them, as also for this Point.

The ninth Lecture of the Church.
THe last general Point we spoke of, was concerning the division of the
Church, wherein we showed, that the Church was distinguished in it self in
many respects, the last whereof was this, in regard of the outward state of it
in the eye and appearance to the World. In this state we showed that it was
sometime visible, to be seen by the eye of man; and sometime invisible, not
to be seen at all, or at least very hardly to be seen. Of the invisible state
of the Church we have spoken already in the last Lecture. Now it remains that
by Gods assistance we speak of the visible Church, for that is the Point
chiefly in question. Therefore leaving the invisible Church to God, he only
knowing who are his, we in the mean while believing it, and esteeming
reverently thereof, we proceed now to speak of the visible Church, which may
and is known not to God only, but also to the eye of the world. That which
has been already spoken of the Church in general, and especially of the
invisible, makes the way plain before us for the understanding of that which
follows; so that now we may find out the visible Church without any
difficulty at all.

Nine things considerable in a visible Church.
In speaking of the visible Church, we must handle these Points, first, the
definition of it; secondly, the causes of it; thirdly, the members of it;
fourthly, the marks and notes of it; fifthly, the government of it; sixthly,
the privileges of it; seventhly, the adversaries of it; eighthly, the
authority of it; and lastly, the application of it to all Churches in the
world so far as they are known to us.

First, for the definition of it, it is this; Namely, A true visible Church is
a Company of people called, First, the definition of it.
and joining together in the public profession of the true Religion. Mark the
parts of this Definition: first, that they may be a Church, they must be a
Company of people called; secondly, that they may be a visible Church, they
must join together in public profession; And thirdly, that they may be a
true Church, they must profess the true Religion. For the first, they must be
a Company; for one man cannot make a Church, a Church being as much to say, as
a Congregation; and a Congregation consists of diverse persons: one man cannot
make a Congregation, and therefore one man cannot make a Church. Now whether
this Company be great or small, three thousand, or but three, it is not much
material, so long as they be a Company, more or fewer; if they be so qualified
as the rest of the definition requires, they are a Church. Secondly, it is a
Company called: for so you may remember that I showed you before, that Church
has her name in the Greek from calling. Now whereas there is a double
calling, one outward, the oath inward, those that have only an outward calling
are visible members; if they obey the outward calling, it is sufficient to make
them to be reputed in the Church: But if they be true and sauing-members of
the Church, ordinarily they must be called, not outwardly only, but inwardly
too, and must yield obedience unto both. Thirdly, a Company of people; which is
not spoken definitiuely, as discovering what company, that is, a Company of men
and women, for that is universally understood; but indefinitely, and to enlarge
the Capacity and bounds of the Church to all people and Nations in the world:
For so it was in part even under the former Testament; strangers joining with
the Jews were reputed of that Church, Exodus 12. much more is it so now under
the Gospel, the partition wall being beaten down, Jew or Gentile, or any
people under the Sun, if they be rightly qualified as in the definition, may
make a true visible Church. So much for the first part of the definition, that
they must be a Company, and a Company called, and a Company of people called.

Secondly, that they may be a visible Church, as they must be a Company called
to the profession of Religion, so they must join together in the public
profession of it; wherein there are three things: first, that they must make
profession: secondly, that their profession must be public: thirdly, that they
must join together in this public profession. First, there must be a
profession; for a Church is visible only so far forth as their faith and
Religion is visible: but this is not to be discerned but by their profession,
and therefore the Church is not visible but only by profession; so then there
must be a profession. Secondly their profession must be public or open, that
is, it must be so public and open, that there may be notice taken, that such
and such men are of such a society and Religion; else they are rather of the
invisible Church, spoken of before: And look as their profession is more or
less public, so the Church is to be reputed more or less visible. Thirdly,
as they must publicly profess, so they must join together in this
profession; and that intends, first, their separation from all others, whether
they be of none, or of a contrary and diverse Religion; and secondly, it intends
their associating, or sorting of themselves together with professors of the
same Religion, growing into and living in a loving Communion and fellowship
with them. Thirdly, it intendes that they must do it voluntarily, and of their
own accord; some join for fashion, some for fear, some for hope of gain,
and some others for the saving of their goods, and the like; yet all these do
it voluntarily, for the will cannot be forced; yea if they do it against their
will it is a sin to them, though they join to the purest Churches in the
world. And so much for the second part of the definition; that they must join
together in a public profession of Religion.

Thirdly, that there may be a true visible Church, the Religion which this
Company make profession of must be the true Religion: for as without the Church
there is no salvation; so without the true Religion there is no true Church:
there are diverse Religions in the world, and accordingly diverse Churches; yet
there is but one only true Religion, which is that which is contained in the
Scripture, the Word of Truth; and so there is but one only true Church, that
is, that which embraces that true Religion. Vera ecclesia est quae profitetur
Christi fidem. Bellar. de eccl^s milit. p. 249.
So that whatsoever Congregation under the Sun does not profess that one
true Religion, let them profess whatsoever Religion they will besides, they
cannot justly be reputed true visible Churches.

For the better understanding of this Point, I will draw it into an
Observation, and so discourse of it at large; and the Observation is this:
First, some Churches are either universal visible Churches, or particular
visible Churches.
though not in the outward Communion of the same Ecclesiastical Assembly, and
therefore all these may be termed a true universal visible Church: so also
every particular Ecclesiastical Assembly, professing the same saving Truth,
and joining together in the outward Communion of one settled Congregation, and
observing the same laws and Orders at the same time and place, may be called a
true particular visible Church; and that whether it be in the same Country and
Province, or in a Parish, or in a private house: and accordingly they are
called a Provincial, a Parochial, or a domestical Church; and each of these
is a true visible Church, First, Particular visible Churches are, first,
National, Parochial, or domestical. Jnstances, first, of a Provincial Church
though one be universal and the other particular. For Instances of all these
in Scripture.

First, for a Provincial or National Church, which is a Company of people
professing the same Truth in the whole Land or Nation; you may see an instance.
Act. 9.31. Then had the Churches Rest in Judea, and Samaria, and Galile, etc.
There were Provincial Churches, named by the Country they were in, as Judea,
Samaria, etc. And in the Revelations the second and third Chapters, the seven
Churches there mentioned were National Churches, as Ephesus, etc. And 1. Cor.
1.2. unto the Church of God which is at Corinthus, etc. there was a national
Church.

Secondly, of a Parochial Church.
Secondly, for a Parochial or Parish Church, which is a Company of people
professing the same faith in a Town or in a Parish, we shall read of them in
Act. 14.23. Where it is said, that the Apostles ordained them Elders in every
Town.

Thirdly, of a Domestical Church.
Thirdly, for a domestical Church, which is a Company professing the same faith
in a private house, as we may read in the Romans 16.5. and in the 1. Cor. 16.19.
of Aquila and Priscilla with the Church in their House. And Colos. 4.15. We
read of a Church that was in the House of Nimphas, though these are rather to
be reputed invisible Churches, except they may be so openly taken notice of,
and so notoriously known, as the Church that was in Priscilla and Aquila's
house; then they may be called Domestical visible Churches. So much for the
first division, that some Churches are either universal visible Churches, or
particular Churches; and that either in a whole Land, or in a Town, or in a
private House.

Secondly, they are either more or less visible.
Secondly, whereas some Churches are more notoriously known, some less; yet
both are true visible Churches, though one be more visible, and the other less
visible. In the time of the Apostles it was so: the Church of Rome was
notoriously known; for their faith was known throughout the whole world, Romans
1.8. and their obedience was come abroad amongst all, Romans 16.19. so that this
Church was more visible. Other Churches were less known, as the Church at
Cenchrea and Creet, which are only named in the Scripture, and no Epistle
written to them. Now because they are only mentioned, therefore they were less
known, and so less visible, and yet true Churches as well as the other.

Thirdly, whereas some Churches profess the saving faith more purely and
sincerely, others more corruptly; Thirdly, either more or less pure.
yet each of these is a true visible Church, though the one be more pure, (not
more true) the other less. Instances of these we have in the second and third
Chapters of the Revelation; some Churches there were more pure, some more
corrupt, yet all true Churches. Churches more pure were Smyrna and
Philadelphia, all commended in them, nothing dispraysed. Churches less pure
were Ephesus, Pergamus, and Thiatira, in which Churches some things are
commended, some things discommended. Churches yet less pure were, Sardis and
Laodicea, where there is nothing commended, but all things dispraysed. So we
see that some of these professed the true saving faith more purely, some less
purely, and some more corruptly, yet every one of them was a true visible
Church.

Fourthly, and lastly, Fourthly, they are more or less perfect.
whereas some Churches are grown to some Ripeness and perfection, and to some
settled form of Government; others are in their infancy, and have not such a
form established for Government; yet each of these is a true visible Church,
though the one be more, the other less perfect. Instances of these we have in
Scripture; First, for them that were more perfect, as at Jerusalem, where
James was Bishop, there the Church was grown to some perfection; there the
Apostles met and had a Consultation together, Act. 15.2. and there was a settled
form of Government. And so the Church of Philippi, Phil. 1.1. was also grown
to some perfection and settled form of Government, they had their Bishops and
Deacons: So likewise the Church of Ephesus, Act. 17.28. they had their Elders
and Overseers. Secondly some are less perfect, as the Church in Creta, which
had some things that were imperfect, and therefore Titus was left there to
redress things amiss, Tit. 1.5. And so the Churches of the Gentiles were not
grown to that perfection, and therefore the Apostles would lay no heavy
burden on them, but that which they should be well able to bear, Act. 15.19.
yet these were true Churches. So that though some visible Churches be
universal, some particular; some more notoriously known, some less known;
some more pure, some more corrupt; and some grown to some perfection and
ripeness, some in their infancy less perfect; yet all these are true visible
Churches, so long as they profess the true saving faith. This may suffice for
the illustration of the Note.

Now we come to the proofs of the point, and first under the Law there was a
set place chosen, where the Lord would put his Name; that is, where Religion
should be professed, and he dwells there; that is, as a Father, or as a Master of
the family begetting children, and ruling and governing that family by his
Word. Now what is this under the Gospel, but this, that where Gods saving
truth is professed, there God himself is present, as in his true visible Church,
Matthew. 18.20. Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, says our
Savior, there am I in the midst of them. What is a Church? but a company of
people gathered together in the Name of Jesus Christ. And what is it to be
gathered together in his Name? but jointly to profess his saving Truth. And
what are they in the midst of whom he is, but his Church? For so in Revel. 2.1.
he is said to walk in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks. And what
are the seven golden Candlesticks, but the seven visible Churches? Revel. 1.20.
and this is not tied to any one place more then other, but wheresoever, says
our Savior, two or three are gathered, etc. be it among the Jews, or among
the Gentiles, be it generally in the World, or particularly in a Parish or
House, wheresoever it is, says our Savior, I am in the midst of them: neither
does he say, that of necessity there must be any great multitude of them, if
but two or three are gathered together in his Name, he is in the midst of them.
So Act. 2.41, 47. there was a true visible Church, there was a company of
people that received the Word, that is, that heard it, and obeyed it; and they
were baptized, that is, they did not only embrace, but outwardly profess the
saving Truth, and so they were added to the Church, that is, they were of the
visible Church. Do but consider how the Apostle, 1. Cor. 1.2. describes the
Church of Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Jesus Christ; that is, to
those that have true saving Faith in Christ that sanctifies them; Saints by
Calling, that is, such as make profession at the least to be so; with all that
call on the Name of the Lord Jesus in every place; which phrase, calling on the
Name of the Lord, generally in Scripture signifies the profession of Gods
Religion; so that those that thus profess the true Religion are true visible
Churches. Revel. 1.20. the Churches there are said to be golden Candlestickes.
Now what is the use of a Candlestick, but to hold forth the light to be seen
of men? and this not only experience teaches, but Christ himself teaches
it, Mat. 5.15. Neither do men light a Candle and put it under a Bushel, but
on a Candlestick, and it gives light to all that are in the house. And what
is the true visible Church? but a company that hold forth the light of the
saving Truth to be seen by the World. And those instances alleged of those
Churches that are some more visible, some less; some more pure some more
corrupt; some more perfect, some more imperfect; yet all of them true Churches;
proves the whole substance of the Observation clearly and directly. And so
much for the proofs.

The Reasons of the point are these. First, the saving

Secondly, where there is such a company professing Gods Matthew. 18.20. but
Christ is present no where in such a special manner, but in his Church;
therefore such a company are a true Church. Again, they have also the promise
of life and salvation, Romans 10.13. but none are saved but those that are of the
Church; therefore they are a true Church.

Thirdly, the true Church is built on the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2.10.
that is, on that saving faith which they taught and wrote: therefore they that
profess this faith must needs be a true visible Church.

Ephesians. 1.22. therefore they that profess to be such are his visible Body.

Matthew. 16.19.

Ioh. 10.27.





Act. 8.37, 38. he believed the saving faith of Christ, and was baptized, and
so made open profession of it, and so became a member of the true visible
Church. If this profession in particular make a particular man a true member of
the visible Church; much more in general does it make a company of men
professing the same faith to be a true visible Church.

true Religion, is by the true visible Church (which may be true in some sense,
but not in this.) And their reach herein is to make all the Christian World to
suspend themselves upon their Church, as that being always visible, and so to
receive that Religion, and none but that which their Church does teach. For say
they, there is no way to find out the true Religion, but by the true visible
Church: but ours is the true visible Church; therefore if ever you will find
out the true Religion, you must find it out by our Church. It is not to be
denied, but that a true visible Church is a good means to find out the true
Religion, being assisted with the continual presence of Gods Spirit, and being
furnished with the Word and Sacraments, and gifts for that purpose: but whereas
they say, it is the only way, it is not true; for the Scripture has another
way, and a better, Ioh 5.39. Search the Scriptures (says our Savior) for they
testify of me. Again, if this be the only way to find out the true Religion
by the Church, then a man must first be well assured which is the true Church,
before he can safely rely upon her judgment for the truth of Religion; so
that whereas before his care was to find out the true Religion, and thereupon
resolves to search it out from the true Church; now his first and greatest care
is to find out which is the true Church: for other companies that are not, may
and do brag oft-times, that they are the true Church, when there is no such
matter; what are we to do in this case? This Doctrine tells us directly what
is to be done; where is it that the saving truth is professed? There and no
where else is a true visible Church; so that whereas they say, the Church is
the only way for the finding out of the true Religion, it is plain (as we
have showed) that the true Religion professed is the only way, or at least the
chief way to find out a true visible Church. The case is this: we say, the
true Religion shows forth the true Church; the Papists say the contrary, that
the true Church shows forth the true Religion. And this that they say is true
in some sense, but that which we say is true in a better sense: for the true
Religion shows the true Church, as the cause shows the effects; but the
Church shows the true Religion, as the effects show the cause. As for example,
the Sunshine is the cause of the day, and the day proves that the Sun
shines. Now one man may reason thus from the cause to the effect, and say; The
Sun shines, therefore it is day: another from the effect to the cause; It is
day, therefore the Sun shines; and both say true: but the first is the more
forcible kind of reasoning, when we reason from the cause to the effects. So
when I reason thus; Here is the true Religion, therefore the true Church: here
I reason from the cause to the effects; and this is a more forcible and better
reason, then to say, Here is the true Church, therefore here is the true
Religion, which is but to reason from the effect to the cause. This we shall
find to be true in the Scripture phrase, where the Church is compared to a
Candlestick; now what serves that for, but only to hold out the light? then
the saving truth is the Light or Candle: now the Candlestick is not seen at
all without the Light of the Candle in the dark night, though it were of gold:
so in the darkness of this World, the Church which is the Candlestick, if it
hold not forth the saving truth, which is the Light or Candle, it cannot be
seen it self. So that it is the truth of Religion that makes a true Church,
and the profession of this truth makes it visible: then the Church is not the
only way to find out the true Religion, nor yet the best way; but the best and
safest way to find out the true visible Church, is to find it out by the true
Religion which they profess. And so much for the reproof of the Papists.

these hold in reciprocal terms; so that whether we would prove any assembly
to be a true visible Church, or reprove and convince any for a false, we must
lay it to this Rule; so whether they profess the saving truth of Christ, or
not, and accordingly esteem and judge of them to be true or false Churches.
Here certain exceptions may be made to this Doctrine. The first exception is
this: What, Exception 1.
do you say, that a company professing the saving truth makes a true visible
Church? Will profession only make a true visible Church? I answer, No: First,
it is required, Romans 10.10. Exception 2.
The second exception is this: But what say you if they profess it with their
lips, and deny it in their lives and practice; is such a Church, a true visible
Church? I answer, Exception 3.
The third exception; But what say you of such a Church, which though they
profess the whole saving faith; yet they do in certain some cross opinions,
which overthrow it? whether they be persisted in after they have been
admonisht by neighbor Churches? Then they are no longer to be taken notice of
as true visible Churches. But on the other side, if they be matters of smaller
moment, that do not overthrow the foundation, then the hay and stubble shall
burn, 1. Cor. 3.12, 15. but yet they shall remain still a true Church.
Secondly, if they be greater matters, errors that do overthrow the
foundation, yet if they be not publicly professed as the Doctrine of that
Church; yea, though they be publicly professed, yet if upon admonition of other
neighbor Churches they do recant and reform their Errors, then they are still
to be accounted true visible Churches, and it is a sin for any to forsake
them, being in them; yea, it is a sin not to join as a member to them,
living in them, Deu. 12.5. at least we are to join with them in cons^nt and
Communion of profession. The case of the Churches in the second and third
Chapter of the Revelation make the former exceptions clear, as you may see in
your own reading of them.

his Angls in heaven: and as we must not be ashamed of it, so we must not be
afraid to profess it; it is not a matter of shame or fear to be of Gods
Church, but a matter of glory and comfort; therefore be not afraid of reproach,
persecution, temptation, all outward misery which we are sure to endure, if
we be known to profess the saving Truth of Christ. Christ Jesus did boldly
oppose himself against the high Priest, and Pilate, and the Jews, the Scribes
and Pharisees, and the Soldiers; yea, he opposed himself to Death it self,
and to all the powers of darkness, and to the terrors of God himself for
thee; and will thou be afraid to oppose thy self to some few outward dangers
for him? Nay, it is for our selves in the end, for we shall have the glory of
it: yet be wise, and do not rashly thrust thy self into any danger; but if
thou have just occasion, and a Calling from God, shun it not for fear of
men: Let not thy false heart betray the truth of Christ his cause, but relying
upon Gods power, promise and protection, stand to it resolutely and with a good
Christian courage, and say, I am a Professor of Christ crucified, and so I will
continue by his Assistance even unto the very death, though I be crucified even
as he was. Thirdly, we must see that our profession be not in hypocrisy: for
this is the Canker-worme that eats out Religion in the hearts of many
professors; therefore profess the Truth sincerely and in singleness of heart,
as in the sight of God, who sees and searches the Reins; do it as the only
cause whereby we may, and must be saved, and whereby thou look for thy
reward in mercy at Gods hand at the last day; do it as in obedience to God, to
glorify his Name, and to advance his Kingdom, and to the confusion of Satan
and his accomplices. Fourthly, as we must do it without hypocrisy, so we must
see we practice it, and that openly; for our public practice of it is our
greatest and best part of our profession: we must not be like those, Titus
1.16. that in their words profess that they know God, but by their works deny
him, that is, their works stand up against them, and tell them to their faces,
that there is no such matter; that which we profess with our lips, we must
practice with our lives. Put the case that two men be at ods, one man says
one thing, another man proves the contrary by plain and evident Arguments;
whether of these two is the best and greatest auoucher of the thing? So it is
in this, he that professes in his words only the Truth of God, and another
which does practice it in his works, which is the best and greatest auoucher
of Gods Truth? surely he that practices it in his works. Fifthly, as we must
labor to do these things our selves, so we must do the best we can to draw
others to it, according to the Commandment of our Savior Christ to Peter,
Luke 22.32. When thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren. Which when I
think on, it cannot but admonish me of my Duty, and so it does us all, that
we should labor to draw others to that good, which we our selves are
partakers of. Thus it was with the woman of Samaria; when she was converted,
she labored to draw all the City of Samaria to Christ, John 4.28, 29.
Especially we should labor with our own families that they may serve God, as
Joshua did, I and my house (says he) will serve the Lord. So shall we have
true visible Churches within the walls of our own houses, howsoever it be in
the Land, or Country, or Parish where we dwell.

The Church of England a true visible Church.
we confess there are many sins in our lives, defects in our state, and we
mourn for them, and groan under them, and pray with sighs and tears against
them; and we trust, God in his good time will hear us, and redress these
corruptions and abuses amongst us; yet, through Gods mercy, we profess the
whole saving truth, and therefore we are a true visible Church of God against
all Schismatikes, and Papists, and slanderers whatsoever. Every one may see and
say, that it is a miraculous and wonderful of God, that still this profession
is maintained; be thankful for it, and walk in Obedience to it, and honor God
for it, and use it well, and pray and labor for the continuance of it, to us
and our posterity to all generations.

The blessing is so much the greater, and thank-worthy, Eleven Considerations
to move us in England to be thankful for the truth of God amongst us, and
they show the greatness of the blessing.
if we consider the State of this Land from the beginning. Before Christ's
coming what were we, but Gentiles, and so without Christ?

And secondly, even since Christ's coming, what were we, but even Pagans in
the highest degree? Like Nimrods and Giants, most brutish and unreasonable; and
therefore it is a wonder that any of their seed should be wrought upon

Thirdly, when we were converted, by what means was

Fourthly, England has been as true a Slave to Popery,

Fifthly, Consider when Reformation began, King Henry the eighth and Luther
were at great variance, the King opposing him, and threatening that if the Duke
of Saxony would not punish him, he would fetch him thence by the ears.

Sixthly, consider how all conspired together, to keep out

Seventhly consider that King Edward, that first restored mouths of Babes and
sucklings God ordained strength, for the establishing of his Truth amongst us.



Elizabeth's time; she went through many troubles, and was very hardly
preserved, yet at length she obtained her right, and came to the Crown, and
she established Gods Truth amongst us, against all the practices of the
Instruments of Satan; yet she was but a weak woman, much endangered, yet still
preserved, and by her means God continued his Truth long amongst us.

James, it was very strange that he should come in, in peace, though it were
his right: it was the Gospel that had prevailed with us, and subdued our
affections, else there being an heart-burning betwixt that nation and us, we
having been enemies, there would have followed a bloody war, or else some
civil dissension, which would have made a foul wrack of Religion, and a
destruction of Gods Church amongst us.

this should stir us up to the more thankfulness to God, that has thus
brought in, and continued his Religion amongst us, and so to continue us to be
a true visible Church; as also it should stir us up to pray for the
Continuance of it. And so much for this point.

The tenth Lecture of the Church.
NOw that we have spoken in the first place concerning the definition of a
true visible Church, we come in the second place to speak of the causes of
it; For that was the second point laid down to be spoken to in the handling of
the visible Church. The second thing considerable in a true visible Church, are
the causes of it.
We must know the Causes of it: for until we know the causes of a thing, we
can have no perfect knowledge of that thing; for then we know a thing rightly,
and in its kind, when we are well acquainted with the Causes thereof. This
point is the more carefully to be looked into, because we are challenged and
endited by many of our Adversaries, especially those of the separation, that
our Church has not her being from such causes, as it should; and therefore
that ours is a false Church. Now upon the discovery and view of these causes,
it will appear to any man that can and will ingenuously apply it, that we have
the right Causes of a true visible Church; and therefore that our Church is a
true Church of God.

The causes of the being of a Church are generally of two sorts; the first
sort are such, And they be of two sorts.
as cause the Church directly and of themselves, purposely tending to that end:
the second being of a Church; and that sometimes besides, sometimes against
their own bent and intendment. We will speak of these last sort of causes
first. The second sort of causes have first spoken of, and they of two sorts.
First, God ouer-rules some things, to make them helpful to the being of the
Church, besides their own bent and intendment; as when the thing it self is
neither here nor there to the being of the Church, yet Of this diverse.
Ioh. 4 7. she came about her ordinary business to draw water at Jacobs Well;
now this in it self could be no cause of the Church, yet this was so
ouer-ruled by God, that it was a Cause of the being of the Church in Samaria.
For she heard Christ, and believed in him, and ran, and told it in the City,
and they came also and heard him, and believed in him, and so Luke 15.17. he
might have perished in his affliction, yet God made this a by-cause, to make
Herod, Act. 12.23.24 What was the death of Herod to the being of a Church, more
then the death of an Hog? Yet God so ouer-ruled it, that besides it own
intendment, it was helpefull Of this diverse.
Virginius a Bishop of Rome, who being set to write against Calvin, and ^eading
over Caluins books for that end, he saw the light so clear against him, that
he was convinced, and would write no more against him: so that whereas he read
over his books with intent to cavil at them, God so ouer-ruled it, that
against his own intendment he became a member of the true Church thereby.
Secondly, the sins of Gods chosen, Saul in persecuting the Church, to the
making of him to be of the Church, Act. 9.4.5. Thirdly, the falling Romans 11.11.
Fourthly, persecutions of the faithful, that is so ouerrul'd by Mary's bloody
days, at least ever since, by occasion of those persecutions? Lastly, sometime
the scattering of the Act. 8.4. there was great persecution, and the Word was
scattered abroad, what could hurt the Church more than this? Yet this was so
ouer-ruled by God, as that he made it a means of the propagation of his
Church in many places, whereas before it was in Judea only, by this means it
is come into Samaria too. But all these are bycauses, and therefore we do
only point at them, and so pass them by; yet this is worthy herein to be
taken notice of, the wonderful power, wisdom, and mercy of God, that brings
light out of darkness, and makes whatsoever pleases him, even besides and
against its own bent and intendment, serviceable means for the being of his
Church.

The first sort of causes handled, such as cause the Church directly, and these
are four taking the Church in a comparatiue sense.
The other sort of causes which were the first, are such as cause the Church
directly and of themselves, and these are more proper and material than the
other. First then, take the Church in a comparatiue sense, as it is compared to
a building, and so the causes are to be apprehended thus. As a building has
four principal causes, so has the Church; first, in a building there is the
foundation; secondly, the Cor. 3.11. Other foundation can no man lay, than that
which is laid, which is Jesus Christ: and metaphorically, the Prophets and
Apostles, as they teaching Christ. 1 Cor. 3.10. As a skillful master builder I
have laid the foundation (says the Apostle) Ephesians. 2.20. and are built upon
the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ Jesus being the head
cornerstone, Secondly, the builders, and they are the Teachers; for so they are
called, 1 Pet. 2.7. The stone which the Builders refused, etc. that is, which
the Jewish Teachers refused. And 1. Cor. 3.10. the teachers are called Master
Builders. Pet. 2.5. lively stones, a spiritual house. And in the 1 Cor. Gods
building. Lastly, the form of the building, and that is the laying and the
coupling of the faithful together, Ephesians. 2.21, 22. In whom all the building
coupled together, grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord, in whom ye are also
built together to be the habitation of God by the Spirit. And thus the Church
is to be apprehended in a comparatiue sense, as it is compared to a building.

Again, take the Church absolutely in it self, Taking the Church absolutely,
there are sieve.
and then it has an efficient cause, an isntrumental cause, a material
cause, a formal cause, and a final cause. First, it has an efficient cause,
from which it has her being (for that is the The efficient cause.
from whence a thing has that being which it has.) Now the efficient cause
from whence the Church has her being, is God himself, he is the Author of it,
Act. 2.47. The Lord added to the Church, etc. so that God himself is the
efficient cause of the Church.

Secondly, the isntrumental cause, or means of the being The isntrumental
cause: First, outward.
either outward or inward: outward, as first the Ministers of God, they are the
isntrumental causes whereby we are brought to believe, as in the 1 Cor. 3.5.
and these are sometimes ordinary, sometime extraordinary: ordinary, that is,
when they have an ordinary Calling, as most Ministers (if not all) have in
these days; extraordinary, that is, then when they are extraordinarily called,
as the Prophets, and John Baptist, and the Apostles were. The next outward
isntrumental cause of the Church is the Word, Ioh. 20.31. These things are
written that ye might believe. 2 These. 2.14. whereunto he called you by our
Gospel. And in the 2 Cor. 5.19. both these outward isntrumental causes of the
Church are laid down together; God has committed unto us (says the Apostle)
the Word of reconciliation. Then the Sacraments, they are the next outward
isntrumental causes or means of the being of the Church; and first, Baptism,
Romans 6.4. Know ye not that all we that have been baptized into Christ, have
been baptized into his death? And the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup of
blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? The
Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? By
Baptism we are made members of Christ's mystical Body, and by the Lords Supper
we are nourished in this Body, which is his Church. Now all these three outward
means are laid down together, Matthew. 28.19. Go, teach all Nations, baptizing
them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Go,
that is spoken to the Apostles; Teach, there is the Word; and Baptize, there
are the Sacraments, one expressed, the other employed. These are the isntrumental
causes without us.

Secondly, inward.
Now the isntrumental causes within us are, first, repentance, Act. 11.18. God
has granted to the Gentiles Repentance to life. Secondly, faith: Act. 15.9.
And he put no difference betwixt us and them, after that by faith he had
purified their hearts. And lastly and principally Gods Spirit, that is, the
testimony of Gods Spirit in our hearts, whereby we are persuaded of Gods love
and favor, 1 Cor. 2.12. We have received not the Spirit of the world, but the
Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are given to us of
God. And all these six isntrumental means inward and outward, are laid down
together in the second of the Acts in the case of the first Church that was
planted after our Saviors Ascension, from the fourteen verse to the six and
thirty, there is their Minister, and the Word his Sermon, Then Peter life up
his voice, etc. Then there are their Sacraments; first, Baptism in the 38. and
41. verses; Then they that gladly received the Word were baptized, etc. and the
Lords Supper in the 42. and 46. verses; and they continued in the Apostles
Doctrine and fellowship, and breaking of bread, etc. there are the outward
causes. So likewise the inward, as first there is Repentance, verse. 37. and 38.
They were pricked in their hearts; then secondly, there was Faith too, as in
the 41. and 44. verses; They that gladly received his Word, and all that
believed, etc. And lastly, there was the Spirit of God, for in the seventeenth
verse it is said, that it was prophesied before of them, that God would power
out his Spirit upon them. And in the 38. verse the Apostle bids them repent,
and be baptized, etc. and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost, so that
they repenting and believing, did receive the gift of the holy Ghost. So these
are the isntrumental causes or means of the being of the Church.

The next cause is the material cause, and that is the people Saints by
calling 1 Cor. 1.2. The members of the body of Christ, 1 Cor. 12.27. Citizens
with the Saints, etc. Ephesians. 2.19. As members are the matter of the body, and
Citizens the matter of a City; so the members of Christ are the matter of the
body of Christ, which is his Church.

Fourthly, the formal cause of the being of the Church, Act. 2. first, their
effectual calling, which is their inward formal cause, that is laid down in
the 37, 38, 41, and 44. verses, they were pricked in their hearts, repented,
baptized, added to the Church, etc. there is their effectual calling. Their
outward formal cause, that is set down in the 41, 42, 44, 45, 46. verses,
They continued in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship, etc. and had all things
common, etc. there is their joint and public profession of the saving faith,
and their outward communion. These are the material causes of the Church.

Lastly, the final cause of the Church, which is the end of Adams seed might
glorify the Lord God here in his Church, by believing, obeying, calling upon
him, and hereafter in heaven singing everlasting praises to his glory, Romans
9.23. That he might declare the riches of his glory, on the vessels of mercy
which he has prepared to glory. Secondly, the final cause of the Church is in
respect of the faithful themselves, and of their salvation and glory; for God
will not have all mankind cast away as they well deserved, but some he would
have of his free grace and mercy to obtain salvation and glory by Jesus
Christ, 2 These. 2.14. and to receive the end of their faith which is the
salvation of their souls, 1 Pet. 1.9. Thirdly, the final cause of the Church
is in respect of the truth of God, that the same might be embraced and
maintained and kept alive on earth, that some men might not only know the
truth, but believe it, and live in the obedience of it, and also that the
Scriptures, the records of truth might be safely preserved; first, that the
body of the Scriptures might not be mangled, or torn by Heretics; secondly,
that the sense of the Scripture might not be depraved by the enemies of it;
lastly, that the Scriptures might not be as a sealed book, but that there
might be some on earth to interpret it, and to teach it, and that it might be
openly taught and practiced on earth, this is one end of Gods Church. Fourthly,
the final cause of the Church is in regard of the wicked, that they might be
left without excuse, when as the precious truth of God is propounded to them by
his Ministers, and by his Church, and when as they deny it as false, or
contemn it, or at least carelessly neglect it as a vile thing, not worth
hearkening to, that then they might justly perish in their own wilfulness.
Thus you have heard concerning the causes of the being of the Church, both of
those that cause it directly, and of themselves, and also such as cause it, not
of themselves directly, but only as by the way, being ouer-ruled by God to
that end.

We will draw it into an Observation; Ephesians. 4.6. the Apostle speaking there
of the Church, says, There is one God, and Father of all, which is above all,
and through all, and in you all. And in the 1 Cor. 12.6. the Apostle speaking
of the edification of the Church, uses the very word in the note, There are
diversities of operations, (says he) but God is the same which works all in
all. And this we shall find to be the voice of Gods Church, Psalm. 95, 6, 7, 8.
Come (say they) let us worship and fall down before the Lord our Maker, etc.
he is our Lord, our Maker, our God, and we are his people of his pasture, his
sheep of his hand. Why, but all other are his people: Yea, but we are his
people after a special manner, Ephesians. 2.10. We are his workmanship. But you
will say, so are all things else: Yea, but we are another kind of workmanship,
we are created in Christ Jesus unto good works; we have not only our being,
but our well-being from him; he has not only created us as men, but
re-created us, or regenerated us as new men; wherein howsoever many things
concur, as the Word and Sacraments, etc. yet all is his doing, he is the
worker of it, he is all in all.

Let us enlarge our thoughts in this point, How all the three persons have a
hand in causing the Church.
that God is all in all in causing of his Church; and let us consider first,
how every one of the three persons in the Trinity have a special and an
effectual hand herein: First, God the Father the first person, he has a
special hand in it, Ioh. 6.44. No man can come unto me, except the Father
which sent me draw him. So likewise the second person Jesus Christ, he has a
special hand in it, Ioh. 14.6. No man comes unto the Father but by me. So
likewise the third person, the holy Ghost, he has a special hand in it, 1
Cor. 12.3. No man can say (that is, by a true persuasion) that Jesus is the
Lord, but by the holy Ghost. God the Father he loves the world, and in that
love of his he decreed, that such and such should be gathered to his Church,
and so be saved; and also in that love sends his Son to redeem us, and to
pay our ransom, and gives us his Spirit to sanctify, and to comfort us that
are his Church. So likewise Christ Jesus he loves the Church, and in this love
of his comes down from heaven, and takes our nature, and our sins, and our
punishment upon him, and lays down his life for us, that he might purchase
the Church with his own blood, as the Apostle speaks, Act. 20.28. and
incorporates us into himself, and makes us bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh, Ephesians. 5.30. and brings us to his Father, Ioh. 14.6. So likewise the
holy Ghost he loves them, and in that love which he carries to them, he comes
and dwells in them, and enlightens them, gouernes them, and frames them to
obedience, sanctifies them, and applies the means of grace to the particular
conscience of every one of them; he makes them apprehensiue of that course
whereby they are saved, and applies it unto them, 1 Cor. 2.10, 12. Secondly,
every part and several work that tends to our salvation is of God, as first,
Election, that is from God, Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us in him, etc. so our
Calling is from him; Romans 8.30. Whom he predestined them also he called:
likewise our regeneration is from him, Ioh. 1.13. Which are borne not of blood,
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. So also our
teaching is of God, Ioh. 6.45. They shall be all taught of God. Our
justification is also of him, Romans 8.33. It is God that justifies. Lastly, our
sanctification is from him, 1 These. 5.23. Now the very God of peace sanctify
you throughout, etc. So that every several work that tends to our salvation
is of God. Lastly, every several means both within us, and without us is Gods
doing: but of this we shall speak in the Reasons; and therefore we will now
come to them.

Tim. 3.15. now who should build a House for God, but God himself?

Deuteronomy. 12.11. Where God puts his name there he will be worshipped. Now who
shall, or can prescribe Gods worship but himself? therefore he is all in all
in his Church.

adopted Sons, members of Christ's mystical body, Kings and Priests unto God,
in all which the like causes God is (most sensibly) all in all in his Church,
for he makes them Kings and Priests, etc. Revel. 1.6.

Fourthly, to be made a Church, or a true member thereof,

Lastly, consider the efficient cause in comparison to all Ephesians. 4.11, 12. he
has given some to be Apostles, and some to be Prophets, and some to be
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the gathering of his Saints,
for the work of the ministry, etc. Secondly, he vouchsafes the presence and
tender of them to such persons and places, where he would have his Church to
be, as we may see, Act. 16.6. Paul and Silas were forbidden by the holy Ghost
to preach the Word in Asia: and Verse. 7. the Spirit suffered them not to go
into Bithynia. And in the tenth Verse it is said, they went into Macedonia,
being assured that the Lord had called them to preach the Gospel there.
Sometimes God restrayneth the means from some, and enlarges them to others,
as Matthew. 10.5. Go not into the way of the Gentiles, compared with Act. 13.46,
47. It was necessary (says the Apostle to the Jews there) that the Word of
God should first have been preached unto you, but seeing ye put it from you,
and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life; Lo, we turn to the
Gentiles, for so has the Lord commanded us, etc. Lastly, God gives the
success and blessing to the means, and so makes them effectual. 1 Cor. 3.5,
6. Paul planteth, and Apollo waters, but it is God that gives the increase.
And Act. 11.21. the hand of the Lord was with them, so that a great number
believed, and turned to the Lord. 2 Chronicles. 30. from the sixth to the twelfth
verse, Hezekiah sent forth messengers throughout all Israel and Judah with
godly letters for the keeping of the Passover, and the wicked laughed them to
scorn, but the Text notes in the twelfth Verse, that the hand of God was in
Judah, so that he gave them one heart to do the Commandment of the King. The
King might have commanded long enough, yet if God had not given the people a
heart they would never have obeyed him: so that all other means are utterly
void, yea nothing without God. 1 Co. 3.7. Neither is he that planteth any
thing, nor he that waters, but God that gives the increase. Now if God gives
us these outward isntrumental Causes of the being of his Church, he gives us
the inward much more, as Repentance, and Faith, and principally the chief of
all, Gods Spirit is given us merely and freely of God, 2 Cor. 1.22. Who has
also sealed us, and given us, the earnest of his Spirit in our hearts. So that
we see the isntrumental causes of the Church, both inward and outward, are of
God. So also the material cause, that is of God too, 1 Cor. 3.9. Ye are Gods
building (says the Apostle.) The formal cause, that is of God also, the
outward formal cause, which is our joint and public profession of the faith,
1 Cor. 12.3. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost,
specially the inward formal cause is of God, 1 Cor. 1.9. We are called of God
to the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ. Lastly, the final cause that is
of God too, Gods Word, labors, husbandry, ordinances, Church, etc. are not
only of, and from him, as he being the efficient cause of them, but also for
him and his glory, as he being the final cause of them. So likewise if we cast
our eyes on the by-causes of the Church, God is all in all even in them too;
yea, extraordinarily in these; so that he seems rather to have a greater
hand, in these, than in the rest; that God should make persecution (which tends
of it self to the destruction of the Church) to be a cause of the being of
the Church; this then shows that God is all in all in causing his Church. So
much for the Reasons.

The uses are these. First Use is for instruction; to teach us, Cor. 3.5. They
are but ministers by whom we believed; let God have the honor and praise of all
that the Church has, for it is all his doing. Secondly, as this should stir
us up to thankfulness, for the good we have already received; so it should
stir us up to prayer and continual calling upon God, that he would be
pleased in his good time to afford the means of his Church where they are
wanting: And that where they are, there God (who is all in all in his Church)
would be pleased to confirm, increase, and continue them for ever; that so he
may have a Church there to the worlds end. Alas, what is it to have care for
our selves only as Josiah had? Lord (says he) let there be peace in my
days: but we must have a care of our posterity, and pray that God would
continue his Church to them too: and this is a necessary duty both for
Ministers and People, and that each for himself, and one for another; the
Minister he is to pray for himself, that the Lord would open his mouth, and
sanctify his heart and affections; that he may preach powerfully and
effectually; and for the people, that they may be teachable and tractable,
humble, willing, and ready to understand and believe, obey and practice that
which they are taught. And so likewise the people, they are to pray for their
Minister, and for themselves too, that God would open their Ministers mouth,
and sanctify his heart and affections, that he might preach powerfully and
effectually to them; and also that they might have teachable hearts, ready and
willing to hear and to obey, and that God would water their hearts with his
Spirit that they may be fruitful. Thirdly, this should stir us up to use the
means profitably, which are the causes of the Church; let them not be
unprofitable toward us, much less let them be contemned of us, but let us
make a good use of them, as of Gods special ordinances, which he will surely
revenge if we contemn them. Does the Lord bend himself wholly and all his
forces as it were, to make us understanding, wise, and obedient, and to bring
us to himself; and shall we neglect so great salvation, and not make use of
it to be brought unto God? Do not receive such a precious grace of God in
vain, but embrace it, take the opportunity of it: now is the accepted time,
now is the day of salvation, now God stands at the door and knockes, now the
Table is prepared, the victuals are ready, and the Guests are called, therefore
let us now quicken up our selves, let us take hold on the promise of Grace, and
let us receive the Word, not as the word of man, but as it is indeed the Word
of the eternal God, powerful to save us, if we believe and obey it; or else,
if we refuse and contemn it, powerful to condemn us, and to cast us
headlong into hell.

welfare of the Church, it shall go well with the Church, although Satan bend
all his forces against it, though the wicked malign and persecute it, God is
for it, who can be against it? It is of God, and therefore it shall stand in
despite of Satan and all his forces. It is God that plants his vine, who can
root it out? He makes a hedge about it, who can break it down? Yea, God is a
wall of fire about his Church, therefore whosoever comes near to hurt it,
shall be consumed and burnt up: God waters it, and makes it fruitful, who
shall hinder the growth and increase thereof? Surely, God will not suffer his
own work to be hindered by any power in the world. If this were well
considered, it would dismay the adversaries of the Church, and even daunt Satan
himself; for they know beforehand, that they are fighters against God, yea
against his special hand, and therefore it is impossible that they should
prevail. The wicked after the Flood, when they built the Tower of Babel, they
fought against God, but they could not prevail, it turned to their confusion;
but these fight against God in a special manner. And therefore this is our
comfort, they shall never prevail, though they band themselves together against
the Lord and against his Church, yet all they do is but the imagination of a
vain thing, because it is against God and against his people. This should
comfort the faithful in all their persecutions, temptations and distresses
whatsoever, because that they are built by Gods own hand, and therefore like
Mount Sion they shall stand fast for ever, and never be removed; and likewise
they are continually assisted by Gods hand, so that their enemies cannot hurt
them; as the Mountains are about Jerusalem, so the Lord is about his people,
from henceforth and for ever, Psalm. 125.1, 2. So much of the first observation
arising from the causes of the Church.

The next Point arising hence is this; That wheresoever they are effectual,
for sometimes the causes may be present, yet not effectual, or at least very
little effectual; but where they are effectual, only there they cause a
Church. Secondly, I say, by the ordinary blessing of God: for extraordinary
blessing and success does not sufficiently prove a true visible Church. The
point is clear in the case of the Church, Act. 2. from the beginning to the
end, the causes of a Church were there, as we showed before, and they were
effectual, Verse. 41. They were added to the Church; and it was ordinarily
effectual, Verse 47. The Lord added to the Church from day to day, etc. and
therefore there was a true Church, and so it is called in that verse 47. And so
it was in the case of the Church of Antioch, Act. 11. from 20. to 26. verse,
there was the means, the Word and the Ministers of it, and it was effectual,
for they believed; and it was ordinarily effectual, for a great number
believed, and turned to the Lord; and therefore they were a Church, and were
also so called, verse. 26. So likewise in the 1 Cor. 1.2. Unto the Church of God
which is at Corinthus, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, Saints by
calling, etc. They had a Calling then, and this was effectual, for they were
sanctified in Christ Jesus, and so were a true Church. The case was thus in the
seven Churches, Revel. 1.16. to the end of the Chapter, there were the seven
golden Candlesticks, that is, seven true visible Churches, and there was the
Son of man, that is, Christ, walking in the middst of them, and there were
the Stars, that is, his Ministers vpholden in his right hand, and a two-edged
sword came out of his mouth, that is, his Word, and the power thereof; for so
the Word is compared to a two-edged sword, Heb 4.12. And these were effectual
too, the Stars were vpholden, and it was a sharp two-edged sword: so where
these are thus effectual, there is a golden Candlestick, that is, a true
visible Church.

true Church, and their work is not resisted, therefore here is the effect
too, that is a true visible Church.

Secondly, where these causes are, there is the definition

Thirdly, whosoever lives in such a Church, where these

The Uses are these; First, this serves to justify our Church The Church of
England justified to be a true Church, against the Separation.
against the separation that deny it; for by this it appears we have a true
Church, because that we have the causes of a true Church, and because they are
effectual, yea, and ordinarily effectual amongst us. If they except against
us, they must deny, and say, either that we have not the causes of a true
Church amongst us, or that these causes are not effectual, or else that they
are not ordinarily effectual amongst us. Some deny some of these, and some
deny all of them; and therefore say, we are no true Church. If they say, we
have not the means, The Church of England has the means of salvation and of
a Church. Object. You want d^scipline.
we answer, that we have through Gods mercy, the Word, and the Sacraments, and
Ministers, and gifts, which are the causes and means of a Church. Yea, but say
they; ye have not all Gods ordinances amongst you, you want discipline, etc. I
answer; first, we only wait to see them proved by the word, to be Gods
ordinances, which they so much require, not receive them yet we might be a
true Church, though happily not so pure and perfect a Church; for Discipline is
not a matter of substance to the being of a Church, but to the well-being only:
Your Ministers have not a true Calling.
yet you have it not out of the Lords mouth; for your Ministers have not a true
calling, they are not called and sent of God? I answer, that extraordinary
calling we neither have, You have your Calling from the Church of Rome.
I answer, we have not our calling from the Church of Rome, but from other
ministers professing the same faith with us as they have; Luther, and other
Ministers that had their calling in the Church of Rome: You have no covenant
betwixt you and God.
Yea, but you were not gathered by the Word, but compelled by a Proclamation in
the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign? I answer; Yes, we were gathered
before in King Henery the eighth, Edward the sixth days, so that this
Proclamation was but a restoring of us to our former estate, as it was in the
days of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 30.5. where the people were restored to religion by
the Kings Proclamation; and this compulsion by the Proclamation was but to the
outward means. But now in our times there is no such compulsion, but men are
gathered by the word; therefore this is unseasonably applied to us. Yes, says
Ainsworth, It is so still? I answer; If it be so that we are still compeld, it
is but to the outward means as I have said; but yet so many of us, as since
the preaching of the Gospel do voluntarily join and enter covenant with God
and the faithful, are (even by our Adversaries confession) true members of a
Church, and therefore consequently such are a true visible Church. Or else
secondly they say, Object. You want the success of the means.
If we have the means, yet we have not the success? Yes, we have the
success too; for many of us feel it, and taste it to our singular
consolation; many of us are converted, Cor. 13.3. Or thirdly, It is ordinarily
effectual.
they say it may be effectually sometimes, but it is not ordinarily effectual?
I Answer; What is more ordinary? For first, we have many converted amongst us,
and secondly, this is daily done; and thirdly, by these means that we have
amongst us, the preaching of the Word; and fourthly, this is as usual here as
in any visible Church; yea, I dare undertake, that our Church is as fruitful
in gathering people, and begetting Children unto God, as ever any Church was
since the Apostles days; they indeed had an extraordinary Calling, and so an
extraordinary success, which we must not look for: but ours is ordinarily
effectual, for it is wrought upon many, and that day by day, and also by the
power of the means which is amongst us; and also as usually as in any Church
since the Apostles times. And therefore ours must needs be a true Church,
therefore let none of us entertain any such thoughts into our heads, as to
think we have not the causes and means of a true Church amongst us, or that
they be not effectual to our conversion and salvation, or that they be not
ordinarily effectual: But let us bless God for the means, and the success
which daily they have amongst us, lest for our unthankfulness God deprive us
of them, and turn from us, as he did from the Jews, and take his Church and
presence from amongst us.

The eleventh Lecture of the Church.
The first thing considerable in a visible Church, the members of it.
Having acquainted you already with the definition, as also with the Causes of a
true Church; It remains that we proceed in the third place to speak (as we
propounded) of the members of the Church: For whereas the visible Church is
compared to a Body, and every body consists of diverse parts and members framed
and joined proportionably together; if therefore we would exactly know the
body of a true visible Church, we must be well instructed touching the parts
and members of the same; for the presence of the members proves the presence of
the body; look where the members are, there likewise is the body also. And the
state of the members well considered, instructs us rightly to esteem of the
state of the body, for the body is to be accounted sound or unsound,
accordingly as the members thereof are affected. Now when we speak of the
members of the Church; we may as well understand the head, as the other parts;
for in a general sense the head is as well a member, as the rest of the parts
of the body: or else we may speak of all the other parts besides the head, for
so in a more strict and particular sense, the head and the members are opposed
against each other, as they being diverse from the head, and the head from
them. Now because we desire to carry the matter fully before us as near as we
can, therefore we will speak of this body in the general sense, as including
both head and members too.

First, of the head, In it first of the head.
for that being the chief and principal member, is first and principally to
be spoken of; specially in this case, the head being here infinitely greater,
and more excellent than all the body besides, and therefore first of that: That
which we will speak of in this point, And in it three things.
we will contriue into these three heads; First, that the visible Church must
have a head; secondly, that it must have one head; thirdly, that this head is
Jesus Christ and he alone.

First, that the Church being a body must have a head, for so in the first
place the course of nature requires it, for in

Secondly, as the course of nature requires it, so the necessity of the Church
requires it; for the Church must be endued with spiritual life, therefore it
must have a head to convey life into it.

Thirdly, the wisdom of God requires it; for God is the God not of confusion,
but of order in all his works, specially in his special workmanshippe, that is
his Church. What a confused heap of stones would a Church be, if it had not a
head corner stone, to hold all the other stones together, every one in his due
place: and what a disordered Assembly would the Church be, if the members were
without a head to order it, and to relieve it.

Secondly, as the Church has a head, so it has but one

Thirdly, this our head is Christ Jesus, and he alone; for take the body of a
man, and set upon it the head of a beast, and so should be a body against
nature: for as a body without a head is a Monster in nature by defect, and as a
body with two or many heads is a Monster beyond nature by excess; so for a
body to have a head of another kind is against nature, and is as monstrous as
either of the other; therefore the Church being the body of Christ, must have
Christ alone to be the head of it. And thus the way is beaten out plain to
this natural Observation, which follows,

of the same saving truth in some particular place and time, etc. Now therefore
when I say, Christ is the Head of a true visible Church, I mean chiefly and
most properly the universal visible Church, not but that it may be affirmed
also of every particular visible Church, yea and of every member too, that is
so far forth as it is a member of Christ, and Christ the Head thereof; as the
head is the head of the right side as well as of the left, and of the hand too,
as well as of the whole body; yet not simply and by way of appropriation, but
together with the rest of the members by way of participation and
communication; that is, as being a member with the rest of such a body: so all
particular visible Churches, from the beginning to the end of the world, are
indeed but one body, though diverse in time, place, and other circumstances, yet
in the profession of the saving truth, they are but one and the same in
general. And Christ is the head of the whole universal visible Church, and
also he is the head of every particular visible Church, but that is only by
way of communication, as that particular Church concurres and participates with
other particular Churches, in the universal visible Church: simply in it
self, Christ cannot be said to be the head of one particular visible Church,
for then we should make many heads and many bodies; as the head cannot be said
to be the head of the hand simply by it self, but by way of concurrence with
the rest of the members; therefore, when we say, Christ is the head of a
particular visible Church, we must understand it in common, as all particular
visible Churches are members of that body, whereof Christ is the head. The
Apostle makes this plain in the 1 Cor. 12.27. Ye are the body of Christ and
members for your part; they are the body of Christ in some sense, and yet in
some sense they are but members, and in both these senses they have Christ to
be their head. Consider the Church of Corinth in it self, and it is a body;
consider it in the general with other particular Churches, and it is but a
part of the body. I note this the rather, to prevent an objection ready to be
made against this truth, which is, That if Christ be the head of every
particular visible Church in England and France, etc. then either there are
many Christ's, because there are many bodies; or else there is but one head to
many bodies, both which are absurd: but Christ is the head of every particular
visible Church proportionably, that is, as that particular Church is a member
of the universal visible Church; and so much shall serve for explication.

Corpus adaequatum.
Now we come to the proofs, That Christ Jesus is the Head, and the only Head
proportionably of a true particular visible Church. In Ephesians. 1.22. the Apostle
says, God has appointed him over all things to be the Head to his Church. I
grant that this is spoken principally and properly of the Church universal,
for that is the only body that is in all respects fitted and equalled to the
head, and the head to it. Yet it holds consequently and by proportion of the
visible Church; for that is therefore called a Church, because it is presumed
that there were at least some faithful and elect of God amongst them, yea the
Apostle seems to speak it with reference to that particular Church of
Ephesus, whom he calls Saints in the first verse, and it could be no comfort
to them to know, that Christ is the Head to his Church, unless it were
intended that they were a part of his body. And so likewise Ephesians. 4.15, 16.
Christ is said to be the head of his body. Now what body is that? but only
that body spoken of in the 11. and 12. verses, where his Ministry is publicly
exercised, and that is a true visible Church. So in Ephesians. 5.23. Christ is the
head of the Church, and the Church is his body; that is spoken principally of
the invisible Church, but is proportionably to be understood of the visible:
for the Apostle speaks of that Church, wherein was the use of the Word, and of
the Sacrament of Baptism, as we may see in the 26. verse, which are only in
use in the visible Church. And in Colos. 1.18. there is Christ the head of his
Church, and there is the Church the body of Christ. Now the Apostle speaks of
that Church, whereof he was a Minister, as we may see, verse. 25. which is a
visible Church. And that it may appear that these Collections are not strained
against the meaning of the holy Ghost, you shall find that the Apostle in the 1
Cor. 12.27. speaking to the visible particular Church of Corinth, says
plainly, Ye are the body of Christ; and so intends necessarily, that Christ
is the head of that particular visible Church. And as it was with the Church of
Corinth, so it is too with all true visible Churches else, Revel. 1.13. there
the head and the body is described together; there was the seven golden
Candlesticks, the seven particular visible Churches, and there was also the Son
of Man walking in the midst of them, that is, Christ the head of them. And no
question but the Jewish Church in the former Testament was Christ's Spouse, and
so Christ was her Husband, and consequently her Head: for how often did God
threaten to cast them off, and to give them a Bill of Divorce; showing thereby
that he was the Head even of their visible Church, then much more of our
particular visible Churches: so that Christ proportionably is the Head of a
true visible Church.

The Reasons of the Observation are these; first, Christ

Secondly, all power is given to Christ both in heaven Matthew. 28.18. and he is
the head of all principalities and powers, Colos. 2.10. And in what respect is
he the head of all? but that he might be the head of the Church, as the very
reason is employed, Ephesians. 1.22. And has made all things subject under his
feet, and has appointed him over all things: Why? to be the head of his
Church. And this is that we mean in that Article of our Faith, when we say, I
believe that Jesus Christ sits at the right hand of God; that is, that he has
power given him to rule over all things, specially over his Church, to rule and
govern it, and to convey all good things to it, as the head to the body.

Col. 2.19. and Ephesians. 4.15, 16. therefore he is the head of the body.



Ephesians. 5.23. and therefore he is the head of his Church; for it is the office
of the head to defend, and to see to the safety of the whole body.

Ioh. 14.30. The Prince of this World comes and has naught in me: yea, he
breaks the Serpents head, Genesis 3.15. And in the Revelation, there is Michael
and his Angels fighting with the Dragon and his Angels, and they overcome them.
Now Christ is this Michael that overcomes the Devil and all the enemies of
his Church; therefore he is the head of his Church.

John 20.22. where he breathed on the Apostles and said, Receive the holy
Ghost; Sit Christus Christiani caput. Aug. lib. 3. cont. Petil. c. 42.
but also in regard of sanctification and inward graces, as Act. 2.4 and this
he does for ever, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Now it is the head that conueyes Spirit and
motion to the body. Therefore seeing every visible Church receives the Spirit
from Christ, then he must needs be the head of them.

Reinolds confer. 5.
the eldest Brother, or first borne of the Church, therefore the head of the
Church. So much for the Reasons.

they say, the Pope is the head of it, and as they mean it, it is worse than
it seems to be, for therein they affirm a double blasphemy against God, The
blasphemy the Church of Rome does run into, in saying, the Pope is the head of
the Church.

The blow they give to Christ therein in two respects:

First, in regard of the body, the Church.


and give two maine blows to Jesus Christ, to cut him off from being head to
his Church, at least they take his Crown from his head. And this they do,
first, in regard of the Body, the Church; secondly, in regard of the Head,
Christ: First, in regard of the Church, for they say the Pope is the head not
of the Church of Rome only, for that were tolerable, if he would content and
contain himself within his own Diocese, neither would we much contend with
him about his Bishopric: But he looks high, and gapes wide, and says, like
his lying father the Devil, All is mine, that he is the head of the universal
Church through the world: A proud challenge easy to be made, but impossible
that it should be maintained. You see that it is proved to be Christ's due
only, by right to be head of the visible Church; if then the Pope will be head,
either he must take it from Christ against his will, The Pope is Antichrist.
and so he is plain Antichrist, as indeed and in truth he is: or else he must
have it by Christ's grant, and this he pretends to be his Title. But first he
has it not by Christ's grant, for Christ never gave him any such matter; for
many hundred years after Christ's ascension, this headship of the Popes was
never heard of. Yea, but say they, he gave it to Peter, Christ never gave the
headship of the Church to Peter.

Papists plea for the headship of the Pope answered.

Places alleged by them for this, answered: as Mat. 16.19. And Ioh. 21.16, 17.


and so to the Pope? I answer, No, Christ gave it not to Peter, nor yet ever
meant to give it him, much less to the Pope: First, he gave it not to Peter,
for the places which they allege to prove this point serve nothing to this
purpose, as Matthew. 16.19. Whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, is bound in
heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. This
is spoken equally to all the rest of the Apostles, as well as unto Peter; Ioh.
20.23. Whosoever sins ye remit, they are remitted, etc. Where now is the
headship of Peter over the whole Church? So that in Ioh. 21. where our Savior
says three times to Peter, Feed my sheep, etc. What a slight ground is this
to build the headship of the Church upon? And if they ask then, why Christ
should thus press it upon Peter so often? The Fathers answer them, that it is
only a special charge binding to Duty (not any universal authority or
jurisdiction) pressed thrice upon him, for his former threefold denial of
Christ, that so he might be the more careful for the time to come; else the
charge is alike to all the rest of the Apostles: for shall we think that any
of them were not bound to feed the sheep of Christ as well as he? The Apostle
gives this charge to all Ministers 1 Pet. 5.2. Feed the flock of God, etc.
Yea, but Peter is the Rock, and upon this Rock Christ will build his Church,
And Mat. 16.18
Matthew. 16.18. I answer, if the Church were built upon Peter, then it was
either built upon his person, or upon his Confession; but it was not built upon
his person, for then when he died, the Church must have failed too: Therefore
the place must be understood of Peter's confession, or of his faith, or of that
Christ which he confessed. Christ built his Church on the confession of Peter's
faith, because himself was the substance of his confession, etc. Peter's
confession of his faith is the Rock, in making known the Church: But Christ
himself is the Rock, as being the substance of that his confession, so that
the Church is not built upon Peter's person. And if it had, what is that to the
Pope? Unless they can prove these two things: First, that Peter sat at Rome
as head of the universal Church; secondly, that he intended to leave his
headship to the Pope of Rome, and to none other, which is a mere fancy and
device of their own brain, for which they have no color. So then Christ
never gave Peter, much less the Pope, this headship. Secondly, Christ says,
He never will give it.
as Christ never did give it, so he says expressly he never will give it,
Luke 22.25, 26. Our Savior says to his Disciples, that it was enough for the
Gentiles to be Lords, and to reign one over another, but it shall not be so
amongst you (says he) so that Christ checks them for having but a conceit of
superiority, so far is he from giving it to any of them. Further, this being a
great part of Christ's glory, as he is Mediator, to be head of his Church, he
will not give it to any other, Isai. 48.11. My glory will I not give to
another. And as Christ never gave this, nor meant to give it to any other; so
no man is able to weeld or sway it, None is able to weeld and sway it.
no more than any one temporal Governor can rule all the Kingdoms in the
world; no, this power is reserved only to him that made the whole world, and
all things therein. So that we see, they ouer-reach in saying the Pope is the
head of the universal visible Church. Secondly, Secondly, in regard of the
Head, Christ.
they ouerreach as far in saying he is the head; if you ask them what head
they mean? They will say only, a ministerial head under Christ, here is
some show of modesty: But ask them further, what power they ascribe to him?
The power and authority that is given to the Pope proves, that he cannot be a
ministerial head as is pretended, but rather a supreme head.
And then they bewray themselves; for they say that the government of the whole
Church through the world, depends on him, that he has power and authority to
judge and determine of all causes of Faith and Religion, to rule Counsels, to
order Bishops and Pastors, to excommunicate and to suspend, and to inflict
other penalties upon offenders; yea, whatsoever concerns either preaching of
Doctrine, or the practice of Discipline in the Church of Christ, the power of
governing in all such causes (they say) lies in the Pope. Is this to be a
ministerial head? This is rather to be an absolute supreme head. If by head
they meant only some chief Governor, the name head in that sense might agree
to some one man, in respect of some one particular place, for so the Scripture
uses the word in other cases, in the 1 Cor. 11.3. The man is the woman's head,
etc. But never in this case, for a man to be the head of the whole Church. The
Pope is made the Doctor, yea, the only Doctor of the Church.

The Pope does what he does of himself, and not as under Christ; for he takes
not the course prescribed by Christ in that he does.


This transcendent power by them ascribed to the Pope, is a great part of
Christ's own power, and can never agree to any man in the world; for Christ is
the only Doctor of his Church, Mat. 23.8, 10. How then can the Pope determine
all matters of faith and religion? Is not this to make him a great Doctor, yea
the only Doctor? No, say they, for he does it but under Christ: But he does
it of himself, if the Pope in controversies would take Christ's book, and use
prayer to God for direction therein, and in humility and sincere love of the
Truth, would examine every cause and so judge, there were some hope that he
would do many things well and that he would judge rightly, as in Christ's
stead, and so honor his Master, and do good service to the Church: But first,
he takes no such course; but mingles with the word, and uses his own Canons
in stead of the word; and he is so far from using prayer to God for
direction, as that he presumes the truth is tied to his Chair; and therefore
that he cannot err in any of his Sentences, likewise he is sinisterly
affected to the Truth, framing it to the state and practice of his own Church,
and accordingly he judges and pronounces. Secondly, if he should take the
former course, yet his reach is not infinite, he cannot judge rightly in all
causes of faith and religion, for no one man that ever was (Christ Jesus only
excepted, and his Apostles) that was able to judge of all Truth; Therefore
every Pope in particular must be at least as one of the Apostles, nay he must
be as Christ is. For if the Apostles could do it, yet they had fellows, Paul
as well as Peter could do this; The Pope takes upon him to judge the Apostles
doctrine, and so to be Peter's Master, and so proves himself to be Antichrist.
The Pope takes Christ's name upon him, viz. Chief Shepherd. Object. You make
the King head of the Church.
But the Pope is without any fellow, yea he will take upon him to judge of the
Apostles own Doctrine and writings: so that though he pretends to be Peter's
successor only, yet upon the point he takes on him to be Peter's Master, even to
be Christ, and so proves himself to be very Antichrist; yea and he not only
takes upon him Christ's Office, but he takes his name upon him also; he calls
himself the chief Shepherd, which name is proper to Christ only, 1 Pet.
5.4. What is this but to step into the throne of Christ? But they except
against us and say, do you find fault with us for saying the Pope is the head
of the Church? Why you your selves make the King supreme head of the Church. I
answer, how do we say the King is the head of the Church, as they say the Pope
is? No, but we say the King is the head of the Church within his jurisdiction,
to see Gods religion maintained, Word decides. But this word, Head of the
Church, The word, Head of the Church, to be warily used, because not found in
the Scripture.
must be warily used, because it is not found in the Scripture; but chief
Governor is: and therefore in that sense the King may be said to be head of the
Church within his dominions, because under Christ he is chief Governor.
Secondly, they except and say, the universal visible Church has a visible
head. Now where is this visible Head, Christ is not visible? I answer; Yes,
Christ is visible: for first, though he be not actually seen in this
dispensation of time, yet he may be seen. If the King after he is crowned,
should keep himself in his Closet all his life time, yet he is a King, and a
visible King too, though he be not actually seen of his subjects. So Christ,
he is the King of his Church, and is now in heaven, Christ the Head of the
Church is visible.
where the Saints see him, and where we shall see him too, and that with these
eyes of ours; and therefore he is visible, though he be not actually seen of
us now. Secondly, I answer, that in some sort he is visible daily in his
Church, in the Word and in the Sacraments, especially in the Lords Supper, in
these Christ is amongst us, and in our sight crucified, Gal. 3.1. Thirdly, he
was once visible and seen on earth for many years, and shall be seen by
every eye at the last day, and that as the head of the Church. Fourthly, his
Ministers together with lawful Magistrates, do in some sort visibly represent
him amongst us. So that Christ (and not the Pope) is the head of the visible
Church, though he be not actually seen every day amongst us. And so much for
the first Use.

The second Use is matter of comfort to Gods Church, in Matter of comfort to
the Church many ways.
it shows the excellency of the Church; secondly, the neerenesse it has with
Christ; lastly, it shows the safety of the Church. First, it shows the
excellency of the Church: for that is, as far as mortal and sinful man
comes short of the eternal and blessed Son of God. As Christ has a Name
above all names, to be the Head of heads, that is, the most excellent and
glorious head: so has the Church in her measure a name above all names, the
body of bodies, the most excellent and glorious body in the World.

Act. 9. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me (says our Savior:) he took the
injury that Saul offered to his Church, as done to himself. And of necessity
Christ must needs be sensible of the harms done to his Church, as the head is
of the hurt done to the body. It is imposible but that the head should be
sensible of the hurt done to the body, and that in regard of it self, as well
as of the members. This the Church considers, and receives inestimable comfort
by the consideration thereof; for by this they are assured of Christ's nearest
presence to them in their afflictions, by means of this near conjunction, and
also they are assured that he will relieve them of the wrongs and injuries done
unto them, and revenge them on their enemies, as done to himself. And also he
will mercifully recompense all our releeuers, as if they had relieved him on
earth in his greatest extremity. This point is marvelous comfortable to all
such as know themselves to be living members of his body the Church.

Thirdly, this is matter of comfort to us, in regard of our I have overcome the
World, says our Savior. Thirdly, it assures us, that certainly we shall live
and reign in heaven: for where the head is, there the members shall be also,
Ioh. 17.24. yea, we are already by communication with him in heavenly places,
Ephesians. 2.6. because he being our Head, is there already.

The third use is for instruction, that seeing Christ is the Sam. 8.7. and the
Jews wilfulness, Luke 19.14. that they did refuse to have Christ to be their
head and to reign over them, and therefore he refused them to be his Body:
therefore what direction soever Christ tenders unto us, we must obey it; and
whatsoever is against the directions of Christ, we must defy them. And
secondly, seeing Christ is our head, therefore whatsoever life or direction we
have in spiritual things, we must acknowledge the Fountain of them, that we
have them not of our selves, but from him only; for of his fullness we all
receive grace for grace, Ioh. 1.16. and without him we are able to do nothing,
Ioh. 15.5. and by him we are able to do all things, Phil. 4.13. Mark how
sweetly these places agree together, we receive all from him, without him we
can do nothing, by him we are able to do all things; therefore whatsoever
good things we have, spiritual life or graces, we must receive them
thankfully, embrace them sweetly, use them graciously, to the honor of thy
head, and the good and comfort of thy self, and thy fellow members: so
likewise for unprofitable members that dishonor our head, we should pray that
our head, Christ Jesus, would either make them profitable, or else cut them
off; and also that he would be pleased to purge from his body, the noisome
humors, as sin and superstition, that so he may have a sound and a
healthful body. Thirdly and lastly, seeing Christ is our head, therefore as he
has a gracious care for our safety, so we should be as careful to preserve
and maintain his honor and glory, we should rejoice when we see his honor and
glory advanced, and we should mourn and be grieved when we see it opposed.
And so likewise we should be affected with the good or harm of our
fellow members, 1 Cor. 12.25. we should be careful to bring one another to
heaven, and not be careless whether they come thither or no.

except against us; First, say they, you have not Gods ordinances amongst you,
and therefore you have not Christ to be your head? We answer, that they must
show us out of Gods word that those are the ordinances of Christ which we want.
But say they, you have Antichrist to be your head, for you have many things
from him? I answer, we defy him as much as they do together with his doctrine
we defy his practices and courses, if we have, or use any thing, that he
does or has used before us: first, it is either no matter of substance, but
only some passage or carriage or circumstance, either in worship or
government: or secondly, they are such things as were used in purer time, and
Churches before Antichrist: or thirdly, it is of the best, which that Church
being in Apostasy, that is, having been a Church, and still pretending to
continue the same, has reserved, for still they have some good things, and
profess some good truths: Lastly, at least it is thoroughly cleansed from their
superstition and idolatry. So that still we having Christ to be the head of our
Church, and his spiritual life, and the Doctrine of salvation being found
amongst us, and begetting spiritual life in many of us, we must needs be a
true visible Church. And so much for this point.

The twelfth Lecture of the Church.
THe third point propounded to be spoken of concerning the finding out of a
true visible Church, was touching the members of it; for as I showed you, the
Church being a body, and that every body consists of certain members,
therefore if we would exactly know the body, we must know the members: Now the
members were taken either in a more general sense, including the head; or else
in a more strict and particular sense being considered, as a diverse thing from
the head: now because we would carry the matter fully before us, we took it in
both those senses, and having spoken of the members of the Church in the first
sense (where we showed that our Lord Jesus Christ was the head, and the only
head of the true visible Church,) now we come to speak of the members of the
Church in a more strict and particular sense, The second thing considerable in
the third thing touching a visible Church, viz. the members thereof in a more
strickt sense; and they are of three sorts.
being considered as a diverse thing from the head. And thus considered, the
members are of three sorts: First, some are members by right only, and not by
possession; secondly, some are members by possession, not by right; and
thirdly, some are members both by right and by possession.

First, some are members of the visible Church by right only, not by
possession; for some members have a good The first sort, and of the diverse
kinds.
but yet are not actually possessed of them. And of these there are diverse
kinds; irst, generally all the elect of God living upon the face of the earth,
that Saul, who by his practice was of the malignant Church, and persecuted the
true Church of God, and yet by right he was a member of the true Church of God.

Secondly, those that are members of the true visible Catechumeni or Nouices,
that began to be instructed in the grounds of Religion, that upon their further
growth and fitness they might soon after be made partakers of Baptism, and
so become members by possession: It is in this spiritual building, as it is in
the building of a material Church, which is built of stones, whereof some are
laid already, and so are parts of the Church by possession; others are only
taken out of the Quarry, and are under the workemans hand in fitting and
preparing for the building, and are not yet placed within the building as the
others are, and so are no parts by possession, yet these stones because they
are not only appointed, but also being in the Workemans hand a fitting for the
building, therefore they have a place by right in the building; So likewise it
is in the spiritual building of the Church, there are some members that are
placed in the Church already, and so are members by possession, of which we
shall speak in their due place; others there are that are a fitting and
preparing under the workmans hand, that Faith may be wrought in the^, that so
they may afterward be baptized and become members of the church by posession,
as it was with those Nouices in the primitive church: Now that these are
members by right, before they are baptized, the reason is very good, for put
the case that these should dye before they be baptized, shall we say, they are
damned, or that they died out of the Church? God forbid; But rather we must say
that they died within the Church, though not by possession, yet by right, and
so were saved.





have made a voluntary separation, and so have dismissed themselves, as
Schismatikes do; or else they are excommunicate by the Discipline of the
Church, and so are dispossessed by others for some sin; these afterward, if
they repent of their schism, or of their sin, and desire to be restored into
the Church again, though they die before their second admission, yet still we
are charitably to be persuaded, that by right they are members of the Church,
though not by possession.

The second Branch is, The second sort.
that some are members by posfession, and not by right, and they are such as
are baptized and planted in the Church already, but have no true right nor
title to it; for after they have gotten to be members by possession, they grow
lewd and profane in their lives, and so by right they are no members of the
Church. They are so but by intrusion and usurpation, and have gotten possession
by colorable and fraudulent means, pretending to be that they never were,
that is, that they are true believers, when indeed they are not, nor ever were
such; for if they were, they would bring forth better fruits. And of this two
sorts.
Of these there are two sorts; notorious offenders, and secret hypocrites.
First, notorious offenders, such were the sons of Eli, 1 Samuel 2.12, 17. they
were members of the Church by possession, but they were such notorious wicked
men, so that they made the offering of the Lord to be abhorred; therefore they
were not members by right. And such are many amongst us, that were baptized in
their infancy, but when they are of years, they show themselves openly
profane, and of dissolute lives; their Baptism gives them possession, but
their profaneness and dissoluteness of life utterly disables them from
having any right at all in this body; for if they had their right, they should
be turned out. But you will say; So they are cast out when they are once
known to be such, and then they are not members by possession neither. I
answer; It is true, they are so where matters are carried as they ought to be,
but yet sometimes the Church is in a weak case, and has not this power, their
hands are tied, and they cannot do it; or else if they have power, sometime
they are negligent, and do not exercise that power they have; or if they be
forward in it, yet at least there must be a time for admonition betwixt their
discovery and casting out, and so still for a time they are members by
possession, but yet not by right.

Judas that professed himself to be one of Christ's Disciples, and a member of
the true Church, and outwardly carried himself as a true believer; but yet
within he was a devil, and a child of perdition; no member of the Church by
right, though he were by possession. It is with them in this case, as it is
with a man that wrongfully possesses an house, all the while that it is not
discovered, he is accounted the true possessor of that house: but afterward
when it is proved he is not so, then he is thrust out; so that though he had
possession, yet he had no right to it: so these hypocrites profess themselves
outwardly to be true members by possession, and are so accounted of others,
yet they are not that within, which outwardly they profess; and therefore are
no true members by right.

The third sort.
Thirdly, there are some that are members both by right and by possession too,
and so are only the faithful that make profession of the saving faith, and
none but they, Romans 10.10. If they believe with the heart, and confess with
the mouth, they are true members: for faith gives us right to be true members
of the Church, and the outward profession of this faith gives us possession of
it: so that only the faithful making profession of their faith, are true
members of the visible Church by right and by possession: I will give you an
instance of all these kinds of those that are members by right, and not by
possession, and also of those that are members by possession, and not by right;
lastly, of those that are members both by right and by possession. In Matthew.
21.29. there is a Parable of the two sons; the eldest son he was bid to
go and work in the Vineyard, and he said he would not, but afterward he
repented himself and went: here was a member by right, though not by
possession then, because he refused to go: in the 30. verse, there is the
younger son that was bidden go, and said he would, but went not; there was a
member by possession, because he said he would go, but not by right because he
went not. So likewise the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23.3. made show to be
members of the Church, but by right they were not; for they said and did not.
Lastly, members by right and by possession too, so were all the Prophets and
Apostles, so was the Prophet David, Psalm. 116.10. I believed (says he)
therefore I spoke: and so was the Apostle Paul, and the rest of the Apostles, 2
Cor. 4.16. We believe, and therefore we speak. We believe; here is our right:
therefore we speak; here is our possession. So that in these instances we have
examples of these three sorts of members. Now the matter of greatest doubt and
most consequence, is concerning the wicked, how they can be members of Gods
Church; therefore that is most to be insisted on. And for the better
understanding thereof, I will draw it into an Observation.

And the Observation is this; Luke 13.26. We have eaten and drunk in thy
presence, and thou have taught in our streets, etc. Therefore they were
members of the true visible Churches, and yet they were Reprobates; for our
Savior says unto them, verse. 27. I know ye not, depart from me ye workers
of iniquity. And so Matthew. 7.22. they shall say to our Savior; Have not we by
thy Name prophesied, and by thy Name cast out Devils, and by thy Name done many
great works? And yet our Savior shall say unto them; I never knew ye, depart
from me ye workers of iniquity. These were members of true visible Churches,
and yet they were hyprocrites and castawayes: so ye have heard it from their
own mouths. Now take it from a surer witness, out of the mouth of our
Savior himself, in that Parable, Matthew. 13.47, 48. where the kingdom of
heaven is compared to a draw-Net cast into the Sea, that gathers all kind of
fish good and bad. Here it is so clearly laid down, as if the Parable had
been framed of purpose to prove this point. I will not stand here to prove,
that by the kingdom of heaven is meant the visible Church, though the place
would bear it well enough, but it signifies plainly the preaching of the
Gospel, or the Gospel preached, whereby a Church is gathered and fitted for
the Kingdom of heaven: for in that sense it is taken in verse. 31. Now
understand the comparison thus; Like as a draw-Net that is cast into the Sea,
gathers of all kinds good and bad, so the preaching of the Gospel is cast
forth into the World, and gathers all kind of men, good and bad, chosen and
reprobates, hypocrites and true believers, all are gathered by this Net, into
the outward communion of the faithful, and as the bad fishes are part of this
draught; as well as the good; so the wicked outwardly gathered by the Gospel,
are also parts and members of the visible Church, as well as the godly. So
likewise another Parable we have to prove this point, Ioh. 15.1, 2. In the
first verse our Savior says, I am the Vine; and in the second verse he sets
down two sorts of branches; some that abide in him, and bring forth fruit, and
these are the faithful: others that bear no fruit, that are taken away, what
are these but hypocrites and castawayes? Therefore they are parts of the
visible Church as well as the faithful.



I answer; None are in Christ, Genesis 4.3. Caine was a member of the visible
Church, his outward conformity to religious duties proves it; for he brought
his offering to God, and yet he was a wicked reprobate. So Genesis 9.18. Ham he
was a member of the visible Church, for he was preserved in the Arc, and yet
he was an accursed wretch as we may see in the 25. verse. If we look into our
Saviors chosen Disciples, they were certainly a true visible Church, else
there was never any in the world, and yet there was a Judas a member of it and
a Devil, Ioh. 6.70. So if we look into those Churches in the Revelation, 2.
and 3. Chapters, many of them were full of wicked and ungodly men in one kind
or other. The Church of Corinth may be a witness of all this; there were
carnal people, 1 Cor. 3.3. there were fornicators, and one in the highest
degree, an incestuous person, 1 Cor. 5 1. so there were deprauers of the
Doctrine of the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.12. And for the Lords Supper, how
horribly did they abuse it, 1 Cor. 11.21. yet for all this though there were
such notorious offenders in it, it was a true Church: So likewise if you would
find out false brethren, you shall have them in the Church, Gal. ^.4. So for
heretics you shall have them in the Church too, 1 Cor. 11.19. there must be
heresies amongst you (says the Apostle) And Revel. 2.6, 14, 15 in the Church
of Ephesus there were the Nicholaitans. And so in the Church of Pergamus, there
were they that maintaind the Doctrine of Balaam, and the Doctrine of the
Nicholaitans: So for Schismatics, they are in the Church too, before they are
separated, 1 Cor. 11.18. There were dissentions amongst them. Nay, I will say
further that Antichrist may be a member of a true visible Church; The Text
intends he must be so, 2 These. 2.4. He must sit in the Temple of God: diverse
Divines tire themselves with opinions upon this place. Some say he must sit in
that which was the temple of God; but that answers not the meaning of the
words, for he must sit in that which is the Temple of God. Yea, but say others,
he may sit in that which is the Temple of God, because some faithful lie hid
within it; but this cannot be the meaning of it, for it is meant of a visible
Church, as if he should say, Antichrist shall sit in that which is the Temple
of God, that is, in a true visible Church; till he be utterly corrupt, and
fully discovered. And no question but that many years after Antichrist fate in
the Church, it was a true Church. So that it is plain that hypocrites and
castawaies in the highest degree, are and may be of a true visible Church.

Cor. 2.16. is the savor of death unto death to some, and to others it is the
savor of life unto life; to the wicked it is the savor of death unto death,
the sweetness and the comfort of the Gospel drawing them on to profess and
to embrace it for a while; but the hardness of the practice of it makes them
to give over, and to fall away at last, and so it becomes a savor of death unto
them.

profession is such, that generally all men desire to be of it, and therefore
even the wicked would seem to be such; and so they join to the outward
Communion of the Church, though they be but Reprobates and Castawaies.

Thirdly, it is the corruption of men's hearts to be satisfied and to rest in
shadows, but leaving the substance; so

Fourthly, it is from the subtilty and malice of the Devil; Matthew. 13.28. he
seeks above all the disgrace and spoil of the Church; and this he knows, he
cannot do more, than by drawing the members and professors thereof into
hypocrisy and wickedness.

Fifthly, else there should be no hypocrites at all, unless

Sixthly, the visible Church consists only of men, now

Seventhly, it is for the trial of the faithful; and therefore Cor. 11.19.
God will try us whether we will follow him in his word, or them in their
heresies and fancies, and therefore they are amongst us, even as the Canaanites
were left among the Israelites to prove them, whether they would keep the
ways of the Lord or not, Judge. 2.22. and Chap. 3.1.12.

Matthew. 22.10. all both good and bad were brought into the wedding Feast, he
would have the bad to come as well as the good, that they might have the tender
of grace: and hence it is that Reprobates and Castawayes are in the visible
Church.

Matthew. 22.13. 1 Cor. 11.30, 32. that when the wicked are punished, the
righteous may take warning; therefore there are Reprobates in the Church.

Cor. 5.4, 7. and 2 Cor. 2.7, 8. such must be delivered to Satan, that they may
be won if it be possible; or at least that the faithful may be admonished
by their example, and may take heed by their reproaches and censures: for when
the wicked are punished, the righteous will beware.

Matthew. 13.39, 40. It is true that a separation from the bad must be
endeavored by us here in this life, so far as they are known to us, and so
far as we are able to separate. But first it is impossible for us to know
all that are wicked; secondly, for those we do know, it is impossible also to
be quite separated from them, for then we must go out of the World, as the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 5.10. howsoever some heretics (as the Donatists) have
maintained, that the visible Church consists only of the elect and chosen; and
some of our Divines have used the same words; but the heretics meant it in one
sense, and our Divines in another. The heretics intend it as they speak it,
and so it is not true; but our Divines mean it principally of the Church
invisible, and so it is true, that none but Gods chosen are members thereof:
and when they do apply it to the visible Church, they understand it of the
living, abiding, and fruitful members of the Church, and so it is true too,
that none are living members of the visible Church, but the chosen, but yet
there may be rotten and dead members too.

Secondly, this teaches us what to esteem of such as Ioh. 2.19. They went out
from us, because they were not of us. I answer, this is spoken of them after
their falling away, but yet while they abode with them, they were members by
possession, Hyper. method. 574.
though not by right: and it is confessed of the Apostles, that Judas had
obtained fellowship with them, and was numbered amongst them; besides, Additum
diminuens.
visible is additum diminuens, that is, it adds not to the thing, but
diminishes from the strict acceptance; so that the wicked reprobates and
castawayes may be of the true visible Church, though not of the true Church
simply. The second exception is this: How can they be the members of the
Church, the body of Christ, seeing they have not Christ to be their Head? for
Christ is the Head of no Reprobate. I answer; Yes, they are members of that
body whereof Christ is the Head, though simply he is neither Head to them, nor
they members to him, but he is the Head properly of the faithful in that body;
and therefore proportionably he is reckoned the Head of the whole. Besides, the
wicked pretend and counterfeite themselves to be the members of Christ, but
Christ never pretends and counterfeites himself to be their head; and
therefore though head and members be relatiues, yet it is so that they may be
members of him in their sense, and yet he no way pretending to be their head.
Lastly, he is their head in that sense that they are his members, that is in
the show of the world, and in their own pretense, though not in his. The third
exception: But how then is the visible Church the Kingdom of heaven? for so it
is called many times in the Scripture. I answer; First, it is said so in
respect of the faithful that are in it; secondly, it is said so, because there
is the means, to bring all, even the wicked to heaven; thirdly, they do all
outwardly profess to be Citizens of heaven, and are so to be reputed, till
there be evident proof to the contrary, and then they are to be cast out.
Fourth exception: But what if all be hypocrites, is that a true visible
Church? I answer: It is impossible; for where the Word is truly preached, it
cannot be but that there are some that* do sincerely profess. Secondly, I
say, that if it were possible, yet till it be discerned to be so, it is to be
held a true visible Church. The fifth exception: Yea, but you confess your
self, that though they be members, yet they are not living but dead members;
and will any man say, that a dead member is a member of a living body? I
answer; Yes, even as a rotten branch of a tree, till it be cut off, is a member
of the tree as well as the soundest. In Revel. 3.1. the case is avouched in
this very kind; the Church of Sardis is said to be a dead Church, because it
had dead members, and yet it was a true visible Church. And so they may be
members by possession and by show, though they be dead members, and so by
right are not members, for that belongs only to the faithful.

Thirdly, this teaches us, that we should not be rash, to A Church cannot be
denied to be a true visible Church, though there be an hundred hypocrites in it
to one believer.

The Brownists objection of our Church being a profane multitude, answered
diverse ways.


but so long as there are some it, and of it, that do openly profess the
saving faith in sincerity, though otherwise it be full of wicked men and
hypocrites, it cannot be denied to be a Church, yea a true visible Church,
though there be a thousand hypocrites to one true Believer. This matter
concerns us nearly, for it is one of the maine Reasons alleged by Brown and
Barrow and Greeneway and the rest of the separation, to prove us to be a false
Church. Oh, say they, your Church is a profane multitude, promiscuously mingled
together of good and bad, all were admitted together into the Church, and so
you continue in it without separation. I answer, If it were so, this might
prove us to be an impure and corrupt into our Church, that are professedly
wicked, for our baptism is administered to none, but upon solemn protestation
and promise of the profession of the saving faith, and obedience to the same:
Now because they are received into our Church being young, therefore this
promise is not made by themselves, but by sureties; and when they come to
years, such sureties as are conscionable, and likewise the Ministers call upon
them to consider and perform their promise made in baptism: so then first our
Church admits none, but such as make solemn protestation of faith and
obedience. Object. You let wicked ones continue in your Church without
separation.
And secondly, whereas they allege that we let the wicked continue in our
Church without separation, whereas we should cut them off when we find them to
be hypocrites. I answer, we do separate, as much as in us lies, for we labor
to have them separated from us, and also Mesech and Kedar, and reproving them
for their sins; and if that will not serve, complaining against them to those
that are in Authority, that they may be excommunicate, and withal we are
instant with God by prayer to stir up the hearts of such as are in Authority
to execute his Ordinances upon them: we do what we can to separate them from
us, and it comes sometime to pass, that many are so separated from us; but if
they should not, that indeed were the Churches sin, and a foul sin too;
yet it destroys not the true being of our Church. Secondly, Hyp. 577. 580. etc.
and that is the separation that the Scripture so much beats upon in private
persons, as we are more conscionable, so we do more separate from them, from
their wills, affections and courses; yea, we must separate as much as
conveniently we may from their persons, at least from their sins, which for
our parts we are persuaded to be the chief separation that the Scripture
intends. Yea, but this is a secret separation, say they, under hand, not openly
known. Nay, this is a notorious and known separation: For first, it is
ingenuously professed on our part, to the moving of their after-hatred and
despite against us; we disclayming them that are lewd, swearing and profane
wretches, and that openly, not caring who know it; and likewise it is known on
their part, they vpbraiding us therefore very reproachfully, with the names of
Puritanes, Precisions, holy Brethren, and such like, because we will not
accompany with them, if this be not an holy and a plain separation, What is?
I marvel then, the matter being so notorious, that they are not ashamed to
say, that we do not separate from the wicked: this therefore is an horrible
slander. Yea, but say they, ye should separate from them in the Assemblies,
from the Word and the Sacraments? I answer, rather the wicked should separate
from us in these things: where the Assembly and business are naught in
themselves, Bernard against Brownists. 1034. where the assemblies are bad,
there the good must separate; but where the assemblies be good, there the bad
must separate.
as at Playhouses and such like, there the good must separate: but where the
Assembly and business is good in themselves, there the bad must separate; and
the reason is good, for it is none of theirs, and the good must tarry and be
present, for it is their own right; and it is sin to refuse Gods ordinances
for the pollution of others, 1 Samuel 2.17.24. Yea, but say they, Can your
holiness sanctify them? If not, then your Congregations are profane. I answer;
No, our holiness sanctifies not them, yet our holiness being true in us, and
openly professed and practiced, it shall be enough to make us a true visible
Church, yea, and an holy Congregation in Gods acceptance, and in the
charitable estimation of our Brethren. Yea, but say they, their filthiness
defiles you, and your holy things; either really, or at least by imputation? I
answer; they defile these holy things to themselves indeed, Numb. 19.22.
compared with Hag. 2.14, 15. and Titus 1.15. but not to us, so long as by faith
we receive them; neither can they defile us, so long as we communicate not with
them in their sins, no not so much as by imputation, Galath. 6.3.15.

The fourth Use. Seeing wicked men and Reprobates may be members of a true
visible Church, this may teach us to be wise as Serpents, to try before we
trust, be not too credulous to believe every show of profession. Our Savior
says, Matthew. 7.15. beware of false Prophets that come to you in sheep
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Woolues, etc. And the Apostle John, 1
Ioh. 4.1. bids us, Believe not every Sprit, but try the Spirits whether they
are of God or no. And for this end the gift of discerning of Spirits is given
to the Church, 1 Cor. 12.10. therefore let every one of us labor to be wise
in this kind.

Heb. 3.12. That there be not in any of us, at any time, an evil heart and an
unfaithful to depart away from the living God. As great and as bright stars as
thou art have fallen from heaven; therefore, as the Apostle says, Let every
one that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall; not that he which does
stand can fall, but he that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. Try
therefore, and examine thy self daily, fifth hypocrisy out of thy heart; that
so as thou art a member of the Church by possession, so by thy standing and
continuing in the faith, and the sincere profession thereof, thou may show
thy self to be a member by right too. And so much for this point, that
Reprobates and Castawaies may be, and often are members of true visible
Churches. And so much likewise be spoken of the members of the Church.

The thirteenth Lecture of the Church.
AFter that we had spoken of the definition of a true visible Church, in the
first place, and in the second place of the causes of it, we came in the third
place to speak of the members of it, wherein we handled such points, as it
pleased God to afford unto us. The fourth general thing considerable in a
visible Church, viz. the Marks of it.
Now we come in the fourth place to speak of the notes and marks, whereby a
visible Church is discerned to be a true Church of God. We know that all
Soldiers have their Banners and colors under which they fight, and so has
the Militant Church, the Soldiers of Jesus Christ, her Colors and Banner to
fight under. So likewise every Corporation and Company have their Arms and
Liueries, whereby they are distinguished from all other Companies: yea, we know
that every Lord and great man has his Badge and Cognizance, whereby his
servants and attendants are to be known from other men's. So the Lord Jesus
Christ, the Lord of Lords, the great and glorious God of heaven and earth, has
his Badge and Cognizance whereby his Servants are distinguished and discerned
from all other, from the servants of sin, and from the servants of the world,
and from the servants of men. True it is, that the Church invisible is known
to God alone, because none but he is the Searcher of the heart: But the Church
visible is therefore called visible, because it has certain sensible notes
and marks set upon it, that at the sight thereof it may be known to be the
Church of God. I do not speak here of the inward, marks which God does set
secretly on his Children; as that they are borne of God, joined by faith unto
Christ their head, endued with the Spirit of Adoption assuring them of Gods
favor, and persuading them to holiness, and an inward love and affection to
the Brethren; for by these they are only known to God and to themselves: but
I speak of outward marks whereby they are known to others, such, as that
thereby the world may take notice of such a congregation so marked, that they
are a true visible Church of God. This was a mattter practiced in the former
Testament, and prophesied for the latter, Isai. 19.19. that the visible Church
should be thus marked out. And surely it is very necessary, Reasons why there
should be Marks of the Church.
that there should be such outward tokens and marks to discern it by: First,
in respect of those that are within the Church, for the surer confirmation of
their hearts, that they are in the right way; as also

Two qualities of these Marks, to make them legitimate.
Now these outward marks have certain qualities or properties belonging to
them, which wheresoever they are found, they make these marks legitimate, and
to be acknowledged to be true and sufficient, else they are not to be
admitted. Now these qualities or properties belonging to these marks of the
Church are two, first that these marks and notes of the Church must be
essential to it: secondly, that they must be better known to us than the
Church it self.

First, they must be essential, that is, The first quality and
such as concern the very being of the Church; some concern the well being of
the Church, as Discipline and such like, which wheresoever it is found, it
makes that Church more pure, sound and perfect, than other Churches that want
them. But the marks we seek after are, such as concern the very being of
the Church; so that wheresoever they are found, there is certainly the true
being of a visible Church; and also wheresoever the Church visible has any
true being at all, It is attended with three other tha^ (...) subordinate to
them.
there are these found. And this quality is attended with three others that
are subordinate to it, and follow consequently upon it; as first, these marks
must have this being,

The second property or quality of these marks, The second qual^^^^ of these
marks.
is that they must be better known than the Church it self, for to seek out
a thing unknown, by that which is as much unknown; or a thing little known,
by that which is less known, is a thing preposterous and absurd, we are
never the nearer: but if we would seek out a thing wisely, we must seek
that which is unknown, by that which is known; and that which is but a little
known, by that which is more known: for that which I know another by, must
be beter known to me than the other: as for example; If I know a man by his
face, or by some wart or mole upon it, then I must know that better, or at
least have a more particular impression of it in my mind, than of the man
himself: So the notes and marks of the Church must be better known to me
than the Church it self. And both these marks and notes must concur
together, for being a certain mark it must be first able to direct us to the
thing we seek; and secondly, such as may not deceive us therein: if it be a
thing well known, and yet not essential, it may direct, but it is apt to
deceive; again, if it be essential, and not best known, as it is not apt to
deceive, so it is not able to direct, therefore they must both concur
together. So then the issue of all is this; That whatsoever things do so
belong to a visible Church, that being examined by these notes, they will stand
answerable thereunto; these and none other are to be acknowledged, right marks
thereof. Vrsin. 582. Vogel. 727.
Now there is none that will hold the touch of these notes, but these three,
the Word preached, the Sacraments administered, and thirdly obedience professed
to that which they both require; which because it is the maine substance of all
that which is spoken touching this point, we will deliver and handle it by way
of observation.

Calvin. inst. lib. 4 cap. 1 sect. 10. in Acts 2.42.
I do not say, that they are the only marks for many other are assigned, and
may be admitted, but not upon these properties before mentioned; for they are
not essential nor better known than the Church it self, as these are;
therefore these are the chief and most infallible marks. For proof of the
observation, look into Matthew. 28.19. Go teach all Nations, baptising them
(says our Savior) in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost,
etc. What is the business our Savior sends his Apostles about? It was to
plant and erect visible Churches in the world; how is that to be done? Go
(says he) teach all nations, etc. First, they must teach the Word; there is
the Word preached: secondly, Go and baptize, etc. there is the Sacraments
administered, and though but one be named, as that being of most special use,
for the present dispensation of planting Churches, yet figuratively the other
is intended: for so you shall find was their practice, Act. 2.41, 42. where it
is said, not only that they did baptize, but that they brake bread also; there
is the Lords supper too: and it is not to be thought, that they went beyond
their commission in this: for it was the Ministers part to deliver it, and the
peoples to receive it. So then here is the Word preached, and the Sacraments
administered; and what else are they to do? verse. 20. Teaching them to observe
and do, etc. there is (at least) profession of Obedience. As if Christ should
say; Let them profess at least, that they will obey you; else turn away from
them, and shake off the dust of your feet as a witness against them. The
words are so precise for every particular in the observation, and that from our
Saviors own mouth, and containing such an absolute description of the office
both of Ministers and people, and the intendment being the erecting and
settling of true visible Churches, that me thinks it is as much as if our
Savior had said; Wheresoever these three are performed, there let the World
take notice of a true visible Church: and so from time to time wheresoever
there is any true Church to the worlds end. And what is this but that which I
have affirmed in the observation, that the preaching of the Word, and the
administration of the Sacraments, and obedience of the people to that which
they do both require, are the most infallible and chiefest marks of a true
visible Church. Another Evangelist reporting the same Commission, speaks as
much in effect, though not in such precise terms, Mark. 16.15, 16. Go ye into
all the World and preach the Gospel to every Creature, he that shall believe
and be baptized, shall be saved, etc. there is the Word preached, and there
are the Sacraments (as before) and there is profession of obedience to them
both: for if they believe, they must obey. This point is so clear, that it
needs no further proof; yet because it is a question betwixt us and the
Papists, and also betwixt us and the separation, and likewise among Divines;
therefore we will see further proof of it: There are other places of
Scripture which avouch the same in effect, yet not so pregnantly as these do,
Ioh. 10.4. our Savior says, He goes before his sheep; that is, before his
people, and they hear his voice and follow him. How does Christ go before his
people? He goes before them in the Word and in the Sacraments, leading them in
the ways of salvation: for the Word is there expressly named, My voice; and
under that, the Sacraments are figuratively to be understood, And they hear
it, and follow him; there is obedience. Our Savior alludes to the custom of
the Shepherds in that Country, that were wont to tune a voice to their
sheep, which they hearing and knowing, did all follow. Now this voice of
Christ is his Word; and his Sacraments are parts thereof; therefore if ye ask
who are the sheep of Christ? The answer is ready, They that hear the voice of
Christ, and follow him. As who should say, Where is a true visible Church? The
Answer is, where the Word is truly preached, and at least professed to be
obeyed. The like speech is in the 27. verse of the same Chapter. So likewise in
Ephesians. 5.26. the Apostle says, that Christ gave himself for his Church, that
he might sanctify it, and cleanse it, by the washing of water through the
Word. Apply these words to the visible Church, then there is the Word, and
Water, that is, Baptism; and under that Sacrament the Lords Supper is implied;
and there is profession of obedience, for they are sanctified and cleansed; so
that wheresoever these are, there is a true visible Church. Answerable unto
these assertions, you shall find it by experience to have been from the
beginning, look into Paradise, Genesis 2.16, 17. there is the Word, Gods
Commandment given to our first Parents; Ye shall not eat, etc. and there
were the Sacraments, the Tree of life, verse 9. purposely to signify and to
seal unto them eternal life, if they did obey; and there was also their
obedience acknowledged, in that they accepted of their estate, and that upon
that condition. If any doubt of this it is plainly laid down, Genesis ^.4. Where
the woman acknowledged that they were bound not to eat of that Tree, so there
is their profession of Obedience: So you see how it was with the Church in
Paradise before the fall. Now let us see how it was with the Church out of
Paradise after the fall, Genesis 3.15. There was the promise of the Gospel, there
is the Word preached: and Genesis 4.3, 4. There were the Sacrifices, there was
Caine and Abel offering Sacrifices, which were representations of Christ's own
Sacrifice of himself, and consequently of the Sacrifices of the new Testament;
and there was also their profession of Obedience, in that they brought their
Sacrifices unto God: no doubt but Adam their Father taught them the Doctrine of
the Gospel, and how they ought to worship God, and they professed obedience to
that he taught, both Caine as well as Abel, for then they were both members of
the visible Church: so here is the Word, and the Sacraments, and Obedience
professed to them both, and so a true visible Church. Likewise that in Genesis 9.
from the eighth to the seventeenth verse; In Noah's time after the flood, there
was Gods Covenant made with Noah, so there is the Word, and there was the Bow
set in the Clouds, there was the Sacrament; and thirdly, their profession of
obedience too; for it is a Covenant, which intends obedience on Noah's part, for
else, how is it a Covenant if it be not condescended to on both parts? And so
also in Abraham's time Genesis 17 4 7.10.23. in the 4. and 7. verses God makes a
covenant with Abraham, there is the Word; and in the 10. verse. there is the
Sacrament, Circumcision: and in the 23. verse there is Abraham's obedience, He
circumcised Ismael, and all the males in his house. So likewise when God sent
to gather his people out of Egypt, first he delivers them his Word by Moses,
Exo. 3.15. and 6.6. and he gives them the Sacrament of the Passover, Exo.
12.3. and in the eight and twenty verse of that Chapter, there is the peoples
obedience, The Children of Israel went and did as the Lord had commanded Moses
and Aaron, even so did they. And what was the Law and Sacrifices in the former
Testament, but even as the Word and Sacraments are in the new Testament. And
did not the Lord require and receive of the people a precise promise of
obedience, even before he prescribed them either Law or Sacrifices? This we
may see he did Exodus 19.5.8. God sent Moses to the people there, before he
delivered them his Law, and before he prescribed their sacrifices, to know
whether they would obey or not: and they said they would. So that under the Law
there was the Word and the Sacraments, and profession of obedience in the
people, and so a true visible Church. And so Joshua renewing the true worship
of God, Ios. 1.16.18. redresseth the things amiss, and brings in the Law and
the Passe-ouer, and the people they promise obedience in all things, even as
they obeyed Moses. And so in the 2 King. 23.2, 3, 21, 22, 23. When Josiah
restored the Church of God; First, he caused the words of the book of the
Covenant to be read to the people in the second verse, so there was the Word:
and in the 21. verse, there the King restored the Passover, so there is the
Sacrament: and in the third verse, there is their obedience, for the King made
a Covenant with the Lord, and all the people stood to it: And thus likewise it
was in the time of Ezra, as you may read Chap. 7.8. And also in the time of
Nehemiah, Chap. 8. and 9. they restored the Word and Sacraments, and made a
Covenant with God, wherein they professed their obedience; and so were restored
to be a true visible Church. So then these must needs be the principal marks
and notes whereby a true visible Church is discerned, because they are not
only in the instituting of a true visible Church, but also in the renewing and
restoring of it, when it is corrupted. It is in this case as with a Camp in
the field, who as they are gathered at the first to their Colors and Banners,
Non secus ac belli duces, vt dissipatum clade aliqua exercitum recolligant,
signa militaria, vel accensos ignes, ex edito loce conspiciendos proponunt, quo
pedem referant quotquot ex clade dispersis, and palantes vagantur. Morn. de
eccles. p. 27.
so likewise if the Camp be put to flight by the enemy, the General hangs
out and displaies his Colors and Ensigns, that so they that are scattered may
gather to them again, and that so they may be a Camp as before: So it is
with Gods Church, when it is put to the worst, when it is corrupted and
polluted, he displayes the Ensigns and Banners of his Word and Sacraments,
that so whosoever is fallen away, may enter into Covenant again, and become a
member of the true visible Church, and fight under Gods Banner as well as he
did before. Thus we see how it was in the former Testament, that these were
the true marks of a true visible Church; and so it is also in the new
Testament: I will give you a pattern or example only in two Churches, and by
them you may esteem of all the rest. The first is the Church of Jerusalem, Act.
2.14, 41, 42. In the fourteenth verse, it is said Peter lifted up his voice,
etc. there is the word preached: and in verse 41. there is the Sacrament of
Baptism, they that gladly received his Word were baptized; and in verse 42.
there is the Sacrament of the Lords Supper under the name of breaking of bread:
and there is also their profession of obedience, for they continued in the
Apostles Doctrine and fellowship, and breaking of bread and prayer; and so
there was a true visible Church. The second pattern is the Church of Corinth,
1 Corinthians. 1.13. there was Baptism; and in the 1 Corinthians. 11.23. There was the
Lords Supper, and Chap. 15.1. there was the Word preached, and also their
obedience; for the Apostle Paul preached unto them the Gospel which they
received and continued in. So that these are the chief and most principal
marks of a true visible Church. And where these are, the Word truly preached,
the Sacraments rightly administered, and profession of obedience to that which
they do both require, there is a true visible Church of God: The ancient
Fathers do acknowledge this in effect; for they say, that the Word preached,
and the Sacraments administered, are the chiefest marks of a true visible
Church: Morney ^6.29.
but there must be obedience to them both, for that is the Life of all, and
indeed, even the Papists themselves, when they are out of controversy, do
grant the Word and Sacraments are the chiefest and clearest marks of a true
visible Church. And so much for the proofs.



Math. 28.19. and in the continuing, Act. 2.41, 42. and in the restoring, as
Joshua's and Iosiah's times, etc. as we have showed before.

Moses is taught and obeyed with his Ceremonies, there is a Synagogue of the
Jews; where the Alcoran is taught and Mahomet observed, there is a Church of
Mahometans: So likewise where the Gospel of Christ is taught, and his
Sacraments administered, and obedience yielded to them, there is a true Church
of Christ.

Fourthly, where there is good wheat sown and thriues, and comes up in the
blade, is not that a field of wheat? So likewise where the Word is preached,
and the Sacraments administered, and profession of obedience to them both, is
not this a true Church? Not that profession only makes a true Church, but
because as I have showed, it cannot be but whereas these are, there is some
that do sincerely profess.

Fifthly, is not she a right and natural Mother, that

Sixthly, every Tree is known by the fruits, Matthew. 7.16,

Seventhly, it is Christ's presence that makes a true visible

Lastly, from the sufficient enumeration of the parts of a true Cor. 4.1. and
the people doing their duty in obeying that they teach, at least outwardly,
they are the sheep of Christ, Ioh. 10.4. Now which of these marks might be
spared; or what other are One sort of excepters against this doctrine, and
their exception.
there is a true visible Church.

The uses of the point are these; The first, use is matter of reproof, and
that of many adversaries; First, it reprooues such as except and say, first,
that other Congregations besides the true visible Church, have these marks,
and therefore they are not sufficient, nor infallible marks. I answer,

But this is a false pretense, for when it comes to the trial, it will appear
that it is but their saying, not that it is so in truth; for either they will
refuse some part of the Scripture: or else they will mangle and deprave it, or
else they will take the Letter for the sense, as the Papists do in the matter
of Transubstantiation, this is my Body; and other Heretics that because it is
said, He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire; therefore they
baptize with fire, taking the Letter of the Scripture instead of the sense of
it. Or else they add something to the word, as traditions and such like; and so
though they do approve, and take it in at the fore-doore, yet they cast it out
at the backdoore; so that indeed they have it not at all, whatsoever they
pretend: we may say truly therefore that they challenge these marks; but we
cannot say they are theirs, but they still remain the proper right of Gods
true Church. We know that the Devils policy and the depth of his subtlety,
is to imitate apishly, the courses of God; that thereby he may deceive the
more cunningly, and therefore he will counterfeit Gods own marks and
cognizance; but we must try the Spirits, 1 Ioh. 4.1. and the proof will make
all clear, for Satan can transform himself into an Angel of light, and his
Apostles can transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ and his
Ministers, as though they were the Ministers of righteousness, 2 Cor. 11.13,
14, 15. So then though these lay claim to these marks, and say they are
theirs, yet they have no right to them, it is but their vain bragges, their
master Satan himself alleges Scripture, and pretends it is for him, but he
was shamefully discovered by our Savior, for he left out part of it, and
depraved it, as we may see Math. 4.6, 7. And so the harlot, Pro. 7.14. said, I
have peace offerings, this day I have paid my vows, therefore came I out to
meet thee: she pretends to pray, but her intent was to play the harlot. And so
Zidkiah, 1 King. 22.24. braggs that he had the Spirit of Prophecy, when
indeed it was a lying Spirit, that was in his mouth. So the Congregations of
Heretics and of Schismatikes lay claim to the Word and Sacraments, and say
they are theirs, when as indeed they are not; because, they do either refuse
some part of them, or deprave them, or add unto them their own Inventions.
Secondly, that except and say that many visible Churches have Two
considerations necessary.
sometimes Gods Church does thrive and flourish; and then it has all these
marks, without doubt Gods Word is truly preached, marks; if it be a dying
and a decaying Church, then it has dying and decaying marks: So then, these
marks must be found in all true visible Churches according to the state of
those Churches; if it be a dying Church, then the Word and Sacraments and
Obedience are dying and decaying too; but when it is quite fallen, it cease
to be a true visible Church, nor has it these marks. And so likewise in the
time of persecution, when the Church is so persecuted, that there are none left
to make open profession of the Faith and Religion of Christ, yet so long as
there are any that publicly suffer for the Gospel, so long there is a true
Church, though troubled and brought low; for by their suffering they profess
obedience to the Gospel: and though they are debarred of the public use of
the Word and Sacraments, yet the fruit and effect of them is still visible, and
so they have these notes and marks in some degree.

Church, though more corrupt. As for example, the Church of Galatia, embraced
the true Word, but not truly preached; for they taught justification by works,
Gal. 3.1, 2, 3. and some think that they were then in the state of Apostacy,
and yet they were a true visible Church, and are so called, Gal. 1.2. So
secondly, for the Sacraments, look into the Church of Corinth 1 Cor. 11.22. to
the end of the Chapter, they had the Lords Supper, but it was much depraved,
and not so sincerely administered as it ought to have been, and yet they were a
true Church; and so for the Doctrine of the Resurrection, a material point in
Religion; there were some that denied it in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor.
15.12. and yet they were a true Church.

Lastly, for profession of obedience the Church of Sardis, Revel. 3.3.1. had a
name that she lived but was dead; Bernard against Separat. 122. 123.
they were generally in the estate of Apostacy in that Church, yet because
they made profession of obedience, though not sincerely; and because some
amongst them did truly profess, as in the 4. ver. therefore it is called a
Church: I speak not this to cherish any Church in the corruptions that they
are in; but only to keep us from an uncharitable conceit of such a Church: as
not to esteem it for a true Church, because the Word is not so truly preached,
nor the Sacraments so rightly administered, nor profession of obedience so
sincerely yielded as it ought to be.

Thirdly, they object and say, that these are not more know a Musician because
of his Music, not the Music by the Musician. And so much for reproof of
these first sort of Adversaries that except against this Doctrine.

^^Second sort of excepters against this doctrine, and their exceptions.
Secondly, it reproves others that object and say, that there are other marks
required, as well as these; as first, Love to the Brethren. I answer: This is a
part of their obedience which they profess. Secondly, say they, there

Third sort of adversaries to this doctrine, viz. the Papists, and the Marks
they allege, and answers to them.
Thirdly and lastly, there are other adversaries here reproved, that object
against this Doctrine, and they are the Papists. They object and say, that
these marks are not the principal, but others are more required than these,
and that as better marks. They allege four; first, Antiquity; secondly,
Succession; thirdly, Multitude; lastly, Unity or Consent. These are strange
marks of a true Church.

then it would follow, that every ancient Church were a true Church; and so the
Church amongst the Turks should be a true Church, because it is ancient;
therefore it is Antiquity of truth, not of place or people. Look what Church
maintains the ancient Doctrine of truth, that is the true Church: so that
antiquity separated from the truth, is no note of a true visible Church. Caine
and Satan were ancient, yet no true Church: but join this note with the Truth,
The true Word preached (which is one of our notes) and then it is a true mark.

Secondly, for Succession. What succession of Bishops,

Thirdly, for multitude, they make that a Note of the

Lastly, for unity and consent, that is no Note, unless it prove it by the
Word? that so their Church may be yielded to be Catholic: so that still they
justify their Church by the Word as well as they can, as that being indeed the
only witness to justify any Church by. Also, if an heresy arise, how do
they disprove it, but by the Word principally? So that still the Word by their
own practice (whatsoever for a shift, and for contention-sake they profess)
is the best and truest witness, of a true or a false, of a Catholic or
Heretical Church; yea, they themselves put these very things into the
definition of a true visible Church (that is, Bellar. de eccles. mili. p. 184.
188.
the Word, and the Sacraments, and Profession) and that chiefly, as
Bellarmine: therefore by their own confession, we that have these marks, are
more certainly a true visible Church, than they that have any other marks
whatsoever. So much for the reproof of these adversaries that except against
this Doctrine.



The fourteenth Lecture of the Church.
We have spoken, as you may remember, concerning the Church visible; first, of
the Definition of it; secondly, of the causes of it; thirdly, of the memhers of
it; fourthly, of the notes and marks of it. Now we are to speak in the fifth
place, according to the order set down of the government of it. And it
follows orderly; The fifth thing considerable in a visible Church, viz
government.
for when we have seen what this Church is, and the causes whereby it is, and
the members whereof it consists, and the notes and marks whereby it is
discerned from all other companies; then it follows orderly to know in the
next place, what government this Church has; first, whether it has any at
all; and secondly if it have any, to know what government this is; that is the
point then we are to speak to, namely, Vid. Pol^^. 426, 459.
Church government. A point in my judgment, that in regard of it self, needs
not to be so exactly looked into, and precisely stood upon now, as heretofore:
but yet in regard of many unhappy differences and inconveniences that have
risen about it, and been occasion^d by it in the Church of God; therefore to
satisfy the Consciences of some that are weak, and to stop the mouths of
others that are clamorous, humourous, and perverse; and to maintain peace and
unity in the house of God, and to justify the State of all reformed Churches,
professing the saving faith of Jesus Christ, that howsoever they differ from
one another in the matter of Church-gouernment, as some have many faylings, and
sore blemishes in their Government, yet all are true Churches of God. I say, in
these respects I know not any one point of Religion, not fundamental, so
necessary to be thoroughly sought into, and advisedly and duly to be
considered of: Therefore in this regard, I purpose to speak of it as God shall
enable me.

And in it five things handled.
That which I purpose to speak concerning this point, I will reduce to these
heads: First, I will speak of the harms and evils that have been raised, and
that have happened by this question of Church-Gouernment: secondly, I will show
what is meant by Church-Gouernment: thirdly, I will show how needful it is in
the Church: Fourthly, whether there be a precise Rule left by the Apostles for
this Government: Fifthly, if there be not, then what is to be done in this
case? He that resolves me in these points, resolves me of all that can be
spoken concerning Church-Gouernment.

First, the harms and evils that have been raised in the Church of God
occasionally by Church-gouernment.
We will begin therefore with the first point; The harms and evils that have
been raised up in Gods Church hereby. Infinite are the evils which this matter
of Church-Gouernment has occasionally bred, and brought forth in the Church of
God; I say, occasionally, not of it self; for the thing in its own nature is
holy and good, and therefore naturally can yield no such bad fruits, but
occasionally as being abused by the malice of Satan, and the corruption of man's
heart, hence it is that it brings forth such bad effects.

The fault is partly in the Governors, and partly in the governed. First, the
Governors; sometimes when they be proud and hauty, contemning their
inferiors, striving with equals, aspiring to the highest places, as is evident
in the Papal government. And some tokens of bad Governors the Scriptures give
us, as Covetous, given to filthy Lucre; abusing their places and Authority to
their own private gain; negligent and careless, like Gallio in the Acts,
making no conscience of the faithful execution of their Office.

Secondly, there are faults in those that are Governed; some ambitiously
seeking for higher places, than they are fit for; some are envious, maligning
and spiting their superiors; some are sensual, despising Government; some are
ill-tongued, speaking evil of those in Authority; some are obstinate and
rebellious, resisting their orders and proceedings, and will not endure their
neck under any yoke.

Lastly, some are humourous and peevish, denying that power set over them to
be lawful, laboring for innouations and changes, and new platformes of
government of their own devising: contrary to that already established. These
and the like Advantages has the enemy from time to time wrought upon, thereby
to disgrace Church-gouernment, and to make it the greatest trouble-state in the
Christian world. What was it that the Disciples contended about in our Saviors
time? Luk 22.24. Was it not the matter of Church-gouernment? Who should be the
chiefest amongst them, and so the Ruler and Governor of the rest: By this
occasion the Devil made strife amongst the Apostles. And what bred those great
broils and contentions in the primitive Church, betwixt the Eastern and the
Western Bishops? Was it not Church-gouernment, which should be the highest
See; and who should be the highest and chi^^^t Bishop? To go further; what
brought forth Antichrist into the world, and that advanced the Pope to that
high pitch which he came to; was it not Church-gouernment? The Pope
audaciously engrossing all Sovereignty in the Church to himself, and many good
Bishops and Churches in their weakness yielding too much to him in that kind,
by the perverseness of the governed. In a word; what dishonor has hereby
been done to God? What disgrace to Religion? What hinderance to the prosperous
success of the Gospel, and of the Kingdom of Christ? What furtherance and
advantage to the Kingdom of Satan? What heart-burning has it bred amongst
some? How has it alienated the hearts of others from us, and that in many that
otherwise are inclinable toward us? What tumults has it bred at home? What
clamours abroad? What grief has it brought to our friends and well affected?
What rejoicing to our enemies and profane persons? What distractions and doubts
has it bred in weak and tender Consciences? What disheartning and
discouraging has it been? How many excellent Talents for Gods ministry, have
been hereby buried in the ground without profit? And so consequently many
congregations destitute of their faithful Ministers, and of their heavenly
food, and left as a prey to the Ravening Wolves by this means, had they not by
the providence and wisdom of our Governors been otherwise provided for.

I dare undertake, that in all likelihood (had not the Devil cast this bone
amongst us, and thrown this business of Church-gouernment, as a football
before us, for every one to run after, and so to set us all together by the
ears) this Church of England through Gods blessing, had been this day the most
famous and flourishing Church that ever was in the world; whereas now this
business, this only business of Church-gouernment, has occasionally by the
peevishness of some, hatched, nourished and brought forth much ignorance,
prophannesse, uncharitableness, contempt of holiness, neglect of Gods
ord^^^^ces, looseness, and licentiousness; I grieve to think on these
things, and I can have no pleasure to speak of them; and we may be all ashamed
of them before God and the World, and it must be every ones care and endeavor
to be instant with God by prayer, that in his good time he would be pleased to
redress these foul evils; yet here I have mentioned them, to the end that we
may be both whetted on by these considerations to look the more carefully into
this business; and also that we might be admonished to carry our selves the
more temperately and moderately toward it. And so much of the first point,
namely, of the harms and evils that have happened occasionally by this matter
of the Church-Gouernment, though in it self holy and good.

Second thing in Church government, what is meant by it.
The second point is, what is meant by Church Government? Yea see here two
words, Church and Government, and each of these may carry three senses. First,
for the word Church, we are not here to understand it of the Catholic Church,
for that being dispersed over all places of the world cannot well be brought
within the compass of the same Laws, nor ruled by the same earthly
Governors; it is impossible for the reatures to weild such a great charge. The
sole Governor of the Church in this sense is Jesus Christ, the only Head
thereof. And the only Laws it is to be governed by, is the presence, power
and direction of the Spirit: but here we understand it of a particular visible
Church, whether it be Parochial, National, or Provincial: for these being
confined, and bounded within their several places, may, and must have their
several Laws and Governors, every one for and within it self: of this
Church it is that we here speak of, whether it be greater or less. Now we
come to the next word Government, which word in a general sense signifies to
maintain; secondly, in particular to govern. First, in general, in respect
of the state of nature, as we are men, so the Lord gouernes, that is,
maintains and preserues his Church, seating every particular Church in the
place where it is, making a Fence about it, feeding and clothing them,
supplying their wants, affording them helps and means for their relief,
defending them from their enemies, delivering them from dangers, causing them
to thrive and prosper in outward things, and covering them with his favor as
with a shield. And this kind of Government the Lord extends over the whole
world, yea, even to the wicked, as well as to the faithful; yet with this
difference: to the wicked in the common favor of his providence; to the
faithful in the special favor of his Grace in Christ: for even in the very
temporal blessings that the faithful have in this life, they are theirs by
Grace and promise in Christ. And therefore, to the wicked they perish in the
inioying of them, they have no further benefit of them but outward and
temporal; to the faithful they are helpefull and serviceable in some degree,
to the work of their eternal salvation: for so God intends them, and so the
faithful accept and use them. This is for the general Government of God, in
respect of the state of nature, as we are men. Secondly, there is a particular
Government in respect of the estate of Grace, as we are men professing the
saving Faith of Jesus Christ, and so the Government is twofold, inward and
outward. First, inward; and this is proper to the Spirit of Christ, God only
ruling in the hearts of his chosen, as a King by the power of his Word and
Spirit, converting them from the service of sin to the service of God,
causing them to believe Gods promises in Christ, and so justifying us from our
sins, crucifying the old man, and quickening the new, acquainting us with his
will, and framing us to obedience, putting good motions from time to time into
our minds, and stirring us up, and enabling us to entertain them graciously,
and to give place unto them, and so sanctifying us: and further he assures us
of Gods love and favor, and our election in Christ, and so comforts us:
further, he increases these and other Graces in us every day more and more, so
long as we are in this world, till at length they be fully perfected in us,
and we received into his Kingdom of glory in heaven, and so he glorifies us.
This, this is the right Kingdom of God, and of Christ, whereby God reigns in
us, as King here, and makes us to reign as Kings with him for ever hereafter.
This is the inward Government. Secondly, the outward Government, that is, the
power and direction that God has put over to the sons of men, for the well
governing of the Church, whereby there must be first sufficient and painful
Ministers to instruct the people in the ways of salvation, teaching them
Repentance toward God, and Faith in Jesus Christ; and secondly, there must be
others that are holy and religious men, chosen for their Assistants, for the
dispatch of such Ecclesiastical business, as they may be helpefull in. And
thirdly, there must be certain godly and Christian Laws and customs
established amongst them by the common consent of the Church, for the
maintaining of peace and order in the Church, for the punishment of sin and
sinners, and for the encouragement of well-doers, and for the better execution
of all such ordinances, as the Lord in this case has provided to be done in
his Church. And this is the Government which we here mean, and which we seek
after, that is, the power and direction, and administration that God has
committed to his Church, specially to the Ministers and overseers thereof, to
see that the whole body be well ordered, and that every member carry themselves
godly and religiously, both in private, especially in public both toward God
and the World.

In the third place we are to speak of the necessity of Church-gouernment,
The third thing considerable in Church-gouernment, viz how needful it is.
how needful and necessary it is in the Church for the good thereof. For the
better understanding of this Point we must know, that there is a twofold
necessity; one absolute, the other conditional. Absolute, that is, when one
thing is so necessarily required to another, as that it cannot be without it.
Secondly, there is a necessity that is not absolute, but conditional; that
is, when one thing is so necessary to another, as that it cannot well be
without it: of this latter sort, the necessity of this Government in the Church
of God is: for the Church may be without it in some kind of being, but it
cannot have her well-being except this concur. The Point lies fit to be
handled by way of Observation, and therefore so I will deliver it.

The Observation is this, namely; For first, these men must not be such as are
of no Church; for what have we to do with them that are without, or they with
us? Nor secondly, it must not be done by them that are members of another
Church; for what has one Church to do to meddle with another Government,
except it be by advice; or in case of necessity, or in such causes as concern
diverse Churches; but they must be members of the same Church. These are the
parties that may, and must Administer this Government: so that we see, the
Note stands upright, namely, that of necessity there is to be required an
outward form of Government in Gods Church, to be exercised and administered by
men. For the proof of this point, in Romans 12.4, 5, etc. The Apostle compares
the Church to a body, and Professors to parts and members of that body; Now
(says he) every member has not the same office; no, for that were
superfluity, and would breed confusion: but several members are tied to
several offices, for the good of the whole body. Now there the Apostle speaks
of outward government in the Church, as verse 5, etc. and there must be sundry
Offices and Officers to exercise that Government, and who should these be, but
the members of the same body? In the 1 Cor. 12. from the 12. to the 21. verse,
there the Apostle presses the same comparison further, and grows to more
particulars, calling one the eye, another the foot, the hand, the head, etc.
of purpose to show, that as in the body and the parts thereof it is so ordered,
that some are to govern, others to be governed: so it is in the Church, some
must govern, others must be governed; and still understand, that the Apostle
speaks of outward Government in the Church: and that they that govern, must
be members of the same Church, for so the comparison holds, they must be
members of the same body. And this the Apostle does set down generally for a
rule, in the first Epistle of the Corinthians, Chap. 14. verse. 40. Let all
things be done decently and by order: where we see, that the Apostle expressly
commands order in the Church, that is Government: for it is all one for
things to be well ordered, or well governed; and it is intended of outward
businesses in the Church, as verse 26. Where the Apostle speaks of their
coming together; and it is a Charge, Let all things, etc. there is the
necessity of it, and all is imposed upon men, as we see in the 26 verse;
Brethren, when ye come together, etc. ye that are members of the same Church.
And according to this general Rule, so the Apostles carry themselves; the
Apostle writing to Timothy, 1 Timothy 3.14, 15. says, These things write I unto
thee, that thou may know how to behave thy self in the house of God. Now
that which he wrote to him of was, partly of outward Government, as verse 1.
and forward, where he speaks of the Office of a Bishop; and the words in the
fifteenth verse show it plainly; he writes to him that he may know how to
behave himself in the house of God; that is, in the Church of God. But you
will say, he was but a particular man, and therefore what does this concern
the whole Church? I answer, Though it were written particularly to him, yet he
being the chief ouer-seer in that Church, it consequently concerns the whole
Church. And this was so necessary, that he would not respite it till his
coming, though he were to come shortly, but for the more surety he wrote
beforehand, that so the Church might not be destitute of so material an
ornament, as outward Government is: And he charges Timothy most severely in
Chap. 5. verse. 21. and in Chap. 6. verse. 13. and 14. that the same be duly
observed. And so in Tit. 1.5. there the Apostle writing to Titus, that was
Bishop of the Church of Creta; says; For this cause left I thee in Creta, that
thou should continue to redress the things that are amiss, and that thou
should ordain Elders in every City, etc. There by name are two principal
parts of outward Government set down, redressing things that are amiss, and
ordaining elders. And these are imposed upon Titus being Bishop of that Church,
and that of necessity; for he was left there for this very cause. And in the
second and third Chapters of the Revelation, there are directions sent from
heaven to the Angels of the seven Churches, and that for many things that did
concern even the outward, as well as the inward Government of the Churches. If
we look into the estate of the Church from time to time, we shall see that
the practice was answerable, that still of necessity there was outward
Government in the Church. Our Savior while he was upon earth among his
Disciples, how orderly did he govern them? When any thing was amiss amongst
them, how quietly did he order it? How orderly did he send them out to
preach? How carefully did he give them Rules for the outward Government of the
Church for the time to come? So the Church after Christ's ascension, how well
was it ordered and governed? As we may see, Act. 1.13, 14. Where it is said,
that the Apostles continued with one accord, in prayers and supplications with
the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and his Brethren. And Act. 2.42. they
continued in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship, and breaking of bread, and
prayer. And Act. 6.2, 3, etc. When that matter of difference arose concerning
the poor, how wisely did they order it? and chose out men from amongst them
fearing God, for the performance of this business. So here we see how well the
Church was ordered and governed after our Saviors Ascension. See it further
Act. 15.2. and forward; when there arose dissension in the Church about
Circumcision, what did they do? They called the Apostles and Elders together,
and so they ordered what should be done in that business: so here we see is
outward Government still. And so Phil. 1.1. the Apostle writes to the Bishops
and Deacons of that Church, that is, to the Governors of it. So that we see,
that of necessity there is required an outward Government in the Church of God
to be administered by men. And so much for the proof of the point.

Reasons, and that of some sorts.
The Reasons are many and of diverse sorts: some are drawn from the nature of
God; some are drawn by comparison from other Assemblies: the third sort are
drawn from the persons that are to be Governed, and the last sort are drawn
from the Offices, that are to be exercised, and the businesses that are to be
done in the Church.

The first sort of Reasons drawn from the nature and will of God are these:
First, God is the Author, not of confusion, First sort of Reasons.
but of peace, as we see in all the Churches of the Saints, 1. Cor. 14.33. The
Apostle gives all the Churches of the Saints for instance in this point, that
God is the Author of peace in all them; as he commanding it, and they obeying.
Now what peace can there be, or how can it be maintained, but by Government?
therefore wheresoever there is a Church of Saints, there must of necessity be
Government. Again secondly, Holiness becomes Gods House for ever, says the
Psalm. 93.5 but without Government there can be no Holiness, at least in the
outward man; and therefore of necessity outward Government must be in the
Church.

The second sort of Reasons are drawn by comparison from other Assemblies;
Second sort of Reasons.
what Company is there without Government? In heaven there is order and
Government amongst the Saints and Angels themselves: some amongst the Angels
for order sake are above the rest, there are Principalities, and Powers, and
Thrones, etc. I do not say, as the Papists do, that one Angel is above
another in degree, but in order at least; Christ is the Head and governor of
them all, and that personally: so there is a Government in heaven. And as it is
in heaven, so it is in earth; What Company or Corporation either in the City or
Kingdom, is, or can consist without Government? And is not the Church the
Company of Gods Saints (so they are called, Ps. 89.7.) and can that be without
Government? So in an house there can be no peace, nor living together in it
without Government. The Church is the House of God, the City of God, the
Kingdom of his own Son; and therefore there must be of necessity an outward
government in it exercised by men: yea, Hell it self, though it be the place
of all disorder and confusion, yet they have some Government amongst
themselves, else their kingdom cannot stand.

Third sort of Reasons.
The third sort of Reasons are taken from the nature of the persons of whom the
Church consists, and they are men, and therefore to be governed, and that by
men. Some are tractable, and these are gently to be led: others are obstinate,
those are to be drawn with strong hand: some are Nouices, and they are to be
fed with milk; others are of stronger growth, and they are to be fed with
stronger meat: some are out of the Church that must be called in, these are to
be admitted; others are within the Church misdemeaning themselves, these are to
be cast out. Therefore there must be Order and Government in the Church for the
doing of all this.

Fourth sort of Reasons.
Lastly, there must be government in the Church, in respect of the offices and
businesses that are to be done in it; the Word and the Sacraments are outward
things, and therefore are outwardly to be administered: Officers are to be
chosen, Laws to be made, controversies and contentions are to be pacified,
the Sick are to be visited, the Poor are to be relieved, Offenses are to be
punished, and sundry other things are to be done, which without outward
Government it is not possible they should be well done. Therefore of necessity
there must be this outward Government in the Church.

inward man: for the best liberty the outward man can have, is, when it is made
conformable to the ordinances of God, and such wholesome Laws as by his
direction are established; we are free indeed from sin that it should not
reign over us, and we are free from Satan that he cannot condemn us, and we
have a freedom from the Law, that we are not subject to the curse of it: but
yet we are still bound to do that which the Law commands, and so to obey our
Governors, and to submit our selves to outward Government, only we are free
from them in our Consciences, that they should not be Lords over that. Yea, but
say they, we are a Law unto our selves, we need not any Rulers. A proud
allegation from a presumptuous spirit, who is there amongst us that has made
any trial of his heart for obedience to God, but is guilty to himself that he
is dull and backward, and needs reproves, and admonitions, and censures, and
all too little to keep him within the compass of obedience; the humble soul
feels such a rebelliousnesse within it self, that it cries out not to God
only, but to man too; O, I am a miserable sinner! I pray ye look to me,
watch over me, reprove me, exhort me, censure me, terrify me with shame and
punishment for my sins: for my rebellious heart must be so bridled, or else
it will break forth outragiously into sin. We know what the Apostle said of
himself, Romans 7. That he was sold under sin. Therefore this comes from a
proud spirit in them to say, they have no need of Government, because they are
a law unto themselves. We see the inconveniences that it breeds in particular
men; what would the inconvenience be to the whole body, if it were suffered in
general? surely much more: as it was with the Israelites when there was no
King in Israel; so would it be in the Church, if there were no outward
Government, every man would do what he lift.

Secondly, it reproues those that hold Church-gouernment be, say they, and yet
the Church may do well enough. But these are sufficiently disproued by the
former inconveniences that follow where no Government is. And had this been the
mind of Christ and his Apostles, they would never have taken such precise order
for it in every Church. And surely, the Churches that maintain this Doctrine,
are not the Churches of the Saints: for in all the Churches of the Saints, God
is the Author not of confusion, but of peace and order, 1 Cor. 14.33. and so
likewise that particular member that maintains it, is no sound member of Gods
Church.

Five differences betwixt the inward and outward government of the Church.
otherwise we shall run into many absurdities. First, the inward is merely
spiritual, the outward is for the most part bodily, that is, such as affects
the ear, or the eye, or some other parts; only it is thus far spiritual,
in regard of the end it aims at, that is, to make us spiritually minded.
inward. Fifthly, the inward seconds the outward, and (...)
And this is the Brownists exception: You (say they) deny Christ to be your
King, because you own not his Discipline which he has prescribed. I am (...)
the Apostle; Gods Kingdom consists no^ of meats (...) drinks, and of outward
Rites, but of righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost* the
principal part of God Kingdom is, when he rules by his Spirit in the hearts
of his children: and therefore if there were any such Discipline prescribed by
the Word as they pretend, yet we should not lose the one half of Christ's
Kingdom, though it were not observed. Happily it is not known to them that
do not observe it, and then it is no Rebellion; if it be known by them, the
sin is much the greater, if it be not observed. But yet Christ may still
exercise his Kingdom in the hearts of many members of the Church by his
Spirit, though this were wanting. The case may seem to be well paraleld by
our outward and inward worship in prayer: the outward worship is but an
appurtenance to the inward, for the inward may be true without the outward. And
so Discipline is rather an appurtenance to Gods Kingdom, than the Kingdom it
self; so that we see that Gods Church may be without Discipline, though it
cannot be well nor long without it; where outward Government is wanting, the
Church may be defective and maimed, yea half dead in outward show at least,
and yet a true Church still. Ye^, but are not the Word and the Sacraments parts
of the outward Government and they are necessary to the very being of the
Church therefore some part of the outward Government is essential to the
Church. I answer; That they are not necessary to themselves, but by accident,
because they (...) to the inward, as that it cannot be without this. And
besides, the Word and the Sacraments are not so much of the outward Government
of themselves, but rather the carriage and manner of using of them, is of the
outward government. Lastly, I answer, they are simply necessary, as they are
the causes and gathering of the Church, but not as they are parts of outward
government. As Moses his message and gathering of the Israelites to the Lord,
was one thing, his governing of them another. So that the Word and Sacraments
must be considered in both these respects, and so in respect of gathering the
Church, they are simply necessary, not in respect of governing of it. So that
outward Government is not simply necessary to the being of the Church, but to
the well-being only.



Pet. 5.3. where he gives all Ministers charge that they should rule, not as
Lords over Gods heritage, etc. yet the Pope he will be Head and Lord over all
Churches on earth. Yea, but say the Papists, though we say, he is Head of the
Church, yet we mean a ministerial Head, as I have said heretofore, the very
name of the Head of the Church is harsh and dangerous, yet this word
Ministerial qualifies it well, if it be soberly understood, it may agree to a
particular, but never to the general Church over all the World, as the Pope
challenges it. And so much for this point.

The fifteenth Lecture of the Church.
We have already entered into the business concerning Church Government: In
handling whereof we propounded these things in order to discourse upon: First,
of the harms and evils that this matter has occasionally brought forth in
Gods Church: Secondly, what is meant by these words, Church and Government:
Thirdly, how necessary it is in the Church: Fourthly, whether there be any
prescript form of Church-Gouernment for every particular set down in the
Word: Fifthly, if there be not then, what is to be done in this case. Of the
three former we have already heard. Now we are, as God shall enable us, The
fourth thing considerable in Church-gouernment, viz. whether there be any
prescript form of Church Government in every particular set down in the Word.
to speak of the fourth; Whether there be any prescript form of
Church-Gouernement in every particular set down in the Word. It is natural to
every man, when he hears that such a good thing there is, and that it is
behoouefull and necessary to his own use, to have a longing desire after it,
he would then feign know, where it is be to be had, and how he may come by it.
I doubt not but this is your pure mind in this case; you have heard that there
is a Church-gouernment; you have seen also how necessary it is to the
well-being of the whole Church, and the members thereof: Now you would cast
about to see where it is to be had, that so you may be made partakers of it.
For the satisfaction of this your desire; I will propound it here by way of
question; Whether there be any prescript form of Church-gouernment in every
particular to be found in the Word? For if it be found any where, surely it
must be found in the Word. For first, it being Gods own Ordinance as you have
heard, it must have Gods own warrant; and ordinarily there is no warrant from
God but in his Word. Secondly, that which is to be governed, being the Church,
the House of the living God, it must be fashioned to his own mind: for who is
to prescribe Orders for the governing of the House but the Master of the house?
And who shall prescribe Orders for this House, the Church, to be governed by,
but Jesus Christ the Lord and Master of this House. And we cannot know the
mind of the Lord, but by the Spirit of the Lord; and Gods Spirit reueales Gods
mind, only by Gods Word. Therefore we must do in this case, as in all other
doubtful and difficult cases in Religion; Fly to the golden Rule, Isai. 8.20.
To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this Word, it
is because they have no light in them. Gods Word must be consulted withal,
and what that faith, must be embraced: If we have not the light of Gods Word
in it, we are blind and dumb, and no light is in us at all. This Rule of the
Prophet is seconded by our Savior himself, Ioh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures,
etc. they testify of me; not only of the person of Christ, who or what he
is; but of his mind what he would have us to do in all our courses. What the
Scripture says herein, delivered in two positions.
Now what the Scripture says, and what order it takes in this kind, may be
truly and plainly delivered in these two Positions: First, that the whole
substance of Church-gouernment is so set down in Gods Word, as that every
particular Church may receive instruction how to be governed by it. Secondly,
that there is not any one set particular form of Church-Gouernment so set
down in the Scripture, that every Church may receive instruction thereby, how
to be governed in every particular ceremony and discipline. These two
positions being well understood do teach us all things needful to be known
in this point. There may seem to be some contradiction betwixt them; the one
affirming, that there is a form of Church Government set down in the Word;
the other denying it. But this is only in show a Contradiction, and is easily
reconciled by this distinction: It is one thing to speak of the general,
another thing to speak of the particular. The affirmative Position says; That
it is wholly set down there in the general, and partly in the particular. The
negative says; It is not there wholly in every particular. These Positions I
purpose to deliver by way of Observation, that so I may speak the more
plentifully upon them, The first drawn into an Observation.
and that they may be the fitter for your understanding.

I will begin with the first; which is this; namely, Matthew. 28.20. Teaching
them to observe, and do whatsoever I have commanded you. First, we must here
presuppose the necessity of Church-gouernment, as I have taught before: and
secondly, that it is Gods ordinance, as I have also before showed; and then it
must needs follow, that Christ gave it in charge to his Apostles, and so they
taught it, and that not by preaching only, but by writing too: For what they
preached, they writ the substance of it; so that even in their writings at
least the substance of this business is contained: and this is the more
likely, because about that very time, that is, somewhat before his Ascension,
he spoke unto them of the things which appertain to the Kingdom of God, Act.
1.3. which if we understand not of the substance of Gods Kingdom, which is
inward in the hearts of his Children; but of the appurtenances of it, as it
seems to be, then it cannot be fitter applied, than to this matter of
Church-Gouernment: For what does more nearly and properly appertain, or is
annexed to that Kingdom than this? Now the Apostles must teach all that Christ
taught them; but Christ taught them this; therefore they must teach it too; and
that not by preaching only, but by writing too: for what they preached, they
writ the substance of it; therefore there is sufficient matter to be found in
Scripture, to direct every Church in the substance of Church-gouernment. Let us
come somewhat nearer to the point: Ephesians. 4.11, 12. It is there said, that
Christ did therefore give some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors, and Teachers for the repairing of the Saints,
and for the work of the Ministry, and for the edification of the Body of
Christ. Whereby it is plain, that by those which Christ so gave to be
Apostles, etc. there is sufficient direction left, for the edification of the
whole body. Now Government is one special means for edification, yea, and for
the gathering of the Saints, and for the work of the Ministry; and therefore
that is not untaught by them, and so consequently not unwritten at least for
the substance of it. Ad to this that which the Apostle has in 1 Cor. 12.5, 9.
especially in verse. 28. and then it will appear to be clear enough; where the
Apostle tells us of administrations and gifts, and so comes to those that are
endued with those gifts, and that are to exercise them, whereof though some be
temporal, yet others are perpetual: Which if we add to that, Ephesians. 4.11.
then here is sufficient provision ordained of God, and set down in his Word
for every Church to be directed by, for substance of Governors, and
Government. And consider that this is not spoken of the Corinths only, but of
the Church in general; God has ordained some in his Church, etc. that thereby
it might be plain, that it is appliable to every particular Church. The like
place is in Romans 12.7, 8. where the Apostle speaks of Offices in the Church,
and of them that use them. These places then laid together, prove the point.
Let us come to examples of Churches in Scripture, to prove the point further.
We have examples of this in two Churches in Scripture, that were best provided
for in this kind, and that is in the Churches of Corinth and of Ephesus. Take
the Church of Corinth for an example, and see how sufficiently it was provided
for in this kind; and that in most particulars: for they had the Word, and the
Lords Supper, Sects and Offenders were punished, yea, and generally they have
Rules given them for the whole Carriage of Gods worship, as in the 1 Cor. 14.
Consider what Rules of edification and Order he there prescribes, and extends
them to all Churches in their kind; and say then whether all Churches be not
sufficiently provided for in the general, for this matter of
Church-gouernment. See this also in the Church of Ephesus, Act. 20, 28 Consider
the Charge there given to all the Overseers of that Church, that they should
feed the flock, etc. that is, govern them, as well as teach them. Consider
the manifold instructions he gives them there, how they should carry
themselves; and withal consider the particulars he charge Timothy withal in
both his Epistles, for the Government of the Church and say, if this Church
were not sufficiently provided for in this kind. If you yet doubt of it,
believe the Apostle, Act. 20.20. where the Apostle says, that he had kept
nothing back from them, that was profitable: so that if Church-Gouernment be
profitable for them (as surely it is very necessary) then for the substance of
it they were sufficiently instructed. And so it will follow, that all other
Churches must be so too, either more or less, though happily not in that
degree of perfection as these were. And so much for the proof of the point.

The Reasons of it are these First, it is so in matters of substance,

Secondly, it was so in the Jewish Church in the former Testament; God set down
the matter of Church-Gouernment very precisely for the substance of it, and
that in most particulars; and therefore he does so with the Church in the
latter Testament: for must not the Church now be as well provided as then;
surely it must in matters of substance.

Moses being but a Servant, as the Apostle makes the comparison, Heb. 3.4, 5,
6. Or shall we believe, that Christ was not so careful of the whole Church,
as Paul was of Ephesus? But Paul wrote sufficiently to Timothy, how he was to
govern and to behave himself in that Church, 1 Timothy 3.15. therefore Christ
being more faithful than Moses; and more careful of the whole Church, than
Paul was of Ephesus, must needs leave sufficient direction in Scripture how
every Church ought to be governed, at least for the substance of it.



Tim. 3.16, 17. For the whole Scripture is given by inspiration from God, and
is profitable to teach, to convince, to correct, and to instruct in
righteousness. But how far forth is it thus profitable? The Apostle says in
the 17. verse, That the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect to all
good works. That the man of God may be absolute; Who is this man of God?
Surely Timothy, and such as he is, that are in the chiefest place for
Government in Gods Church; and these must be perfect to every good work; and
therefore to this work to govern aright. Therefore, if government be a good
work, and that the Scriptures make the man of God perfect to every good work,
then also it instructs him, and makes him perfect in this good work.

Lastly, the maine business in this matter of Government

The Uses are these: First, here is a Rule for all Churches Moses in building
the Tabernacle, was to do all things according to the pattern which he saw in
the Mount: so must they do every thing in the Government of the Church,
according to the pattern set down in the Scriptures. Two extremes to be
avoided.
And here two extremities are to be avoided, that some have fallen into; First,
perpetual, which is but temporal, as the works of Miracles, etc. these
things have been the occasion of much mischief in the Church of God; and
therefore howsoever the intent of these may be good, yet the event is naught;
as if the event of them be at any time good, yet the practice of them is foul
and naught: for hereby they accuse the Scripture of insufficiency, and Christ
himself of neglect, that he did not, or of want of wisdom, as if he could
not provide sufficiently for his Church.

Secondly, as we must not go too far, so we must take heed that we come not
too short; for that is as great a sin to leave out any thing that God has
prescribed, as to add any thing thereto; to decline from Gods Word either to
the right hand or to the left, is alike sinful; to charge Christ with
superfluity as well as with defect, are alike evil. Thus they err that make
those Offices, or Officers temporal, which Christ has made perpetual to
endure to the worlds end: For this is to charge Christ with superfluity.
Therefore the best and safest course in this business is to do thus: The whole
body of a Church, both Magistrates, Ministers, and people are to consult with
Gods Word, and to entreat God by prayer to open the Scriptures to them, and to
open their understandings, that they may see what is propounded to them therein
in this case, and that they are to embrace, and not wilfully either to take or
refuse any thing, but with submission to receive better advice, if God send it
them; and accordingly they are to proceed, as in Christ's stead, and as if
himself were personally present to direct them what is to be done in this case.

What if I live in a Church where I think their Government is not according to
Gods Word? I answer: First, that though every particular in that Government
cannot be maintained by Gods Word, yet in the general it may be soundly
maintained. Secondly, I say, that except thou can disprove it, on very good
ground out of the word, thou must take it on their words that impose it, and
thou must obey it till thou be better resolved. For this is the Rule
concerning outward Government in the Church, when it is imposed by the
Magistrate, it is not left free to us, either to obey or not to obey; but we
must obey, unless we have a good warrant out of Gods Word against it. But what
if I doubt, must I yet obey, before I am resolved? Yes, though thou doubt of
it, yet thou must obey, except thou can bring some sound proof out of Gods
Word against it, either directly, or by necessary consequence.

our selves into the hands of Satan, if we had not the Rod and Staff of our
blessed Shepherd, his holy Discipline, to guide us in the right way. Lord,
says the Prophet Jeremy, I know it is not in man to direct his own steps. We
may truly apply this speech to the Church: It is not in her to devise her own
Government: If Christ therefore had not provided for her in this case, but had
left her to her self, a thousand to one she had never hit on the right way; or
if she had, she could have had no comfort of conscience in that case, nor hope
of blessing in the course, because still she would have been uncertain and
doubtful, whether it were of God or not. Therefore as it is and must be from
the Lord, so let us bless and praise the Lord our good God, that has so
mercifully and plentifully furnished us in this kind. And so much of the
affirmative point, namely, that the whole substance of Church-gouernment is so
set down in Scripture, that every particular Church may receive instruction
and direction thereby, how they ought to be governed.

Second thing considerable in this fourth point of Church-gouernment, viz. that
there is not any one particular form of Church-gouernment for every
particular, set down in Scripture.
Now I come to the second point; the negative Position, namely, That there is
not any one particular form of Church-Gouernment set down in Scripture, that
every particular Church is precisely bound unto, to observe for ordering every
particular. This being a negative Position as you see, must be content with
negative proofs; for seeing the question is, whether there be such a
Government in Scripture for every particular, or not, and seeing the answer is,
that there is not; no marvel then though there be no direct place to confirm
it. But you will say, that many together will. I say, No, many laid all
together will not: they that pretend there is such a thing, must instance in
some such places in the Word where it is proved; else the contrary is presumed
to be true. And so it follows, that the refutation of such allegations, is the
direct proof of the Position. Therefore for proof of this negative Position;
First, I say, no place of Scripture says, that there is, or prescribes that
there should be such a particular form of Church-Gouernment, etc. for every
part of discipline: nay, nor many places conferred, and laid all together do
not. For matter of substance, and in general, there is proof enough, as we
heard before in the former point, but not for any particular form in every
particular, etc. As there is no place that affirms or prescribes this
particular form of Church-Gouernment: so I say further, there is no example
for it in all the Scripture. There is no question, but that if our Savior, or
his Apostles had intended any such form of Government to be observed in every
particular, either they would have given it in express charge particularly, or
at least there would have been some notorious pattern of it in some Church,
but there is no such in Scripture. To instance in the best Churches, Corinth
and Ephesus were the best provided for in that case; yet these had no
particular form of Church-Gouernment, whereunto they were precisely bound.
First, for Corinth, there was more written to that Church for matter of outward
Government, than to any other Church; yea, almost as much as to all others; yet
it was not provided for in every particular, no, not in regard of it self: in
many particulars it was well provided for, in all it was not by writing, for
some the Apostle respited till his presence, 1 Cor. 11.34. Other things will I
set in order when I come. So then the Church of Corinth was not provided for in
every particular by writing, for her self, much less was it so provided for,
as that every Church should be directed thereby. But you will say, are not the
Church-orders of the Church of Corinth, the Lords own Commandment? 1 Cor.
14.37. Yes; they are to them of that Church, so far as was directly enjoined
them, but not to all Churches else: So likewise for the Church of Ephesus,
though it were then the most famous Church in Asia, and plentifully provided
for that way, yet it was not so provided for, that every Church should be
directed by it; nay, it was not provided for in every particular for it self.
But you will say, are not particulars profitable? If so be they are, then the
Apostle Paul says to the overseers of that Church, Act. 20.20. I have kept
nothing back that was profitable for you; and therefore not those particulars?
I Answer: Surely, particulars are profitable, and therefore this Church had
enough in general, whereby they might frame unto themselves such particulars
as were needful for them: but they had not all particulars, this place proves
the former Position well, that the substance of Church-gouernment is set down
in the Word, wholly in the general, but not in every particular, though they
had some to measure the rest by. Yea (but there is a further matter for
Government in the Church of Ephesus, than in any other Church) for the Apostle
imposes on Timothy a charge of perpetuity, as in 1 Timothy 6.13. I charge thee in
the sight of God, etc. that thou keep the Commandment without spot, until
the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. So then that Government which he
charge him withal, was to be perpetual? I answer, first, that that
Commandment is chiefly, if not only of faith and holiness. Secondly, if it
be understood of Government, yet that was but personal to Timothy, that he
should keep it as much as in him lay; and also it was only for that
particular Church, and for those particular things there commanded (which came
far short of every particular) that they should perpetually be there
observed; this is the charge he gives Timothy. Lastly, I answer; If it be
extended to every particular Church, it must be understood of matters of
substance, which as we have heard, must be perpetual in all Churches. So that
we see there is no proof for this, nor no example in Scripture, nay, there
are examples against it, because we find not the same Government in all
Churches: for some wanted that which others had, and so (by this rule) one of
them should have sinned; as in the Church of Philippi, there are only Bishops
and Deacons named. So that we see there is no particular form of
Church-Gouernment for every particular set down in the Word, for every Church
precisely to be ruled by.

infinite, and still new occasions arising in the Church daily, which if they
were foreseen, yet they could not be written, the world could not contain
the books, as the Evangelist speaks, of the Word and works of our Savior.
What civil Law was there ever, that the best heads have been laid together to
devise, that were sufficient at the first for every particular, but by new
occasions still increased for particular causes? Yea, but though men could not,
yet God could have provided for that? But yet he did not; yea, I say further,
that the Word of God, though it be a most perfect and absolute Law of faith
and life; yet it prescribes not for every particular, what is to be done; but
there are generals from which, and some particulars by which the rest are to
be drawn and measured. That is the first Reason, the impossibility of it.



left in the Word in every particular, whereunto all Churches are to conform.

Act. 6.1. and there was Commandment about it too, as well as about other
offices; as widows; 1 Timothy 5.3. and yet this is not of necessity required in
any reformed Church. So much for the Reasons.

Timothies Bishopric in the Postscript to the second Epistle to Timothy; so
sometime they put in, though not into the Text, yet cunningly they add it, as
in Ephesians. 4.11. where it is said, Pastors and Teachers; they say, and some
Pastors, and some Teachers, to make them a diverse Office: so likewise they
mis-interpret, as in Phil. 1.1. where they will have Bishops to signify
Lay Elders, a thing never heard of that they were called Bishops, and so they
are exceeding unconscionable in handling the Word in this business;

Peter, and from him it came to the Pope, and so it is to contiene for ever;
and therefore (say they) whosoever is not under this head, is no part of Gods
Church. But of all oppositions to this Observation, this has the least color
of truth; and these opposites have least color of Scripture for them of all
other: for besides that there is no precept nor example for it in Scripture,
they are both most directly against it. First, for precept, look in Luke
22.25.26. The Kings of the Gentiles reign over them, etc. but it shall not be
so among you, etc. there is our Saviors precept directly against it. And so
for example, look in Act. 15.13. We shall see that James Bishop of Jerusalem,
moderates the matter in question, and gives sentence in it, which is the Office
of a Bishop, and which Peter should have done, if he had been head of the
whole Church. Besides, what meant Paul to write to Rome, and to Corinth, and
Ephesus, and other Churches, and to prescribe Orders for them; if Peter had
been Head, it had been his Office, and he must have performed it; and if he
were dead, why did not his Successor do it? Likewise when commandment came
from heaven for reformation of the seven Churches in Asia, why were they not
revealed to Peter; or he being dead, to the Pope his Successor, but that they
must be revealed to John in Pathmos; if the Pope had been Head of the Churches,
the Epistles should have been sent by him, or at least by John from him. So
that they have no color for their Government.

Lastly, this reproues those of the Presbytery that say, that their Government
and their Rulers which they require are plainly set down in the Word, and is
an ordinance of God to endure for ever. Yet this is not sufficiently furnished
in every particular: for first, they are not certain whether the Office of a
Pastor and Teacher be diverse; or if they be so, then secondly, they know not
whether they may not be in one and the same person: thirdly, whether of
necessity all these must be in every particular Congregation, so that it does
not suffice that they be in some parts of the Church where most need is. And
lastly, the Christian Magistrate who has a chief stroke in Government, they
speak nothing of him; neither do they interpret any of those places, where
the Apostle speaks of Rulers, of the Christian Magistrate, though I am verily
persuaded, that it is to be understood of them: And therefore they err in
these particulars. And so we see that there is not any one particular form of
Church-gouernment set down in Scripture which every particular Church is
precisely bound to observe, as prescribing to it every particular in Government.

The sixteenth Lecture of the Church.
Having propounded five principal heads to be treated upon touching
Church-gouernment, as namely, First, the harms and evils that this matter has
occasioned in Gods Church. Secondly, what is meant by these words Church and
Government. Thirdly, how necessary it is in Gods Church. Fourthly, whether
there be any prescript Rule in Gods Word for it. And lastly, if there be not,
then what is to be done in that case? I have proceeded in the four former, as
God has enabled me: The fifth thing considerable in Church-gouernment.
Now I come to speak of the fifth, namely; That if God has not ordained any
prescript form in his Word for every particular in government, then what is
to be done in this case? The Resolution whereof it is to be fetched from that
which has been formerly spoken. For whereas every particular Church must have
her particular government, and the Word has not prescribed any one set form
for all Churches to observe in every particular, as I have showed in the
second Observation of the former Lecture: Therefore every particular Church,
out of their own power and wisdom, and being guided by the general form
set down in the Scriptures, as often as necessity requires, must make the best
supply and provision for themselves herein that they can: howbeit, because the
whole substance of Church-gouernment is set down in the Word, etc. as I showed
in the first Observation of the former Lecture; Therefore the Church must not
be presumptuous and licentious, as if it were arbitrary, and as if they might
ordain and do what they list: But they must carefully see that whatsoever
provision they make in this kind, be such as may well stand with those
general rules and directions which the word affords: I take not upon me here
to define what is prescribed in Gods word; what not; this is a hard task, too
curious for me, and too tedious for you; That is left to the inquiry of the
particular Churches, every one for it self; and the promise of the Spirit to
lead the Church into all Truth of special use for this purpose, both to
instruct the Church what is prescribed, and what is not; as also to help and
direct them what to take, and what to leave, and how to behave themselves in
such cases of Government, wherein they are destitute of particular warrant for
each particular case from the word: yet because I would feign inform you
thoroughly of the whole business, so far as is needful to know, I will (God
willing) enlarge my discourse farther than I thought to have done, and labor
to rip it up from the very bottom.

The whole form of Church-gouernment consists of three principals.
The whole form of Church-gouernment (as I conceive) consists of three
principalls or Pillars (as I may call them;) First, of some Actions and duties
to be performed in the Church; Secondly, of some Persons or Officers that are
to perform these duties in the Church; And thirdly, of some Laws and rules
that these persons are to be directed by, in the execution of these actions and
duties which are to be done in the Church. And if once you can tell these
things; first, what is to be done in Church-Gouernment; secondly, by whom it
must be done; and thirdly, how and after what manner, and upon what ground,
and with what Conditions they are to be done; you may sit down well satisfied
and resolved in this point. In the handling of all these points I shall be in
danger, either to be too intricate, or too tedious; too intricate, if I should
handle them jointly, all together; or too tedious, if I should frame a several
discourse for each particular by it self: To prevent both, I will first propound
them all in a general view by themselves; and then I will instance in two or
three particular duties, fitting them with their Officers and Laws; that so
any man of understanding may learn thereby to do the like in all the rest.

First, First, the duty: or actions to be done in Church-gouernment, and they
are six principal.
we will begin with the Duties or Actions to be done in Church-Gouernment;
happily I shall not touch them all, but I will labor to touch the chief and
principal, and those to which all the rest may be referred. The principal
Duties are these: First, Order must be taken that the Word and Sacraments, and
Prayers be had in the Church. Secondly, there must be election of Officers
from time to time, as occasion shall require. Thirdly, Duties of Charity must
be carefully and religiously practiced. Fourthly, censures and proceedings
against Offenders must be executed. Fifthly, order must be taken for calling
public Assemblies. Lastly, order must be taken for the oversight of all these
things.

Vid. separat. s^bis^. 137.
For as the Word is to beget faith; so the Sacraments, as seals and pledges,
accompany it, for the more palpable Assurance of ou^ increasing in it: and
Prayer is to be joined with them both, that they may be effectual and
powerful for edification. First, for the Word, order must be taken that it
may be had in the Church: first, the Canonical books of the old and new
Testament must be extant. And how must they be extant? Surely in their own
original languages, because if there be any corruption in the Translation,
we may run to the Original, so that it must be had in the original
languages. And in what Copies? Surely the best that be to be had. But what
then, every one cannot understand these languages, they may be in a Nation
whose language is not the Mother Tongue; What must be done then? Surely we
must get the most faithful and best Translations that are; and when they are
got, what must the Church see to be done with them? First, some of these
Copies must be laid up in a safe and secret place, that if Desolation should
come, yet the written Word may be preserved: so the book of the Law, 2 Chronicles.
34.14. which was thought to be written by Moses own hand, was found in a
secret place, where no doubt it had been laid up by Gods special providence to
be preserved from that common hauock which was in the Land; so that some
Copies must be laid up in safe and secret places. Yea, but that is not enough,
but there must be some extant in places of public and religious Assemblies,
as it may seem to be in our Saviors time, Luke 4.16, 17. where our Savior
coming into the Temple, there was a book of the Prophecy of Isaiah delivered
to him: So that they must be extant in the public Assemblies. And how must
they be extant there? Not as dumb shows, but as the lively voice of God to
be read openly; so was the case, Act. 13.27. The word of the Prophets were
read every Sabbath Day. And not only so, but it must be preached too; that is,
conscionably expounded and applied: So you may read, Act. 13.15. that there
were Lectures of the Law and of the Prophets. And that the Ruler of the
Synagogue sent to Paul and Barnabas, saying, That if they had any word of
exhortation, they should say on. And this is our Saviors charge, Mark. 16.15.
Go preach the Gospel to every Creature. And so it is the Apostles charge to
Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.2. Preach the Word, be instant, etc. And this is so
necessary, as that it is the power of God to salvation, Romans 1.16. we cannot
be saved without it. And it is impossible we should believe without the
preaching of the Word: How shall they believe in him of whom they have not
heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? Romans 10.14. And this was
the practice both of Christ, and of his Apostles; they preached the Word. And as
the Word must be taught, so it must be heard, understood, and obeyed;
therefore our Savior says, Luke 11.28. Blessed are they that hear the Word
of God and keep it. And therefore the Apostle, Colos. 3.16. says, Let the
Word of God dwell in you plenteously: he uses a very elegant Speech, as if
he should say; Let it not come as a Stranger, to tarry with you for a little
while, but let it dwell with you, etc. And as it must be heard and obeyed, so
it must be diligently conferred upon; that is it which is commended in the men
of Berea, Act. 17.11. that they searched the Scriptures, to try whether the
things were so that Paul taught them. So there must be care had for the Word
we see. Secondly, there must be care had for the Sacraments: first, that they
be used, and none other, which Christ instituted; and secondly, that they be
administered in the same manner that our Savior did administer them; so it is
commanded, Matthew. 28.19. Go teach all nations, baptizing them, etc. there is
the Sacrament of Baptism enjoined; and in the 1 Cor. 11.23. there is the Lords
Supper; and the practice of them appears in both the Epistles to the
Corinthians, and by name for the Lords Supper in that first Epistle cha. 11. v.
25. where the Apostle delivers not only the substance of it, but in some
measure the circumstances of it also. Lastly, the Duty of Prayer, that must be
had in the Church, that prayers must be publicly made in the Church: we have
the exhortation of the Apostle to it, 1 Timothy 3.1. I exhort, that first of all
Prayers be made for all men etc. where he intends it of public Prayer, and
exhorts to it as to a chief duty, I exhort, that first of all prayers be
made, etc. and so in the 1 Cor. 14.16. And the practice of the Apostles is
answerable to this Act. 1.14. after Christ's assension, they continued with one
accord in prayer, etc. So you see how that in well-gouerned Churches, the Word,
and Sacraments, and Prayer are to be had and used. We have an example for all
these together, Act. 2 41, 42. where it is said, That they which gladly
received the Word were baptized, and they continued in the Apostles Doctrine,
and fellowship, and breaking of Bread and Prayer. So there was the Word, and
the Sacraments, and Prayer. Here many good and profitable observations might
be had, but they are here only handled as by the way, and we have handled
some of them before in the marks and notes of a true visible Church; and the
maine thing in them rests to be handled in the instances when we come to
them. So much for the first point, that the Word and the Sacraments, and Prayer
must be had in the Church.

The second duties to be done. Vid. Zegred. 120.
The second point is election of Officers from time to time as occasion
requires, this must be had too: for a duty to be performed necessarily
requires an Officer to perform it. And the Duties being of sundry kinds, so
must the Officers be too that manage them, else there would be disorder and
confusion; and none must intrude or thrust themselves into such places of their
own heads, for that were intolerable presumption, Heb. 5.4. No man takes this
honor to himself unless he be chosen of God as Aaron was: there is no
warrant of Conscience, either in them that thus intrude to execute such
offices, nor in others to obey, nor no hope of blessing by either: Therefore
there must be election of Officers in the Church, that is, there must be a
lawful Assignment of such men to such Offices. When a Church is first planted,
it is one of their first Duties, to proceed to the election of Officers, as
Act. 14.23. They ordained them Elders in every Church by election. And so in
Titus 1.5. Titus was left in Crete, when the Church was first planted, to
ordain Elders in every City. Again, as there must be election of Officers
when the Church is first planted; so there must be election for the supply of
Officers, when any are displaced, either by death, or for their misdemeanor,
others must be placed in their rooms by election. And thus did the Apostles
when Judas was fallen away, they fell to election by lot, for another to supply
his room, Act. 1.21. Again, when the Church of God is increast, and when by
multitude of business, those that are Officers have as much already to do, as
they can turn their hands to, other Officers are to be added by election. And
this was the case, Act. 6.2, 3. When the multitude of Disciples grew, there was
a murmuring because the widows of the Grecians were neglected in the daily
ministration. Now the Apostles had greater matters in hand, and therefore it
was unmeet for them to tend to it; therefore said they, Choose you out seven men
from among you, etc. And so when the people of Israel were increased, and that
Moses knew not what to do, Exodus 18.21, 22. Iethro his Father in Law gave him
counsel to choose other Officers to assist him, and so he did. So that election
of Officers is a needful duty in the Church. Now as this must be done in
regard of all Officers, so especially there must be election of Ministers,
such as labor in the Word and Doctrine, as they having the chief business to
deal in: and their election consists chiefly in two things; Ordination and
Assignation to some particular place.

First, Ordination, that is an Action whereby men are separated to the work of
the Ministry, and whereby they are enabled to do some things, which they
could not do before, as in the power and use of the Keys to bind and loose;
and some other things they may do lawfully now, which they were able to do
before, but not lawfully, as to preach and to administer the Sacraments, etc.
these depending upon lawful Ordination; such an Ordination we find, Act. 13.2,
3. where Paul and Barnabas were separated to the work of the Ministry, but not
assigned to any one particular place. And in the 1 Timothy 4.4. where the Apostle
says to Timothy, Despise not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by
Prophecy, and the laying on of the hands of the Company of the Presbytery:
where the Apostle speaks of his Ordination, before he came to be assigned to a
particular place: for as yet he had no certain Charge till he came to Ephesus,
and the Apostle speaks as of a thing done before: that is for Ordination.

In the second place we come to the appointment of them to some particular
place, where they may exercise their gifts, and to perform the work of their
Ministry, whereby there is a mutual reference betwixt the Minister, and those
whom he is set over, he being their Pastor, and they being his Flock. And so
the Apostle left Titus in Crete, that he might ordain Elders in every City,
Tit. 1.5. that is, that he might ordain them, and appoint them in every City;
for both these usually do, and should go together, that is Ordination and
appointment to some particular place, specially amongst us, though in the
Apostles times, there were Ministers at large: but this is not good amongst us,
we have no such large Commission as the Apostles had, but we must have
reference to a certain people, and to a certain place. And so Act. 14.23.
They ordained Elders by election in every Church: there they did ordain
Ministers, and appoint them to a certain place. And surely, whatsoever is
rightly done in this kind, the Lord himself acknowledges for his own handy
work, Act. 20.28. Take heed to the Flock over which the holy Ghost has made
you overseers, etc. I speak all this while of the outward calling only, for
that is in the power of the Church; the inward is merely, and immediately from
God. The Church is to try and examine the inward too by the proof of their
gifts, and by charging them in the sight of God to speak the truth herein,
whether they find that Gods Spirit has made them willing and able for the
Ministry, but to confer it on them they cannot. So much for the second
point, election of Officers.

The third sort of duties to be done.
The third point is the duties of charity and mercy, they are to be done in the
Church, next to the duties of piety to God; the duties of mercy and charity
are most carefully to be performed, and to be provided for in the Churches of
Christ. I speak not so much of spiritual duties of charity, concerning
spiritual distresses, as to comfort the wounded conscience, to bear with the
weak, to have compassion on our Brethrens infirmities; but chiefly of outward
bodily charity, which concerns the outward state of our Brethren; as first,
the sick must be visited; secondly, the dead must be bu^ied; thirdly, the
needy must be relieved; fourthly, the Ministers must be maintained. In these
four consist all the duties of mercy and charity to be done in the Church.
First, the sick are to be visited, the Text is clear for this in Iam. 5.14.
If any man be sick, let them call for the Elders of the Church, etc. And this
must not be done for fashion sake after a civil manner, but for conscience
sake, after a religious and Christian manner we must pray with them and for
them for their recovery, and for a speedy and comfortable end; we must offer
our service to them for any good office in that necessity; we must comfort and
encourage them against the terrors and pangs of death; we must stir them up
to put their house, especially their souls in order. Thus we must labor every
way to fit them for the time of their dissolution: thus we must visit the
sick. Secondly, the dead are to be buried; this is commended for a good work
of mercy by Christ's own words, Mark. 14.6, 8. when the Woman powered the box
of Ointment on his head, some murmured at it, but our Savior says, She has
wrought a good work on me, for she is come aforehand to anoint my Body to
the Burial: so he approues Burial for a good work.

And seeing that Sepulchers and Burials are monuments of our Resurrection (for
that was the first and true use of them amongst the faithful) where should
this be practiced more than in the Churches of God, where the Resurrection is
most and best taught and believed. Thirdly, the needy are to be relieved, the
naked must be clothed, the hungry must be fed, etc. and this duty consists of
two branches, collection and distribution. First, there must be collection; so
the Apostle inioynes, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. That every first day of the week every
man must put aside something for the relief of the Saints: then it must be
collected and gathered, and so much put into the Treasury, and that was the use
of the Treasury in Mark. 12.45 to put in that which was collected. Secondly,
there must be distribution, as Romans 12.8. He that distributeth, let him do it
with simplicity; and verse. 13. distributing to the necessity of the Saints.
Heb. 13.16. to do good, and to distribute forget not, etc. and this may be
done either by their own hands, or others; and that not to their own Churches
alone, but to others too; if they want and these abound, Romans 12.26. so that
that which is collected, must not be kept, but after collection, there must be
distribution, and in these two offices consists the relieuing of the needy. The
fourth duty of mercy is this, the Ministers must be manifested; this is the
Apostle means in the 1 Timothy 5.17. where he says, that he that rules well is
worthy of double honor, specially he that labors in the Word and Doctrine:
where at least double honor is taken for the honor of maintenance; and the
Text is clear for it by that which follows, where he says, Thou shall not
mussell the mouth of the Ox that treads forth the Corn: and this must not
be done with a sparing hand, but as the Apostle commands it in Galat. 6.6. Let
him that is taught in the Word, make him that has taught him partaker of all
his goods. Let him think nothing too dear for him. And this is not grounded
on the law of love only but even upon the law of reason too: for so the
Apostle in the 1 Cor. 9.11. shows, that in reason if they minister to us
spiritual things, it is no great matter if they reap our carnal things. It
is true, that rather than the Minister should be burdensome to the Church, he
is to labor with his own hands to satisfy his necessity: but yet when there
is a competent state in the people, they are to ease him of that labor, and of
their estates to relieve his wants, as the Philippians did by the Apostle Paul,
Phil. 4.10, 11. where the Apostle rejoices for the care which they had in
ministering to him. And surely the people lose nothing by this; for when the
Ministers are thus provided for, they give themselves wholly to their callings
without let, to study for the good of the people, whereas else they be driven
to provide for themselves, it will be with them as it was with the Israelites
under the hands of the cruel Taskmasters in Egypt, they must be seeking straw
while they should be making brick to build withal; they must be seeking after
the pelf of this world, while they should be building Gods house. And they
that neglect this duty, are empty of all Religion, both for piety to God whose
Ministers they are, and for charity to themselves and their brethren, because
they do not strain themselves to relieve the wants of such as by Gods
Ordinance they are most bound unto, and which do spend themselves and their
time for others good and salvation. So much of the third point, for duties and
works of mercy and charity.

The fourth point is the censures of the Church, The fourth sort of works to
be done. Church censures.
the proceeding against offenders. For seeing in all Churches there are still
some that walk inordinately, some course of necessity must be taken against
them, that the Church may be disburdened, either of their persons, or of their
sins. And hence it is, that our Savior himself takes precise order for this
matter, Matthew. 18.15, etc. And the Apostle charge this Duty on the
Thessalonians with great authority, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. We warn you brethren in the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you withdraw your selves from every Brother
that walks inordinately. And he is grievously offended with the Corinthians,
that they did not proceed accordingly with all severity against the incestuous
Person, 1 Cor. 55. And the Reasons for such proceedings are very weighty.
Reasons of this.
First, no Government, I say, not only can be good, but can Cor. 5.6. A little
leaven leaueneth the whole l^mpe: therefore the old and sour leaven is to be
purged forth. Fourthly, in regard of the offender Cor. 5.5. But if he continue
obstinate, his punishment here is but the beginning of his tormented State in
hell, and the decreee of Gods Reprobation is begun to be executed upon him,
and so the Lord is glorified in judgment in the midst of his Church, in the
confusion of his enemies.

Now these proceedings consist in many particulars; for the Church is
merciful, even as their heavenly Father is merciful, they delight not in the
death of sinners, but rather that they should be converted, and live; and
therefore they attempt all means of cure first, before they proceed in cutting
off. How to proceed ^^ this.
And yet they are just too, as God their Father is just, and therefore when
gracious and mild means Matthew. 18.15, 16. Secondly, if he will not hear,
complaint must be made to the Church, as in verse. 17. which (as I take it) is
that noting out by Letter, which the Apostle speaks These. 2.14. Thirdly,
consequently if he will not hear the Church, separate from him, have no
Company with him, as the Apostle speaks in that 2 These. 3.14. And this is it
also which the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 5.9. I wrote unto you that you should not
company with fornicators, this is a suspending of them for a time from the
Sacraments, and from Communion in holy things, till the Church had trial
whether thereby they would be brought to Repentance. Fourthly, if this will
not prevail, what must be done then? Cor. 5.5. and 1 Timothy 1.20. and that which
the Church does in this case; the Lord ratifies in heaven, Matthew. 18.18.
Whosoever they bind on earth, is bound in heaven; yet so too, that upon his
Repentance, they can, and must, and do most willingly loose them from those
bands of Satan, wherein they wrapped him before. This is a most serious and
weighty duty to be performed in the Church of God: but how grievously it is
both neglected and abused, it is a shame to speak of, that any that profess
themselves to be of the Church of God, and have power in their hands to
execute these censures, should yet neglect them; (these being the only means
to reclaim or cast off the obstinate, when imprisonment and all other ways
will not serve). So also it is abused by those upon whom it is inflicted, they
deriding it, and making but a jest of it, as if they were never the further
from heaven for all that: and surely it may be they are not, because they were
never near it. Well, whosoever they be that abuse it, let them know that it is
Gods own precious and holy Ordinance, and therefore not to be dallied in, nor
basely esteemed; yea, it is Gods own work and doing, where it is lawfully
proceeded in, and it is ratified by him in heaven; and where it is abused, God
will be avenged on the abusers to the full. It is true, that the Curse
causeless, as Solomon speaks, is like the flying of a Bird in the Air, it
leaves no impression behind it; and in this case God derides it from heaven,
and it is their fearful sin that inflict it. But when it is justly
suffered, it is the heauiest stroke that can light upon man in this life,
either from God or man. The sword of the Magistrate is nothing to this, that
only depriving us of temporal life, this of eternal life: a wounded
Conscience (which is an intolerable Burden to them that have ^el^ it) is
nothing to this: For a man sometimes in that case can pray for himself, or if
he cannot pray for himself, yet he may and must, and is prayed for by the
Congregation. These are neither in case to pray for themselves, nor must they
be prayed for by the Saints, 1 Ioh. 5.16. because now, for ought we can see,
he is quite cut off from God our Father: nothing can match this state but
hell, this being the Porch, that the House; this the Mouth, that the Body; this
the very brinke, that the eternal Pit of utter desolation. I herefore we are
to bewail the misery of our times, wherein so precious an ordinance of God as
this is, is so abused; and we are to pray unto God that this Ordinance of his
may take effect amongst us, this being an excellent Ordinance of God to
reclaim offenders, when neither the Sword of the Magistrate, nor any other
means could reclaim them. And so much of the fourth Duty.

The fifth duty is calling of public assemblies; The (...) duty^
they must be called: For matters are not to be carried in the Church by one
man's direction alone, but by the Common consent of the whole; and consent is
not to be fetched from house to house, of every man by himself, for that
course is subject to fraud, but Assistants are to be called, parties are to
be warned to be there, and so publicly to testify their own consent, and
our Savior has promised his presence and assistance in such cases, Matthew.
18.19, 20. Now these Assemblies are sometimes greater, as of a Diocese or
Province, sometimes smaller, as of a Parish. Again, some are ordinary, upon
ordinary occasions; and, as extraordinary occasions do often fall out, some are
extraordinary. An assembling together for ordinary occasions and duties, they
are for the most part these; First, the preaching of the Word, the
administration of the Sacraments and Prayer. 1 Cor. 11.20. When ye come
together into one place; this is not to eat the Lords Supper. And 1 Cor.
14.26. What is to be done, Brethren, when ye come together, according as
every one of you has a Psalm or a Doctrine, etc. So that there must be
public Assemblies for these duties. Secondly, there must be a calling of
public Assemblies for the election of officers; for this cause the multitude
were called together, Act. 6.2. Thirdly, there must be a public meeting for
Alms, for the collecting and distributing to the Saints, so the Apostle
commands 1 Cor. 16.3, 4. Lastly, there must be ordinary public Assemblies,
for the execution of Church censures, as 1 Cor. 5.4. When ye are gathered
together, and my Spirit with you, etc. So there must be public meetings upon
extraordinary occasions; sometimes God testifies extraordinary mercies, and
gives extraordinary blessings to his Church, and then there must be an
extraordinary assembly of the Church to give public thanks to God, as it was
in Hester. 9.22. Secondly, some heavy judgments are either felt or feared to
come upon the Church, and then the Church must assemble together for fasting
and prayer, as it is commanded, Joel 2.15, 16. And we see the practice of it
in the Ninevites, Jonah 3.5. where they proclaimed a Fast upon Jonas preaching
of destruction to come upon them. Thirdly, Laws and Decrees are to be made or
revived for the carriage of Gods worship, or such like, and so in Act. 15. the
Church came together for the decreeing of matters concerning ceremonies. And
Act. 16.4. they delivered those decrees for the Churches to keep, then there
must be an assembling for the receiving of them. Lastly, doubts and
controversies are to be decided; therefore there must be public Assemblies
for the deciding of them. So Paul was sent up to Jerusalem, Act. 15.1, 2, etc.
about doubts that did arise; and what did they there, the Apostles and Elders
came together to look to this matter, verse. 6. So much of the fifth Duty.

The sixth Duty is ouer-sight, The sixth duty.
that all these things may be duly and rightly done; this Duty is as needful
as the rest: For we know that every thing grows out of frame in time, except
they be vpheld and renewed by continual ouer-sight and looking into; and
therefore it is said, Act. 15.6. that the Apostles and Elders came together to
look into the matter. This is one most necessary Duty; for it is the keeper
and maintainer of all the rest; if this be neglected, all the rest will fail;
we know concerning our own bodies, that if we look not to our selves in our
diet, all will be soon out of frame, and much more in our souls, for who
finds not by experience, that though he labor to set himself never so well
in frame in the morning, yet before night for want of ouer-sight, the Soul will
be much out of Order; and were it not for this careful oversight our Souls
would be grown over with sins, as the Fields are with weeds: so would it
be likewise with the Church. Now for this matter of oversight, first, it must
be ordered, that things once ordained be established by authority, and if it
be possible by the authority of the Christian Magistrate, at least of the
Church. Thus Josiah made a Covenant with God, and established it by his
authority, and made all the people stand to it, 1 Chronicles. 34.32. And so the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.37. establishes those things which he had ordained in the
Church by the authority of his Apostleship; If any man (says he) be
spiritual, let him acknowledge, that the things which I write unto you are of
the Lord. And if things be not thus established, civil men will not regard
them. Secondly, every man must be quickened up, and encouraged to the
performance of this duty, and therefore there must be over sight in the
Church. Thus Josiah encouraged the Priests to the service of the Lord, 2 Chronicles.
35.2. and so Paul quickened up Timothy to the observation of his duty, 1 Timothy
5.21. I charge thee in the sight of God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the
elect Angels that thou observe these things. And so the Lord incourageth the
Church of Smyrna, Revel. 2.10. against her sufferings; Fear none of those
things (says he) which thou shall suffer, etc. but be faithful unto the
death, and I will give thee the Crown of life. Thirdly, there must be
ouer-sight, that well-doers may be commended and approved: so the Apostle
Peter commends them to whom he wrote 2 Pet 1.19. for doing well, in that they
did take heed unto the words of the Prophets, etc. And in the second and third
Chapters of the Revelation, there is never a Church that had any good thing in
it, but our Savior commends them for it, and the want of this duty is a great
dismaying to religious proceedings amongst us. Fourthly, things must be
redressed, therefore there must be ouer-sight in the Church, and so Paul left
Titus in Creta to redress those things that were amiss, Titus 1 5. And so our
Savior in Revel. 2.5. labors to reform the Church of Ephesus; Remember from
whence thou art fallen, and repent, etc. And likewise the Church of Sardi,
Revel. 3.2.

The last duty in the matter of ouer-sight is this; that if we cannot reform
and redress those things that are amiss, then we must make open protestation
against their failings, ^s the Apostle did, 1 Cor. 5.6. with sharp
denuntiations and threatenings of Gods Judgments against the^, if they reform
not: so our Savior threatens the Church of Ephesus, Revel. 2 5. That if she
will not repent, he will come against her shortly and remove her Candlestick,
etc. and the Church of Pergamus in the sixteenth verse, Repent thy self, or
else I will come against thee shortly, and will fight against thee with the
sword of my mouth. So if I live in a Church that will not reform the things
amiss, if my place afford it me, I will make open protestation against them;
and if that will not prevail, I will sharply denounce the judgments of God
against them, and so I shall have peace in discharging my Conscience. And so
much for the last Duty to be performed in the Church, namely, ouer-sight.

The seventeenth Lecture of the Church.
COncerning the matter of Church-Gouernment I showed you in the last exercise,
that the whole frame of it did consist of three Principles; First, of some
actions and duties to be done in the Church; secondly, of some Officers or
Persons that must do them: Thirdly, of certain Rules and directions, whereby
those Persons are to be guided in doing those duties. Of the first of these
three, namely, The second principle whereupon Church-gouernment consists,
viz. the Persons or Officers that are to perform this duty.
of the Actions and Duties to be done in the Church we have spoken already in
the last Exercise. Now we are to speak of the second point, as God shall
assist us, namely, of the Persons or Officers that are to perform these
Duties: For every Duty to be performed in the Church does of necessity require
some Person or Officer for to perform it. Now every member of the Church is
not presently an Officer of the Church, but first a man must be a member, and
afterward as his fitness is, he is to be made an Officer; neither yet is
every Officer to manage every duty, but several duties are to be matched with
several Officers; and every Officer is to be confined to that particular
Duty, which he is appointed unto.

If you ask me, generally
First, I answer in general, that these officers must have two things: first,
they must be qualified with a competent measure of gifts, fit for such offices;
Church Officers must have two things: First, they must be qualified with a
competent measure of gifts.
secondly, they must be appointed to such offices, by the order and authority
of the Church wherein they live. First, they must be qualified with a competent
measure of gifts fit for such offices: for such is the admirable wisdom of
God, that as he has ordained diverse administrations (that is to say, duties)
to be done in the Church; so proportionably he has given diverse gifts, that
is, enablements for the administration of such duties. And these gifts he has
not heaped up all together upon one man, for one man is not able to receive
them all, at least not to use and weeld them all, but has distributed some to
one man, and some unto another, to every one severally as himself pleases. So
the Apostle delivers the matter very plainly and pithily in the 1 Cor. 12.4.
to the eleventh verse, where he speaks of administrations, gifts, and
offices; and says, that one and the same Spirit distributeth to every man
severally, as he will. And these three have both a mutual correspondency too,
and a dependency in Nature with each other, and are inseparably joined
together: administrations require gifts, gifts require officers, and officers
require administrations; yea, administrations require not gifts only
wherewith, but officers also by whom they are to be executed: and gifts require
not officers alone by whom, but administrations also whereupon they are to be
employed: and officers require not only administrations which they are to
execute, but gifts also whereby they are enabled to execute them.
Administrations without answerable gifts and officers are but dead matters,
there is no life in them. Gifts without officers and administrations
answerable, are idle things, there is no profit in them. And so officers
without administrations and gifts are mere shadows and shows, no truth nor
substance is in them: So that these three are inseparably joined together. And
hence it is, that whatsoever duty the Lord would have to succeed happily, still
through the whole book of God, we shall find that he matcheth that duty with
gifts and officers accordingly. This we may see in the twenty five, and twenty
six, and so to the thirtieth Chapter of Exodus, there was a Tabernacle to be
built, and an Altar, and an Arc to be made; here is the administration: then
look in the 31. Chapter, second and third verses, and we shall see, that
there were presently gifts and officers fitted thereto. In the second verse
there was Bezaleel, whom God had called by name for that work: and in the
third verse there were gifts too, Whom I have filled with the Spirit of God in
wisdom, etc. So likewise in Matthew. 9.37. and chap. 10.1, 2. In the ninth
Chapter, verse. 37. our Savior says, The harvest is great, etc. here is the
administration, the preaching of the Gospel: and in the tenth Chapter, the
first and second verses, there are gifts and offices suited thereto; for Christ
calls his Disciples, and gives them gifts for this purpose. That may suffice
for the first point.

Secondly, Secondly, they must be lawfully appointed to such offices.
they must lawfully be appointed to such offices by the authority and orders
of the Church wherein they live; Tit. 1.5. the Apostle says to Titus, that he
left him in Crete to ordain Elders, etc. I have appointed thee (says he;) he
was not to do these things of himself, but according to the Orders
established by Paul in that place. And there is great reason for it: for
wheresoever an officer is thrust on a people against, or besides their Orders
or Customs, it breeds in the people discontent against him, and makes, that
neither he nor his service is well accepted of them. But what if we live in a
Church where the Government and Orders are corrupt? I answer: It were for to
be wished, that in all places officers might be made after the best and
purest manner: but when we live in places where we cannot be served with the
best and finest, we must be served with courser, we can have no better than
the place will yield. Therefore if an officer be appointed, after the usual
Orders and Customs of the Church, though somewhat corrupt, if withal he be
qualified with some competent measure of gifts, this suffices to make him a
lawful officer to them, and so he is to be accepted and esteemed. And that
these two are most necessary, as none being a lawful officer ordinarily that
has not both; and most sufficient, as that whosoever has these is a lawful
officer, appears by these Reasons: First, that which a man is lawfully seized
on, he must have both right to, and possession in. When God gives a man gifts,
he has a possible right; and when he is appointed by the Authority and Orders
of the Church, that gives him actual possession. Secondly, every such officer
is an officer both for God and for men, and therefore he must be invested by
each; Man inuests him by appointment, God inuests him when he is qualified by
himself, and appointed by man according to Gods ordinance. So much for the
first general answer, that officers in the Church must be men qualified with
a competent measure of gifts. Secondly, that they must be appointed thereto by
the Authority and Orders of the Church wherein they live.

Particularly, What these Officers are.
Now I come to answer particularly, and by name to the Question, namely, what
these officers are. It were too great a labor, and yet to no great purpose, to
reckon up all particular officers, that have had to do in Church businesses;
for besides the ordinary, there have been many extraordinary. Some in our
Saviors time, and the Age next succeeding: as Apostles that were to teach at
large through the whole world, Matthew. 28.19, etc. and Prophets to foresee and
foreshew things to come, as Agabus, Act. 11. and Evangelists to be Assistants
to the Apostles. Others there were also in many Ages after, as Exorcists,
Doore-keepers, Acolutiues, and Readers, etc. but whether these were in,
rightfully or wrongfully, is to be seen hereafter. In the mean time we will
speak of such officers as were of ordinary and necessary use in the Church,
either such as were indeed, or else are pretended so to be on probable and
plausible grounds. We will begin with the officers of the Ministry, as that
being the principal duty, and so they the principal Church Officers in the
most strait and proper sense. We will take them in their orders: first, we will
begin with Bishops: secondly, we will come to Presbyters, then to Doctors, then
to governing Elders, then to Deacons, then to Widows, then to other
Assistants: lastly, we will come to speak of the Christian Magistrate.

First, we will begin with Bishops; and first, First, Bishops. First, their
name.
we will speak of their name; secondly, of their office. First, of their
name. Bishop is as much to say, as an Ouerseer in the Original; and it is
attributed unto them by a kind of excellency: for there are many Ouer-seers,
but these are the chief (in the Scripture sense) that are, and these are
Ouer-seers by a kind of excellency, whether we respect the persons they
ouer-see, or whether we respect their designement to that office, or whether
we respect the work they do. First, if we respect the persons they ouer-see,
they are ouer-seers by a kind of excellency, for they ouer-see the faithful,
or the flock of Christ: for whereas they have other ouer-seers, as they are
Subjects, they have the King, and other Magistrates to be their Ouer-seers; yet
none are so as these, for these are their Ouer-seers, as they are the flock of
Christ. Secondly, if we respect their special designment over that flock, they
have a more special designment over the Lords flock, than any other Ouer-seer
has over any other people; the holy Ghost makes them ouer-seers after a
special manner. Thirdly, if we respect their work, which is to feed, and
that not with bodily food, but with spiritual and heavenly food to eternal
life. All these are intimated, Act. 20.28. Take heed to the flock over which
the holy Ghost has made ye Ouer-seers, to feed the Church of God, etc. First,
they are Ouer-seers, and that by a kind of excellency; first, in respect of the
persons they ouer-see, which is, the flock of Christ; Take heed to the flock,
etc. Secondly, in respect of their special assignment; over which the holy
Ghost has made ye Ouer-seers. And thirdly, in respect of their work, to feed
the Church of God, etc. And as this name Ouer-seer is restrained only to
these, so it may be safely extended to every particular in that kind, and so
is the use in Scripture, Phil. 1.1. To all the Saints in Christ Jesus which are
at Philippi with the Bishops, etc. And most plainly in the 1 Timothy 3.1. If any
man desires the office of a Bishop, etc. this is the general signification of
the word in Scripture. But you shall understand, that by common practice of
speech, I find this name always, almost ever since the Apostles times
particularly applied to those that have a primacy and precedence in the Church
above their fellow-Ministers; and so Bishops are not Ouer-seers of the flock
only, but also of the Pastors too within such a compass, some greater, some
smaller, which we call Diocesses; and as this is generally so in all ancient
Writers, so likewise if the Postscript be authentical, 2 Timothy (as for any
thing I see it must) then the Scripture favors it too: for there Timothy is
said to be a Bishop in this sense, and so had other Pastors under him. And so
much for the signification of the name, Bishop.

Secondly, their office, consisting in two things. First, in ordaining
Ministers.
Now we come to their Office; (we speak still in the particular sense) their
Office (besides their preaching and other ministerial Duties common to all
Ministers) consists, First, in ordaining Ministers; secondly, in reforming
things amiss. First, in ordaining Ministers: So it is said of Titus, that he
was left in Crete to ordain Elders, Titus 1.5. and so in the 1 Timothy 5.22. the
Apostle would have Timothy lay hands rashly on no man, etc. What is it to lay
on hands, but to ordain Ministers? And this Timothy must do; and thereto
Antiquity so plainly agrees, that Jerome, though otherwise bitter enough
against Bishops, acknowledged it to be done by them, and misliked not the doing
of it. And surely, seeing ordination must be continued in the Church, The
objection that the Apostles did ordain as Apostles, not as Bishops; and
Timothy and Titus as Evangelists not as Bishops, answered.
some Persons must needs have a special ouer-ruling hand in it; and who are
they but Bishops, that is, they that are highest and chiefest in the Ministry?
So the Apostles, and so the Evangelists being the chiefest in the Ministry, did
ordain Ministers. If it be said, that the Apostles ordained not as Bishops,
but as Apostles; and Timothy and Titus not as Bishops, but Evangelists, yet the
same office being of necessity still to be performed, some must always be in
the Church, answerable to them in that respect, call them how you will, if not
Bishops, yet they must have as much authority in this business, as I for my
part do ascribe to Bishops. It is true, that extraordinary Officers are not to
be imitated in extraordinary works: but in their ordinary works of continual
and necessary use, when extraordinary Officers cease, ordinary must succeed
them. I do not say, they did this wholly and alone, but still other Presbyters
or Ministers were assistants, and laid on hands with them: and so it was in the
Primitive Church, and so our Law requires, that the Bishop should make no
Minister, unless other Ministers be with him: but yet still they have the
chief stroke; the power of ordaining is in the one, the approbation in the
other.

The second thing wherein their Office consists, Secondly, in redressing things
amiss.
is in ouerseeing, and redressing things that are amiss: for this purpose was
Titus left in Crete to redress things amiss, Titus 1.5. and that not in the
people only, but in the Ministers also, 1 Timothy 5.19, 20. Against an Elder
receive none accusation, but under two or three witnesses; them that sin
openly rebuke openly, etc. Timothy was at Ephesus, as Titus was at Crete, to
redress things amiss, and there were many Ministers there, and these must be
reformed too; and therefore the Apostle would have him in redressing things
amiss amongst them, to receive no accusation against them but under two or
three witnesses. So that there must be one above the rest, for the performance
of this Duty: the same Reason may be proportionably applied for this, as for
the former, for seeing some ministers must be redressed, then there must be
some that must have this power to do it; and who are they but Bishops that are
in the chiefest places? I do not ascribe to Bishops hereby any absolute power
over their Brethren, as to do what they list, but a limited power to proceed
with the approbation of their Brethren: neither say I, that these were simply
Diocesan Bishops, as ours are, but surely they were such as had some compass
of jurisdiction allotted them, wherein were many Congregations, at least many
Ministers whom these did ouer-see. Those of the Presbytery have one that is
chief amongst them, and so is the confession of the Reformed Churches. And
Master Calvin himself confesses as much, that in the ancient Church there
were such Superiors; and says further, that their proceedings were not
contrary to the Word; yea, and he shows and approues the reason why such were
chosen, and that was of purpose to prevent dissension, which by equality would
arise. Mistake me not, as if I did mean to settle in Bishops any Princely
authority or Lordlike command; neither he, nor they, nor I intend it, but that
at least there must be one superior, and above the rest for order-sake. For so
it must needs be in all Companies and Societies whatsoever, else it cannot
stand. There were many Ministers in Ephesus, Act. 20.28. And so Act. 15.35. we
read of many that were in the Church of Antioch, and some of them are named,
Act. 13.1. Now what disorder would there have been in these Churches, if one
had not been above the rest? What danger of Schism would there have been? How
could matters have been decided amongst them? Who should there have been to
have moderated their actions? The freest State that ever was, has one
Superior above the rest, as Venice has her Duke, Rome has her Consuls, etc.
yea, the Apostles themselves exercised this order amongst themselves; some in
one Cause was Moderator, some in another. Nay, I add further, that they
exercised power, though not over themselves, for they were all equal, yet over
other Ministers. Therefore the thing is not unlawful in it self, if it be
moderately and lawfully used. And the order which I plead for, I would not
have thought a bare Title, but such as is armed with some kind of power too,
which is conferred on them, by them which chose them to such places. But you
will say all this is tolerable, if it were but for one Action, or for one
year? I answer, that surely the lawfulness is all one, be it for a year or
for a man's life, only there is less danger of abusing such a place, if they be
limited to a shorter time: And so much of the first Office, namely, Bishops,
where ye have heard first of their Name, and secondly of their Office.

Now we come in the second place to Presbyters or Elders; Secondly, Presbyters.
for so the word Presbyter in the Original signifies an Elder; and they were
so called, either as they were Ministers, or as they were ancient in years, or
at least in carriage, or because they were more ancient in grace, and in
begetting others to the Faith. We speak here of such as labor in the Word and
Doctrine, for of such as are pretended to be governing Elders, we shall speak
in the next place. This name we find also to be general to all in the
Ministry, from the highest to the lowest; yea, even the Apostles themselves
are so called; so Peter calls himself an Elder, 1 Pet. 5.1. yet by use for the
most part both in Scripture, as Act. 15.4. and the 14.23. and in other Writers,
it is restrained to those that are assigned to teach in some particular
Congregation, sometimes many of them together, sometimes one by himself, as
times and occasions served.

Their Office in regard of the maine essential duty, Their office, first,
generally.
is to feed, and therefore they are called Pastors, Ephesians. 4.11. He gave some
to be Apostles, etc. and some Pastors, etc. And to this duty they are often
exhorted in Scripture, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. The Elders which are amongst you I
beseech -- feed the Flock of God, etc. Act. 20.28. Take heed therefore unto
your selves, and to all the Flock whereof the holy Ghost has made you
Ouer-seers, to feed the Church of God, etc. And this feeding consists chiefly
in two things; that is, first, to teach; secondly, to rule and govern: they
must be acknowledged to have as absolute power and authority from God for
both these duties within their Charge, as the Bishops in theirs: for every
Presbiter is a Feeder; that is, both a Teacher and a Ruler within his Charge.
It is true, that Presbyters have bin most unjustly scantled and abridged by
Canons and Councels of this part of their office, that consists in ruling and
governing; too much has been taken from them, that Bishops might be advanced
the more.

Secondly, more particularly.
To speak more particularly of their Office, it consists in many particulars;
First, they are to teach the Word; that Paul to Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.2. is spoken
to all Ministers; Preach the Word, be instant in season and out of season,
improve, rebuke, exhort, etc. And there is reason for it; for the Word being
committed to every Pastor to be ministered by them, and that being profitable
to teach, to convince, to correct, as it is in the 2 Timothy 3.16. therefore there
is power and charge in them, to handle Mat. 28.19. was intended to all the
Ministry, as well as the Word: and in the 1 Cor. 10.18. The Cup of blessing
which we bless, etc. there is the other Sacrament, and the Apostle makes it
peculiar to him and other it which we bless, etc. The third Duty is prayer,
Act. 6.4. and in the 1 Cor. 14.16. there the manner of public prayer is
plainly set down, that is, that which is conceived by the Minister, and the
people accompanying him in their affections, and saying, Amen. The Pet. 5.3. to
be an example to their flock: and so the Apostle exhorts Timothy to be an
example to them that believe, 1 Timothy 4.12. James 5.14. If any man be sick let
him call for the Elders of the Their sixth Duty; they are to use and exercise
the power of the Keys both in binding and loosing, for that also is common to
them with the Apostles; and that which is said to the Apostle in Ioh. 20.23. is
said also to all true Ministers; Whose sins soever ye remit on earth, they
are remitted, etc. This is peculiar to all in the Ministry, and none else. The
seventh Duty belonging to their Office is, Cor. 16.1. Eighthly and lastly,
their Duty is to Act. 20.28. Take heed to the flock over which the holy Ghost
has made you overseers, etc. The very name, Ouerseer, intends so much, that
they must be continually resident over the flock, wherein the Apostles
themselves, though they went from place to place, yet they were very careful
in visiting, and in writing to the Churches which they had planted, as Paul and
Barnabas did, Act. 15.36. and they did long to be with them, as the Apostle
Paul says, Romans 1.11. and when they were hindered from it, they bewailed it, as
Satan's work therein. So does the same Apostle, 1 These. 2.8. and when they
could not come themselves, they supplied their bodily absence by the presence
of their Ministers and Deputies, as also by Letters. But no ordinary Minister
can thus excuse himself, but they are continually bound to be resident. And
the danger is exceeding great when the Pastor is absent, as we may see in the
1 Cor. 15.12. When the Apostle was absent, some crept into the Church that
taught errors and false Doctrine, as that there is no resurrection, etc. and
the danger of it amongst us is too apparent and lamentable. And therefore we
are to pray unto God, that those in Authority may force them that are tied to
a Charge to be resident upon it: so much for Presbyters.

In the third place we come to Doctors: Thirdly, Doctors.
I find the word used in Ephesians. 4.11. and we expound it Teachers, which has
two significations: First, I find it to be understood of those that teach the
Word, and that is the true and only sense of it in the Scriptures: secondly
sometimes it is understood of those that instruct Scholars specially in the
grounds of Religion; and so after in other matters; and so it is taken in some
ancient Writers. The question concerning Doctors is in the former sense this;
Whether there must be such an one in every particular Congregation, as a
several Officer from the Pastor? For answer whereunto, I say, that the Office
of a Doctor is necessary in both senses generally in the Church: and also in
the former sense, as he is a Teacher, he is necessary in every particular
Congregation; yea and further, I say; that if there be in one and the same
Congregation, a Doctor in whom is the Word o^ knowledge, joined with a Pastor
in whom is the word of wisdom, 1 Cor. 12.8. it is not to be misliked. But that
this must be so of necessity that we deny: for howsoever the gifts be
diverse, the Doctors to teach and expound the Scripture* the Pastors to apply
it; yet they may be and are usually found in the same Person: and therefore
we shall find it. Scripture, that teaching and preaching concur together in
the same Officer: so it is said of our Savior Christ himself, Matthew. 9.35.
That he went about teaching and preaching the Gospel. And so it is said of
the Apostles Paul and Barnabas, Act. 15.35. That they continued preaching and
teaching at Antioch. And so the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.2. requires this in Timothy,
that he teach and exhort. And this is generally required of all preaching
Elders, 1 Timothy 5.17. that they labor in the Word and Doctrine; and what is
that but to teach and apply? And every Minister must be apt to teach. What
necessity is there of a Doctor in every particular Congregation? Howsoever
then they are diverse gifts, yet commonly they are found in the same person:
and that which they allege* Ephesians. 4.11. makes directly against them; for if the
Apostle there had meant to have made them diverse offi^es, he^ would have
disioyned the^ with the same note of difference, as he did the other, and have
said, and some Pastors, and some Teachers; but in that he conioynes them
together, and says, Pastors and Teachers; he makes them to be as one.

Now we come in the fourth place to governing Elders. Fourthly, governing
Elders.
I find Governors mentioned in Scripture, as in the 1 Cor. 12.28. and also
Rulers, Romans 12.8. And I deny not but this is of necessary use in the Church;
for the Ministers must be endued with it, they must rule and govern, as we
have seen before, 1 Timothy 5.17. And it may be of good use too, for the Church;
even in those that are out of the Ministry, as in the Christian Magistrate: but
that this must be meant directly of some that must of necessity rule in every
particular Church, besides the Ministers, I cannot see; specially seeing they
ascribe to these Rulers a hand in the Censures of the Church, which being a
chief part of the power of the keys, and therefore appropriated to the
Ministers, and limited by Christ only to the Apostles and them; how shall they
be imparted to others, without their open wrong? I will deliver my judgment
briefly and freely in this case: First, either there were none such at all; or
if there were such, they were only by practice, not by institution; or if they
were by institution, yet they were for that present dispensation, and not
perpetual; or lastly, if they were perpetual, yet our Church is not destitute
in that case. First, either there were none such at all; for first, whereas it
is said, that the Jews had their Elders in their Synagogues, and that these
were translated from them; though this be probable and likely enough, yet it
is but a conjecture, there is no sure proof for it: But there must be sure
ground to erect a Church Officer upon. Secondly, there is no example in all the
Scripture of any Church so governed. Thirdly, the places of Scripture alleged
for them are scarce and few, and indeed there is but one, and that is in the 1 Timothy 5.17. I will not stand to scanne it, or to make shifts against it; but if
it be so expounded of Governing Elders besides Ministers, it is subject to
many just exceptions, and also it may admit many interpretations to the
contrary, agreeable to the Analogy of Faith, and fitting to the words
themselves, and there are a great many more harsh interpretations that pass
for current in far weightier matters: so that first either there were none
such at all; or secondly, if there were such (as for my part I will not utterly
deny it) yet they were only in practice then, it cannot be proved to be an
Institution: for many things were done then, which in doing were not
instituted. Thirdly, or if it were by Institution, yet it was only for that
present dispensation; when there was no Christian Magistrate; so that now we
living under a Christian Magistrate are not bound to it, nor have no such use
of it, and therefore it is not perpetual. Fourthly, or if it be perpetual,
yet our Church is not utterly destitute; we have in every Parish Vestry-men to
join with the Minister in such parts of government, as needs such persons, to
hear and reform some matters with the Minister, that he might not carry all
alone. And therefore there is no cause of such quarrel and exclamation as is
made against our Church upon this occasion. And so much for the fourth point
concerning governing Elders.

Fifth, deacons.
In the fifth place we come to the office of Deacons; that is an express Office
mentioned in Scripture, as Act. 6.2. though they are not there expressly
called Deacons; yet I doubt not but they were such. In Romans 12.8. they are
called Distributors and in the 1 Timothy 3.12. there they are by name. These are
such as at the first were appointed, and employed altogether about the poor,
and about Church-Treasury; but afterward they did also exercise some
ministerial functions: for Philip was a Deacon, Philip preached and baptized
rather as he was an Evangelist, than a Deacon.
Act. 6. yet afterward he preached and baptized, Act. 8.5, 38. though he did
that rather as he was an Evangelist, than a Deacon; for so we may read, Act.
21 8. that Philip was an Evangelist. And afterward the Deacons baptized, which
(saving the judgment of the better learned) I think they rather usurped, than
had any right to it by office, or other warrant for it; yet in succeeding Ages,
they had generally a degree of the Ministry, answerable to that of the Levites
under the Law, who taught and looked to the Treasury too; and the Scripture
seems to favor it, 1 Timothy 3.13. where it is said, they have ministered well,
etc. so that it is neither strange, nor much to be found fault with, that there
are some such amongst us. But admit they were only employed in Church-treasury,
for that is the true original of them; yet either they were only for certain
times and places, and so was the occasion of their first erection, Act. 6.
Calvin in Acts 21.8. And therefore they are not of necessity to be in every
Congregation; or if they be necessary, we have Churchwardens and Collectors
answerable to them, though not so gifted as they were in Act. 6. that may be
the defect of the times that afford not men so well qualified, or of the
chusers of them, that make not better choice, and also though they be not so
chosen by prayer and imposition of hands, which either is not simply necessary
in this case; or else being omitted, that is also the choosers fault. But, say
they, if you retain the Office and not the Title, this is to subject Gods
Ordinance to your own invention; as if one should say, he would yield to have
his matter moderated and determined in the Chancery, and yet not by my Lord
Chancellor, whom the King appoints, but by one of his own choosing: and so in
the Church you will have this matter of Church-treasury ordered, and yet not by
Deacons whom the Lord Jesus has appointed? I answer: This is but a cavil
about words, so long as we retain the thing it self, there is no such great
matter for the name. And so much shall suffice to be spoken concerning Deacons.

In the sixth place we come to Widows; Sixthly, widows.
of these we may read in Scripture, as in Act. 6.1. and 1 Timothy 5.3. and it is
probable that these are meant, 1 Cor. 12.28. where they are called helpers; and
Romans 12.8. shewers of mercy. Ye shall have my judgment briefly in this point,
and that is this; That all these places of Scripture well understood and
compared together, do prove only thus much; first, that in many Churches
there were then such Widows: secondly, that wheresoever they were, there they
were to be relieved: thirdly, that where they were so relieved, there they
were to perform works of mercy and charity, as to attend the sick, to wash
the Saints feet, and such like, as occasion required: But that they are a
necessary Officer in every Church, and that where they are not, there the
Church-gouernment is defective, that can never be proved. In Geneua they have
rather poor men than women; and in the Churches of France they have no such
use of Widows at all.

Seventhly, we come to speak of other Assistants, as Readers, Fellows,
Acolutiues, Exorcists, etc. concerning whom because they be not at all found
in the Word, we therefore do pass them by.

Eighthly the christian Magistrate; wherein first that he is a Church Officer.
Eighthly and lastly, we come to the Christian Magistrate, who though he be
last named, yet has not the least hand in Church-gouernment. And the question
concerning him is, First, whether he may be rightly called a Church Officer;
I answer: He may: though not in that proper sense as the Minister, because he
has not such an immediate hand in the Word and Sacraments; but in a large
sense he may, and that very rightly. For being a member of the Church, and that
a chief one too, how can he be excluded from being a Church Officer, and that
a chief one too, in his nature. It is no disparagement to him, Christ being
the Head of the Church, and he being Christ's Lieutenant within his lawful
Dominions, why may not he be a chief Ruler in Church-businesse. It is Gods
own promise, Isai. 49.23. that Kings and Queens should be noursing Fathers
and noursing Mothers to his Church. Themselves by Officers are Nurses, and
their Authority and countenance are like Breasts or Dugs to cherish and feed,
and hatch up the Church withal. And the Apostle lays it as a duty upon all
the faithful, 1 Timothy 2.2. That they pray for Kings and all in authority, that
they may live peaceably and quietly under them in all godliness and honesty;
not only in civil honesty, as they are Magistrates, but in all goodness too,
as they are Christian Magistrates, to be countenanced and established by them
where they be Christians, and to be tolerated by them, though they be no
Christians. And surely these Officers of ruling and governing spoken of, To.
12.8. and 1 Cor. 12.28. in all good consideration, are to reach to the
Christian Magistrate.

The second question concerning the civil Magistrate is, Secondly, wherein
this office consists.
wherein his Office consists? I answer: It consists chiefly in the matter of
ouer-sight, the last duty we spoke of in the former exercise. First, generally.
The new Testament is very scarce of proofs for this point, because there were
then no Christian Magistrates, but it is abundantly supplied in the old, and
the equity of the thing is the same in both: you shall find then that his
office consists specially, as I said before in oversight. But the particulars
wherein his Office consists are these: First, in calling Assemblies; secondly,
in abolishing false worship, Secondly, particularly in five things.
and establishing the true worship of God; thirdly, in looking to the Ministry
and their maintenance; fourthly, in causing the people to serve the Lord;
lastly in appointing Consistories: you shall find these things performed by
Asa, Iehosaphat, Hezekiah, and Josiah, as you may read in the 2 Chronicles. 15. and
in the 29. and 30. and 34. and 35. Chapters of the same book. And for the
proof of the particulars; First, for calling of Assemblies, that it was
performed Jonah 3.7. And secondly, for abolishing Moses the chief Magistrate,
Exodus 32.20. as also by King Asa in the 1 King. 15.12, 13, and 14. verses, and
for establishing Gods true worship, it was done by Josiah, in the 2 King. 23.2,
3. and by Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 29.3, 4, 5. And if we look into Judges 6. from
the 23. to the 26. verse, we shall find both these performed by Gedeon. And
thirdly, for looking to the Solomon in the 2 Chro. 8.14, 15. and by Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 29.4. and Chap. 31.4. and 16. and 17. verses, and by Josiah, 2 Chronicles.
35.2. and by Nehemiah, Chap. 13.11, 12. verses. And fourthly, for causing the
people to serve the Hezekiah in the 2 Chronicles. 30. from the first to the sixth
verse. And Josiah compelled all that were found in Israel to serve the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 34.33. and so Asa did the like, 2 Chronicles. 15.13. And lastly, for the
appointing. And lastly, for the appointing Consistories, you shall read in the
2 Chronicles. 19.8. how it was done by Iehosaphat; and commanded by God, Deuteronomy. 17.8.







The eighteenth Lecture of the Church.
AFter we had spoken in the first place touching the duties to be performed
in the Church-gouernment, we came in the second place to speak of the persons
or Officers that are to perform these duties: where we showed; first, what
manner of persons they ought to be; and secondly, what they were by name. Now
we come to the third point, namely, the Rules and Laws that these persons and
officers (spoken of in the second point) are to be directed by, in the
execution of these actions and duties spoken of in the first point, that is the
point we are now to speak to.

All businesses to be done do necessarily require certain Laws and Rules to
be performed by: and surely, The third pillar whereupon the Church-gouernment
consists, viz. the Rules and Laws by which the Governors are to be directed;
Gods business requires it much more. It is not enough that the works of God
be done, but as they are good in themselves; so the carriage must be good too,
they must be well done. The Lord is very precise and jealous over his own
Ordinances; and therefore as he has given express commandment that they be
observed for the matter and substance of them, so also he has prescribed
certain rules and directions how they are to be proceeded in for the manner
and circumstances of them: and therefore to perform the duty commanded,
neglecting the directions prescribed for the managing of them, is like Saul's
obedience, which is said to be disobedience; at the best it is but half
obedience, the Lord accepts it not. For our sound and entire obedience to God
consists in this, when we do that which the Lord commands, and when we do it
as he commands it to be done, according to that in Exodus 39.42, 43. where the
children of Israel are commended because they did that which the Lord commanded
them, and in every point as he commanded them.

And they are reduced to three heads.
Now the Rules here to be observed (that these duties may be well done) are
many; for order and plainness sake we will reduce them to these three heads:
First, the warrant must be good by which they are guided in the doing of them:
Secondly, the manner must be good whereby they are carried: Thirdly, the end
must be good which we aimed at in the doing of them.

What things are to be warranted.
Here therefore in Gods Word, First, we must have a warrant for the Duty,
that it be necessary, or at least lawful to be done. Secondly, for the Doer,
that he or they are authorized, at least allowed by God to deal in it:
Thirdly, a warrant must be had hence for the Carriage of the Business, that
it be commanded, or at least permitted by the warrant of Gods Word. The matter
we are now to insist on, is the warrant for the cautions, conditions, and
carriage of the business. And this is of two sorts: First, Warrants for the
cautions, conditions, and carriage of the business are, First, more principal.
either a principal and direct warrant; or secondly, an inferior warrant of a
lower degree, derived from it. The principal and direct warrant is expressly
mentioned in the Word, and that either by way of precept or example: By way of
precept, and that is either particular or general, each precisely to be
observed, as being in the nature of a binding Law. Examples (I mean only such
as the word commends) they are either ordinary, or extraordinary: extraordinary
were such as were peculiar to certain times, places, and Churches; such as was
the election of Matthias by lot, Act. 1. and these ended where they began, and
are not to be propounded as patterns for imitation. Ordinary, are such as
were commonly practiced, as gathering for the Saints, whereof the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 16.1. That as he had ordained in the Churches of Galatia, so he
ordained amongst them also, etc. and these are to be observed by all, where
there are like occasions.

Secondly, the warrant from an inferior or lower degree, Secondly, infer^our
warrant.
as being derived from the principal; these are younger in years, as not being
in the Apostles times, but in some near Ages after, and meaner in authority,
as being ratified by men not so infallibly guided by the Spirit, as the
Apostles were. And these also are either Precepts, or examples. First,
principal warrant. Therefore when any thing is to be done in this case, look
specially into the principal warrant, which is the Word; if so there be any
particular precept for it, then that must be done as the Lords Commandment,
without any further communicating with flesh and blood, as the Apostle says,
when he speaks of matters of Church-Gouernment, 1 Cor. 14.37. But if the
Precepts be general, as that all thing must be done in order, etc. make use of
them for such particulars only, as naturally proceed from thence, being
informed by sound consequence in reason and Religion. If we have no precept in
Scripture, then we must look to examples, and those that are ordinary; which
though they are not of that authority that precepts are of, because those are
absolutely to be embraced, yet they are much to be regarded; and these we are
to fashion our selves unto, always observing a due proportion of times,
places, persons, occasions, and such other necessary circumstances: for to
apply that to one Church in one state, and at one time, which was in another
Church, in another State, and at another time; were absurd. Well then, if we be
destitute of this principal warrant, that we have neither precept nor example
in Gods Word; then we must go to the inferior warrants, we must see what
Precepts and examples are to be found in Writers that have spoken of
Church-Gouernment since the Apostles times; and of these we must see, whether
they were of the most ancient and purest Churches; or of the latter and more
corrupt: if we have no president by constitution or practice, but in the later
and corrupt times; I see not, but that the Churches now being, may as well
devise particulars of their own, as follow theirs; yea, and better, so long as
they measure their particulars, fitly and wisely by those in the Word. But if
we have any president in all, or the most ancient and purest Churches, for the
most part it is safe enough to build on them, so as they be not mis-applyed
nor mistaken (I speak still of matters of Church-gouernment, not of faith) But
if there be many constitutions and examples in those Churches, and some
diffring from other, take the best, that is, that which is nearest to the word,
and has best presidents of purest Churches, or of such as that their condition
and state may best agree with ours. This point of inferior warrant some have
gone too far in, esteeming too highly of it; some have come too short,
esteeming too basely of it. First, some esteem too highly of these, impiously
equalling them with the Word, whereas there are two maine differences; First,
because those in the Word are certainly true; we know it was done by Christ,
or his Apostles. Secondly, as we know they were done by them; so we know that
they were done by them, as they were infallibly guided by God himself, so that
they could not err. But for the matter of inferior warrant, first, happily there
was no such thing done, at least in those times, and by those Persons; for
Histories make mention of things not true: or secondly, yet they might err,
for they were not infallibly guided by Gods Spirit. Others come too short,
esteeming too basely of them, as if they were nothing worth; they esteem no
more of an ancient Church, than of one that has been within these two hundred
years. Let us take the mean betwixt both these, embrace them reverently,
where they are not contradicted by the Word; and so they are a sufficient
warrant in those cases, if we be destitute of better. And so much be spoken
for the warrant of those things which are to be done in Church-gouernment.

Now we come to the second general head, Second head, and in it five Rules.
the manner whereby they must be carried; that must be good too, as well as the
warrant whereon they are grounded: for many times good things are marred by ill
handling; therefore that these good things may not be marred with ill
handling. Observe touching the manner of the carriage of them these Rules:
First, that the most necessary and material duties be first and chiefly
provided for: secondly, that all things be done decently, and in order:
thirdly, that the peace of the Church be not troubled: fourthly, that whosoever
has any right in the performance of this business be not contemned, or
restrained of their right. Lastly, these duties must be so carried (so far as
may be) as best fits the civil Government wherein we live. We will begin with
Matthew. 28.19. Go, teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc. And so the Apostle
Peter in Act. 2.37, 38, etc. First, he preaches and baptizeth. And so the
Apostle Paul in the 1 Cor. 15.3. First of all (says he) I delivered unto you
that which I received, how that Christ died for our sins, etc. First, he
preaches Faith and Repentance: and the Reasons are plain for this; for these
are the foundation of Religion, therefore these must be first laid, else there
can be no building: secondly, these are the gatherers of Gods chosen; if they
have not these, none can be converted at all: thirdly, these are so effectual
to the being of a Church, that where these are found, there is a Church; and
where they are not, there is none; therefore these must be first and chiefly
provided for. The due observation of this Rule, if it were carefully looked
into, would prevent much ignorance and dissension, and other inconveniences:
many there are that nuzzle the people up in Ceremonies only, and go no
further, as the Popish Church. This is a cause of horrible blindness and
ignorance, the people for the most part resting there, and thinking they have
Religion enough, if they observe such and such Ceremonies, and so are careless
of true growth in Christianity by the true use of the Word and Sacraments.
These are Pharisaicall courses to tithe Mint and Annise, and to leave the
weighty matters of the Law, Matthew. 23.23. Others beat first and chiefly on
Discipline, and would have that and nothing else taught, a preposterous zeal,
which wrought much dissension, as by lamentable experience we may see in our
Church; for this has been an occasion that many have separated from our
Church, and that many live discontent in it, not being first well grounded in
the principal: first, faith and repentance must be taught, and afterward
Church-gouernment.

The second Rule is, The second Rule
All must be done decently and in order; for so is the express Rule, 1 Cor.
14.40. First then, decency is required in Church-gouernment; this is required
in civil and natural duties; and therefore in Christian and religious duties
it is required much more. Now this is not in all places alike: for we must
understand, that that which is decent in one place, may be uncomely in
another: that is to be reputed decent in any place, That is uncomely in one
place which is decent in another. What is to be reputed decent.
which the customs and fashions of the place, not repugnant to the Rules of
Nature, Civility and Gods Word have made decent; as for example, prophesying
with the hat on, in the Church of Corinth indecent, 1 Cor. 11.4. but in the
reformed Churches in France, made decent by Custom, they being in Gods stead
to speak unto the people, they think they may be covered: Therefore still
such customs are to be considered, and accordingly decency to be esteemed.
Secondly, Order is required in Churchgouernment, so it is in all other things,
specially it must be so in Gods Church, he being the Author and God of order,
and not of confusion. This was it that commended and graced Salomons house
exceedingly, so that the Queen of Sheba was ravished to see it in the 1 King.
10.5. and shall he that is greater than Solomon, the Lord Jesus want it in his
house, the Church. It is a special grace belongs to the visible Church, and
therefore Cant. 4.2. Solomon speaking of the order of Gods Church, shows how
comely it is, Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep in good order, which go up
from the washing, etc. David was enamoured with it Psa. 68.25. speaking as
under a veil of the godly order which is in Gods Church, faith, the Singers
went before, the Players of instruments came after, and in the midst were the
maids playing with Timbrells. Order extends it self to two things. First, to
things to be done.
Now this order extends it self to two things; first, in things to be done in
the Church: secondly, in the persons that do them. First, in things to be
done, there must be order as in prophesying, that one speak after another, 1
Cor. 14.31. and so in order the Word must be preached before the Sacraments be
administered; prayer must be before preaching; Baptism before the Lords
Supper; as also smaller matters must be laid by, while greater are in
handling, Act. 6 2. sometimes extraordinary cases of necessity may ouerbeare
this Rule, but generally it must be thus. So there must be order in Persons,
the Superiors must be first respected, Secondly, to persons.
whether he be superior in years, or in gifts and graces, the Pastor must
rule the flock, and not the flock the Pastor. Finally, it is with us in the
Church, as it is with Soldiers in the field, every man is placed by the
Captain, and must keep his rank; And so it must be with us, we must keep
our rank that God has placed us in in the Church, and not break out, for
that is a grievous sin: I would this were well looked into in our Church,
that men would not go beyond their ranks for this breeds disorder and
confusion in the Church.

The third Rule.
The third Rule is, that the peace of the Church be not broken nor troubled,
the Apostle in Ephesians. 4.3. would have us, whatsoever we do, to keep peace;
and he uses a special phrase there; Keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace: As if he should say, if ye keep not peace, which is the bond,
your spiritual Communion is in danger to be soon dissolved. And in the 1
Cor. 11.16. the Apostle teaches that contentiousnes is not tolerated in the
churches of God. The envious Serpent, and his instruments, have a special
delight in disturbing this peace, and spares no means but seeks all
advantages, for the sowing of dissension in the Church: and the members of the
Church are too apprehensiue of it, else he could not do us that harm he does,
unless we were so apprehensiue of dissension amongst our selves. Now as the
peace of the Church is endangered in many cases; Three ways how peace is
endangered.
so especially in these: First, when men are addicted to one Minister before
another, one to Paul, another to Cephas, etc. this comes of a carnal mind, as
the Apostle shows, 1 Cor. 3. and thus they wrong themselves and the Ministers
too: themselves, in that they are hindered hereby from the good they might have:
and their Ministers, because that they make Contention betwixt them, where
otherwise none would be. Secondly, this peace is endangered in the election of
Officers; some breeding and making factions for one against another, as their
affections lead them. Thirdly, it is endangered in deciding controversies
either of Religion or State; one will be crossing and thwarting another in the
heat of Contention and strife; yea, happily rent themselves from the Church,
if it may not go as they would have it. Let Gods children be admonished to
have no part in such Contentions, but let them labor for the peace of the
Church, if they will have peace in themselves; for we are called to peace, to
mind and to speak one thing; if the good things we seek for may quietly and
peaceably be obtained, it is well; let God have the glory, and our selves may
comfortably enjoy the benefit of them. But if they cannot be had without
breaking the peace of the Church, what is to be done? They may have comfort,
for they have discharged their Consciences in seeking the best things, and let
them bewaille the corruptions of the times, and keep themselves unspotted of
those corruptions, and pray to God for redress. Thus are we to seek the
peace of the Church, and not be any cause of dissension whereby it may be
broken.

The fourth Rule to be observed in the manner of the carriage of Church
business is, The fourth Rule.
that whosoever has any right in the performance of any such Duties, be not
contemned, nor rsterained of their right; but that they be called to the
business, and permitted to speak, and do freely so far as the Lord has
put into their hands: For then the Lord is best pleased with a Business, when
it is jointly performed by eueryone that is authorized by himself thereto: the
Magistrate must not neglect the Minister, nor the Minister must neglect the
Magistrate. The Pastor must not neglect the flock, nor must the flock neglect
the Pastor, but every man must have his due, and do his duty. Look into Act.
15.23. and see how the business was carried there, the Apostles, Three ways
how this rule is broken.
and the Elders, and the Brethren had a hand in that business, every man so
far as concerned him. Ofttimes it comes to pass, that there is a Diotrephes
found in the Church, as in the third Epistle of John, that loves to have the
pre-eminence, and to sway all with their own hand; there this rule is broken,
sometimes in a Church, the Censures of the Church are wrung out of the hands of
the Minister, and passed by another authority, only he may complain and
publish what others have done, himself can have no further hold in them; here
likewise this Rule is broken: Lastly, many abuse their Christian liberty to the
offense of the weak, and so this Rule is broken; for the weak brother has his
interest in my liberty, as well as my self.

The fifth Rule.
The fifth and last Rule is, that all things in the outward Government of the
Church must be so carried, as best (so far forth as may be) fits the
Government of the civil State wherein we live. I would not have any think,
that we would draw Religion to the bent of the outward State, but we speak
of outward Government in the Church, that we say, must not cross the well
established Government of the civil State, to cause Innouations, and changes,
and troubles, and confusions, specially in a Christian Commonwealth. It was
never our Saviors meaning, that the outward carriage of Religion, should
overthrow the carriage of the temporal State; But that Caesar should have as
well that which is Caesar's, as God that which is Gods. I speak of a politic
State already established by lawful Authority, and confirmed by wholesome
Laws, and maintained by the ancient use and custom of the place, there
Religion coming in afterward, it must be framed for the outward carriage of
it to the civil State; except wherein Religion is plainly contradicted. Our
Savior no doubt was as careful of civil Christian States, as Moses was of
the Jewish Policy; but there Church-gouernment was fitted to their civil
State, and so must ours. But you will say, that both civil State, and their
Church-gouernment were each of them directly and equally from God. True, and
are not all the powers that are ordained of God? So the Apostle says, Romans
13.1. and therefore though the Government of civil States be not now so
immediately from God as the Jews was, yet it is from God too; and therefore by
proportion where the government of the civil State is ratified by use,
Religion coming in afterward, in all equity and reason it is to be carried
accordingly, for the outward passages of it. When the Apostle Peter persuades
the scattered Jews to submit themselves to all manner ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2.3. it is a plain warning to them, that nothing be done by
them in their particular carriage, much less in the outward Government of the
Church, which might be prejudicial to the government of the civil State;
they must not cross that, unless that cross Religion, as I said before. The
want of the due observation of this Rule, has made many become Anabaptists,
and despisers of Government, and in many places it has made Religion fare the
worse, and the professors thereof to be traduced for rebellious, troublesome,
and dangerous people, Enemies to the State. So much for the manner of the
carriage of Church Business.

Now we come to the third and last general head, The third head, and that is
the end.

And there be two kinds of them:


namely, the end that must be aimed at in doing these Duties, that must be
good too. It must be done with a single end, and a sincere affection and
intention, free from all sinister respects, either to themselves or others.
There are two good ends which we must aim at in all actions concerning
Church-gouernment; the first is, the glory of God, the second Cor. 10.31.
Whatsoever ye do, let all be done to the glory of God. For it is Gods
business, his gifts, and officers, and ordinances, of purpose appointed for
his glory after a special manner: and therefore this requires a true zeal for
the Lord of Hoasts, for the advancing of his Kingdom, and the magnifying of
his Name; as also it requires uprightness of heart, that laying aside all
guile, covetousness, ambition, pleasing of men, they may merely intend the
honor and glory of their Lord and Master. The second end is, that all tend to
the edification of their Brethren; so the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.26. would have all
things in the Church done for edification: and so he carries himself; 2 Cor.
12.19. for the Lord has ordained officers in his Church, and given them gifts
for that end, as it is in Ephesians. 4.12. therefore that is the matter that all
must direct themselves unto. Now this matter of edification requires two
graces; Two graces necessary for this: First, wisdom.
first, wisdom; secondly, love: If we have not these graces, we shall never
take this course. First, it requires wisdom to observe and discern what
courses are most profitable for edification, and that to follow: as the
Minister is wisely to observe the times and seasons he lives in, and the
Persons that he has to deal withal, and so to insist chiefly on such points,
as are fit for such seasons and persons: to give milk to the weak, and meat
to the strong: he must be a wise Steward* giving to every one in Gods house
his portion in due season: where this Rule is observed, it will be a singular
furtherance to the labors of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Church. As
wisdom is required in this duty, so also in the second place love is required,
in commiserating the infirmities of the weak, Secondly, love.
and in having compassion of the damnable estate of poor ignorant and
unbelieving Souls, unfeignedly desiring and laboring their conversion; and
for that cause framing themselves and their courses, so as may be fittest to
bring them to God; they must with the Apostle become all to all, that they may
win some. Love is a far more excellent virtue and more beneficial to the
Church than knowledge; knowledge puffes up, says the Apostle, but love
edifieth, 1 Cor. 8.1. knowledge without love makes men proud, it tends to
ostentation; but love always seeks and labors for those things only that
may edify. Then do men swerue from this golden Rule of edification, when they
enact Laws, ordain Ceremonies, use preaching generally for the maintenance of
the state, more than for edification; yea, When this Rule is swerved from.
then they commit high impiety in this kind, when they use courses and
passages in Church-gouernment to destruction, not to edification; yea, as
snares to entrappe tender Consciences, at least to provoke and offend them.
This is against the Apostles Rule, 2 Cor. 1 3. our power (says he) is given
for edification, not for destruction. Put the case that those things which be
imposed be lawful; must we do them presently? No, not unless they edify
our brother so the Apostle says, Romans 15.1, 2. We must bear with the weak,
and every man must please his neighbor in that which is good to edification.
And Romans 14.19. Let us follow those things which concern peace, and wherewith
one may edify another. And 1 Cor. 10.23. the Apostle says, All things are
lawful for me, but all things edify not: As if he should say, We must not
do all lawful things unless they edify. So then this is the end of all our
Actions to be done in the Church, they must be done to Gods glory, and the
edification of our brother. And so much shall serve touching the rules and
laws whereby the Officers must be guided in performing their Actions and
Duties in the Church.

Now it remains only that I instance (as I promised) in two or three duties,
fitting them to the Persons and Rules. Instances in diverse duties.
And first, I will instance in the first duty, which was the Cor. 14.34. and
therefore whereas sometimes they take upon them to baptize, this is an horrible
presumption in them, and a profanation of Gods Mysteries. Secondly, the Rules
whereby they must be directed in doing these duties are these: first, the
preaching of the Word, for the matter of it, it must be Gods Word alone, and
that which is built upon it; for the manner, it must be sincerely preached, not
making merchandise thero^, and truly and rightly agreeable to the Analogy of
faith, and instantly and continually, in season and out of season, reverently
and conscionably, and powerfully, not as the word of man, but as it is indeed
the Word of the living God. secondly, the Sacraments, those and none other must
be administered, which Christ has instituted, and that rightly and in such
manner as Christ and his Apostles instituted them: but yet we are not bound to
every Circumstance; For Christ and the Apostles were baptized when they were of
years; so must not we be. Thirdly, Prayer, that must be fitted for every
occasion, sins must be confessed, judgments must be prayed against, blessings
must be thankfully remembered; And this must be done both for themselves and
others, and all fervently and in the Spirit* So much for the first instance.

Act. 6. where the Apostles referred this partly to the people, that they
should choose out certain from amongst themselves for this Office; and yet
still they had an eye to it, and a hand in it too, as we may see in that
place. Secondly, the Rules they must proceed by in this Duty, and specially in
election of Ministers, are these: First, is examination and trial of their
gifts, so it is implied of the Ministry in the 1 Timothy 5.21, 22. Lay hands
suddenly on no man, etc. And so it is expressed in Deacons, 1 Timothy 3.10. Let them
first be proved, then let them minister. If it be so of Deacons, much more of
Ministers. The second Rule they are to proceed by, is approbation: so says the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.7. He (that is, a Bishop) must be also well reported of, etc.
And so it is said of Timothy, Act. 16.2. That the brethren reported well of
him. Thirdly, there must be imposition of hands, as in Act. 13.3. After they
had fasted and prayed they laid their hands upon Paul and Barnabas, etc. And in
the 1 Timothy 4.14. the Apostle says to Timothy, despise not the gift that is in
thee -- which was given thee by Prophecy and laying on of the hands of the
company of the Eldership. Fourthly, there must be fasting and Prayer, that is
plain, Act. 13.3. Lastly, both the choosers and the chosen must have God
before their eyes, that without any sinister respect the one seek, and the
other admit: also the chosen must solemnly promise a conscionable care to
perform the duty imposed upon him faithfully; this they must make open
protestation of.

Deuteronomy. 15.7. If one of thy Brethren with thee be poorer, thou shall not harden
thine heart* nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother: then i^ be much more
so under the Gospel, that the poor be provided for; for the Law of love is
there more precisely enforced both by the example and command of Christ, as
being his new Commandment, 1 Pet. 3.8. Love as brethren, be pitiful, Proofs
are here used, because omitted before.
be courteous; Heb. 1^.76. Isai. 58.7. Luke 14.13. Matthew. 10. and 2.5. Ioh was
a Father of the poor: yea, God himself is fo, Psalm. 68.5. the poor are in
Christ's stead, Mark. 14.7. and they sustain Christ's own person on earth,
Matthew. ^. and Pro. 19.17. He that has mercy on the poor ^^^deth to the Lord,
etc. Therefore they must be provided for. Again, these Duties are first the
fruits of our faith, Titus. 3.8. Secondly, they are inseperable consequents of
our love to God, 1 Ioh. 3.7. and 4.21. Thirdly, they are badges of our
profession. Fourthly, this may be our case hereafter. Fifthly, this is the
measure of our judgment, Matthew. 25. Sixthly, civil and carnal men do the
like. Secondly, the Persons to deal in this Duty are Ministers and people.
Thirdly, the Rules they are to be done by, are many and excellent. First, they
must be done with cherfulness. Romans 12.8. Let him that shows mercy do it
with cheerfulness: and 2 Cor. 9.7. Let every man give not grudgingly: for God
loves a cheerful giver. Secondly, they must be done with speed, Pro. 3.19.
Say not to thy brother, go and come again to morrow, and I will give thee, if
thou now have it. Thirdly, they must be done without hypocrisy in singleness
and simplicity of heart, Matthew. 6.1, etc. Give not your alms before men (says
our Savior) to be seen of them: Romans 8.12. let him that distributeth do it
with simplicity. Fourthly, it must be done arcording to the ability of the
giver, 2 Cor. 8.12. For if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted,
according to that a man has, and not according to that a man has not. And 1
Cor. 16.2. Every man must lay up, and give to the poor, as God has prospered
him. Fifthly, it must be done according to the need of the Receiver, Act.
4.35. The Apostle distributed to every man as they had need. Lastly, it must
be done with an eye to Christ, Matthew. 10.42, 43. Whosoever receives a Prophet
in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward; and he that gives
a cup of cold water to drink, to one of these little ones in the name of a
Disciple, he shall not lose his reward. And so much shall serve for the
instances.

Yea, but will some say, what if I live in a Church where these things are not
done? I answer, that yet we must not forsake the Communion of the Church, if
the principal and essential matters be in some competent measure provided
for; we must not separate from the communion of the Church; much is to be
borne and suffered (rather than that be committed) both in the Parties that do
those things; specially in the tolerating and yielding to these things, of
those that are not to be Actors and Doers of them; there is some difference
betwixt the doer and the sufferer: when a man is an actor and doer in these
things, if that be imposed upon him, which is against his Conscience, he
sins in doing of it; as if the Minister be to wear a Garment, etc. he were
better leave his Ministry, then sin against his Conscience; but the
Sufferer, they have no reason to forbear coming to the Lords Table for that,
because they are no Actors in it. And so much of the instances; as also of this
matter of Church-gouernment.

The Nineteenth LECTVRE of the CHVRCH.
THe last point we handled concerning the Church, was of the Government of
it, The sixth general things concerning the Church viz. the privileges of it.
which being finished, it remains that we come now to the sixth general point
propounded, namely; To the privileges of the Church. A Privilege is a matter
of Benefit, or special favor granted to one or more Persons or Companies, or
such like; which generally others are debarred from; for so the Nature and use
of the Word, amongst us, seems to require; First, that the matter of a
Privilege be a matter of Benefit, or else it would be a Burden or
Disparagment, and no easement, nor prerogative, and so it is a Privilege
rather to be without it; therefore it must be a matter of benefit. Secondly,
it must be appropriate to those Parties to whom it is granted; that is, it
must be free to them, and every of them to enjoy, and peculiar to them alone,
others must be abridged and debarred from it: this is the use of the word
amongst us, in the nature of it: It is otherwise used in profane authors, but
we speak in our own language, and therefore we speak of it, as it is in use
amongst us.

Now in speaking of the privileges of the Church, In this head two points
handled. 1 handled by way of observation.
we will handle these two points: First, that the Church has her privileges;
Secondly, what these privileges are: For the first, it offers it self
naturally to us by way of observation; And therefore take it thus, the Church
of God has her privileges, that is, there are certain excellent privileges
belonging to the true visible Church, which all that are of the Church, and
they alone, have right and interest in, and are denied to all others: Psalm.
147. last verse, He has not dealt so with every nation, that is, he has not
dealt so with any Nation; the Prophet speaks there of Gods dealing toward
Israel then, and, by Consequence, of his dealing toward his Church for ever.
Now God had many Nations in the world besides Israel, and he deals mercifully
and graciously and bountifully with them all, and gives them food and raiment,
and health and life and all; But so, as with Israel, that is, so mercifully and
so bountifully, he deals not with any Nation: No, he has not dealt so with
any Nation under the Sun, as with them; and as God dealt with them, so he
deals with his Church, from time to time, he vouchsafes them more excellent
Privileges then all the world besides. And in the 1 Peter 2.9. Ye are a
peculiar people, that is, such a people as the Lord has endued with many
excellent Privileges, proper and peculiar to them alone: And Psalm. 83.3. they
are called, Gods secret ones, what is that, but private ones? And what are
privileges, but certain Conditions granted to some private States or Persons?
So then, the Church are Gods secret ones, as who should say, he grants them
many excellent privileges, which none other are partakers of: And in Exodus
19.5. the Church is called Gods Chief Treasure; It is true, that all the Earth
is the Lords, and is all full of his Treasures; but his Church is his chief
Treasure; Silver has her prerogative above all baser metal, and gold his
prerogative above silver, but Pearls and precious Jewels are a chief
Treasury, and have prerogative above all the rest. Sodom was a goodly City like
Eden; and Egypt was a fat and fruitful Soil; B^t they were nothing to Canaan,
for that flowed with milk and honey; milk and honey are the best and sweetest
things, Canaan flowed with these, that is, had great abundance of them; Niniueb
was a great and famous City; Babel was the Glory and Pride of Kingdoms, Isay
13.19. but these are nothing to Jerusalem, that is the holy City, the City of
the great King; the Joy of the whole Earth, Psalm. 48.1.2. To go forward,
Bashan is a high mountain; But Zion is far beyond that, Psalm. 68.15.16. All
these, as they are true in the story, so are they in the Type; All other places
are inferior to Gods Church: The Scripture forbeares not the name of
Privilege, in effect, and applies it in this very case, Romans 3.1.2. what is
the preferment of the Jew, etc? The Lord questions it there, and answers it
himself, that none may doubt of it; much every manner of way, as who should
say they have Privileges and preferments, and they are not scanted of them,
much, etc; that is, many and great, and that (not in one kind, but) every way:
It is spoken there only of the Jew, but, by Analogy of Faith, it may be
applied to the whole Church, John 1.12. to them that received him, to them he
gave Power (or prerogative) to be the Sons of God; here is a prerogative
given, and what is that? to be the Sons of God; this is a Privilege of all
Privileges; for he that has this Privilege, to be Gods Child, has, with
all, free right and interest in all the blessings that can be affoorded to
man, such as the Apostle speaks of, 1 Cor. 2.9. that the Eye has not seen,
nor the Ear heard, neither can it enter into man's heart, where the Apostle
speaks, not only of things to be enjoyed in the life to come, but even of
the Privileges of Gods Children, even in this life: And Isay 64.4. since the
beginning of the world, they have not heard nor understood with the ^are,
neither has the eye seen any other God, besides thee, which does so to him
that waits for him: God does so for none as he does for his Children.

Reasons.
The Reasons, why the visible Church has such Privileges are these; First,
every Company and every City have certain Privileges of their own;
therefore the Church, the Company of the faithful, the City of the great
King, must have hers much

Secondly, the special favor and love, which God does bear to his Church, is
such, that he can do no less for them; Those whom the Kings of the earth most
favor, on them they bestow the greatest Privileges: Therefore whom the King
of Kings favors most of all, that is, the Church, he is to bestow on them
greater and better privileges, then any King can give, but God only; or any
subject can receive, but Gods own Dearlings.



indue his Body with all such Privileges and graces, as it is capable of? So
that their near dependence on Christ, and her oneness with him requires that
he bestow many excellent Privileges on her, which others may not enjoy.







The uses of the point are these; and so that we have right and special claim
in them all: And this benefit will appear to be the greater, if we consider,
first, that it is denied to others, and yet affoorded to us; that Child or
Subject, that is specially singled out, by the Father or King, from the rest of
the Children or Subjects, to have a richer portion then they, to have a second
Mess, as Benjamin had, is not he singularly bound to that father or King? This
is our case in respect of many thousands in the world, they are left, we are
taken; they ever in harmes-way, we are privileged; alas, they are his
Creatures as well as we, and we are dust and ashes as well as they, why
should we have better at Gods hands then they? Yea, we are sinners as well as
they; why then are we privileged from those Evils, which they are subject
unto? Why does not this land wallow in the darkness of Heathenisme, Idolatry,
Turcisme, Iudaisme, Papistry, etc: as the the greatest part of the world does
besides? Why do not we, here present, also wallow in Profaneness,
Idleness, Deadness, Inconsionableness, Ungodliness, Unprofitableness, as
the most in the land do besides? Surely there is no reason for it but this;
Gods mere Mercy and special Favor to us, above them; Let us consider this
well and take it to heart, and never think of it, but let our hearts even melt
to God for it: Alas! What are we, that God should thus privilege us above
others? And let it stir us up to continual Thankfulness to God; and also,
let it inflame us with entire Love to God again, that has so dearly and
entirely loved us; and as God has made choice of us, above all other to be
his chief Treasure: so let us make choice of him, above all other, to be our
chief Treasure: and say with David, Who have we in Heaven (O Lord) but thee?
and whom do we desire on earth in Comparison of thee?

of our rouing and unsettled thoughts about the prosperity of the wicked: Alas!
their prosperity to our privileges is nothing, there is no comparison betwixt
them; It may be that he is rich, and has the world at will; yea, but thou
art rich in God and in the Faith of Christ, this is the true Treasure. A
worldly man is not troubled, but has peace and quietness round about him;
yea, but thou have peace with God and in thine own conscience, and this is the
right peace. A worldly man lives at his own will, and does what himself list;
yea, but thou live after Gods Will, and do, in some measure, what he
commandes, this is the Life of God; heavenly and eternal Life. Worldly men,
they and their children are gayly and richly apparrelled, and fare deliciously
every day: yea, but what art thou the worse for that; that which they have, is
but for the outward man, that which thou have, is for the inward man; thou art
clothed with the rich Robe of Christ's Righteousness, this is rich and gay
Apparel indeed; and thou art fed with spiritual food, the Word and
Sacraments, and Gods Comforts, and the continual Feast of a good Conscience:
this is the daintiest fare and the sweetest dishes that can be set on our
tables, if we were Angels we could have no better: yea, mark further thou
shall see the time, when they and theirs for all their present glory, shall die
like Beasts, and afterward be tormented in hell with the Rich man for ever;
whereas thou and thine being brought up in Gods Fear, shall die Gods dear
Saints and Children, and afterward be also glorified in Heaven, and that for
ever. If wicked rich men would consider and understand this, it would quell
them in their greatest mirth, and abate their haughty thoughts of themselves,
and their pride, and their Contempt of Gods Children, and their Cruelty against
them: And so if Gods Children would seriously consider of it, they would be
far from envying the wicked, and grudging at their prosperity; yea, rather
they would pity their persons, and commiserate and grieve for the extreme
misery that is upon them, they would sit down in silence and not murmr;
though others carry the world before them, what care they? they have such
Privileges as the world knows not of, and the prosperity of the wicked is
lighter then vanity it self.

Isay 43.2. the Prophet says, We go through water, and we go through fire,
here is our danger; yea, but the Lord is with us, so that the Fire shall not
burn us, nor the Waters ouerflow us, here is our Privilege, And in John
16.20. our Savior says, Ye shall weep and lament, and the world shall
rejoice; and ye shall sorrow, there is our present Affliction; but your sorrow
shall be turned into Joy, there is our Privilege: and so in verse. 33. In the
world ye shall have Affliction; here is the hardest of our portion; but be of
good Comfort, I have overcome the world; here is our Privilege to make us
amends; And so in Matthew. 19.29. We forsake houses and brethren, and sisters and
father and mother, and wife and children and lands for Christ's sake; yea, but,
we receive an hundred fould more in this life: that is, in regard of many
gracious and spiritual Privileges, and we shall inherit everlasting life: Oh;
that Gods Children had a lively feeling of these things in their hearts; It
would make them scorn all that ever Satan or his Instruments could do unto
them, and they would be so far from grudging, as that they would rejoice in
tribulation, and take exceeding comfort in all their sufferings. But ye will
say, The Church visible consists of good and bad; have the bad such
Privileges? I answer, yes, some they have by outward right and possession, the
rest being found in the good, are freely affirmed of the whole from the better
part: But most of these Privileges belong to the invisible Church, how then
are they Privileges of the visible? Answer. yes, As the same persons, that is,
the chosen, being living members of both.

So much for the first point, that The Church of God has many excellent
Privileges.

Now in the second place we come to know what these privileges are? Surely, 2
things handled viz. the privileges of Church and they be of two sorts. 1
humane.
they are more and greater then can be spoken or understood; yet because though
we do enjoy them, they are not such a comfort to us, except we know them:
Therefore I will labor to give you some taste of them; They are of two sorts,
some are humane, that are granted by men, and some are divine granted by God
himself. First, some are humane, granted by men, as by Kings and Emperors,
Councels and States, either politic or Ecclesiasticke; yea, sometimes by
Heathenish States as well as Christian, for sometime God stirred up Heathen men,
to be beneficial to his Church; and these privileges were outward, either of
their persons from war, or of their goods from taxes, or the places consecrat
to religious uses were freed from arrests, and such like; hence came
privileged places: But these, as they came from men; so there is no such
excellency nor comfort in them; and they were intended only or chiefly to
Churchmen, as they call them, that is, the clergy. But yet even in these
things, let us observe Gods love to his Church; for as it was the Lord that
gave Israel favor in the sight of the Egyptians, that they gave them their
jewels, etc. Exodus 11.3. 2 di^r these ^uers sorts, generally, of two sorts.
so it was the Lord that enlarged the hearts of those Princes and States to be
beneficial to his Church: but the privileges we seek, are much more material
and excellent, and are common to the whole Church, people as well as ministers,
and these are divine privileges, granted immediately by God himself. And these
are of diverse sort; generally, they are of two sorts. The Church of God is
privileged, partly, in respect of others, and partly in respect of themselves:
In respect of others they are privileged. First, in regard of their friends,
1. In respect of others, both friends and enemies
whom God blesses for them; and also in regard of their enemies, whom God
curses for their sakes, as in Genesis 12.3. I will bless them that bless thee,
and curse them that curse thee; Yea, they are privileged in respect of the
world it self, whose substance and standards they are, Isay 6.13. It was made,
and is preserved, continued, altered, and shall be destroyed for their sakes;
As it was a great Privilege of the Ark of God, that where it entered and was
well esteemed and used, as it was in the house of Obed Edom, the place and
persons were blessed by it, and where it was not worthily esteemed, as amongst
the Phylistims; they were accursed by it: So it is a great privilege to the
Church, that they, that are friends unto it, are blessed by it, at least in
outward things; and that they, that are Enemies to it, 2. In respect of
themselves. 1 temporal privileges.
are cursed and plagued for it. Secondly, they are privileged chiefly in
respect of themselves, whereby they fared the better in their own persons. And
these Privileges are of two sorts: some concern Isay 4.5, 6. there the Church
is called the Glory, and there is a promise of universal Protection to it: so
also defense Psalm. 91. Psalm. 149. verse the last, That Last of all, the
continuance of the very outward being of the Church through all Ages to the
worlds end, is a Privilege to it, as in Psalm. 46.5.6. the Prophet says, God
is in the middst of it, therefore it shall not be moved. Let the world do
what it will, yet it cannot deprive the Church of the outward being of it; it
may wax and wane as the Moon does, yet as that has always a being; so shall
the Church ever be. These are temporal Privileges.

The second sort are such, 2. Spiritual privileges these^ of two sorts 1
common to all the members.
as concern our spiritual and eternal estate, and they also are of two
sorts; such as are common to all the members of the Church: Hypocrites as well
as true Believers; as the use and profession of the Word, Sacraments, Prayer,
Fasting, Gifts of the ministry; Profession of the Gospel, Knowledge of Gods
Will, and outward conformity and obedience thereto; as also Historical and
temporary Faith, and some taste of heavenly things, Heb. 6.2. and such other
common gifts of the Spirit; These, in the godly, tend to their eternal good,
but in the wicked and reprobate, to their eternal condemnation.

Secondly, such as are proper to Believers only, 2. proper to the true
Believers, and these of two sorts. 1. matters of present possession of diverse
kinds.
as the Spirit of Adoption, and such like; and these are also of two sorts.
First, matters of present possession; secondly, matters of future certainty.
First, matters of present possession, and they consist of diverse kinds. First,
we are privileged in respect of God; Secondly, in respect of the Creatures;
Thirdly, in respect of Gods ordinary dealings in the world; Fourthly, in
respect of the works, he does for us; Fifthly, in regard of the graces he
works in us; Sixthly, in respect of the comfort he impartes to us; And lastly,
in regard of the liberty he gives us.

First, they are privileged in respect of God, he is theirs, and they are
his; God the Father is their Father, Master, and Preserver; they are his
Children, Creatures and Charge. Jesus Christ is their Head, they are his
members; he is their husband, they are his Spouse; he is their Savior, they
are his redeemed; he is their Advocate, they are his Clyents; he he is their
Sheepherd, they are his Sheep; yea, they in some sort are one with him, and
he with them; so likewise the holy Ghost, he is their master, they are his
Scholars; he is their Leader, they are his followers; he is their Counselor,
they are his Clients; he is their Sanctifier, they are his Temple; he is their
Quickner, they are his frame and workmanship to a new Creature. Yea, the whole
blessed Trinity do most graciously concur by their personal Actions in
every part of our Salvation: here is a singular privilege; if we had no more
but only this, it were enough to stir us up to glorify God, and to comfort
us against all our present afflictions; how truly then may we say with the
Prophet, Psalm. 144. last, Blessed are the people that are in such a case, yea,
blessed are the people, whose God is the Lord. Secondly, we are privileged in
respect of the Creatures, the holy Angels are servants and attendants upon the
Church; they are ministering Spirits sent forth for their sakes: The Saints in
Heaven acknowledge us to be Members of their Body, the Catholic Church, and
do instantly desire the full accomplishment of our salvation, that they and we
may be perfected together. The Saints on earth love us, pray for us, rejoice at
our good; sorrow at our harms: The wicked of the world oftentimes reverence
and admire us for our holiness, and the good things we have, though otherwise
we be most odious to them; yea, all the unreasonable and senseless Creatures,
in heaven and earth, are at League with us; yea, the Devils are subdued to us,
and trodden under our feet; yea, further, the damned in hell, that scorned and
hated us whilst they did live, do now acknowledge that our estate is
exceeding happy; and curse themselves that they had so little grace in their
life, as not to join themselves to our Societies and practice our courses;
yea, the whole world is ours, it was made for our use and service, 1 Cor. 3.22,
23. even all things are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

Thirdly, in respect of Gods ordinary dealings and proceedings in the world,
we have our privileges, whether he strikes or spares, gives or takes away,
rains or shines, kills or gives life, blesses or curses, helps or forsakes,
whether it be man or a beast, good or bad, whole kingdoms or private persons,
Church or Commonwealth; we have our privilege and our benefit in and by them,
they are all done with a special Eye and intendment toward us, and so they
all work together for the best unto us, as it is, Romans 8.28. All Gods
Judgments are our Schoolmasters; his blessings, our comforts; his warnings,
our counselors; his laws our rules; his dealings, our directions: Specially
those dealings which God exercises toward our selves, are matters of special
privilege to us; when he blesses us, that is a matter of special privilege
to us; for we have them by promise, we esteem and embrace them as pledges of
his love, and we use them aright to the glory of the giver: for want of which
privilege, the very blessings of the wicked are heavy Curses: Again, God
chastens us, and it is our privilege, he chastens us in the world, that we
might not be condemnedwith the world, as it is in the 1 Cor. 11.32. and to you
is it given (says the Apostle) not only to believe in Christ, but also for to
suffer for his sake: For want of which Privilege to the wicked, all their
present punishments are the beginnings of their Torments in hell; Again, God
sometimes takes away his Spirit from us for a while; and then we mourn and
grieve, and being left to our selves, oftentimes we sin grievously, and then
our case is most fearful, yet by virtue of our privilege in Christ, these
very desertions of his, and sins of ours, work by contraries, for when we come
to our selves again, they work more grace in us, and make us wiser for the
time to come, and work more conscience in us of our ways, and bring us
greater comfort afterward, for war of which the wicked are left in their sins,
and are hardened therein and perish for ever. Lastly, he kills us and we die,
but by virtue of our privilege in Christ, and his death; this very death of
ours, is advantage to us, for a better life; whereas to the wicked it is the
end of their happiness; and the beginning of all their misery. Fourthly, 4 The
works God does for the faithful.
we are also privileged in respect of the works God does for us; what are
these? First, he chooses us to salvation, whereas he leaves others in the
mass of the old Adam to perish justly by their covering us with his own
righteousness; the rest of the world, the Lord Jesus lets alone, standing
defiled in their blood, ugly and odious with all their sins on them, before
the face of God, an Angry Judge, to condemn them, and to cast them into utter
darkness: Lastly, subdues our nature and brings it under the Obedience of his
blessed Will, renewing us into his own glorious Image; whereas all the rest of
the world are left in the slavery and bondage of the Devil being his Children,
and having his Image on them (but this is more natural to the next head) these
things are so nearely depending on each other, that we can make no perfect and
exact distinction; but, for Doctrine sake, they are to be sundred howsoever,
that we may know variety of our Privileges.

Fifthly, the Graces God works in us, are a Privilege to us, as Faith in Jesus
Christ, and in all Gods promises; Repentance for our sins, Mortification of
the old man, and quickening of the new man; hatred of sin, and love of
righteousness; Love to God, and his Religion, and to his Children; zeal for
his Glory; patience in afflictions; strength against temptations; he works in
us knowledge, wisdom, hope, perseverance, loathing of sin, and of the
world, and a longing and hasting for the coming of the Lord Jesus to
Judgment, and he works in us a sanctified heart, to make a saving use of the
Word and the Sacraments, and of all occurrences that befall us, and every fruit
of the spirit: and this God work in us, either indeed, or at least, in desire,
either more or less, sooner or later. Sixthly the Comforts God imparts to us,
many excellent Comforts he does priuiledg us in; he gives us the spirit of
adoption, whereby we cry Abba father; assurance of his love and favor in
Christ, and the pardon and forgiveness of all our sins, he gives us peace of
Conscience and Joy in the holy Ghost, cheering us up in all our tribulations
and temptations, and in our prayers, and in all his holy Ordinances, that
surely the end is good, and the manner profitable and comfortable, he gives us
also a Taste of heavenly Joys, whilst we are her; eternal life is already
begun in us, we ^eele sin daily dying in us, and grace prevailing above
nature, and we feel the Spirit helping our infirmities, and comforting,
directing and quickening us, all these are real performances and sensible
Comforts actually enjoyed, besides the promise of greater and better hereafter;
The consideration and expectation hereof is no small Comfort to us, seeing we
know he is faithful that has promised, and will not deceive us.

Son has made us free, John 8.36. First, Gods Justice was agianst us, to hurt
us, and to condemn us for our sins; we are sinners, and God is Just, and
hates sin, and how can we stand before him? But that we have this privilege by
Christ, that he has fully satisfied for all our sins, and so we are freed
from this danger; so that now to us in Christ, God is a merciful Father, not a
Just Judge; yea, Christ having satisfied the Justice of God, to the full, for
us, we may reverently challenge the Lord, in the Name of Christ, that he cannot
punish us, having punished one for us; and so Christ's merits, being
all-sufficient, have purchased all good things for us; so that now Justice is
for us, to give us that which is due to Christ; not against us, to give us our
own deseruings: Secondly, the Law is against us, and, like Saul, breathes out
threatenings against the Church of God; saying, If thou do not this, thou
shall dye; but this is satisfied too; Christ took on him the curse of the Law,
and so redeemed us from it, Galat. 3.13. Next to the Law comes sin, that had
defiled us, and exposed us to Gods wrath, and kept us under, as slaves and
servants, that we could do nothing but sin; here is our privilege, even the
blood of Christ that cleanses us and frees us from all our sins, so that the
filth does not appear in us, the guilt is not imputed to us, and the dominion
is ended, so that it does not reign in us, Romans 6. After sin comes death,
for the reward of sin is death, and death had seized on us for her own, we
Death destroys him that had power of death, which is the devil, and sets us
at liberty; so that we may now say with the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.56.57. The sting
of Death is sin, the strength of sin is the Law, but thanks be to God, who
has given us victory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Afterward comes in hell
for her share, and opens her mouth to swallow us down quick: Hell, that house
of horror, that should have been, by right, the house of our perpetual
habitation and aboade; but Christ Jesus he has triumphed for us over Hell and
Condemnation, so that now there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, Romans 8.1. Lastly, the devil, who is the ground of all these forces, he
had fingered us, and got us within his clutches, and wrapped us up in chains and
fetters, as his captives and bond-slaues; Christ Jesus he comes, and loses
the works of the devil, 1 Ioh. 3.8. he breaks these chains, and subdues
Satan; so that we may say with the Prophet, Psalm 124.7. the snare is broken,
and we are delivered; These are great and rare privileges, I would have you
wisely to consider of them: For, who so is wise, will ponder on these things,
that they may understand the loving kindness of the Lord; we should labor to
know these things, and to make use of them, and to stand fast in this liberty,
and not to be entangled again in the yoke of bondage: In the second place
consider what was or could be for us, we have bold access unto the Throne of
Grace, and an entrance unto God the Father, through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans
5.2. Ephesians. 2.18. we may go boldly, and safely to God, and tell him our
wants, and beg supply; we may talk familiarly with him, as a man does with
his neighbor, as Job speaks, we may come unto God, and say, Thou art my
Father and my maker, despise not the work of thy hands; so we may go to our
Lord Jesus Christ, and say with Thomas, My Lord, and my God, he by sight, we
by faith; so likewise we may go to the holy Spirit, and say, thou art my
Sanctifier and Comforter, and I am thy Temple, suffer not Satan to defile me
with sin: So likewise, we may have free access to the Word, and to the
Sacraments, and to all Gods promises, and we may lay our hands on them, and
challenge them for our own; So likewise, we may also reach out our hands to
all the creatures, as being our peculiar right; and lastly, when we are on our
deathbeds; we may with our Savior Christ, and with Stephen, sweetly and
comfortably, commend our spirits into the hands of God, and say, Into thy hands
O Lord I commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of truth:
this is an excellent privilege, that at the hour of death, when we are
assaulted with many sore temptations, we may throw them all from us, and
safely commend our souls into Gods hand; and if there were no other privilege
but this, it were enough to make us desire 2. matters of future certainties.
I say, matters of future Certainties, not of possibilities, that is too weak
a word in this sense; possibilities are for men, as that the son shall have
this and this after his fathers decease, and yet the son may be disappointed
many ways: but with God, future possibilities are undoubted Certainties, they
are as surely ours, as if we had them already. Now these are, first, perfection
of all grace, now we have them but in part, 1 Cor. 13.9.12. but hereafter we
shall have them in perfection: The second thing is the resurrection of the
body, but that (you will say) is common to the wicked too? It is true they,
shall rise too, but they shall not be able to stand in judgment, Psalm 1.5.
they shall rise to condemnation, as our Savior says, Ioh. 5.29. It were
better for them to lie still, the grave is better then hell; so that it is no
Privilege to them to rise: Thirdly, we shall stand dreadlesse, and fearelesse
before the Iugdement Seat of God; alas, now we are afraid of every qualme, how
shall we stand dreadlesse then? I answer, Then we shall know God to be our
Father in Christ, we shall know that our peace is made beforehand, we shall
have the righteousness of Jesus Christ to cover us, and then there shall be no
sin in us: this is it that will make us stand dreadlesse: whereas the wicked,
for want of this, shall tremble and quake, and call to the mountains to fall
upon them, and to the hills to cover them. Lastly, we shall have everlasting
glory, life and happiness in heaven, inioying the fellowship of God and
Christ, and the holy Spirit, and the blessed Angels, and there we shall live
continually, praising and glorifying God, there we shall have fullness of joy
and pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. To conclude therefore, let us not debase
our selves to sinful and vile, and slavish courses, but let us labor to walk
in some good measure, answerable to such great and high privileges as these
are.

The Twentieth LECTVRE of the CHVRCH.
THe last point we spoke of, was concerning the privileges of the Church, not
humane, such as Kings and men endowed the Church withal; but divine, such as
God endues the Church withal; and therein we handled two points; first, that
there are such privileges belonging to the Church; secondly, what these
Privileges are; there is something to be added to the last point, namely, what
they are: For there are two special privileges, something questionable above
the rest, each of them subject to mistaking; and the mistaking of them is, and
has been, the cause of much error: The first is concerning the infallible
guidance of the Church by the Spirit of truth; 2. other special privileges
added and entreated on.
and thereupon arises this question; whether the Church may err or no? The
second Privilege questionable, is concerning the necessity of being a member
of the Church, if ever we will attain salvation; and thereupon arises this
question; 1. concerning the infallibe guidance of the Church by Gods Spirit,
and so whether the Church can err or no, either in manners, or in Doctrine, or
in both, or in neither.
whether any can be saved out of the Church or no? These are the two points
which I purpose to handle at this time. The first is concerning the infallible
guidance of the Church, by Gods Spirit, whereupon arises this question, whether
the Church may err or no? And because error is a general name, affirmed, as
well of matters of obedience, as of knowledge, of bad ma^ners as well as of
false doctrine, therefore in plain and large terms it shall be propounded and
handled thus: whether the Church may err either in manners or doctrine, or in
both, or in neither? to open the way to the disclosing of the point, we are to
understand, rightly, these words, Church and Error: First, concerning the word
Church; for whereas, sometimes it signifies the whole Company of Believers
living on earth; sometimes, some one visible Congregation professing the Faith
of Christ: the state of the question is not of both alike, but we must
understand it far otherwise of the one then of the other: For whereas in the
first sense it contains Believers only, and all of them together, it must
needs have some special Privilege above particular Congregations, at least
for some kind of Error: Every Believer has a Privilege, in that respect
above an unbeliever; therefore all together much more: so that if it be
possible that one or two might be seduced to Error, yet that all of them
together should be so, it is impossible: And whereas, in the second sense, the
Church consists of Hypocrites, as well as true Believers; yea sometime all, or
most of Hypocrites, therefore the Church, taken in this sense, must needs be
more subject unto Error, then in the former sense.

Secondly, concerning the word Error: The Word of God prescribes every true and
right way, and every swaruing from that is therefore called Error, whether it
be in Doctrine or manners; because it is a going from that true and right way,
which the Word of God does teach us: And though Error, properly signify a
swaruing from the Truth, whether on the right or on the left hand, yet it
comprehends ^gnorances too, that is, their not attaining to some heavenly
Truths: these Errors are of diverse kinds, Errors of four sorts.
especially four; First, some are either fundamental, or in smaller matters;
Secondly, some are either of obstinacy or 1. what a fundamental Errors is.
or in smaller matters; fundamental Errors are such, which, being held, do
race the very foundation: he that erres in this manner, cuts himself off from
Christ, and cannot be saved; such was the Error of the Church of Gal^tia, in
Gal. 5.2.4. where they joined the works of the Law with Christ in the matter
of Justification, and therefore the Apostle tells them in the 2. verse, that if
they were circumcised, Christ should profit them nothing, and verse. 4. ye are
abolished from Christ, whosoever is justified by the works of the Law, is
fallen from Grace: Errors in smaller matters what they be.
Other Errors are of smaller moment; as when men hold the foundation, but yet
err in building on it, and such, notwithstanding these errors, may be saved,
1 Cor. 3.12, to 15. the Apostle says, that some build hay and stubble upon the
Foundation; but shall this turn to their damnation? No, themselves shall be
saved, says he; but what; without Repentance? No, for in the 13. verse it is
said, The day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by Fire, and the
Fire shall try every man's work, of what sort it is, that is, the Day or Light
of Gods Truth shall dispell this darkness, and the Fire of Gods Spirit shall
purify and purge away these errors from them, so that they must repent of
these errors: But then ye will say, what difference is there betwixt those
that err in the foundation, and those that err in smaller matters; for they
that err in the foundation shall be saved too, Difference btw^eene them that
err in the foundation, and them that err in smaller matters.
upon their Repentance. It is true; but yet there is great difference betwixt
them; for first, they that err in the foundation, are seldom and hardly
reclaimed, not one amongst a hundredth: but they that err in smaller matters,
are usually and easily reclaimed; for if the foundation be overthrown, all
must be reared up a new; but if any thing, that is built upon it, be amiss,
it may be easily amended; yea those that err those that err in matters of
less moment, though they do not repent of their error in particular: Nay,
though they do not know them (for who knows his errors) yet if they repent in
general of them, they shall find mercy and pardon from God: so that we see,
there is a great difference betwixt these. Secondly, some errors are either
Gal. 6.1. Brethren, if a man be suddenly fallen into any offense, ye which are
spiritual restore such a one, etc: when as they see it not to be an error, or
if they do see it to be so; yet they have some weak desire and labor against
it, but yet the assault is so strong, and their corruption so great, that they
cannot overcome it; this is an Error of Infirmity: Some errors are of
obstinacy, that is, when as the Party knows the right, and yet willingly
declines from it; and these that thus err, are so far from striving against
their Error, that they rather strive against a manifest Truth, to maintain
their Error; such an Error the Jews are taxed for, by Stephen, Acts 7.51. and
by Paul himself, Acts 28.26. where he applies a place out of Esaias to them,
showing their obstinacy, that in seeing they did see and not perceive, etc. so
that this is an error of obstinacy, for a man to know the Truth, and yet
willingly to decline from it. Thirdly, some are finite, and for a time only,
some final and for ever: for a time only, and upon better Advice they change
their mind; such was Peter's denial of Christ, Matthew. 26.75. for which he
presently repented and went out and wept bitterly: Again, some are final and
for ever, as when men live and dye in sin without any Repentance at all, at
least without any true and sound Repentance; such was the sin of Judas in
betraying Christ, he died desperately in it, without any true Repentance, Mat.
27.3, 5. Lastly, some Errors are particular, some are general, and each of
these in two respects; first, in respect of the persons that err; secondly in
respect of the things they err in, for when as one or two or some few men in a
Congregation are tainted with Error, here is a particular Error in respect of
the persons, as it was in the Church of Corinth, when as but some of them
denied the Resurrection, and not all 1 Cor. 15.12. But when as all or the
greatest part in a Church err, this is a general Error in respect of the
persons; An Instance of this we have in the Jews, when as they did all cry
out against our Savior Christ, Crucify him, Crucify him: So, secondly, in
respect of the things erred in, as when a man or a Church erres only in one or
in few things, this is a particular Error in that respect, so did the Church of
Pergamus, Revel. 2.14. I have a few things against thee; But when a man or a
Church erres in all or the most things, this is general also in respect of the
things they err in, as the Church of Rome at this day erres in all, or the
most things and so their Error is general in that respect, as also in respect
of their persons. Now to apply all this to the subject of the question, whether
the Church may err in all, or in any of these respects, or no? If we
understand the Church in the first sense, for the whole Company of Believers
living on earth, in this sense the Church may be said to err: first, in
matters of smaller moment, not in the foundation; Secondly, of Infirmity, not
of obstinacy; Thirdly, at least, only for a time, not for ever; Fourthly,
particularly, not universally; either in respect of the persons or of the
things: But if we understand the Church in the latter sense, of one particular
Congregation, in this sense, the Church may err in all these; which, that I
may the more largely and distinctly, without Confusion, deliver, and you
apprehend, receive it plainly in these Observations.

The First is this; That the Church militant (the whole Company of Believers on
earth) howsoever it has many excellent Priuildges by the Spirit of truth, yet
it is not so exempted from Error, but that it may and does oftentimes err both
in Doctrine and manners: I shall not need to handle Errors in manners by
themselves, and Errors in Doctrine by themselves, for each of these are
transgressions against the Word and Will of God, and they are both damnable; and
each, alike, may take hold of the Church, 1 Cor. 13.12. The Apostle Paul
speaking of himself, being then a sound, yea, a principal Member of the
Church of Christ, acknowledges ingenuously much Ignorance, that he knows
little to that he should know, he knows but in part; Now Ignorance being an
Error in a general sense, as we heard before, then we see that the Apostle
willingly undergoes the Imputation of Error; and if he be in Error, who can
look to escape? And thereupon it follows by necessary consequence, that he
erred in manners too; for we cannot be obedient in that we do not know; so
that, as his knowledge was imperfect; so was his love and obedience too: But
for errors in manners, it is far plainer in Romans 7.22, 23. where the Apostle
acknowledges that there was a Law in his members rebelling against the Law of
his mind, and leading him captive unto the law of sin, etc: and this was not
his infirmity alone, but it is the infirmity of all the Faithful, the Spirit
stirs them up to do good: yea, but, says the Apostle, Galat. 5.17. the
flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, and these
are contrary one to another, so that you cannot do the same things you would:
And our Savior gives an Inckling of this to his Disciples in a kind of
Parable, Ioh. 13.10. where he faith, He that washed is needs no ^^ue to wash
his feet, etc. which, though it be spoken in a negative sense, as showing,
that nothing needs washing in them but their feet; yet, it is affirmative in
force, showing, that none is so cleansed and purified, but that still he has
foul feet, that is, he has still sin and error in him, and these must be
cleansed and washed away, or else he can have no part in Christ Jesus, as in
verse 8: So likewise for error in manners, the Apostle James 3.2. says, In
many things we sin all, there all are included, and that not in one kind
only, as n^ a divided sense, as if one should offend in one thing, and another
in another thing; but in a compounded sense, not one, or many, but all sin;
and that not in one or few things, but in many: And for further confirmation of
the Truth hereof, it is elsewhere negatiuely delivered, as in the 1 King. 8.46.
There is not a man that lives, and sins not; now lay these two together, and
we shall see; that none is exempted from error in manners: So for Error in
Doctrine, Romans 3.4. where it is not only affirmed, in general, of all, and of
every one in particular, that every man is a liar, that is, that he erres in
some of his Apprehensions of the Truth; but the Apostle does, likewise, so
derogate the holding of the whole Truth entirely, and incorruptly, from man,
that he appropriates it to God alone; so that it is as possible for man to be
God, as not to be deceived: So that the Doctrine is clear, that the Church
militant, that is, the Company of Believers, living on earth, may, and
oftentimes do, err both in Doctrine and manners; So much for proof of the
point out of Scripture.

Scholar be not capable of the Art he teaches, he shall never bring him to
it: so it is in this, the Spirit is sufficient to teach them all Truths, but
they are not capable of them; the Spirit is sufficient in them for Salvation,
but not for perfect knowledge or obedience, and that by reason of their
frailty, that they are not so far capable of the Spirit.

The second reason is Satan's malice and subtilty, who

Thirdly, whilst we live here we have many occasions

Fourthly, Our perfection both for knowledge and Phil. 3.12. the Apostle says,
that he had not attained to perfection, though he were inferior to no man; no,
it is not for this life, it is respited to the life to come; then the Church
shall be without spot or wrinckle, Ephesians. 5.27. and that, not only by
Imputation, as we are here; but, by actual possession, then shall that be
verified Cant. 4.7. where the Church is said to be all fair and no spot in
her; but that is for the Church glorious and triumphant, it cannot be so with
the Church militant, but they must sit down under that ignorance and error
which they cannot prevail against, and pray daily, Lord forgive us our
trespasses: So you see the point made plain by reasons too.

Jeremy 10.14. Every man is a beast by his own knowledge, and for Obedience it
is said, Job 15.16. that man drinks up Iniquity as water, etc.: concerning
knowledge; First, we find by experience that we love error and falsehood, and
that we are ready to accept lies at the hands of Satan, and other deceivers;
we embrace them with both hands, and make much of them, and hardly can abide
to be won from them; we are sooner and easier persuaded from an hundred
Truths, then from one Error: Secondly, for Truth, we know that naturally we
hate and abhor it, we cannot learn or find it our selves, nor yet are we
willing to receive it from others, when it is brought to us; no, not when God
himself, and his Word, and his own blessed Spirit tenders it unto us; or if we
do receive it, it is but in part, to the halues deadly and coldly and
fearfully, and we are easily drawn from it, the Evil one catching it out of
our hearts, our minds wavering, carried away with every wind or blast of vain
Doctrine; or if we do receive it and stick to it, it is with much infirmity,
we are apt to defile it with our own Inventions, devises, glosses, additions,
detractions, mistakings, doubts, distrustes, idle and evil apprehensions; the
Lord knows the thoughts of man, that they are all but vain: So concerning
obedience, we find that, of our selves, we are prone to all sin, and averse
from all righteousness, and in this we do much more resist the spirit of
Grace then them former; the Reason is this, Truth and falsehood being of the
understanding, reason and judgment, the highest faculties of the soul, we can
more easily submit to the power of the Word and Spirit; but good and evil
being of the will and heart and affections, the more base and more carnal
parts in us; and the doing of good, and the forbearing of evil, being the
denying of our selves, and the bridling of the course of nature, the forsaking
of all our pleasures and profits, and indeed, the breaking of our hearts; It is
death to us to be thus mastred, and this is the reason, that we are much more
unwilling to reform in matters of obedience, then in matters of knowledge, and
that reformation, which we do attain to in matters of obedience, is much
more imperfect then in matters of knowledge: Let us consider rightly of this,
and seeing the case stands thus with us, let us be ashamed and confounded
before the presence of God, and hate and abhor our selves in dust and ashes;
what, are we ignorant of our selves, and yet will not learn? naught and
sinful, and cannot be reformed? How does this provoke Gods Wrath against us?
what a deforming is this to his Image in us? what dishonor to his name? what
grief is this to his spirit, that he has to deal with such perverse and
froward Scholars, that will not be taught by him? either we will not receive
his good motions at all, or else not as we should; what rejoicing is this to
Satan, that can insult and say, I can persuade men to error and sin, when as
Gods Spirit, and his motions to Truth and righteousness, are rejected? this is a
great gratifying of Satan, and a great rejoicing to him; besides, what hurt do
we to those amongst whom we live? But specially, what wrong do we to our
own Souls? this is to forsake our own mercy, and herein our selves are the
chiefest Enemies to our own salvation; let us confess this to God, and
bewail it and instantly beg pardon of him for it, and strive the best we can
against ^^, and let us be humbled all our days, that we can strive no better
against this brutish nature of ours.

forsook Christ and fled, Matthew. 26.56. but this was before the coming down
of the holy Ghost upon them, but did they so afterward? yes, even after they
had received the holy Ghost, they erred in manners, John the Disciple whom
Jesus loved, would have worshipped the Angel, Reu. 19.10. and again even
after admonition, he would have done the like, in Chap. 22.8. and so, very
likely, he did it after Repentance too; And so we see that Peter was reproved
to his face, by Paul, for his sin, Galat. 2. If this be so in the green
tree, Alas, Alas! What shall it be in the dry: when Peter and John, and the
rest of the Apostles have had their falls, shall any Puritan in the world be
so shameless, as to boast of perfection? This point shall need no further
Refutation; all Gods Children, from the first to the last, will ondemne this
Assertion, by their own contrary clamentable experience in the whole race of
their lives: I mention this the rather, because some papists, Anabaptists, and
familists are infected with this presumption at this day.

Church militant, howsoever it has many excellent privileges, yet it is not
so exempted from Error, but that it may and oftentimes does err, both in
Doctrine and manners.

Now let us come to the second Observation, and Psalm. 62.2. he is my strength
and my salvation and my defense, therefore, I shall not much be moved, that
is, fundamentally; nor obstinately, Psalm. 19.13. Lord keep me from
presumptuous sins: nor finally, Psalm. 55.22. the Lord will not suffer the
righteous to fall for ever, he may fall, but not for ever: nor generally in all
her parts; but still some are reserved, that have not bowed their knee to Baal,
1 King. 19.18. these two, finally and generally, are never found in the true
members of the militant Church: happily they may err fundamentally and
obstinately, but never finally and generally, Psalm. 37.24. though he fall, yet
shall he not be cast off, which, if it be understood of our outward
preservation here, as the Text seems to intend it, then much more of our
preservation from sin and error, that though we do fall, yet not finally
for ever: And Psalm. 125.1. they which trust in the Lord, are like mount Syon,
which cannot be removed, but stands fast for ever: And this is cleared by
our Saviors own mouth, Matthew. 16.18. upon this Rock will I build my Church,
and the gates of hell shall not overcome it, he says not, shall not touch it,
but only not overcome it, And Psalm. 102. last verse, the Children of thy
Servants shall continue, and their seed shall stand fast in thy sight; So then
the Church militant, though happily it do fall, fundamentally and obstinately,
yet it cannot fall finally and generally.

The Reasons, First, it is Christ's promise, that the 16.18. if there were no
other reason, this were sufficient.

built upon a Rock, Mat. 16.8. and therefore cannot fall; Matthew. 7.25.



that we may not fall, Luke 22.23. and he cannot be denied.

God loves once, he loves to the end, John 13.

Ioh. 16.13. the Spirit of Truth is continually present with them, inlightning,
quickening directing, persuading and reclaiming them from sin and error;
whereunto if we add the sufficiency of the Scripture, for all matters both
for life and doctrine, what other direction can we have? or how can we err
finally and generally.

the Church, which is the Pillar and Ground of Truth; therefore still, the
Truth is alive, at least, in some of the Church: so that the Church cannot fall
finally and generally, for then the Truth must fall too.

shall be quite lost, he will bring us home on his own shoulders, Luke 15.
Satan may, and does seek to devour us, and to swallow us up quick, but God
has set him his stint, so that neither altogether, nor for ever he can
prevail against us, John 10.28.29. Christ knows his sheep and he will give
them eterternall life: and they shall never perish, etc. If we be ignorant of
any point, God will reveal it, if we be doubtful, God will resolve it, if
we be out of the way, he will admonish and reclaim us; we shall hear a
voice behind us, saying, This is the way, walk in it, etc. Esaias 30.21.

The second use is for reproof of the Papists, and

The third note of observation is this; that no particular under the Law, and
before the Law, yea, and in Paradise, as also in Christ's time, yea, even the
churches whereof the Apostles were members, had their errors; but some churches
may err, and others have erred fundamentally, and finally too: Take the Church
of Ephesus for an example, that once was a true Church of God, and called a
golden Candlestick, and a Pillar of Truth, 1 Timothy 3. yet it erred in the
Apostle John's time, yea, it is now utterly and finaly fallen away from Christ to
Mahomet, and is utterly cut off from Christ the foundation: but it may be said,
that the church of Ephesus may recover again, and so her fall is not final: I
d^ny not, but that it may be recovered, through Gods providence at the last;
yea, but that is uncertain, and therefore, for ought we know, her fall is as
well final as fundamental, and that which was her case, may be the case of
any other particular church, and surely shall be, if they walk in her steps,
Reuelat. 2.5. The like we find in many other Primitive Churches, how many
famous churches are fallen away, that were true visible churches in those times?
some to the Arians heresy, some to the Donatists, some to the Nouatians, etc.
The lamentable estate of the Jews, Gods own people, proves this point without
exception, they are utterly cut off from the foundation, Christ: Error, like a
gangrene sometimes ouer-growes all; but some may say, when may a church be said
to err thus; seeing, though some may err, yet happily not the rest? I answer,
then a church may be said to err, either when an error is embraced of all in
general, or specially of those that are the Pastors and guides, and carry the
chief face and port of the Church with them; which error if it be general, in
all, or the chiefest Articles of faith, and that after admonition they persist
in it, and condemn all other churches that hold otherwise; Then is that church
degenerate into a faction, against the Church, and except some amongst them
impugn their untruths, and these in some answerable number, or of some good
place and quality in the Church, or in some known manner, that notice may be
publicly taken of it, such a Church cease (to us) to be a true visible
Church; but if there be such opposers in these untruths only, and yet they
hold with the factions in opinion, in some other truths fundamental; the
Church (for their sakes) may be falsely reputed (by all that know that
opposition) a true visible Church.

The reasons of the point are these: The same reasons that prove that the
Militant Church may err, hold directly for proof of the first part of this
observation, that a particular church may err, and often does err; for if it
be so in them, being all certainly chosen, much more in these, being all
called, but few chosen: which also, well considered, will prove the latter part
of this observation, that is, they may err fundamentally and finally too; for
in every particular visible church, there are some few of Gods chosen, else it
can be no true church; Now these few dying, still, the Truth and the Church
(where God in his Judgment forsakes) decays more, and more, loosing one truth
after another, and one faithful person after another, till at last, few, or
none are left, not enough in number, at least in port and place, to bear the
name of such a visible church.

Secondly, God ties himself, and his grace, and salvation to no one particular
place; and therefore he may take it from one particular church, and give it to
another, that may bring forth better ffruits.

The first use is for instruction to all particular Churches, to teach them to
walk warily, and carefully, examining themselves by the Word, whether their
courses be agreeable thereunto, and praying for the Spirit to enlighten them,
and let them take heed of the doctrines and inventions of men; if any error
arise, presently let them oppose and suppress it; If any doubt, let them go
unto the Law, and to the Testimony; If there be any difficulty, let us pray for
the Spirit, he is the best expounder, and God has promised to give the Spirit
to them that ask him; so though we may err, yet we shall not err finally,
and generally: Let not any Church presume of it self, though it be never so
pure, for as good Churches, as they, have fallen, and they may; yea, and without
great heed, they are in as great danger of corruption, and so proceeding, of a
final fall and desolation: Neither let any man do at on the Church, be it
never so glorious, as if it were an infallible Oracle, and the ground of our
faith and salvation: rather search the Scriptures; if the Doctrine of a Church
be agreeable unto them, embrace it, and build on it, not so much because of the
Church, which may err, and, happily will deny that afterward, which it once
affirmed; but because of the Scripture, which is always constant to it self,
and unchangeable. If the Scribes and Pharisees teach out of Moses chair, that
which is Moses Doctrine, believe them, else believe them not.

how can the Papists maintain their doubting of salvation, with the not
errring of the Church? yes, say they, though we know what we are now, members
of the true Church, and therefore in the state of salvation; yet we are not
sure what we shall be, whether we shall continue so or not: but yet then they
confess, that there is assurance of salvation for the time present, though not
for the time to come; and how also can they maintain the falling away of the
faithful, with the not erring of the Church? For the faithful are chosen of
God; but some of these that are of a visible Church are only called; If then
the chosen faithful may fall away, then those that are only called, much
more: yes says Hosius, Every particular member may fall away, but the whole
Church cannot: but I answer, that the only bar to stay men from final falling
away, is the decree of Gods election, which is tied no more to all the Church
in general, then it is to every man in particular; but they retort this on us;
you (say they) deny the final falling away of the faithful, and yet affirm
the final falling away of the Church; and yet also you call the Church the
company of the faithful: I answer, when we say the faithful cannot fall away
for ever, we understand the chosen faithful; But when we say the Church may
fall away, we mean only the faithful by profession, and by calling only, not
by election; and when we say that the Church is the company of the faithful,
we understand it properly of the whole members, not of any visible
congregation: and for that which they object, that the Church cannot err,
because the Church is the Spouse of Christ, the Pillar and ground of truth; and
because it has the promise of the spirit: to this I answer; that these do
belong properly to the whole militant Church, not to any particular visible
Church; but only by proportion, that is, so far forth as the faithful and
chosen are found in it: But notwithstanding this promise of the Spirit, they
may sin, and therefore they may err too, for Gods Kingdom is the Kingdom
of righteousness, as well as of truth; and that holy Ghost is the Spirit of
grace against sin, as well as the spirit of truth against error; he is a
sanctifier, as well as an inlightener. And so much shall serve concerning the
first doubt and question, whether the Church may err or no.

The second thing is concerning the necessity of being a member of the Church,
if ever we will attain salvation; and so whether any may be saved out of the
Church or no. Extra fidem Ecclesiae. Morn. 451.
The second matter of doubt, is concerning the necessity of being a member of
the Church, if ever we will attain salvation; And hence arises this
question; whether any may be saved out of the Church or no? For this is one
singular prerogative of the Church, that whosoever is of it, is in the state of
Salvation, and whosoever is out of it, is in the state of Damnation. To this
question I answer, that if we understand it of the inward communion of the
faith of the Church, that is, of the chosen; it is simply true, that without
the Church, there is no salvation at all: And so also, if we understand it of
the outward Communion in the profession of faith with the Church, that is, of
the called; it is true also, that, ordinarily and usually, without the Church
there is no salvation: So that it is true properly of the whole Militant
Church, and yet it extends to the visible thus far, that if a man be where
there is a visible Church, if he join not with it, ordinarily he cannot be
saved.

Esaias 60.1.2, 3. as there was light in Goshen, when all Egypt beside was in
darkness; so is there light and salvation in the Church, when the whole world
besides is in darkness, and the estate of Damnation. And as all that were not
in the Arc, perished in the flood, so they that are not of the Church, cannot
be saved, but must needs perish with the world; and that which the ancient
fathers say, is true; that they which have not the Church for their mother,
have not God for their father: and surely, they that are not of the Kingdom of
heaven here on earth, shall never be of that Kingdom which is in heaven.

The reasons are these; First, the Church is the fold,

Secondly, Election, the promise of grace, Christ himself,

The uses are these, first this teaches us to labor to be

Secondly, let those that are in this State, let them

Thirdly, here we see the misery of those that are not

Fourthly, this teaches those that are of the visible



The one and twentieth LECTVRE of the CHVRCH.
WE have already spoken of the 6th general point propounded to be handled,
namely, of the privileges of the Church: The seventh general head in the
doctrine of the church, viz. the adversaries and opposites of it.
Now we are to proceed to the seventh, namely, of the adversaries and opposites
of the Church: for as the Church of God is endued with many excellent
privileges above all other congregations whatsoever; So no other company in the
world is more subject to adversaries and oppositions, then they are; for such
is the condition even of the best and happiest estates, that can be attained to
in this life, that they consist of sweet and sower mingled together; and
commonly, they which have the most sweet one way, have the most sower another:
So is the estate of the Church, a comfortable estate, the best and happiest
that this life can yield, in respect of many excellent privileges belonging to
it; and yet no estate so maligned and spited at by so many, and so sore
adversaries, as the Church is: the wisdom of God has so framed and appointed
where there is all sweet, no sour; perfection of good and happiness, without
any mixture of any evil: Now the present estate of the Church being thus
compounded of sour, as well as sweet, of many dangers, as well as of many
privileges; It is needful therefore, first, for me to speak of, secondly,
for you to learn the one as well as the other; first for me to speak of
them, for he is a deceitful Merchant, that in setting forth his Commodities
to sail, shows only the best, and conceales the worst: So, if I should
acquaint you with the Privileges only, and not with the adversaries too; I
should be a deceitful handler of the Word and mysteries of God. Secondly, it
is needful for you to learn both, that you may know what to trust to, if ever
you come within the walls of the Church, not to dream all of privileges and
comforts; but make account aforehand, to meet with adversaries and crosses,
and oppositions of sundry kinds: I speak not this to dismay any from joining
to the Church (though this has been one special means to discourage many)
but I speak this to stir up your spirits, and to fit and frame you
beforehand for the trials that God has appointed you for, This handled in 5.
point.
that so you may fight that good fight of faith, against all your adversaries:
that which I shall speak concerning this matter, I will deliver in these five
points; First, I will show, that the Church of God has many adversaries to
oppose it, so long as it is in this world: Secondly, I will show what these
Adversaries are: Thirdly, I will show the dealing of these Adversaries against
Gods Church; Fourthly, I will show what is the dealing of the church, the
faithful against her Adversaries: And lastly, I will show the courses and
dealings of God, both how he carries himself to the Adversaries, and also how
he carries himself to his Church. And having spoken of these particulars, I
shall have spoken sufficiently of this point.

And first of the First, that the Church of God has many Adversaries to oppose
it; ^. The (...) that the Church of God has many Adversaries to oppose it,
delivered in a Doctrine.
The point offers it self in a plain and direct observation, and therefore so
we will take it, and so proceed in the handling of it: And the observation is
this; That the Church of God so long as it is in this world, is always
incountred and assaulted with many adversaries, that seek to disquiet their
peace, and hinder their good proceedings; Mark the parts of the observation,
First, I say, they are Adversaries, there is their quality, they are
Adversaries, full of hatred; Secondly, I say they are many Adversaries, there
is their number: Thirdly, I say, that they encounter and assault the Church,
there is their work: Fourthly, I say, they do always assault it, there is
their diligence: Lastly, I say, they seek to disquiet their peace, and hinder
their good proceedings, there is their end: I shall not need to make a curious
Application of any proofs to every one of these particulars (though I doubt
not, but that many of the places brought for proof would afford it): It will
be sufficient, that I prove the maine matter plainly and directly: Therefore
for the proof of this observation, see it first in a shadow, Mat. 8.24. where
Christ and his Disciples are in a Ship upon the Sea, and this Ship is troubled
with Tempests, and ouerflowed with waves: Now although this be but a story, and
that there be no intendment in the place to be applied to this; yet under this
is fitly shadowed out the estate of the Church in this life: Imagine the Sea to
be the world, and the ship to be the Church, and the tempests and waves to be
assaults and incounters, that the Church is subject unto, and the Winds to be
the Adversaries of the Church; And then we shall see in this shadow, the
observation be plain, that no ship is more tossed in the Sea with Winds and
tempests, hindering their course, and indangering their estate; then the Church
is, beaten against by the assaults and oppositions of adversaries, troubling
their peace, and hindering their good proceedings: See it more plainly in a
Comparison of Gods own Making and applying, Cant 2.2. where the Church is
compared to a Lilly amongst thorns; Now the Lilly is a tender, yet a glorious
plant; so glorious, that Christ prefers it before Solomon in all his Royalty;
but the thorn is a shrubbed Plant, rough and full of Pricks: And the Church,
so long as it is here, is a Lilly among thorns, has many adversaries
continually vexing it like so many pricking thorns in her sides, even on every
side round about her. See it also in a Parable of our Saviors making, Mat.
13.25. etc: where the Church is compared to wheat among Tares; as the wheat
is among tares, so the Church is among her Adversaries, the seed of the
wicked; And as the Tares hinder the growth and take away the Iuce from the good
Corn: so the wicked disquiet the Church, and seek to hinder and keep her
down from growing, And how long shall they do this? why, till the Harvest,
verse. 30. that is, till the end of the world, verse. 39. Then so long as the
Church shall be in this world, she shall be encountered and assaulted with
many Adversaries, that shall seek to suppress it, as the Tares the wheat:
See it yet more plainly in a vision, Reu. 12. which is not a bare and empty
vision, like a Dream, but a beholding of things as in deed and truth they
are; In the first verse. there is a woman clothed with the Sun, and having
the Mo^ne under her feet, that is the Church of God; In the third verse there
are her Adversaries, a Red Dragon, Red with wrath against the Church; there is
but one Adversary named, but he has many heads and horns, that is, many
accomplices and retinues: In the seventh verse, there is their work, the Dragon
and his angels fought against Michael and his Angels, that is, against the
Church; And in the fourth verse. there is their end, to devour the Child, that
is, to hinder all good fruits, that should be brought forth and grow up in the
Church; And this he never gives over, not though himself be foiled and cast
unto the earth; for there he persecuted the woman, verse. 13. nor yet though
the woman be carried away from him into the wilderness, yet there he
persecuteth her, verse. 14. and 15. not yet though he be disapointed of his
Attempts, yet he gives not over, but makes war with the remnant of her seed
verse. 16.17. So that this place teaches every particular the point observed.
See it yet more plainly affirmed by the Lords own mouth in the former
testament, and set down as an ordinance and work of God himself, Genesis 3.15.
I will put Emnity betwixt thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her
seed, he shall break thine head, thou shall bruise his heel: here is a plain
opposition betwixt Satan and his seed, and the Church and her seed; and this
is continual; for when his head was broke by our Savior, Matthew. 4. in
ouercomming him in his temptations, but specially at his death; yet still he
seeks to assault the Church, and to bruise her heel. And the same in effect
is justified by Christ himself, in the new Testament, John 16.33. In the world
ye shall have affliction, but be of good Comfort: I have overcome the world,
etc: As if he should say, so long as you are in the world, look for
affliction, it is your portion here, to be afflicted and assaulted with many
adversaries. Yet last of all, see it most plainly in the experience of all
Ages, In the fourth chapter of Nehemiah verse. 7.8. when Sanballat and Tobiah,
and the Arabians and the Ammonites, and the Ashdodims heard that the walls of
Jerusalem were repaired, they conspired altogether to come and to fight against
Jerusalem, and to hinder them: So in Heb. 11.35, 36, 37. where the estate of
the Church in this world is set down to be this, that many were stoned, many
racked, others hewn asunder, and others slain with the Sword, etc. These are
the assaults and oppositions, that the Church is to expect in this life; So the
Apostle 1 Cor. 49. to the 13. speaks of the like oppositions, that the Church
meets withal in this world, that they were as men appointed to Death, a
gazing stock unto the world, to Angels, and to men, etc: made as the filth of
the world, and the off scowring of all things: And in the 1 These. 2.18. the
Apostle says, that he would have come unto them, but Satan hindered him: so
that we see that Satan, and his Instruments assault the Church continually,
and hinder their good proceedings. So in Psalm. 2.1.2. etc. the heathen rage and
the people murmr, the Kings of the earth band themselves, and the Princes
are assembled together against the Lord and his Christ. And in Act. 4.27. in
both these places Christ himself is propounded for an example in this case,
that so all that believe in him and profess him, may know what to trust to;
Herod and Pontius Pilate, and the Gentiles, and the people of Israel, all were
gathered together against Christ; if it were so with our Savior, it must needs
be so with all his members: If they hated and opposed him, they will hate and
oppose them, for the Servant is not above his Master: what Church ever was
there in the world, yea, or what one true member of the Church, that can no by
their own experience give Testimony to this Truth? Either in captivity, or out
of it; either under the Law, or before the Law; or after the Law: Either
Apostles, Prophets or Patriarchs, all from the first to the last; yea Adam
himself in Paradise, see how he was encountered and overcome, and so cast out
of Paradise, which all mankind rues to this day: There is no place not state,
but heaven free, there, and no where but there, shall the Church be triumphant,
there she is always militant, assaulted and fought against by many
Adversaries, that seek to disquiet her peace, and hinder her good proceedings.
So much for the proof of the observation: Now let us see the Reasons of it.

And the first and chief Reason, is the Justice of God Genesis 3.15. he was in a
course of Justice, as a Judge inflicting; this is a punishment upon the
Serpent, because he seduced our first Parents: So that howsoever these
oppositions light heavily and justly on the faithful, yet it hits them only,
as it were a by-blow, for their chasticement; the maine stroke is inflicted on
the Serpent and his seed, as their deserved punishment.



Galat. 5.17. the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit lusts
against the flesh and these two are contrary.



a Sign to be spoken against, Luke 2.34. and therefore they that profess and
believe in him, cannot but be mightily opposed, not only, because they are
members of a militan^ head; but also for that very cause, because they profess
and believe in him.

Cor. 11.19. There must be Heresies even among you, that they which are
approved amongst you may be known; And so the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4.12. think it
not strange concerning the fiery Trial, which is amongst you to prove you. So
likewise, these oppositions are for the trial of Gods graces in us, of our love
to Jesus Christ, whether we love him unfeignedly and merely for himself, or
for our own ease and good and safety; for, if we love him not for himself,
but for these, then when these fail, our love will fail too: So also it is
for the trial of our Faith in his promises; to see whether we will still build
and rest upon them in all our Crosses, with all manly Confidence, when in
outward appearance it is unlikely, that they should be performed and stand: So
it is also for the trial of our Patience, to see if we will quietly endure
all Crosses and oppositions, and speaking against of Sinners, and all manner of
evil dealings for Christ's sake. Lastly, it is for the trial of the corruption
that is in us; For commonly many corruptions break out of our hearts in these
oppositions, as we see in Job, who was a Just and upright man, and yet we see
in his afflictions, what a Sea of corruption burst out of him. These are the
Reasons that the Church has so many adversaries and opposits.

The uses are these; The first use is matter of Instruction Tranquillity and
peace is a most dangerous estate, and where there is such a state, we may
fear, that the Devil possesses all in peace there, as our Savior says, Luke
11.27. And in Luke 6.21, 22. he says, Blessed are ye that weep, for ye
shall laugh; Blessed are ye, when men hate you, etc. there is the estate of the
faithful: but we be to you that laugh now, for ye shall wail and weep: woe
be to you when all men speak well of you, verse. 25.26. there is the estate of
the Reprobate; Do we laugh and have we our pleasure now, and do all men
speak well of us? then certainly we are not of the number of the blessed,
but our estate is a woeful estate; we must take this as a Rule, that to whom
Abraham our heavenly Father may say, Son, remember that thou in thy life time
receiuedst thy pleasure, to those shall be also said after this life, now thou
art tormented, Luke 16. the Torments of hell are the end of such an estate: but
on the contrary if it be with us, as it was with Lazarus, that our heavenly
Father may say of us, that we have had our pains here; he shall also affirm
of us after this life, as of him, but now he is comforted; pains are bitter
here, but they are sweet hereafter: I doubt not but Gods children have many
times peace here, and yet go to heaven; and the wicked may have many crosses,
and yet go to hell: But I speak here of crosses and sufferings that befall us
for Christ's cause, and for his sake because, we are the Church of Christ; and
these we must look for in this life, as Christ was a Sign to be spoken
against, Luke 2.34. or a butt to shoot at, so is his Chruch, and every
paricular member, and this is it we are to look for in this world, here is
our warfare, in heaven is our crown: And therefore while we live here, let us
look for many Adversaries and oppositions.

first, it keeps many from entering into the Church; what, say they, Shall we
enter into so many troubles? If they could separate the Church from the cross,
then they would be of the Church, like unto the high Priests and the Scribes,
and the Elders, and Pharisees, in Matthew. 27.42. that said, Let him come down
from the Cross, and we will believe in him; so these men, if ye can separate
Christ from his cross, they will believe in him: Secondly, it is a stumbling
block to many to make them fly away from the Church, at least for a time, so
did the Disciples of Christ, Matthew. 26.56. when their Master was in trouble for
his life, they all forsook him and fled; this was but for a time: But many in
the time of opposition and persecution, fall away finally from the Church, such
are they that are compared to the stony ground, Mat. 13.20.21. that received
the seed of the Word with joy for a time, but because it was not rooted in
their hearts, therefore when persecution comes, they fall away: Thirdly, it
is a stumbling block to others, that are beholders of these oppositions,
causing them to pass hard and uncharitable censures on us, either scoffingly
by way of insultation, as they did over our Savior, in Matthew. 27.43. He
trusted in God, let him deliver him now if he will have him, for he said, I am
the Son of God; because our Savior was brought to a shameful death,
therefore they scoff at him, and insult over him, as if he were not the Son
of God, and so this was a stumbling block to keep them from believing in him:
or else it causes others to pass hard censures on us, reprochfully taxing us
as notorious sinners, because we are so continually molested, as they did of
our Savior, Esa. 53.34. they thought him to be a wicked man, and that
therefore he was plagued and smitten of God; and so in Acts 28.4. they judged
of Paul when the viper hung upon his hand, that he was a wicked man; and
therefore, though he had escaped the Sea, yet vengeance would not suffer him
to live. Thus many make the persecutions and oppositions of the Church as a
stumbling block, to keep them from joining with the Church: these are all
here reproved.

Sti^ting up to many duties.
Is the Church opposed with many adversaries, then we must learn, first,
fight, and to take up arms, and to bear up our selves with good spirit and
courage against all our adversaries; the Apostle, 1 Cor 16.13. exhorts us to
this duty, Stand fast in the faith, quit your selves like men, be strong, etc.
seeing we are matched with so many adversaries, we must fight manfully, and
quit our selves like Christian men, for shall they fight against us, and that
continually; and shall we lie still, either not fighting at all, or if we
begin to fight, shall we like cowards give over, and suffer them to trample
us under their feet? God forbid; this were not only to bring our selves and
our souls into our enemies hands, but also to deliver God himself (as much as
in us lies) and his cause and Religion into the hands of his enemies; If we
be opposed in an outward fight, as men, we are ready to take up arms, and to
strike again, and to make all resistance, where we should not; but in this
case we should rather yield, and give place, and not resist evil, as our
Savior teaches us, Matthew. 5.39, etc. Being therefore opposed as Christians,
and members of the Church, and our faith being dearer to us then our lives; and
the Lord having given us an express charge to resist and fight it out; why do
we not then quicken up our spirits, and resist even unto blood, if need
require, that lawfully, as the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 2 5. that is, as we must
fight on a good ground, so we must fight by good and lawful means, when we
come to have bickerings with the wicked, we must not do by them as they do
by us, to quit them like for like; if they wrong us, we must not wrong them;
or if they slander, or revile, or ouer-reach us, we must not do the like by
them; no, we must fight against them by lawful means, such as are infallible
by Gods Word; we are to deal so by lawful courses against them, as they do
unlawfully against us. Thirdly, that we may strive lawfully, we must put on
6.11. as we must fight, so we must be armed; our adversaries come forth armed
against us, and shall we go forth naked against them? No, we must be armed
too; yea, they are in complete harness, well appointed in every respect to
hurt us, and yet to keep themselves harmless; so must we have complete
armor too, from the head to the foot, we must have the helmet of salvation,
the breast plate of righteousness the shield of faith, the sword of the spirit,
the Girdle of verity, and we must be sh^d with the preparation of the Gospel
of peace. Besides, as they are furnished by the devil their captain, so must
we by God our captain, vpder whose colors we fight, we must put on the whole
armor of God; and that this may be pressed the more upon us, the Apostle
doubleth his exhortation, in 13. verse, and says, For this cause, take unto
you the whole armor of God. Fourthly, we must watch, so the Apostle commands
Cor. 16.13. and Peter, 1 Pet. 5.8. Be sober and watch; we must watch, for
first our adversaries are many, secondly, every one assaults, thirdly, they
watch to overthrow us, fourthly, they have much craft and subtilty amongst
them, even as much as the Devil can put into them, and therefore we had need
to watch continually, and to stand on our guard, and to have our eyes open, and
to cast every way about us, to discover and prevent the enemy, and to save our
selves, remembering still, that the envious man prevailed in his purpose against
the good seed, while men were sleeping, Matthew. 13.25. that is, while they were
not watchful and wary to prevent him. The fifth duty which we must practice,
take all opportunities and advantages for our own defense, we must learn of
our adversaries, who are exceeding wise in doing evil: so we must be wise in
doing good; as they spy out their best advantages when they are strongest, and
best prepared, and when it will be most for their benefit, and our hurt, and
when we are weakest and most unprovided, not so able to make our party good
against them; so must we do against them, specially, we must take such
advantages as God affoords us in his Word, when we read how others of Gods
children have defended them selves in such assaults, let us take advantage by
their example, and still in all our assaults let us lay up something for our
defense, against throw away all hindrances, 2 Timothy 4.2. no man that warreth,
intangleth himself with the affairs of this life, etc. Soldiers carry little
with them to the war, but cast away all that is troublesome to them; so must
we throw away all hindrances that may trouble us in this fight, as the love of
the world, and of our selves, and of pleasures, yea, and if need be, we must
loaue father and mother, wife and children too, and throw them all away, rather
then they should comber us in this battle; we must rid our hands of all
things, but what necessity ties us to, that so we may be free from incombrances
in the mannaging of this spiritual warfare: The Apostle in the 1 Corinthians. 9
26, 27. propounds himself for an example in this case, so fight I (says he)
not as one that beats the air, but I beat down my body, and bring it in
subjection, etc. he knew, that if he did not beat down his body, and so cast
this hindrance away, he should but beat the air, teaching us, that we must
throw away all that hinders us in the mannaging of this confidence in Gods
love, we must cast our selves by faith upon the power of God, as the Apostle
exhorts, Ephesians. 6.10. My brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of
his might, and if we do thus, it shall go well with us in this our battle;
and this faith and confidence is nor only a part of this fight, but the very
victory it self, as the Apostle says 1 John 5.4. this is the victory whereby
we overcome the world, even our faith, and in this respect it is called a
shield to quench all the fiery darts of Satan, Ephesians. 6.

The eighth duty which we are taught from hence to David says, Psalm 56.9.
when I cry, then mine enemies shall turn back; and this the Apostle Paul
practiced in his spiritual fight, when the messenger of Satan was sent to
buffet him, he besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from him; and the
same Apostle, Ephesians. 6.18. exhorts us hereunto in many terms; pray always,
with all manner of prayer, and supplication, in the Spirit, and watch
thereunto, with all perseverance, we must have help and strength, else we
cannot withstand our enemies, they being so strong, and we so weak; and whence
should we have help, but from God? And how shall we obtain it of him but by
prayer? and therefore we must pray always unto God, that he would help and
strengthen us in our fight, and that he would daunt and draw all good success
from our enemies that so they may not prevail against us, but that we may
prevail against them, Exodus 17.11. When Moses held up his hand, Israel
prevailed, and when he let his hand down, Amaleck prevailed; so it is with us
when we hold up our hands to God by prayer, we shall prevail against our
spiritual enemies; but if we let down our hands, neglect this duty, this
duty of prayer, they will prevail against us.

The last duty which we are hence taught to practice, possess our souls with
patience, holding out to the end of the fight, and being well content with our
present portion, sighing for deliverance, and yet waiting the Lords good
leisure, with an expectation of help and comfort to all our crosses, and a
seasonable and joyful deliverance from all our crosses, and a recompense in
heaven, with a Crown of glory, for all the crosses and miseries which we do
here endure. And so much for the first point; that the Church of God has many
adversaries, etc.

The second point, what these adversaries are, and they are many.
The second point is; who, and what these adversaries are? Surely they are very
many in number: In general, they are all they that are not of the Church, for
so is our Saviors Rule, Luke 11.23. He that is not with me, is against me;
The particulars are many, and therefore not easily to be comprehended within
one artificial division, therefore take every one by themselves.



2. sort.
The second sort are those that are not yet admitted into the Church, and they
are not only Infidells and Reprobates, which never were, nor ever shall be of
the Church, but also Gods chosen children before their calling are bitter
enemies of the Church; as the Apostle Paul, he was as great an adversary
against the Church, till he was called, as the world could yield.

3. sort.
The third sort of opposites to the Church are heretics, they are such as
stiffely maintain any gross opinion against the faith professed in the
Church; some such there were in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 11.19. and these
opposites are of all sorts, some are greater heretics, others less, and
accordingly they are more or less opposite; yet they are all adversaries, and
that in an high degree, even to the faith which is the life of the Church; at
least in such particulars as they oppose. All the embracers of heresies are
enemies, but the broachers of them most of all.

The 4th sort of opposites are Schismatikes, 4. sort.
those that make a division or rent in the Church, withdrawing themselves from
the outward fellowship of those that profess the saving truth, of these the
Apostle speaks. Heb. 10.34. that they withdraw themselves to perdition, these
are dangerous adversaries, for they do not only make a rent in the Church
(but as much as in them lies) they divide Christ, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor.
1.13. of both these opposites, the Heretic and the Schismatike, it may be said
as the Apostle says, 1 John 2.19. They went out from us, because they were not
of us; Now as Heretics are opposite to the faith of the Church; so are
Schismtikes to the unity of the Church; and as Schismatikes are opposite to the
whole Church, so specially they are opposite to that Church from which they
separate.

The fifth sort of adversaries, are Apostates, 5. sort.
that revolt from the faith, and fall to their old estate of nature and sin,
such was Demas, 2 Timothy 4.10. who forsook the Apostle Paul, and embraced this
present evil world. And this is the fearefullest estate of all the rest, for
if they so persist (as they hardly ever recover) they fall into the sin
against the holy Ghost, which shall never be forgiven; of such the Apostle
speaks, Hebr. 6.4, 5, 6. that it is impossible that they which were once
enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, etc. if they fall away, that
they should be renewed again by repentance: and Heb. 10.26. If we sin willingly
after we have received and acknowledged that truth, there remains no more
sacrifice for sin.

The sixth sort of opposites are persecutors, 6. sort.
that do not only not regard the Church, and the truth, but they hate and
persecute it, and those that love it, and that not in a mean degree, but for
the most part they are bloodsuckers, and nothing will satisfy them, but either
the souls of professors, if they forsake the truth, or their bodies and lives,
if they continue steadfast in the truth.

The 7th sort of opposites are Hypocrites, 7. sort.
or Counterfeits, such as pretend Religion when as yet they affect it not
sincerely and in truth, they go to the Church, hear the Word, receive the
Sacraments, etc. but they do it not with a single and sincere affection; If
these be Ministers then they are false Apostles, such as the Apostle speaks
of, 2 Cor. 11.13. that are deceitful workers, and transform themselves into
the Apostles of Christ: or if they be of the people, they are false brethren,
such as the Apostle speaks of, Galat. 2.4. that are crept into the Church, to
spy out our liberty; these are the more dangerous enemies, because they are so
near to us; as it is in a family, there is most danger by those of the same
household if any of them be a thief, he may set the doors open to let others
in; they are most dangerous, as first, being least suspected; for if we did
suspect them, we would beware of them; secondly, as having fittest
opportunities to do us mischief, because they know our courses, and so can
the more easily betray us: as Judas knowing our Saviors walk, was the fittest
Instrument to betray the Lord of life, John 18.2.

8. sort.
Eighthly, excommunicate persons are adversaries to the Church, who, though they
do not voluntarily depart from the Church, as Schismatikes do, yet are they
worthily cut off from the Church: such was the Incestuous person, 1 Cor. 5.5.
these are in a fearful estate, for they have no comfort by the prayers of the
Church, being cut off from the body, they can have no communion with it, and
till such times as they repent, and are reconciled to the Church, they are to
be accounted of as opposites, as Heathens and as Publicans.

9. sort.
Ninthly (we come to those that are more spiritual enemies) the world, that is,
the people, and fashions of the world; the people of the world, they hate us
because we are none of their society, as our Savior says, John 15.19. And
the fashions of the world, which we are not to yield unto in any hand, Fashion
not your selves according to the world, says the Apostle, Romans 12.2. These are
dangerous enemies, and it is hard for us to prevail against the whole world.

Tenthly, the flesh, that is, 10. sort.
the unregenerate part in our selves, this always fights against the spirit,
Gal. 5.17. and seek the destruction of our souls, 1 Peter 2.11. Abstain from
fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul; this is a pestilent adversary
which we carry always in our bosoms, and cannot possibly either fly from it,
or cause it to fly from us, which is the singular mischief of this enemy,
above and beyond all others. The devil himself, if we resist him will fly
from us, but this we carry always about with us.

The eleventh adversary is sin, 11. sort.
this is a deadly enemy to the soul too, the Apostle says, Romans 7.11.13.
Sin took occasion by the Commandment, and thereby slew me: and sin, that
it might appear sin, wrought death in me.

The last Adversary is the devil, 12. sort.
he is the adversary of all adversaries, and the commander of all the rest.
And this being the principal oposition of all, we will speak, God willing,
the more largely and particularly of it by way of observation.

And the observation is this, Genesis 3.15. The maine enmity betwixt us and our
adversaries, is from the Serpent himself, as he being the head, all other are
but his seed, Revel. 12.37. The red Dragon the devil, he fought and his
angels; he is the Arch enemy, the other are but his angels: 1 Pet. 5.8. your
Adversary, the devil, etc. What, are there not many adversaries besides him?
ye^, but he is an adversary by way of excellency, the adversary of adversaries,
he has the rule of all the rest, Ephesians. 6.12. the Apostle says, We wrestle not
against flesh and blood; Do we not wrestle against flesh and blood? yes, that
we do, but they are but instruments, the author of them are principalities
and powers, etc. The devil and his angels, Matthew. 13.28. Who sowed the Tares
amongst the good Corn? the envious man did it; as who should say, whatsoever
the means were, yet he was the chief Agent, and therefore they are called his
seed, verse. 38. and thefore he is said to deceive the whole world, Revel.
12.9. because he leads the world after him to do his will, he it is that
works in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. as he being the mouer, and
they his engines, he their father, they his children: So that Satan is the
Grand-aduersary of Gods Church, all other adversaries are but his instruments,
etc. See this proved further in every particular enemy before named; first, all
false Churches, whose are they? the Synagogues of Satan. Revel. 2.9. secondly,
they which are without, not yet admitted into the Church, they are his too,
they are under his power, Acts 26.18. thirdly, Heretics, they are his, Revel.
2.24. fourthly, Schismatikes are his, James 3.14.15. Satan himself was the
first Schismatike, and that in heaven: fifthly, Apostates are his, and Apostasy
is by the working of Satan, 2 These. 2.3.9. sixthly, Persecutors are his, Reu.
2.10. the devil is said to cast some of them into prison, when as persecutors
did it: And 1 John 3.12. Cayne that slew his brother, is said to be of the
wicked one, that is, of the devil, seventhly Hypocrites are his, false
apostles are Satan's Ministers, 2 Cor. 11.15. the devil was in Judas heart,
John 13.15. and the wicked Jews are said to be of their father the devil,
John 8.44. eighthly, excommunicate persons are his vassalls, 1 Timothy 1.20. they
are delivered to Satan, ninthly, the world is his, he is the Prince of the
world, John 14.30. yea, he is the God of the world, 2 Cor. 4.4. tenthly, the
flesh is his messenger, 2 Timothy 12.7. Lastly, Sin is his Snare, 2 Timothy 2.26.
So that the devil erects false churches, possesses them that are without,
inspires Heretics, incenseth Schismatikes, seduceth Apostates, incourageth
persecutors, begets hypocrites, triumphs in the excommunicate, commands the
world, and has them in a string, prouokes the flesh, inticeth to sin, he
imployes all and every one of them busily and eagerly in the disturbance of
Gods people.

The Reasons are these: First, God himself is the general

Secondly, Satan's outrageous and incessant malice against

Thirdly, if there be any loss to the Adversaries, it

The Uses are these: First, this teaches us that seeing Ephesians. 6.13. For this
cause (says he) take unto you the whole Armor of God, for what cause? why,
because we wrestle not only against flesh and blood, but against
principalities and powers, etc: verse. 12. and 1 Pet. 5.8. your Adversary the
devil goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, whom
resist (says the Apostle): so that if he bend himself, and all his forces
against us, we should labor to bend all our forces against him to resist him.

Secondly, here we are taught what to esteem of all are carried with such a
zeal against the wicked, for they are but devils, as it were, and therefore
our Savior says, Go ye cursed into everlasting Fire prepared for the devil
and his angels, Matthew. 25.41.

Use 3.
Thirdly, let us consider the wonderful power and mercy of God; here is the
wonderful power and love of God that keeps us so long and so safe from so
many Devils (as I may say) that are continually beleaguering

And therefore lastly, this should encourage Gods children in the fight,
because so often as we resist (I say not only so often as we overcome them,
but so often as we resist) them, and keep them from prevailing over us; so many
victories we get over the Devil himself, and so many wounds we give to the
Serpents head; but, on the contrary, so often as they prevail against us, so
many victories they get over us, and so many wounds they give us: also let the
Promises of God encourage us, that not a bone of ours shall be broken, nor the
gates of hell ever prevail against us.

The two and twentieth LECTVRE of the CHVRCH.
TOuching the seventh general point propounded to be handled in the Question
concerning the visible Church, namely, of the Adversaries that oppose and set
them selves against it, we have propounded these several heads to speak
unto: First, that the Church of God has many Adversaries and opposites, so
long as it is in this world: Secondly, what these Adversaries are; Thirdly,
their dealing against the Church; Fourthly, the course and dealing of the
Church against her Adversaries: And lastly, the course and dealing of God to
both: The two first points we have already spoken to; Now God willing we are
to speak of the three last points.

The 3. point then, that we now first are to speak to, The third point which
is, how these Adversaries oppose us.
is how the adversaries behave themselves in oppugning and fighting against the
Church; for as in all other conflicts and encounters, It is a great advantage
for a man to know the carriage of his Adversaries fight: so in this spiritual
conflict that the Church does manage against her Adversaries for the Lord of
heasts; It is a singular help to us, and a very needful thing to be well
acquainted with the proceedings of our enemies, to know their weapons,
purposes, St^atagems and practices, and the whole course and manner of their
fightings against us; for thereby we shall be the better armed and fitted to
meet with them at every turn, and to ward off their blows, and defeat their
enterprises, and to match their assaults, and to prevent and avoid their
dangers: This was a singular help to the Apostle Paul, the faithful Soldier
of Jesus Christ in his fight, 2 Cor. 2.11. mark the reach of the place, the
Apostle was not ignorant of his Adversaries enterprises, he knew them well
enough, and thereby he prevented Satan from circumuenting him: And this help
our Savior would have all his Disciples furnished withal; and therefore he
fore-shewes, Matthew 10 16, 17. their enemies dealings against them, that so they
being forewarned, how their Aduersaies would deal with them, they might also
be fore-armed how to answer them, and be provided against all their attempts;
Behold (says he) I send you as sheep among wolves, etc; and so in the 19. 20,
21, 23. etc, verses; our Savior still foreshewes the manner of their
Adversaries dealings against them, the brother shall betray the brother to
Death, etc; and that they should be hated of all men for his names sakes, etc:
And in Matthew. 24. from the 9. to the 26. verse. our Savior makes a great
discourse to this purpose. And in the 25. verse, he purposely specifies this
prediction: Behold I have told you before, thereby calling on them to consider
advisedly of it, as who should say, that that very prediction and foretelling
them of it, were a sufficient Caveat, at least a very necessary help in their
fight, against their Adversaries: And so in Luke 21. from the 8. to the 19.
verse, where he first acquaints his Disciples with their Adversaries courses;
and then teaches them how to defend themselves from them; where our Savior
shows plainly by his own practice, how needful it is to know our
Adversaries fight, that so we may wisely and safely encounter them: If ye ask
me what their dealings and attempts are against the Church? I answer, Of sundry
sorts; yea, indeed of all sorts: And therefore take the matter fully and
plainly in this Observation.

The Adversaries of the Church, Peter says, 1 Pet. 5.8. Your Adversary the
Devil like a roaring lion, goes about seeking whom he may devour, that is to
say, he casts about every way to do us hurt, one search will not serve his
turn, but he searches every corner, and spies every advantage, still going
about and seeking to devour: In Matthew. 5.11. Our Savior gives us a sufficient
Intimation of their malicious disposition against us, that they will not stick
to speak, all manner of evil falsely against us, and they that will not stick
to speak, if it were in their power, will not stick to do all manner of
evil to us: To display the point more at large, we will descend to some
particulars: First, The matter they strike at.
let us consider the matter they strike at, or the mark they shoot at;
Secondly, the manner of their opposition; first the mark they shoot at, is
either Religion it self, or the Persons that profess it, and indeed,
whatsoever they do against our Persons, their quarrel is against our
Religion, to goare that through our sides; so that if we would leave our
Religion, our Enemies would leave to hurt us, Religion is their Quarrel: so
says our Savior, Matthew. 10.22. you shall be hated of all men, that is true
indeed, 1 against the persons of professors.
but it is for my name: First the persons that profess Religion, is the mark
they shoot at, see this in the example of Job, in the 1 and 2 Chapters, see how
Satan set himself against him, in his Cattle, servants, Children, wife, body,
and if he might have had his will, against his life and soul too; and see how
he musters up his forces against him every way, thieves, fire, winds, botches,
wife and friends, and all at once to ouerwhelme him with an heap of
temptations: In the new Testament we find this true in the example of the
Apostles, 1 Cor. 4.9. to the 13. I think (says he) that God has set out us
the last Apostles, as men appointed to death, for we are made a gazing stock,
etc: we hunger and thrist, are naked and buffetted, etc: so we see how he
setts himself against the persons of the faithful; 2 against their profession.
See also how he sets himself against their profession, Acts 4.18, 21. Peter
and John are charged to preach no more in the Name of Jesus, and threatened if
they do: And Acts 5.18. the Apostles are laid hands on, and put in prison; and
in the 33. verse. they consult to slay them; and in the 40. verse. they beat
them and command them again not to speak in the name of Jesus, what could the
Devil have done more against the Gospel, as things then stood; All these
places both: the former and these latter prove that they set themselves against
their persons and their profession both: but the former are more directly
against their persons; the latter more directly against their profession: So
we see the practices of our Adversaries against our persons, and against our
profession, yet, here is the difference, that they oppose against Religion for
it self, but they oppose against our persons for our Religion. Secondly, for
the manner of their opposition, The manner of their opposition.
they do it sometimes openly, sometimes secretly; openly, so did Saul Acts
9.1, 2. when he went with open mouth to make havoc of the Church; sometimes
they do it secretly, ^ secretly.
that is, when either they cannot do it openly at all; or at least when they
cannot do it openly with such safety to themselves, and such hurt and danger
to their enemies; thus it was in Galat. 2.4. the false brethren crept in
craftily into the Church, to spy out their liberty, that so they might the
better bring them into bondage; we shall find both these kinds of oppositions,
Act. 6.9, 10, 11. where certain of the Synagogue disputed with Stephen, and
thought to have borne him down openly, but when they were not able to resist
the wisdom and spirit by which he spoke, then they secretly suborned witnesses
to accuse him falsely.

Secondly, again, 2. open^
sometimes they oppose by strong hand as Herod, Acts 12.1.2. he stretched forth
his hands to vex certain of the Church, and he killed James, the brother of
John, with the sword; and when Satan does thus oppose, he is a Lion, sometime
by fraud and subtilty he opposes the Church, and then he is a Serpent: and
so in Acts 7.19. Stephen says, the Egyptians dealt subtly with the
Israelites. 3. The means or weapons whereby they fight against Gods Children.

1 carnal reasons and therein.


the third thing in the manner of their opposition, is the means or weapons,
whereby they fight against Gods Church, and they are infinite, I shall touch
those only that are most material, and the first kind is carnal reasons,
and these are the fittest weapons for carnal men to fight withal, and
readiest against the truth and the Church, as they being both spiritual and
professed enemies to flesh and blood; See how they flourish with this weapon,
first with multitude; yours it is every where spoken against, as they said to
Paul, Acts 28.22. Again, says the false Church, we have far greater pomp and
greater riches, Reuelat. 17.4. besides, say they, you have no great men to
applaud you; do any of the Rulers believe in him, say the Jews? John 7.48.
Lastly, there weapons prevail not, 2. Religious pretenses, and herein, 1.
Scriptures. 2. that they are the Church. 3. miracles.
then they take other kind of weapons, and close in nearer with us, forcing us
with Religious pretenses, and so striving to beat us with our own weapons,
they pretend that they have the Scriptures, so did the devil, Matthew. 4.6. that
they are the Church, as the wicked Jews did, Ierem. 7 4. so for miracles, they
pretend they have them too; they have the effectual working of Satan, with all
power and signs, and 2. These. 2.9. so they pretend to be Abraham's 8 39. and to
be Moses Scholars and 9.28. yea, to be Gods own seed, Ioh. 8.41. Prophets,
Reuelat. 2.20. yea, to be Apostles of Christ, 2 Cor. 11.13. yea, and to be
Angels verse 14. and for outward holiness, they will have more then ordinary,
as the Scribes and Pharisees Matthew. 23.27. And for simplicity, which is the
proper note of Christ's sheep, they will so cunningly pretend it, that you would
take them for sheep of Christ's own fold, and they cannot be discerned to be
ravening Wolves, till they bewray it in their works; and therefore our Savior
says, 3. more gross dealing.
Matthew. 7.15. Beware of false prophets, And when they fail this way, then they
will fall to more gross dealing, flattering us with fair promises, as the
devil dealt with our Savior, Matthew. 4.9. such and such things will I give
you, if you will do thus and thus; if this will not prevail, they will labor
to seduce us with Eve, Gens. 3.4, 5. or else they will labor to corrupt our
sincere worship of God, with inventions and traditions of men, as the Pharisees
did, Mat. 15.3. If they can prevail none of these ways, then they will raise
up flanders and false reports, against our persons, howsoever we carry our
selves, as they did against Christ and John Baptist, Mat. 11.18. Our Savior
^ame eating and drinking, and they say, behold a Drunkard, and a Glutton: John
Baptist came neither eating nor drinking, and they said he had a devil; so
they raised up false reports of our Religion, as they did in the Apostles time,
Romans 3.8. Some say that he taught, that we might do evil, that good may come
thereof, etc. If this be not enough, they will breath out threatenings against
us, as Saul did against the Church, Acts 9.1. If that serve not their turn,
they will procure Laws and Decrees against us, as they did against Daniel,
Dan. 6.7, 8. and Letters of State, as Saul did, Acts 2.9. And their last, and
sorest and commonest weapon of all, is blows, persecutions, banishments,
imprisonments, and all the punishments they can devise, as their hatred is
deadly against us, so they cease not to pursue us to the very death: cruel
blood-suckers they are, for when they cannot suck Religion out of our hearts,
yet they will suck our lives, and our bloods out of our bodies: In a word,
there is no one thing in the world, but the devil and his instruments catch at
it, and take hold of it as a weapon in their fury, to hurt and strike at Gods
children withal.

The reasons of the point are these; First, the silliness

The second reason is drawn from the multitude of Satan is a hunter, and the
wicked are his hell hounds; and the faithful, they are in the field of this
world, like a silly Hare in the field, beset about with hounds in every corner,
so that it is impossible for her to escape them, but that still he is
assaulted; how can the faithful choose then, but be assaulted every way.











Exodus 9.16.

the exceeding great danger that the Church, and every member thereof, is
subject to in this world; there is no danger that can possibly be imagined, nor
no one thing named in the world, that a man may be endangered by, that the
faithful can safely say, I am free from the danger of it; See how many dangers
one silly soul was beset withal, the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 11.26. that was
often in perils of waters, in perils of his own Nation, in perils amongst
the Gentiles, in perils in the City, in perils in the Wilderness, in perils
in the Sea, in perils amongst false brethren; he was in peril every way, and
yet these were but dangers; besides which, he had many forcible and cruel
blows laid on him, as we may see from the 23 to the 28. verse, In labors
more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prison more plenteously, in death
often, etc. Many men marvel that the faithful being so dearly beloved as
they are of God, should be so often foiled, that they should fall into so many
troubles, yea, oftentimes sinful and reproachful evils; but if they could
see but half the dangers they are in, they would rather marvel that they fall
into no more, yea, that they are not utterly ouer-throwne, and that they are
not ouer-throwne by their enemies, no reason can be given, but that, Lam. 3.22.
It is the Lords mercy, that we are not consumed, and Psalm. 124.1.2, 3. Except
the Lord had been on our side, may Israel now say; Except the Lord had been
on our side, when men rose up against us, they had swallowed us up quick, when
their wrath was kindled against us; And this is a gracious and a comfortable
use, which we are to make of all the straights, that we are driven to in this
life, not so much to look on the multitude and greatness of the dangers which
we are in, but on the merciful protection and all-sufficient grace of God in
Christ, that does so uphold us, that let our enemies do what they can, and all
that may be done, yet we shall not be left as a prey to be swallowed up by
them: In the 2 King. 6.15, 16, 17. The Prophet Elishae's man, when he saw that
they were compassed about with an host, he was stricken with great fear, and
cried out, Alas, Master, what shall we do? But Elisha answered, Fear not, for
they that be with us, are more then they that be with them; And when Elisha had
prayed, and that the Lord had opened his servants eyes, he saw the mountain
full of Horses and Chariots of fire round about his Master: and as it was with
him, so it is with us, it is a great terror to us, to see our selves assaulted
and compassed about with our enemies, and to see dangers on every side; but let
us look about us, and see also the merciful protection, and all-sufficient
grace of God in Christ, which embraces us on every side, so that our enemies
can no way prevail against us, and this will be a great encouragement and
comfort to us, against all the assaults that our enemies make against us.

Moses direction, Exodus 14.13. when their enemies were behind them, and the
red Sea before them, and the mountains on each side of them, and no way for
them to escape; Moses says to them, Fear not, stand still, and he hold the
salvation of the Lord, which he will show to you this day, etc. and so the
Lord did deliver them; there wants neither will nor power on Gods part, if
there be not want of our apprehending and relying upon it; as we must cleave
unto God by confidence: So secondly, we must cleave to him by prayer, for it is
not enough for us to believe it, but we must beg it too, we must lift up
our eyes and hearts to God in humble and hearty prayer, for help and
deliverance, and we shall have it: you shall see this course taken, and the
success of it both together in the 2 Chronicles. 32.20, 22. When Senacherib came up
with his host against Jerusalem, then Hezechiah the King, and the Prophet
Esaiah prayed against them, and cried to heaven, and the Lord sent an Angel
which destroyed all the valiant men and Princes of Senacheribs host, and saved
Hezechiah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, from the hand of Senacherib, King
of Ashur: thirdly, we must cleave to God by using the means that he tenders
to us for our relief, either by resistance, or by escape; if he affords us
means to fight and resist, then we must withstand our enemies to the uttermost
of our power, James 4.7. Resist the devil, etc. If God tender opportunity by
flight, take the benefit of that means; so Christ teaches us, Matthew. 10.23.
If they persecute you in one City, fly into another: and this did the Apostle
Paul practice, Acts 9.25. he was let down in a basket through the wall, and
so escaped form his enemies; so that if opportunity be offered us of flight,
we must take it, always considering, that this is the best course for us to
take, which God offers us opportunity of, and we may be bold to wait for a
blessing on it: fourthly, we must cleave to God, by walking with God in
obedience to his will; make, and keep thy peace always with God, whatsoever
thou do, keep him thy friend, whosoever be thine enemy, and this thou must
do by walking in his ways, and then he will give his Angels charge over
thee, to carry thee in their hands, that nothing may hurt thee, Psalm 91.11,
12. and Psalm. 34.7. The Prophet says, that the Angels of the Lord, pitch
their tents round about them that fear him, and delivers them; If thou fear
God, and labor to please him, then thine enemies may go about thee, again
and again, seeking to devour thee, but still they shall find the tents of
Gods Angels every where round about thee, to deliver thee, that they should
not hurt thee.

The third use teaches us how to carry and behave our selves to all things in
the world, even to every thing thee, and therefore, when we use any of these
things, let us sanctify them to us by the Word and Prayer, and this we must
do, if not for any good and blessing that we expect by them, yet at least,
for fear of some evil that the enemy intends against us in them; specially
we are to carry our selves very warily to the men of the world, even to all
those that are without, take notice of them, as enemies most dangerous; such
enemies as are ever seeking, or ready to seek thy destruction; have little to
do with them, but even as thou needs must, and so thou shall be safest from
their danger; learn Christ's Lesson, Matthew. 10.17. Beware of men, for they will
deliver you up to Counsels, etc. and follow his example, Ioh. 2.24. when many
believed in him, because of his miracles, yet he would not commit himself to
them, because he knew them all: There are many more particular duties to be
learned hence, but because they are more natural to the next point, we will
refer them thither.

The 4. point, how the Church is to carry her self to her adversaries.
Now come we to the fourth point, and that is this, namely, how the Church is
to carry and behave her self to her adversaries: they must not cowardly lie
down under their feet, and suffer them to trample on them, but they must
oppose against them, and that not rashly, and desperately, and presumptuously,
hand ouerhead, but as their warfare is spiritual and Religious, so must they
carry themselves accordingly in it: I will deliver it by way of observation;
Tim. 6.12. The Apostle bids Timothy fight out the good fight of faith, showing
us, that it is a fight that we are put to, and we must fight it out, and it
must be a fight of faith; first, because our faith is it that is specially
stricken at by our enemies, and maintained by us, and also it is the chief
weapon and means whereby we fight; so likewise the fight we make, must be a
good fight, well managed in every respect; and that Timothy might see that
Paul charge no more on him, then he practiced in himself, he professes,
that he for his part had done so, and takes his death (...) it, as it were, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7. I am now ready to be offered, etc. I have fought a good fight, I
have finished my course and have kept the faith, etc. And this is every man's
duty, 1 Pet. 5.9. whom resist steadfast in the faith, except we will be
devoured by Satan, and carried quick to hell; we are to resist, and that in
faith, and it must be a steadfast resistance, in a steadfast faith; And the
Apostle, Ephesians. 6.10. having exhorted to be strong in the Lord, because the
strongest, if he be not well appoined with armor and weapons, may be
overthrown; therefore in the 11. verse, he teaches us, how to fight,
furnishing us with armor and weapons, and discretion how to use them, put on
the whole armor of God, 2. things to be done, that we may be able to make a
good fight.
etc Now that we may be able to make a good fight of faith, against our
adversaries, we are to consider, first, what we have to do in this fight;
secondly, bow we are to do it: First, what we have to do in it, and that is
two things, there is a double work to be done in this fight, defensive, and
offensive, we are What is to be done in it, and therein 2. things.
and therefore the Apostle, Ephesians. 6. making mention of the weapons of our
Christian warfare, reckons up not only a Shield and an Helmet, but a Sword
too: the first John gives us, in his 2. Epistle, verse 8. Look to your selves,
that ye loose not the things ye have done: So likewise our Savior gives us
counsel for our bodily preservation, Matthew. 10.23. If they persecute you in
one City, fly unto another; and God having promised, that not one hair of our
head shall perish, we are to use all the good means we can, that it may be
accomplished; It will be replied, that our Savior himself did otherwise,
Matthew. 26.53. he would not defend himself, though he might have had Legions
of Angels to defend him; I answer, the case is not alike, for he knew it was
his fathers will, that he should thus yield, as you may see verse. 54. he did
it that the Scripture might be fulfilled; but we do not know this, and
therefore we are to defend our selves, if lawfully we can; But yet, if we see
plainly, that God will have our lives, it is as great a finne in that case to
seek to save them, as in the other case to loose them, as we see Matthew.
10.39. and howsoever we our selves speed, though we do loose our lives, and
all we have; yet, we must be sure to defend our Faith, and maintain our
Religion; a good Soldier will look to defend his head specially, so must we
look to Christ, that he and his Gospel be defended, whatsoever become of us;
so did the Martyrs, Revel. 6.9. they were killed for the Word of God, The 2
work to be done.
and the Testimony they maintained. The second work to be done in this fight is
offensive, we must fight against our Adversaries, and here our first reach must
be to win them, if it be possible; But if we cannot do this, then
secondly, we are to seek to overthrow them in their courses and practices;
yea, and in their persons too, if we have a warrantable calling from God:
Thirdly, we are to stop their mouths, that they may not justly be opened
against us; and the best means to do this, is by our holy Conversation, so
says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.15. that it is the Will of God, that by well doing
we put to silence, 2 thing how it is to be done.
the Ignorance of foolish men.

Secondly, we must consider in this fight, how we must do it; first, it must
be done in a simple wisdom, so our Savior teaches us, Matthew. 10 16. Behold,
I send you as sheep among wolves, be therefore wise as Serpents, and innocent
as Doves; policy and wisdom is necessary in every ^ight, and ^o it is in this,
but let us take heed we turn them not into crafts and subtilties, but let
them be such as may come from a single and simple heart: secondly, all we do
in mannaging this Battle, must be done in holiness, we must still be
consulting David did Psalm 69.13. when the wicked spoke against him, he made
his Prayer to God, and Psalm. 109.4. he says, for my friendship they were mine
enemies, but I gave my self to Prayer: Thirdly, Peter 2.23. that when he was
reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not; but committed
it to him that judges righteously; we must not render evil for evil, nor
curse for curse, but contrariwise, we must bless, as the same Apostle teaches
us, 1 Pet. 3.9. Fourthly, that we do, Luke 19 41. and thus he had compassion
on them that crucified him, Luke 23.24. Father, forgive them, they know not
what they do; here was a compassionate heart indeed. Fifthly we Ierem. chap.
10.19. we is me (says he) for my destruction, and my greiuous plague; but I
thought it is my sorrow, and I will bear it. Sixthly, we must David did Psalm.
69.9. the zeal of thine house has eaten me up; And so our Savior in Ioh.
2.14. when he saw men defile the Temple of God with buying and selling, he
made a whip of small cords and drove them all out, and this he did in zeal to
Gods house verse. 17. Seventhly, we must do it with cherfulness and good
courage, quit you says the Apostle 1 Cor. 16.13. Eighthly, it must Pet. 5.9,
whom Ninthly, it must be done Be sober and watch, 1 Pet. 5.8. Tenthly, it must
be done in the name of the Lord of Hoasts, that is, in his power, and in his
strength, Psalm. 118, 10, 11, 12, 13. the Prophet says, all Nations have
compassed me, but in the Name of the Lord shall I destroy them; they have
compassed me, they have compassed me, but in the Name of the Lord shall I
destroy them, etc. And thus he encountered Goliath in the Name of the Lord of
Hoasts, 1 Samuel 17.45. we must disdain all other matters, and say, as the same
Prophet does, Psalm. 20.7. some trust in horses, and some in Charriots, but we
will remember the Name of the Eleuenthly, It must be done in the blood of the
Lamb, Reu. 12.11. that is, in a true conformity to the Death of Christ; when
they oppose us, we must labor what we can to be made thereby comfortable to the
death of Christ, this is the way to overcome in the blood of

fight a good fight, because the cause is good.



in this fight to procure good to our selves, except they be procured by such
means as are pleasing to God.

Fourthly, we have a promise from God, of a happy victory, and of a Crown of
Glory, if we fight a good fight, and therefore let us not make our selves
incapable of it, either by neglecting any good course in this fight, or by
practicing any evil courses therein.

Fifthly, This fight is for the pulling down of Satan's David had a sore enemy
of Saul, and in the 1 Samuel 24.5, 6, 7. we may read that he had a fit
opportunity to be eased of him, if he would have laid his hands on the Lords
anointed, but he knew that was not the way, it was none of Gods courses, and
therefore he forbear it, and except we may do it in God, it were better not
to be done at all.

Lastly, the Crown of Righteousness is laid up for us, but fight a good Fight,
and not otherwise, 1 Timothy 4.7, 8.

The uses of the point are these: This should teach David was in the 1 Samuel
24.26. when he had but cut off the lap of Saul's Garment, though he had not
taken away his life, yet his heart smote him for this: And let us for the time
to come labor to reform, wherein-soeuer we have failed, and look better to
our steps ever after: But if we have taken these courses, and observed these
directions; then it may be a great Comfort to us, whatsoever the Issue be,
whether we have overcome or not; if we have overcome, how boldly may we go to
God, and give him thanks for his own victory, and not for ours, because we
have got it by his means and courses: If they have overcome us, yet we may
have comfort in our foiles, that it has not been through our mis-behauiour,
we have done as God would have us, and therefore there is good hope, that
though now we be overcome by our enemies, yet at last, we shall overcome them;
howsoever we are sure not to loose our Crown, because we have striuen
lawfully, for the Crown is promised to them that strive lawfully, as well as
to them that overcome.

may be quickened to a more careful and through resistance. Thirdly, we must
observe our own former experience, we must consider where we have been foiled
before time, and there to look better to it, and to prevent it another time;
And also consider where thou have put the enemy to the worst, and be careful
to use the same means still; Fourthly, observe also the examples of other of
the faithful in the like case, especially of the old beaten Soldiers of Jesus
Christ, as of Abraham, Job, David, Paul, and the like; Let us observe their
ouersights and their failings, and shun them; also observe their religious
practices and courses and follow them, not doubting but God will bless them to
thee, as he did to them: Principally, let us observe our Captain Jesus
Christ, and follow his Example as far as we can. Lastly, let us be earnest
with God, from whom every good thing comes, that as he has appointed us his
Soldiers, so he would furnish us with help fitting thereunto. And so much
shall serve for this fourth point, namely, how the Church behaues and carries
her self against her Adversaries.

The fifth and last point concerning the Adversaries and opposites of the
Church, is, The 5 point how the Lord carries himself to his Church and their
adversaries.
how the Lord in this case, carries himself both toward the Church, and
toward her Adversaries; for the Lord sees and beholds all on both sides, yea,
and he works on both sides too, though in a contrary manner, he is for and
with the Church in mercy to deliver them; and he is with the wicked in
Judgment to confound and overthrow them. Then the observation is this:

Psalm. 34.15, 16. The Eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his Ears
are open to their cries, but the face of the Lord is against them that do
evil, to cut off their remembrance from the earth: So in Esa. 66.5. the
Prophet says, Hear ye the Word of the Lord, all ye that tremble at his Word:
your brethren that cast you out for my names sake, said; Let the Lord be
glorified: but ye shall appear to your Joy, atnd they shall be ashamed. And
Phil. 1.28. In nothing fear your Enemies, which to them is a token of
Perdition, and to you of salvation, and that of God: Thus God was with the
Israelites to save them; and with the Egyptians to drown them in the red Sea,
Let us see this point proved a little more plainly in particulars: God is with
and for the faithful in many respects.

How God is with the says full in many respects.
First, as a party in the cause, fighting with them and for them, Reu. 3.7.
Michael and his Angels fought, etc. and thus God is with his Church either
inwardly or outwardly; Inwardly teaching them to fight, Psalm. 144.1. and
strengthening them, and comforting them, Luke 22.43. and defending them, Psalm.
118.13. and giving a blessing and good success to them; Or outwardly, as
supplying them with means, and raising up friends and Captains and such
outward helps. Thus he raised up Joshua and others to deliver his Church; And
so by ministering to the faithful many gracious opportunities, either to
preserve themselves, or to overthrow their enemies.

so David acknowledges, Psalm. 70.5. that God is his helper and deliverer; And
Zach. 2.8. the Lord promises to be a wall of Fire about Jerusalem; And in the
9. Chapter and the 8. verse. the Lord says, that he will camp about his house,
and no oppressor shall come upon them.

Reu. 2.10. be thou faithful unto the Death, and I will give thee the Crown
of Life, 2 Timothy 48. I have fought a good fight (says he Apostle) I have
finished my course, from hence forth is laid up for me a Crown of
rhteousnesse, which the Lord, the righteous Judge shall give me that day; thus
the Lord rewards and crowns us, and for this end, he counts al our flittings,
and keeps all our tears in his bottle, and puts them all in his Register, Ps.
56.8. So we see, that God is with, and for his Church to defend them: first, as
a party in the cause: secondly, as a deliverer to save them from their enemies:
Thirdly, as a Rewarder, to crown them after the fight. How God is against the
enemies his Church many ways.


On the other side he is against their enemies, and that many ways, nay, every
way: First, to deride them, Psalm. 37 12, 13. The wicked practices against the
just, and gnasheth his teeth at him, but the Lord shall laugh them to scorn,
etc. and Psalm. 2.4. The Lord shall have them in derision:

Secondly, to defeat them, Job 5.12. he scatters 129.1, 2. They have often
times aflicted me from my youth, but they could not prevail against me: Isa.
33.11, 12. and Chap. 8.10. take Council together yet it shall be brought to
naught, pronounce a decree, yet it shall not stand, for God is with us.

Thirdly, to blind them, as he did the Sodomites, Genesis 19.11. and as he did
the Aramites, 2 Kings 6.18.

Fourthly, the Lord is against the adversaries of his Job 18.6. The light shall
be dark in his dwelling, etc. thus he terrified Moah, and made them sore
afraid of the Israelites, Number. 22.3. And thus he terrified the Aramites, with
the noise of a great Army, and made them fly, when none pursued them, 2 King.
7.6, 7.

Fifthly, he is sometimes against them, to turn their hearts to his Church,
that they should be of their side: Paul, Acts 9.1. compared with the 20. verse.

Sixthly, he is against them, to set one of them against Midianites, Judge.
7.22. and as he did the Philistims, 1 Samuel 14.20.

Isay 45.24 all that provoke him shall be confounded.

Esa. 7.10.

Egyptians, drowning them, Exodus 14.28. or by fire consuming them, as he did
the Sodomites, Genesis 19. or by an Angel destroying them, as he did the Camp of
Ashur, Esa 37.36. or from heaven, raining haile-stones upon them, as he did
upon the five Kings, Joshua 10.11. or by women, to be slain by them, as Sisera
was by Iael, Judge. 4.21. and Abimeleck by a woman on the wall, Judge 9 53. or by
base creatures, to be annoyed, and devoured by them, as he did the Egyptians,
Exodus 8.6. and the 10.13. and Herod, Acts 12.23. for, as there is nothing in
the world, but the devil and his instruments take aduange of it, to fight
against the faithful; so on the other side, there is nothing in the world, but
the Lord takes aduange of it, to fight against them.

These. 1.6.9.

the Lords battle, and not ours, as Iahaziel said to Iehosaphat, 2 Chro.
20.15. and therefore he will manage it for the defense of his Church, and the
destruction of their adversaries, he that touches the Church, touches the
Apple of Gods eye, Zach. 2.8. and Joel 3.34. the Lord says to Tyrus, when they
cast lots for his people, What have thou to do with me? And to Saul, Acts 9.4.
when he went to persecute the Church, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
and 1 King. 19.22. when Zenacherib railed against Jerusalem, and lifted up
himself against them, the Lord says, Whom have thou railed on? etc. Even
against the Holy one of Israel: and in Ezech. 35. from the 3. to the 6. verse.
The Lord threateneth, against Mount Sier, that because they had put the
children of Israel to flight by the Sword, therefore as I live (says the Lord)
I will prepare thee to blood; that which the adversaries do against the
Church, they do it against God, and therefore he will defend his Church, and
punish and destroy them.

Secondly, it is his promise to the one, that he will Esa. 43.2. When thou
passest through the water I will be with thee, Exodus 23.22. I will be an enemy
to thine enemies, and afflict them that afflict thee, Zeph. 3.19. I will bruise
all that afflict thee.

The third reason is, Gods love to his Church, he Zach. 24, 5, 8.

The last reason is the justice of God against his enemies; These. 1.6.

The uses of the point are these: the first is for reproof, and first it
reproues the faithful themselves, such of them as are suspicious and fearful
to encounter with their adversaries, that think there is no way when their
enemies assault them, but desolation, measuring things by sense, and not by
faith; Why, The Lord is with us to defend us, why then should we be afraid
though ten thousand rose up against us? secondly, it reproues the presumptuous
adversaries, that think when they prevail, that God has forsook his Church,
as Psalm. 71.11. and Matthew. 27.43. or that he does not regard their trouble
Psalm. 94.6, 7. or that he could not redress it, 2 Chronicles. 32.14. Lastly, it
reproues the graceless and carnal beholders that ascribe all to the means,
and do not believe Gods hand to be all in all in defending his Church, and
destroying their enemies.

The second use is for comfort to the faithful, Use 2.
both in that God is with them to help them, and then if he be with us, who
shall be against us? and to give them a good issue, and a plentiful reward; as
also in that God is against our enemies to confound them, and all their courses
taken in hand against us.

Psalm. 34.19. Great are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers
them out of all; The troubles of Gods children are great and many, yet let us
show our selves to be righteous men, justified by the blood of Christ, and we
shall find it to be true, as it is in the note; that the Lord will be
altogether with us, to save and defend us, and altogether against our enemies
to confound and destroy them.

The three and twentieth LECTVRE of the CHVRCH.
Having propounded nine several heads to be spoken to concerning the visible
Church, we have through Gods assistance spoken of seven of them. It remains
therefore now, that we come to the eighth, namely, the power and authority of
the Church: The 8. general head of the Church, viz. the power and auhority of
it.
A point which was named and pointed at before, amongst the Privileges of the
Church; For surely the power that God has endued the Church withal, is none of
her smallest privileges, if it be not one of her greatest; as the greatest
privilege of a King, is his Kingly power and authority: then we pointed at it,
but we respited the full handling of it to this place, partly, because in the
beginning, we propounded it as one of the principal heads in this question;
but especially because it is both large and weighty; large, and so requires;
weighty, and so deserves worthily to be handled in a several Title by it
self; it has also some affinity and neernesse with the fifth head, namely,
the Government of the Church, for many of the same things that are incident to
the Government of the Church, are also incident to the authority of it, and
such things we will only touch as we meet with them, referring you for
further knowledge of them to those places that already they have been handled
in: But there are somethings belonging to the power of the Church, which could
not so fitly be reduced to the government of the Church; and these are the
points which, God willing, here we will speak unto: The power and authority
of the Church; I call it power and authority, for in effect they are both one;
It is true, that they are sometimes distinguished, and then this is the
difference; power, signifies an ability to do a thing; and authority, a
warrant from God to exercise that ability: but here they signify one and the
same thing, and the reason is plain; because the Church of all other sorts
does absolutely deny her self, to have any power to do ought but that which
she has authority and warrant from God to do.

And in it 3. things to be spoken unto.
The points that I will speak of concerning this matter, are these: First, that
the Church of God has power and authority belonging to it: Secondly, what
manner of power and authority this is; And thirdly, what it is that she has
power in.

1. that there is a power.
First, that there is power and authority belonging to the Church; for howsoever
she be weak in outward forces, and contemptible in the eyes of the world, and
for the most part spurned out, ouer-borne and trodden under foot by the
Potentates of the earth, and for the mannaging of any temporal administration
or state, able to do little, and warranted to do less, yet, if she be taken
within her own element, that is, in Church affairs, she is armed with much
power, and great authority: every State and society has power and authority
annexed to it, whereby it is vpholden; the Church then being the worthiest
State, and happiest Society that is, has it authority nothing must be done;
And therefore the Church must have power and authority. Again, the Matthew.
22.23. and to Moses, Exodus 2.14. Who made thee a man of authority, etc. so that
except she be furnished with sufficient authority, there is no hope that they
or their proceedings should find any acceptance: the people were astonished at
Christ's Doctrine, because he taught with authority, and not as the Scribes,
Mat. 7. and Mar. 1.27. he commands even the foul spirits with authority, and
they obey him, as who should say, if he had not commanded them with authority,
they would never have obeyed him; they would know good cause why first: This
serves first to encourage the Church to the doing of that the Church is a
powerful worker, and that that Doctrine which she teaches, is a word of great
power, able to save or to destroy, and the Censures that she passes, are
Censures of power, able to kill or give life, and whosoueuer withstandeth
these, shall find them matters of power to their destruction in hell, if they
be obstinate: but whosoever obeyes them, shall find power enough in them, to
bring them to God and to his Kingdom. So much for that first point.

2. point, what manner of power it is, and in it things asserted.
The second point, is what manner of power this is: for this we must look well
into, lest mistaking, we go too far, or come too short, each being a
dangerous error; you shall understand therefore, that this power is not humane,
but divine: Secondly, not temporal, but spiritual: Thirdly, that though it be
spiritual, yet it is bounded and limited.

1 that it is not humane, but divine.
First, it is not humane, that is, it is not of men, though they be men that
exercise it, and howsoever, where it is publicly practiced, it is usually, and
needfully ratified, at least permitted by the authority of the temporal State,
yet it has not his power from men; but it is divine, and has his power
directly from God himself; the first beginnings of this power is from him, as
we may see, Matthew. 10.1. to 5. where our Savior calls his Disciples and give
them power to preach and to cast out devils, and to heal the sick, etc. and
the promise of more power is also from God, as his own free gift, Matthew.
16.19. I will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; And so the
performance of more power is from him, as derived from his own Pattent, Matthew.
28.18.19. Go teach all Nations, etc. teaching them to observe all things, and
lo I am with you to the end of the world; The Church is furnished with power
from Christ, even as he is from his father, Ioh. 20 21.22. As my Father sent
me, even send I you, etc. and yet a more full increase of this power is from
God too, Luke 24.49. Behold, I send the promise of my father upon you, but
tarry ye in the City of Jerusalem until ye be endued with Power from on high,
And Acts 1.8. ye shall receive power after that the Holy Ghost is come upon
you; These places prove, that the Power which the Church is endued withal, is
not humane, but divine, conferred God himself.

And the Reason is plain, because all Power is from 13.1. And there is no
power but from above, as our Savior tells Pilate, he could have no power,
except it were given him from above; If all power, even the power which the
wicked have, be from God, much more is the power and authority which the Church
has, from God too; And that after a special manner, so much the more
immediately, as the Church is more nearer joined to Christ, then any other
State whatsoever; And to much the more rightly, as Christ is more rightly a
spiritual King then a temporal, as Ioh. 18. my Kingdom is not of this world,
etc: And so much the more properly, as Christ is the head and ruler of the
Church more properly, then of the Commonwealth: And so much the more
effectually, as the Lord does more magnify himself in Church causes, then in
causes of the State.

This teaches, first, that if the power and authority Gamaliel said, Acts
5.38.39. If it be of God, ye cannot destroy it, etc; if it be of God so
directly, it must needs stand most firmly above all other power whatsoever.

Secondly, it teaches the Church, that they be the

Thirdly, seeing this power is so directly from God, then this teaches us,
that it must be the more dutifully obeyed and submitted to, of them that live
under it, else if we despise it, we despise not men but God, as it is Luke
10.16. he that despises you, despises me, etc. But you will say, How we may
know when the Church speaks true or false.
But you will say, how shall I know when she speaks true or false, when she
does right or wrong? I Answer, The Lord has given both her and us the Word to
rule and measure things by; this is the rule that she must go by in her
proceedings; and this is the rule that we must measure her proceedings by: But
sometimes the Church inioynes things in themselves indifferent, neither simply
good nor bad, neitheir simply commanded nor forbidden in the word; In this the
Church is to be yielded to for order sake, as she having therein a general power
from God; but yet the Conscience is not subject to them, because the particular
choice and determination of these indifferent things is from themselves, and
out of their own lawful liberty; I note this the rather, because some not only
in the popish church but among us too, stick not to affirm, that the churches
constitutions in this latter kind, be of divine authority, and to be accounted
as the Constitutions of God himself: But I have showed you, how you are to
receive and to submit to them, for order sake, and in respect of the general
power she has from God in these things.

Two things asserted, that power of the Church is not temporal, but spiritual.
The second branch of this second point is, that this power is not temporal,
but spiritual; and therefore it is not so often called a Sword to smite, or a
scepter to sway, as Keys to open and shut; and what does it open and shut?
Even the Kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 16.19. and therefore it is a spiritual
Power. The Civil Magistrate has to do about our bodies, goods and outward
State, the Church has to do with the Soul and Conscience and the inward man;
Temporal power and authority serves to maintain a temporal Life begun and
ended here; spiritual Power and Authority maintains a spiritual Life begun
here, but perfected and finished hereafter in the life to come; Temporal power
rules by the laws of men, spiritual Power rules only by the Laws of God;
temporal power fights and defends it self by the material Sword and worldly
Policy; Spiritual Power renounceth these, and therefore Christ said to Peter,
Mat. 26.52. put up thy Sword into his place, for all that take the Sword, shall
perish by the Sword; Christ would not be defended by the Sword; Spiritual
Power betakes it self to better Weapons, to spiritual and heavenly Weapons, 2
Cor. 10.4, 5. the Weapons of our warfare (says the Apostle) are not carnal,
but spiritual, mighty through God, etc: they are not carnal, but spiritual;
not weak, but mighty; and that not of themselves, nor through the power of him
that uses them, but through God: And what are these weapons? They are the Word
and the Spirit, Faith, Repentance, Prayer, etc. It is true, that sometimes both
these Powers do concur together in the Church, that is, when the Magistrate is
Christian; and surely, then Gods work goes happily forward, and then this is
a blessed thing both for our Souls and bodies too, if we have grace so to use
it: but though they do sometimes concur, yet they are never confounded,
though they be not divided, yet they be distinguished; they must each of them
keep in it is own rank, and manage their several Charges by several
administrations; The Church is not to usurp on the temporal power, for that is
flatly forbidden, Matthew. 20.15, 16. the Gentiles reign over them, but it shall
not be so amongst you, says our Savior to his Disciples, and 1 Pet. 5.3. Be
not Lords over Gods Heritage; Nor is the temporal power to usurp the
Spiritual; for ye see how Vzziah was stricken with leprosy for meddling with
the Priests Office, 2 Chronicles. 26.16. to the 19. And it was well he escaped so,
for by the law he deserved Death, Numb. 18.7.

The 3. thing asserted: that the Power of the Church is limited and scantled
within the bounds of the Word.
The third Branch of the second point is, that though it be a spiritual Power,
yet, it is not unbounded, but it is limited and scantled within the bounds of
the Word; For the same God that has set marks and bounds in the earth for
the Sea that it shall not ouerflow them, Job 38.11. he has also prescribed in
his Word, certain marks, limits, and bounds for the power of the Church, and
so far the Church must go and no further: The Body and Spouse have power to
do many things, yet still they are to be ruled by the direction of their Head
and Husband; And so long as the Church contains herself within these bounds
and limits it goes well with her, God prospers her, and he has promised (and
will perform) a blessing to her, but if she go beyond these bounds and
transgress against God: It is a fearful and dangerous case, the bond is
broken, all flies a sunder, the walls and hedges of the Church are trodden
down, and the Boar and wild Beasts enter in, and spoil and make a prey of
all; Gods yoke is shaken off and then men run into strange outrageous
unwarrantable and exorbitant Courses, fitter for lawless Infidels, then for
Christ's Disciples, and by this means Gods Church will be degenerate into
Synagogues of Satan, and Religion turned into Ignorance, superstition,
profaneness and mere licentiousness; And by this means Antichrist himself
has clymed up into the Seat of Christ. The reason is plain in the very like
case, 1 Samuel 15.23. Because that they have rejected God and his yoke, and gone
beyond their bounds, therefore God will reject them and cast them off from
being his Church; The Church therefore must consider, like a modest Spouse,
that she has power indeed, but to what, to that that she will and list her
self? No, but to that, which Christ her husband will have her to do; so far
as in the exercising of her power she walks with God, she may go on safely
and boldly: But if when God stays, she will not stay, but still go on
forward, at her own peril be it.

The fourth Branch of the second point is, The 4. thing asserted, that the
power of the Church is the greatest power on earth: Kings are under the power
of the Church, though they be above the persons that exercise it.
that though it be a bounded and limited power and authority, yet it is the
greatest power on earth, it reaches not only to the people, but Kings and
Princes must obey it; I say, they are under the power of the Church, though
they be above the persons, that exercise this power, as may appear in the
Example of David and Nathan, the Person of Nathan being subject to David, and
yet David subject to the Power of his reproof: Secondly, as it reaches not
only to the meanest, but to the highest; so it reaches not only to the
outward man, but even to the Inward also; the very Spirit and Conscience though
it be free from all other power, yet it is subject to this; I say not to the
Church it self, but to that spiritual and divine power, which it in Christ's
Name does exercise: Lastly, whereas no other authority or power reaches so
high as heaven, or so low as hell; this power of the Church extends to both, it
cuts off from God, and delivers over to Satan; And again it releases out of
Satan's laws, and reconciles us to God, and brings us to heaven: So much for
the second point, what manner of power this is.

The third and last point is this, Namely; what is it, The 3 point is, what it
is that the Church have power in, and it is double 1. over persons, and that 1
either as members either not come in to admit. Who are to be admitted.
that the Church has power in? The Church has a double power, one over
persons and another over things; over persons, and that in two respects, either
as they are members, or as they are officers; As they are members, and that in
two respects also, either as they are not come into the Church, or as they are
come in already; as they are not come in, and that in two respects too; either
to admit them as members, or to repel and refuse them: If ye ask, who are to
be admitted? The Answer is, all those that are called, Acts 2.39. the promise
is made to you and your children, and to many that are a far off, even to as
many as the Lord our God shall call; For seeing the promise belongs to them,
and so they are, for ought we know, within the Covenant, then they ought to be
admitted into the Bosom of the Church, and to be admitted as members thereof:
If ye ask, how we shall know that they are called? The Answer is plain, ye
shall know it by their profession of faith in the Church, and by their
profession of Repentance; by their profession of faith, as Acts 8.12, 37. As
soon as they believed Philip, which preached the things that concerned the
Kingdom of God, and the Name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized both men and
women, And verse 37. Philip said to the Eunuch, If thou beleeuest with all
thine heart, thou may be baptized; then he answered and said, I believe that
Jesus Christ is the Son of God, etc: 38. and he baptized him: And so, by the
profession of Repentance, Matthew. 3.6. they were baptized of John, confessing
their sins: And both these you shall find together, Acts 2.37.38. when they
were pricked in their hearts at Peter's Sermon, they said, Men and Brethren what
shall we do to be saved; Peter said unto them, Amend your lives and be
baptized every one of you in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, for the
remission of sins; as if he had said, repent and believe: for amendment of
life does necessarily imply purpose of obedience; and so the profession of
Repentance is a promise of obedience, and this is precisely required, Exodus
19.5. to the 8. where the Lord sent to the people of Israel, to know whether
they would obey him, before he would enter into Covenant with them: To which
agrees the practice of Josiah, and the people in the case of Reformation or
renewing their admission: when they had broken their Covenant with God, 2 Chronicles. 34.31, 32. he renewed the Covenant betwixt God and his people, and caused
all that were found in Jerusalem and in Benjamin to stand to it; If you ask
what is the means and act of Admission? The answer is, that it is baptism,
The Act and means of admission.
Mat. 3.6. Act. 8.37, 38 Acts 2.41. they that gladly received the Word were
baptized, and the same day there was added to the Church above three thousand
Souls; Now this Act being once received, is never to be recalled, though the
Covenant be afterward neglected and broken; for one entrance stands good for
our whole estate: In so much, that if I fall after Baptism, and that so
greiuously, as that I be cut off by the censure of the Church, yet if I return
again, This not to be renewed upon any falling away.
the Covenant is to be renewed, but not baptism, no more then circumcision in
the former Testament was to be renewed in the like case; but if men were never
before baptized, then though they be of years of discretion, yet they are to
receive Baptism. But whether has the Church power to compel men to be
members? No surely, How far the Magistrate may compel.
faith cannot be forced upon any, yet if the Magistrate be Christian, he by his
authority, may, and must compel men to come to the outward means, else we
deny him the privilege of his authority, and of our subjection: So did Josiah
cause all that were found in Jerusalem, Or, to repel them.
and Benjamin to stand to the covenant, 2 Chronicles. 34.32. As they have power to
admit into the Church, so they have power to repel and keep out; and this we
find to be plain, Acts 8.36.37. See, here is water (says the Eunuch) what
does let me to be baptized? Philip said unto him, if thou beleeuest with all
thine heart, thou may, etc. as who should say, where faith is wanting, it is
a sufficient let to keep from baptism, and so from being admitted into the
Church; But what shall children do then? I answer, they, if they be the seed
of the faithful, are pre-supposed to be within the covenant, and so they are
to be reputed, as Genesis 17.7. God says to Abraham, I will establish my Covenant
between me and there, and thy seed after thee; and Acts 3.29. The promise is
made to you and to your children, says the Apostle, and so in the 1 Cor. 7.14.
The unbelieving wife is sanctified by the believing husband, etc. else were
your children unclean, but now are they holy, and therefore where children are
tendered by faithful parents to the Church, they must admit them, so far as
they have power, and that is to baptism, Mark 10.13.14. as it was with
circumcision in the time of the Law, the children of the faithful, all that
were males, were circumcised; so it is in Baptism, which succeedes in the
room of that; all the children of believing parents, are to be made partakers
of it: So you see the Church has power over persons that are not come in, and
that either to admit, or repel them. Secondly, Or, secondly, as come in, to
keep them in, or cast them out.
they have power over persons, as they are come in already, and that either to
keep them in, or to cast them out; to keep them in, as in Reu. 3.11. Our
Savior says to the Angel of the Church of Philadelphia, Hold fast that thou
have, that no man take thy Crown from thee; and what was the Angels Crown,
but the faithful in that Church? So the Apostle Paul calls the Thesalonians
his Crown; and how must he hold them fast, and keep them in? By confirming,
exhorting, reproving, comforting, and instructing them, bearing with their
weakness, admitting them to the Lords Table, and upon their repentance,
loosing them from their sins: So the Church has power to cast out, for their
obstinacy in sin, and so to bind them in the chains of everlasting
damnation: that the Church has this power, it is plain, for the Word of God
is powerful each way, It is the savor of life unto life, unto some, to other,
It is the savor of death unto death; so the Censures of the Church are
wonderful powerful, John 20.23. whose sins ye remit, they are remitted,
and whose sins soever ye retain, they are retained, says our Savior to
his Disciples: And so we see how the Church did cast out the Incestuous man, in
1 Cor. 5.4, 5. and how they received him in again, in the 2 Cor. 2.7, 8. Or
thirdly, over members as Officers, to choose, or refuse, place or displace.
The next point is the power that the Church has over members, as officers,
and herein the Church has power to choose or refuse, to place or displace, to
choose and place, Acts 6.5. and the saying pleased the multitude, and they
choose Stephen, etc. to refuse and displace, as in Acts 8.21. Peter refused
Simon Magus, when he would have bought gifts of the holy Ghost for money: and
in the 1 Timothy 5.11. refuse younger widows, etc. and in the 1 Kings 2.27. to
the 35. we may read how Solomon displaced and cast out Abiather from the
Priests office; But of this I have spoken sufficiently before the matter of
Church government, and therefore as I promised, I will refer you thither.

Now in the second place, Secondly, the Church has power over things, and
these either matters of substance, as touching the Scripture, and therein first
touching the credit of the Scripture,
the Church has power over things, and these things are of diverse kinds, some
are matters of substance, some of circumstance: the Churches power in matters
of stubstance, is either touching the Scripture it sefe, or in things besides
the Scripture: as touching the Scripture, and that is either touching the
credit and authority, of Scripture, or the sense of it: first, of the credit
and authority of Scripture, which is called into question, and much disparaged,
not only by those that are without, but even of those that profess themselves
to be within, and to be members of the Church, which should most lighly esteem
it: some of of her champions, as they pretend, challenge at least an equal,
yea, indeed a superior authority to the Church, above the Scripture: And
herein whether the authority of Church be greater then the authority of the
Spripture.
and therefore the point to be discused here is, whether the authority of the
Church be greater then the authority of the Scripture? It is not denied, but
that the Church has some authority concerning Scripture, as we shall hear
afterward, but that it has authority equal with or above Scripture, is not to
be granted.

I will draw this point into an observation, the authority of the Church is not
greater then the authority of the Scripture, no, it is not equal with it, but
the authority of the Scripture is greater and higher then the authority of the
Church: here are two parts of this observation: First, that the authority of
the Church is not greater then of the Scripture: secondly, that the authority
of Scripture is greater then of the Church; the same places that prove one,
prove both, Ioh. 4.39. The woman of Samariah having had conference with our
Savior, and believing him to be the Messiah, she went and told it in the
City, and it is said in the 39. verse, that many of the Samaritans believed in
Christ for the saying of the woman; but it is said in the 41. verse, that many
more believed, because of Christ's own words: The voice of the woman, what is it
but the voice of the Church? she believing in Christ her self, propounds him
unto others: which is the Office of the Church in this case; well, the people
believed for her saying; but do they rest upon that as the chiefest authority
of their faith? No, for verse 41. many more believed for his own word, and
verse 42. they that did believe for the saying of the woman, acknowledge a
greater and surer cause of their faith, disclayming the former as insufficient;
now say they, we believe not for thy saying, for we have heard him our
selves, and know that this indeed is that Christ the Savior of the world: and
is not Christ's voice to us now the voice of the Scripture? Therefore either
they much wronged the woman's voice in preferring Christ's before it, or else the
Church is not of greater authority then the Scripture, but the Scriptures of
greater authority then the Church, John 5.33. to the 39. John bare witness to
the truth, that Christ was the Messiah, and his voice therein is the voice of
the Church: But does our Savior rest there, as if the truth were thereby
sufficently confirmed? no, he disclaimes it in that respect, verse 34. I
receive not the record of man, and appeals to a higher and greater witness,
even to his Fathers, who did speak more sufficiently for him, and does not the
Father speak in the Scriptures? So that as the Testimony of John is not
greater then that of the Father, but the Testimony of the Father greater then
of John; so the authority of the Church is not greater then the authority of
the Scripture, but the authority of the Scripture, is greater then that of the
Church: And in the 39. verse of that Chapter, he appeals from the Testimony
of John by name to Scriptures; Search the Scriptures, for they testify of me,
as they being a greater witness, then the witness of John: So in Luke 16.
from verse 27. to 31. the rich man being in hell in torments, entreats father
Abraham, that Lazarus might go and forewarne his brethren, that they might not
come into those torments; No, says Abraham, they have Moses and the Prophets,
and if they will not hear them, they will not hear him; The case is plain,
if Lazarus had come to his brethren and told them that they should take heed of
their brothers courses, for he was now in hell in torments for their sins;
if he had done thus, had not his voice been the voice of the Church? For what
does the Church, but instruct, exhort, reprove, and forewarne men from Sin,
that so they might keep them from hell; and yet Abraham referres them to
Scriptures, as of greater authority, and if Lazarus had come thus, it had been
by miracle too; which would have added weight to his words; and yet for all
that, he referres them to the Scripture, to Moses and the Prophets, with a
plain affirmation of greater authority in them to persuade men from hell, then
if one had risen from the dead to persuade them: The last place that I will
add for proof of this point, is in John 10.3.4. the sheep of Christ, they
follow Christ, that is, the faithful they believe in him; why? because they
know his voice; as who should say, there is a secret skill, that God has
endued them withal, whereby they discern the voice of Christ from any other;
and that voice of his, they hear and believe it; why, because the Church tells
them so? No, that is not it; but, because it is his voice, and he has spoken
it: So that the authority of the Church is not greater then the authority of
the Scripture, but the authority of the Scripture is greater then the authority
of the Church: this is a material point, Bellarmy de Verbo Dei, interpret. 246.
not only against the Papists, but even in our consciences, that we may know
what is the maine ground which we are to rest upon, the Church, or the
Scripture.

Ephesians. 2.20. you are built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles,
Christ Jesus himself being the chief corner Stone, that is, ye are built upon
the Scripture; then the Scripture is the foundation, and the Church the
building; now we know that the foundation may, and often times does stand fast
without the building, but the building cannot stand at all without the
foundation, therefore the foundation is a far surer stay then the building,
and the Scripture then the Church.

Pet. 1.23. now which is greater, the seed that begets, or the fruit that is
thereof begotten.

John 5.36. to the 39. Our Savior appeals from the voice of John, which was
the voice of the Church, to his miracles, as being of greater authority, and
yet he appeals from his miracles to the Scripture, as being of greater
authority then them both; And Luke 16.31. If they hear not Moses and the
Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rise from the dead: and 2
Pet. 1.17, 18, 19. miracles are of greater authority then the Church, and the
Scriptures are of far greate^ authority then miracles; that the Scriptures
are of more greater authority then the Church; I will make it plain by a
Simile: In a Family, the wife being of more authority then the child, her word
shall stand when the childs shall not stand, yea, but the husbands word is of
more Authority, then the wives, for his shall stand, when hers shall not; then
it follows, that the husbands word must needs be of greater authority then the
childs.

Fourthly, that which speaks true always, must needs all Scripture is given
by inspiration from God, 2 Timoth. 3.16. but the Church speaks sometimes
false, for every man is a liar, Romans 3.4. therefore the Scripture is of greater
authority then the Church: or take it thus more plainly. God is to be believed
before man, but the voice of the Scripture is the voice of God himself; and
the voice of the Church is but the voice of man; therefore the voice of the
Scripture is of greater authority, and is to be believed before the voice of
the Church.

Fifthly, our assurance of any truth, stands more on and so the authority of
the Scripture is greater then the authority of the Church: an Angel from
heaven is not to be believed besides the Word, Gal. 1.8.

Esa. 8.20. to the law and to the testimony, if they speak not according to
this Word, it is because they have not light in them, Acts 10.43. to him give
all the Prophets witness, says Peter to Cornelius, referring the truth he
taught, to be tried by the Scripture: and so this has been the practice of
the learners, Acts 17.11, 12. The men of Berea seached the Scriptures to try
whether the things were so, as Paul had taught them; and yet Paul was a
principal member of the Church, and in his Doctrine, he was specially guided
by the Spirit, more then ever any Church was since; and the Bereans are
commended for this, and not accounted curious; So that the Teachers and the
Learners, have still referred themselves, for the trial of the truth, to the
Scriptures, and not to the Church: and therefore the authority of the
Scripture, is greater then the authority of the Church: Yea, the Scripture or
the Church is the highest thing, in this kind, whereon we are to rest, for
they cnanot be equal; then the Scriptures must needs be highest, and if they
be referred to any at all, it must be to themselves, for there is none greater
nor higher; as in the matter of an oath, Heb. 6.13. to 16. men swear by him,
that is greater then them selves, But God swears by himself, because there is
none greater to swear by: So likewise the Church is referred to the Scripture
for trial, because the Scripture is higher then the Church; but Scripture is
referred to Scripture, because there is none higher to be referred to, nor
there cannot be two highests in one kind, for that is against nature and
reason too; and therefore when the sayings of the Church are referred to the
approbation of Scripture, it is the referring of them to an higher; and so the
authority of the Scripture is greater then the authority of the Church.

The uses are these; The first is matter of refutation, The blasphemous
speeches of the Papists concerning the Scripture without the approbation of the
church.
It is strange to see and hear, what monstrous and blasphemous speeches and
positions, many of them have delivered to this purpose, as that the Scripture
is of no more authority without the approbation of the Church, then Esops
Fables, Oh, horrible blasphemy! there are some others of a better kind, that
are more modest, that say, that the Scriptures are to be fitted to the times,
and the sense thereof is to be altered as the times alter; others there are that
say, that the Churches are not bound to take the Scriptures as true, without
the allegation of the Church; and that the Church has authority to reject or
allow Scripture, and that ye may know, that by the Church, they mean their
Romish church, and by that the Pope: hearken how blasphemously they ascribe
unto him all power in heaven and in earth, that he may dispense against the
Apostles and their Canons, The Church of Rome is that whore of Babylon.
and against all the commandments of God in the old and new Testament, etc.
Here the world may see, that the church of Rome is that whore of Babylon, an
impudent, and shameless strumpet, that sets such a brazen face, and belches
out such whorish, filthy blasphemies against God and his Word; the very naming
of these positions, is refutation enough for them in any Christians judgments.
The best positions of the Papists in this controversy, Answered.
To come to their best positions in this controversy: Ioh. 2, 20, 27. you have
anoyntment from that holy one, and know all things; And again, the same
anointing teaches you of all things: Mal. 2.7. and is not the Priest the
highest Judge then? Deuteronomy. 17.8, 12. But he was to judge according to the Law,
as we may see in Verse. 11. so that except they will arrogate more to
themselves, then the messengers of the Lord of hoasts did under the law; they
cannot be Judge nor Judges of the Scripture.

The second position of theirs is this, How the Church is to be believed and
obeyed.
The Scribes and Pharisees were to be obeyed, as they sat in Moses chair,
that is, as they taught his Doctrine, Matthew. 23, 2, 3. but if they transgress
and bring in the precepts of men, and their own traditions, as sometime they
did, then is their Doctrine vain, and to be rejected, Mark 7, 7, 8. so that
it is plain that the Church is to be believed and obeyed, so long as they go
according to Gods Word; but when they swerue from that, they are no more to be
believed, Esa. 8.20. to the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not
according to this Word, it is because there is no light in them, except they
speak according to the Scripture, they are but dark and blind guides, no
light in them at all; and that which is pretended to the contrary, Matthew.
18.17. is directly understood of Church Censures, which yet are not simply
authentical in themselves, but as they are proceeded in Christ's name, Ver. 20.
that is according to his order, else there is no danger in it, John 9.34.

Their last Position is this, Answered.
In which gross assertion they, first, Reasons against it.
dishonor God exceedingly, as who should say, man is to be believed before
God; at least that God should not be believed, but because of man; Besides,
whence had the Scripture its authority in the writers of it, from God or man?
Surely from God, he is the author himself of Scripture, 2. Timothy 3.16. every
Scripture is given by Inspiration from God: then it must have its authority
from God, who is the author of it; Again, who gives us faith? the Church? No,
it is the work of God, John 6.29. Therefore that we believe the Scripture to
be Scripture, or any book of it to be Scripture, it is wholly from God
himself, who works Faith in us to believe it; Well, Reply.
But the Protestants do magnify every one himself, as much as we do the
Church? which she professes is true, because she says so her self, she
lays her self open to the scoffs and insultations of the adversary; For by
that reason every Religion will be a true Religion, seeing the professors thereof
will say, It is true, as well and as confidently as the Church; whereas if she
say, her Religion is true, because God says so in his word, and so proves it;
this is sufficient to stop their mouths, or else to leave them without excuse.

give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, and unto God that which is Gods: How
we must esteem of the Scriptures.
So must we give unto the Church, that which is the Churches, and unto the
Scripture, that which is the Scriptures: First, esteem of the Scripture as
Gods own Word, 2 Pet. 1.21, 22. able to make us wise to salvation, and perfect
to every good work, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17: Secondly, How we must esteem of the
Church.
esteem of the Churh as the Pillar, that is, as the keeper and vphoulder of
the truth; 1. Tim. 3.16. not that light, but a witness of that light, John
1.8. she is to inquire, search, propound, expound, pronounce, teach, approve,
and judge, according to Scriptures themselves, and not otherwise; she is as the
woman of Samariah, that propounded the Messiah to the men of the city and
brought them to him, but when they heard him, they say, now we believe not for
thy saying, but we have heard him our selves, and know that this is indeed that
Christ, John 4.42. So the Church propounds and brings us to the Scripture, but
when we look into it and hear it speak, then we believe. But ye will say, 4.
Ways how we may know the scripture to be the Scripture.
how then do we know which is Scripture, or how shall we know that the contents
therein are true, and of God? I Answer: First, we shall know it from the
Scripture it self; as the Sun is known by his own light, so the Scriptures
are known by their own light, God speaking and shining in the Scripture: Do
we then believe the Scriptures because the Church says Tim. 3.16. Secondly,
we shall know them by the Spirit working in us, together with the Word, and
persuading us that they are true, 1 John 5.6. John 20.30, 31. 6 Rules
concerning our believing what the Church says of the authority of the
Scripture.
that is, that congregation that truly professes the saving faith of Christ;
So that first, not every company, that profess themselves to be the Church,
but professing the saving faith, are to be believed; And secondly, not
whatsoever the Church says, is to be believed, but that which she says by
the evidence of the Scripture it self, and interpretation of the Spirit: And
Thessa. 2.3.2 Peter 1.19, 20. 2 Timothy 3.16. And therefore still the Preface of
the Prophets is, Verbum Domini.

And so much shall seue to be spoken concerning the authority of the Scripture.

The four and twentieth LECTVRE of the CHVRCH.
COncerning the power of the Church ye have heard how it extends it self to
persons and things (for so we divided it, for our more easier proceeding in the
point) that which concerns persons we have already spoken of; And that which
concerns the thing wherein the Church has power we have entered into and
showed, that they are of two sorts, either matters of circumstance, or matters
of substance. The Churches power in matters of substance are either in matters
touching Scripture, or besides Scripture, touching Scripture, and that I showed
was of two sorts, either touching the authority of Scripture; or the sense of
Scripture. Of the authority of Scripture, we spoke in the last Lecture; The
second thing the Church has power in about the Scripture is the sense of it,
and how far it has power therein.
Now we are to speak of the sense of Scripture, which we shall be the longer
in handling, because look what was wanting in the former point, shall be here
supplied. Touching this point, what authority the Church has in the sense of
Scripture, it is as material, and as difficult a point as the former: First as
material, for after we are made acquainted which the letter of Scripture: so
that we know which are Canonical books, written by the Infallible direction
of the Holy Ghost, and that every thing contained in them is the undoubted
truth of God, we are still as far to seek in matters of faith as before till
we proceed further and be acquainted with the sense and meaning of Scripture;
for the Word of God is not so much the letter, as the sense; and the Scripture
is not so much the bare written word, as the right meaning, and understanding
of that which is written: That what a man says, is his speech indeed, in
common acceptance: Hieron. in Epist. ad Gelat. cap. 1.
But yet if it be not taken in the sense he means it, he will and may justly
disclaim, as none of his speech: A man's meaning is contained in his words, as
the things signified in the sign, because words are the signification of our
meaning; but the subject of them wherein it properly rests and is seated, is
the breast of the speaker; So the Word of God is in the Scripture, as the
sign, whereby God signifies his meaning, but the subject of them, wherein
properly the meaning of them restes, is in God himself; so that this is a
material point to be known. Secondly, it is as difficult a point as the
former, for after we hear which is the right letter of Scripture, it is as
difficult to know which is the right sense, as before it was to know which was
the right letter; for the same words sometimes have diverse significations, and
one and the same sentence may be understood many ways; and diverse men, are of
diverse minds, expounding one and the same Scripture diverse ways; every man
abounding in his own sense; the true believer expounding it to the maintenance
of the true Catholic faith; the Heretic to the maintenance of his Heresy;
Yea among and true believers themselves, one interprets the same words to that
opinion that he favors, and another to a contrary that he favors; What is to
be done in this case? The Church is here thrust upon us, as the only or
chiefest vmpyre in these differences, and that alone to be the true sense,
which she pronounces; And surely I see not, but that the Church may as
probably and plausibly challenge authority to deliver which is the meaning of
Scripture, as which is the letter of Scripture. We have given the Church her
due, touching the former, acknowledging her authority in and about the letter
of, Scripture, but not over or above it; and so God willing, we will deal as
ingenurously in this concerning the sense of Scripture; But yet we will limit
and bound it within certain necessary cautions and limitations; And that we
may do so, we will handle it by way of Observation.

The Observation is this; Esaias 8.20. To the law and to the Testimony, etc.
whosoever is the speaker, and whatsoever he speaks in matters of God, and of
Religion, and therefore specially in expounding Scripture, it must be according
to the law and the testimony; that is, according to the meaning that God
intends therein, and so in the 1 Peter 4.11. the Apostle says, Let him that
speaks, speak as the words of God, that is, in Gods sense. As in general all
must thus speak Gods Word, so specially the Preacher, or whosoever that takes
upon him to expound Gods Word, he must speak it as the Word of God, that is,
not only for the manner of it, reverently and zealously, as becomes the Word
of God; but for the matter much more, that is, in the same sense that God
himself has spoken it, as he being then in Gods stead, and delivering his
message, else he speaks his own words not Gods; Secondly, more particularly,
John 5, 39. Search the Scripture says our Savior, he does not bide them, take
the Scriptures, and read them, and give what sense of them they think good;
But he bids them search them, that is, examine them and consider advisedly of
them, lay them rightly together and weigh one place well with another, and make
diligent inquiry after the sense, and reach that God intends in them; And so we
shall find that they are first witnesses of Christ, and then that they are
helps to eternal life: See it yet more nearly Romans 12.6. Let us prophecy
according to the proportion of faith, says the Apostle, whereby prophecy is
expressly meant interpretation of Scripture, for so it is taken in the 1 Cor.
14.3.31. and that is to be framed according to the proportion or Analogy of
faith, which whether it be meant of faith, contained in the Creed, or of the
measure of faith that God has endued us with all, yet still it is to be
understood, that that faith which God has revealed in the body of the
Scripture, must needs be the rule and square of all interpretations; And so in
the 2 Peter 1.20. No prophecy of Scripture is of any private interpretation,
etc. where intepretation of Scripture is named, and all private interpretations
of Scripture excluded; now what is meant by private interpretations; it is
explained by the opposition verse. 21. but holy man of God spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost, so that every interpretation is forbidden and
condemned as ptiuate, that is not according to the mind of the holy Ghost that
speaks in Scripture, and see it falls in right, with the observation, as if it
were the same words. Secondly, the examples of the practice of the faithful is
plain for this; Nehem 8.7.8. The Text says, they read in the book of the Law,
and gave the sense, etc. not that they did give a sense of their own, but they
gave that sense that the Lord himself therein intended, and so caused them to
understand it: So in Act. 8.34, 35. the Eunuch reading that place, Esa. 53. he
was led as a Sheep to the slaughter, etc. he asks Philip whether the
Prophet speaks this of himself, or of some other, acknowledging thereby,
that the meaning of the Prophet himself must be the Rule that he must go by
in expounding the Prophet, And Act. 17.11. The Bereans took not the Apostles
word, no farther then it was consonant to the sense of Scripture, but they
searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so; And our Savior
him self submitted himself to the same Rule, Luke 24.27. he expounded Moses
and the Prophets to them, that is, he did plainly deliver their meaning, for
that is the right office of an Interpreter; as when two speak together, being
of a strange language, the Interpreter is to tell what each of them means:
And this being the chief office that the Church has concerning Scripture, to
interpret them, she is then to give no other sense of them, but that which is
the mind of God, and the meaning of the Scriptures themselves; this is true
preaching; and this did our Savior, Luke 4.17.21. he opened the book, and
read in it, and then expounded it: So much for the proof of the point.

The reasons are these, the natural man perceives not the things of the
Spirit of God; and the sense of the flesh is enmity against God, Romans 8.7. and
when Peter confessed aright, that our Savior was the Son of God, flesh and
blood did not reveal this unto him, Matthew. 16.17. and therefore if so be they
will find out the truth in the Scripture, they must not consult with
themselves, but with the Spirit of the Lord.

specially, he that makes laws is to expound them; And is not the Scripture
Gods own Word? and is not he the author of all the Laws and Statutes therein
contained? And shall we scantle God of that in this kind, which is due to
every man in the like kind? Shall every man expound his own words, and
interpret the laws he makes, according to his own meaning? And shall not God
do so much more? It is the Apostles reason for the words of the Prophets, 2
Pet. 1.20, 21. where he says, that no prophecy of Scripture is of any private
interpretation, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost,
as if he should say, it is Gods Word, and therefore not to be interpreted
after the will of man; and it may as justly be applied to all the Scriptures,
as to the Prophets, because they be all of God, 2 Timothy 3.16. all given by
inspiration from God, therefore God is to expound them.

Iehosaphat says to the Judges in the 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7. if it be so in civil
things, that the Judge must do nothing, but that which God will have him to
do, because it is Gods Judgment; much more in Religious judgments, as about
the sense of Scripture, it must needs be so; for the life of natural reason
is far more clear in the other, then these: yea, the Lord himself quotes
them both together in this case, limiting both alike, Deuteronomy. 17.8. to the 11. If
a controversy arise, they must go unto the Priest, and unto the Judge, and
what they inform, according to the Law, that they must do.

go before it, framing it to their own fancies; and the Church has the
promise of the Spirit, no further, but as following Gods Word, John 14.26.







Cor. 2.17. and 4.2. whereas the Apostles, and Gods Ministers do otherwise,
they make Gods meaning plain in every man's conscience in the sight of God; So
it is the practice of the devil and his instruments, to mis-apply Scripture,
wresting it to error, to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16. So they allege
it quite against the meaning of God, as Satan did, Math. 4 6.

Lastly, the sufficiency of the Scriptures, and plainness, and constancy in
it self, is such, that it requires, that whosoever interpret them, they must
do it according to the meaning of God in them, and not their own mind. So
much of the reasons.

Reproving first the opinion of the Papists.
and it meets with them two ways: First it reproues their opinion, and
secondly, their practice. And first, it reproues them for their opinion, for
they esteem the Scriptures but a dead or killing Letter, and the written Word,
but bare and dead Ink; It is the Church, say they, that is the mouth of the
Scriptures, giving it sound and sense; and it has no meaning, but what she
pronounces: This is their wicked opinion; but the faithful have spiritual
ears, they hear God himself speak, even in the written Word; It is true
that the Church sounds it to the outward ear, but God speaks in it to the
heart and conscience, and they receive it, not as the word of man, but, The
Scriptures speak, and have a voice.
as it is indeed, the Word of God. A dead letter do they call them? O horrible
blasphemy! Stephen calls them lively Oracles, Acts 7.38. and the Angel, Acts
5.20. calls them words of life: and Christ himself says, John 5.39. that
eternal life is in them, and that they are witnesses of him; If they be dumb,
as they say they are, then they give but a slender witness of Christ; but our
Savior would have us to know, that there is a living voice in the Scripture,
as he says, John 6.63. the words that I speak, are spirit and life; I say
not that this life is in the Scriptures simply, but as it is in the Sacraments
to the faithful Receiver, that is, by the promise of God, and the presence of
his Spirit: How the Church is the mouth of the Scripture.
It is true that the Church is the mouth of the Scriptures, as Aaron was the
mouth of Moses, Exodus 4.16. He shall be thy spokes-man to the people, he
shall be unto thee in stead of a mouth, and thou shall be unto him in stead of
God: And as the Prophets were the mouth of God, Luke 1.70. as he spoke by the
mouth of all his holy Prophets, etc. thus the Church is the mouth of God, and
his spokes-man to the people and so far she is to be believed: But that she
is so the mouth of Scriptures, as that what sense soever she speaks must be
esteemed the voice of Scripture; this is not to be believed: No, the Scripture
is not dumb, but speaks it self, The Scripture not dumb.
Romans 10.11. the Scripture says, and Romans 11.2. Wot ye not what the Scripture
says? and most plainly, Romans 9.17. for the Scripture says unto Pharaoh, etc.
that is, God in the Scripture, says to Pharaoh; so that the Scriptures are not
dumb, but the spiritual man hears God speak in them. As it condemns their
opinion, so secondly, Secondly, their practice first in regard of the vulgar
latin translation imposed by them as the authentical Text.
it condemns their practice, and that in many respects; and first in regard of
their vulgar latin translation, for they impose that upon the Church, as the
authentical Text, and Word of God, and in the council of Trent they have
decreed, that none may appeal from it, under any pretense, and that upon pain
of Gods curse; It is true, that translations are Scripture, so far as they go
with the original Text, but that any translation is to be equalled, much less
preferred to the original Text, wherein both the the matter and the words are
Gods own, it is absurd: And this is a sufficient motive to any indifferent
man's judgment not blinded and besotted with mysts of prejudice and error, that
we are in the right, and they are in the wrong, because we are willing to
stand to the trial of Gods own Text, but they will only stand to their own
translation, refusing the other. Secondly, in that all their Expositors are
slaves and vassalls to their Church.
The second practice of theirs here reproved is, that all their expositors are
slaves and vassalls to their Church; for in all their interpretations, either
they must concur to award with the sense, that the Church has already given,
or if they differ, they must veil Bonnet, and say with submission of their
judgment to the church of Rome, and then though they do err, yet it is not
damnable, because they show a willingness to be better advised, else they are
Heretics and Castawayes: it were far more grace in them, to submit
themselves to the judgment of God, with entreaty of pardon, for that we have
not attained to the full sense of his words, for if any wrong be done therein,
it is most to him, whose words we have mistaken; and also we must pray unto
him for further illumination, who is the father of lights: and in this they
would show themselves to be the good servants of God, whereas in the other,
they show themselves to be the servants and slaves of men. Thirdly, in regard
of the oath, which generally all Papists rec^ue concerning the exposition of
the Scripture.
Their third practice here reproved is this, That in the oath, which generally
all Papists receive, they do swear to understand Scripture only so, as the
Fathers jointly do expound them, and to receive no other interpretation, but
that which they do generally consent in: No doubt, but the Fathers, jointly
consenting, and all agreeing in the exposition of a Scripture; It is great
reason to move me to believe that it is the true sense; but yet it is no proof
that I should swear to it; but I ask what one place of Scripture is there,
that is not manifest by its own light, which is expounded one, and the same
way by all the Fathers? If it be manifest by it self, we believe it for its
own light, and not for theirs: but if it be not manifest in it self, then
some one or other of Fathers dissent in the interpretation of it: yea, but say
they, if most agree, then it is all one, as if they all agreed? But what if the
most dissent from the best, must we follow the most to do evil? But in the
division of the Commandments they follow not the most, but leave all the rest
of the Fathers, and follow Austin, who will have but three Commandments, in
the first Table, because he had a conceit of a mystery of the Trinity to be in
them: But will they believe the most, and leave the best? this is against Gods
Commandment, to follow the multitude to do evil; The Fathers do all
generally concur, and yet miss in the right expounding of the Scriptures.
but thus they must do, or else they are foresworne: See what dangerous
plunges these desperate fellows put themselves on, to uphold the Churches
transcendent authority, in expounding of Scripture^ but secondly, what if they
do all generally concur, and yet miss in the right expounding of Scripture,
some of the best learned amongst the Papists challenge them so to do; and we
can give instance of it, as in the dangerous heresy of the Millenaries upon
that place, Reu. 20.4. that Christ should reign on the earth, after the day of
judgment a 1000. years; now if they follow the Fathers in this exposition,
wherein they generally err, they must forsake the truth; if they follow them
not, they break their oath; what a snare do these men entangle themselves in?
Lastly, if they should never err, yet to swear to the words of men, is to
inthrall our consciences to men; which the Lord alone is to have the command
thereof. Fourthly, in that they rely upon the judgments of Counsels, and the
Pope^ in case the Church dissent.
The last practice of theirs here reproved is, that when the Church dissents,
they rely finally on the judgment of Counsels and Popes for the sense of the
Scriptures, whereas they are all but men, and may err, yea, and have erred,
one of them crossing that which another has held, and therefore we must not
tie the Scriptures to men's humors; no, let God be true, and every man a liar,
let Gods Word expound it self, and let not us ty it to the interpretation of
men, though they be never so many, never so holy, so learned, so painful, or
so great in the Church; For, that may be truly said of Counsels and Fathers,
and without disgrace to the best of them, that is spoken of John Baptist, John
1.9. that they are not the light, but men that bear witness of the light.

life and salvation, if it be understood and believed aright, else it is death
and destruction; and therefore we had need look well about us in meddling
with the Scripture and the sense thereof, and carry our selves warily,
carefully and conscionably therein; And that, first, in admitting the
expositions of others; secondly, in making expositions of our own. First, in
admitting the expositions of others, we must not altogether look into them
with other men's eyes, but with our own; First, other men's and the Churches
expositions are to be examined by us. Ob. Answer. 1.
we are not to take any expositions upon any man's, or any churches bare word;
but we are to examine their grounds and their reasons whereby they are
maintained: But some may say, If I examine their grounds, I make my self the
Judge of the sense of Scripture, and were I not as good rest on the Churches
judgment, as mine own? I answer, first, that if I do thus, yet I do not
properly Rectract. lib. cap. 18.
in that holy Father, Austin, who finding an interpetation of Cyprians, (a holy
man too) not so well agreeable to Scripture; and another of Liconius an
heretic, on the same Text, more agreeable thereto, refused Cyprians
exposition, though otherwise he greatly reverenced him; and received that of
Liconius, though otherwise he knew him to be out of the right way; and said,
Pardon me, Cyprian, I must leave thee here, and take Liconius exposition, not
because it is his, but because it is Gods: This is an ingenuous practice, and
this we must follow, we must look into other men's expositions with our own
eyes, and examine their grounds, and that without respect of persons. Secondly,
Secondly in framing expositions of our own, we must come not as masters to
teach, but as scholars to learn, to the Scriptures.
in framing expositions of our own, when we come to the Scripture, to seek
the sense hereof, we must not come as Lords to command, but as servants to
obey; not as masters to teach what we will have it say, but as scholars, to
learn what it self does say; not as the speaker, but as the interpreter to
take that which is spoken to our hand; And that we may walk uprightly herein,
and take such a course as is pleasing to God, and worthy of the Scripture, and
beneficial and comfortable to our selves, let us be ruled by these directions;
they are very pithy, and he that is ruled by them, God will reveal his meaning
to them, so far as shall be for their salvation: Directions to walk and be
ruled by, when we seek the sense of the Scripture, and they are of three
sorts 1 some before we come to expound the Scripture, and they are 7.
There are some things that we are to be ruled by, before we come to expound
the Scripture; and some things in the exposition of it; and some rules we are
to observe after it (I labor to make this point plain, because it is a maine
difference betwixt us and the Papists; And also because that without the
knowledge of the sense of Scripture, we cannot be saved) First then, we are to
observe these directions, before we take the Scripture in hand, and that is,
First, we must go to God by prayer, we must begin with God, that he may begin
with us, and go on with us, and lead us safe through to the end of our
business, pray with David Psalm. 119.18. Lord open mine eyes, that pray for
light, and for the grace of illumination of him that is the Father of lights,
James 1.17. for thy self art darkness; and pray to him for wisdom, James
1.5. for all thine own wit in this case is foolishnes; and pray for the Spirit
of God, that he may be present with us, and effectual unto us to instruct,
direct, quicken, and teach us, for that which is in us, is but flesh and
nature, and the natural man perceives not the things of God, 1 Cor. 2.14. and
doubt not but that thou shall be heard, and find good success, for thou have
Gods promise for it, James 1.5. If any man lack wisdom let him ask of God,
and it shall be given him, Luke 11.13. Cor. 2.16. seeing they did not see, that
is, though the matter were as clear as the Sun, that every one that had any
eyes might see it; yet they did not. Psalm. 25.9. he will teach the humble his
way; Empty thy self that thou may receive of his fullness; deny thy self,
that God may teach thee; and become a fool, that thou may be made wise.
Matthew. 5.6. have a good mark to aim at when we come to handle the Scripture,
namely, Gods glory, and the finding out of the truth, not to know it only, but
to live by it, that God may be glorified; we must say, Lord it is thy face we
seek, and thy glory we aymeat, and this is the end that God himself aims at
in the tender of the Scripture to thee, and therefore if thou set the same End
before thee, God will surely assist and bless thee accordingly. Rom 12.3.4.
Let no man presume to understand above that which is meet, Things to be
observed in the business it self.
but that he understand according to sobriety, as God has dealt to every man
the measure of faith.

Secondly, in the business it self, what is to be done? First we must take
the Scripture and read it, and consider and observe the scope of the place, and
the consistence of it with the words going before and following after, and
compare sense with sense, and phrase with phrase; And if thy skill can reach so
far, go to the original, and thus doing thou shall see the sense arise from
the words sensibly, as waters out of the Fountain: Yea, but say the Papists,
the Scriptures are hard, and contain dark speeches, high matters, and
doubtful words, how can the unlearned then expound them? I Answer, First, for
fundamental points that concern our salvation, they are most plain to every
man's understanding, that is, either in the same place, as most commonly it is,
or at least in other places, as always we find it, the Lord still confirming
every truth by the ^outh of two or three witnesses; Other points also are
plain enough, for the most part, to a proportionable capacity, I say not to
every capacity, but yet so long as matters concerning salvation are plain
enough in Scripture, that is enough; But say they, if you tie us to this Rule,
to seek the sense of Scripture by Scripture, you do but as Heretics used to
do and yet they have missed the right sense of Scripture? I Answer, It is
true, but that has been their own fault, the fault has not James says, How
we may consulie with Gods Spirit.
shall not we pray because of that? The second thing we are to do, in this
action, is this, we must go and consult with Gods Spirit, who understands
them, and best knows the mind of God in them, 1 Cor. 2.11.14, 16. and
therefore consult with him, and we shall know the mind of God too; This is
true, say they, but how shall we consult with Gods Spirit? I Answer, we must
do it by prayer and heavenly meditation, the Spirit being by name Christ's
substitute on earth for this business, John 14.25, 26. to teach us all things,
and to bring them to our remembrance; And look what our Savior did when he
was present upon earth, Luke 24.32, 45. he opened the Scriptures to the
Disciples, and opened their understandings that they might conceive them; so
does the Spirit now in his absence, he opens the Scriptures to us, and our
understandings that we may understand them, and know the meaning of them: But
have ye he Spirit, say the Papists? Yea, we have the Spirit of God, for God
promises to give his Spirit, to those that ask him, to the meanest as well as
to the learnedest; And therefore that is but a scoff of theirs, to say, you
that are a plain simple man, have you the spirit? What is the analogy of
faith.
that is, to those known grounds that are contained in the Creed, the ten
Commandments and the Lords Prayer, and not admit of any sense to cross
them; For they are the sum and marrow of Scriptures in fundamental matters,
they are in effect nothing but Scripture itself, only they differ in manner,
that which is more largely set down in Scripture, is there set down in a
brief form, that so our eye might the better be fixed on them, And this rule
the Apostle teaches us, Romans 12.6, to prophecy according to the portion or
analogy of faith, as if he should say, still have an eye to that: Labor for
the meat which endures to everlasting life; says our Savior, John 6.27.
Things to be dove after.
we come to that which we must do after we have laid the Book of God by;
Mary did the words of the Shepherds, and of Christ, Luke 2.19, 51. she did
ponder and keep these sayings in her heart. And this will ripen our thoughts
and digest our readings and conceits, as chewing the cud, separating the
refuse, and turning the best into good nourishment. two Disciples did, Luke
24.4, 32. for this will revive our understanding, and quicken our wits, and
when our reason, and help our memories, and stablish our judgment, and throw
out the hidden substance, as it were from the husk, and winnow away the chafe
from the wheat; Phil. 3.15. all this while that thou have been toyling and
striving, expect and wait upon God, and thou shall find the success in Gods
good time: thou having used the means, and daily laboring and praying for the
effect, be sure it shall be revealed unto thee, when it is best for thee and
thou fittest for it; and if it should never be revealed to thee, yet thy former
pains seconded with patience, shall make thy state as good in Gods acceptance
through Christ, as if thou had known it. John 7 17. If any man do his
will, he shall know of the Doctrine whether it be of God or no; Act. 5.32. the
holy Ghost whom God has given to them that obey him, Psalm. 119.100. I
understand more then the ancients, because I have kept thy Precepts; God will
not see us err in Judgment and practice too, in such necessary points, as he
sees we desire as well to obey as to learn; And so much for the second use,
which teaches us wariness, and care, and conscience in meddling with Scripture.

men both at home and abroad, yea many Churches have published their judgment
touching the sense of most places of Scripture, And therefore if men will be
blind, now; let them be blind for ever, let us take the benefit of these helps
thankefully and soberly, and let us add to these the use of those seciall
helps before mentioned and then it is not possible that we should err
fundamentally and finally in any truth.

Diverse objections against this doctrine.
But there are diverse exceptions made against this Doctrine, Peter 1.20.

Secondly, It is excepted, Ob. 2.
that this is a detraction from the Church; I Answer, No, for any private man
that believes, is of the Church; and as the Church must try the Spirits, so
must every believer, 1 Cor. 12.10. and 1 John 4.1. and as the Church has the
promise of the Spirit, so has every believer; And this is a sure rule, the
Spirit does infallibly teach every one of Gods chosen, first, or last every
thing needful for his salvation; he using such means as the Lord has
appointed, Phillip 3.15. It is so in manners, therefore it is so in Doctrine;
each being a part of the truth which God requires, and which the Spirit leads
us into, Psalm. 25.5. lead me in thy truth, and teach me, for thou art the God
of my Salvation; And Psalm. 143.10. teach me to do thy will, for thou art my
God: Every one of the faithful has the Spirit to comfort them in their
distress, to help them in their temptations, to persuade them to holiness,
and why not therefore to inlighten, and teach them the truth.

from your own fancy; for any Heretic can and will say as much as you: John
16.13. when the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth:

Wicklife, Husse, and Luther, one or few then delivering the truth ought to be
believed before the present Church, because they observed these rules:
Sometimes the Church does observe these rules, and particular men do so too;
and then either they concur, and so the truth is directly delivered and
received, or else, they dissente, and then rather follow the stream, then one
or two, if there be no other reason to the contrary; For sometimes even in this
case too, one man may see more then many; as Paphnutius in the Council of
Nice: Again, sometimes the Church observes these rules, and some particular
men do not so; In this case particular men are right Heretics and the other
the true Church of God.

Ob: 5.
Fifthly, It is Objected, that by this means we all rest on our own Judgment,
and so have no faith in God? Scripture revealed by the Spirit, is not our own
judgment indeed, but Gods; our frailties wherewith we are accompanied, are
ours only, but we are endued with our judgment from God; so that we rest on
Gods judgment now, and not our own; Every man must have faith of his own,
that is, though not of his own by working, yet of his own by possession and
feeling, and therefore every man must have judgment of his own too; for faith
without judgment, is blind presumption; And must I not rest on my faith in
that sense? And why not on mine own judgment too; that is, on Gods Judgment,
which he has endued my mind and soul withal.

Lastly, it is objected, This is strange, say they, we hear them confess
that every man, though he be never so much enlightened, yet he is subject to
error; and yet every one of them assures himself (having one,

The five and Twentieth LECTVRE of the CHVRCH.
COncerning the power of the Church, we have heard that it reaches to persons
and things; for so we divided it for plainness sake; concerning Persons we
have done; concerning things we have entered into them, and showed that the
things wherein the Church has power, are either matters of substance, or
matters of circumstance; matters of substance, and that either touching
Scripture, or besides Scripture; touching Scripture, and that either touching
the authority, or sense of Scripture; Of these two last points we have spoken,
namely, concerning the power of the Church, touching the authority and sense of
Scripture: Now we are to speak of matters besides Scripture, Of the authority
of the Church in matters besides the Scriptures, and what is to be held therein.
which is the last point concerning matters of substance; that is the point we
are now to speak to, matters beside Scripture; for though in deed and in
truth, there is nothing to be held in matters of substance in Religion, but
what is sufficiently warranted by the Word, either expressly, or at least by
sound consequence and deduction; yet because some have fondly imagined, and
confidently avouched, that such things there are, and that it is in the
Churches power to ordain them: and because some churches have usurped and
incroached upon more authority in this case; then ever was granted or committed
to them from God; therefore in handling the authority of the Church, this point
also amongst the rest, is needful to be spoken unto: Matters of substance in
Religion are of two sorts, some concerning faith, teaching us what to know and
believe; others concerning obedience, prescribing us what to do and practice,
in each of these, the Church has a great hand, where the light of Scripture
goes before, and where she follows the Doctrine thereof accordingly; but
where the Scripture is silent in any thing of either or both these kinds,
there the Church must be silent too, and not desire to speak.

We will deliver the matter plainly by way of observation, and that is this,
namely, The places that prove this are of four sorts.
some places ascribe this authority to God alone: the second sort commends us
to the sufficiency of the Scripture in it self; the third sort condemn all
adding to Scripture; and the last sort condemn all Doctrine so taught.

The first that ascribe this authority to God alone, First, such as ascribe
th^s authority to God alone.
they are these. James 4.12. there is one Lawgiver, which is able to save and
to destroy, and what is it to ordain matters of substance in Religion, but to
give Laws? Laws I say, of the highest kind, such as we must live and be
saved by; and who is it that gives these Laws? he only that is able to save
and to destroy, for so the Lawgiver is there described, which being peculiar
to God alone, he alone must be the Lawgiver; Now the Laws that God has
given, are contained in the Scriptures, which are therefore called the Word of
God, because therein God has delivered his mind and meaning, therefore
besides those in Scripture, no other Laws are to be ordained for matters of
substance in Religion: another proof of this kind, we have, Matthew. 23.8, 10.
Be not called Doctors, and be not called Master, for one is your Doctor and
Master, and who is that, but Christ himself; Now what is it to be our Doctor
and to be our Master? It is to teach us what to believe, and what to do, that
we may be saved; therefore Christ being our only Doctor and Master, he alone
is to teach and direct us in matters of Salvation: And in Ioh. 1.18. The Office
of revealing God to man, is appropriated to Christ, he only declares him; and
the reason is there employed, because he only came out of the bosom of the
Father, and therefore he only knows the mind of his Father, and therefore
consequently he only being of ability and authority to declare it; so that
whosoever takes upon him to reveal any part of the mind of God, he must show
that he comes out of Gods bosom, else he neither must, nor can speak in this
business, that Christ himself has already revealed, that is, that which is
contained in the Scripture; Now, that we may know that this Rule is inuiolably
to be observed, we must know, that all which ever had to deal in matters of
salvation, were precisely tied and and confined to this scantling, both
teachers and hearers; Teachers, they must teach nothing in this kind, but what
Christ in his Word has first taught: The Apostles, and in them all Ministers
are forbidden to teach any thing but what Christ commands them, Matthew. 20.28.
that, and nothing besides that: yea, the holy Ghost, Christ's special and
chief Deputy on earth, he is to receive of Christ, and to show that to the
people, John 16.14, 15. he shall receive of mine, and show it unto you; And the
Text says in the 14. verse, that he shall glorify Christ in this, as who
should say, if he teach ought besides, it were a dishonor and disparagement
to the Lord Jesus, much more, if any other should do so: and so the hearers
they are tied to this scantling too; for so it was prophesied before, Deuteronomy.
18.15. The Lord thy God will raise up a Prophet unto thee, like unto me, from
among you, even of your brethren, unto him ye shall hearken; And this Prophet
is Christ, as the Apostle Peter proves, Acts 3.17. And this was after confirmed
by a voice from heaven, Matthew. 17.5. This is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased, hear him: And it is the mark of Christ's own sheep, that they
will hear his voice, John 10.6.27. and his only, and not a strangers, that
is, whatsoever is spoken not according to the voice of Christ in the Scripture:
So much for the first sort of Scriptures. Secondly, such as commend unto us the
sufficiency Scrip^
The second sort that prove this point, are such as commend unto us the
perfection and sufficiency of Scripture: for if the Scriptures contain all
things necessary to salvation, then what has the Church to do in such matters
besides Scripture; the Church and the Scriptures stand in oposition in this
point, for that sufficiency being granted to the Scripture, it disanulls all
such power challenged to the Church: and that power being granted to the
Church, disanulls that sufficiency of Scripture; but the Scriptures are
sufficient as we will prove by these places following, John 20.31. but, these
things are written that ye might believe, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son
of God, and that in believing ye might have life through his name. All things
that Christ spoke and did, are not written, yet there is enough written for
quantity, and enough for power, to cause us to believe, and so to believe, that
we may have life through his name, and therefore sufficient enough for all
matters of salvation, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. The whole Scripture, says the Apostle,
is given by inspiration from God, and is profitable to teach, and to convince,
to correct and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be
absolute, being made perfect unto every good work: here are reckoned up such
special works, as are most effectual to teach both faith and obedience, and
these are ascribed to the Scriptures: True, say the Papists, they are ascribed
to the Scriptures, as being profitable to these, but yet not sufficient, yes,
it is sufficient too, for it is so far profitable to every one of these, that
thereby the man of God is made perfect to all good works: and is not this as
much as if the Apostle had said, the Scriptures had been sufficient for every
matter of salvation; and that he means so, is plain in the 15. verse thou
have known the Scriptures of a child, which are able to make thee wise unto
salvation; so much for the second sort of Scriptures. Thirdly, such as forbid
any addition to, or detraction from the Scripture.
The third sort are such as absolutely forbid any addition or detraction from
Scripture, as in Deuteronomy 4.2. there is an absolute prohibition; ye shall put
nothing unto the Word of God, which I commend you, neither shall ye take ought
therefrom; and Pro. 30.6. put nothing unto his Words, lest he reprove thee,
and thou be found a liar, Revel. 22.18, 19. If any man shall add unto these
things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book, and
if any man shall take away, God shall take away his part out of the book of
life, etc. Now then if the Church can decree any matter of salvation besides
Scripture, and not add to Scripture, nor diminish from it, then they may have
some color for it, notwithstanding these prohibitions; but if that be
impossible, as it is, then this is simply unlawful; The Apostle amplifies this
point by way of comparison, Galat. 3.15. If it be but a man's testament, no man
will add to it, much less to the Testament of Christ. The last sort of
Scriptures are those that condemn all Doctrines so taught, either without or
besides Scripture, Esa. 29.13. It is a sore complaint which the Lord takes up
against the people there; because the Religion they looked to be saved by, was
taught by the precepts of men, and Matthew. 15.9. Christ utterly rejected this
worship, as vain and hypocritical, when they teach for Doctrine men's
precepts: and 1 Timothy 6.3, 4. Fourthly, such as condemn all Doctrine taught,
either without or besides the Scripture.
If any man teach otherwise, and consents not to the wholesome Doctrine of
our Lord Jesus Christ, he is puffed up, and knows nothing; It is self-conceit
and gross ignorance, yea, and not only when it comes from an ordinary man,
but if it come from an Apostle, nay, an Angel, if they should teach any other
Gospel, not only that is against this, but besides this which I have taught
you (says the Apostle) hold him accursed, Galat. 1.8, 9. So that if any,
either Apostle or Angel from heaven deliver or teach any other Gospel, that
is, any matter of substance in Religion, though it be but besides that which we
have in the Scripture, they are accursed. And so much for the proof of the
point.

The reasons are many: And the first reason is drawn Romans 10.17. Faith comes
by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God; Faith comes by hearing, of whose
sayings, man's? No, but the Word of God; whatsoever God speaks, faith hears
it, and most willingly and sweetly believes and embraces it; but what any else
says, whether it be man, or Church, or Angel, as it is not powerful to beget
saving faith; so also it is the nature of faith to refuse it, or, at least, to
suspect it, because it is beside the Word, and God speaks it not.

Secondly, The second reason is drawn from the state Corinth. 3.23. Be not the
servants of men.

The third reason is drawn from the property of the builds not upon Scripture,
is unable therefore to afford any such warrant, therefore without and besides
Scripture the Church has no power in such things.



John 12.49, 50. and whatsoever the Spirit does teach, he received it from
Christ, John, 16.13. If Christ do tie himself to teach those things, and
nothing but those things he received from the Father, and the Spirit nothing,
but those things he received from Christ; then I hope the Church has not
greater liberty in respect of the Scripture, then Christ in respect of his
Father, and the Spirit in respect of Christ: Therefore as Christ spoke nothing
besides that he heard of his Father; and the Spirit nothing, but that he
received from Christ; so by proportion the Church is to speak nothing in
matters of salvation, besides Scripture.

themselves sometimes ingenuously confess, that the Testimony o^ the truth,
consists in the holy Ghost, Rhemists 15, Acts ^.
and the Prelates jointly, so that it is not in the Church alone without the
Spirit: And what; does the Spirit teach the Church any new Doctrines or
Revelations? No, but that which Christ has revealed before. If ye compare John
14.26. with John 16.13, 14, 15. you shall find that the holy Ghost, whom
Christ promises to send, shall teach all things, that Christ has taught;
which being the same which is in the Scripture, then the Spirit teaches the
Church nothing besides Scripture: And so the Church is able to decree nothing
besides the Scripture, because she is able to do nothing without the Spirit.

Lastly, when things are decreed by the Church, are These. 5.21. Try all
things, 1 John 4.1. Try the Spirits; If then they must be received upon trial
and Examination, how must they be tried and by what rule? Either by the
Judgment of the present Church, or by the Scripture; If ye say by the Church,
that were to make her Judge in her own cause; then it must be examined by the
Scripture, as the men of Berea did Paul's Doctrine, Act 17.11, they searched
the Scriptures daily, whether the things were so as he taught; So the things
the Church decrees, must be tried by Scripture; and if that cannot approve
them, as being not there found, they are to be rejected and the authority of
the Church in imposing them to be disclaimed: So we see in reason, that the
Church has no power nor authority to decree anything or matter of substance in
Religion ^yth (...) faith o^ for obedience, without or besides Scrip^^^.

The first vs^ (...) of reproof of sundry Popish practices and positions, not
to name all; For indeed if this point be well understood, it razeth and over
throws the very foundation of Popery; Here then we see, first, that the
Church cannot coin any new Articles of faith; why, is any man so graceless to
do so? yes, the Papists do so; And howsoever many of them will not seem to
favor it in word, yet their practice makes them guilty of it: The Papists say
the church may coin new articles of faith.
Pope Pius the fourth propounds a Creed, and ties his children, the Papists,
to it, wherein, after he had set down the twelve articles contained in the
Nicene Creed, he adds twelve more of his own, concerning traditions and
Purgatory, etc. And these he will have acknowledged, and undoubtedly believed
as the former; and is not this to coin new articles of faith? What authority
the Church has about articles of Faith.
I Answer, No, But only as thus; if any article has been neglected,
obscured, and layen hidden in former times, (the places of Scripture whereon it
is grounded, being not well understood) then the Church has power to declare
and publish it, upon the better understanding of such places, Hyper 6^. Hyper
54.
as it is proved by; And this is not to make new articles of faith, but to
revive and renew those that were before, and that not beside the word, but with
and by the word. This may be cleared by an Instance, The article of
Justification by Faith, had lain hidden for many years before Christ came, but
when Christ and his Apostles came, they revived it, and yet made no new article
of it, but the same that was taught from the beginning of the world: to come
nearer home; After that this doctrine was again obscured and lay hid for many
years, till it pleased God to raise up Luther, and others, which brought it
forth, to that clear light, that it was in in the Apostles times; And is this
to make new articles? No, but to revive and to bring to light that which had
lain hid a long time; And thus far the Church may go, and no further. The
second Position is this, that the Church cannot make any book to be Canonical
Scripture, Secondly that the Church make any book to be Canonical Scripture.
Which the Papists hold this confuted by diverse reasons.
which is not so of it self; For this is to ordain and decree matters of
substance in Religion besides Scripture: But do the Papists do this? yes, they
do, and, therefore are here to be reproved for it, as being utterly unlawful
for them so to do; For first, the number of Canonical books are certain, as
themselves confess, and therefore no authority can admit more. Secondly, if
the Church has power to make books that are Apocrypha, Canonical, then also
she has power are Canonical books by the Scripture, and not make any so of
her self, for this she cannot do.

Thirdly that the Church has power to devise, add, diminish, or alter any
part of Gods worship.
The third Position is this. That as the Church cannot make any book Canonical
which is not so of it self, for she has no power to devise, add, diminish,
or alter any part of Gods worship; outward passages of Gods worship are much in
her power, as we shall see hereafter, but that she may ordain any part of his
worship besides Scripture, or affixe remission of sins or other supernatural
effects to the observations and ceremonies which she deuiseth, all this is but
will worship hateful to God, and expressly forbidden, Col. 2.23. which the
Church of Rome has done proved by diverse things.
Intolerable has been the presumption of the Church of Rome in both these;
For first, they have ordained besides Scripture Images, satisfactons, new
Sacraments, new intercessours new propitiatory sacrifices, and sundry other
parts of Gods worship and Fourthly, concerning customs.
custom we know preuailes much in matter of practice, and many times they are
very approuable, and not to be varyed from, but upon good occasion; yet in
matters of Religion, yielding to customs has bred much inconvenience; as we
see amongst us profaning the Sabbath by playing and walking in the streets and
in the fields after the exercises, is grown to such a custom; as that men
think it no sin, and so in other things: And to speak plainly, customs
are but a carnal motive, apt to over sway the natural man; but of themselves
besides Scripture, they are no spiritual motives to the true Believer; The
fathers judgment concerning customs.
The ancient fathers tie up customs in Religion thus short, that they must be
agreeable to the truth; so that where truth and customs agree; there they are
to be admitted, else to be rejected; Now what is truth? Our Savior says, Gods
Word is truth, John 17 17. then if there be any customs in matters of Religion
besides the Scriptures; which are the truth, they must be abolished, even by
the Judgment of the Fathers, whom the Papists would seem to allege for
these things; yea, but say they, the Apostle Paul alleges custom 1 Cor.
11.16. but how does he alleges them? Against contentions, because
contentions are against the Word of God, so that custom besides Scripture, is
nothing worth. The last point is for matter of traditions; Fifthly concerning
traditions.
Traditions are one mine Pillar of Popery, and if they leave them once, they
will quickly leave their Religion too; Now if we understand traditions in a
general sense; It intends the whole Doctrine of Salvation, which from time to
time has been delivered from the fore fathers, to the children of the Church;
How and in what sense tradition is to be received.
And so we willingly embrace traditions, as being the Doctrine contained in the
word and so the speeches of many of the ancients are to be expounded, and do
make for traditions: But in the particular sense, as the Popish Church intends:
them, that is, unwritten verities, and matters besides Scripture, then so there
is no building on them; If they be verities, it is more then we know, and being
unwritten, we have no warrant to receive them: Answers to the Popish tenent
concerning tradititions. Answer. 1. Ob.
to his point we these by tradition, Answer wherein is showed that the Baptism
of Infants, the change of the Sabbath, and that so many books are Canonical
Scripture, and are not had by tradition, but proved by good consequence out of
the Scripture.
for they may sufficiently be proved by good consequence out of the Scripture,
As first for the Baptism of Infants, we have the example of our Savior in
Mark 10.14. And secondly, for the Canon of Scripture, we have that place, 2 Timothy 3.16. the whole Scripture is given by Inspiration from God, etc. yea, but
what place in the word says, that so many books are Canonical: I Answer,
every book bears witness of it self, and this place of them all, that they
are Canonical: Thirdly, for the change of the Sabbath, we have, Reu. 1.10.
where it is called the Lords day, so that we have Scripture enough for these
things to satisfy an humble minded man, that is not contentious. Secondly, if
there were any such, yet they were needless, for supposing the sufficiency of
Scripture (which we have proved before) what need unwritten traditions besides
Scripture; Answ. 2.
Indeed, before the Word of salvation was committed to writing, It was needful
that it should be delivered by word of mouth from man to man; but the word
being now written, and having been now written these 1610. years, and as much
written, as ever shall be, what have we to do with traditions besides
Scripture? Answ. 3.
Thirdly, if they were necessary, yet they are uncertain, for how shall I know
that the Apostles delivered ought by tradition, or that the Churches after
them, be they either de facto or de iure; Their proof out of 2 These. 2.15.
Answe-
For that which is alleged from the Apostle in the, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. keep the
Instructions ye have bin taught either by word or by Epistle; whereupon they
say, the Apostle left traditions and Epistle I Answer, these words do not
imply any diversity in the things he taught, but only in the manner of
delivery; Answ. 4.
look what he preached, he writ. And whatsoever can be alleged for the
Churches after them, is but the testimony of man, we must know it by history,
and what certainety is there in that to repose my Salvation upon: Lastly, if
they were certain, yet all this while they were but certain the traditions of
men, and certainly not the Word of God; And therefore here is the damnable
presumption of the Papists, that they by name call them the Word of God
unwritten, and equal them both in authority to bind the conscience, and in
necessity to be believed and obeyed with the written word; common sense and
reason which is endued but with the least touch of Religion, will easily decide
this controversy: If we add here to determination of councels, consent of
fathers, decrees of Popes, and other patches and faynings of Popish Religion,
the conclusion must be this, that either there were none such; or if there
were, they were not beside Scripture; but according to it; or else if they were
besides Scripture, then they were no matter of substances nor Salvation, nor to
be received as such.

The second Use, is for Instruction to teach us what The scripture the so only
rule of says acknowledged to be by all Churches generally.
The Scripture is the only rule of Faith, and of obedience, what it teaches
must only be believed, and what it commands must only be obeyed, and nothing
else as necessary to salvation; And generally all Churches acknowledge the
Scripture to be the canon; yea the Popish Church to his day retains the name,
though they cast it out at the backgate, yet at the foregate they take it in;
the Canon, that is as much to say as the rule: Now what is to be done with a
rule? All things are to be fitted to it, and not it to any thing; Carpenters
and Masons, they fit their timber and stone to the rule, and not the rule to
the timber or stone; so then the Scripture being the rule; whatsoever is to be
believed or obeyed, must be squared by it; and look how much it comes short or
goes beyond, or misseth on this hand or that of the rule; so much it comes
short of true saving faith and obedience, and so much we go out of the way of
Salvation; therefore cast away all other measures as crooked, traditions,
customs, etc. and stick fast only to this rule, as to the perfect square of
all Religion, we must put nothing to Gods Word, nor take ought there from, this
the Lord himself commands Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 5.32.35. Secondly, as this is the
rule of faith, so it is the trial of every truth; the Scripture is the only
touch stone of truth: if Paul teach the truth, Secondly the Scripture is the
only trial of every truth.
it must be tried by the Scriptures Act 17.11. Let heathen men bring their
Paganism, the Turcks their Alcoran, the Jews their Talmud, the Papists their
Catechismes, councels, customs, and traditions to this touchstone, and this,
this will show them all to be stark counterfeits, very dross and filth: not
worthy to be once looked after, much less to be esteemed the precious golden
truth of God, that souls should be saved by. Lastly, yet mistake not, as to
think that all matters of substance and salvation were expressly in the word,
How every matter of substance is to be found in the Scripture. Concerning
Churches power in matters of circumstance, and they are of two sorts, one of
miracles, and what is to be held concerning the same.
that is, by name, and in so many words, as we are to apprehend it, but at
least by consequence, and to be deducted by sound and sanctified reason,
applying it to the circumstances of the Text, and to the analogy of faith. And
so we have finished those things that concern matters of substance.

We come in the next place to matters of circumstance, and these are of two
sorts, either miracles or discipline: either miracles; for indeed it is a part
of the power of the Catholic visible Church, as it contains altogether from
the Apostles themselves down to our times, for with them it was an ordinary
thing to do miracles, Matthew. 10.1. Our Savior gave them power against
unclean Spirits to cast them out, etc: and Mark 16.17. and 1 Cor. 12.9.10. to
another is given the the gifts of healing: to another the operation of great
works, by the same Spirit: And it was very necessary at the first planting of
the Gospel, that they should have this power, for the confirming of their
office, and authority, that planted it: but now there is no use of miracles,
their Doctrine and writings being sufficiently confirmed already, and therefore
that power is restrained; and what Church soever challenges this power,
Secondly of discipline, and this is of two sorts: either matter of d^scipline,
which is spoken of before, or secondly, matter of ceremonies, and what the
church has power to do therein.
may justly be censured for Antichristian, spoken of in the 2 These. 2.9.
Secondly, or Discipline, and that is of two sorts, either matter of
Government, or matter of Ceremonies; of the first we have spoken already; of
the second, we will speak a word; by Ceremonies we understand the time,
place, and gesture to be observed in Gods worship and service; we will contriue
the whole business into this observation:

Every particular visible Church has power from God, to ordain some outward
Rites and Ceremonies for the outward carriage of Gods worship within that
Church or Congregation; Mark the parts of the Note: every visible Church, for
the invisible not being contained within the bounds of any one settled outward
state, can have no such orders: Secondly, I say, particular, for besides that a
general visible Church cannot so be properly assigned to a place; and if it
were, yet being of so large an extent, as commonly it is, it cannot be brought
within the compass of the same outward Rites: Thirdly, I say, has power from
God, to ordain Ceretaine Rites: Fourthly, I say, for the outward carriage of
Church business, for they have nothing to do with the Inward man: Fifthly, I
say, they must be within that particular Church, for one Church is not to
prescribe another what they should do, except their case be very like, and
that there be a willingness in the Receiver: So the Note is clear; we come to
the proofs, Acts 15.1, 2. In the Church of Antioch, there was a matter in
question, as touching Circumcision, an outward Ceremony; the Apostles being
then at Jerusalem, were by the consent of the Church of Antioch, consulted
withal about it; and accordingly they deliver their judgment in the 23.
verse, etc. And therein show their power, and consequently the power of the
Church after them (for the causes being perpetual, the course must be
perpetual too) and they show their power both in disanulling some Ceremonies,
as Circumcision, verse. 10. as abstaming from meat offered to Idols, and blood,
verse 20. which were certainly things in their own nature indifferent, as the
Apostle shows of meats, 1 Corinthians. 8.8. And yet all this they did with the
assistance of the holy Ghost, verse 28. and that only in things needful, as
in the same verse; and this they did not so much for the thing it self, but
for the avoiding of offense: And so in the 1 Cor. 11.2. etc. where the Apostle
mentions the ordinances, which he had delivered them already, which are
generally understood of matters of order and decency, and the circumstances
make it plain enough, for after verse 3, etc. he delivers them other
ordinances keep, which he had not delivered them before, concerning the
uncovering of the man's head, and the covering of the woman's head, which were
things indifferent in themselves, yet for comeliness sake, he does there
inioyne them: and verse 20, etc. he delivers certain other ordinances,
concerning the outward carriage of Gods worship in the Lords Supper, as their
tarrying one for another, eating before, etc. verse 33.34. And whereas many
other things were out of frame with them, he promises in the end of 34. verse,
to order the rest at his coming to them, where it is clear that the ordering
of things concerning the outward carriage of Gods worship, is in the power of
the Church it self; for still the Rule holds, that the disease continuing,
always requires a continual reamedy from time to time: So in the 1. Cor,
14.26, 40. The Apostle would have all things done decently, and in order: he
gives them this general rule for matters of Ceremony, and they must draw
particulars accordingly, and this Rule holds as well for the Church now, as
then; there being the same necessity, there must also be the same power: So the
point is plain, that every particular visible Church, has power from God to
ordain certain outward Rites, etc.

The reasons to prove this point are these: First some

Secondly, no Rights are universal, to hold every

Thirdly, no Ceremonies are perpetual in one and the

Lastly, if a particular Church has not power to ordain

The uses are these: First this teaches the Church to Ceremonies, The bounds
the Church is to keep in ordaining matters of ceremony. 1. 2.
are these: First they must do nothing that is opposite to Gods Word,
Secondly, they must have no opinion of Gods worship placed in them, as the
Surplice and the Cross, if the Church so inioyne them, it makes them
unlawful; If they have been abused so heretofore by the Papists, that is not
their sin now, take away the abuse, and the things may still be imposed all
to Gods glory, 1 Cor. 10.31. Fourthly, they must be done without scandal or
offense, as much as possibly may be, the Church must be wary herein, for
though all things be lawful, yet all thing are not expedient, 1 Cor. 10. all
things must be done to edification 1 Cor. all things must be done decently and
in order, 1 Cor. 14.40. as in Exodus 28.40. Aarons sons must have Coats and
Girdles, and Bonnets made them for glory and beauty; which being the end that
the Lord in the Legal Ceremonies did aim at, it must needs be our end also in
the like cases; and thus the Church may safely ordain Ceremonies.

Use 2.
The last use is to teach us, that if we live in a Church, where such things are
ordained that are not simply unlawful, we must take heed that we resist not
this power, or the things thereby ordained; Bridle thy self from dislike,
specially from refusal, yet yield with some persuasion of conscience, take
such a course whereby thou mai'st obey the Magistrate and the Church, and yet
not offend the weak, herein is wisdom, yet rather obey the Magistrate,
though with offense, for here disobedience is the greater sin, and so takes
away the sin of offending the weak; and indeed in this case, I give none
offense because my hands are bound, and I have no liberty to do otherwise: but
what if a man be not persuaded of these things, What is then to be done? must
he separate from the Church? No, first, they must labor to be better
informed: secondly, they must resolve to bear with a great deal, rather then
to make a rent in the Church: thirdly, suffer thy self to be ouerborne, in
things indifferent, by the authority of the Church, till thou be'st able to
prove it simply unlawful, or to show that there is greater scandal in the use
of it, then in disobeying the voice of the Church, and of the Christian
Magistrate; I know that it is sin to disobey the Christian Magistrate, except
I know that God commands the contrary: Now in these indifferent things, I do
but fear, I do not know that God commands the contrary, to that which my
conscience is doubtful of; now shall I run into a known sin, because I
would avoid a sin only feared? So much shall serve for this point: And so
we have finished the eyghth point, concerning the power and authority of the
Church.

The six and twentieth LECTVRE of the CHVRCH.
YOu may remember that 9. points were propounded to be spoken to concerning the
Church, 1. The ninth general point concerning the Church, viz. the application
of all that has bin spoken to all visible Churches in christendom that I know
of.
whereof we have already handled 8. of them: And now we are to speak of the
ninth, and that is the application of all that which has been spoken to all
visible Churches in Christendom, that I knnow of; those Congreagtions that
profess not Christianity, we meddle not with: The Pagans that profess
heathenish Religion, no, Christian; the Jews that profess the Law and not the
Gospel: the Turks that profess that abominable Idol Mahomet, and not the
Son of God, Jesus Christ, these we have here nothing to do with; they are
utterly excluded from the outward name of a Church; as being assemblies quite
of another kind; they have no Christ, not so much as in outward profession, and
therefore are no Church at all: It is the Christian assemblies, that is, those
that profess the faith of Christ crucified, that we are here to speak of;
you shall understand that the Doctrine concerning the Church, whereof I have
spoken, has been so plainly and fully delivered, that if it be rightly
understood, it will easily apply it self to all Christian Churches in the
censure of those that are Religious and Judicious: but yet because diverse
Christian Churches are of diverse conditions, differing one from another, as
well in time, as in place; and because the chief reach of this whole
discourse, both in teacher and hearer is this, to see how we may justify our
standing in the present state of this Church of England; therefore for your
better direction, both to help your judgment The general division of all
churches that have been, or are since our Saviors time into Eastern and
Weste^rne, and this according to their sc^tuation. Secondly, according to their
language and so some be greek and some latin Churches.
touching the goodness and soundness of this Church that we live in. I will
endeavor (God willing) to make application of that which has been spoken, as
to all Churches in general: so more particularly to this Church of ours: The
general division, of all Churches that either are or have been since our
Saviors time, is twofold: First, according to their situation, and so some
are Eastern, and the rest Western Churches: Secondly, according to their
language, and so some are Greek, and some Latin Churches. And because the most
famous of the Eastern Churches used the Greek tongue, therefore usually the
Eastern, have been called the Greek Churches: and on the other side most of
the famous Western Churches have used the latin tongue, and have therefore
been called the latin Churches: The Eastern Churches have the precedence both
for time and order* and therefore we will speak first of them; but because
some both Eastern and Western Churches have been Heretical and
Schismatic; Whether Schismatic or heretical Churches may be accounted
true visible Churches. What a Schismatike church is.
therefore this general point offers it self by the way to be discussed, viz.
Whether Schismatic or Heretical Churches may be accounted true visible
Churches; which general being cleared, will give great light to the right
censuring of particular churches: First, for Schismatic Churches, that is,
such as embrace and profess the common saving faith of the Catholic Church;
but yet have separated themselves from the outward communion of those
particular visible Churches, that sometimes they have been, and should be
members of; the cause of such Schisms is sometimes pride, discontent,
weakness, wilfulness, pretended zeal, a factious spirit; always it is
Satan's instigation, and man's acceptance: whatsoever the cause be, and how
great soever the Schism be, though they be justly condemned as Schismatic,
in regard they are rent from the outward fellowship of such visible
Congregations, as they belong unto, yet because they hold correspondency with
the Catholic Church in matters of saving faith, and accordingly profess the
same, they cannot be denied to be true visible Churches: Such were the
Donatists of old, and such are the Brownists at this day: But you will say, our
selves, like to Christ our head, even to our reuiling adversaries, then with
them that are so bitter and uncharitable censurers, and merciless judges of
us; They know we believe in Christ Jesus, and in him crucified, as our only
Savior, and they have bin baptized in our Church into his name, and they do
not yield to be rebaptized, by which very practice of theirs, they acknowledge
that which in words they deny, namely, that we are a true Church: for there
can be no true baptism administered in and by a false Church; where there are
true Sacraments, there is a true Church, as we shall hear further hereafter:
Heretical Churches. First, what they are, and when any particular man is to be
reputed an Heretic.
So much for Schismatic Churches. In the second place, we come to
Heretical Churches, and they are such as hold, and stiffely maintain any
material point in Religion, contrary to the common faith of the Catholic
Church: a particular man is not to be reputed an Heretic, except he join
with his error, obstinacy, and that he wilfully persist therein, against the
admonitions and allegations of the Church; and so a Church is not to be reputed
Heretical, till they be obstinate in their error; and this obstinacy must be
in all, or, at least, in the chiefest and greatest part of them, so that none
of note amongst them do testify their dissent from them, nor oppose themselves
against their heresy; but if any of note be found amongst them, though but few
that do openly contradict the rest, that Church, till separation be made of
the sound from the unsound, is rather in charity to be well thought of, because
of the right believers, then in zeal to be utterly condemned as heretical,
because of the mis-beleeuers, though they be the greater part. Now Heresies are
of two sorts: Heresies of 2. sorts: first, such as overthrow the foundation.
first, such as directly overthrow the foundation: secondly, such as affirm it
in express words, but yet hold some cross positions, which by necessary
consequence do overthrow it. That we may the better understand this, we must
know what is the foundation, What this fundation is.
and that is Jesus Christ, God and man, the only Savior of the world, as he
is revealed in the Scripture, for so the Scripture propounds it; First that
Jesus Christ is the foundation; the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 3.11. other
foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ:
Secondly, Jesus Christ God, the foundation, Mat. 16.16, 18. And Simon Peter
answered, thou art Christ the Son of the living God. And I say unto thee, thou
art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church; In both which places he
is expressly spoken of, as the foundation: Thirdly, Jesus Christ man, the
foundation, 1 John 4.2. Every Spirit, that confesses that Jesus Christ is come
in the flesh, is of God. And there by implication he is spoken of, as the
foundation too, for they that so believe, are of God, as who should say, they
are within the foundation; and contrarily, they that do not so believe, are
not of God, Verse. 3. that is, are not within the foundation: Fourthly, Christ
the only Savior of the world, the foundation, Acts 4.12. neither is there
salvation in any other, for among men there is given none other name under
heaven, whereby we must be saved; And there he is spoken of expressly, as the
foundation, for look in the 11. Verse, and it is said, he is the stone cast
aside of the Builders, and is become the head of the Corner. Lastly, Christ the
foundation, as he is revealed in the Scriptures, Colos. 2.7. rooted and built
up in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have been taught, that is, in
the word, for this is as truly a part of the foundation, as any of the other;
and therefore the Scriptures elsewhere, by a borrowed kind of speech, are
called the foundation it self, Ephesians. 2.19. And are built upon the foundation
of the Apostles and Prophets, etc. for it is not enough to Salvation, to
believe the former of the definition, without this clause, as making a full and
complete description of the foundation; to say that Jesus Christ God and man,
the only Savior of the world, is the foundation, is not enough; unless this
be added to make it complete, as he is revealed in the Scriptures; for they
teach concerning him, his Nature, Offices, Birth, life, Death, and
Resurrection, etc: And therefore the Layers of this foundation make the
Scriptures the rule or line that they work by, they proved that which they
taught by the Scriptures: So the Apostle Paul, Act 26.22, 23. witnessing both
to small and great, saying none other thing, then that which the Prophets and
Moses did say, should come, that Christ should suffer, etc: And Act 28.23. he
expounded and testified the kingdom of God, persuading them concerning Jesus,
both out of the Law of Moses, and out of the Prophets; And 1 Cor. 15.3.4. I
delivered unto you, first of all, that which I received, that is, how that
Christ dyed for our sins according to the Scriptures, etc: And so Apollos,
Act 18.28. mightily convinced the Jews, and that publicly, showing by
Scripture that Jesus was Christ; still the Builders made the Scriptures their
rule and line whereby they taught; And this foundation in Scripture, is
sometimes set down in fewer words, as in the 1 Cor. 2.2. Jesus Christ and him
crucified: sometimes in more words, as in the 1 Timothy 3.16. great is the mystery
of godliness, God was manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen
of Angels. preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received
up into Glory; But this is the substance of all, Jesus Christ, God and man, the
only Savior of the world, as he is revealed in the Scripture, the shortest
is intended by the holy Ghost, and so it is to be understood of us in this
largeness, and the largest is sufficiently comprised in this shortness; And
that this is the right foundation of the Church; first, appears plainly by
the difference between Christians, and professors of other Religions; If a
Gentile or Pagan dispute with a Christian, how happiness is to be attained? We
say, by Jesus Christ; they will reject him and say, there is no Christ, and de
ride us, to think that he can make us happy: So let a Jew and a Christian
dispute about happiness; we say, by the true Messiah, Jesus Christ, as he is
thus revealed; They say, by the Messiah, but this Jesus thus revealed, say
they, is not he, look into, Act 25, 13. to 19 the matter there in question is
this very foundation, Jesus; and there is a Gentile Festus speaks scornefully
of him, and there are the Jews denying him, and opposing against him, and
there is Paul a Christian, professing and auouching him, and that no doubt, as
he was revealed in the Scriptures, for that was always his manner before. The
like in effect we have in the 1 Cor. 1.23.24. there the Jew and the Gentile,
and the Christian, they all fight about the foundation, Christ, to the Jews
he is a stumbling block, to the Grecians foolishness, but to them, that are
called, the power of God to salvation, says the Apostle; So we see plainly;
this is the foundation, Jesus Christ, God and man, the only Savior of the
world, as he is revealed in the Scripture: The resolution then is this, Resol.
those heretical assemblies, Those that deny directly this foundation or any
part thereof cease to be Christians and are no more visible Churcher.
that directly deny this foundation or any part thereof, cease to be Christians,
and are no more visible Churches; But those that directly affirm the whole
foundation and every part thereof, though they do hold some erroneous
Positions, whereby they overthrow some part of the foundation by necessary
consequence, are yet to be held true visible Churches. Mark the terms of the
Resolution, there be many by-ways there is but one right way; It is easy to
miss of the right way, hard to hit it; to deny directly any part of this
foundation, is enought to make such persons no true visible church; but to
affirm one part, The Greek Churches be here spoken of, and what wear to
think of them 1. of the Greek Churches generally disperse in most at the
Eastern parts of the world,
is not enough to make them a true, visible Church; But they must affirm the
whole and every part of the foundation.

Now then we are to speak of the Churches according to their divisions; And
first of the Greek Churches they are generally dispersed in most of the
Eastern parts of the world; And to speak plainly, God has in some sort even
a visible Church dispersed in every part of the world at this day. Those that
are most remote from us in the Easternely parts of the world, are comprehended
under the name of Greek, or Eastern Churches because though neither their
language be Greek, nor their situation altogether Easternly; yet they have
received their faith, for the most part, from the Greek Churches: There are
Christians amongst the East Indians, there are some there, making public
profession of the faith of Christ, as others do of Iudaisme and Mahometisme,
etc. whether they be the beginnings of faith, as being but lately planted
amongst them; or the remainders of faith, as being planted of old; I am not
very certain, Ortelius 100. Ortelius 97. 98. 108.
nor is it much material; so long as they believe in Christ crucified, and
profess it so far as the Lord has revealed unto them, why may they not be
acknowledged for true visible Churches: In Russia, there are many professed
Christians, that are after the manner of the Greek Church, they are full of
Ignorance and superstitions; the Lord inlighten them, and purge them, yet
professing Christ crucified their only Savior; though by some consequences,
as mediation of Saints, they deny it, they are not to be denied to be true
visible Churches; And so in Ethiopia, there are found great store of
Christians, who though they be circumcised, and tainted with many gross
errors, yet holding, the foundation, Christ crucified for their Salvation, may
justly be acknowledged true Churches: And so in many other Easternly
countries, as in Persia and Assyria, there are many Churches of sundry names,
as the Iacobites, minorites, etc: but most of them are nestorians, as being
suspected to hold with Nestorius, that there are two persons in Christ, which
yet they have quitted themselves of; And they were only so called, because
they opposed most vehemently against the contrary error of Eutychus, who held
confusion of natures in Christ. In Armenia likewise are many Christians, who
are generally held to be Eutychans, but they have also cleared themselves; but
because they opposed the Council of Chalcedon, which condemned that heresy:
All these believe and profess Christ crucified, and therefore howsoever all of
them are either corrupt, persecuted, scattered, or disorderly; yet far be it
from us to deny them to be true Churches of God: let us esteem them as
brethren, and magnify the Lord for them, and let us pity their defects, and
rejoice at their graces; And let us entreat the Lord for them, as the Church
in Cant, 8, 8. did sometime for us; Let us pray to God to perfect the
beginnings of some of those Churches, to build up the ruins of others, and to
purge away the errors and corruptions of them all, that so if it be his blessed
will, they may be glorious and flourishing Churches even in the eyes of the
world: And so much of these Churches that are generally called Greek Churches.

Now we come to speak of those which are more particularly and properly called
Greek Churches, Secondly the Greek Churches which are more particularly and
properly so called, and what we are to hold of them, delivered in an
observation. Doct.
lying in and about Greece; And these are more particularly to be spoken to;
And therefore we will handle them by way of observation, which is this,
namely; That the Greek Churches even as they stand at this day, though they
live under the miserable slavery of the Turk, yet are to be accounted true
visible Churches: we will take our pattern by that of Constantinople, where
there is a Patriarch at this day, who has answered the Objections both of the
Protestants and Papists to their Religion; Now there is a true Church, First,
because they affirm the foundation and every part thereof: Secondly, their
errors do not directly overthrow the foundation, nor any part thereof: For the
first, they hold so much of the right Catholic faith, as may justly entitle
them to the name of a true Church; The whole Creed that we profess, they
retain also; In the interpretation of some points they differ somewhat from
us, but in the maine substance they agree, holding the foundation firm and
sure, Christ Jesus God and man, the only Savior of the world, etc. they
renounce the head-ship of the Pope, and many other points of Popish Religion;
They submit themselves to the direction of Scripture, though the interpretation
thereof they would fetch most willingly from their predecessors, the Greek
fathers, of whom some being more sound, others less, their Religion is not so
sincere as it should: Therefore the second part of the proof is, whether their
errors be such as directly overthrow the foundation, or any part thereof; They
are tainted with the errors of free will, Intercession of Saints and
Transubstantiation, and some other Popish opinions, which yet they do not
maintain altogether so obstinately as the Romish church does: The main error
of the Greek Churches.
But their maine error is, their denying of the holy Ghost, to proceed from
the Son, from the Father they acknowledge, and by the Son; but from the
Son, this they expressly deny; Now we know that the Doctrine of the majesty
of God himself in his nature, and in his persons, is a most profound and
principal point in Religion, and very warily to be considered of, Every error
therein being dangerous and fearful, and near to blasphemy; And this very
error, happly, if it be thoroughly sifted, will be proved, to overthrow by
consequence the foundation; yet seeing first, it does not directly overthrow
any part of it, and seeing, secondly, we hear they do not either absolutely
oppose herein to the known truth, or omit the search of Scripture for it, but
profess that upon playner evidence of Scripture, they will yield; And thirdly,
seeing they hold the foundation and every part thereof in express words, we
dare hardly charge them for heretical Churches, much less to be no true
visible Churches at all; but that men living in those Churches, believing
otherwise aright in Christ crucified, and repenting of their manifold errors
and ignorances may be all saved undoubtedly.

reproof: And first, of the Papists, and that in two points; first, in that
they presuming the Church, of Rome to be the only true visible Church affirm
that no Church is a true visible Church, but they that are subject to the Pope,
and have him to be their head; we see here that these are true Churches, and
better then the Popish Church, The Greek Churches better then the
Popish-Church.
and yet are far from his Jurisdiction; yea, they hate and defy it: so that
their definition of a true visible Church, is false, when they say, that there
is no true Church, but that which is gathered under the head-ship of the Pope:
whereas the Greek Churches, as we see, are true Churches, and yet not gathered
under that head: It is true that in former times, A Patriarch of
Constantinople did in ambition seek the title of head or universal Bishop;
And the Pope of Rome at that time withstood him; saying, that whosoever took
upon him that title, should be the forerunner of Antichrist; and it proved
true, for not long after one that succeeded that Pope, took this title upon
him, and was indeed Antichrist; I say, that a Patriarch in ambition sought it,
but now he is brought low enough, his head is under the yoke of the Turk, the
Adversary of Gods Church, who then thought to be the head of all Churches; But
though he missed of that, the Church still continued a true visible Church, and
is so to this day, and yet never acknowledged the Pope to be their head:
Secondly, The Papists vnchatarible censuring the Greek Churches answered.
it meets with them for their uncharitable censuring of these Churches, as no
true Churches of God; They are both heretical and Schismatical, say: they,
what if they were so; yet still they may be true Churches, as we showed
before; For Heresy as I will not precisely condemn them; so neither can I
altogether acquitte them; but as for Schism they are guilty of none; The
Greek Churches not gu^lty of Schism from Rome,
But only they are rent from the Romish Church in particular; so that here is
the quarrel; because they do not submit their necks under the Popes yoke: And
seeing they and every particular church is a body within itself, as that of
Rome; I see no reason that their estate should be judged Schismatic, The
Greek Churches never subject to the Roman Church.

One note of the Church, as the Papists account it, is found in the Greek
Church viz: succession of Bishops.


except they had departed when they had been members of that Church; but they
were never subject to the Church of Rome. One thing there is found in these
Greek Churches, which the Papists take in their state to be a chief note of
the Church, and that is Succession of Bishops, which is as current in the
Church of Constantinople, and Alexandria, as in Rome; even from the Apostles
times; Succession in Rome is a certain note, and mark of a true visible
Church, and there is as good Succession in the Greek Churches as at Rome, and
yet they say, they are no Churches at all; either let them disclaim this in
the one, or acknowledge it in the other: I am persuaded that the Lord has
preserved this succession in the Greek Churches of purpose to abate the pride
of the Roman Church, building so directly upon that allegation: It would else
have been a far more colorable plea to the natural man: but they denying
the force of the

The goodness of God in perseruing of his Churches seen in the Greek Churches
under the Turk The miseries of the Greek Church under the Turk in many
particulars in regard of their persecutions, in regard of the Religion of the
Turks.
The second Use, teaches us the great goodness of God, and the care he has in
the preservation of his Church; these Greek Churches, have lived many a
hundred years under the government and slavery of the Turk; that bought and
sold them and their children, and amongst the Professors of Mahomet, the
foulest Idol that the world affords; In regard of government they live under,
what a heavy yoke is it? what a bloody service? how many persecutions,
disgraces, indignities, taxes, and oppressions, horrible wrongs, and miserable
slaueries, do they undergo? They are bought, sold, imprisoned and put to
death; It cannot be spoken what slavery they live in; And yet behold God has
vpheld his Church amongst them all to this day: I dare say that Isreal's
preservation under the bondage of Egypt, so many hundred years, was not more
miraculous, then this of these Christians under the Turks. So likewise in
regard of the Religion of those that they are mixed with, it is an heavy yoke;
The Religion of the Turks 1. a pestilent Religion, directly opposite to Christ.
They are mingled with the professors of Mahomet, which is a most pestilent
Religion, and directly opposite to the Christian faith, admitting no color of
Reconciliation, but if we believe in Christ, we must reject Mahomet, and if we
believe in Mahomet, we must reject Christ: And yet the Lord, I say, has showed
himself a Ruler in the midst of his sorest enemies, preserving his faith and
Church, even where Satan's throne is, 2. It ouerspreadeth a great part of the
known world.
as he did the church of of Pergamus, Reu. 2.13. secondly, as it is a Pestilent
Religion, directly opposite to Christ, so consider that it generally abounds
and swarms, ouerspreading a great part of the known world; and yet in these
places the Lord has reserved a remnant that stick close unto him, and that
follow not the sway of the world; as he had 7000. in Israel in the days of
Elias that had not bowed their knees to Baall Romans 11.4. so he has many
thousands among them, that have not bowed the knee to Mahomet: Thirdly, 3. It
is a pleasing Religion.
consider the pleasingnesse of that Religion of Mahomet, a great inchanter of
nature, yet still the Lord has preserved some, that chose rather with Moses,
to suffer adversity with the children of God, then to enjoy for a season all
the pleasure that ever Mahomet could ever promise or bestow upon them. Surely,
we must needs acknowledge it to be a heavy judgment of God, that such
flourishing Churches in Achaia, Macedonia, Corinth, Ephesus, etc. should come
to that miserable ruin and desolation, that Mahomet, For what it was that the
Lord suffered such famous Churches to come to ruin, applied to us.
should reign amongst them, so generally in Christ's own Territories; and let
us know that it was for their unprofitableness in the use of the Gospel, and
other means of grace, which God so freely offered them: and let us consider of
it and fear and labor to profit by the Gospel, and pray to God that the like
befall not us, for our unprofitableness. This, I say, is a great judgment of
God upon them; and yet withal, see how in wrath God remembers mercy, and in
despite of Satan, Turk and Mahomet, and other instruments he plucks out
some, as firebrands out of the fire, to be professors of his saving faith, and
members of his Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against them.
And so much of the Greek Churches, both improperly and properly so called.

The Western churches, and first of those that acknowledge the Pope their head,
as the Church of Rome, and those that hold with her, and what man be said and
held of her; delivered in two observations.
Now we come to the Western and Latin Churches, which are generally of two
sorts, some acknowledging the Pope their head, as the Church of Rome it self
and sundry others that hold communion with that Church both in Doctrine, and in
all or most of the corruptions thereof: others renouncing his headship, and
refusing to communicate in the deformities, corruptions, and abuses of the
church of Rome, being therefore called the reformed Churches; I shall not need
to speak of the former in every particular; look what is said of the Church
of Rome it self, the same may be applied to all the rest: as is the mother, so
is the daughter, Ezech. 16.44. We will deliver her state in two observation:
First, we will show what may be said in charity, and yet in truth and sound
judgment, for the church of Rome: Secondly, what may be said in zeal, and yet
in truth too, and found judgment, against it; For the first, the observation
is this.

The church of Rome, as now it stands, may in some sense be reputed a true
visible Church.
some sense be judged a true visible Church: Secondly, we say not a sound
Church; no, that we flatly deny, as untrue, but a true visible Church: as a
man, though he be wounded, fainting, and dying, yet so long as there is any
spark of life in him, he is a true living man, not a false, though he be an
unsound and dying man: A differen^e between the papacy, or the pop^sh ^action
and some better spirits amongst them in regard of whom, the whole may be called
a true Church.
Thirdly, we make a difference betwixt the Papacy, or the Popish fact^on, and
some better spirits, in that Church, which no doubt have a righter belief, and
walk with a righter foot in the profession of the Gospel, then the faction
does; and these being mingled together with the rest, the whole may be called a
^^ue Church for their sakes; as was in our Sauiors time, the Scribes and
Pharisees were a faction in the Church, pretending Religion, and the true
worship of God, and yet swaying all against the truth and sincerity of it in
their courses: Mary, Simeon, Anna, Zachary, and Elizabeth and a few more, with
whom our Savior joined, or rather they with him, as living member of Gods
Church, and should not the whole be rightly acknowledged to be a true Church
because of them? Doubtless it may; and so the church of Rome may rightly be
acknowledged to be a true Church, in respect of some better spirits that are
mixed with them, and not in respect of the Papacy and Popish faction alone.

The reasons to prove them a true Church, are these, first, The popish church
does not directly deny any part of the fundation, but in outward show of words
affirm it. The church of Rome has been a true Church.
in outward show of words they expressly affirm it still, and therefore may
truly be acknowledged a true Church: That they have been a true Church of
God, is plain enough, Romans 1.8. But ye will say, that is no sound arguement
that they are so still? I answer, that yet this is to be considered; for it is
a great matter that must make a congregation, that has been a true Church, to
become a false one; and with more charity and love are such to be censured that
are in the state of Apostasy, then other congregations, holding the same
errors, that are but only coming on in the says, and have not yet been
thoroughly possessed of the true being of a Church. The Church of Ephesus was
fallen away from her first love, Revel. 2.5. And the Church of Sardy had a name
that she loved, and yet was dead, Reu. 3 1. And yet God calls them true
Churches still; A Church in Apostasy, that is, falling, not utterly fallen, is
still a true, though an unsound and dying Church; having been a true Church,
and not directly overthrowing the foundation, so long it may be still entitled
a true Church, well then, the church of Rome having bin a true church, it must
appear that they in outward show, at least, affirm the whole foundation, and
every part thereof; but this they do, they affirm the whole foundation, at
least in outward show and sound of words; they profess the same Scriptures,
and the same Creed that we do, yea, they profess in words the very same
foundation before spoken of, in the very same terms in effect; Look into the
Rhemists Testament, and you shall see that upon those places, 1 Timothy 2.5. and 1
John 1.7. they acknowledge Jesus Christ to be the only Savior of the world;
and therefore they may in some sense be rightly acknowledged a true visible
Church; I grant that they come very near the root of faith, and overthrow the
foundation almost to the very ground, The Papists by their Doctrine of
justification by works must overthrow the foundation, they by this over throw
Christ not directly, but by consequence. Quest. Answ. It is not so great a sin
to deny Christ directly as by consequence, yet he that does this, deserves to
be cut off from Gods mercy.
by the Doctrine of Justification by works, which error, if they would
reclaim, few, or none of us would doubt, but that they are a true visible
Church, yet this overthrows Christ, not directly, but by consequence; by
consequence they do, because if man's merits justify, then Christ's merits
alone do not justify us; but directly they do not, for still they believe in
Christ their only Savior, and they say that it is Christ's merits, that makes
them merit: they are not so gross in this point as they were, yet still they
are gross enough, overthrowing the foundation by consequence, yet still by
consequence only, not directly, and therefore still they may be reputed a true
visible Church: but ye will say, is it not as dangerous against a man's
salvation, to deny Christ by Consequence, as to deny him directly, to shut him
out at the backedoore as at the foredore? I answer, It is not so great a sin,
yet I say, he that does this, deserves in Gods Justice to be cut off from
Christ's mercy, as well as the other, especially, if he see the consequent; but
if he see it not, it is not so foul a sin as to deny Christ directly; he
that directly denies the foundation, whether he see it or not, is in certain
state of Damnation, but he that denies it by consequence, and sees it not, but
yet does firmly believe in Christ, so far as he knows, and is willing in
reverence and humility to learn more, and to obey better, and does daily
repent and beg mercy of God for his failings: the Lord does ordinarily either
inlighten such an one, and so bring him to repent, or else does forgive him his
ignorances, and so save him: So that he that denies Christ directly, is in
certain state of damnation, unless he have a part^cular repentance for that
sin, but he that denies Christ by consequence, if he confess his ignorances
and weakness to God, and crave pardon of them, and labor for more knowledge,
may be saved, though they have not this particular repentance for that sin.
And that this is the case of many thousand poor simple souls, that heretofore
have been, and now are contained in the besome of the Church of Rome, no man
of any bowels of charity can suspect. So much for the first reason.

The second reason is taken from the comparison of The Church of Rome compared
with the Church of Israel,
with other Churches in the same state; compare her to the Church of Israel in
Exodus 32.6. There they fell to Idolatry, worshipping the Calfe, and yet they
were a true Church still, and in Numb. 25.3, 9. compared with the 1 Cor. 3.8.
we see that they joined themselves to Baalpeor, and committed fornication with
the Moabites, thus they were very bad, and yet a true Church still: Look
further into the time of Jeroboam, that set up the Calves, and made all Israel
to sin, so that God threatened to give them up, for the sin of Jeroboam, 1
King. 14.16. and so in Ahabs time, in the 1 Kings 16.30. Ahab the Son of
Omri, did worse in the sight of the Lord, then all that were before him: and so
a time was, when there was no passe-ouer in Israel for many years: 2. with the
Church of the Jews in our Saviors times.
and yet they were a true visible Church still: So likewise compare it with the
estate of the Church of the Jews in our Saviors time, it was in the state of
Apostasy, and yet a true Church, the Scribes and Pharisees retaining some
notable truths, were still to be heard, Matthew. 23.3. and yet their Leven to be
taken heed of, Matthew With the Church of Galatia.
The Church of Galatia retained circumcision, whereby all profit and benefit by
Christ is utterly m de void, that is, by consequence: The Apostle says,
Galat. 5.2. that if we be circumcised, Christ shall profit us nothing, and yet
this was a true Church still; Circumcision does as nearly by consequence cut
off from Christ, as justification by works.
and I dare say, that circumcision does as nearly cut off from Christ, as
Justification by works; by consequence they do both overthrow the foundation:
And so the Church of Sardis, that had but a name to live and was dead, Revel.
3.1. was yet a true Church: Now, if all these were true Churches that were thus
corruped, why may not the Church of Rome, with the of Church Sardis.
be, in some sense, reputed a true visible

The third Reasen is drawn from the Confession of many, even of our best
Divines, as Luther, Calvin, Zanchey, Morney, and others that were most fiery
and fierce against the Romish Church, hating their abominations with as perfect
hatred and detestation as any, and yet they confessed her to be a true Church,
though a corrupt Church, though a dying Church, though her life hung but by a
thread; this they have confessed of her: I allege this, not so much a Reason to
prove, but rather as a qualification to mitigate the odiousness of this
Speech in the ears of many, which do greatly reverence the judgment of these
fathers; and yet cannot endure to hear that the name of a true Church should
be afforded to Rome.

other, wheresoever there is a true Sacrament rightly administered for the
substance of it, Baptism a true Sacrament in Rome and rightly administered
there, for the substance of it.
there is a true Church, But Baptism in the church of Rome is rightly
administered for the substance of it, and therefore the church of Rome is a true
church: The error of rebaptization of such as have been baptized by
Heretics, did arise from the want of the due consideration of the very like
point in those things. So much for the reason.

The Uses are these; first then this teaches us, Those that were Baptized in
the Church of Rome, were lawfully Baptized. Ob: 1. Answ.
that those were lawfully baptized, that have been baptized in the Church of
Rome, and that the Baptism we received from them is lawful Baptism. But
some except and say, that they that are Baptized in the Church of Rome are
baptized into their faith? I Answer, No, but they are Baptized into the Faith
of the Trinity; And this is the singular wisdom and mercy of God, to keep
them sound in that, that is, for the substance of Baptism, though otherwise
they are generally corrupt: But ye will say, It is intended by them into their
faith? Ob. 2. Answ.
I Answer, first, that their intent is so, as being persuaded their faith is
the true Christian Faith: And secondly, I Answer, the Ministers intent makes
not the Sacrament answerable to it; but it is Gods work, and he makes it to a
faithful receiver, effectual to the The ordinati- of our Ministers from the
Church of Rome, and yet a lawful ordination.


Secondly, it iustifies our ministry against the Brownists and the Papists,
that say we have no true Ordination; we Answer, that we had our ordination
from the Church of Rome at the first, and that being a true visible Church,
therefore we have a lawful Ministry.

Thirdly, The question where the Church was before Luthers time answered.
this may serve for satisfaction to that question, which the Papists ask us,
where was your Church before Luthers time, did he erect a new church? No, he
erected no new church, but by his Ministry brought many faithful out of their
impure and unsound Church, The inconvenience prevented by acknowledging that
the Church of Rome may be accounted a true Church.
into a more sound and pure Church, not only, for matters of ceremonies (for
then he had been a Schismatique to separate from them) but for matters of
substance, so that this point well considered, preuents a number of
inconveniences which we should run into, if we should fall into that heat
of zeal as to deny them to be a true visible Church.

What to think of our fathers that lived in the Popish Church.
what shall we think of them, that they lived in no true visible Church, and
therefore could not be saved? far be it from us, no, we are persuaded that
they lived in a true Church, and that many of them where sound in those times
and now saved; they attained not to that high strain of Justification by
works; I would feign know whether they did not do that they did ignorantly;
or whether they did challenge or disclaim their merits on their death beds?
many at the point of death disclaim their merits now, though that point now is
more stiffly defended by the Popish faction then ever it was, much more did
they do it then. Now to disclaim all their own merits at their death, is not
that both repentance of former errors, if any in that kind, and faith in
Christ alone too? If any believe in Christ crucified in truth of heart though
he hold but by the hemme of his garment, shall he perish? Surely, no.

They of the Popish Church are to ^e ^ud^ed rather mis-beleeuers then
unbelievers.
as the Disciples would have Christ have done, on the Samaritanes; No, ye know
not what Spirit ye are of, says our Savior; we must not rashly Judge them to
be unbelievers, but rather mis-beleeuers. And so much for that point, what in
charity, and yet in truth, maybe said for that Church.

The seven and Twentieth LECTVRE of the CHVRCH.
Having entered into the last point concerning the matter of the Church; namely,
the application of the Doctrine of the Church to all Churches that we know in
the world: After we had divided them according to their situation and language
into the Eastern and Western, the Greek and Latin Churches; we began with
the Eastern and Greek Churches; and so proceeded to the Western and Latin
Churches; And of them I told you, that some were under the yoke of the Pope,
and have him to be their head; Others have shook off that yoke and
head-shippe, and are therefore called the Reformed Churches: Concerning the
Church of Rome, that which is spoken of her, may be applied to her Adherents,
as is the mother, ^o is the daughter, as I have said. The 2. Observation
wherein is further delired what may be said and held further of the church of
Rome.
Now for the Church of Rome I propounded these two observations to be spoken
to, first, what might be-spoken in charity for her, and yet in truth and sound
judgment too; and of that we have spoken. Secondly, what in zeal, and yet in
truth and sound judgment too may be said against it; And that is it which we
are now to speak to; what may be said in zeal, and yet in truth and sound
judgment against her: A point very needful to be well cleared and rightly
understood; for whereas we have delivered in the former observation; that the
Church of Rome in some sense may rightly be reputed a true visible Church';
Every one will be ready to except against it, and say, why then have ye^
forsaken it, why do ye not still hold communion with her, what just exception
can ye allege for your separation from her? For Answer to which exception,

The Church of Rome so corrupt that it is not lawful to join with her.
The Observation, ye see, consists of two branches, the former is the ground of
the latter, auouching that she is polluted with many foul abominations; the
latter is an inference from the former, that therefore it is not safe nor
lawful to join with her: The whole observation is to be understood of that
Church, specially, in respect of the Popish faction, the Pope and his Darlings;
for as when we spoke in charity for them, acknowledging that in some sense
they are to be reputed a true visible Church, it was intended of some that were
of better Spirits amongst them, that are sounder in some chief points of
Religion, and that are not so obstinate in their errors as the rest: So now
that we come to speak in zeal against them, that they are so foulely
polluted, that it is not safe to join with them; This that is spoken against
thee is in respect of the Pope and Popish factors.
It is intended in respect of the Pope, and his chief Darlings, and factors,
called the Popish faction; neither is this any wrong to the Church, that we so
speak of the whole body in general terms, because the Church and faction
are there mingled together in that Body, as when we come into a Barn floor,
and see a great deal of chafe in the same heap with good wheat we may speak
favorably of the wheat, and say there is good corn, and we may speak
disgracefully of it too, and say, it is but light stuff. We will begin with
the first part of the observation, that condemns her corruptions; Corruption
of the Church of Rome reduced to 2. sorts. 1. matter of Doctrine reduced to 1.
part of the Doctrine.
And we will reduce all her corruptions to these two sorts; First, matter of
Doctrine; secondly, matter of practice; And though these be much incident one
to the other yet for playnnesse sake we will distinguish them, (God willing) as
well as we can: First, for Doctrine, the point is this; The Doctrine of the
Church of Rome, as it is at this day understood and maintained by the Popish
faction, is very unsound and corrupt, full of gross and abominable errors;
they have changed the truth of God into a lie, light into darkness; and the
Gospel of Christ, and the comfortable Doctrine of grace and faith into the
erors of Antichrist, and the damnable Doctrine of works and merits and of man's
traditions; We will not speak of all her corruptions in doctrine, that were too
much, Four heads. 1 concerning Scriptures.
only we will show it in some chief particulars, and that briefly: we will
reduce them to these four heads; The first, is error in Doctrine concerning
the Scripture; the second is concerning the direct office of the mediator; the
third is concerning Images; the fourth is concerning Justification: for the
first, And their error therein.
which is her corruption in Doctrine concerning the Scripture, which is the
truth and ground of Religion, they teach uery erroniously, not only that which
disparageth them (which yet is a presumptuous sin) but that which by
consequence utterly ouerthrows them: First, Three things, 1 denying the
sufficiency of the Scripture.
in that they dare deny the sufficiency of Scripture; Secondly, in that they
pervert the truth of Scripture; thirdly, in that they disanulle the authority
of Scripture; First, they deny expressly the sufficiency of Scripture, whereas
God has delivered them as a particular rule, 2 Timothy 3.16. they say, No, It is
not sufficient of it self, they must be pieced and perfected by traditions:
No, man dare add to the will of a dead man, and yet these are so shameless
and presumptuous, 2 Per^erting the truth of the Scripture.
that they dare presume to add to the sacred Testament of Jesus Christ: thus
they deny the sufficiency of Scripture. Secondly, they pervert the truth of
Scripture, teaching and delivering; first, concerning the translation; that
none is to be admitted as authen^icall, but the vulgar Latin translation which
themselves confess is sometimes faulty, and does miss of the meaning of the
Holy Ghost: secondly, for the interpretation of Scripture, they will admit of
none but such, as it pleases the fathers to give, who themselves acknowledge
may and do sometimes err, and are deceived; now to teach that an untrue
translation is the Text of Scripture, and an untrue interpretation to be the
sense of Scripture, 3 Disanulling the author^ty and credit of the Scripture
many ways 1 teaching the apochrypha^l books to be canonical Scripture:
Secondly equalling traditions of men with the written word of God. Thirdly
preferring the authority of the Church above the Scripture,
what is this, but to make the Scripture untrue. Third- they disanull the
authority and credit of the Scripture, and that many ways; first, teaching
that the Apochryphall books, which are known to contain certain untruths,
to be Canonical Scripture; secondly, equalling the traditions of men, with the
written Word of God, and urging them to be received with as great authority, as
the Word of God; Now if the Word of God be of no more authority in matters of
Salvation then the word of man, it is very feeble, and not worth trusting to:
Thirdly, they go further, preferring the authority of the Church above the
Scripture: the Scripture, say they, is to believed for the authority of the
Church, that is as much as if they should say, God is not to believed for his
own sayings, but for the witness of man; thus they disanull the authority and
credit of the Scripture. Now all these laid together, see whether that may not
be justly taken up against them, which our Savior speaks against the Jews,
John 8 47. he that is of God, hears Gods Word, ye therefore hear them not,
because ye are not of God; and John 10.26.27. ye believe not, because ye are
not my sheep; my sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me:
Gods children hear his word, and will not impeach the truth and credit of it;
the Popish faction will not hear it, but will impeach the truth and credit of
it, and therefore they are none of Christ's sheep: Two heads wherein they orre
in matter of Doctrine viz concerning the direct offices of the Mediator.
So much for their error in Doctrine, concerning the scripture, where we see
that their fountains are corrupt, and therefore we are like to find but foul
waters in their Channels. Their second Error in Doctrine is concerning the
direct office of the mediator, God says directly, that there is but one
Mediator betwixt God and man, and that is Christ, 1. Tim. 2.5 they say there
are many; The Papists say, there be many mediators betwixt God and man
the blessed Virgin Mary, and other Saints, not only praying for us, but to
be inuocated by us; does not this iustle Christ out of his room, at least to
sit so close, The distinction of mediators of intercession and redemption
answered.
that others must sit in commission with him in that office; they would shift
it off with this, that they make the Saints mediators of intercession only,
and Christ of Redemption; and the Apostle (say they) when he says, there is
but one Mediator, etc. he means of Redemption, not of intercession: I
Answer, that the Apostle in that place, Two things in a Mediator.
speaks of a Mediator of intercession; for he speaks of Prayers and
intercessions in the first Verse; and as in reason; he that is to make
intercession for any, must be able to reconcile them, and to take away the
enmity, and to bring the parties whom he intercedes for, into favor, else it
would be a frivolous and vain intercession, and he that intercedes for any,
must be such an one, as the person interceded does appoint, or at least approve
of for that business; even so the Scripture propounds Christ alone to be
intercessor, in both these respects, 1 John 2.1.2. If any man sin, we have
an Aduocat with the Father, Jesus Christ the Just, and he is the propitiation
for our sins: He is our Advocate or intercessor, and our propitiation or
reconciliation both; and John 16.23. whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my
name, he shall give it you; he does not say, whatsoever ye shall ask in my
mothers name, or in the Saints names, but in my name; And therefore both
Redemption and Intercession are often times in Scripture by name joined together,
as in that 1 Timothy 2.5, 6 there is one Mediator betwixt God and man, etc: who
gave himself a Ransom for all men; and Rom 8.34. who shall condemn us? it is
Christ that died, ye rather that is risen again, To be mediator of intercession
is peculiar to Christ, as well as to be mediator of redemption. The popish
sh^ft off praying to the Saints, not as helpers, but as intercessor, Answered.
The popish reason for praying to the Saints departed, drawn from our desi^ing
the Saints on earth to pray for us, Answered.
who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us; so
that we see, to be mediator of intercession, is as peculiar to Chrst, as to be
mediator of redemption: They shift again and say, we pray to the Saints not as
helpers, but as intercessors only, but we pray to Christ, as intercessor and
helper by his own power too; I answer, yet still they make them intercessors
then, though not in the same degree, and so they either iustle Christ out of
his room, or set his mother and the Saints on the Bench with him; but if
therebe any other intercessors, then either the intercession of Christ is
imperfect, or else the intercession of the Saints is superfluous: But, say
they, we do no more to the Saints in heaven, then ye do to the Saints on
earth, and then the Apostle did to the Thessalonians in the 2 These. 3.1.
Brethren, pray for us, etc. I answer, First, we have a warrant for this
Scripture, but for the other we have none at all; Secondly, will any man say,
that the Apostle made them intercessors for him? This were a disparagement to
him, no, but he entreats them to be fellow Suitors, and joint Petitioners to
God with him, and for him; Thirdly, the Saints that are alive, we have access
unto, and can utter our minds to them; but so we cannot to them that are
deceased; and therefore they, that pray to them, though it be but as fellow
suitors, they make God of them in that very fact, that is, they make them
knowers of the desires of the heart, for Prayer is the desire of the heart, and
to know that, is proper to God; but, say they, the Saints in heaven can know
the desires of our hearts by our words? But, how shall they hear our words?
God reueales them (say they) to the Saints: I answer, there is no warrant for
that. And thus we see, that the Papists making other intercessors besides
Christ, they iustle Christ out of his room, or set others on the Bench with
him; and so much of their error in Doctrine, concerning the direct Office of
the mediator. The third head wherein the church of Rome erreth in doctrine, and
that is concerning Images.

The church of Rome an abominable whore deserving to be divorced and cut off as
a filthy Strumpet. The Popish plea for Images, that they do not worship the
Image, but God in and by the Image, Answdred. The heathen made images of the
true God.

The resemb^ing of the invisible God in any made Image, is flat Idolatry.

The Papists do worship the Image.


The third point is concerning images, they teach that images are to be
worshipped, though God himself has exprssely forbidden it, Exodus 20.4. in the
second Commandment, and if that Commandment forbid Idolatry, as what other
meaning can it have, then they teaching the contrary, do teach flat Idolatry:
And if Idolatry be spiritual whoredom, and if a Spouse playing the Harlot, is
to be divorced from her husband, both which are largely set forth in Ezech.
chap. 16. Then howsoever the church of Rome, has been the Lords own Spouse,
yet upon this abominable whoredom, she deserves justly to be divorced and cut
off, as a filthy Strumpet: but let us hear how this Harlot pleads for her
self, to save her credit and honesty; First, say they, we worship not the
Image, but God, in, and by the Image: I answer, did not the heathen do so, and
yet they were abominable Idolaters, yea, say they, but they made Images of the
false gods, we of the true God: I answer, yes, they made Images of the true God
too, Acts 17.23, whom ye ignorantly worship him declare I unto you, says the
Apostle: And did not the Israelites worship the true God in an Image, Exo.
3^.9. and yet they were horrible Idolaters, nay, the very resembling of the
invisible God, in any m^de image, is in the second Commandment and else where
directly forbidden as flat Idolatry; Nay, is it possible, that any man falling
down before the Image to worship God in it, can be freed from worshipping the
Image it self, at least in outward worship? which worship God challenges, as
entirely to himself, as the inward; the matter is so plain, that themselves
confess, that they worship the Image; but here they have another device: some
honor (say they) we give indeed to the Image it self, but that is a lesser
honor, The Popish distinction giving the lesser honor to the Image, the
greater to God, Answered.
but the greater we give to God alone; so they distinguish without any ground
from the Scripture, for both these worships are condemned alike in the
Scripture, Romans 1.25. there the great worship is condemned, Galat. 4.8. there
the lesser worship is condemned, when it is not performed to God: Besides, to
examine the matter a little further, I would feign know, whether that lesser
honor which they give to the Image, be any part of that worship which is due
to God, or not; If they say it is not, then there is some religious worship,
which is not due unto God; and so the Saints belike have that which is not
befitting his Majesty, whereas we know, that little and great worship is all
too little for his greatness: If they say, it is part of that worship which is
due to God, then it is plain Idolatry, for God will not give the least part of
his glory to any other, Esa: Lastly, if this lesser service could or were or
might be given to Images, Papists give the greater worship to the bread in the
Sacrament, to the wooden cross, to the Image of God and Christ. The fourth
head of the errors of the church of Rome in Doctrine, viz. concerning
Justification.
yet not the greater worship; but they give to the bread in the Sacrament, to
the wooden Cross, yea, to the Image of God and Christ, this greater worship,
this very Latria, this they profess to be due, and accordingly they give it
them, which is as gross Idolatry as any among the heathen. We come now to the
last point concerning their Corruption in Doctrine, and that is in the matter
of Justification, which is the life of Religion, and the ground of Salvation,
as being our reconcilement to God, and acceptance into his Favor, wherein
consists our whole Comfort and true happiness, therefore to err in this point
is most dangerous of all; The Apostle says directly, Gal. 2.16. that a man is
not justified by the works of the Law; they say directly, that a man is
justified in part by his own works; And here they mince it, lest they should
make a manifest Contradiction to the world, and say, that their works do not
justify of themselves, but because of the divine Grace dwelling in us, which
makes us work; and that we are saved by grace, the Apostle says it, and ye
grant it; where then is the difference? Surely, the difference is very much,
though in appearance there be little or none at all; The difference between
the Papists saying, we are justified by grace, and the Apostles saying so.
For by grace they understand the gifts of Grace inherent in us, as faith, and
hope, and love, etc: And so they directly conclude, that our Justification is
by inherent Righteousness: But the Apostle says, and so say we, that we are
justified by the Grace and free Favor of God in Christ, Ephesians. 2.8, 9. and
Titus 3.3. and not by the works of Righteousness, which we have done; Our
Justification is only by Christ's Righteousness imputed, which we
apprehending only by Faith, that is, believing it for our selves, and so
applying it to our own State, by the comfortable persuasion of Gods Spirit in
our hearts, are therefore justified by faith alone; Alone I say, not but that
it is joined with good works in our living, but because Christ our Iustifier is
apprehended by our faith, and not by our works. Gods plain truth without any
quillets, is this: God is all in all for our salvation, he chose us to
salvation before the world was, he calls us, takes us out of our filth, and
bestows his Spirit, and the gifts thereof freely upon us, and he receives us
into glory at the end of our life, and all this he does freely for his names
sake, and for the grace and mercy, and merits of Christ Jesus, without any
merits of our own, or deserving the least blessing at his hands; The second
thing wherein the church of Rome erreth, viz. in ma^ter of practice, and this
is twofold: first in the carriage of Gods worship, and this is showed first in
the general.
this is the plain truth of God; the opposite whereof is a most fundamental
error, and they that disclaim it not, I see not how they can possibly be
saved. And so much be said for their errors in matter of Doctrine.

Secondly, their errors and corruptions in matters of practice, and they are of
two sorts: The first is their corruption in practice, in the carriage of Gods
worship: And the second is their corruption in their ordinary manners. First
for the carriage of Gods worship, they are exceedingly corrupt in their
practice, and this we will show first in the general; Secondly in the
particular parts of it. In the general carriage of Gods worship they err and
are foulely corrupted: for take it as it is carried by the Popish faction, Gods
worship as it is carried by the popish faction, is fitter for man, yea, for an
Idol, then for the true and eu^^l^uing God: First, it is a ca^^all service,
^ull of ^ites and Ceremonies.
and it is fitter for man, yea, for an Idol, then for the true and living God
to be honored and served by; for first, it is a carnal service, full of Rites
and Ceremonies, like unto that of the Jews, Heb. 6.10. Which stood only in
meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal ordinances imposed on them
unto the time of reformation, which being by Christ abolished, are not fit for
true worshippers, which must worship God in spirit and in truth, John 4.24.
their continual smiting of their breasts, crossing of themselves, numbering of
their prayers, lifting up the host, Signs, Gestures, Pictures, and infinite
such like trash, some borrowed from the Jews, some from the heathen, idle
complements, superstitious, impious, unseemly, most of them are unprofitable,
scarce any of them warrantable, indeed they are a mere foppery, as many
beholders have judged even by sense and reason, when they have not been
besotted with their iuglings: neither are they only carnal, that is, full of
shadows and Ceremonies, but they are carnal too, that is, as being most
agreeable to flesh and blood; And most agreeable to flesh and blood.
what more carnal persuasion then this, that a pardon for sins may be bought
with money; that a Priest may absolve upon auricular confession, that if a man
have no merits of his own, yet for money he shall have out of the Church
Treasury, the merits of Saints, that after death he may be relieved with
prayers of the living, that many sins are venial and pardonable in their
own nature; that if a man give to Churches, Hospitalls, or monasteries, or the
like, he shall go to heaven, The Papists give but the blood of the body for
the sin of the soul.
yea, that which in show is most labor to the flesh, yet indeed is merely
carnal; as their whipping of themselves almost to death there is no
spiritualnesse at all in it; it is but the blood of the body, for the sin of
the soul; the Prophet scoffs at such like dealing, Micha. 6.7. The truth is
this, Natural men had rather be scourged then undertake the spiritual combat.
that every natural man had rather be scourged and die then undertake the
spiritual combat against his beloved sins: and the Papists use that to be
excused of this, as they folishly imagine; and they measure out Religion for
the most part, by natural reason and grounds of Philosophy: so that we see they
have a carnal Religion: Secondly, Secondly, they have a will worship for the
most part of their own devising.
they have a wilworship, that is, a service, for the most part, of their own
devising, their pilgrimages, prayers, abstinence from diverse meats, voluntary
poverty, works of supererogation, their Masses, Satisfactions, Holy days,
fasting days, all these and many more are merely men's inventions, so that God
may say to them, as he does to the people of Israel, Esa. 1.12. Who required
these things at your hands; so that upon the point we see, that they serve and
please themselves, but they serve nor please not God at all: Thirdly, they have
policies in their Religion, Thirdly, they have policy in their Religion for the
maintenance of their outward state.
for the maintenance of their outward state, their purgatory, prayers for the
dead, Images and Relics of Saints erected in their Churches to be offered
unto, are merely a means to enrich their own Coffers, and to uphold the
honor of the triple Crown, and to maintain the Beast in her Scarlet colors;
when they sell a man a pardon for his sins, or so many years release from
purgatory, for some round sum of money: do ye not think they laugh at him
when he is gone? even as our cheaters do when they have gulled some poor
simple hearted man? They know these can do no good, and yet they practice this
for policy: Machiauel held it, and these practice it; that Religion is merely
a matter of policy to keep men in awe, and to maintain a state; cursed
wretches, have they none to make a scoff at but God, and his Religion and
service? Is this to serve God? no, it is to make God to serve them, and abuse
and change his word to their vile purposes.

Secondly, Secondly, in the particular parts of it.
as they err and are foulely corrupted in the carriage of Gods worship in
general; so are they also in the particular parts of it: First in respect of
the Word, first it is obscured.
for first, the word which was purposely delivered to the Church for their
light to walk by; this is purposely obscured by the Papists, that to the
people it is a dark light, they see little or nothing by it: The word is to be
preached, there is little preaching among them; or if there be any, they preach
faction, traditions, and commandments of the Church, Secondly, little or
seldom preached amongst the Papists.
and the Word of God least of all: As for any other public minstration of the
Word, it is altogether in an unknown tongue, without any profit or edification
to the people; well, yet if the people might have access to the Word, as the
Bereans had, that they might hear the Pharisees, The people kept from the Word
amongst the Papists.
but yet beware of their Leaven, it were somewhat, but they are kept far
enough from that, they shall learn no more but what the Priests and Jesuits
teach them, they are likely to be good Christians then, and they must take all
upon their words, a sure ground to build upon; this is a notable policy to
cloak their errors, that the people may not discern them, and a great
dishonor to God, to suppress and smother up his own ordinances, and to put
that Candle under a Bushel, Secondly, in respect of the Sacraments. First, in
respect of the number of them, and so those that Christ never ordained.
Secondly, in respect of those which Christ did ordain, they are full of
abominations: as first Baptism.
which himself has put on a Candlestick, that it might give light to all in
the house, and a notorious wrong to Gods people, to sterue them of the food of
life, and to keep them hood-winkt, that they might not see with their own
eyes into the evidences of their own right, and matters of their own
salvation: Secondly, the Sacraments, not to speak of the number of them,
increased by them from two, to seven: (though I know there is no authority in
the world can make a Sacrament, but those Christ Jesus himself has ordained)
But even in Christ's own Sacraments they are full of abominations; as first in
Baptism, they add oil, salt, spittle and exorcismes, and I know not what
toys, and toys are loathsome in Gods Service; but in the Lords Supper, their
corruptions are not only in the outward Bark, as they are in Baptism, but in
the very sap and heart, Secondly, in the Lords supper, in the very so^ and
hea^^. Thirdly, in respect of their Discipline. The Papists have scarce any
thing sound in their Discipline.
there is adoration of the Sacrament as of God himself, and defrauding of the
people of the one half of it, and the making of it a Sacrifice propitiatory
for the quick and the dead, and the making of Christ's own body by the hands
of the Priest: all these are wicked deprauations, either of the nature, or
right use of this holy Sacrament. Thirdly, for their Discipline, they have
scarce any thing sound in that; the Laws they rule by, are Canons and Laws of
their own making, and not found in the Scripture, the ouerseer is the Pope,
armed as well with a Temporal, as with a spiritual sword; the power of the
keys, that also is horribly abused by them in binding, excommunicating true
Believers, Christian States and Princes, that will not submit to the Popes
yoke, in stead of obstinate offenders against Gods Law; and so in loosing,
absoluing offenders for money and for favor, yea, and before repentance too,
Fourthly in respect of their prayers, they are corrupt: first, in that they are
made to Saints, and not to God alone, secondly, in that they are made in an
unknown tongue. Things are far worse now in the popish church in diverse
respects.
because before the fact, whereto if we add their dispensations and
reseruations whereby they have an absolute power to free whom they will, see
now if there be any fouler carriage in any heathen State in the world:
Fourthly, for their prayers, they are corrupt too, if either we respect to whom
they are made, to Saints, and not to God alone; or for whom, for the dead, and
not for the living only; or how, not with understanding, for they are in an
unknown tongue; specially their public prayers, and so as good have no
prayers at all. I have entered a foul sink, and I must needs confess that I
can find no bottom, yet if this be not enough, add heereto these aggravating
circumstances; these things which were somewhat in a more tolerable manner
among them before, be now much worse, first, by the Council of Trent; for
whereas before that Council they were but private opinions of some men, now
they are the Doctrine of the whole Church, and are obtruded on all professors
as necessary hatred against the contrary truth, and the professors thereof, and
persecutions by fire and Sword: The second thing wherein the Church of Rome
erres in matters of practice. viz. in matter of manners.

The corruptions of the Church of Rome in matter of manners, are in a manner
heathnish and such as they maintain to be lawful.

Particular errors of the Papists maintained, 1. equivocation, and mental
reservation, 2 disobedience to superiors, 3. treasons and murders of Kings and
Princes.

No people or state in the world matcheth the Church of Rome with the defense
and practice of so many villainies as she does defend and practice.

Cruelties exercised by the Jesuits upon the Indians.


at least some are otherwise persuaded, then they pretend; yea some have
confessed so much, and yet still go on in their old courses.

Secondly, they are foulely corrupted in their ordinary manners, I know every
Church fails, specially in manners exceedingly, but the corruptions in manners
that are in the Church of Rome, are extraordinary, and in a manner heathenish:
secondly they are such as follow upon their Doctrine, and which themselves
profess to be lawful, whereas it is not so with other Churches, they do not
maintain and profess their corruptions of manners to be lawful, the Church
of Rome does; take a taste of these in their equivocation and mental
reservation; civil honesty abhors and condemns these, they use and justify
the use of them, breaking faith and promise; Nature denies it, they affirm and
defend it; that with Heretics faith is not to be kept; disobedience to
superiors, and maintaining others therein, with them is a familiar practice:
whoredom is but a small sin, and the stews a tolerable evil; treasons and
murders of Kings, Princes, and whole states, are they sins with them? No,
they are meritorious, works and the actors of the mare canonized for Saints;
Let them or any for them show me their matches in the world, be they Turks,
Jews or Pagans, or any other state that is justly chargeable with the defense
and practice of so many villainies; and then I will confess I have dealt
injuriously with them; but if they can show me none such, let them confess,
that whereas many states, and kingdoms, and Churches have done wickedly, yet
the Church of Rome does surmount them all; and let them veil bonnet, and throw
away their pride, state, malice, wilfulnes, and their devilish practices; and
let them humble themselves and repent in sackcloth and ashes, that, if it be
possible, their horrible evils may be forgiven them: I omit to speak of those
exquisite cruelties practiced upon the poor Indians, even by the Jesuits
themselves, as well as by the Spaniards; (Oh miserable state! what? a bloody
government and a bloody Religion too) whereby they have made the very name of
Christian Religion to be abhorred even amongst the Heathen. So much for the
first branch of the observation; that the Church of Rome is exceedingly unsound
and polluted with many foul errors, etc.

Now let us come to the second Branch of it, The second branche of the Doctrine.
which is the inference of the former; that therefore it is not lawful nor
safe to communicate with her. It is true, that there is no Church but has some
unsoundness in it, either in Doctrine, or in manners, or both; as there is no
body but has some infirmities and diseases in it; But this Church of Rome is
so unsound, that take it as it is this a day maintained by the Popish faction,
and there is no communion to be had with them in their Doctrine and manners,
without certain danger to their own souls; We will proceed in the proof
hereof, No communion to be had with the Church of Rome without certain danger
of our souls.
according to the grounds before mentioned; their Doctrine and their practice
being both unsound and corrupt, we may communicate with them in neither; first,
Gods commandment shows it; for their Doctrine being otherwise then that which
Paul taught (as befere is showed) they must be held accursed; Gal. 1.8, 9. and
shall we communicate with such in matters of God, and of Salvation, as we must
hold accursed as enemies thereto? And in the 1 Timothy 6.3, 5. there is an
express separation enjoined. If any teach otherwise, and consent^th not to the
wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, from such separate thy self:
Secondly, they are wilful in their errors, and therefore are to be shaken
^ff, Titus 3.10.11. Reject him that is an Heretic; after once or twice
admonition, etc. Thirdly, their sin being idolatrous, therefore they and it
are to be fled from, 1 Cor 10.14. slye from idolatry, 1 John 5.21. keep your
selves from Idols: yea the place of their idolatrous worship is not to be
resorted to, Hosea 4.15. though Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah
sin; Come not ye to Gilgal, neither go ye up to Bethauen, etc. Nay, those
that are there must come forth from amongst them, and touch none of their
unclean things, Esaias 48.20. and 52.11. Ier. 51.8 Go ye out of Babel, etc: and
that not only out of the litterall Babel in the deliverance; but also out of
the mystical Babel; the very subject now in hand, and that with a fearful
d^nunciation of Judgment. Revel. 18.4. Go out of her, my people, that ye be
not partakers of her sins, ^^ that ye receive not of her plagues fourthly, the
wickedns of their lives being very great, we are to withdraw our selves from
them, 2 These. 3.6. which though it be not of it self sufficient to enforce a
separation from 2 whole Church, (for there is more required to the forsaking of
a whole Church, then of some private men) yet being added to the former, it
makes our separation from them very warrantable; secondly, the practice of the
faithful proves this, those new conuerts, Act. 2.40.47. gathered themselves
together, and separated from that froward generation, they were mingled
withal; And Paul, Act. 18, 8 9. when some were hardened and disobeyed,
speaking evil of the way of God before the multitude, he departed from them,
and separated the Disciples.

The reason of this point is this: Cor. 6.15.16 17. what concord has Christ
with Belial? or what part has the believer with the Infidel? or what
agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? wherefore come out from amongst
them and separate your selves, says the Lord, etc.

I will make uses of both the branches of the observation together: Uses of
both branches together.
And the first use may be a preservative to us against all the infection and
enchantments of the Popish Church, and all her followers and well wille^s; They
will pretend Religion, and the Church, yea the soundest and the only
Catholic Church, and they will pretend holiness and mortification, and what
not; But they are but Pharisaicall shows, painted sepulchers without, but what
is within? full of dead men's bones, a world of rottenness and corruption: In
Reu. 17.4. The whore of Babylon is arrayed in purple, and a cup of Gold is in
her hand, which is most pure and precious; but let the Spirit of man enter into
a due consideration of her state, and we shall see, that within it is full of
abominations and filthiness: And now that we see what she is, let us defye
the Papacy, and hate all her corruptions with a perfect hatred, and be kindled
in true zeal for the Lord of Hoasts against them all; and so long as we
breath, and that (...) is in us, let us never cease to oppose against (...)
word and in^^eed to the uttermost of our (...) and so far as any of us wish
well to Syon, let us labor, by all good means, the utter ruin and overthrow
of this filthy Babylon; there is no reconciliation to be dreamed of, betwixt
them and us; No reconciliation to be dreamed on, betwixt Papists and us.
Cassander and others of good note have attempted it in commiseration of the
rents and disunions that are in Christendom, and that we might all join
together against the Pagan; But all in vain, it was discussed much on either
side, they will not yield to us, we must not yield to them, for there is no
halting betwixt these two Religions. They will not yield to us we must not
yield to them
If God be God, follow him, etc. If the Arc, that is, Gods holy Religion and
pure worship do stand: then Dagon, that is, the Pope and Popery must needs
fall to the ground.

Our separation from the Church of Rome, justified.
we have neither offended God, nor wronged our selves, nor them in it; we have
done nothing therein, but what God has commanded, the faithful practiced, and
their own tyrannous proceedings against us have forced us unto, except we
would perish with them; They charge us with Schism, but indeed the Schism was
not ours; It was Schism in them to erect faction against the true Church, and
to sway all with a strong hand against the rule of the Word, and the practice
of the faithful in former times; No Schism to separate from the Church of
Rome.
And it is no Schism to, separate from such schismatiques as they are: we
were of the Church before, when we were amongst them; and we are of the Church
still; then we were of a more impure Church, now of a sounder; we stedde from
them as men do from the City for fear of infection: Besides, since the
Council of Trent, there is much less color of Schism in us; they then
abandoning us unjustly, we might justly forsake them, 1 Cor. 7.15. If the
vnbelieuer depart, let him depart: But some will except thus, did Elias or
Elisha so, by the Jewish Church, Except. 1.
though it were idolatrous? I Answer, first, it is avouched by some, Answ. 1
they did: secondly, but then one place of worship, we are not so. Secondly,
some will except and say; Except. 2. Answ.
but ye have communion with them, being baptized at their hands? I Answer. It
is true, but that was before we knew thoroughly their corruptions; If our
parents knew them, and yet brought us to their Baptism, whatsoever sin was
in that, was theirs, not ours; and the Sacrament is not thereby made to us
ineffectuall; Secondly, we deny not communion with them in good things, as in
Baptism, which is for substance sound amongst them.

Thirdly, It teaches us thankfulness to God, that mystery of iniquity, and so
has in a mystery been carried a long time, yea and to many thousands it is a
mystery to this day: but unto us, blessed be God, It is opened and displayed,
that we see and feel who is that Antichrist, and not only so, but we are also
delivered from them, even from the darkness of Egypt, the cruelty of Pharaoh,
and those Romish task masters, and from the bondage and slavery that our bodies
and consciences we^e detained in, the Lord offering most gracious means,
Luther, King Henry, etc.

Fourthly, What we are to think of such a^ continule in the Church of Rome.
this teaches us what we are to think Nicodemus, sin of fearefulnes; Or
else they do not know their corruptions at all; and these sin of ignorance,
which if it be affected, is a gross sin; or else they be such as do
profess publicly dislike of their chiefest abominations at the least, and
these are in the best case, and through Gods mercy the (...) in a ^opefull
state.

Fifthly, and lastly, it teache^ us wisely to dinstinguish of that whole body,
and to give the several parts their right; we have many bitter inuectiues
against them; that they are Apostates, Antichrist, Babylon, etc: which is
directly to be understood of the Papacy: Again we say, they are a true Church,
our Sister, etc: this is to be understood directly of the believers amongst
them, though because they are mingled together, each receive the others titles:
our acknowledging that she is a true visible Church, is no cause of boasting to
them, or of fear in us, that any should be enamoured with her beauty, for
look on her deformities, and they are most ugly; And our accusation that she
is Antichrist, etc. does not prejudice the faithful amongst them, as if we
did condemn every particular; No, she has some precious members, and for
their sakes she is charitably to be censured of: there is a woe belongs to them
that call evil good, or good evil, we prevent both these woes by this
distinction.

The eight and Twentieth LECTVRE of the CHVRCH.
WE have, as ye have heard, made our division of Churches into the Eastern and
Western Churches; and we have made an end of our discourse concerning the
Eastern; And have entered into the discourse concerning the Western; And these
we showed were of two sorts; first, some that receive and acknowledge the Pope
to be their head, as the Church of Rome and other her accomplices: secondly,
some that refuse to communicate with her, at least in her abuses, and are
therefore called the Reformed Churches; Concerning the former we have spoken of
them all in the name of the Church of Rome; for what is said against her, is
said against them; as is the mother, so are her daughters.

Now therefore we come to speak of those that renounce the head-ship of the
Pope, The second part of the distribution of the Western churches viz the
Reformed Churches. 1 Why they be called Reformed Churchches.
and refuse to communicate with the Church of Rome: And are therefore called
the reformed Churches; for whereas the Church of Rome was sometime a true and
sound visible Church, but in process of time did degenerate, and stain her
self with sundry corruptions and abuses both in Doctrine and practice (as has
been showed) It pleased God to inlighten the minds of many godly and learned
divines amongst them, that they saw and discerned these corruptions, and
withal stirred up their hearts to oppose openly against them, both by
preaching and writing: Now those congregations that by these men's labors were
called out of Babylon, and embraced a purer profession, did thereby gain the
name and title of reformed Churches, as leaving the Church of Rome, as a
deformed Church, still wallowing in her own corruptions; but themselves having
recovered in some sort the ancient Beauty and Integrity of the ancient time,
and sounder Churches.

First, of the causes of Reformation.
Now to make the way plain before us, we will speak first, of the causes of
this Reformation; secondly, of the manner of it: first, for the causes of this
Reformation, they were weighty and necessary, many notorious errors, and gross
abominations both in Doctrine and manners (as before we have showed)
possessing the whole body of that Church, yea the head, and all; such as the
Christian world has often complained of, and the godly had groned sore under the
burden of them, for many years, and could bear them no longer; so then they
had weighty causes for this Reformation. Secondly, the manner of the carriage
of it, Secondly, of the manner of reformation and herein 5. things.
was approouable and good, they did nothing herein for the substance of the
business, but that which might well beseem Gods people, and whereof they had
many commendable presidents of other godly men in like cases; For first, they
gave notice to that Church that and yet nothing d^ne, finding no amendment, but
that indeed, matters did wax worse and worse, that old burdens were
continued, new imposed that were worse, their admonitions rejected, errors and
corruptions stiffely maintained, and the seekers of reformation hated,
reproached, persecuted, excommunicated, and the like, finding no redress, they
left them, and gave them over, and as our Savior commanded his Apostles, so
they shook off the dust of their feet against them: As if they should have
said unto them after this manner. Do you serve what gods ye will, we and our
Congregations will serve the Lord, do ye worship God, as ye list your
selves, we will worship him after his own will revealed in his word, seeing we
cannot procure a general redress of these corruptions amongst you; we must
and will redress them in our selves; what could these men do more then they
did? or what fault justly can be charged on these proceedings? The Papists
deride and scoff at this reformation, and deny it to be any reformation at
all, but rather say they, it is an Innovation made by Heretics, but till such
time as they can prove the truth of God in his Word to be heresy, they shall
be never able to convince this for an heretical Innovation, as they falsely
and maliciously slander it, but in despite of their malice it must be
acknowledged, and stand good for a godly and Religious reformation of things
amiss; another manner of reformation then that of the Papists in the Council
of Trent; wherein though some things were well and commendably redrest, yet the
whole Tenor of that reformation runs on this promise, that the authority of
the Pope be no way impeached; the Council would have some reformation, but
yet, so as the Popes authority may not be m^ddled withal; whereas that very
authority is partly one of the chief corruptions it self, and partly the mai^
occasion and ground of all the rest, at least it is the (...) hinderance, that
the rest is not reformed (...) ^^at except that be reformed, there can be no
sound and through reformation at all; so that there is great difference betwixt
their reformation and ours: For we square all by the rule of Gods Word; they
by the authority of the Pope. So much of the reformed Church in general.

The reason why these churches are called Protestant Churches.
There is also another Title that these Churches are styled with, and that is
Protestant Churches; the reason of that name is this: upon the first sounding
of the Gospel by Luther in Germany, there was great stir, and much ado
among the people, and not only there, but generally in all places: some
embracing the Doctrine of Luther, others still continuing in the Popish
Religion; the Emperor and the States consult together, how to pacify these
tumults, many meetings they had, and many Decrees they made against it: one
Decree more famous then the rest, was made at Spier in Germany, Anno 15 29.
where it was enacted by the States of the empire, that men should not abolish
the Mass, nor make any further change in Religion, till there should be a
general Council to determine these differences; which because the people
should not think they would delude them, they promise to call it within a
convenient time, within a year or thereabouts; This Decree was much
distasteful to those Princes and States, that had engaged themselves with
Luther in this work of reformation; and therefore they made a general
protestation against it to this effect; That howsoever they did unfeignedly
affect the peace of the State, both in Church and Commonwealth, and would
willingly satisfy the Emperor in all that lawfully they might, yet because
that reformation in hand was Gods own work, it must not tarry man's leisure,
for God was to be obeyed before man, and therefore they were bound in conscience
to proceed in it as they had begun, whatsoever Decrees of men were to the
contrary; notwithstanding, if any trouble did ensue of it, it was not their
sin, nor any fault in the cause, but in men's ill dispositions, that would
abuse so good a cause to their bad purposes; upon this very protestation it
was, that then presently, and ever since, not only there, but generally in all
places, these Princes and States and all other men and Churches, approving the
reformation, were called Protestants: The name we for our parts do neither
greatly approve nor much dislike, yet seeing it was imposed upon so good an
occasion, that is, that Princely and Christian resolution to hold out zealously
for God and his Religion, against all Decrees and threatenings of man, we see
no harm in it, and so are well enough content to bear and wear his Title.
And so much be spoken in general concerning the reformed Protestant Churches.

Now we are to descend to a more particular handling of these Churches, and so
to the maine mark, These reformed churches are more or less reformed.
which all this while we specially aimed at; of these reformed Churches, some
are more, some are less reformed, and each of these, either for Doctrine or
Discipline; for some are more reformed in Doctrine then others, but less in
Discipline; some are more disciplined then others, yet their Doctrine is not so
sound as theirs, Churches accounted more reformed.
whose Discipline is faulty: The Churches in Geneua, France, and Holland, and
others of that mould, both for Doctrine and Discipline are thought by some the
best reformed; and yet I hear, that the Brownists deny even Geneua to be a
true Church; but first I see not but that they may say as much, and as justly
against their adversaries, as their adversaries against them: Besides if it be
proved, that those which are less reformed, be true Churches, Churches
accounted less reformed, and therrein first of the Lutheran churches, and
herein of 3. things concerning them.
it will necessarily follow, that these are so much the rather, and therefore
we need not to bestow time and pains to prove them to be true Churches: Those
that are accounted less reformed, are, as some think, the Lutheran Churches:
The Lutheran Churches are less reformed for Doctrine: first we will speak of
the Lutheran Churches, they are so called, because they maintain certain
private opinions that Luther held, or at least is pretended to have held
contrary to the judgment of other reformed Churches: for our better
understanding, I will speak first of their difference in opinion from us;
Secondly of the tumults that have risen betwixt us and them, by reason of these
differences; And thirdly, I will show what we are to esteem of these
Churches, First of their difference in opinion.
notwistanding these differences: And first of their difference in opinion,
they are first more easy and favorable Acts 3.21. So in the Sacrament they
affirm that his body is really present in, under, and with the Bread and Wine;
we say that Christ is really there only to the faithful Receiver, and only
Sacramentally and Spiritually, and not bodily, as John 6.63. These two be
matters of very dangerous consequence, such as if they were thoroughly pressed,
they would give a shrewd blow to the overthrowing of the truth of Christ's
humane nature, for if Christ have a true body, then it cannot be, but in one
place at once. I am not here to discuss these points, but only as falling in
by the way, happily hereafter I may have some fit opportunity to speak of them
more fully; only let it suffice for the present, that these their opinions,
nor any of them, do directly deny the foundation, nor any part thereof. So
much for their opinions.

The second thing concerning the Lutheran churches, viz. the tumul^s and
unnatural contentions raised betwixt us and them.

The Lutherans more bitter against us, then against the Papists.

And herein, first what exceptions the Papists take against us for them.


Secondly, the tumults and unnatural contentions raised betwixt us and them, by
reason of these differences; they are grown to a great height, very bitter
and uncharitable on both sides, we are bitter enough against them, but they
(as men of fiery spirits) are marvelous bitter against us, as bitter as
against the Papists; yea, they are more bitter against us, then they are
against the Papists; I cannot think or speak of these things but with grief
of heart, therefore I will suppress them in silence; it had been best, if
they had never been broacht, but now that they are, it is best to bury them in
silence and perpetual oblivion; but yet seeing there are such dissentions, I
will first show what exception the Papists take against us for them: Secondly,
what use we are to make of them; For the first, the Papists rejoice greatly at
it, it is meat and drink to them, that we are thus together by the cares, and
they insult over both parties, alleging it as a firm exception, that
therefore the reformed Churches are no true Churches, and their Religion, no
true Religion; this is a very malicious, but yet a very weak consequence; it
is a malicious practice of theirs to build up themselves on other men's ruins,
yet when all is done, others ruins will make but a weak and sandy building:
First, Answered diversely.
we will answer to the men, and then to the matter; first to the Papists we
answer, what if there be dissension betwixt us, what get they by that? Indeed
if they agreed with them in all things that they oppose us, then it were some
exception, but the maine difference betwixt the Lutherans and us, is in the
matter of vbiquity, and consubstantiaton, wherein they are as opposite to them
as to us, and therefore they have little vantage by that: Besides, if
dissension betwixt us, make us to be no true Church, then they are no true
Church, for the Papists themselves are at as great dissension, and as bitter
one against another as ever we were, and that not only of old, but even at
this day, the Jesuits and Secular Priests maintain a mortal hatred betwixt
them; And therefore if this be a sufficient exception against us, It is so also
against them; and therefore we answer them with Chirst in the Gospel,
Hypocrite, first pull out the Beam out of thine own eye, etc. Mat. 23.2. First,
let them purge their Church of their own dissentions and differences, and then
let them charge ours: Secondly, we answer to the thing or matter it self;
that consent does not always prove them to be a true Church that do consent,
nor that to be a true Religion that is consented in; neither does dissent
always prove them to be a false Church that do dissent in some things, nor
that a false Religion that is in some things dissented in: First, consent
proves not always a true Church, nor a true Religion; for then the Jews
should be a true Church, and their Religion true, because they all consented to
crucify Christ, and with one voice cried, Crucify him, crucify him; here is
consent, and yet in the bloodiest matter that ever was in the world: And so on
the contrary, Peter and Paul, and Paul and Barnabas, should be of a false
Church, and a false Religion, because they dissented and contended sharply, but
this was nothing to overthrow the truth of their Religion, nor of the Church
they were members of; yea, we see, often times, that the worst matters are
carried with the greatest consent, and the best with great dissension, as it is
in the body, that is the soundest body, that strives most to expel hurtful
humors; so that is the soundest Church, that is most exercised with bickerings
against the adversaries of the Truth, and in the true Church, it is needful
that there should be dissentions and heresies, that those that are approved may
be known, 1 Cor. 11.18, 19. So much be spoken for the Papists exceptions which
they take against us for this dissension. Secondly, what uses we are to make of
these differences
Now secondly, we are to show what use we are to make of these dissentions and
differences; surely, though we will not name them, yet we may distracted, by
men's infirmities, frailties and dissentions: Secondly, this discouers the
devils malice, that cannot The third thing concerning the Lutheran churches
is, what we are to esteem of them.


The third point is, what we are to esteem of these Churches, notwithstanding
these errors and dissentions; Surlev, if we should condemn them as false
Churches, we should be very uncharitable and wicked: For they have been the
chiefest instrument under God of our calling, therefore far be it from us to
deny them to be a true Church; Besides we should wrong them much, for seeing
they affirm directly the foundation, and every part thereof, there is no
color why we should give such hard sentence against them: therefore, let us
esteem them as brethren, and acknowledge them to be Gods own Churches, and
let us commiserate their blindness and ignorance, and let us bear with their
infirmities, and let us pass by the wrongs they offer us; and let us bless
God for the good that is in them, and let us entreat God to open their eyes,
and to pacify their minds, and to reconcile these unhappy differences that are
betwixt us, and to knit our hearts together in the bond of peace, that we may
be all of one mind and judgment, and speak one and the same thing. And so
much be spoken concerning the Lutheran Churches.

The second sort of Churches accounted reformed viz. our own Church.
Now we come to speak of our own Church, which has been the special reach,
and shall be the final conclusion of this whole discourse; We are generally
acknowledged by most Protestant Churches, that we are as well reformed in
Doctrine, as any Church. It is Gods great mercy to us, that we are so reformed
in the best and weightiest things; And it is no small comfort to us, that we
have the approbation of other Churches confessing for us that we are a true
Church of God, sound in the faith: so that if we do fail in discipline, as
they say, yet the substance being sound, the danger is the less; Discipline
makes only for the Beauty of a Church, but yet neither does the presence of it
make a true Church; nor the absence of it cannot mar the life and being of a
true Church, therefore if we be not reformed herein as we should (for some
reformation we have, many points and parts of Discipline are far better
amongst us, then in the Popish Churches) yet as long as our faith is sound, the
life and being of our Church is sound and good.

I will deliver the point by way of Observation, The Church of England if a
true and sound Church too in some good measure
Churches, specially from the Church of Rome, which in some sense, as we
showed, is a true visible church, but very unsound, but ours is true and sound
too, and that in some good measure; The want of which difference rightly
observed, The whole company of Professors in England make one national Church.
And this speech justified by 3 reasons.
has caused many uncharitable censures to pass from us against the church of
Rome, and from the separatists against us; Thirdly, I speak of the Church of
England indefinitely, which seems strange in some ears, that the whole
company of professors in England, should be called one Church, and so make a
national Church, which, say they, is merely a humane invention, not
warrantable by the Word; but to justify this speech against their exception,
take these reasons, First, where there are many particulars of one and the same
kind, there must be acknowledged by of one, and the same kind, they all may
rightly be termed, and comprehended under one name, that Revel. 2.1. with Acts
20 17. why may not therefore all Parochial Churches of any one land, be
called the Church of that land or nation;

It is a true Church.
The reason before mentioned, proving the Greek, Roman, and Lutheran Churches
to be true Churches, being applied unto us, proves us sufficiently to be a true
Church, because we affirm the whole foundation and every part thereof; But in
this we have undertaken more, that is, that our Church is in some good measure
a sound visible Church, and therefore that is the point here to be holden to:

And the first reason to prove this, Reasons to prove it to be a sound visible
Church in some good measure.
is from the infallible marks of a true and sound Church; Wheresoever the Word
and the Sacraments are in public profession in use, so that the Word in some
good measure is purely taught, and the Sacraments rightly administered, and
obedience to them both accordingly professed, there is a true, and in some good
measure a sound visible Church; But in the Church of England, the Word and
Sacraments are in public profession in use, so that Word is purely taught and
the Sacraments rightly Administered, and obedience to them both in some good
measure professed; And therefore the Church of England is a true, and a sound
visible Church. For the proposition I have handled it before in delivering the
marks of a true Church, and therefore I will refer you thither for the
proof of it: For the Assumption none will deny, but we have the Word and the
Sacraments, and profession of obedience to them both: but the Question is,
whether we have them purely or no; for the measure of the soundness of a
Church is esteemed, according to the measure of the pureness of these marks;
where they are more pure, there is a more sound Church; and where they are
less pure; there is a less sound Church: But in the Church of England, they
are pure without traditions or man's inventions; The Separatists exceptions.
Except. 1^. Answ,
therefore the Church of England in some good measure is a sound visible
Church: We are charged by the Separatists that we preach canons, and man's
constitutions, as Gods Wor^; But we Answer, These are not taught for
Doctrines, but only serve for some passage and carriages touching Gods
Service, Except. 2. Answ.
specially in Church government: Secondly, they say, we suppress some part of
Gods Word, as Discipline? I Answer, All that we know we teach expressly and
impartially; if there should be any faylings (as we know there are in all
Churches) yet that hinders not, but that they are in some good measure purely
taught; And so the truth still stands good, that the word taught amongst us, so
also the Sacraments are rightly administered amongst us, for the substance of
them; if there be any error in circumstance (as we know none neither) yet that
does not nullify the action, nor overthrow the truth of this Assumption;
Likewise obedience is truly professed thereunto, at least by some, yea by a
great many too, through Gods mercy; And therefore the note stands firm and
true, that the Church of England, even as it now stands, is a true, and a sound
visible Church.

yea our very adversaries may witness for us in this; Aynsworthe, says;
Aynsw. 11.
I doubt not but your Doctrine has saved many, therefore it must needs be the
same Doctrine of faith, which makes the true Church invisible: And so Johnson
acknowledges that very many amongst us are true Christians by that knowledge
and faith which here they have attained unto, only setting them a part from the
constitutions of our Church; and if any man elsewhere in the world do truly
believe and obey that faith which we profess, who can deny him to be a member
of the true invisible Church; Our Church therefore professing to believe and
obey the same saving faith which the invisible Church does truly believe and
obey, and which is of some amongst us truly believed and obeyed; therefore our
Church must needs be a true, a sound visible Church.

The third reason is drawn from the effects of the Romans 10.17. faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the Word of God; where the Apostle proves that
ordinarily the Word is powerful to beget faith in the ^earers, being preached
by such as are sent of God, Verse 15. and therefore our ministry doing the
same, is a true ministry sent of God, and so our Church a true, and in some
good measure a sound Church of God; But our adversaries except against us, that
our Ministers are not sent, Aynsw. 25.26. Except 1 Answ.
nor have a lawful calling from God; I Answer, the place proves that such
whose Doctrine and Ministry do ordinarily work faith, are sent of God, but
such are ours, and therefore they are sent of God; Except. 2.
And that our ministers have a lawful sending; shall, God willing, be showed
hereafter; They except again and say, that in their assemblies there are many
more converted, then in our Churches? Exept. 3.
But they except again, that others convert also by conference and
disputation, and that out of a visible Church? Ob: Answ.
It is not ordinary in our churches, but only extraordinary, as it is amongst
the Papists; I Answer, what is ordinary? That is ordinary which is usually
done, and that by such means as are ordained for that purpose; But this is
done by our Doctrine and ministry, which are the means ordained to beget
faith, and is ordinarily and usually done, not now and then, in one or two, but
it is done daily, and many experiments confirm it, as any may be an eye
witness of it, that lives amongst us; Besides when a man is converted to God,
out of the office of the ministry, as by conference, disputation, etc: that
they acknowledge to be ordinary; else this is a mere cavil, not opposing our
Proposition; but where one is so won, many are won by our Ministeries, and
therefore to deny this to be ordinary amongst us, which oftentimes produces
such effects, and yet to allege the other as an ordinary means, which yet is
but seldom so effectual, is not ingeniously nor sensibly, much less
charitably done; Sure I am, if that be ordinary, then ours is much more, there
being an especial promise to our public labors herein. And therefore these
reasons considered, It follows that our Church is a true, and a sound visible
Church.

The uses are these; first, for instruction; Secondly, Use 1. for instruction
diversely.
for reproof: The uses for instruction are these; first, Is it so that the
Church of England is a true and a sound visible Church? Then this teaches us,
that lawfully We may safely communicate and join with the Church of England.
without dishonor to God, or just offense to any of the faithful, or danger
to our own souls, or scruple of conscience; And this we must not only know,
but we must practice it, all those that live within this land, and so have
opportunity to be members of our Church, they may and must come and join in
communion with us, and repair to our assemblies, and hear our Ministers, and
profess obedience to our faith. God requires this, Deuteronomy. 12.5. ye shall seek
the place which the Lord thy God shall choose out of all your tribes to put his
name there, and there to dwell, and thither thou shall come; and as God
commands it, so his children have practiced it, as David, Psalm. 26 5, 6, 8, I
have hated the assembly of the wicked. I will wash mine hands in innocence, oh
Lord, and compass thine Altar; Oh Lord I have loved the habitation of thine
house, and the place where thine honor dwells; And so the faithful that
were newly converted, Act. 2.42. continued in the Apostles Doctrine and
fellowship, and breaking of bread and Prayers; And in the 47. It is said, the
Lord added to the Church from day to day, such as should be saved: And
therefore such as be not joined to our Church, must resolve to join; and those
that are already joined, must continue their communion with her; And there are
also many particular motives to induce to it, which I allege not as reasons
to prove directly, that necessarily we must join, but they may serve only as
persuasions to a man well affected, and not carried away with prejudice,
Motives to move to join with our Church.
that he may safely communicate with our Church: First, if there were no other
motive but this, it were sufficient, we hold the Peter said to our Savior,
John 6.68. Thirdly, we have a powerful Ministry, to exhort, reprove, comfort,
etc. to beget faith where it is wanting, to increase and confirm faith where
it is begun; to persuade men to holy obedience, and to renounce their sins,
and to make restitution of wrongs, and to be sound in Religion, and to hunger
and thirst after rightousnes, and to be zealous for Gods glory, and for all
good duties; And therefore we are ^o communicate with this Church where the
ministry is thus powerful, and if we forsake her, it were just with God to
give us over to our former errors and worse courses; were here begotten too;
the soundest part of that faith, which the best of our Separtists have, they
learned and attained unto in our church; therefore the greater is their sin,
first, to fly from us: secondly, to deny her to be their mother: and thirdly,
to pursue her with so many obloquies and repreaches, as if she were no Church
of God. Sixthly, our Church has been Bradford, Latimer, etc: are now members
of the triumphant Church in heaven? then desire to be and to continue members
of the same visible militant Church on earth, renounce communion with them
here, and renounce communion with them in heaven. Seventhly, consider what a
shelter our Church has Edward, a child, then preserved in Queen Elizabeth
time, being but a woman, against the whole rabble of Gods enemies, Pope, and
Spaniard, and Satan himself, and all his Instruments, this is no small token
that God took notice of us, as of his own Church, and therefore may be motive
to us to communicate with her. Ninthly, all other Reformed Churches acknowledge
us to be a Beza) yet pray for us, and for the continuance of our State, even
as it is, to many generations, they are wise, Religious, Impartial, yet they
approve us; Me thinks it should astonish the Separatists, that all are for us,
but they as if they were holier and wiser then all others; surely, it should
much encourage us to keep our hold, and to have them in great iealously,
because they have deceived themselves, and would deceive us. Lastly, who are
they that condemn us? None but Papists, and some hot turbulent Spirits that
have a great felicity in overthrowing the Societies of other Churches, and yet
cannot thoroughly agree amongst themselves, what is to be done in their own
Churches; So much for the first Instruction.

2 things taught in this use viz. Thankfulness in two respects.
Secondly, this teaches us thankfulness to God, and that in two kinds;
First, that God has been so favorable to this Land, as to inlighten the
people thereof, by the preaching of the word, and other means in the bosom of
a true, and in a sound visible Church, except we will wilfully neglect such
means of Salvation, we may be saved: And therefore while we have this Light,
let us labor to walk in the Light, as Children of the Light; And let us bring
forth fruits worthy of this Light, let us live more graciously and holily, then
those that want this Light, that so it may appear to the world, that there is
a difference in men's lives, as well as in their Religion. Lastly, Third thing
in this use.
let us pray to God for the continuance of this Light, to ou^ poor posterity,
that are yet unborn, that they may be as well provided for herein, as we are
even to the worlds end; And therefore it stands us in hand by Prayers and
tears to entreat God, not only that the Gospel may be in our days, but
that it may continue to our Children, and to our Childrens children, so long as
the world endures; And so much for the uses of Instruction. Second use of
reproof.
The other uses for Reproof, though they have been handled heretofore by the
way, yet in the next Lecture I will handle them purposely.

The Nine and Twentieth LECTVRE of the CHVRCH.
IN the last Lecture we spoke of the Reformed Churches, and so at length, we
came to speak in particular of our own Church, the Church of England: And we
delivered this Observation concerning the same; Namely, That the Church of
England, even as now it stands, though it have many failings, and weakness in
it, yet notwithstanding, it is a true and a sound visible Church; I did
explain this Observation, and made proof of it by sundry Reasons; I have also
entered into the uses thereof, which I showed were of two sorts; the first for
instruction, the second for reproof, we have handled the first sort, and now
we are to come to the second sort of uses.

Wherein two sorts of Adversaries are reproved. 3. the Papists.
And they are of Reproof, and that of two sorts of Adversaries; the Papists and
the Separatists; for we are close beset, and hardly assaulted on both sides;
The Papist on the one side exclaimes, that we are no Church, or a false one,
because we are separated from them; and the Separatists on the other side
exclaim so too, and therefore have separated from us; and yet neither does the
Papist acknowledge the Separatist to be a true Church, nor the Separatist
acknowledge the Papist to be so; Manasseth against Ephraim, and Ephraim
against Manasseth, and both against Judah, Esa 9.21. And so the Papist is
against the Seperatist, and the Seperatist against the Papist, and both against
our Church of England; Each of them crying out with open mouth against the
Church of England, and our standing therein: And the Papist thinks we cannot
justify our, selves against their exceptions, but that we must incline to the
Seperatists; And the Seperatists boast, that we cannot acquit our selves of
their exceptions, but that we must incline to Popery: here then is our present
task, how to deliver our selves from both these Adversaries, that we may fall
foul on neither; they do not assault us both in the same kind, nor about one
and the same thing; Each of them have their several Quarrel, and each do
manage a several fight against us, and therefore we must frame our several
defenses accordingly against them: The Papist he strikes mainely against our
Religion, the very life of our Church; The Seperatist strikes specially at the
State of our Church; The exceptions of the Papist is the more dangerous, but
yet altogether unjust and untrue; Our Church and religion is warranted against
the Papists by proving that our reli^ion is better then the religion of the
Church of Rome which is proved by the call^ng out of six or seven of the
principal differences between them and us.
that of the Seperatist may seem to have some more color of Truth in some
points, but is much less dangerous: First, we will begin with the Papist,
as being the ancienter enemy of the two, and his Quarrel the greater; And
because he excepts against our Religion, we will balance their Religion and
ours together, and so put the matter to trial and join in this Issue, whether
their Religion be better then ours, or our Religion better then theirs; And
because false Balances are an abomination to the Lord, we will disclaim them;
Carnal Reason, outward Pomp, plausible shows, and probabilities are
deceitful waights not fit for this use; Let us bring them to the Scales of the
Sanctuary, and examine them by the equal and true waights of the Lord
himself, that is, by such spiritual and sound considerations, as the holy
things of God are to be esteemed and tried by; it were ted^ous, if not
infinite, to reckon up all the diff^rences betwixt them and us; I will
therefore cull out six or seven of the principal for Instances; and thereby
ye may judge of the rest: And I will weigh them in four exceptionlesse
Balances, and make it plain, God willing, in every one of these six or seven
Instances, by every of these four Balances, that our Religion will hold
weight, full weight down to the ground; and that theirs is too light, not
worthy to be brought to the Beam: weighed by four balances.
The four Balances, that we will weigh these Instances in, are first, the
Balance of Gods glory; Secondly, the Balance of Gods The points which are
weighed and whereby the trial is made are.
The first is of the sufficiency of Scripture and the absolute Authority it
has above the Church and Traditions; The second is of Gods free grace against
man's freewill; The third is of justification by faith alone, against man's, of
merits, The fourth is of Christ our only Advocate, against other Intercessors.
The fifth is of the spiritual worship of God against Images; Cor. 10.31.
specially our Religion, Col. 3.16.17. And if men should devise a Religion for
any God, true or false, they would resoule, That that were the best Religion,
whereby that God, to whom it is erected, might be most glorified; yea, our
very Religion it self, what is it? But our worshipping of, believing in,
calling upon, and obeying God, which is nothing else but our very glorifying of
God: But the Religion professed by the Church of England does most directly and
entirely tend to Gods Glory; and the Popish Religion does not, but contrarily
it tends to his Dishonor, and therefore our Religion is the true Religion of
God, theirs is not; as we shall see in these Instances: The first is
concerning the sufficiency of Scripture, 1. weighed in the first balance viz.
Gods glory.
and the absolute authority thereof, above the Church and Traditions, put this
into the Balance of Gods Glory, and admit, as we do; that the Scripture is
sufficient in it self, and has absolute Authority above the Church and
Traditions, and see how Gods Glory is thereby advanced, for thereby God is
acknowledged to have provided most bountifully and sufficiently for his Church,
a perfect rule of faith and life, that needs no addition, and thereby God
shall rule by his own will and Laws, and be worshipped by his own ordinances
only, all which are matters of Gods greatest honor: But deny this, as the
Papists do, and prefer or equal the Church with the Scripture, and mingle
Traditions with Gods Word, and all this Glory shall be much ecclipsed. The
second Instance is of Gods free grace, The second Instance weighed by the first
Balance.
against man's free will; Admit that all the good we do or have, proceeds
merely from the grace and Spirit of God, without any will or towardliness to
good in our selves: And the Lord is thereby rightly and truly glorified; If
we have no sufficiency of our selves, no not to think well; but that the will
and the deed, be both from Gods grace. If we have nothing in Abilty or desire
or endeavor, but as we are effectually moved by the Spirit, then the whole
glory of our working (which is the greatest honor we can here do to God) is
wholly ascribed unto God alone: But deny this, as the Papists do, and avouch
that there is some freedom in our own will to good, then God does the less
for us, and so does the less glorify himself on us, extol man (in this
corrupt estate) and dishonor God, but dishonor man herein, and extol God.
The third Instance is of Justification by faith alone against man's merits; The
third Instance weighed by the first balance.
If it be said, as we say, That we are justified by faith alone without man's
merits, and we yield to Christ Jesus the glory and prerogative of our alone and
all-sufficient Savior, and we magnify his righteousness, as being of that
infinite worth and power in and by it self, as to make us truly and perfectly
righteous that believe it, which as his proper due is directly assigned of his
father, and justly challenged by himself, and worthily obtained by his doings,
sufferings and victory: But say, as the Papists do, that we do merit some
favor with God by our own good works, and then we detract from Christ's glory,
and make men compartners together with Christ in this glorious work of
Justification. The fourth Instance weighed by the same balance.
The fourth Instance is concerning Christ our only Advocate, against other
Intercessors: Say with us, that Christ alone presents our suits to God, and
makes them available with God, and that he is to be called upon, as our only
Intercessor; and then we give him the due honor of his place and office of
Mediatorship, Ioh. 14.13. For his Intercession is a special part of that
office, as well as Redemption, wherein if he be acknowledged to be, as we make
him, our alone Intercessor, he is much magnified: But if others be joined with
him, as they make it, he is much disparaged, as being not sufficient of
himself, but needs others help, or at least in that office, being but of
smaller moment, such as the Saints might manage well enough; And so not Christ
only, but God the Father also is much dishonored, The fifth Instance
balanced by the same rule.
that would put his own Son to that, which meaner persons might do as well
as he. The fifth Instance is concerning the spiritual worship of God, against
Images; Let us worship God, as we teach, only in Spirit and Truth without an
Image, and he is rightly and truly worshipped, being served as he is, a most
glorious Spirit free from any matter, or form, or outward apprehension, and
impossible to be expressed by any sensible Representation whatsoever: But
worship him in or by an Image, as they teach and practice, and we cannot but
defile our selves, and in some sort the Lords great majesty to our selves, by
many gross, carnal, bodily, and material thoughts, and imaginations, wholly
mis-beseeming the purity of Gods nature, being and majesty, as if he were a
carnal, bodily, or manly God, then which nothing can be more contrary to his
nature and will, and so not more derogatory to his glory. The sixth instance
tried by the same rule.
The sixth instance is of our Communion, against their Mass: Celebrate the
memorial of Christ's death, as we do, in the holy Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, and the Sacrifice of Christ once offered by himself on the cross, is
thereby advanced and acknowledged to be a most perfect and sufficient,
expiation by it self of all our sins, hereby it is only remembered and showed
according to the institution, but not repeated; But celebrate the death of
Christ in the Popish Mass, which the Papists themselves hold to be a
propitiatory Sacrifice for the quick and the dead, and how can Christ once
sacrificed be more disparaged. The last instance tried by the same rule.
The last instance is concerning the carriage of the means of Salvation in
open sight and plain dealing amongst us, that all may look into them with
their own eyes, against their carriage of all in a cloud and shadow, and
hukermucker; Let Prayer be made in a known tongue, and we honor God, not
with lips only, but with understanding too: but let it be made in an unknown
tongue, as it is in Popery: and we dishonor God, babbling and prattling to him
we know not what: Let the Scripture be free and common to all, that every one
may read and understand, and the Lord is glorified in the comfort, knowledge,
faith, and obedience of many: But let the Word be kept from the people, and
then they cannot know God, and so cannot honor him: let men have an explicit
faith, to understand and believe particularly for themselves all things
necessary to salvation; and they shall glorify God in giving a reason of the
hope that is them, 1 Pet. 3.15. But if they be content with an implicit faith,
only to believe as the Church believes, they shall dishonor God, in their
blindness and ignorance, and hardly shall the Lord be glorified in their
Salvation; God is jealous of his own glory, and so must all that profess his
name; and the more jealous we are of that, and zealous for it, the more truly
Religious we are; If we be out of our wits (says the Apostle) we are it to
God, 2 Cor. 5.3, So we see in these seven instances, that our Religion is full
weight in this balance of Gods glory, and the Religion of Popery too light,
not worthy to be tried in this Beam.

The same things tried in the second balance, viz. Gods Word.
The second balance wherein we will try our Religion and theirs, in these seven
instances, is in the balance of Gods Word; for it is not enough to aim at
Gods glory in our own intention, but after his direction, for he cannot be
truly glorified, but so as himself teaches in his word; That is the best and
true Religion of God, tha^ is most agreeable to Gods Word, and that is the
worst that most disagrees with Gods Word, Leuit. 18.4.5. ye shall do after my
judgments, and seek mine ordinances, etc; And John 5.39. Search the
Scriptures, Mat. 15.9. In vain they worshipme teaching for doctrine men's
precepts. And 1 Ioh. 4.5. he that knows God, hears us, etc: where is Gods
Religion to be found, but in Gods book? As the Jews religion is found in their
talmud; and the Turks in their Alcoan: But the religion professed in our
Church is most agreeable to Gods Word, and the Religion of Popery is not
agreeable thereto; therefore our Religion is the true Religion: That ours is
most agreeable to Gods Word, and not theirs, The first instance tried by the
second rule.
see it in the first instance; The sufficiency of Scripture, and the absolute
authority it has above the Church and traditions; this is agreeable to that in
the 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. for the whole Scripture is given by inspiration from God,
and is profitable to teach, to convince, to correct, and to instruct in
righteousness, that the man of God may be absolute being made perfect unto all
good works; And John 10.27. my sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and
they follow me, and 5. Verse, they will not follow a stranger, but fly from
him, for they know not the voice of strangers; For that which the Papists
allege for the Church, that she is to be heard, Matthew. 18.17. It is to be
understood subordinately to the word, that is, so far as the Church is
advised by God in his Word, and for that which they allege for traditions,
out of the 2 These. 2.15. keep the instructions which ye have been taught,
either by word, or by Epistle; by word and Epistle are meant one and the same
thing, only the manner of delivery was diverse, sometimes by word, sometimes by
Epistle: And seeing the authority of the Church above the Scripture and
traditions, be each of them a disparagment to the word, except the word should
disparage it self, (which no wise man can imagine) there is no seeking for any
warrant for them within the word. The second instance, Gods free grace, The
second instance tried by the second rule.
against man's free will; Our Religion teaches according to Gods Word, Phil.
2.13. that it is God which works in us both the will and the deed; And 2 Cor.
3.5. that we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of our
selves, but our sufficiency is of God; And Ier. 31.18, Convert thou me etc; And
there is no color of any one direct place to the contrary in all the
Scripture; There are some indirect allegations by way of inference from Gods
commandments, bidding us to do well, and from his promises, if we do well;
which rather send us to God for that which we cannot do of our selves, then
imply any ability for the doing of them in our selves. The third instance tried
by the second rule.
The third instance, justification by faith alone, against man's merits, we
teach according to the Scripture, Romans 3.20, 28 that by the works of the law,
no flesh shall be justified. But that a man is justified by faith without the
works of the law. And Gal. 2.16. A man is not justified by the works of the
law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ; And Ephesians. 2.8, 9. by grace ye are saved
through faith, not of works, etc: And Titus 3.5. not by the works of
righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us:
That which the Papists pretend to the contrary, James 2.24. ye see then how
that of works a man is justified, and not of faith only, does not cross the
former, except they will blaspheme and say, that God does contradict himself,
but is plainly spoken of another says, that is dead, Verse 90. whereas
justifying faith is a living faith; and of another justification that is before
man, as Verse 18. whereas this is before God. The fourth instance tried by the
second ^ule.
The fourth instance, Christ our only advocate, against other intercessors,
we hold and teach according to the Scripture, 1 John 2.1.2. that we have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just, and he is the reconciliation
for our sins; And Revel. 8.3. Another Angel came and stood before the Altar,
having a golden censor, and much odours were given unto him, that he should
offer with the Prayers of all Saints: This Angel is Christ, who as the high
Priest in the Law, Exodus 28.38. does appear before God, making the Prayers of
the Saints acceptable to God; And there is not any show of warrant in the word,
neither for any one, no nor for all the Saints together to do the like; The
fifth instance tried by the second rule.
The fifth instance, the spiritual worship of God, against images; Our
Religion teaches according to the Word, John 4.23.24. that all true
worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and truth, for the Father
requires even such to worship him; God is a Spirit, and they that worship him,
must worship him in Spirit and truth; And Exodus 20.4, 5. Thou shall make thee
no graven Image, thou shall not bow down to them etc: This second
Commandment is so plain for this, that the Papists leave it out in some of
their Catechismes, and make up the number of ten Commandments, by dividing the
last: And there is not one tit^le of Scripture for Images, neither precept,
dispensation, exception, or example approved; The sixth instance tried by
second ^rule.
but on the contrary they are fearfully threatened, and strangely punished. The
sixth instance, Our Communion against their Mass: Our Communion is warranted
by Gods Word, 1 Cor. 10.16. the Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not
the Communion of the blood of Christ, etc? And 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25, etc:
whereas their Mass has no warrant at all in the Word, not so much as the name
of it found there, nor in the Nature of any propitiatory Sacrifice, The seventh
Instance tried by the second rule.
nor any Intimation of repeating it, but directly the contrary, as we may see,
Hebr. 10.10, 14. the offering of the body of Christ once made with one
offering, etc: The seventh Instance, our carriage of the means of Salvation in
open sight against their carriage of all in a cloud; Our prayers made in a
known Tongue are warranted in the word, 1 Cor. 14.14, 15. If I pray in a
strange Tongue, my spirit prays, but my understanding is without fruit, what
is it then? I will pray with the Spirit, but I will pray with understanding
also, etc: And so for the word to be free and common to all, as it is with us,
has his warrant, Matthew. 5.15. neither do men light a candle, and put it under
a Bushel, but on a candlestick, and it gives light to all that are in the
house, And Prou. 9.4, 5. who is simple, let him come hither, etc: And Esa.
55.1.3. Lo, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, etc: incline your
ears and come unto me, and your soul shall live: So likewise has an
explicit faith his warrant, Ioh. 9.35. Do thou believe in the Son of God,
where our Savior requires an explicit and particular faith, in the blind
man. And in the 1 Pet. 3.15. the Apostle would have us be ready always to
give an Answer to every man, that asks us a Reason of the hope that is in us,
etc: That which the Papists pretend to the contrary, Matthew. 7.6. Give ye not
that which is Holy to Dogs, etc: is a malicious perverting of Christ's Words,
to his peoples destruction, and their own Ruin; Thus we see that their
Religion is too light, and oars full weight in this second Balance of Gods
word.

Let us try them in the third Balance: The same things tried in the third bal^
The Balance of true holiness; That is the best and true Religion of God,
that is most powerful to work Holiness of heart and life; for God is holy,
and our calling, and the end of ^^ what cold devotion will there be in us, and
what hourly prayers, and little faith, and less reverence, as dealing with
men, and not with God himself. For the fifth instance; The fifth instance tried
by the third rule.
If we worship God in Spirit, without Images, it works in us Spiritualnesse
and truth, for we presenting our selves in all our worship nakedly, without
any Image before the Lord, as before a pure Spirit, we are stirred up thereby,
and grown by use to frame our selves to his own Image, to be spiritual men,
and spiritually minded, and spiritually affected; our understanding, will,
thoughts, desires, meditations, and courses, will be spiritual and heavenly,
lifted up to an higher strain in affection, and elevation of Spirit, the only
means whereby to be truly renewed in the Spirit of our minds, it will be a
notable means against all carelessness, and Hypocrisy, The sixth instance
tried by the third rule.
and formality in our hearts and lives. Sixthly, our spiritual and true
Communion with Christ, against their Mass: By this Communion Christ
spiritually enters into us, and stirs us up to the life of God, and
incorporates us, into his mystical body, here faith does her right office; in
discerning the Lords Body with a spiritual eye, and applying Christ, and his
death, and merits, soundly to the heart of the receiver, and feeding upon
Christ in heaven at Gods right hand; whereas in the Mass, there is but the
flesh, which without the Spirit profits nothing; and the bodily eye and hand,
and mouth, and belly, do in a manner all, and faith does little, or nothing.
Seventhly, if the means of Salvation be carried openly, The 7. instance tried
by the third rule.
and not in a cloud; then all is done in knowledge, and understanding; And
then there is an holy will, desire, devotion, affection, and endeavor to serve
the Lord in an holy manner, as may best beseem him, and them; It is a foolish
doctrine of the Papists; That ignorance is the mother of devotion, it must
needs be a blind and graceless devotion in that mind, where knowledge has
not first enlightened the understanding.

Let us now come to the fourth and last balance, The same things tried by the
fourth rule viz. comfort of conscience
and therein try our religion and theirs, in these seven instances, and that is
the balance of comfort of conscience; that is the true Religion, that brings
soundest comfort of conscience, for that is the right Gospel, that brings glad
tidings of peace to the afflicted soul; and agrees directly with Christ's
spiritual office, Esaias 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, therefore has
the Lord anointed me, he has sent me to preach good tidings to the poor, to
bind up the broken hearted etc: and Matthew. 11.28. But the Religion of our
Church brings sound comfort to the conscience; and the Popish Religion does not
so; but rather purposely afflicts men's consciences, then comfort them,
terrifying them with a slavish fear, nourishing the Spirit of bondage and
bringing men back, as it were, to the Law again; Therefore our Religion is
the true Religion, theirs is the false: The first instance tried by the fourth
rule.
See this in the first instance waighed in this Balance; The sufficiency of
the Scripture sets the conscience at rest, as having all that is needful to be
believed or done, set plainly before us in Gods Book; so that we need not
wander after uncertainties and doubtings, but we may know what we must trust
unto; And the absolute command of Scripture conuinces the conscience, that it
is well done, and both together assures the conscience of him that endeauours
truly to frame himself thereunto, that he is in the right way to heaven, and
in the certain state of grace and Salvation; Secondly, if all be of Gods free
grace, The second instance tried by the fourth rule.
and not of man's free will, then we are singularly comforted in that all our
thoughts desires, and works are not our own, for then they would be loathsome
to God; who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? But they are Gods own
doings, and they are the actions of his own Spirit, and therefore cannot but
be acceptable unto him. Thirdly, The third instance tried by the fourth rule.
if Justification be by faith alone without man's merits, then we have peace
with God, Romans 5.1. And then we have assurance of Salvation being grounded,
not on the sands of our own merits, but on the immouable rock Christ Jesus,
and his righteousness, and the favor of God, and the free promise of mercy in
him. Fourthly, if Christ be our only Aduocat, The fourth instance tried by the
fourth rule.
we have assurance to be heard, John 16.23. and 1 John 5.14, 15. and Romans 5.1,
2. for what can the Lord deny his own Son, or us for his sake? whereas if we
have other aduocats, we know not whether they hear us, (yea of many we know
not whether they be Saints or no) or if they do hear us, yet we know not,
whether they will or can help us; yea, we having no sound warrant to pray to
Saints, we know not whether the Lord will be angry with us for such an
unwarrantable course, and so fare the worse for sodoing amongst men. The fifth
Instance tried in the fourth rule.
Fifthly, if we worship God in Spirit and truth, and not in Images, then we
have assurance, that we worship the true God, and that after the true and right
manner: And this is the specificall difference of Gods Religion, from all other
Religions whatsoever; whereas if we worship in or by an Image, we do still
suspect whether we do well or no; for even nature it self (if it be well
marked) abhors, that God should be reputed a material substance, and therefore
how can God be pleased, The sixth instance tried by the fourth rule.
that he should be so resembled? Sixthly, if we celebrate the memorial of the
Lords death in our Communion, then the benefit of Christ's death is effectually
settled to the believing soul, by the presence of the Spirit; and the comfort
and strength of the bread, and the sweetness and comfort of the wine in our
stomach, works an answerable correspondency by the thing signified, The
seventh Instance tried by the fourth rule.
to the soul, and puts us in possession of it; Lastly, if we have the means
of Salvation plainly delivered unto us, that we may see into them with our
own eyes, and not darkely, as they are amongst the Papists, then we know what
we worship, John 4. We walk in the light; whereas they poor souls go on in
the dark, not knowing whither they go. So we see in all these four
balances, that their Religion is too light, and ours is down weight: And so
we see that they are justly reproved for censuring our Church to be a false
Church, because we have a false Religion, whereas theirs is the false, and
ours is the true Religion.

Secondly, It is for reproof of the Separatists; Secondly, this use is for
reproof of separatists: their exceptions briefly answered. 1. Except. Your
Church has a false constitution. Answ. both consequence and antecedent be
false. What constitution signifies
They are very clamorous and bitter against us: But I purpose, God willing,
briefly to answer the sum of all their exceptions, and to let all their bitter
clamours alone: Their first Exception is against the constitution of our
Church, they say, it has a false constitution, and therefore is a false
Church; But this is a false Consequence, and can never be proved, there be
many froggs and mice and other Creatures generated of putrefaction, and yet are
true froggs, though they be not produced by natural generation; And he that
out of the very stones can raise up children unto Abraham, is able to gather a
Church otherwise then by that which they call a true constitution; so that the
consequence is false, and the Antecedent is false too; For our Constitution
through Gods mercy is true and sound; Constitution signifies sometime, the
state which a thing is framed unto, as the natural constitution of the Body,
that is, the state, condition, or dispensation, which by the rule of nature it
is endued with; sometimes it signifies the Act whereby it is to be framed, as
the natural constitution of the body, that is, the Act of Nature whereby it is
constituted: Each of these are in the Church, as being a Body in a borrowed
sense; And the constitution of ours is true in the first sense, we have the
Word, Sacraments, ministry, and Government, and people professing the true
Religion, and obedience thereunto: And therefore what need we to inquire into
the Act whereby we were so constituted, as thereby to disprove the Truth of
our Church: As for example, when I come into a strange place, that has the
name of a City; and there I see people, corporations, Civil assemblies, laws
and orders, and a general profession of obedience thereunto: Shall not I hold
that a true City, though I know not how it was founded and gathered? But if it
be necessary to be inquired into, in the second sense, the Constitution of our
Church is true and good in that sense also; men are truly called and gathered
amongst us, by the ministry of the Word, but say they, they were not so
gathered at the first: I Answer; first, if they were not, it is no prejudice to
us, we are so now: Secondly, I answer, that it was so at the first too; Luther
and others, first spreading the Gospel: First some of our own loved,
believed, and embraced it by their preaching, and then they persuaded others;
And I know not how our English at Amsterdam can show any better calling to
their Church: But they except and say, that in England, our Church was gathered
by proclamation, and by the sound of a Trumpet, as in Queen Elizabeth's days,
and so was done by compulsion, and was not voluntary? I Answer, first some did
come voluntarily and gladly, and therefore at least for them it was a true
constitution; Secondly, the compulsion that was used was only to the outward
means, not to the faith, and that is very ^ustifiable Josiah compelled ill
that were found in Israel, to serve the Lord their God, 2 Chronicles. 34.33. But
they say, that was at the restoring, not at the planting of a Church? I Answer,
I see no Reason, but that it is as lawful in the one, as in the other; and
therefore if it destroy not the true restoring, why should it destroy the true
planting? But we say, Queen Elizabeth's Act was a restoring too, for I hope we
had a true Church here in Queen Mary's time, though under persecution; And I
am sure then there was no compulsion to ou^ religion, nor such Government,
Service, ministry or people amongst the Protestants, as they now except
against, and therefore it was a restoring; Put case the Separatists have any
children or servants, that are negligent, cold, and backward in frequenting
holy Assemblies, or performing religious Duties, public or private, and upon
admontion they will not reform, what will they do in this case? Will they
utterly cast them off? or rather will they not punish them, and thereby compel
them to the outward means, and to obedience thereunto? wherein if God do
bless their labors: so that through his mercy, such children or Servants do
afterward labor in the means, soundly and conscionably, shall this be
naught, because they were brought thereto by compulsion? No surely: It is great
comfort to the compellers, that they took that course, and it is great comfort
to the compelled, that they were so dealt withal; So the compulsion used in
restoring the Church in Queen Elizabeth's time, was lawful and good, against
all their clamours and exceptions.

Secondly, The second exception that we have a false government and therefore a
false Church.

Answ. both consequence and antecedent be false.

The third exception against our Service that we have a false Service. Answ.


they except against the Government of our Church, and say, that we have a
false government and therefore a false Church? But the consequence is false,
for then it must follow, that a true Government makes a true Church, which is
not true; The Antecedent is false too; If they had said, it makes a faulty
Church, they had said true, But that it makes a false, Antichristian Church,
and I know not what, it is a mere slander. But say they, your officers, be
Antichristian; I answer, the chiefest officers and those that be most spurnd
at, are the Bishops: And they were before Antichrist.

Thirdly, they except against our Service of God, they say, we have a false
Service of God, and therefore a false Church: I Answer, if they mean only
some part of our Service, as they have no color so to traduce it all; then the
Consequence is false: but if they mean all, then the Antecedent is notoriously
untrue: No part of our Service of God, can be proved false: it being performed
of those that are truly religious amongst us, in truth and understanding and
affection: They except, first say they, it is carnal. I answer, happly in
some, those that have carnal minds, it is so: but it is neither so in it
self, nor so in the conscionable performers thereof; The Lord being one God,
an eternal, infinite Spirit, our hearts and spirits are lifted up to believe
in him, to go to him, to cry and call upon him in his Son: Secondly, they
say, It is Idolatrous: your Service book being your Idol, say they: I answer;
that is no Idol, nor our Service thereby, Idolatry: Thirdly, they say, we have
a will worship invented by man I answer, we worship not God by any inventions
of our own, or other men's, as parts of his worship, but only as outward
Carriages thereof; And these also are such as our Church is persuaded, are
agreeable to these general Rules of Decency and Order, which God has
prescribed in his Word. Fourthly, against our stinted praie^s answered.
Fourthly, they except against our stinted Prayers; I answer them, has not the
Church always used stinted Prayers, look into these Scriptures, and ye shall
find it so, Numb. 6.23. etc; there was a stinted prayer appointed to Aaron and
his Sons, to bless the Children of Israel withal: Thus shall you bless, the
Lord bless thee and keep thee, etc: Deuteronomy. 26.3. to the 15. there is a form
of Confession and Prayer set down, which the people were to use when they
brought the first fruits: 1 Chronicles. 16.7. to the 36. there is a Psalm which
David did appoint to give thanks unto the Lord, by the hand of Asaph and his
Brethren Praise the Lord, and call upon his Name, etc: And Psalm. 92. is
entitled a Psalm for the Sabbath, appointed to be sung that day; And our
Savior Christ himself appoints a stinted Prayer, Luke 11.2. when ye pray,
say, Our Father, etc: And likewise himself uses a stinted Prayer, Matthew.
26.44. and he prayed the third time, saying the same words: And therefore
stinted Prayer in it self is no sin; If they reply, that they were so
directed by the holy Ghost, yet that is no let to us, for their conceived
prayers were also directly from the holy Ghost, after a special manner; yet
that is no reason but that we may use conceived prayers, though they be not so
specially from the Spirit as theirs: And yet we are not so confined to those
set prayers, but that we may and do, in every particular congregation, before
and after preaching, enlarge, add, alter and supply, as occasion requires, and
that as freely, zealously, and spiritually, as any may do in other Churches:
yea, but say they, your Service was all taken out of the Portesse or Mass
book, contrary to Gods Commandment, Leuit. 18.2.3. Deuteronomy. 12.30. etc: I
answer, it is well known, that the Church of Rome has been a true and sound
Church, and it is known, that in that time, there was some form of public
prayer and administration of the Sacraments in use amongst them: And as that
Church fell by little and little from her integrity, so that form by little
and little was corrupted; Now the Church being to be reformed, (...) was to be
reformed too, and so it was; that which was idolatrous and superstitious, was
cast out, and that which was profitable, was retained, partly for peace sake,
that the better sort might still be held within the Communion of the Church;
but specially because it was of good use, even before Popery; so that we take
nothing from them, but what may in a charitable construction be well endured;
That which is most questioned is, the cross in Baptism, which we had from
them, yet it was before Antichrist; there be many speeches in the fathers of
it, but we retain it not as the Papists do idolatrously; no, the imposers
protest against that, but for an ancient custom: And that we may see they
retain it not for superstition, they have turned it out of the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, for it was used in that Sacrament too; so that though it be
retrayned in the Church, yet not as an idolatrous or superstitious ceremony.

Fourthly, they except against our Ministry, The fifth exception against our
Ministry that we have a false Ministry answered.
and say that we have a false ministry, and therefore a false Church: I
Answer, Our Ministry is a true Ministry and ^ustifiable, if we look into all
parts of it, we will justify it against them, better then they can justify
theirs against us; But say they, your ordination, whence had ye it, but from
the Pope? I Answer, First, either it was extraordinary in Luther and others,
and so they being thus called, might ordain others; or secondly, else it was
ordinary, from the Popish Church, as the Sacrament of Baptism is true amongst
them, and so acknowledged by the separatists; so is ordination; They hold that
those that are Baptized amongst them, are lawfully Baptized, and by the same
reason we hold, that they which are ordained Ministers amongst them, have a
lawful ordination: Then for their gifts, let any Church show better gifts
then it has pleased God to bestow on our Ministers; Then look into the
exercise of their gifts; It is, true that we have many idle backs, and slow
bellies, that will not labor, but that is their personal fault: But we have
many public exercises, and many Ministers that are extraordinary painful in
preaching, reading, visiting the sick, etc. Lastly look into the effect of
our ministry, and we can show the scale of our ministry in many that are
called, and that ordinarily by our public ministry, and therefore our
ordination is good.

The sixth exception that we have a false people, answered.
Lastly, they except, that we have a false people, and therefore a false Church;
they say, our people were profanely gathered, and live profanely in our
Church: for their gath^ring I have Answered before; for their living
profanely, I Answer, that does not make a false Church: I have showed that
there are more Hypocrites in the Church, then true believers; yea, but say
they, these are openly wicked, and yet are admitted into your Church, and to
your Sacraments: I Answer, though they be wicked in their lives, yet they are
not so in their profession, and therefore there is no fault in us, if upon
their profession of repentance and obedience we admit them to the Sacraments:
the fault is, that they are not cast out for their open notorious sins, by
them that have authority, and not that upon profession of repentance they are
admitted to the Sacraments: So that we see that all that they can except
against us, is for petty matters, or else they be personal faults, and
therefore not to be charged upon the whole Church; for there is none of these
faults, but may be redrest, and by this Government which is in our Church; if
they be not, it is men's personal sins; for by law there should be a learned
ministry, and that those which sin openly should be cast out of the Church
etc: And therefore let not this be charged on our Church, we have many abuses
in our Church, as well as in other Churches, and we are to entreat God to
sweep them out, but yet we are not thereupon to be condemned for a false
Church. Thus ye see that our note stands true against all the exceptions, both
of the Papists and the separatists; namely, that the Church of England, even as
now it stands, is through Gods mercy, not only a true, but a sound visible
Church.

FINIS.

