True News Of a notable victory obtained against the Turks.

By the Right honorable Lord, Adolph Baron of Swartzburg, the 18. day of
March last past, Anno 1598. When as he and his Army three hours before day,
came before Raab: And took in that strong and well fenced Hold and City.

Translated out of the high Dutch copy, printed first at Nurnbergh. etc. By
W.S.R.

The true counterfeit of the Lord Adolph.
portrait of Baron Adolf zu Schwarzenberg

Printed at London by I.R. for Richard Olive, and are to be sold at his shop in
Long-lane, at the sign of the Bible.

True News Of a notable victory obtained against the Turks.
WIth what deceitful craft, and false practices, (the outrageous Enemy of
Christendom) the Turk a few years past, through the permission of God, and
for our sins, took in the strong and well defenced hold of Raab in
Hungaria, and with all other Fortresses lying on the frontiers, whereby no
small loss and damage is hitherto grown unto all Christendom: is well known
unto many.

But forasmuch, as GOD himself, had even so small pleasure, in such false
practices, and crafty deceit of the enemy, as of our own sins, whereby we
daily provoke him, that he suffers the enemy to reign over us, he has with
his grace turned again to us, and given his Christian soldiers a heart and
courage, that they and their whole company coming before the said Hold, by the
power and help of GOD, have wonderfully taken and won the same. For which
glorious victory, the same almighty God be praised and thanked for ever, and
that he will be still assistant to his Christian people, to destroy and defend
the Enemy, for his most holy Names sake, Amen.

The whole circumstances as it happened, of the getting thereof, is contained
briefly in a letter written to the Emperors Majesty, as follows.
THE Lord Adolph of Swartzburg, being credibly informed, that the Turks of
Raab, were gone forth on forraging: departed out of Camorr the 18. day of
March, 1598. with certain Ensigns of well appointed Soldiers on horseback
and on foot, and with the Lord Palfy, with those his Haiducks, Husserns, and
certain Duch men of Strigonia, and so secretly encamped in a vale or holow
place, about three leagues from Raab. From thence hes presently sent about
midnight, a hundred chosen men on horseback and on foot, before to Raab, with
certain wagons, laden with Boate-bridges, Skaling-ladders, and instruments of
fire-workes. But he himself with the rest of his Soldiers, followed softly
after.

In which expedition, almighty God wonderfully showed his goodness toward us.

For even as the Christian Soldiers approached nere unto Raab, and the Moon
shyning so light and so clear, that they might easily have been seen,
perceived, and known of the Enemy: suddenly a long, thick and black cloud,
covered the Moon in such sort, that they could scant discern one another.

In which sudden darkning of the Moon: there arose also a great wind, and
withal, a mist. Which wind did drive the noise of our Soldiers and their
furniture back from the Enemy, and their coming so unlooked for, that they
could not perceive any thing at all. When the Foreward was come to Raab
(without being perceived as aforesaid), they found the draw bridge down, and
the Portcullis drawn up. Because the Turks of Raab, looked every hour for
certain wagons of prouender to come from Stulweissenburg, and feared no
invasion at this time.

Which good opportunity our men quickly perceiving, passed over the bridge to
the gate, fastening the instruments of fire works, and kindling of the same,
which wrought not at the very first, but yet at last with the greater force, it
did tear, and break both gate, wall, and whatsoever else it lighted on, and
made such way, that they in the forward, thrust into the Hold, making have to
the watch, which they killed. And certain also, took in the principal
Bulwarks, and some fired the Ordinance at the gate.

In which time, the rest of the company were not idle, but with great violence
did fall in, helping their fellows, that they that came first, took the
Ordinance at the Weissenburgish gate, and discharged the same from the
carriage, that the Turks could not come to shoot of the same, against the
rest of our people, which were yet without.

When the Turks perceived it: they defended them selves very valiantly and
manfully: whereof many that were lying in their bed, and feared no such
danger, came speedily running out in their shirts, as in have and for fear,
not making themselves ready, defending themselves stoutly, but yet all in
vain, for they were all killed by the Christians.

The Lord Adolph of Swartzburg, with certain great Ordinance, went before the
Castle, and with shooting opened the same, wherein he found about 600. Turks,
which thought to have saved themselves, which were all slain, with the Bassa
of Raab. The Bassa had in each hand a Sabel, and defended himself so stoutly
and manfully, that he could not be taken alive, but was lastly thrust through
by a Wallon, his head sticked upon a pole, and set over the Hungarian
Bulwark.

There were also about 300. crept underneath a Bulwark, wherein stood certain
barrels of Gunpowder. Which our men coming unto, the Turks would not yield
themselves, as also not looking for any favor at our hands: they set the
Gunpowder on fire, splitte the Bulwark, spoiled themselves, and about 300. of
our men, which were then upon the Bulwark. Which was a great loss, as well to
our men, as to themselves. Which if it had not happened: it was thought, we
had not lost above 200. of our people.

But in the same unlooked for skirmish (which continued five hours) there was
slain of our men, about 600. And of the Turks, about 1500. men. There was
taken above 300. amongst the which was a Beglerbeg, the Bassaes son, and two
of his Daughters. And again, our men found about 400. Christians there, and
released them.

It was also well furnished with victuals and other provisions, and almost in
every house, was great store found.

Of Ordinance, on the walls and Bulwarks: there was 120. Pieces upon wheels,
and there lie yet in the Fort 50. Pieces, without Carriages.

Our people had also so stopped all the gates of Raab, that not one could come
forth, to tell the other Turks near at hand. So that the Turks of
Stulweissenburg, sent 40. Wagons of victuals and munition, gunpowder, and long
Pieces, strongly conducted with Soldiers, to Raab. Which came thither even as
the skirmish was ended, who knowing nothing of their great losses and hurts:
ever made have toward the Town. When they came to the Bridge, thinking no
otherwise but that they were near their friends: our men did let them come in,
one after another. But gave them such ill entertainment, that none escaped
alive. Where unto the Lord Palfi helped well: for as they so passed in good
order toward Raab, he departed out of his Bulwark with his folk, enuironing
them behind, slaying them, that none could escape. For look what could not
rearh to the Town: The same did the Lord Palsi, lay hold on, and slew.

The true counterfeit of the Lord Palsi.


Likewise was there many of the principallest Turks, which were gone out of
Raab, on forraging (as it is noted at the beginning) coming home, and because
they knew nothing of their great loss, they thought themselves more surer: but
our men fell upon them, and slew them. By whom our men also found, (as thee did
in the Town) great treasure, of gold, silver, precious stones, and apparel.
And have brought away about 600. fair Turkish horses.

And so, and in this manner (God be therefore ever praised and thanked) was
this worthy place gotten again, which the vehement Enemy with treachery had
gotten from the Christians, and without reason p^ssessed. And especially
through the manfull courage of the chief General, The Lord Adolph Baron of
Swartzburg, recovered and brought to Christendom. Whereunto also the
honorable Lord Palsi, with his retinue, truly helped.

As the said Lord Adolph, in his first Letter to the Emperors majesty prayseth
him, that he in expedition of these affairs, behaved himself valiantly, as
he also writes of the other Captains, Lieuetenants, and whole company. That
they in this service of importance, behaved themselves according to his mind,
and kept the order appointed them. And withal declares, that if he might be
soon helped with Horsemen and Foote-men: he would with Gods help, seek his
good fortune, in some other place.

When these news, were truly brought to the Emperor: his Majesty thanked GOD
for such a glorions victory. And the people were with 18. Trumpetters, and with
Droms, called to the Church, where all the whole congregation did ^ing, We
praise thee o God. After which, there followed a Sermon, which Sermon, and
thanksgiving being finished: There was at the Lionhouse 18. great Pieces of
Ordinance, each three times shot of, for joy of the obtained victory. And
through the whole City, was a joyful feast holden, to the praise and honor
of God.

A CHRISTIAN EXhortation, whereby we are admonished to give thanks with our
hearts, for the obtained victory: as also to true repentance, and earnest and
devout prayer.
LIke as God in old time, by his Prophet, denounced that Israel in Assiria and
Jury, with their Kings and Princes, wives and children, should he carried away
to Babylon, the Land destroyed, and all by reason of sin, false Doctrine, and
Idolatry: yet they notwithstanding despised all warning and admonition,
persecuted the Prophets, and favored yet their sins, till that they gave the
Lord cause, to thrust them out of his sight. Even so, and in like manner, has
God our Christ, in the latter days of the world, also denounced unto us, of
Gog and Magog, Mesech and Thubal. which are even the Turks, Tarters, and such
like people. That they with great multitudes should overrun, harry, and
spoil Christendom, and all through his wrath, by reason of our sin. For
thus says the Lord, in the 38. Chapter of Ezechiell. It shall come to pass,
when Gog shall come: that my anger shall go forth in my wrath, and I speak
the same in my jealousy, and in the fire of anger.

Whereby it is clear, that the Turk is nothing else, but the wrathful anger
of GOD, against our sins, which he now, especially, in his gracious
visitatirn, and revelation of his holy word, in all places of Christendom,
finds to be so great: that it may even now be said of us, as it is written of
Israel. The children of Israel sinned against the Lord their God, which
brought them out of the land of Egypt, and settled themselves against the Lord.
And when the Lord said unto them, Turn away from your evil doings, and keep
my commandments: They harkned not, but stifned their necks like the necks of
their forefathers. Therefore are we threatened so much the more: in so much as
in these days, we have more grace and warning through his holy Gospel, then
many of our forefathers, and predecessors.

Whereby it follows then. What can a man do, or what will he do, when he
has God himself and the Turk, against him. But the chiefest and next way is,
as he says himself: Turn away from your evil doings, and keep my laws and
commandments. For by that means we bring God again to us, and may with
comfort go against our Enemies.

And withal, let all Christian people be here-with admonished, both high and
low degrees, Super^ours and Subjects, touching the great danger yet to come, of
the professed Enemy of Christian name (the Turk) and what Enemies else soever
there be: that every one prepare himself to God, keep himself from false
doctrine, and lean with all his endeavor, to the dear and precious word of
God, and his holy Sacraments. To endeavor himself, as it were before God, to
live according to his word, and with good conscience, both openly and secretly,
to leave of from evil, and to do good. So then if every one will so do: we
may then be assured of Gods promises, where he says. Turn you to me, and I
will turn me to you. The which he has showed by many notable examples amongst
his people, when they were sorest oppressed of their Enemies, and in the very
midst of their punishment, turned unto God: God did also turn unto them, and
gave them oftentimes great fortune and victory, against their Enemies.

For so GOD says furthermore himself, that he will punish the Enemies of
Christendom, Gog, Magog, Thuball, and Mesech, that they shall fall upon the
hills of Israel, which is (as all Christian Teachers do understand it) in the
lands of Christendom, into which the same Enemies shall fall: and God will
finally cast the same Enemy, and all whatsoever is against his Christendom,
together, into the fiery lake.

Whereof we have now (God be thanked) a fair example, of the glorious victory,
which we through Gods help, had at the strong Town of Raab. Especially
because God heard the hearty sighing and earnest prayers of his faithful,
himself standing by, and helping our Christian Soldiers. If now the wicked
(whereof alas there are always more then godly) would turn away from their
evil ways, to the little heap of the godly, with true repentance, and with
them call earnestly upon God: God would undoubtedly show us yet greater help.
And raise up such valiant Soldiers, and give them such hearts and courage: that
with the comfort of Gods help, dare go under the very noses of their Enemies.
Therefore let every one, for the honor of God, help, and delivery, for his
own temporal prosperity and salvation, be admonished to repentance.

For if the same have not a right passage through us: God can soon withdraw
his help again, that one land after another must abide it, as Israel and
Judah and many Kings and kingdoms did, which heretofore were Christians, as
hitherto is come to pass. And yet can God make a difference both of spiritual
and worldly, with them which repent and amend: and them also which do not
repent.

But because prayer is the best armor, whereby we call upon Christ in faith:
let us with hearty thanks, for the obtained victory, calling evermore to God,
with heart and mouth, say, We praise thee, O God, etc.

FINIS.

