(...) cleanness of life; commanding us to abstain from Drunkenness, which
brings us forward unto Whoredom: and when we have once embraced these,
they lead us captive, unto the breach of Gods Sabbath: to be disobedient unto
our Parents, Magistrates, and Pastors: to steal: to murder: to swear, and
forswear: yea, to become Idolaters, and blasphemers of Gods Name, etc. as
shall be shown hereafter, God willing, by sufficient Testimonies, as well out
of Gods word, as also from the Wrytings of holy and learned Authors: together
with manifest Examples; of the which some have happened eve^ in our days. But
first of all, let us come along the Borders of the Bible, and take a view how
the Plague of Drunkenness has miserably infected some even of GODS dearest
Saints, from the beginning.

Then to begin with Noah* who first after the Flood planted a Vineyarde, was
first drunken, and cursed his son Cham, because he mocked him, when he saw
him lie sleeping uncovered. Genes. 9.21.

What excuse can our Drunkards now adays, draw from Noah? he knew not the
quality of the Grape, but was beg^^led with the juice thereof; and that after
his wearisome business no doubt: and yet for his fault he escapes not, but is
punished with the derision of his own son, his son is accursed, and the
whole generation of the Canaanites also accursed of God for his sake: behold,
Noah's indigent drunkenness is the original hereof: And shall we then be
blameless, who wilfully, wittinglie, and of set purpose, drink our selves
drunken? giving it the name of Merrinesse, Goodfellowship, etc. No, surely,
except we forsake and detest our vylde Drunkenness, not only shall our
flesh and blood (and all godly Men) hold us in derision; but God Himself will
laugh us to scorn, the Earth shall be accursed for our sakes, and at the
Great Day of the Lord we shall descend downward, and receive a portion in the
Lake which is already prepared with fire and brimstone, for the Devil, who
shall be accompanied with the impenitent Drunkardes, Harlots, Sabbath Breakers
Swearers, etc. Therefore, in the Name of God, let us join hands with the holy
Ghost (leaving off all Uncleanness) and sanctify the Lords Sabbath here; so
shall we possess those glorious Mansions hereafter which He has prepared for
us from the beginning of the world.

Lots two Daughters beguiled their Father: they made him drunken: and
there-upon he committed most abominable Incest, and begot his own daughters
with child: and, though he knew not of it, yet was he punished in that his
untimelie seed: (the seed of Drunkenness we may call it) for the eldest
daughter bare the father of the Moabites, and the younger the father of the
Ammonites; who as they were begotten in drunken incestuous whoredom, so were
they, and their posterity, vylde and wicked. Genes. 19. Verse. 32.33.34.35. etc.

The Lord Himself makes Drunkenness a mark, whereby the unholie are known
from the holy, and the unclean from the clean. Leviticus, Chap. 10. Verse.
9.10.

And what happened unto Nabal, I pray you, after his drunkenness? The Scripture
says, that he was very drunken: and he never rose again: for within ten
days after, the Lord smote that drunken gluttonous churl that he died. 1.
Sam. 38.

When David had committed adultery with Vriahs wife, he sent for her husband
from the Camp, and made him drunken: thinking that drunkenness would provoke
him to Lust, to go down to his house, and lie with his wife, etc. But because
drunkenness prevailed not to cover adultery, murder proceeded: yea, murder
after murder: so that the sword never departed from David's house. 2. Sam.
Verse. 10.

It is to be marked, that the wise king Solomon often joyneth Whoredom, with
Drunkenness; strong drink, with strange women, etc. as unseparable companions:
and says, that those are the ways which destroy even kings, and causes
them to forget Gods decree, and to change the judgment of the children of
affliction. Prove. 23. Verse. 27.28.29.30.31.32.33. And Chap. 31. Verse. 3.4.5.

And Jesus Syrach, in his book called Ecclesiasticus, rayleth out most
bitterly against the vices of Drun^ennesse, Gluttony, Leacherie, etc. saying,
that they bring men to poverty, make them impudent, to forget God, and all
goo^ manners, plenisheth men full of ^glie diseases in this life: and in the
end brings both body and soul into Hell fire. Syrach 19.3. and 23.6. and
31.12.

The Prophet Isaiah thundering out the threatenings of the Lord against His
people, upbraydeth them especially with Drunkenness, and makes it the very
root of all Mischief, even amongst men of every vocation: for he spares
neither King nor Bishop, Prophet nor Puritan, Priest nor Laicke, Master nor
Servant: but says, they all go astraye through strong Drink, and are even
swallowed up with Drunkenness. If any should be offended hereat, I trust he
will blame the Prophet for his downe-setting, and excuse me for my repetition:
for it is not mine intention to cavil with any, nor to move them to wrath: but
rather to make my self, and others, abhor Drunkenness. Lo, read the
places: Isaiah, Chap. 5. verse. 11.12.22.23. And Chap. 22. verse. 13.14. And
Chap. 28. verse. 7.8. And Chap. 56. verse. 10.11.12.

Now take but a slender view what the prophet Ezekiel says of Dru^kennes,
Gluttony, Pride, and Idleness, together with Whoredom, those five sisters;
in the 16. chapt. of his Prophecy: and so let us go on, and see what Daniel
says of Drunkenness, and the rest of the holy Prophets.

It is then manifest by Daniel, that God, even our own God, is a merciful
Lord, slow to anger, and ready to forgive: yea, in His wrath He thinks on
mercy. But if His mercies, loving kindness, and wonderful great benefits,
which He bestows upon us, from time to time, prevayle not with us; then we
must understand that He is righteous, and is forced (through our ingratitude) to
enter into judgment with us. As we see by the example of many here and there
through the whole Bible: and in this place by Belshazzar, king of Babylon, who
succeeded to the kingdom when Nebuchadnezar was driven from Babel, and from
the fellowship of men, and was feign to eat grass with beasts, and abide
heat, cold, and wet, till his hair grew like Eagles feathers, and his
nails like the claws of Fowls? this misery came unto him, no doubt, through
Wantonness, Drunkendesse, Gluttony, and Whoredom: for those are the Chains
wherewith Satan binds the world, and draws us from the true service of
our God, and makes us abjectes, and slaves unto sin, and at last to become
like himself, even damned for ever. Thus much concerning Nebuchadnezar.

Now let us go on, unto Belshazzar, of whom we spoke before: and let us
behold what kind of Riot, Gluttony, and Drunkenness he used, and what was
the success thereof. The Scripture says, he made a Feast unto no less than a
thousand Princes: and that he drunk much wine in their company: yea, till
he became drunken. And then forsooth no Vessels could serve him to drink in,
but those of Gold and Silver, which his Grandfather Nebuchadnezar had taken
out of the Temple of the Lord in Jerusalem: those, I say, he caused bring
before him, filled them with strong Drink, and he, his princes, wives,
concubines, and harlots drank, and were beastly drunken: then thought they no
more on the God of Heaven: but rather in contempt of Him, with wide throats
they praised the gods which were made with men's hands, of Gold, Silver,
Brass, Iron, Wood, and of Stone. But what followed upon this Drunkenness? As
I take it, the drink was not yet digested when the king was slain, his house
divided, and a miserable end happened on the whole drunken rout, I warrant you.
Daniel, Chap. 4. verse. 30. And Chap. 5. verse. 1.2.3.4.30.31.

Hosea prophesies, that there shall be like people, like priest: they shall
eat, but not be satisfied: they shall commit Adultery, but not increase:
Whoredom and wine takes away their heart: the spirit of Fornication causes
them to err: they still go a whoring: therefore their daughters shall be
Harlots, and their spouses Whores: and their Drunkenness stinketh. But I hope
there are no such priests in this Age: if there be, I dare say they are
amongst the Papists, but not amongst us. But I pray you read the 4.5. and 6.
Chapters of Hosea, for in them is so much said of Priests, that I think a
Jesuit will (...) enough ado to expound them.

The Prophet Joel bids the Drunkardes to awake, and in stead of their
drunken pastyme and laughter, to howl, and lament: for, says he, ye have
made sale of Gods people: and the price which ye get, ye bestow it on Harlots,
and on Wine, that ye may drink, and be drunken: but woe be unto you, for the
drink shall be pulled from your mouth, and a sudden destruction shall come
upon you. Joel, Chap. 1. Verse. 5. And Chap. 3. verse. 3.4.

Micah, in his 2. Chapt. threatens the wanton Drunkardes, and (...)


