A DIRECTORIE TEACHING THE WAY TO THE TRVTH IN A BRIEF AND PLAIN DISCOVRSE
AGAINST the heresies of this time.

(*)

WHEREUNTO IS ADDED, A SHORT TREATISE AGAINST ADIAPHORISTS, NEVTERS, and such
as say they may be saved in any Sect or Religion, and would make of many diverse
sects one Church.

1. Cor. 2. Veninon in sublimitate sermonis aut sapientiae. I came not in
loftiness of speech or of wisdom. Psalm. 63. Sagittae paruuloru^ factae sunt
plagae eoru^. The darts of little ones are made their scourges. 3. Reg. 3.
Dabis ergo seruo tuo cor docile. Thou shall give therefore thy servant, a heart
easy to be taught. Solomon. Printed with license. 1605.

ADMODVM REVERENDO IN CHRISTO PATRI, ERVDITIONE, pietate, and morum integritate
conspicuo, GEORGIO BLACKVELLO Archipresbitero, totiusque cleri Anglicani
Ordinarii, intra Britaniae fines laborantis, and constituti, moderatori, and
rectori optimo, RADFORDVS in Domino salutem. (*)
IN vsus veteris illius tabernaculi, non solum a principibus olim dabantur
(dignissime praesul) gemmae, aurum, argentum, lapides Onychini, and donaria
quaeque praetiosiora: sed ab alijs etiam infimae sortis hominibus, sponte and
promptissimo animo offerebantur, si non oleum ad luminaria concinnanda: tamen
pili caprarum, aut pelles arietum rubricatae. Neque in restauratione templi,
and murorum Jerusalem reaedificatione, post insignem illam captiuitatem
Babylonicam, a Deo per Nabucodonozor, propter peccata populi, genti Iudaeorum
inductam; omnes cum Eliasib Sacerdote mangno, and fratribus ejus aedificauerunt
portam gregis: aut cum filio Iosue principe Maspha, contra ascensum firmissimi
anguli, collapsi, muri ruinas extruere; aut cum Baruch montem tenere potuerunt
(quidam enim portam piscium texuerunt, alij vero in valle, and ad furnos, and
ad sontes loca inferiora occupantes, muri fabricam consurgere feceru^t) and sic
per summos, and infimos (vt aedific entur muri Jerusalem vbi solummodo
holocausta and debitae lauds Deo persoluantur) perfectum and consummatum est
opus. Sic nimirum disponente spiritu sancto, and nos in veteri illo populo (cui
omnia in figuris contingebant) erudiente, vt quisque in loco, in ea, inquam
vocatione, inquam a Deo vocatus est, permaneat and aedificetin salutem suam,
vtilitatem proximi sui: vt sic viuis ex lapidibus, animis viz. fidelium,
extruatur murus sanctae ciuitatis Jerusalem, domus Dei, quae (astipulante
Apostolo) est Ecclesia Dei viui, columna and firmamentum veritatis. In hujus
muro qui aedificare aut ruinas resarcire moliatur, sit paruulus, sit inops, sit
a Sanaballat irrisus, sieve a principibus, sieve a sapientibus huius mundi
contemptus; tamen quoniam firmum habet fundamentu^ (adsit tantum debita
perseuerantia) sicut mons Syon non commouebitur in aeternum. Extra hunc marum
quiaedificat, quisquis est, destruit; hostis est, alienus est, non est cum
Christo, qui non est in corpore Christi, cujus so^ius ipse est saluator; and
qui non colligit cum illo, dispergit. Merito igitur cecinit Propheta: Elegi
abjectus esse in domo Deimei, magis quam habitare in tabernaculis peccatorum.
In hac domo, qui segregauit me ab vtero matris meae (licet abjectissimum and
indignissimum) per gratiam suam inhabitare fecit, hujus decorum diligere, in
hac omnibus diebus vitae meae locum concupiscere, hujus ruinas dolere, huic pro
viribus inseruire, and vocatione instituit, and praeceptis deuinxit, and
innumeris indies beneficijs, infinitisque donis magis magisque allicit: in
tantum (vt verum fatear) quando concupiuit anima mea (ex visitatione superna)
in atria Domini, vox illa, vox tua, (O Deus cordis mei, O vnicum solatium and
praesidium singular meum) dulcior prae caeteris aliquoties auribus meis
insonuit: cum ex intimis meis praecordijs optauerim cum Propheta vt annuntiem
omnes praedicationes tuas in portis filiae Syon. In hijs portis (quas sic
diligit Deus supra omnia illa tabernacula jam obsolaeta and antiquata, licet
olim sancta and modo cum honor sepulta) quamuis nec cum primis illis
principibus and luminibus orbis terrarum, dominicique gregis ducibus summis,
fundamenta prima ponere, valuas sanctificare, nec in eas obrizum, aut aurum
purissimum cum lapidibus praetiosissimis infer possim: neque cum stellis
illis in perpetuas aeternitates micantibus, scilicet doctoribus sanctis (qui
omni scientia praecellentes and vera virtute praediti fuerunt) ne minima quidem
ex part sim dignus haberi, qui etiam de thesauris suis promentes noua and
uetera ascensum fecerunt contra firmissimum angulum, mysteriorum,
profunditatem, indagantes, and in montibus sanctis sacrarum scripturarum
aedificantes, and inhabitants die ac nocte tanquam lucernae super candelabrum
positae vniuerso mundo illux^runt, quique pennis columbae deargentatae
exornati, and ipsi probatum argentum vestesque praetiosas in tabernaculum, and
gazophilatium templi intulerunt: neque denique licet cum purpuratis patribus,
excubitoribus domus Dei vigilantissimis, nec quidem cum mediocribus, nedum
hujus temporis praestantissimis, theologis, hyacinthum, purpuram, coccumque bis
tinctu^, ad velandum, sieve tegendum; aes ad sustentandum, ligua Setim ad sarta
tecta domus Dei tenenda confer valeam: tamen cum inferioribus ministris ex
aedificiorum fragmentis, lapillos congerere, and persic congestos murorum licet
fundatissimorum cicatrices obducere, foramina seu abrupta quaeque cum trulla
mea caementaria obstruere, oppilare, and pro viribus meis adimplere, aggerem
vero aedificij, si non firmiorem hostibus tarnen ciuitatis Dei, per rudera
humumque aggestam magis maccessibile^ facere statui, mecumque animo meo
firmiter decreui. Fretus igitur misericordia ejus, qui viduae pauperculae
munus, era minutissima, offerentis, bonoque animo majora volentis,
praeditiorum muneribus non respuit, hoc qualecunque opusculum, tanquam capita
rerum fidei fere omnium, hodie controuersarum, breuissime complectens, crassa
(vt aiunt) Minerua contextum, and simpliciorum captui maxim inseruiens,
magisque accommodatum in thesaurum domus Dei projectum* and aequo iudicij tui
libramini subjectum ab omnibus, ad consolationem fidelium, and conuersionem
infidelium sub benignissima tutela tua, legendum humiliter obtuli. Cui enim
alij ego Presbiter licet indignus (vir ornatissime) hunc meum laborem magis
dicarem, quam tibi, quem Archipresbiteratus titulo dignissime notatum, seu
insignitum, non pecunia, cupiditates, ambitio, aut secularis potentia, non
priuati studium, nec vllum temporalium desiderium, sed bonae arts, literarum
ornamenta insignia, cum eximia quadam charitate in omnes, caeterisque veris
virtutibus co^juncta ad hunc honorem euexerunt. Te igitur prae caeteris mihi
potissimum elegi, cujus manibus hoc opus, vtcunque exile and indignum,
offerrem, and merito: cum enim doctrina, lectione, judicio, praepolleas quis
fere satius aut errores m^os emendare, aut errata corrigire, aut si quid forte
laud dignum fuerit, per bona tua verba, and hilarem vultum gratius acceptare,
aut mihi fructuosius rependere possit; cum vero animi, humilitate, charitate,
alijsque virtutibus praecellas, si quid a me dictum fuerit communi vtilitati,
maxim patriae nostrae expediens and accommodatum, non segniter aut
indiligenter praeterire, sed humanissime amplecti dignaberis; quod si quid non
tam ad rem a me aliquando dictum est, aut forte aliquid offensum fuerit, non
propterea statim omnia cum supercilio, nasute reijcere, aut cum fastu
contemnere, sed potius cum lima tua dexterrima perpolire, aut cum virgula
censoria corrigere, pro insita tibi humanitate and ch^ritate velis. Praeterea
cum prouidentia diuina caeteris praelatus eo loco sis, vt justa authoritate
praelatus eo loco sis, vt justa authoritate praemineas, si hic libellus
(censoribus varijs abnoxius) sub bonis auspicijs and debita approbatione tua in
lucem prodeat (absit verbo inuidiae) nemo inter nos fere melior aut
excellentior te facile inueniri potest, qui ^um a Criticorum stylis iniquis
aemulatorum corrosione, aut ab obtrectatorum vipereis morsibus inuidoru^ue
serpentinis dentibus fortius defendat, meque dignius ex omni part tueatur.
Tantum abest vt domesticorum, aut fratrum nostrorum in hac causa objurgationes
tum verear: vt te duce instra militis Cataphracti in aciem prodiens, ne hostium
quidem communium amentatam hastam and venenata jacula aut saeuissimorum
inimicorum atrocissimos ictus vllo modo pertimesca^. Denique cum sis
doctissimus, est quod sperem, vt has lucubratiunculas meas, vtcunque raptim and
in subseciuis operibus co^textas, etsi non a docto profectas: tame^ ab eo, qui
fuit semper amantissimus literarum and literatorum omnium, co^positas saltemque
a doctissimorum fontibus exhaustas sieve depromptas, sis eodem omnino animo quo
oblatae sunt accepturus precipue cu^ ingenij and ingenuitatis tuae sit, non tam
personae alicuius indignitatem, aut muneris tenuitatem expendere quam
offerentis animum, vota ac fidem ponderare: prudentiaeque pietatisque tuae
linum fumigans non extinguere, nouellaque germina aut nouos foetus non
exscindere: sed animos propensos in bonum Ecclesiae, and conatus omnes communi
vtilitati seruientes, dictis, factis, exemplis, conseruare, alere, augere. Quod
cum facis, sicut tibi subditi a te, vti arboris rami a radice portantur, ita vt
propediem maiores inde fructus erumpentes expectes, multa faciunt. Nam and
animos tuorum erigis, and praeclarissimum omnium virtutum exemplar praebes,
vnde nobis omnibus egregiam opera^ nauare possis, vt maiores indies progressus
in virtute and sana doctrina habeamus, vt in charitate (quod est vinculum pacis
and vnitatis) radicati atque fundati, contra omnes Diaboli insidias, and
haereticorum prauissimos insultus, firmiores stare, omniaque ignita tela
inimici facilius superare possimus. Hoc igitur opusculum tibi dedico, illud
tuis manibus offero* and si forte ad vtilitatem populi, praelo dignum videatur,
vt sub patrocinio tuo in lucem prodeat suppliciter oro. Qua in re pro certo
scias non quaero meipsum aut gloriolam meam, quae nihil est (cum in hoc libello
ex professo and verborum fucos, and Rhetorum flosculos deuitauerim) sed cum
miserear turba^, and doleam patriam labentem, and fere iacente^, quaero pro
modulo meo populum in viam veritatis, errantem reducere; patriae ruinas pro
viribus meis resarcire; and sic gloriam Christo and Deo in Ecclesia sua
restituere. Sane attendens inter quos viuimus, and quomodo caute oporteat
ambulare ne quid grauius a me contra saecularium statum huius regm principum
(salua semper veritate) dictum foret diligentissime precauebam; tamen siquid
forte a me aliquando vehementius dictum sit quam status huius temporis ac
locipatiatur, aut vsque quaque omni rei tam aeque conueniat, aut in omnibus
expediat, certe iste feruor mihi tantillu^ co^cedendus est, quem honor Jesus
mei, and inuicta veritas imperarit. Tamen si quando haec scripta mea (si forte
digna fuerint) a charitate tua vtcunque cursim (licet non perfunctorie vt
spero) perlegantur, si quid in eis quod doctas tuas aures offendat
deprehenderis, obsecro vt statim expungatur: Siineptum, melioretur: si quid
erratum, corrigatur: si quid a me liberius dictum sit, quam pro statu huius
temporis, cautius ponatur: denique si hoc opus ex omni part indignum fuerit vt
lucem videat, omnimodo supprimatur. Cum igitur hoc opus qualecunque est,
meipsum, and omnia mea tibi refero, and iusto tuo judicio subijcio, no^ est
(vti spe^o) vt quisquam me arrogantiae, temeritatis, aut imprudentiae just
arguat aut insimulet: sin candido calculo hosce meos labores, and conatus
approbaueris, and serenafronte susceperis, si forte alijs sic tempore
profecerint, sicut maximum fere meritum, tibi inde iure debetur: ita vires
ingeni^ and animo meo addideris, vt majora and magis ardua pro communi bono
certamina, si non inscriptis, tamen in factis quotidie aggrediar. Non ignoro
quamplurimos doctissimorum virorum libro^ co^tr^uersiarum apprime eruditos
etiam in vulgari nostra lingua conscriptos extare, quos qui been perlegerint
certe co^tra Haereticos Spartam nacti videantur: sed hij plerique magni
voluminis, quique de vno fere articulo in re fidei pertractantes, cum non
seruiant omniu^ sensibus aut captui, tu nec omnibus obuij sunt, nec pro varijs
huius mundi negotijs perlegendi, quibus sicut no^ quicquam detraho, sed omni
laud dignos existimo, ita alijs eiusmodi recens forte cudendis atque
diuulgandis ex hoc meo opusculo nihil praeripio. Catachysmi vero nonnulli*
(maxim ille venerabilis Canisii Societatis IESV Theologisummi, nuper Anglicae
traductus, meritoque non sine magno multorum fructu impressus) quamuis summatim
fere omnia doctissime complectantur: tamen experie^tia test rudes and
indoctiores eos non vsquequaque tam been intelligunt, neque quidem tam minutis
rebus praesertim questiunculis nostratum tam magni viri se facile dimittunt.
Hic vero meus libellus (seu Enchyridion) velut humi repens, sicut fere omnia
hodie co^trouersa breuiter (^tsi promiscue) cum adhortatiunculis ad sanam fidem
and mores emendandos summatim docet, and praecipue de ijsdem inde pertractat,
ita indoctorum and simplissimorum ingenijs dimissus sieve subjectus ijsdem sese
facillime accommodat, quod quidem opus (ex quorundam instantijs (qui rationem
quantulamcunque de omnibus modernis fidei controuersijs in vno libello sibi
reddi vehementer postularunt and efflagitauerunt) a me iampridem compositum
est: Sed cum essem partim serijs quibusdam negotijs impeditus, varijsque curis
implicatus, partim a falsis fratribus proditus, and elusus, and ingrauescente
persecutione nullo diu loco quiet stare perpessus, sed a communi host ad
morte^ fere quaesitus. Hijs inquam alijsque impedimentis rebusque cum essem
distentus, iste libellus non editus, sed quibusdam meis ami^^s notus, and ab
eis desideratus situ obductus iacebat, interim nonnulli vt promissis starem and
eum in lucem emitterem expetierunt, quibus cum amplius refragari non possem,
non diutius eos differendos putaui; sed ut eorum pijs desiderijs satisfacerem
me accinxi, and vt hoc perficerem (quamuis adhuc in medio tribulationum
positus) quantum in me est, feci. Itaque Autographum apud metenens, hunc
libellum nonnullis in locis locupletatum transcribendum and charitati tuae
mittendum curaui; vnde, confido in Domino, feci, quod meum est: ne paruulis
petentibus panem non sit qui frangeret eis, tuum erit facere, aut vt hoc
opusculum tanquam horridum and abortiuum reijciatur, and conspuatur; aut vti
opus pernecessarium and vtile, vtcunque sero emissum and postliminio receptum,
a bonis omnibus obuijs (vt aiunt) vlnis amplectatur, quod and opto ad
vtilitatem Ecclesiae, and laudem nominis sui qui est benedictus in secula.
Amen. Christus Dominus ad pacem bonorum, and Ecclesiae Anglicanae ornamentum
egregium, te mei memorem, diutissime, and vbique incolumem conseruet, vir
eximie and admodum Reverend pater.

27. Martii. 1599. Reuerentiae vestrae filius obseruantissimus, particeps in
tr^bulatione, and in Christo conseruus. I. R.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Understanding by a freinde of mine, not long ago, that one of familiar, and
old acquaintance of his, was desirous to know the truth in matters of
religion; and to have the truth set down in writing, for his better memory,
and stay in this great diversity of men's minds, and sundry opinions at this
day: I was loath at first to enterprise the matter, for that I knew, that
there be written books most ample, and learned of all matters of controversy
at this present far beyond my learning, and skyll; wherein the Heretics of
our time, be most evidently confuted: and the truth most plainly open, set
down, and declared; able to satisfy any man in conscience whosoever, that
with lowly spirit, and desire of truth, will consideratly and thoroughly read
them. Yet considering many men in this troublesome time there be (that be
desiro^s to know the truth) either cannot attain those books, or be not of
ability to buy them: or if they be, yet not at leisure to read them: or not of
learning, and capacity sufficient well to conceaue^ of them; fearing likewise
lest if any at my hands should desire to know GODS truth, and I hiding it
from them, for want of discharge of my duty, might highly displease GOD, (to
whom I am to make an account,) and that I might justly be reckoned amongst
those, whom God by his holy Prophet complains of, Paruuli petierunt panem.
My little ou^s that is poor simple souls, desirons of the truth, and their
salvation have desired bread, the food of GODS word, and the Sacraments, and
there was not that would break it unto them; Though there be many others of
my Brethren, that do, and can do it far better, I being the least, and
vnworthyest of all: Yet for these and diverse other considerations, and
especially for discharge of my duty, at this present, I have breiflie, and
plai^ly for the simple sort, set down my mind, touching the chiefest
matters, of controversies in religion in this time, whereby an unlearned man,
may easily by him self, or another, find out sufficient authority to
satisfy his mind, touching the truth of the most matters of religion in
question at this day: wherein be not afraid (good countryman) but be bold I
warrant thee, by such authority as I have set down to press, and charge the
greatest Heretic in the world. For he may wrangle and wrest, and seek many
narrow shifts: but in the end, he will bewraye his own weakness; For this
undoubted, and infallible Catholic Church and truth, may for a time in some
sort be oppressed: but never suppressed nor hid it may be gainsaid, but in
the end cannot be with stood, no more then that Idol Dagon could stand, but
in presence of the Arc of the living GOD, was thrown down and burst a
sunder: not for that in me any such exquisite matter may be found; but because
I lean of such sure grownds, and authority, that possibly cannot fail. For
eue^ as at the noone day the light of the sun cannot be denied; so there is a
certain truth so plain, that by no guylefull falsehoode in words, nor
deceitefull colored speeches, can in any wise be darkened, or overthrown;
which truth to speak and teach, if man should cease; the very rocks, and
stones might cry out. But for that I write this little treatise, to inform
especially, an ignorant, and unlearned man: therefore I have acco^modated my
self as much as I could, to his understanding, using plain words, and now
and then often repetition of things that to the learned be not needful, and may
seem ^edyous. Wherefore if this writing chance to fall into the hands of the
learned, they may look for no ^yne phrases, or rhetorical terms, at my
hands; neither in writing hastily have I observed that order, and method,
which otherwise were requisite. Only, let him remember to whom I write* and for
whose sake especially, I have written this; which if not so sufficiently as I
would wish, yet at least wise, it may be an occasion to some other, that ca^
do it better, to make a more large, and profitable discourse. In the mean
time if this my poor labor, and indeauoures, may do any good; be an
instrument, or mean, to con^erte to GOD, or strengthen, Yea but the least, or
weakest soul in the world: I think my pains well bestowed, and attribute
thou nothing to me, but give the praise, and thanks wholly to GOD. But if
(upon just occasion) in writing so in haste and that I aslure you with out any
help of books, Except that partelic in 2. or 3. chapters only of the B.
Sacramit of the Altar, I hau^ not only alleged, some authorityes, of the
holy Fathers, gathered by a learned, and late writer, but al so therein, nov and
then have used some oshisowne speeches whose name though very memorable, yet
for the present upon inst reasons, I do conceal.
trusting only to my slender, and weak memory of that I have heretofore read
or in schools heard of my masters: if I say in touching of so high mysteries
so many, and weighty matters, I in any sort have failed, or gone one iotte
astray from the common received faith, of the true Catholic, and Apostolic
Roman Church (as by GODS gracious assistance I trust I have not) yet if there
be any of my learned Catholic Brethren, that can synde any just fault, or
error herein: I will not obstinatly defend yet, (as Heret^ks do) but humbly
thank him, that will friendly, and charitable, either correct it him self,
or warn me of it, that I may correct it my self, and amend it. For I as a
fra^le man may easily e^; Yet ^^l I boldly say, with that learned * Father, I
w^^ ^euer be an heretic: by GODS grace, as always submitting my lelfe, and
all my sayings, and doings, to the censure, judgment, and correction of the
holy Catholic Church, that I know cannot err. Neither have I hear written
any large discourse of any thing: but only touched as it wear the tops of
things with what brevity l might, making the unlearned to understand. But
this I beseech you, if at any time you perce^^e me to enueigh sh^rply against
heretics or their falie d^alings, and abuses; that you would not take yt, that
I do it for any want of Charity, toward them, or for hatred against their
persons: but only in respect of their vices, and damnable sects, and heresies,
whereby they hurt themselves, and others, and slander the truth. For it is the
zeal of GODS cause, and the Catholic truth, that some time more vehemently,
causes me to speak; for it is not the most malicious heretic in this land;
nor all the heretics (though never so malitiouslie they seek our blood) but
GOD is my witness; I am so far from wishing them harm (though old infestred
diseases must be cured with sharp medicines sometimes for the patients good)
that I would lay my hands under their feet and kiss the very ground they
tread one, to do them good; and win their souls to GOD: which though with
the losle of my lise it were done: yet I trust in GOD; I should think it
well * Aug.
bestowed. But if my labors can do such no good: yet I hope GOD will accept
my good will; and desire. And if that I may herewith do any well disposed
person good: Then I beseech him whosoever that I, a sinnful wretch; may be
pertaker of his good prayers; which is all I desire for these small pains. Fare
you well.

10. Aprilis. Anno 1594. Written by him who desires the good of his Country,
and salvation of all. I. R.

CHAP. I. OF THE TRVE WAT to salvation.
GOod Sir, touching the truth of those matters you desire to know: First,
assure your self for certain, there is but one truth; from which, whosoever
obstinatly swarueth must needs be a liar, and so not of God, but of the Devil
the father of lies. Secondly, to know the truth, you can enquire of none more
certain; the^ of him, who is truth himself, who calls himself via,
veritas, and vita: the way, truth, and life. A way by grace; truth by
infallible direction; and life by fruition of his glory, that is Christ: him,
if you follow the true way, you shall not walk a-stray; him, the light and
fountain of truth, if you chiefly respect, you shall not err, nor be
ouer-whelmed in darkness, and so neither here want the life of grace, without
which the soul cannot live: nor so consequently of Gods glory, without which
the soul lives in everlasting death: without which life of grace here, and
glory there, better it had bin never to have enjoyed this mortal and transitory
life. For what profits it a man (says that everlasting truth) if he win
the wholeworld, and loose his own soul? The beauty of which soul of man
created by God, whilst it remains in state of grace, is so great, as framed
to the likeness of almighty God; the dignity so excellent, as being fellow and
coheire with Christ: and the price of such value, as redeemed with his precious
blood; which beauty of man's soul, is soiled, blotted, quite lost, yea become
like unto the old and crooked most ugly serpent the Devil by sin; ignorance,
and forgetfulness; to be brief for want of knowledge, and following of the
truth, which is Christ, who said he that follows me, walks not in
darkness, but shall have the light of life. Assure your self then (my good
Sir) that it is the sweet motion of Gods holy spirit that in clineth your
desire to know the truth, which is of such inuinsible force, that it stays it
self in God only, I mean as the final, and chief end of truth. For wine may
be strong, women fair, Princes mighty, Sed omnia vincit veritas, But truth
overcomes all things. Enquire then of Christ the infallible truth of those
things you stand in doubt, and you shall be sure never to miss the way: so
that you so enquire that you follow him with perseverance to the end, which is
obtained by Gods grace in perfect humility: without security, presumption, or
trust in our selves as of our selves, but working with Gods grace our own
salvation, chiefly reposing and staying our selves in the help and mercies of
God: and so in matters of faith, yea and good works also, a man* I mean, may
be in sure hope, and confidence never to miss the way. I have you will say,
enquired thus of Christ, but I find diverse professors of Christ, quite
differing a sunder in most weighty matters of high mysteries of Faith,
Religion, Sacraments, Ceremonies and of everlasting Salvation, and yet all
parties glory of the truth. How may I then an unlearned man discern the light
of the truth, from amongst so many monstrous clouds of darkness. Hear therefore
what Christ says, the truth that cannot fail, well consider, I say, the rule he
sets down to know the truth, from the dissembled cloak of truth, which is
pernicious falsehood, and deceitful flattery. These be his words, Many shall
come in my name, and say, I am Christ, and shall deceive many: Mat. 4
and again shall say; Behold here is Christ, Behold him there, as one sort
of people who at this day glory of christ, The word of the Lord and the
Gospel, say, behold you shall find Christ in a part and corner of Germany,
in Saxony, in Wittenberge, in Denmark, as the Lutherans, who affirm that man
has no free will, and that God is the author of evil, as well of the treason
of Judas, as of the election of Saint Paul. An other Sect as of Anabaptists
that oftentimes abuse Baptism and confound all good civil and politic
government, to the extirpation of Christian Princes and all governors, say you
shall find Christ, the truth only with them. Another sort of men called
Caluinists and Protestants who reign at Geneua and here especially in England,
affirm Christ and the truth of the gospel to be only with them, these men say
only faith justifies, and leads to Salvation, they deny Christ's Blessed
Body and Blood to be really, and substantially, truly present in the most
Blessed Sacrament of the Altar: These men deny prayer for the Faithful
departed, invocation of Saints and the like. An other sort be called the
Family of love, who after their prayer, preaching of Christ, and the gospel, as
they term it, do work as it appears by their ill fruits, the works of
darkness and things, inconvenient to be named. An other Sect called Puritans,
would pull down Churches, and also confound civil government. It were too long
to reckon up al, far differing in opinions condemners of one another, and yet
all professors of Christ, the truth, and the Gospel, and yet as I said
before, as there is one very God, so but one truth: On^ God, one Faith, one
Baptism, and yet Ephesians. 4
every one of these will not stick to say, behold here is Christ, and the
truth with us, in this corner of the world, and another as stiflye again,
behold he is there in another place: Is Christ divided? No but mark Christ's
rule, who forwarneth us all of such that we go no^ ou^ after them (out of the
unity of faith and the holy Catholic Church, that is, with out which no true
Salvation can be sound) to follow them. If they say unto t^ee says Christ,
belioulde In deserto est, Mat. 24.
and ecce in penitralibus. He is in the desert and secret parlours, Noli^e
exire, nolit^ cr^d^^e* Go not out after them, that be^ so divided amongst
themselves, Do not believe them. And yet he gives us a more certain mark
how better to know Ibidem.
them. Many false prophets says Christ, shall arise and deceive many* they
shall come in she^pes clothing, But inwardly they be ravening Wolves And then
lo he gives us a note to discern them by saying, You shall know them by their
fruits. For a good tree cannot bring forth ill fruits* nor a bad tree good
fruits. Let us then see the fruits of these Sect-Masters, and new Gospellers
that give us such gaye words and promises. Christ by his word and example
commands and teaches us to pray much, fast often, which his true followers
have ever duly observed, these men pray little, fast less. He bids enter
into life everlasting, by the straight way of penance. They preach liberty, as
they say, of the Gospel; but by experience we see it tends to that end,
that every one may with out controulment, live as he lust in loose liberty of
the flesh. God sometimes in this Country for a thousand years together welnere,
was in religious houses with continual prayer of our forefathers served night
and day: these men account such continual prayr lip*labour, pull down godly
houses and Churches, but raise few; to be brief amongst them iniquity
abounds, but Charity waxes cold, wherein our godly predecessors so greatly
excelled; As in building us so many Churches, chapels houses of prayer and
religion, to honor God in so many hospitalls to nourishe and maintain the
poor needy orphans and widows, so many colleges in our Universities to
train up youth in virtue and learning now greatly decayed, as wanting the
ancient orders and wonted disipline therein, appointed by the Founders. Where
is that humility, that modesty, that obedience to parents, and superiors as
of old? Where is that fear of God, that fidelity and true dealing amongst
men, that was wont to be? Be either now servants more trusty and obedient to
their Masters, Wives to their Husbands, Subjects to their Princes? Is now
justice better executed then a foretime, that the poor oppressed have no cause
to complain? Do those that enjoy livings given by our forefathers to the
Church keep better houses then their forefathers, that lived without such
livings? do Ministers now bestow the goods of the Church more liberally upon
the poor, then Priests before time? do they live now in any sort chastely
with wives, as many married christians of old? how far then be they from
the chastity of most reverend continent Priests of all ages? nay rather are not
almes-deedes decayed, charity abandoned, chastity fled away? be these the
fruits of Protestants, that make us such gay promises of the pure and sincere
profession of the gospel? If then you believe Christ's words to be true, that
the tree must be known by the fruits, these brochers then of the fifth
gospel, that bring forth such cockle, darnell, and bad fruit, note and know
them most assuredly not for true, but false Prophets, Ministers of the Devil,
the father of lies, Antichristians, not lambs, but wolves in sheep clothing,
not Ministers of the word of God, but of their own pha^tasies, and foolish
proud conceits, deuourers of your souls, whom you ought to fly, as from the
face of the serpent, for with their sweet words and speeches they deceive the
hearts of the innocent: they confess themselves in words to profess and know
God, but deny him in deeds, you shall know them by their fruits* But you will
say perhaps there have ever been vices amongst men: I grant you, but not so
common and general as now they be, and then Virtue of old was holden for
Virtue, and Vice for Vice. But now quite contrary that which is sin is
termed by the name of virtue; and that which is virtue is termed vice. So that
in place where virtue was exercised now sin and vice is exalted and reigns.
Again these New men that brag to be reformers of the world and bringers in of
light, ought to have taught us better manners, then these had, whom they took
in hand to reform: which when they do not, nay be themselves, and make the
world worse; It is a sure token they be not sent by God to reform men, but by
the Devil to deceive men; Which foul and wilye serpent, as witnesses Saint
Paul* often trans-formeth himself into an Angel of light* fly then such lying
Masters. For their Church and congregation* is not the flock of Christ* but the
very Sinagogue of Satan. And that you may better know the true church of god
from the false Church of Antichrist, I will se^ down, three or four notes
proper to no Church, but only the true Church of Christ which if you mark
well, they shall teach you in these perilous times, how to know the Church of
God and so the true and only way to salvation. For he that will be saved before
all things must keep true faith and religion, and be a member of the church of
God. For unto this Church, as Christ's only dear spouse for which he shed his
precious blood all good guiftes be given, all heavenly promises be made, in
this Church as in his elect vineyard is only found the deaw of his heavenly
grace the sweet li^our of his holy Sacraments, without this Church of Christ
no salvation can be found, this Church is worthily called the ship of S. Peter,
out of which whosoever at death shall be found, shall be overwhelmed without
all* doubt in those floods of eternal damnation. For as at Noes flood, none
were saved, but those only that were in the Arc, eight persons: even so we
cannot pas through the Sea of this troublesome world, nor arrive to the sure
haue^ of rest with god in his kingdom unless we sail in Noe and Saint Peter's
ship, Christ's holy Church which church is nothing else but a congregation of al
faithful people, living in one faith or unity of belief, under Christ their
head and his Vicar the chief Pastor of our souls, Saint Peter's successor hear
in earth, keeping that faith and belief that Christ and his Apostles taught
and has been ever openly preached in Christ's Church without intermission
even from Christ's Assention unto this day, and shall be so without fail, even
to the end of the world. For against his Mat. 16
Church Christ promised The gates of hell (that is the Devil and al his power,
that is al Infidels, Turks, Jews, Heret^kes, and Schismatikes) should never
prevail: but the true Catholic church has and more manifestly shall have in
the end the upper hand, though for a time for our sins, in this and other
countries it has been sore persecuted and oppressed, yet can it never be
vanquished or suppressed, because Christ's word shall never fail who promised
to be with it and assist it with his holy spirit, to the end of the world. Nay
the more it is persecuted, the more in the end, it will flourish: as the vine
that is pruned afterward brings out branches more perfectly and more
plentiful fruit. This ship of Saint Peter has bin sore tossed with storms of
persecution from time to time, but yet by the good guiding of Christ her head,
never overwhelmed. How sore was it shaken when Nero, that bloody tirant and
persecuting Emperor slew the chief Captains thereof Saint Peter and Saint Paul
at Rome: in which city now Christ's Religion by his special grace and by the
merits and prayers of these Apostles, most florisheth? What bloody battles
afterward made Domitian, Diocletian, and the rest of those persecuting Kings
and Emperors, against the same Church, slaying by thousands of Christians in
one day? The Arrian Heritickes above a thousand years ago, that denied the
Son of God to be of the same substance with his father, as the Heretics of
our time now deny him, though not altogether alike, but in another manner, and
in another article of our belief, according to his word to be hear with us
in the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar. Those that were true Christian
Catholics especially Bishopps, and Priests were for the truth by them
persecuted with fire and sword, both by Sea and land; Yet by the valiant death
and constancy of Martirs, and worthy Confessors; who were robbed and spoiled
of goods, lands liberties, and lives, by long imprisonment and death (as many
in this country for the same cause now be) they in the end obtained over the
enemies of the truth the victory, that even in those very places, where
greatest persecution and bloodshed was for the truth, there afterward was of
all sorts of people, greatest confession of the truth: Churches and houses of
prayer being raised in those very places, where many Martirs were hanged and
shed their blood: the bloody persecutor dying, and being buried in hell, in
eternal oblivion; The glorious Martyr now triumphs and rejoices with God in
Heaven with perpetual praise and memory of his name here on earth. When the
ghospel in this country was first preached, a blessed man harbored Amphibo l^s.
by Saint Albon nere to Christ's time, that blessed Martyr for his receipt of
Christ's messenger, and for becoming a Christian shed his blood, and yet in that
very place was afterward a goodly Abbey built where Christ was served both day
and night, and the town of Saint Albons (as of whom it took the name) for
many hundred years honored God in him, in that place, who before as a traitor
and enemy to the Realm and state they put to death. Afterward about a
thousand years ago, when Saint Augustine the Moncke was sent by Saint Gregory
then Pope of Rome to restore and preach christ's faith and religion here amongst
English men: then a among the Britons in some sort partly decayed for sin
(as now in a great part of the whole Isle it is, if not worse in many men's
hearts, though God be thanked a Church though little poor, and afflicted we
have still) many mockes, buffets, and blows, that holy Moncke with the rest
of his fellows had, before they could recall this Country, to the right way of
salvation: The storm against them was sharp for a time: But afterward with
long patience Christ bad the wind cease and there became a great calm: The
Church of England having great tranquillity and flourishing after in religion
and virtue, almost a thousand years together, till wicked Luther, and a many of
his fellows, runagate Friars, and forsakers of their order, and religion for
the desire they had to live as they lust, in all liberty and pleasures of the
flesh, broched a new gospel, I would say raised up a monstrous storm of heresy
and infidelity troubling the peace of the christian world, and quite
overthrowing the common state of Religion here in our Country, till it please
God to bid the raging storm cease, which no doubt hewil do, when it seems
best to his good will and pleasure, who after a storm sends fair weather,
and when he has beaten his children well, knows to cast the rod into the
fire, in the mean time in this perilous storm, it behooves us to be well
armed (least we be overwhelmed) with all virtues, but first and chiefly with
true faith and religion.

Chap. II Of the first certain note of the true Church.
Wherefore because heretics the enemies of truth deceive simple souls under the
show of truth, and glory of the Church, as though they only were true members
of the same, which notwithstanding they oppugn, and pull down. Therefore the
first note whereby you may know the true church of Christ, from the Church of
Satan, is this, that the Church of God is called Catholic, which word
Catholic is derived from the Greek, and in Latin is as much as vniuersalis,
that is, universal and general; common as it were to al true beleuers of all
nations: so that the true Church of Christ, is commonly called the Catholic
church, or at least known The proper etimologie of this word Catholic is
universal or general.
of all sorts so to be called, as we are taught in our Creed to believe the holy
Catholic Church: so that true Christian believing men are commonly called
catholics, and those that be divided from this known common faith, and Church
of Christ in opinion, be properly termed Heretics. Now let us see to which
Church this mark Catholic is proper and agrees, and you shall find it to
belong to no other, but only to that church which Heretics call the Popish or
papistical church, but she it is which they so scornefully miscall, which is in
deed the true Catholic church: For our church and true Catholic faith and
religion, which they term Papistry, is common to all countries, wheresoever
heretics be: but yet Protestants or to speak more plainly heretics, be not
in every place where catholics be as ^or example, heretics as Lutherans,
Caluinists, or Protestants, Puritans, Anabaptists and the like sectaries
divided from the Catholic church be here openly in England, Scotland, Ireland,
Denmark, Switzerland, Iseland, partly in Bohemeland, yea in some corners of
France, Polony, Hungary and in some provinces and free states rebels to their
lawful Princes in the inferior and higher Germany. For in very few places else
in all Europe, save these by me reckoned, shall you find any heretical estate.
To omit then, that all these countries many hundred years together before they
ever hard of these new heresies, were al catholic: yet at this day be they
never so heretical, you shall find amongst the^ some open church of the
catholics, and such as stick not to profes their faith with loss of liberty,
goods and lives: as here in England though Gods church be opressed by heretics
with taxes, impri sonments and death more then any christians be in the world,
yea worse tha^ under that open professed enemy of Christ the Turk, who
permiteth Christians to live with liberty of conscience, to have their churches
and Mass openly, whereas you see how Catholics here for their faith, lose al
their goods, and two parts of their lands, and cannot enjoy that quietly
neither, but pilledwith every apparitor, and purseuant, cast in prison,
restrained of their liberty, and susteining the like notable iniu stices, and
disgraces known unto you already and to long to speak, yet notwithstanding be
they never so sore opressed, beggered or consumed, yet they live, and after
their death new arise in their places so that you want not at every assizes
and sessions, in every shiere town in England Catholics that there be openly
called upon, and ready to profess their faith; besides many hundreds that lie
this day in prison, as in York, Hull, Norwitch, Wisbitch (where be above
thirty priests together, most learned and reverend men, whereof some have been
prisoners thirty years) and above an hundred Priests or there-abouts have
been within the same time hanged, drawn and quartered for the same cause;
though it is given out to the people, it is for treason, whereof they be most
innocent, as may appear by their mild death, where they ever pray for
conversion of the Queen and Realm, for recovery only whereof to the Catholic
Faith and Religion, they be trained up in virtue and learning in other
countries, and sent hither back again; besides many lay men and weomen, young
and old, of all degrees, most noble personages, and of interior sort and
condition, have and do suffer to the open testimony of the world, imprisonment
and death for the Catholic cause. So that you see here for example in England,
though never so poor, and persecuted, yet by Gods gracious mercy and
providence be Catholics, and an open professant Catholic congregation. The
like might be said of Scotland, Ireland, Germany, and other countries, that
look wheresoever heretics be, yet Catholics be amongst them openly, I say
known to the world, But yet the church of Christ is in far more large,
noble, and worthy countries, where no heretic dare openly show his head, no,
nor at all, or rarely be found, as in the greatest countries of Europe (the
corpse of Christendom) as in those most noble Countries In france god he
blessed, though the state public be Catholic yet both publikly and privately
I grant heretics
chiefly, Italy, Spain Sicily, and for the most part in the chief and famous
cities of France, Portugal, and the like provinces, Kingdoms, and dominions
adjoining by North and South, of those Countries; where (God be blessed,) the
Catholic faith and Church has free liberty, use for preaching, Sacraments and
ceremonies, but very few heretics or none to account in respect, in the most
of those mighty Regions, that dare openly avouch, their absurd monstrous
heresies which they deceive the simple souls with all, here in England, and
other obscure corners of the world like lurking theeus, that be ashamed to show
their faces before men. In so much that at the last general council of
Christendom holden at Trent, where the most of all the learned Bishopps and
Doctors of Chistendome were gathered together, to dispute and appease
controversies in religion, the heretics of this country, and of all others in
the world, being sommoned to appear, and having free liberty given them to say
what they could for themselves, with sufficient security of their saufe
conduct to and fro; they like men of cancred and guilty consciences, knowing
the naughtines of their own cause durst not appear, nor show their faces
before the lawful Judge, grave Senate, and council of Christendom; but like
subtle foxes in their dens, kept the^selus at home, and so by the consent of
all christendom, were justly condemned for obstinate Heretics. Over and
besides al these countries abouenamed, where you see by Gods grace the
Catholic church is openly persecuted, or free and in peace, there be other
countries in the world, never heard of but of later years which now be of late
with wonderful For miracles vid^ Osoriu^ d^ Lusitanoru^ gestis: Ite^ Maffeu^,
and maxi^e Epistolas Indicas, and Iaponicas ver by gratia: The Reu^ rende
Father Franc. Z^uier his body was found incorrupt, sweet, and of an
odoriferous savor some months after his death I omit the report how he raised
a dead man. This holy Zauier first in our age preached Christ in Iaponia.:: The
Iaponians though they be as fa^re, or rather farther distant from the Ro^anes
the^ the An^ipodes, yet they be not properly Antipodes but in ^ome sort,
Antiesi, or quasi Antiesi: for that part of the world which is directly
opposit^ ^o Rome is partly (it seems) Sea, partly terra incognita.
miracles converted to Christ's faith, and religion, both in the East and West
Indians: insomuch as about 9. years past in the latter end of the time of
Gregory the thirteen of blessed memory, I my self saw there three young
Princes come to Rome, that came from the uttermost coasts of the earth, out of
a Country called:: Iaponia, who be Antipodes to the Romans, that is, their
feet contrary to theirs, they were 3. years in coming, and all to visit the
bodies of the Apostles S. Peter, and S. Paul, and to acknowledge their dutiful
obedience to the Apostolic Sea, and to worship Christ and his Vicar here on
earth, they were (as worthy) received with great applause of all Christian
states and Princes in Christendom, sent back again with great honor and
gifts, and the like triumph and rejoicing to my knowledge was never in Rome
before, since our Country was first converted unto Christ in Gregory the greats
time our holy Apostle, that sent S. August^ne to preach the Gospel amongst us
English men. These countries new y converted in the Indians, be converted by
Jesuits, Monks, and Friars, so honourab^e once in our Country, but now
odious; yea their very names. They in those mighty Countries and cities far
greater then the rest of all Christendom^* do raise up houses of religion, as
fast as we pull the down: they know, or believe no other faith but only the
Catho* Roman faith and Church, praised ^om. 1. 8.
with the Apost^es mouth to be preached through the whole world. Heretics
here you see in corners of Christendom rent and tear in pieces like rau^ning
Wolves the flock of Christ, but they plant it in no place amongst I^fidelles,
where Christ was never heard of before* as our Priests and religious men do,
which they so rai^e against in their pulpits amongst ignorant people. But no
marvel* for our Savior describes such Wolves under the name of hirelings, or
rather no Pas^ors, but thieves and robbers that come in by the window, and not
by the door, that feed themselves, and not the flock of Christ, but be like
to those whereof the Prophet speaks: De Psalm. 52. 5
uorant plebem mea^ vt cibum panis, deuouro my poor people a^ meat of bread:
It is the property o^ the heretic, vt furetur, mactet, and perdat, to steal,
murder, and destroy: but not as a good shepherd to feed the flock of Christ,
and raise up and build the walls of Jerusalem the holy Church. Thus you see
how the Church of Christ is no private conuenticle, or tied to one or two
Countries, or Nations: but it is common to the whole world. A mari vsque ad
mare* and a flumine vsque ad terminos orbis terrarum: a visible Church to be
seen as he promised by the holy Prophet it should be, that all Nations
might have recourse thereunto: Again Ps. 112. 3.
he promised by his Prophet, it should be from the rising of the Sunnet to the
setting of the same: again Et aperienter portaetuae Isa. 60. 11
iugiter, die ac nocte non claudenter, vt afferatur ad te fortitudo gentium,
and reges earum adducantur. That her gates should never be shut, that is, that
she should be common to all Nations of the world, both Jew and Gentile: but
this is proper to no sort of Heretics in the world, which be enclosed you see
in a few corners of the same: as England and Germany. But our common known
faith, Church, and religion, is Catholic, that is universal, general, and
common: not only to these countries, but to all the countries of the world
where Christ was ever preached or heard of; Even from the rising of the Sun
to the setting of the same again, and therefore no other Church the true
Church but ours only, that is, the common known Catholic and Apostolic,
Roman Church. First then you see what Church has the first true mark which
we be taught in our Creed to believe, that is our Roman Church, and no
other, because ours and no other you see can properly be called Catholic,
that is common to all Nations.

Chap. III Of the second certain note of the true Church.
SEcondly this Catholic Roman church, is of greatest antiquity which is a sure
note, or mark of the true Church, proper to no Church, but only to our
church, that is the true catholic church. For this catholic faith and
religion, which at this day for example is preached at Rome, in the Indians,
and in all the coasts of the world, is no new fangled vpstart opinion and sect,
as lutherans and protestants be, whose first rising is yet in our fathers
memory, but most ancient that is, both ever continued one, and the same Faith
and church, for almost these 1600. years from Christ's Ascension, even unto
this day: whereas the Protestants can neither show church, chapel, nor
congregation of their faith and religion through the whole world, till only
within these 80. years, till Luther and his fellows, licentious Lollards first
arose, if their were any of more ancient years as Wicliff, Hus, Ierom of
Prague and the like, yet with their opinions they held other damnable heresies,
which the Protestants mislike, as-well as Catholics, so that only our
Catholic Church, is that which has continued, not for fourscore years, but
fifteen hundred and fourscore; which mark so ancient of Antiquity, because
heretics want, therefore they cannot be members of Christ's Catholic Church,
against which, our Savior promised: The devil and all his power, should never
prevail, but that it should continue from his Ascension into Heaven, to his
coming again to Judgment, eue^ to the end of the world, when by his just
Judgment he shall sever, the good corn, and chafe a-sunder, and make himself
a glorious triumphant Church in Heaven, without spotte, or wrinckle. Now then,
either it must follow, that Christ failed of his promise, which to think, or
say, is extreme blasphemy; or else that our Church the Catholic Roman
Church, and no other is only the true church, because no other Church but ours
only has been seen, and openly continewed, and prevailed against the devil,
and all his members from Christ's time to this day. For their church if not
you, yet your father knew when it sprung up, and that of what ground and
occasion it rose; that was of Covetousness, Pride, and whordome; but our
Catholic Church has continued, by most of there own confessions for a
thousand years, yea some of them give us thirtene hundred years, but we will
take to us, and are able to prove by all ancient authority, and the invincible
truth sixteene-hundred years now well drawing on, that is even from Christ's
time to this day. Wherefore our Church being the only church, that has ever
visibly been seen, and flourished in many Though the church has ever been
visible, yet I mean she has especially flourished since.
times according to the promise of our Savior his Church should do:
Therefore it must needs follow, that noe Church, but* only our Catholyke
Roman Church is the true Church, as being by far most ancient even from
Christ's time. But the heretic has another shift for this, he grants with
us that the Church of Christ shall ever continue, but he would have it, an
invisible congregation, secrett in men's hearts, a congregation known to God
alone, and to no mortal crea^ure, save only to such as be of the same;
whereupon he would have the Church to consist of the only Elect and saved
souls, and that there be not of both sorts good and bad in the holy true
Catholic Church; which wily shift of the heretics, we easily shift off, and
reprove plainly by Gods word, and his gospel, which compares his church, Unto
a Mat. 20. Mar. 12. Luc. 20.
city set upon a hill, to a tabernacle set in the sun, that cannot be hid.
Again, he bids us, if we cannot amend our brother, by brotherly correction,
Totel the Church, which if he will not hear, account him as a Heathen, and
Publicane, says christ. But how should we tell that Church, or how should a
man hear that church, that can neither be seen nor heard, but is invisible, as
the heretics would have it. Wherefore you see how slender a shifte this is of
them, who like thieves that hate the light, would have the Church invisible,
contrary to Gods word, and his holy Gospel, which bids us to have recourse
unto it in time of need, as the sure foundation and pillar of truth, so
evident and plain that it may, and might ever, and shall be seen to the worlds
end, even from the rising of the sun, to the setting of the same again, as
was foretold by the Prophets. Hereupon the Apostles write their epistles to
such and such Churches, and to the whole Catholic Church, as in particular to
the Romans, the Cor. the Ephesians etc. as visible that may be seen, that is.
This position of theirs (heretics I mean denying the Church to be visible) is
so false, that before Christ's time, when things were but in shaddowe and
figure, yet was there ever an open visible Church of God whereunto men might
have recourse in all doubts, especially since Moses, as appeared in Elias
time, when it was so sore persecuted, that he cried out, Relictus sum ego
solus, I good Lord thy servant am left 3. Reg. 19.
alone:, and yet answer was given him by God that he had left 7000. in
Israel, besides the well known city of Jerusalem, and Cath. Judah) that never
bowed knee to Baal. Lo a visible company at al times, yet in the visible
church we be taught by Scriptures there be both good and bad, as appears by
that parable of the gospel, the Kingdom of Heaven, that is the Church of God
which in holy scriptures is sometimes called the Kingdom of heaven) is
compared to a field, where Mat. 13.
good corn cockle and weed grow together, which our Savior the good man of
the house his Church bad let grow both to gether, least in weeding out the
cockle the good corn also should be bruised, and plucked up, but in the end
of the world, then will he by his Anglles gather his good corn, his elect
people and bind the weed, that is the wicked in bundles to be burnt with
unquenchable fire. For God suffers wicked men, as says Saint Augustine, to
live amongst the just; that either they may be converted by their example, or
else good men's patience by them may be the better exercised; In an other place
the church is Mat. 13.
compared to a net, cast into the Sea gathering good, and bad fishes; and so
likewise to the threshng place wherein is both corn and chafe. So that you
see how false the heretiksb, e and how contrary unto the Gospel (whereof
before the simple and unlearned ears they so brag) that would have the church
invisible that no man might see their wily deceits, and would have therein none
but good, whereas in their Church can be none but bad: but we that by gods grace
be catholics do according to Gods word affirm that in his holy Church be
many good, and none good but only those of Gods Church, yet amongst those good
be some euel, til the last day of payment when the goats, and lambs shall be
shed, or separated by the good sheapheard a sunder: so that Gods Church is
visible, that is open to the whole world to be seen and known and shall so
continue even til the end of the world; take then this for the second most
certain mark of the true Church of God, that our Catholic, and visible
church is of the greatest Antiquity and longest continuance. Wherefore none but
our church is the true spouse of Christ.

Chap. IIII Of the third certain note of the true Church.
The third most certain note of the true church is unity, and consent in all
matters of Religion. For as there is on God (as I said in the beginning) so
one only truth proceeds from him, he is not the author of dissension, but
of peace; as therefore there is one God, so is there but on Church, his only
spouse. For thus he says in his Canticles, Vna est Columba mea, etc. My dove
is Cont. c. 6.
one, as she is one, so is she not, nor cannot possiblye be divided into
diverse sects, factions, and opinions in faith and Religion, forso she should
not be one but many, and so not of God which is one, and has chosen her for
his only spouse, and ever according to his promise guides her with his holy
spirit, saying, Her^ and Heb. 13. 8
hodie ipse, and in secula, who is one and the same, yesterday, to day, and for
ever: hereupon it comes that by the guiding of Christ's holy spirit, ever
resident and directing his Church, that therein is not preached one faith this
day, another that, now this year, one thing, an other year, an other, as
Heretics do that can never agree among themselves in opinions, but the same
faith that was taught in the beginning by christ and his Apostles in matters of
Faith and Religion, the Church of God ever most soundly keeps pure undefiled,
as we be able to prove by authority of Gods words, and all ancient Fathers,
and the same Faith that we Catholics hold here in England, the same they
hold in France, Scotland, Irelande, Germany, Poland, Dalmatia, Italy,
Spain, the East and West Indians, and so to the uttermost coasts of the
world, not differing a iotte in points of religion, and due administration of
the Sacraments. But if you see how finely heretics accord, you shall see them
like Samsons foxes, with sire tied in their Iud. 15.
tails together ready and of one accord to burn up the good corn of
Christ, but their heads quite contrary from each one another, ready to bite
one another in pieces, never agreing in opinyons, but sharply vvriting against
one another, condemning one another to the bottomless pit of Hell. For
Luther that was their sirst father, and broke down the walls and so was
fallen with pronde Lucifer from the kingdom of heaven, from Gods holy Church,
did he long continue think you in one opinion with himself? No; for besides
that in one and the same matter in some one book he is contrary to him self,
he changed his opinions daily to worse and that diverse times. For first of
pride, and covetousness he found fault at the manner of dispensing of pardons,
and in the end denied the Pope, pardons, and all: what said I, Pardones
Saints, and Sacraments to, espeacially private Mass, (as he termed it) and the
most pure and unbloody Sacrifice of the Altar, propitiatory both for the quick
and the dead, and that by the help and counsel of the Devil, that often in
the night by his own confession used familiar speech with him, giving greater
reasons against the Mass, then he was able to disolue. But how did his
Scholars, and followers think you accord with their master, and amongst
themselves? but like to Vipers that burst their Parents bowels. For though in
the beginnig he had followers that greedely followed his opinion as heavenly
oracles, yet the scholars being as proud as their master, they presentlye
invented new opinions of their own, condemning their master in most bitter
writings, and he them; insomuch that about one article of our faith and
belief, (the Blessed Sacrament) a Learned man has noted, above fourscore
sundry heresies and opinions amongst them. Thus they disagree in most weighty
matters, erring and sending others into error, the Lutherans fighting against
the Caluinists, the Caluinists, against the Lutherans, the Swinglians,
Protestants, Anabaptists, Arrians, Puritanes, Celestians, Brethren of love, and
the like, too many to reckon, al branches of that unsavory tree Luther, all
and every discenting from one another, comdemning one another and that in the
highest points of our Faith and belief, and yet every one braggeth of the
word of God, the Lord, the Gospel, and that the truth is of his side, agreing
together for the most part certainly in no one thing, saving that all conspire
against the Church of God taking upon them to defend God when they most of all
offend him, as S. Gregory under the person of the friends In lib. moral. in
Job.
of Job notably and often describes all heretics. This disention you se amongst
themselves argues they have not the spirit of God, for where unity and
concord is wanting there can be no charity so that the heritikes wanting the
knott of peace, unity, concord and charity, cannot be of God who is not author
dissentionis, sed pacis for want of this knot of peace and charity, brag they
never so much of the word of the Lord, use they never so sweet blessings, yet
it is not the word of God, but the very word of the devil, who when he
tempted Christ used words of Seripture but evil understood, wherefore they
were his own, being so euilly applied and expounded, but none of Gods, as all
heretics words be, which be members of their father the Devil; for they with
him bring Scriptures but wrested, so that not the Scripture, but the sense and
euel understanding is blamed, the heritikes bring Scriptures, and we that be
Catholics allege Scriptures abundantly of both sides, but quite contrary
one to the other, some judge the^ must needs be to try and decide the^ who
those be that rightly understand the Scriptures; we ask them how they will be
judged, whether by the holy Fathers of old? Yea say they as long as they
accord with the Scriptures, but when as men they erred from the true sense of
Scripture, then we refuse them, we answer though with more reverence, even so
do we, but yet heretics want a certain Judge to know when as men they erred,
and when they spoke the truth, which certain stay of judgment withoutal doubt,
Christ, which so deerelye beloueth his people, has provided, who promised his
assistance, to direct us in all truth especially in this Law of grace to the
worlds end. He after so dear a price, has not left us in worse case than the
Jews, amongst whom before Christ was a place of judgment to try certainly al
doubts, as appears in the old law in Deuteronomium, That the high Priest and
spiritual congregation assisting him was to judge, decide, and determine all
doubtful matters in Religion, and Conscience, whose answer the people were to
accept as the oracle of the holy ghost: hereupon in Deuteronomy. seventeen cap. is
written Si deficile, and ambiguum apud te iudicium esse prospexeris, etc. if
thou perceive iudgdement to be doubtful with thee, and after if thou perceive
the words or sentences of the Judge to vary, Ascend ad locum quem elegerit
dominus etc. veniesque ad Sacerdotes Leuitici generis etc. queresque ab iis,
qui indicabunt tibi iudicii veritatem. Lo you se here how in the old law,
matters were to be in all doubts determined and judgment by the high Priest
to be given in that place God had chosen, they were in spiritual causes to show
truth of judgment, not the law, or scriptures written, but the high Priest and
his assistance the Leuiticall Preistes were to interpret the law, and judge of
the scriptures, as Malachie foretold how the lips of the Priest do keep the
law. How much more now the^ in this law of grace when Christ had made a more
firm pact with us for the assistance of his holy spirit saying. Alium
Paracletum dabo vobis spritum veritatis. I will give you another co^for ter the
spirit of truth: he shall teach you all truth; now after he has confirmed the
new testament, with his own blud, has he not left us a more sure stay in all
doubts? Yes doubtless, he has promised his spirit you see to his holy church,
and the chief pastors of the same, who promised to Peter, and all his
successors in him, that his faith should never fail. To this church, this high
priest, and vicar of christ in aldoubtful matters of faith as the only place
and chief judge, whom God has chosen, we safely as to the true and lawful
judge must have recourse. The fathers of old, as men may err, but in those
things they conspire and agree generally, altogether they cannot err,
especialy when the authority of the Church confirms their Doctrine to be
according to the Scriptures. The Heretics who refuse to be tried by the
Church they affirm the blessed fathers of the church to err, men in virtue,
and learning no doubt far beyond any in these days, but they themselus now
a days, like gods cannot err, they would be judges not only of Doctors, and
Scriptures, but over general counsels, Saint Peter's, successor, christ's
vicegerent, and under Christ here in earth the high Priest and pastor general
over our Souls, to whom in S. Peter Christ promised his faith should never
fail, yea also over the Church and al, like unto lurking robbers flying ever
the tribunal and judgment seat of the lawful judge, but we that by Gods
grace be Catholics, members of Christ's Mystical body the Church, as we have
received the holy scriptures from the Church neither do we certainly know them
to be scriptures but that the holy Church tells us so we expound and
understand the scriptures that be hard to be understood, yea be an
unspeakable depth, not by our inventions and fantastical opinons, as every
heretic does, which makes so many damnable heresies amongst them, but by the
rule and authority of Christ's holy Catholic Church, who because she is the
spouse of Christ whereof he is head, and guided with his holy spirit according
to his promise, can never err in points of Salvation, nor lead her children
amiss. Here upon it comes that the Catholic Roman Church the house of
Christ, dispersed through out the whole world is not diverse, but one, as
Christ her head is one, who is Savior of his body. This church you shall
find, to preach, teach, and use one uniformity of Sacraments, yea and for the
most part of ceremonies through out the whole world, the same order, and time
of Fasting, of Prayer, one and the same belief of al points of religion, in
every coast in the earth, not now one Faith, and to morrow another: but the
same that was planted by Christ and his Apostles, that which with perpetual
peace, consent, unity, and concord she keeps undefiled, and shall keep, even
unto the end of the world. Here upon it comes, that when as heresy, and
heretics in the beginning seem plausible, and be greedily received, yet for
that they be not grounded in Christ the truth, in the end become loathsome and
hateful to al me^, and being divided destroy one another. Contrary the
Catholic Church being founded on christ the head corner stone, and fast
lincked together in unity concord and charity in all her members ever
increases as she is more persecuted, and is Tanquam acies been ordinata. As
the forefront of a most strong army, well set in battle array: terrible to
the devil and al his power, and ever increases. I say the more she is
afflicted; for besides the herytikes have stirred many up, that before were
a-sleepe, to search out the truth, yea and many to shed their blood in the
Catholic cause; we have not lost so many Christians by heresies in these parts
of the world, but God has stirred up others that hane raised many more in other
parts of the world: which if this heresy had not troubled our quietness
here, perhaps some of those Apostolic men had not so speedely sought to have
planted the Faith in other Countries. Wherein you see so good, and mighty is
God which would never permit evil, but that he knows to gather good of it,
to turn their evil to our good, and, increase of his Church, who by unity
and concord thus obtains the victory, as that Babilonicall strumpet heresy
is ever the ruin of her self. To be brief you see by this little that is
said that none can have the spirit of God and the truth, but those only that
have amongst themselves, the spirit of peace, unity and concord, which when
it is, and ever has beeue wanting amongst Protestants, and other heretics
of this time, therefore it must needs follow, their sect, and congregaton is not
the true church of Christ, and because none else save Catholic Christians which
they call Papists do consent, and agree in all points of Faith and religion,
living Tanquam vnanimes in domo, As brethren all of one mind together in one
house. Therefore we may most certainlye conclude, that none other saving only
the catholic Roman Church (which ever has and does live in unity and consent
of Faith, and Religion in all points) is the true Church of Christ.

Chap. V Of the fourth certain note of the true Church.
THe fourth and last most certain mark of the true Church is the lawful
succession of Apostolic Priests and Bishops in the Catholic Church, which
succession of Bishops, as it was a stay to S. Augustine against the
Donatists, and other heretics of his time, to keep him within the unity of
Gods Church: so is it likewise, a sure pillar for us: Many things there be
(says he) that keep me most justly within the bosom of the Church, the
uniform consent of people, and nations, the authority confirmed with miracles,
norished with hope, increased with charity, finally the succession of Bishopps
in Peter's seat to this day, to whom our Lord committed the charge of his
fllock to be fed, keeps me herein. This lawful succession of Bishops, lo,
that ledd Saint Augustine to the knowledge of the true Church and conserved him
in the lap thereoff, is and iustlye may be no less a guide and stay to us
in the same: which lawful succession of Bishops, because the heretics want,
therefore they be not sent by God. For two kinds of vocations there be, the
one is ordinary, the-other extraordinarye by miracle, both which because the
Heretics want they cannot be of God: for as touching the first, that they
want ordinary vocation by succession, it is plain, as for example who sent
Luther, Calvin, and the rest? If they say God, and so claim an extraordinarye
vocation, where then be their miracles, that testify they be sent from God?
They have none you see to prove their extraordinary vocation: and yet the son
of God himself would not be believed without miracles, saying, Si Ioh.
opera non fecissem in eis, que nemo alius etc If I had not wrought such works
amongst them as no other man did they should not have sinned; and must we
believe Calvin and his fellowoes for their bare words? no, their fruits be
not so good, you see it is unfit; As for their ordinary vocation by succession
that every man sees they want. For before Luthers time, there was neither
Patriarchall, nor Bispopps seat, nor yet ever any honest persons chair of his
Gospel to be found throughout the world, as all men may most easilye know:
but to make the matter more plain by an example at home ask now the
superinte^dent of York or Canterbury whom they succeed, perhaps they can
name you two or three predecessors of their heretical crew, hut appose the^ a
little more, and they can go no farther, whereas he that was last lawful and
true Archbishop of Canterburye Cardinal Poole for example could have showed
his lawful succession from his next lawful predecessor to an other many
hundred years together, even to Saint Augustines time who was sent by Saint
Gregory the great then Pope, Saint Gregory succeeded Pelagius, Pelagius his
predecessor Benedictus and so lineally every of those Bishopps in that seat
could show their predecessor from whose hands by lawful ordinary succession,
and vocation, they received their faith and apostolic authority, even to Saint
Peter who was sent by Christ, as by all ancient writers we can prove; Then as I
said, when as protestants, and all other heretics of this time, want both
these vocations first ordinary not called of god, as Aaron was and much less
extraordinary by miracle (for though meruailes they show many, yet miracles
none, no not as much as the healing of any lame creature: therefore it follows
they be none of Gods messengers, but such as of whom he complains by his
word, Ipse currebant, and ego non mittebam eos. They ran and I sent them not,
that is, be intruders of themselves not true messengers of Christ not pastors,
but robbers, not simple true teachers, but wily foxes, not raisers up of Gods
house entering in by the door, but breakers down of the wall devouring the
flock. Now how evidently the Catholic Roman Church has this ordinary
succession confirmed with miracles it partly appears by that is already
said, when as then the very Jews from Aaron to Christ could show their
lawful succession of Bishops even to Christ the true lawgiver, that state
of old being but a very figure of ours, and whereas by the Apostles doctrine,
none ought to take upon them the office of bishops, no neither king nor prince
(much less to make bishops) but he only that thereto is by ordinary vocation
called as Aaron was by God, and anointed, and invested by Moises, who first
himself by extarordinary vocation or miracle was chosen and called by God:
and whereas by very drift of reason the Church cannot visibly continue, as
Christ promised it should do, without pastors and heads to guide it and
succeed one another in the same. The Catholic Roman Churh only therefore, and
no other being that which can show this ordinary and lawful succession of
Bishops in the Apostolic Sea of Saint Peter, whose faith in them Christ
promised should never fail, must of necessity be the true Church of Christ;
and other flocks and sorts of heretics, as Protestants and Puritanes who
soever, must needs be (brag they never so much of christ and the Gospel) the
very Sinagogue of Satan, and Antichrist. For the Protestants and other
Heretics of our time, that would be accounted gospellers of christ and to have
with them only the true Church, besides the new vpstarts, be very blasphemous
in so saying as going about in effect to prove untruth in christ, as though he
failed in his promis who said his church should never decay: besides this I say
they be very obsurd, ridiculous, and foolish in their opinion; for example
would you not think him a folish painter, and very unskillful in his art, that
hired by some noble gentleman to draw his picture, after he had drawn the head
would leave out body, legs, and arms, and set only the feet where the neck
should stand to his head, Spectatum admissi risum teneatis? Every one think
you that looked thereon would they not laughe him to scorn? yes truly. Like
unto this foolish painter, be the gaye deceitful painted heretics of our
time: they brag Yea heretics (I mean) be far beneth the feet as for want of
succession being no members of Christ's mystical body the church a^ a^.
of the lord and christ the head of the church they say they teach the doctrine
the Apostles did, and forsooth that they be al one with those B. Fathers of the
Primitive church, one body in christ and his church but enquire of the^ by what
sinews and joints they be tied to the Apostles and primitive church, of what
lawful Bishops by succession, they have received their faith they can show you
none. For 1500. years together, they brag of the head, and yet be in steed of
the feet; where is the body? You see it is wanting: wherefore you see for want
of succession they have no true possession in Gods house. Wherefore those that
will come into his kingdom must fly their company Fugite de medio Babilonis
fly out of Babylon, the corpse of sin, and Satan and her confusion heretical
congregations, that you be not inuolued in her ruin and perpetual destruction.

Chap. VI. Of some other signs, and tokens of the true catholic church etc.
how without it none can be saved.
BY these four notes then of universality, antiquity, consent, and lawful
succession, if you mark them well, you may ever know the true Church, from all
other false sects, and conuenticles of infidells, and miscreant heretics;
because they be proper to no other church but only the Catholic Church. But
besides these there be many other notes of the true Church that I cannot stand
to reckon. For what faith (saving only the catholic Roman faith) has been in
every age, when it has been planted in any Country first, confirmed with so
many miracles (as in raising the dead, giving sight to the blind, making the
lame to walk, and the dumb to speak) but our Church and Catholic faith? So
that our church only I say is it and no other that has had so many blessed,
and learned fathers, and Doctors of all ages, from Christ's time to this day, as
appears by so many learned treatises, and boks, yea whole volums of theirs
written in defense of our faith and religion. As to begin with S. Dionise S.
Paul's scholar he writes most learnedly of the Hierarchies of Angels, of
their aid, and succor we receive by them, of holy rites, and ceremonies used
even at Mass this day contrary to the heretics of this time; yea we have
the very Liturgies, that is the forms and orders of sacrifices, as much to say
of saying Mass, which the Apostles namelye Saint James, used in their days as
they were taught by Christ, at his last supper; what shall I say of Policarp
and holy Ignatius, in or nere the Apostles time, the one scholar to S. John?
view their writings you shall find the catholic faith confirmed: how often, and
devoutly do S. Athanasius, S. Gregory Nazianzene, S. Basil to pray our Lady
the mother of God to assist and help them with her prayers? S. Chrysostom how
reuerentlye does he speak of the most holy and blessed Sacrament of the
Altar? no less does Saint Ambrose, most plainly writing whole books of the
same. In so much that learned Saint Hierome is ours, S. Augustine is ours, S.
Gregory the Pope, S. Bid, S. Anselme, S. Bernard, and as many as ever were
writers, or holy doctors in Gods Church, be most evident for us; he that
will but read their books and believe them, needs no more, nor new writers
for confirmation of his faith. If I would lie, yet their books being extant,
to be sold almost in every stationers, or booke-binders shoope in London can
testify the truth. If thou desire thy salvation (good brother) and perhaps
discredit my words, yet take but the pains to peruse the books of those
Blessed fathers by me named, and thou shall find my words true. These Fathers,
and many more to long for me to reck on, were most virtuous, most wise, most
grave, most learned, of the greatest authority amongst al sorts of the best me^
in their days and since, so studious of holy Scriptures, that they consumed
therein nights and days, yea their whole lives, and withal most skillful in
all other liberal sciences. They would not attempt (as heretics do now a days
new come from the grammar schools thinking the^selus great men when they can
speak a little latin and greek, yea some of them perhaps scarce good
grammar scholars) to take upon them profanely to handle the sacred book of
God, and expound rashly the holy scriptures, that book I say sealed with
seven seals, open to none but to the humble in heart, and to such as use
ordinary ways and means, as much fasting, continual prayer adjoined with good
life, especially humility and lowlines of spirit (a virtue ever wanting in
heretics) in clean and pure consciences, in which virtues, and worthy
qualities, these B. Fathers most excelled living in such abstine^ce,
co^tine^cy, watching, meditation of the law of god, both night and day; prayer
with the^ went ever before study, and study was joined with prayer; they did
not expound hard places and high mysteries of Scriptures, after their own
brayn and fantastical conceit; but by the teachig of their masters, and holy
forefathers of who^ they had received the Scriptures, especially therein
following the rule and common consent of Christ's holy Catholic Church that is
ever guided with Christ her spouse, and head, and the holy spirit ever
assisting the same church, which was the cause there was not such iarres
amongst the^ as now be amongst heretics. Far unlike be our new gospellers to
these holy Fathers, and how more securely may we well commit our selves to
God with them, than hazard our salvation with these companions? who with belly
cheer little learning, less honesty, embracing of weomen, care of children,
love of the world, and care of their own carcases being most carnal men,
yet take upon them to reveal his mysteries of the Spirit, to open Gods word,
which commonly is open to none indeed, but to those that be pure in heart, and
mind, and with humility submit their judgments under the obedience of the
holy Catholic Church; whereunto all heretics be traitors and rebels:
whether I say is it more like, if we had no more certain a mark of the true
church and teachers; that these lewd companions have the truth on their
sides; or those holy Fathers by me above named who excelled as much in virtue,
as these new Gospellers be drowned in vice? which Fathers be of such
authority, that though indeed they be always against heretics, yet the
heretic is glad, if he can but get a scrappe, or piece of a sentence, ever
wrested, and evil understood out of these holy Doctors, that may seem to
make for his purpose, though rightly understood in the samesentence,
oftentimes they be most confounded. These holy Fathers were not eloquent in
affection and inckehorne terms (as Protestants be all words, but no true, or
sound matter) but wisdom in those fathers by force joined unto their words
incomparable eloquence. See S. Chrysostom, S. Leo, S. Jerome, Lactantius, but
above all that Blessed martyr S. Ciprian, who (as many other of our holy
doctors and Catholic writers did) sealed his writings with his blood: if any
of these holy Fathers, as men, at any time did of infirmity err, they did not
maliciously and obstinatly defend it, as proud heretics do, but were always
ready to submit their doings to the ce^sure, of the Cath. church, saing with S.
Augustine. Errare possiim hereticus esse nolo; I may err (as a man) yet will I
not be an heretic, that is obstinately defending any opinion the Church
gain-sayeth. This Faith then, and Religion, and Catholic Roman Church thus
grounded on Christ her head, thus plainly known by such distinct notes of
Vniuersallity, Antiquity, Succession, and Consent, thus adorned and flourishing
with writings of so many, and so holy ancient Fathers and Doctors, thus
confirmed with miracles, thus watered and sealed with the blood of most
constant and valiant Martyrs, especially in the beginnig of the Church, whilst
the blood of Christ was yet warm in men's hearts, yea of later years too, as
there want not in England and other places, even to this day: Is there any so
blind, if he observe these notes well, but he may both know this to be the
only true Church, and true way of Salvation, or so careless of his salvation
that dare adventure his soul in any other congregation, save only the true
Church of Christ thus strengthened with so many sure bulwarks and strong
pillars? Assure your self (good sir) ignorance cannot excuse you. For this is
the city set upon a hill that cannot be hid, so evident, and so plain, that
the words of the holy Prophet Esaias may be applied unto her. Hec Isa. 35.
erit vobis directa via ita vt stulti non errent per eam. This shall be your
direct way, so that idiots, or very simple souls may not miss the same.
Where it is written to this effect, that great and less shall know God, that
is, if they will seek his ways diligently and in due time. As also in Jeremy
the thirty one. Omnes cognoscent me a minimo eorum vsque ad maximum. All shall
know me from the least of them to the greatest. And again, Adducam eos. etc
in via recta. I will bring them, or lead them in the right way and Non
impinguent in ea, and they shall not hit or stumble in it. Seek therefore to
walk (good sir) in this way the Church of Christ, if you will attain the port
of salvation, for as long as you be out of this way, you shall always be
worse entangled with brambles, and briars of sin, and blind error, and ever
further from your iourneys end the kingdom of God. As youse when a man loses
his way in the night, he is always in greater incumbraunces, and further from
the mark till he return by good guide to his way again: so it is in the
blind way of this life if we leave Christ the way of life, and his dear
spouse the church the only way of truth we be ever in greater danger till we
return back again. Come home, the night draws near, the day of payment
hieth fast on, take heed if you come short of the mariadge of Christ with his
spouse the door be not closed up, and you shut out. Hear what St. Augustine
says, whatsoever says he, a man be, or whosoever he is he cannot be saved, if
he be not in the Catholic Church, and in another place to Peter the Deaco^ he
has these fearful sayings, Though a man give never so much alms, yea shed
his blood for Christ, if he be not a member of Christ's Catholic Church he
cannot be saved. Firmissime tene says he, this hold steadfastly and doubt in
no wise, not only al Pagans, and Jews, but also heretics and Schismatikes,
that die without the unity of Christ's Catholic Church shall go into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his Augells. Neither does this
holy father St. Angustine speak these words of his own private opinion, but
founded in Gods own word as in the holy Apostle St. Paul, who says; If I
give al my goods to the poor and body to be burnt and want charity, it
profits me nothing: now unity be twixt God; (participatiuely I mean, our
own souls and neighbors) is that which makes charity in us by Gods grace,
which unity none can possibly have, that is not united to Christ, being a
member of his body the holy Catholic Church: for otherwise he is divided, so
that being out of this unity, he is not in charity, and so beingout of Gods
Catholic Church: he is out of state of Salvation; therefore right truly said
that holy father Extra ecclesiam non est salus, without the Church there is no
Salvation and that you may better perceive this reason the holy Apostle S. Paul
1. Cor. 12.
compares Christ's mystical body the church in some sort unto a natural body
wherein every member you se has his office, and function; the eye sees, the
ear hears, the hand helps the leg, and the leg carries hand, and the
whole body, every member is necessary one to the other, and every member is
ruled by the head, and receives life from the body; but divide but a member,
cut but a leg or an arm from the body, it dies you see, the reason is,
because it is not of the body; even so it is in Christ's mistical body his
spouse the holy Catholic Church whereof he our good Lord and Savior that
took upon him our servile nature for us is the true head, and for all
catholic Christians that believe as he teaches, and live in vnitiy under his
Vicar the true, and chief Pastor of our Souls, worthily frequenting his
sacraments, abstaining from all other sects in their prayers, Sacraments, and
Ceremonies, these be truly called members of his visible Catholic Church,
and receive grace, and mercy from Christ the head; yea that which is more,
because there is as we believe a commuion of Saints, every one is partaker
(according to his good disposition and due deserts) of another good prayers,
works, and actions, yea in each of the prayers, and good deeds not only of
those in earth (so we be in state of grace) but also of the merits and prayers
( Promodulo nostro) of the Blessed Saints in Heaven, as both they and we with
prayers, and good deeds help the faithful departed in that cleansing fire of
Gods justice called Purgatory: But if one be divided from this common
company of Christ's Church, either by Heresy, or Schism, as but only going
to the Church there to pray, or to be present, or pray with Heretics: then
lo, is he divided from the body of Christ the Catholic Church (for no man can
serve two Masters) and so he has not the fruit of life and grace in him, as
long as he remains so divided in that state; the reason is because being
divided, from the body he cannot have influence of grace from christ which is
the head; thereupon it comes, that what fasting, prayer, almesededs soever a
man does without Gods Church, it nothing avails to eternal salvation, the
reason is, because our works (if they be not seasoned, or imbrued with the
blood of Christ and watered with the deaw of his grace) cannot be meritorious,
nor acceptable in his sight: For by christ our lord, and head perfect God and
man, by his grace in his passion our works be meritorious, being as he is God
the principal and efficient cause of our justification, and merittes, as he is
man the mediation for our sins, and only Christ is the chief cause of our
merit, though Tit. 3. Ephesians. 1. and 2 Conc. Trid. ses. 6. cap. 7.
we once prevented with Gods grace be workmen with him to our own meritt and
salvation, and the Sacraments be instrumental causes of our justification, so
that by heresy or schism we be divided from the Church his body the^
consequently we be divided from him our head, and so void of his grace, without
which our doings be nothing till we return back to him, in becoming true
members of his body the Church. Yet in what soever state a man be, it is far
better to do virtuous actions and deeds tha^ otherwise, as by Fasting, Prayer,
Almsdeeds, and the like, because in so doing ones damnation is the less, and
because it is a disposition to better, that in the end God will power down,
more ple^tifully his grace, and bring him to perfection, who works his gifts
commonly in matter disposed, and yet first preuenteth, or disposes that a man
may so dispose himself, but yet as I said how so ever, let him work never so
much, yet if he be not in the end a member of Gods Church, he cannot be saved,
for the reasons aboue-saide. And therefore a man ought to fear nothing more,
than separation from Christ's Church, and suffer his soul rather to be
separated from his body, yea loose many lives, if he had them, than ever be
divided from Christ's Catholic Church, without which no true life of grace, nor
salvation can be found, and when a man is once within the unity of the Church,
then Celum ruat, though the world turn vp-side down, if he stick to the
rock and live accordingly to the rules thereof, he needs not be afraid, God
is of his side: he shall lay such a sure foundation of the rock, that he
needs not fear to be carried away, nor be wavering with every blast of new
doctrine. Wherefore if you desire to know the truth, to be guided with
truth, not to err from the truth, then presently become a member of Christ's
body, that you may be guided by the spirit of truth that proceeds from the
head. Let no love of the world, riches nor worldly promotions, no love of
your self, wife, kins-folkes, or children, no fear of imprisonment,
persecution, or death separate you from the knot of unity, and charity in
Christ Jesus and in his blessed and sweet spouse the Church inseparably joined
together. Then in all doubts you may be resolved to perfect quietness* in God,
in heart, and conscience. When you have thus found out, and thus joined your
self to the Catholic Church, you need not then staggar, or stand wavering
ungrounded, never resolute in your self what to believe or do, by reason of
this opinion or that, nor need not to lean upon this man or that, but upon
the infallible truth that can never fail, and without all doubt in all
perplexities say, and firmelye protest the Article of the Creed, I believe the
Holy Catholic Church. See the goodness of God in providing our salvation,
for no man unlearned, is so simple but he may do this and be saved, and none
so learned and wise, but if he exceed this limitte, trusting to himself, he
shall err and be damned. Wherefore thus we must with humility, begin to
believe, subiecting our judgment, and our reason unto Faith, and all our
repose, next to Christ in the holy Catholic Church, and then we shall
understand, otherwise we should be as wavering reeds, ^uer unconstant: for,
Nisi credideritis, non First believe, and after understand* Esaias.
intelligetis. Unless you believe sai^th God by his holy Prophet you shall not
understand, wherefore perfectelye to understand the truth, you must first
learn to believe, and follow the holy Catholic faith and Church, otherwise
you shall never be certain, nor at a-stay, if you seek for salvation. For she
ever directed with the holy Ghost (as Christ promised) is a strong fortress
for great ones, and a quiet repose for little ones, and a Nurse, and Mother for all.

Chap. VII Of the Sacraments in general.
But because perhaps you desire Understand here that in course of divinity many
things besides the Trinity, and Incarnation be taught before the Sacraments,
though in matters of controversy to speak of them now next seems fittest
for my purpose, and I call the Sacraments conduits and wel-springs, because
they being ordained by Christ, ishuing and proceeding from that open bloody side
of his on the Cross convey and confer grace to our souls, as vessels of
mercy though God himself as the fountain of life is the chief original and
principal cause of al grace.
to be informed of some more things in particular to know how this true
Catholic Church teaches us to believe, touching the high mysteries of our
faith, especially the holy Sacrameuts: First then it is to be understood, that
next after the mystery of the blessed Trinity thre^ persons of one substance,
eternity, equal power and authority, and one god from whom all good things
proceed: to whom all good things be referred; and without whom all things
be nothing, next unto this high and unspeakable mystery, as also the mystery of
the second person in godhead Christ's incarnation, which both most deep and
profound articles or points, I suppose you already believe, we be also taught
that God the author of all grace, and goodness, has of his infinite wisdom
ordained the ways and means whereby we may be pertakers of his grace, and
that chiefly by means of his Sacraments; conduits and wel-springs of grace,
which in number be seven. Which in these words of holy scripture in some sort
were foretold or insinuated unto us. Sapientia edificauit sibi domum excidit
columnas septem, that wisdom increate, that is the son of god the second
person in trinity, the eternal wisdom of his father who disposes all things
in weight, number and measure and in unspeakable wisdom but espeacially in
ordinance and government of his holy Church, has cut out Cut out that is, has
ordained or made out of himself that is by his grace. Note that this place of
holy scripture may signify many other gu^fts and graces of God besides the
Sacraments: for such is the Majesty of holy scripture that it often admits
many sen^es in one place, and al according to the spirit of God.
seven pillars, seven Sacraments, fountains, and wel-springs of grace out of
him self, that is the lively fountain of grace and the sure rock and
cornerstone, which Daniell in spirit fore-savve, that without hands was cut
out, and fell from the mountain, that filled the whole world. These
Sacraments then I say Christ ordained as vessels of his grace, and they take
virtue from that fruit of the tree of the Cross: from, and of his precious
blood and passion. For even as of our first Father Adam of a ribbe of his side
Eve was formed, whereby the world was multiplied: even so of the second Adam
Christ our Savior (a sleep by death upon the Cross, whereby we rise again
of that water and blood plentifully running out of his side, and blessed body)
the holy Sacraments of the church proceeded, as taking force and virtue
theroff. Whereby we all be regenerate and borne new men again in Christ,
whereby we be repaired, fostered and fedd in soul, and whereby we receive
here a token of Gods grace to appear with him in his glory.

Chap. VIII What a Sacrament is, of the effects of the Sacraments, and why
they were ordained.
A Sacrament then is a visible sign of an invisible grace not only signifiyng
grace as the heretics would have them like Jews, to be but only bare figures,
but these Sacraments do contein in them, and confer grace to the worthy
receiver: Though Christ is the author of his Sacraments, neither is God so
bound to his sacraments, but he can bestow his grace without them, yet because
he ordained that by means of his sacraments we a^e to obtain his grace, we
neither with contempt of them, nor without will and affection, when necessity
offers it self and just opportunity is given to receive them can be
partakers of his grace, neither is man to expostulate, or argue with God why he
uses sacraments as instruments of his grace, when as without them he can
bestow it. For God that has created man, knows in his divine wisdom the
fittest means for his reparatio^ yet some reason or conuenience of Gods
dispotion herein may be assigned. First because a man consists not only of
spirit but of body, therefore he does no^ only invisiblelye power in us his
grace, immediatlye from himself, but uses these visible, and corporal
signs of his invisible grace, and that by such means, and in such matters as
be most fit to signify the effect of his grace in us by them inwardly
wrought, as sor example; in baptism the matter of the Sacrament is water,
which as it outwardly washes the body, so the word (with the intent of the
lawful minister joined thereunto which things be required, in every
Sacrament) the soul thereby is Eccept Matrimony in some sort, where in the
consent of the parties is chiefly necessary whereunto only signs and tokens of
the parties pr^sent may suffice in persons that be mute* etc*
inwardly (with Gods grace given therein) purged, and washed from al sin.
Moreover it is the just judgment of God we be* tied to visible Sacraments to
obtain his grace, thereby to exercise our humility, and bring us in more
subjection. For whereas we not only in the fall of our first parents wherein we
al fell from God: but also daily of our selves in transgressing his
comma^dementes have, and do therein prefer our selves, mortal creatures,
yea and the things here that be earthly before God himself, and the things
that be spiritual, and heavenly; therefore it is his justice and judgment, and
yet most of sweet disposition, that we now contrary wise for our greater
humility, and obedience be tied to receive these Sacraments, under corporal
forms whereby we may be partakers of spiritual, and invisible graces. To be
brief the Sacraments depend not touching their dignity of the worthiness, or
unworthiness of the Priest, but of god eue^ good the author of the same. And
they be ordained first to the honor and glory of God and increase of grace and
as present remedies, and medicines against sin in persons well disposed* and
also as certain effectual signs, and tokens, yea and in struements, of Gods
good will, grace, and mercy toward us, moving as well both the outward and
inward man. Lastly When tho Sacraments move the outward man I mean that is but
sometimes, and accidentaliter.
they be badges os true Christian men, whereby they be not only knitte together
in Religion, and uniformity of Gods service, but also be discerned and known
from Infidels and mis-beleeuers, far more excellent than the Sacraments of
the Law of Moses, by how much the truth exceeds the shadow or figure. As
for the laudable Ceremonies, the holy Church uses in administration of the
same, they be praised by most ancient Fathers, and many of them practiced in
the Apostles time, and by experience we find stir up reverence and deuoton in
men's hearts, and therefore may not be left off for heretics scoffing, who
in so doing, not only show themselves ridiculous, but of all grave and good
men rather to be lamented, than with tauntes answered.

Chap. IX Of the holy Sacrament of Baptism, and of the necessity thereof.
Now in disposition of these Sacraments in number seven, Gods prouydence and
wisdom is chiefly declared, whereby he governs, nourish eth, and confirms
the best ordered commonweal his holy Church; for as you see in a temporal
common wealth, first for the increase thereof be required procreation of
Children: even so in Christ's commonweal the Church, is required a Spiritual
regeneration, or newe-birth, as it were of Children, whereby we be made
Christians, and heirs of God, and this is performed by the first Sacrament
which is Baptism, whereby we be all borne again in Christ. For even, as
unless we were borne of Adam we should not have original sin: even so
unless we by Baptism, (at least in will and desire be borne again in
Christ) we cannot be justified; which Sacrament is of such necessitye, that
none without it can be saved, at leastwise (if he cannot come to it) in will
and affection, or in blood with the Innocents, and this is plainly Christ's own
words, who taught us, Unless we be borne again of Mat. 28. Mar. 16. Ioh. 3.
Water and the Holy Ghost, we cannot enter into the kingdom, of God: And
therefore because it is so needful that none but in that sort as I said
before, without it can be saved; therefore see the goodness of Christ our
Savior, that did ordain the matter thereof in no other liquor, but in water
only which is common to all, and most easily may be had, and yet besides that
though none but a Priest is the ordinary minister of the Sacrament, yet if a
Priest cannot be had, rather than the Child, or Person should die without
Baptism, and so be lost for ever, god has ordained, that either Man, or
Woman, Turk, or Jew, or Heretic in time of need, when no other person can
be had, may baptize, yea and it is truly Christened, and cannot be Christened
again, so they have intent to do, that the holy Church does, and use the same
words with Water together, which the Church does, which is most easy, as, I
Baptize thee, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, Amen. And the reason why Baptism is of such necessitye, that none can
be saved without it is this, because al we by the trespass of our first
Parents Adam and Eve, are all borne in Original sin, sons of wrath and
perdition, for as I said before, we all sinned in Adams fall, as taking body of
him, which being corrupted in him who of God was, created good, but sinned of
himself as in the root, and being begotten of the same mass whereof he was the
In this place I would imitate S. Austen in his Enchiridion, and alibi.
first Father (next to God the creator man, but not of sin) we be all by Gods
just judgment borne thral to the same damnation that he was, in that he
disobeyed God, in token whereof we feel in our selves the very same infirmity
in our bodies, and minds that he incurred by sin. For such was the state of
our first Parents that were created in Original justice, that in keeping GODS
holy Commandment they should without death of body freelye have passed
without labor, and pain, through this transitorye life to everlasting life.
But as soon as man had disobaied GOD he and all his issue fell into infinite
miseries, as GOD threatened him he should do, saying if he broke his
Commandment he should dye, as being subject to the death of body and
soul: whereas before Adams fall, man's Free Will was of such valewe and force
that his body was altogether (if the fault were not in himself) through GODS
grace subject to reason, and his will. But now by loosing of that first
justice, quite contrary man's Free Will, (though not quite lost, as Heretics
lie) yet it is so much enfeebled that without Gods speaciall grace, and
assistance, it can do nothing good in his sight to the obtaining of Salvation:
Hereuppon it comes to pass that the holy Apostle complains, that he felt
a Law in his members repugnant to the Law of his mind leading him captive
and subject whether he vvoulde, not that is as much to say, a kind of
rebellion that by Adams trespass we his poor children feel in our bodies
which is concupiscence that reigns in us, and provoke us to evil
contrary to right reason, which if it be not resisted it leads us to sin
and damnation. Our good Lord then full of mercy and pittye, seeing we could
fall without him, but not rise without him, sent his only begotten son the
Second Adam to take upon him our frail nature and to be made like unto us in
all things saving sin, and some such infirmities, and defectes as do
proceed of sin.

Wherefore, that vessel of God, that most pure, immaculate, and blessed
Virgin, conceived him without sin, of the holy Ghost without knowledge of
man, which Savior though he is God, yet is he perfect man also in one person
that is Christ God and man, who because he being God, and took upon him our
nature without al spot of sin, therefore Some other causes likewise be why
christ was not subject to death of duty (except only the will and ordinance of
his father) who of his one good will gave his life for us.
he was not subject to death of duty, and necessity, which other men be for
sin. Wherefore the Devil who had all mankind subject to death for sin, yet
him he had not in that thraldom. Christ was only except, which that old wily
serpent not perfectly knowing to be Christ the wisdom of God, intrapped him
in his own snare. For the Devil envying our Savior, by his holy life, and
preaching drawing such multitudes from sin, and evil life, was afraid the
whole world would have followed him, and his kingdom have decayed. Wherefore
he stirred up his ministers the Jews to make a ready dispatch and put him to
death, which malice of the Devil and his ministers, Christ turned to the
salvation of the whole world; for whereas thereby the Devil thought to have
won many, he lost all, for putting our Savior to death unjustly he lost
those, whom he possessed before, in some sort justly.

Chap. X How necessary, and fruitful Christ's passion is to all that follow
him in patience, and good works, and how by Baptism the virtue thereof is
applied to our souls.
But you must understand though Christ died to save the whole world, yea one
drop of his precious blood (in that sort as it was ever after the Incarnation
and united to his divinity) had been, and is sufficient (if need were) for the
ransom of many worlds, yet shall his passion save none, but those only that
believe in him and keep his holy commandments, which every one by his grace
may do, for God commands nothing impossible. But to make this more plain by
a homely and familiar example. There is a poticaries shop in some City full of
medicines for all deseases, none you know be they never so sick, can be
cured, or have any benefit thereby but such as will buy, send for those
medicines, and apply them to their fores and diseases: so the passion of Christ
is sufficient for infinite worlds if need were, but effectual and profitable
to none but such as by themselves, or others apply it to their souls, by such
ways, and means as he has ordained, that is by faith* good works, and
worthy receiuyng of his Sacraments, and such like other good means. This
original sin the^ that we took all of our first parents is cleansed, and
taken away by Baptism the first and most necessary Sacrament though not most
excellent, which (as the rest of the Sacraments) does take virtue of Christ's
Passion: which sacraments (as conduite pipes, from that well of mercy the tree
of the Cross) confer grace to our souls, so we put no obstacle of our parts:
so necessary by such like means is the Passion of Christ to be aplied unto us,
that in no sort without it we can appease gods wrath for our sins nor be
saved: neither Abraham, Moises, David, Elias (if he had died) nor any of the
holy Prophets, could satisfy Gods wrath for their own sins, muchlesse for
the sins of the whole world till Christ's coming, nor since but by him, but
they all and the rest of the Saints of the old testament, and holy Fathers were
shut from the kingdom of God, and his sight in darkness, till Christ opened
by his death the gate of Salvation, descended into Hell, and delivered out
those holy Fathers, that so many thousands years there (with many heavy
sighs, and fervent desires) expected his coming for their delivery: so that
as we Christians believing the Passion of Christ, be saved by it now past, so
those before Christ's time were saved by hope and true belief in him the true
Messiah to come: yet this is the difference in salvation betwixt us since
Christ, and they before his coming, that we presently after death (if we die
in state of grace, or be not detained for a time in Purgatory to cleanse some
lesser sins, or the By reliks understand lesser defects or pain due to great
sins viz. satisfactory^ pains.
relikes of sin) do enter into the kingdom of Heaven, and enjoy the sight of
God, which they before Christ's time were they never so holy, could not
attain to, till he had opened the gate of Paradise, shut for Adams trespass,
and kept by the Angels.

Chap. XI declaring what Baptism is, and that Baptism remi^teth all sins,
and how it truly justifies us.
You see now by this that is said the state of mankind for sin, and the
necessity of Baptism to release him from sin: which Sacrament is ordained by
Christ to take away that sin, wherein especially we be conceived, and borne
of our forefathers, yea and all other sins too, if perhapes a man be not
christened till he be old, as some converted from Jews, and infidells now be.
But you will say perhapps, if this sin we take of our first Parents, by
Baptism in Christ be forgiven us, that after Baptism we are no more the sons
of Adam but of Christ, not of death but of life, why then after christning do
we feel in us, and have the same rebellion, and infirmities in our bodies
still, which proceed of old Adam, as well as those have that be not
christened? as for example we have still remaining in us that old rebellion of
our flesh with many passions, and corrupt motions be-fraught with ignorance,
forgetfulness, yea and subject to sickness and death, with many mo
inconveniences; all which defects, infirmities and the like we take of Adam and
Eve our first Parents which (if they had not trespassed and we in the^) we had
never suffered. How happens it the^ (if by Christ their, and our trespass
together is forgiven) that, as you will say, we still sustain the pain
thereunto due? I answer true it is indeed, we bear still our insirmities,
suffer still hunger, cold, shame, nakedness, and the like, which be left in us
for sin, and by God therefore justly inflicted: But that you may better know
why these still remain in us, you are to understand that in god which is al
good there be two things espeatially, that is, his mercy and justice: whose
mercy though it exceed all his works, yet we may not attribute so much to his
mercy, that we take away his justice: for so we should derogate from Gods
honor, his most pure, and simple nature, which is al good, wherein ^uer mercy
and justice be joined together. First the^ does not God show his infinite mercy
toward us, in that we ofding his Majesty which is infinite, which in no sort
could be appeased, but by the death of his only begotten son (though
otherwise if it had bin his good pleasure he could have redeemed the world) in
that I say by Baptism that takes virtue of Christ's Passion, the door of
grace in this life, and of heaven after death is opened to us, and so we be
free from everlasting death, and damnation in hell, which before Baptism we
were subject unto? does not God therein show toward us his unspeakable mercy,
making Christ pay for our sins? Yet it stands with his justice, that if
Christ our head, that paid for all, would not enter into his glory but by pains
and death, then we his members must of justice be content to suffer some thing
with him to be pertakers of the work of our redemption, and so enter with him
into his glory. For as says S. August. Qui fecit te sine te, non saluabit te
sine t^. he that made thee without thee, will not save thee without thy self.
Besides this those infirmities of concupisce^ce of our fleash and rebellion in
our minds (as long as they be but in the inferior part of our soul, that is,
when reason rules them by virtue of this holy Baptism) be so fare from
sin, that if we resist them and yield not to them they be so far from sin
(I say) that they greatly increase our merit, and be left in us to wrestle
against, that our victory may be more glorious, and our reward greater, in that
we infirm, and weak vessels of our selves, having to fight still against so
many strong enemies, as not only the world and devil, but also against the
fleash that is our selves, yet by the grace of Christ given us in Baptism, we
may overcome them all. To be brief then, Baptism is a Sacrament instituted by
Christ, whereby we be cleansed from sin, do forsake the Devil, are united
and made one body with Christ, in his holy Church, and so thereby are delivered
from everlasting death, and are made heirs of the heavenly kingdom, without
which Sacament, in deed, or in will and affection at least (that is, if a man
in no sort can possibly come unto it) none can be saved, as said our Savior:
Nisi quis natus fuerit denuo, non potest Ioh. 3. Mat. 28. Mar. 16.
videre regnum Dei. Unless a man be borne again (that is, by Baptism) he
cannot enter into the kingdom of God, and again: Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex
aqua, and spiritu Sancto, non potest intrare in regnum Dei, and again: Christ
bad his Disciples go and baptize in the name of the Father and of the, etc.
Unless a man be borne again of water and the holy Ghost, says Christ, he
cannot enter into the kingdom of God. Christ you see says, that without
water and the holy ghost we cannot be saved. The Protestants your ministers a
number of the^, teach you that christian men's children without Baptism may be
saved, wherein they be contrary to Christ, the Gospel, and the common received
says of the holy Catholic Church of all ages, who with all speed ever
hastened her children in danger of death to be baptized, knowing for certain,
that if they departed without Baptism, they should be damned, not to so great
a damnation, as those shall have, that after Baptism dye in deadly sin, but
yet those unchristened children shall be shutt from the sight of God
for-euermore, who is the full joy and delight of the soul, which is an
unspeakable loss. Whereby you see the unmerciful dealing of the heretics of
this time, who hinder poor infants from Baptism, and so utterly cast them
away. The heretics of this time, especially Protestants, I mean the Puritanes
especially, who in their opinions leave almost no Sacrament at all. This as I
remember I have hard reported of the Anabaptists.
Puritanes, and Anabaptists, have lest with them but one Sacrament, amongst
seven that is Baptism only, and yet (good Lord) how many damnable heresies
hold they about that! The * Anabaptists would have folks to be christened
often, which is against the scriptures, and as much as in them lies is to
nail Christ to the Cross again: for by Baptism we be buried with him in his
death to true mortification and once for all washed in his blood (I mean in
Baptism which can not be itterated) as once for all he died, so that I say, to
be rebaptisede is to deny that virtue of Christ's passion once given for all in
Baptism. For there is but one God as says the Apostle one Faith, one Baptism
and all Protestants and other heretics of this time commonly hold that
Baptism does not quitt us from our sins, and make us just indeed as Christ
and his Church teaches, but say, that it but raseth as it were our sins,
that they be not imputed to us, and that God as it were wincketh at them: but
yet nevertheless the blott remains in soul still which be two most damnable
opinions, the one derogating cheifely from the Passion of Christ, the other
from his honor and perfection of his work, who cleanses men's souls in deed,
by his Sacraments that they may be fit vessels, to be replenished with his
glory, and made pure in his sight, and may see him for ever.

Chap. XII Of the impiety, and abuse of heretics about Baptism.
Moreover, many (as I said be fore) of your ministers teach, that if they have
Baptism it is well, if they have it not, it is no matter, some will scarsely
sprinckle water upon the^, but make a preaching and some care not whether they
use Christ's words in Baptism or no* as for the sign of the Cross (as being
enemies indeed to the Cross of Christ, and not deserving the name of
Christians that be ashamed of Christ our Masters ensign, and banner) they
think and account it but a papisticall, and supersticious ceremony, though in
deed it is a most ancient, and Apostol^^^ tradition: neither do they show
themselves Christianes I say but rather Turkishe, and members of Satan that be
afraid, and ashamed of their Masters badge the Cross of Christ, whereby you
see how little reckoning they make of Baptism without which we be Infidells and
heathenishe Turks (as it were) be a man borne never so much of Christian
parents. For we receive our souls from God above, and not of our parents, that
which we take of our parents is a piece of fleash only, conceived and brought
out in sin in our selves (I mean) soiled with that general fault, and blott
we all take of Adam. For though our fathers sins be to their souls forgiven
by Baptism, yet in their bodies still remain the same infirmities they
contracted by original sin before Baptism, and though those infirmities
patiently borne, and resisted be not (as I said before) in our Parents sin,
but rather cause of merit, yet we being conceived of their bodies rebellious
by concupiscence, bearing Yet I mean not that concupisc^nce in the regenerate
is sin so we consent ^ot to it.
those infirmities, receive flesh, and body of them with the same infirmities
and defects in us, that they of old Adam sustained and bore before Baptism,
and so that spiritual substance, and creature, which is our soul* (being by
God newly created* and infused, or put into our bodies newlye formed, laden
with infirmities of Adam) then presentlye by GODS secret justice and iudgmente
contracteth the same original sin, and is soiled with the same blott Adam
our first father was, till it be washed away by Baptism. The heretics that
see not this, show themselves either very ignorant, or else most malicious, that
deceive the ignorante people and damn many poor souls, who because they be
borne in that sin of Adam, in some sort without their own free will,
therefore God ordained most present remedies to save them by, and that without
their own procuring (if they be infants) the matter as water, being so common,
the words so easy to be spoken, and that any reasonable person whosoever may
be minister of it when a lawful Priest cannot be had; that is I mean, in
necessity, when the child or person to be christened is in danger if death, for
otherwise it ought not in any wise, to be sent to your new Ministers to be
christened, nor Schismatike priests, nether if any Catholic Christian can be
had til you ca^ meet with a Catholic priest, t^ough the child of whomsoever
may be truly christened; nether ought to be christened again, being once
baptized, and the parents do offend, that send their children to be christened
of such woolues, unlawful ministers, which be most unfit of al christian men
to christen children, as holding and teaching so many monstrous heresies, about
that holy Sacrament, and with all so little reckoning of it, and using it so
irreverently, as scoffing at it and contemning many godly ceremonies the Church
uses in adminstratio^ of the same: which though they be not of the substance
of the Sacrament, yet be they very requisite and expedient, as well to stir up
devotion in the assistantes and bystanders, as also that the enemy may have
less power before and after to impedite any spiritual benefit the person
baptized has, or is to receive by means of Baptism, and that Satan may have
less power to possess, or infest the vessel of God. Hereuppon as says
Saint Basil, we consecrate, or bless the water of Baptism, and the holy
oil of Unction, and him also that ^^ceiueth Baptism. Finally let Godfathers
and Godmothers look well to their charge, who promise for the child, that it
shall forsake the Devil, and his works* and keep the Commandments of God
and holy Church, I assure you their charge is not small.

Chap. XIII of the holy Sacrament of Confirmation.
The next Sacrament to Baptism is Confirmation which Sacrament though not so
necessary as Baptism, yet as Aug. lib. 2. cont. lit. Petil. cap. 104.
Saint Augustine affirms it is as holy as it, and is given to those that be
baptized first by the imposition, or laying on the hands of a lawful bishope
ordinarily, and the inunction of holy Chrisme: which Sacrament as soon as
Christians can conveniently come to, they ought at their lawful Bishops hands
to desire, and receive it, otherwise they sin, and offend God grieuouslye, if
there be in them notable negligence. This Sacrament is a confirming,
strengthening, and increasing a man in Gods grace, which he before in Baptism
first recieued and God began to work in him. For thereby a man is made more
fit to overcome ghostlye temptations, is threngthned in faith and devotion,
ready to confess Christ, and fight under his banner (if need be) with shedding
of his blood, being never to death ashamed to confess his holy name, and the
Catholic faith, and truth. This Sacrament was ordained by Christ, as we be
taught by Catholic doctrine, and tradition Apostolic. This Sacrament, I say,
(as all others) took beginning by the institution of Luc. 24. These places of
Scripture many learned divines use for confirmation, where by I hinder none to
allege more apt or plain authorities for this Sacrament*
Christ, who first thus spoke to his Apostles, Sit you in the Cittye until you
be clothed with virtue from above. And afterward in the day of Penticost
he powered the holy ghost in to the hearts of his desciples: which marvelous
sending, or coming down of his holy spirit Saint Luke most divinely
describes: as also in the eight, and ninteenth chapter of the acts of the
Apostles, he writes how the Apostles did lay their hands upon those that
were baptized (in using which visible sign they were more confirmed in grace)
and after such imposition of hands, received the holy Ghost, Now lawful
Bishopps (God never leaving his Church destitute of his grace)* do that which
the Apostles did, whose place and person they sustain in giving this holy
Sacrament. The lawful minister then of this holy Sacrament of Confirmation
(ordinarely I mean) is only a Bishop, the matter thereof is mixed of Oil, and
balm which consecrated by the Bishop is called Chrisme, and the form which
the Bishope uses is I sign^ thee with the sign of the Cross, and I confirm
thee with Chrisme, or unction of health, or salvation. In the name of the
Father and of the Son, etc. This matter of Oil sanctified (where unto balm
signifieng the odoriferous sauonr of good works is adioined) is used in this
Sacrament to signify the effect thereof. For as Oil is fat and cures griefs,
aswageth pains, refreshes and strengthens the weary bodies: so the Oil of
Gods grace (plentifully powered done in man's soul in this Sacrament) aswageth
inordinat^ passions and motions, cures our defectes, strengthens and
encourages us in all godly ways, and replenisheth us with many spiritual, and
heavenly gifts, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles above alleged, that
when the people of Samaria had received Christ's faith, and were baptized
afterward the Apostles at Jerusalem sent S. Peter, and S. John to confirm
the^ in their Act. 8.
belief and Gods grace, who when they came thither prayed for the^, and when
they laid their hands upon them they received the holy Ghost (that was more
plentifully of the holy spirit of God) which imposition of hands by them,
without al doubt Divines hold was Confirmation which lawful Bishops their
Successors, and no other properlye, or ordinarelye by Christ's holy ordinance
do use, of which Sacrament likewise is mention made under the name of
imposition of hands in the 6. Chapter to the Hebrews, by which place it
appears that it cannot be itera^^d, or given to one twice, no more than
Baptism ca^. This holy sacrament thus instiuted by Christ and which was by his
Apostles with so great fruit practiced Protestants and other like heretics of
this time abolish, and quite put away, at least would make no more of it than a
bare Ceremony, or Catechism, like Sacrilegious, and most ungodly men,
accounting holy Oil consecrated by Gods holy word that blesses, and
sanctifies all things (o horrible blasphemy) no better, or fit for nothing
but to grease boots and shows. This gross term though barbarous to write*
yet woe be to heretics that are not ashamed to avouch it, giving me occasion to
speak so.
But no meruail seeing they set so little store by Baptism, as I declared
before, though they make Confirmation no Sacrament nor scarce allow it for a
Ceremony: for indeed they hau^ never a true Bishop left alive in England (which
miserable state this poor Country (alas) was not in of a thousand years
before) that can minister or give the holy Sacrament of Confirmation; for these
wolves that be thrust in true Bishops places, be so far from Bishops, that the
most of the^ be no Priests at all, and the lawful Bishops being gone and
consumed by long imprisonment and dead, these bishops (terming themselves
falsely Superintendents or Bishops) have either by simony, or sinister means
intruded themselves in there places, or else be set therein by such as have no
such power in spiritual government, but in spiritual matters ought to be
ruled themselves, as sheep by their lawful pastors and Bishopps. But (oh
England) how far art thou fallen from God, all due ecclesiastical order, and
true religion for sin? Confirmation then you see (as I have declared) is a
Sacrament, whereby as in a temporal common wealth when children to uphold and
increase it, must be borne, and to make more perfect men, and soldiers must be
strengthened, armed, and encouraged* so in this heavenly common wealth of
Christ's Church when children are borne again by Baptism they ought to be
confirmed more in grace, to make them more bold, and courageous soldiers of
Christ, by the holy Sacrament of Confirmation, that so they may fight more
valiently in Gods ways, and vanquish those Princes of darkness conquer the
world, and themselves and win an everlasting Crown.

Chap XIIII of the holy Sacrament of Penance, and of the three parts thereof,
and of the necessity thereof to all sinners after Baptism.
But as you see in a dangerous fight, a most valiant soldier may sometime take
a deadly wound, whereunto a plaster and most sovereign salve is most
needful, that so after he may fight more manfully: Even so Christ the good
physician knowing the dangerous warrefare man has here upon earth with those
most mighty enemies, the flesh, the world, and the devil, whereby sometime in
soul he may take a deadly wound; that father of mercy then, and God of all
comfort (knowing the weakness of our vessels, and taking compassion of our
infimitie) to cure our deadly wounds, has ordained a another most wholesome
Sacrament called Penance, which Saint Hierome calls Secundam tabulam post
naufragium the second table after shipwreck. For even as if in the Sea a ship
burst there is no other remedy but take some board and swim out: Eue^ so in
this troublesome Sea of this wretched world which like the Sea is always
stormy, if a man after Baptism fall again to sin (as we be all sinners, and
need the grace of God) then lo, there is no other refuge to besaued, but only
by Penance, as our Savior teaches us: Nisi penitentiam Luc. 13. verse. 3
egeritis, omnes simul peribitis. Unless you do penance you shall altogether
perish, which fall of ours by sin, as it especially consists in three
things, in Thought, Word, and Deed: So has Gods mercy ordained this
Sacrament of Penance as a remedy which consists of three parts, that is first
of Contrition of heart, in being sorrowful for our sins with full-purpose
to amend; secondly of Confession of mouth in confessing the same to a lawful
Priest as the Vicar of Christ; and thirdlye in Satisfaction of works, which
be Fasting, Prayer, Almes-deedes, and the like, which the Holy Scripture
terms fruits, or works of Penance. At this Heretics (when they cannot
answer) scoff, but we prove them by Gods word, and authority of the Holy
Catholic Church: We prove then the first part of Penance, that is Contrition
of heart, by many places of Holy Scripture, I^^l. ^.
as where we are commanded to convert, and turn our selves to GOD in Fasting,
Weeping, and Lamentation: And again, Scindite corda uestra, and non vestimenta
vestra, etc. Rent your hearts and not your garments, etc. Tolet. sum. lib. 2.
Cap. 4. and conc. Trid. sess. 14. cap. 4*


Which sorrow of heart is of such force when it is done in Charity and pure
love to God, that by virtue thereof it some-time may be so great, that man's
sins may thereby be forgiven: Whereupon Almighty God says by his holy
Prophet, Convert to me, and I will be converted to you: And again, In
quacunque hora ingemuerit peccator, etc. At what hour soever a sinner
lamenteth from the bottom of his heart I will hear him. But what need we
then says the Heretics, to confess our sins to a Preiste? I answer for
diverse causes; first because it is the ordinance of Christ in his New
Testament, who knows best how to Order, Mat. 5. 21. Christian justice, I
grant far exceeds that of the Pharisees in more things then one, which words
declare the perfection of the new testament which to get, Confession is a great
means.
Rule, and Govern his people, who tells us, Wherein is ever understood
Confession included to be made in due time.
Unless our justice exceeds that of the Scribes and Pharisees, we shall not
enter into the kingdom of GOD, etc. For a-fore Christ indeed Penance was not
a Sacrament as now it is, neither were they of the old Testament that was
before Christ bound to confess all their sins, ( Saluo meliori iudicio) to
the Priest, but compunction, inward repentance, and sorrow of heart, with
amendment and restitution for injustice done would suffice, though even then
we read that many would openly confess, yet in that state when the prophet
spoke those words, we grant that in what hour soever a sinner with due
repentance, or contrite sorrow and compunction of heart converted himself to
God, he would forgive him, yea and moreover we grant the same still now in
this law of grace since Christ that when-soeuer a man has perfect contrition,
or sorrow for his sins, they be forgiven him; but true contrition or perfect
repentance with perfect love and charity to God, can no man have but he that
has will to keep Gods Commandments, and to do that Christ has bidden:
But Christ has commanded that we confess our sins, as after I will prove by
the Gospel, and therefore no man can have perfect contrition or conversion to
God but he that is sorrowful for his sins, that as soon as he can meet, with a
lawful Priest, or in due time he will confess the^; that so Christ's ordinance
being fulfilled by means of the Priest, they may be forgiven him. But if a
man be in danger of death, or in such place that he cannot come possiblely by
any mean to confession before a Priest: then no doubt if he have perfect
contrition and sorrow for his sins, Christ the high Priest (who as I said
before is not so bound to his Sacraments but that without them he can give his
grace) gives in such time of necessitye perfect absolution from sin, yea so
great the sorrow of heart may be that both sin, yea and pain due unto sin
in this life, and in the next may be forgiven. And I doubt not but that there
be many good men that perhaps come to Confession once every week; that
before they confess to the Priest have their sins forgiven at Gods hands:
so great is their love to God, and sorrow for their sins, for that they have
offended him, that is chiefly to be be loved; yet because of Christ's
ordinance, in their contrition is always Confession included, or understood,
which was plainly signified unto us, and taught by our Savior by two
especially of his wonderful miracles: the one was when he had healed the
leapers he had them go and show themselves Luc. 17. 14.
to the Preistes, whereby we be taught, that though our sins (which be
leprosy to our souls) be already in Gods sight by perfect sorrow forgiven
yet we must show them by confession to the Priest Gods Vicar, because it is
Christ's holy ordinance, who has left that power his father gave him to his
holy Church. Again when Christ raised Lazarus, that was four days dead
(who signifies a man deeplye dead in sin) when he was alive and rose up,
having yet his hands, and feet bound, Christ bad his disciples Loose his
bands, and suffer him to go a John. 11. 44.
way. So when Christ by his grace inwardly in man's heart, has wrought sorrow,
and repentance, and so made the sinner alive again in soul (which is a
greater work of God then raising a dead man in body) he then biddes his
disciples lawful Preistes loose him by his authority left and given them,
whereby what soever is bound in earth or loosed shall be bound or loosed in
Heaven, and so let* him go freelye away loosed from the bands of sin.

Chap. XV That Confession of our sins to a lawful Priest is necessary.
BEsides this, Confession is necessary, because no man knows whether he has
true Contrition, or no, it is a thing so hard to be known: for though when a
man does that which he ca^, he may be in good hope, he is in gods grace and
favor, yet none knows certainly whether he be worthy love or hatred, now
though a man have not perfect sorrow, and contrition; yet if he be sorry he can
be no more sorry, and fullye purpose to satisfy and amend that which is past,
coming the^ with lowly Confession to the Priest, an imperfect sorrow (which
divines call attrition) by virtue of the holy Sacrament of Penance, in
Confession I speak here after the common phrase of some, who say: Ex attrito
fit quis contritus, though In rigore nun quam attritioper se fit contritio,
quorum principia sunt contraria cum vna ex timore alia vero ex amore ^riatur.
it is made and allowed before God for contrition, and so the eternal
punishment for the sin is forgiven, by virtue of the keys committed to S.
Peter, yet the Church with attrition, or imperfect sorrow, without Confession
cannot save a man, but if he should die in it so without the holy Sacrament of
Confession, yea though he had purpose to confess if he could, without doubt he
should be damned: whereby you may se of what necessity Confession is, if there
were no other reason save this. Moreover the grace of God so concurreth with
this Sacrament that sometime in Confession a man may have contrition though he
had it not before. All which and many mo important reasons show the
conueniency, and necessity of Confesion. Now this Contrition is nothing else but
an inward, and most great sorrow that a man has, that he has offended God
chiefly to be beloved above all things: whereby we may gather that it is not
true Contrition, when a man is sorye for any worldly loss, hinderance, or
shame that comes unto him, for that he has offended, neither when one
repents for fear of hell only (though the holy Church in her Sermons, and
otherwise right worthily, sets before men's eyes the pains of hell, that so
through fear of Gods judgment hard hearted sinners, may come to the perfect
love of God) neither is it true contrition when one is sorry, and amendeth for
fear of death only, or the loss of Heaven, though that fear be good, and
laudable, yet is not so perfect, but a very good disposition to perfection. For
if there were neither Death, Judgment, Hell, nor Heaven, yet we ought to be
sorry for that we have by sin lost and offended God, which above ourselves and
all things is to be beloved, and when we be sorry for that espeacially, the^
have we perfect sorrow and contrition: whereby it appears how far those be
from true contrition and conversion to God, that live a loose, and evil life,
and then in peril of death for fear thereof only, and that which follows,
seem to lament and be sorry, and not for any love to God: who cry then, Lord
Lord, and yet never do the will of that heavenly Father: which kind of men
Christ affirms shall never enter into that heavenly kingdom, for though no
man may despair at any hour when he has full will to come to God, yet S.
Aug. right worthelie doubts of those that defer their conversion to the last
hour, the reason is, because with out a rare special grace of God, such me^
the^ come to God rather for fear of death the^ love of God, and so want true
co^tritic^; yet if they can come to the Sacrament of Confession then lastly and
be sorry, they can be no more sorry, with purpose fully to amend, there is great
hope then of Salvation in the^. See then of what value Confession is whereof
mention is made, yea and the practice thereof showed thus in the 19. Chapter of
the Acts of the Apostles. Multi credentium veniebant confitentes and
annunciantes actus suos. That as many of those that believed came confessing
and showing their works. And Saint James in the fifth Chap. teaches us thus
Confitemini etc. Confess to one another your sins, whereof see but only
Venerable Bede his exposition. Many desperate sinners defer their amendment
to God desiring but one hour to be saved at last with the good thief, but one
swallow makes not a spring, the example of the thief was that no man should
despair, but the damnation of infinite thousa^ds, that defer their conversion
to God till the last hour for-warneth us not to presume to sin. For that
thief, that in the end beco^ing good was saved, sinned of ignorance perhaps
all his life, and not of malicious presumption, as those do that will come to
god when they list; nay it is his great mercy if he receive any, live they never
so well; again, the thief had so perfect co^trition and made such satisfaction
for his sin as I doubt whether any man can do the like. For his sorrow, and
repentance none doubts of, which contrite and humbled heart god will never
despise, he confessed there his sin to Christ the High Priest, and he made
thereof such satisfaction in confessing Christ upon the Cross, and reprehe^ding
the blasphemer before that multitude and the whole world, in so much that one
act of his was of more value the^ perhaps some good preacher can merit in
preaching Christ forty years together in the pulpitte. So that this thief
died a glorious Martyr. Let desperate sinners then that The opinion of some.
die in bed take heed betime they come not short of him. Now what this
Confession is, to whom it ought to be made, who or dained it, and what fruit
comes thereby I will breifely declare. First Confession is the opening of man's
fault, as well secret, as public, spiritual and corporal, with detestation of
sin above all things. Confession in holy Scripture is diverse, as
aboundantlye in the old Testament is declared, as to God, to lawful judges,
etc. But now sacrame^tal confession in this law of grace, is to a lawful
Priest, having jurisdiction siting in Christ's steed, and place, whereof says
Saint James. Confess one to another James. 5. 16.
your sins that you may be saved.

Chap. XVI Of Confession more in particular, and of some sins against the
first and second commandment.
None is bound by the law of god to confession to a priest that is Sacramental
Confession, unless he can justly accuse himself of deadly sin, that is of
the breach of any of Gods comma^dements, or unless he doubt probably, that he
has offended deadly, yet the holy Church commands once a year to recieue,
before which Confession in laymen (but much more in Priests if they find
their consciences guilty) is commonly presupposed, which unless every one
observe (unless he have some just impediment) he grievously sins: and
though a man cannot find himself guilty of deadly sin, yet of some small
sins (wherein we daily al offend and without which this life can hardlye be
led) the best may accuse themselves, and may very well confess them; and
ordinarely good men some every w^eke do confess such small sins: as light
thoughts, vain words, and the like, which be commonly called venial sins,
and whereof Christ says we shall make account at the day of judgment if we
first judge not our selves here, which though not of necessity (because
other-waies they may be forgiven) yet they may be matters of confession. But
a deadly sin if one after due discussion of his conscience can remember it
and come to a lawful Priest every one under pain of damnation is bound to
confess to a lawful Priest a deadlye sin (I say) that is, the
transgression, or breach of Gods Commandment, and it is called deadlye
because it draws to everlasting death unless we confess it in the holy
Sacrament of Penance if in any sort we can come to the Priest. Deadly sins be
many, but especially these following be called capital and principal sins
whereof all other sins proceed. Pride, Covetousness, Leachery, Gluttony,
Wrath, Yet these sins some of them especially be not always mortal, but in
some deep, or high degres.
Envy, and Sloth. Moreover false belief, infidelity, and heresy, these three
be most grievous deadly sins: likewise, witches or those that go or send to
witches, or such you call wisemen and coniurers, those offend deadly. Likewise
those that speak evil of God, our Lady, or his holy Saints, or against the
Pope Christ's vicar here in earth, or against the holy Sacraments especially the
B. Sacrifice of the Mass, those be all, or some of them sacrilegious
blasphemous sinners, and excommunicate, and cannot be forgiven without
Confession (at least in will when a Priest cannot be had) for those sins be
most deadly against the first Commandment of God, that commands no God but
one to be worshipped; as for Images, or Pictures of Christ and his holy saints
they be no more forbidden us therein than to carry the Image of our Queen in
our money or the like. God forbad all Idolatry, and worshipping of false Gods,
and unclean and false Idols, and Images; not true Images that be lively
memories of our Redemption, and virtuous personages, and therefore be called
Laymens books, as holy Fathers term them. Nay God himself (as you shall
read in holy Scripture) commanded Images to be made of Angels which were set
up in Salomons Temple 3. Reg. 6.
wherefore Christians right worthily set in their temples, the Images of Christ
and his Saints. For many a simple unlearned man knows not how Christ died
upon the Cross, but only by seeing his picture upon the Cross; therefore
heretics that have pulled it out of Churches do that which lies in them to
put Christ's Passion out of man's mind, brag they never so much in words of
the same. We then offend not against the first commandment of God that
religiouslye keep and set up holy pictures to imprint Christ's memory in our
hearts, but they that break and pull them down be impious heretics, who
therefore in general Councels many hundred years before by the consent of all
Christendom have been condemned. Who in deed be worse then old Idolators,
as worshipers of their own opinions; an Idolatry far worse then that of the
gentiles. Again great swearers, and forswearers offend deadlye and ought to
confess; for an oathe ought not to be used but in Justice and Judgment,
whereby God is called to witness. Likewise those that break their vows: as
of chastity, and the like. Let Schismatike Preistes that after their vows have
taken whoores to their concubines which they term their wives, look to this:
as for Ministers they have no damnation for marriage, which Preistes with their
so termed wives have, because they never made vow of chastity, for they (good
men) think it impossible to be chaste, whereas Cor. 7. 7. Ministers I mean so
that they would forsake their heretical ministry and become Catholics
should not sin in taking upon them honest marriage or in being married.
Saint Paul wishes all men to be so as himself that was chaste. As for
unlawful oaths, when, where, and before whomsoever they be taken, they ought
not to be kept, for they do evil in taking them, but worse in keeping them if
the matter be of importance, and unjust. As when Herod swore his daughter
should have what she asked, and she like an envious caytiffe by her mothers
suggestion asked Saint John's head. Herod did evil in swearing rashly, but he
offended worse, in keeping his oath deliberatly. * Mar. 6.


Chap. XVII. Of the rest of the Commandments, and of some sins against them
to be confessed to the Priest.
LIkewise when one goes, and as oftas he goes to the heretics Church to hear
or be present with them at service, it is a deadly sin and Schism, and a
denial of Christ which is the truth, and much more grievous a sin it is in
recieuing that wicked and most blasphemous communion of theirs, which is
heinous Idolatry, for that a man takes a piece of bread reposing therein his
salvation, contrary to Christ's holy ordinance, that left us his body and blood
in the holy Sacrament to be received which they like traitors to God and his
Church have abolished, and deceive with a piece of bakers bread the simple
people, giving it them in steed of that bread of life that came down from
heaven, whereby we all do live. So that this communion of theirs, being quite
contrary to Christ's ordinance to receive it is most horrible, and deadly
sin. And as by a worthy receiueing the blessed Sacrament a man is made one
body with christ; so to recieue their communion it makes a man one body with
Antechrist, and the devil: wherefore I cannot find, or ca^ hardly find a greater
sin than to go to the heretics Church, and receive with them. For receiving the
communion as the Diabolical Samaritanes, the ministers thereof do raise up an
Altar as it were against the true Altar of God, which God ever so abhorred and
terribly punished: so the receauers of that communion (I say) make a public
profession of the denial of the B. Body and Blood of Jesus in the holy
Eucharist, and of the catholic Faith and Religion: yea take a sign and seal
of the same, incorporating themselves thereby to the synagogue of Antechrist, and
the devil, as the worthy receauers of the B. Sacrament, be incoporate, knit,
or made one body with Christ. Likewise not to come to Mass every Sunday, and
Holyday (if a man can conveniently) is deadly Sin. So not to receive once a
year, and that about Easter, the most Blessed Sacrament, is deadly Sin.
Likewise all servile works and labors (unless a man have great need, or
that things stand in danger of loosing) be forbidden on one of those days
under pain of sin. Those that in all lawful and honest things of great
importance disobay their Parents, Masters, Kings, Princes and lawful Superiors
offend deadly. But if father or mother, master or mistres, King or prince, or
whosoever command me any unlawful thing against Gods law, or the law of the
holy Catholic Church I may then in no sort obey them, no not to die for it:
but in that case we may say with Saint Peter* when the officers, and Judges
would have had him to have broken Gods law, and to have been an obedient and
good subject (as heretics term it) to his Prince, Nay says S. Peter we
must obey Act. 5. 29
God rather than men. And yet in all lawful and honest things he exhorts,
and commands us to obaye Princes and Rulers, which we ought to do,
otherwise we offend. Moreover those that give not every one their due
(especially in a matter of importance) and oppress their tenants, or unjustly
wrong their poor neighbors offend deadly. Likewise those that unjustly kill,
by word or deed; or consent to death, or murder of others, or in any sort
procure their own or other men's* death unjustly offend deadly: though the
lawful Judge and Magistrate may cause malefactors to be executed, and if they
do it without malice, and justly, they do God good service. Likewise those
that speak, and use craft, and unjust dealing deceiving their neighbors in
great matters offend deadly. So likewise do alvserers yea though they take
but the statute, and are bound under pain of deadly sin to make
restitution, otherwise the Priest cannot give them absolution. Those likewise
be cloaked vserers that sell dearer then the market will give in ready money,
for that they forbear their money; yet if they sustain any hindraunce by
bearing their money, they may justly take so much as thereby they be hindered,
but no more. Here I lament the state of many merchants and petty fogging
lawiers, for it is very dangerous: As for Simony, as buying and selling*
spiritual benefices, and such matter; it is now so common amongst the new
Bishops and ministers, that because God takes not present vengance upon
them, but staieth for their amendment, they think it is almost no sin, but
they shall find it one day most heavy; for it is most deadly, and if ever God
send a good and Catholic time here in our Country they may chance be
called to a reckoning for their honest dealing, unless they speedely amend
and become friends, as they have been enemies to the Church, which I beseech
God they may to his glory, and their own Salvation. Likewise all fornication,
and unlawful dealing with any (save only that lawful knowledge between man
and wife) is a deadly sin, and that betwixt man and wife also ought to be in
honest sort for the avoiding of fornication, and for procreation of children,
otherwise it is sin. Here likewise all dishonest touching of our selves or
others, and all vnseemlye looks, all dishonest speches, and unlawful desires,
with a full consent of heart to that fleshly sin of leachery is forbidden, under
pain of deadlye sin, which and many other secret sins (not fit here to
be named) are rather in Confession to be forbidden than here to be opened.
But I am afraid England at this day (were it but only in such matters) is in a
miserable state for want of Confession. For young folks (alas) be not taught
what is sin, nor how to avoid it. Likewise all drunkards, gluttons,
especially those that break Lent, Fridayes, Satterdayes, Ember days, and
other Eues, and holy fasting days (if they be able to fast, or have not some
lawful impediment) commonly offend deadly, and so do all pernicious liars to
other men's hurt, slaunderes, backbiters, stealers, or unjust receauers of other
men's goods, these and many others hidden, and open finnes that I cannot stand
to reckon be deadly against Gods holy Law and Commaundiments, and must be
confessed, and that to a lawful Priest, that has Jurisdiction, and authority:
for it is not the least of those deadlye sins by me reckoned (with many mo
which time serves me not to reckon) but they deserve everlasting death. And
because the breach of Gods commandment procures death to the soul* as the
breach of the Princes commandment (in capital matters) procures death of the
body, therefore they be called deadly.

Chap. XVIII Declaring what sin is, and how griouous in the sight of God, and
how severely it is, and shall be punished for ever.
ANd that you may the better understand what sin is, and so fear God and
fly it, you shall understand that nothing displeases God, but sin which is
the breaking of his holy law and Commandments. For when God says thou shall
not do this, and then a man breaking his law, does contrary to Gods
commandment, he shows himself a disobedient subject, loving his own will
and preferring it before Gods will, and so deserves death in that he
prefers any creature or tra^sitory pleasure before God the Creator, Note
that this chief ly I mean by them which sin of malice: for many do sin only
of frailty.
who is to man's soul everlasting life: Does not (think you) that subject
justly deserve death that wishes in his heart, and does what is in him, that
his sovereign and lawful Prince were dead? Every one confesses it. Let
every one examine themselves whosoever commits any dead ly sin and (I
warrant you) secretly lurking in his heart he would wish there were no god to
give judgment against him and to punish his sin, and so as much as lies in
him goes about to pull God This seems true in every heinous mortal sin.
from his throane by committing one deadlye sin* in that he prefers the
creature before God the Creator, (so vile a thing is the fond delight of one
sin, which sin is a privation to nothing, fit for nothing but for
everlasting fire) before him who is so good who be blessed for ever. Whereupon
holy S. Chrysostom has a feaerful but most true saying. The Devil at the
last day shall challenge the sinful man arguing with God and saying. This man
is mine, for my will and precepts has he ever followed, but thy holy will and
commandments would he never obey, and therefore of thy Justice thou can not
deny me him. That man* then that offends the Majesty of God, which is
everlasting, and wishing secretly in his heart there were no God to punish him,
that so evermore he might sin, dying in the affection thereof deserves
therefore everlasting death, though it be but for one such a deadly sin, and
should no doubt therefore be punished as long as God is God; that is for ever
(because man of himself could never satisfy) but that God of his mercy has
ordained this holy Sacrament of Penance which takes virtue of Christ's Blood,
which united to his divinity, is able to appease Gods wrath: by means thereof
(I say) and not otherwise (at least in will and perfect contritio^) after
Baptism he may rise again. And that you may better believe that I say, assure
your self God so much abhors sin, that but for one sin of pride and that
but only in thought, in that the first and most beautiful Angel Esaias. 14.
said in his heart, he would be like to the highest, God spared him notnor a
number more of those noble creatures the Angels far more excellent then man,
but cast the^ down from heaven to the uttermost depth of hell without al
recovery. So ugly and unclean is sin in Gods sight, in so much that he spared
not Adam the first Genesis 3.
man but cast him out of Paradise, and all but for one deadly sin in breaking
his commandment in eating the forbidden Apple. The smart whereof al we his
pore sons feel and shall feel to the worlds end. For sin God spared not the
whole world Genesis 7.
(save eight persons) but drowned al. For sin he spared not those noble Cities
Sodom Genesis 19.
and gomorrha, but destroyed the^ with fire and brimstone: In so much that where
they stood is to this day a dead sea, or lake, in toke^ of that filthy sin of
leachery and against nature, wherein those Cities abounded, that no living
creature lives therein, nor any thing (though it bearreth iron aloft) ca^
swim but sink, the fruits that grow about it seem fair, but inwardly be
full of stinking ashes, which strainge qualities of that lake is a toke^ of
gods heavy wrath and indignation for ever more for sin. Likewise Core,
Dathan, and Abiron with all their adherents for rebellion Number. 16.
against Moses and Aaron, Priests and Prophets of God (as heretics now rebel
against the high Preistes of Christ) in detestation of that grievous sin of
division and Schism with fire that came down from heaven were destroyed, and
the earth opened and swallowed them quick to hell. For some one deadly sin we
read in holy scripture, that God has stricken some with sudden death, in
token of everlasting death, that remains for sin after this life. As that
man that committed that foul sin not to be named which nature abhors,
the Angel of god stroke him suddenly with death. Likewise Ananias and Saphira
for one sin Act. 5.
of sacrilegious covetousness, in deceiving the Apost* at a word of S. Peter
fell down dead. To be breife God has not spared most noble persons, Kingdoms,
Nations, no nor the whole world, no nor last of all his only begotten son,
but suffered him to be beaten as long as he had any drop of blood in his body,
not Esthyperbolica lo^uti^
for his own (which was most innocent) but for our sins: And may we think
(though he bear long) unless we amend and do Penance that he will spare
us? No surely: for if our Savior said to those women that at his passion
followed him and wept. O daughters of Jerusalem, Luc. 23.
weep not for me, but for your selves and children. For if they do this in the
grene wood, what shall be done in the dry? As if he should have said, if they
do this to me, if I suffer this which am without sin, the green fruitful
tree of life, and that for your sins, what should be done then with him
that being dry, void of the moisture of gods grace as a dry stick, fit for
nothing but to make a fier-brand in hell, and be punished for his own sins
for ever in torments? The consideration then no doubt of this horror of sin,
how much it displeases God, and how grievously it has been punished in this
world in all states, and shall be for ever in the next life, was the cause
that made so many blessed Saints of old to take upon them such Penance in the
willdernesse night and day: punishing them selves in this life, that they might
have perfect joy and rest in the next. Whereof said S. Augustine. Hic ure, hic
seca vt in illa die quiescam. Good Lord here burn, here cut that I may rest
at that day, so great and odious in Gods sight is one deadly sin, that had a
man done never so many good deeds before, yet if he die in that sin without
Penance, he should loose all and be damned for ever. For by one deadly sin
man does as much as lies in him to nail Christ to the Cross again, in so
much that our sins were the cause of his death. And so bewtifull is the soul
in the sight of God when it is out of sin, that Christ for example if it had
been but to have saved, and delivered your soul from sin, would have
suffered as much as be did for the whole world.

Chap. XIX. Of the great ingratitude of man to God by sin, and that there is
a difference of sins, with an exhortation to Confession, and amendment by
Penance.
O Sweet and most loving Lord Jesus, why then dare we be so boulde to offend
the? If you should se me a wreched sinful man for your sake stripped naked and
all my blood with beating running upon the flower, would you not have pity? I
am sure you would. Remember the^ that Lamb of God he that made you and gives
you life and al things, that you have thus beaten him for your sins and do
Penance for those that be past whilst you have space, and be afraid to offend
him any more, who has so dearly paid for our sins. For he is the same God
he was, and if he spared not such persons more in favor with him then we
be, no more will he us, unless we (whilst we have time) spedily amend. But you
will say, you speak of things impossible for any to keep in this life, for all
we be daily sinners, and as says S. John. 1. Ioh. 1. 8
If we say we be without sin, we deceive our selves. I grant none of us
lives without daily sins, and therefore we say daily in our Pater noster,
Dimitte nobisdebita nostra good Lord forgive us our trespasses: but you must
understand there is great difference in sins. There is a sin to death which
S. John speaks of, wherein if a 1. Ioh. 5. 16.
man continue without Penance to the end for such a one he would not have us
to pray, that is, those that continue to death in any of those deadly sins by
me before rehearsed, without amendment and penance. But from such great sins
a man by Gods grace may ever abstain, as from Theft, Murder, Whoredom,
Heresy, and the like enormous crimes. For God commands nothing impossible,
but that a man may by his grace easily keep. For otherwise God should be
unjust, that would command us things to do, and forbid us other things, and
yet in not keeping his Commandments punish us for the same, if we be not
able to keep them, which to think or speak (as heretics do) of God which is
all good and just, is most horrible blasphemy. But one other kind of sin
there is, which we call Venial sin, as a light thought, vain word, and the
like, and that deserves not damnation, nor is so grievous in Gods sight, and
in such small sins the best commonly offend, some more, some less, and as
we often and diverse ways fall therein, so be there diverse ways for our
remedy, as often saying the Pater noster with sorrow and purpose to amend,
knocking upon the breast, sprinckling our selves with Holy Water, taking
Holy-bread, giving Alms, Fasting, with many such charitable works and the
like; yet we must abstain from such little sins to, as much as we may for
fear of falling into greater; yea and Christ says: Of every Math. 12. *36.
idle word at the day of Judgment we must make account, and therefore we had
need fly all sin as much as we may, for the least sin (though it damneth
not) yet it darkeneth man's soul, hinders Gods grace and devotion, and if we
do not satisfy for it in this life, we must be purged for it in the next
(before we can attain the sight of God) in that clensing fire of purgatory,
that far exceeds all the pain and punishment in this world. But for those
great sins which be deadly, neither Pater noster* knocking, kn^eling, nor any
other ceremonies of the Church will serve without the holy Sacrament of
Penance, of which sins chiefly, our savior spoke, Unless Luc. 13. 5.
you do Penance, you shall all perish. Wherefore as I said every deadlye
sin must needs be opened in confession, with sorrow of heart and full purpose
to amend. * Which confession before a We ought to be diligent to confess all
great sins* for even as a wound not well searched to the bottom (though
outwardly ^^aled) yet corrupts the whole member, or body: so does deadly
sin by dissimulation not opened in Confession infect and destroy the whole
soul 1. Cor. 11. 13.
Priest ought to be breife, simple, plain, in humble sort, entire or whole,
sorrowful and prepared to obey. First breife it ought to be not with many
words, but necessary, accusing no body but our selves, in no sortexcusing
ourfaults, but plainly telling the truth, and no more then the truth. In
hnmble sort* remembering that what we tell to the Priest, we speak as to God:
which confession must be entire or whole, that we tell not one sin and leave
another unconfessed, but confess all, as far as our memo^y serves for God
forgiueth all or else none, and therefore as we remember them, we be bound to
confess, and then God will forgive that and the rest. And withal in
Confession every one ought to be prepared to do that is enjoined him to do by
his ghostly-father, and for so judging a man's self here in this world, a man
at the day of judgment shall not be judged. But if he will not confess himself
to one man here, the^ at the last day shall his sins before God and the whole
world be laid before him to his utter shame, confusion and endless da^natio^,
and therefore as S. Paul exhorts us. Let us judge our selves here, (that is by
humble Confession) and we shall not be judged at the last day. For God has
left a judgment seat here of mercy in his Church, before which if a man judge
himself, he shall escape that straight judgment at the last day, if first
he be losed and quit here: neither needs a man fear to confess, for the
Priest may not reveal, or disclose any thing uttered in Confession no not for
his life, nor to save or loose the whole world, and therefore if any man should
be so ungracious to utter any thing heard in Confession, besides his perpetual
infamy and shame, he should be suspended and degraded ever after from al
Preistly office and function. Wherefore none needs to fear that his
Confession shall be uttered.

Chap. XX Of whom the Sacrament of Penance was ordained and that Preist^ have
authority given them by Christ to forgive sins, and of the matter, form, and
effect of Penance.
THis Sacrament of Penance the^ (whereof lowly Confession is one chief part)
was ordained by Christ when he gave to his Church authority to bind and
loose, saying to his Apostles and Disciples and their lawefull successors to
the worlds end: Whos^ sins you forgive, they be forgiven* Ioh. 20. 23
For that he said to them he said to all as not suffering for their age
only, but for all persons in all ages to the worlds end, saying to them and
us, and the Pastors of his whole Church, Even as my father Ioh. 20*
has sent me: also I send yon. So that his power, that his father gave him,
he left to his Church, and the heads chiefly; as namely to Saint Peter, who
when he first confessed Christ to be the son of God in reward of his
glorious confession he promised him first and chiefly authority to bind and
loose sins, as appears by the very words of the Gospel, saying: Thou art
Peter, and upon this Math. 16 18. and 19.
rock^ will I build my Church, and to thee will I give the k^ies of the
kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever t^ou shall bind in earth shall be bound in
heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose in earth shall be loosed in heaven. And
then after his resurrection as appears by Saint John's gospel he performed
his promise saying to his Apostles, when he breathed upon them. Receive you
the holy Ghost. Whose Ioh. 20. 23
sins you forgive they be forgiven, and whose sins you hold they be
holden. By which plain words of Christ you se^ in both places he has given
authority to his Church to bind and loose sins, as al holy fathers upon these
places do understand. But you must understand that Priests, as they be men do
not forgive sins, but as they be the ministers of Christ, that is by his holy
word and virtue of the holy Sacrament, as you see in Baptism the Priest
speaks Gode^ word and says. I baptize thee in the name of the Father etc.
And so then by the power of Gods word, with water in that holy Sacrament, the
soul of the child is washed and cleansed from all sin. So when the humble
penitent sinner comes to the Priest, and confesses his sin, the Priest
then uses the word of God, and says: I absolve thee, and so by the power of
Gods word, and authority given him from Christ he loses the sinner from
sin. So that he which can believe his sins be forgiven him in Baptism, I see
no reason but he may as well believe his sins by Penance in confession and
absolutio^ be forgiven him. Neither ought any to doubt (as some unlearned
foolish Idiots some times do) whether Priests, and Bishops the lawful
successors of the Apostles and disciples of Christ, have full authority to
forgive sin, as they had. For even as the lawful heir upon his fathers death
has the same power and authority over his land and people (if he be a king)
that his father had: Eue^ so to the worlds end the words of the holy Prophet be
fulfilled in the Catholic Church the true inheritance and land of the living,
Pro Psalm. 44.
patribus tuis nati sunt tibi filii. To these true sons and heirs of the
Apostles in the house of God which shall continue to the worlds end be given
Apostolic power and authority to the same end which the Apostles had it: Ad
consummation Ephesians. 4. 12.
sanctorum in opus ministerii. To the edifying and perfection of the Church of
God, which shall not want her pastores and governors to the end. As therefore
God said once Increase and Genesis 1.
multiply, and all things have done so since and as he said once to his Apost.
Go teach Mat. 28. 19.
all nations baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the holy Ghost, and by those words Priests to this day have had authority
to teach and Baptize: Even so saying to his Apostles. Whose sins you forgive
they be forgiven, he gave in those words authority to lawful Priests to the
worlds end to do the same. Thus you see by the plain words of the holy
Gospel Priests have power given them to forgive sin by virtue of the
Sacrament of Penance, but they cannot know (as lawful Judges in Gods stead)
what sins to forgive, and what penance to enjoin unless the sinner confess
his sin. For no man knows the secrets of man's heart, but God alone; and
therefore that a man's sins may be forgiven he must confess the^ plainly to the
Priest. The minister then of this sacrament is a lawful Priest with
jurisdiction, the form is, I absolve thee and the matter called Remotior, or
the out ward matter belonging to this sacrament be sins, as wood is matter to
the fire: and the matter of this Sacrament called, Vicin^or, or the inward
matter, is the sorrow of the penitent, Contrition, Confession and Satisfaction,
many other things appertain to this holy Sacrament of Confession that I
cannot stand to reckon, the fruits whereof be many and unspeakable, as that
thereby we be delivered from damnation, and to us thereby is opened the gates
of Salvation, thereby follows pureness and joy of soul and heart, and to be
brief, whereas before by sin a man was the limme of the Devil, now by
Penance he is made a member of Christ, and child of Salvation. Those that be
Masters, and have charge of household and children, by experience know what
the want of Confession brings a number unto. For in times past when the
discipline of holy Church in Confession took place here in our country,
servants and children, were afraid to offend God and that for confcience-sake
did their labors as for God. Hard it was to hear of a fellon executed a
foure-score years ago at an Assise, but now a number for want of due
instruction and fear of God, make conscience of nothing, so they may escape
the halter.

Chap. XXI Of the most Blessed Sacrament and Sacrifice of Christ's Body and
Blood substantially, really, and truly upon the Altar.
THe fourth Sacrament which is in the midst of the seven Sacraments is the
most high, noble, most excellent, and worthy Sacrament, that is the Sacrament
of the Alter, and as the son in the midst of the Plannets gives light to
the other stars and plannets, and exceeds the same in glory. So the
blessed Eucharist wherein is Christ himself the fountain of all grace,
excels the other Sacraments in dignity and is far more excellent then any
other Sacrament, by how much the fountain exceeds any little river that
proceeds from it: for in this most blessed Sacrament I say is contained the
fountain and wellspring of all grace and goodness our Lord and Savior Christ
Jesus himself, his Blessed Body and Blood, who at his last supper, when he was
to depart this world, the night before his Death and Passion, devised the
ways and means according to his promise to remain with us still, leaving us
under the form or likeness of bread and wine his very Body and Blood in
perfect memory of his death and Passion. Protestants and other heretics (o
monstrous and blasphemous heresy) hold and teach you that this Sacrament is
but only a bare sign, figure, and remembrance of Christ's Body and his death.
But we most steadfastly according to Christ's words, and the gospel do hold and
believe, as sure as Gods word and the truth cannot fail, that the very self
same Body and Blood which was borne of the B, Virgin Mary and suffered death
upon the Cross, is given us in this B. Sacrament, and that it is not a bare
piece of bread, as it seems to the eye outwardly or is in the mouth by taste:
but far above reason, contrary to our sensual feeling: when the priest in
Christ's person has once spoken Christ's words over that creature which before
was bread, it is the^ wholly, really, and substa^tially turned into the very
body and blood of our redeemer christ by his mighty word, which made all
things of nothing, and to whom nothing is impossible, and this whosoever
will be saved (bark the heretics never so much to the contrary) must
steadfastly believe, for we prove it by Gods word that cannot fail, and the
Apostolic doctrine so to be. First the^ the four Evangelists be plain. The
sixth Chapter of S. John has so many plain places whereby this holy Sacrament
was promised, that I cannot have time to reckon them, as in one place Christ
there says. The bread which I will give is my flesh for the health of the
world, for my flesh is verily meat* and my blood is verily drink, and he
that eats my flesh and drinks my blood* dwells in me and I in him, and I
will raise him up again at the last day, and unless you eat the flesh of the
son of man, and drink his blood you, shall not have life in you. Lo hear no
figure or remembrance only is named as heretics say. I know not truly how our
Savior could use any plainer words: again in the other three Evangelists in
as plain Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22.
words, is mention made how our Savior instituted or ordained this holy
Sacrament, and in this manner the night before he suffered, after he had made
anend of the Paschal lamb and old Testament, he took bread blessed and gave
to his desciples saying. Take and eat for 1. Cor. 11.
this is my Body, and likewise when he had blessed the Chalice, he said. This
is my Blood. Likewise Saint Paul affirms, that that which he received of our
Lord, he^ gave to the Corinthians, for our Lord Jesus (says he) the same
night he was betrayed took bread, and giving thanks brake and gave to his
disciples saying. This is my Body which shall be betrayed or delivered up for
you, so likewise he spoke of the cup calling it his blood. And both the
Evangelists and Saint Paul do agree, that Christ bad his Apostles sacrifice or
do that which he had done in memory of his death and Passion, not to offer a
piece of bread in memory of his death and Passion, for that should be to base
and slender a memory (as the heretics your ministers be-lie the truth) but to
consecrate, sacrifice, and receive after an unbloody manner the very selfsame
body, that the day after was bloudely once for all offered on the Cross there
as a full price of our redemption, and here as a mean to make us pertakers of
that high price and ransom: there once bloudely offered, here the very self
same flesh and blood that there once bloudely was offered, but here after an
unbloody manner, not divided, or not cut in pieces (as the Jews understood,
and the heretics do blaspheme) but whole Christ, though reallye and
substanciallye here present, yet after a spiritual and divine manner that
cannot be sufficiently expressed in words: not one Christ here and other there
or in heaven, not one to day a another to morrow; but one and the self same which
was offered upon the Cross and now sits at the right hand of his father, is
daily offered up here in the Church in diverse places at once, and that by the
mighty power of his Godhead which is al in all In saying united to his sacred
Body, Videtur praeposte ra locutio. For his sacred Body is united to his
Godhead, not confounded, but knit and joined together, (o insigne miraculum)
two natures in one person
united to his sacred body, to whom nothing is impossible. We do not
substitute then, or ordeyne many There is but one Sacrifice, though daily, yea
often every day in the Catholic Church renewed by the ministry of Priests.. 1.
Cor. 11. 26.
Sacrifices of Christ as the heretics be-ly us, for so we might be injurious
to his Passion, but one and the self same sacrifice (though different in the
manner, with that upon the Cross) is daily here offered unto God; there once
bloudely, here vnbloudely by the ministrye of Preistes here in earth, to
appease Gods wrath, and renew in us the fruit of his death and Passion, wrought
by that sacrifice once all bloody upon the Cross for all. Do this that I have
done (says Christ) in memory of me, that is, you shall represet, or show by
this sacrifice the death of our Lord, as says S. Paul to his coming again.
By which words of Christ ( Do this that I have done) he gave his Apostles
and Priests authority to consecrate his Body, by virtue of his holy word: For
what did Christ? He took bread, blessed and gave to his Disciples and said.
This is my Body, and wine saying, This is my Blood. And bad them do that he
had done, that is, by power of his mighty word to consecrate his blessed
Body. So by those very words (that heretics abuse, when he said, Do this
in memory of me, to make the holy Sacrament to be but a bare figure and
remembrance of Christ) by those very words I say you see by uery reason and
as holy doctors ever understood. Christ gave authority to the Apostles, and to
all Priests and Bishopps, their lawful successors to offer up daily that pure
and vnbloodye sacrifice in consecrating his body and blood, to represent and
renew in us his death and Passion, till his coming to Judgment again. And
therefore at the holy Sacrifice of the Mass every ornament and action of the
Priest, reduces to our memory some thing Christ said or did during his life,
bitter death, and Passion.

Chap. XXII That heretics which deny Christ's body in the Sacrament euacuate
the fruits of Christ's death and Passion in men's souls, and prepare the way to
Antechrist.
THe heretics therefore that do blasphem and have abolished the holy, most
blessed, dread full, pure, and most honorable Sacrament and sacrifice of the
Mass, do as much as lies in them to put out of men's minds the Passion of
Christ, and make void in our souls the fruit thereof: wherefore they in deed
be very forerunners of Antechrist that shall deny Christ and all, and yet like
shameless and blasphemous wolves and deceivers, are not afraid to call the
high Priest of God (Christ's Vicar here in earth the Pope) Antechrist, who is
in deed the chief pillar and head of the Church here next to Christ,
spreading and vphoulding Christ's faith against Turks, Jews, Heretics, and
all Infidles throughout the whole world. But these impostors call the Vicar of
Christ Antechrist, that they Antechristians, and their Master Antechrist the
vessel of Satan when he comes may be the less suspected, and so pull down
Christianity. But Gods Church Christ's kingdom shall not fail, though we are
to fear now in the later end of the world Antechriste is near hand (as
these certainly be his forerunners) who at his coming shall raise a greater
persecution against the Church, then ever was before: For he shall deny Christ
and God, and also exalt himself above God with such false deceits and words,
that if it were possible the very elect should be deceived, and the holy and
continual sacrifice of the Mass shall in his time cease to be offered openly,
as the holy prophet Daniell foretold. What other thing then Dan. 12. Heb. 7.
12 The turks though perhaps sometimes they baue some voluntary external
superstitious sacrifice: yet no ordinarye set sacrifice-publike for as much as
ever I red or heard.
do these heretics but prepare a way for Antechrist, who denying the blessed
Mass (ordained and first said or celebrated by christ at his last supper)
would leave us never an external Sacrifice to worship God withal, like very
Turks, to whom being without external sacrifice they be most like?
Translato enim (according to the Apostles doctrine) Sacerdotio, necesse est vt
and legis translatio fiat: So that take away Preisthood, take a way sacrifice,
and so consequentlye God and all. For that by external sacrifice God is
chiefly known and worshipped, the want and honor most due unto which
sacrifice makes us (you se) so many Atheists that now a days make a scoffing
against Christ and God to: But Lord be merciful unto this Country whether is
it fallen for sin and blind heresy, the worste weed that ever was sown? To
be brief you see here how in an eleven plain places, in the four
Evangelists and Saint Paul Christ calls that most blessed Sacrament he
ordained at his last supper his very body and blood* Calvin, Beza, and the
Protestants, and other heretics of this time say it is but a figure,
shadow, or bare remembrance (In a piece of bread) of his body and blood, must
we believe Christ's and Saint Paul then, or your wise ministers and new vpstart
heretics of this time? O Christ; if I should forsake thee the everlasting
truth, and believe or follow any brainsicke heretic in the world, what
should I answer, or how durst I appear before thy face? I confess then it
is most certain and sure which thou have said of this blessed Sacrament? This
is my Body. This is my Blood. And that every heretic that says, This is a
figureof thy Body, This is a figure of thy Blood, is a most blasphemous and
impudent heretic and liar.

Chap. XXIII Wherein is declared that we ought as really, and truly to receive
his Body with our mouths to health and salvation, as Adam did eat the
forbidden apple to death and damnation.
But it is a wonder what shifts these false Prophets, the heretics have to
cover their lies under some show of truth, as though we were to eat Christ
at his Fathers right hand, and so to delude the simple: for as a learned man of
our time writes of this matter in this sort. Concerning that Calvin wills
us to go into heaven by faith, to eat Christ's body: know you not because our
nature was not able to clime up to the seat of God in heaven, therefore the
son of God came down from heaven to earth to lead and lift us up to the
fruition of his father? Know you not that because our body more quickly draws
our souls downwarde then our spirit is able to draw our body upward,
therefore Christ took not only the soul, but also the body of man, giving us in
his last supper that body of his, to the intent that our bodies (taking hold
in the Sacrament of the Alter of his body) might be carried into heaven to have
the sight of God; and because faith without the Incarnation of Christ cannot
lift up our bodies, therefore Christ fulfilled faith with truth, and having
taken of the Virgin our nature, gave his body in deed to our bodies and
souls, that we again might in body and soul be lifted up with it. It is not
then sufficient to eat Christ by faith only: but to arise again in Christ the
second Adam we must eat him in this blessed Sacrament, as reallye and verily
as our first father Adam (wherein we all fell) did eat the forbidden fruit.
The fruit of the tree forbiden entered into the mouth and damned; the fruit of
the blessed Virgin, and of the tree of the Cross must enter into our mouths
and spiritually work effect in our souls and thereby we shall be saved. For as
a man that is cast into a deep pit calls by the mean of his tongue for
help, but when a cord is let down to him, for the aid and succor of him, it
is not then sufficient to use his tongue still, and to let his hands alone:
Even so our faith called for Christ to come from heaven to help us to let
down the cord of his humanity, and of his flesh and blood, and shall we now
when it is let down to be fastened in our bodies, and in the bottom of our
hearts by eating it really, shall we now refuse it, and say we will go into
heaven by faith our selves, and there take hold of Christ, whereby we may be
saved and delivered out of the deep vale of misery? As though need were that
the cord should have been let down, if we could have fastened our bodies to
any thing in heaven, and yet our bodies are they which weigh down our souls
chiefly. Authorities to prove the undoubted truth of this most blessed
Sacrament, be almost inumerable. For if I should reckon up all holy Saints,
and blessed Fathers that have written of the truth of this B. Sacrament, I
should never make an end, S. Ambrose says, Lib. 4. de Sacram.
This bread is bread before the words of the Sacrament, but when Consecration
comes to it, of bread is made the body of Christ, and how at Mass the
Priest prays for Kings, Princes, and the people, but when he comes to the
most venerable and renowned Sacrament* then he uses not his own words (says
he) but the word of our Lord Jesus, God commanded (says he) and heaven was
made, earth was made, all creatures were made, thou see then (says he) of
what virtue the word of Christ is. If then God made things before of nothing,
that were not, how much-more able is he to make things to be that were before,
and to change them into another? As for example to make that which before was
bread and wine, by consecration his Body and Blood: and before the words of
Christ (says he) the Chalice is full of wine and water, but when the words of
Christ come thereunto, there is then the Blood that redeemed the people. All
the holy Doctors as Saint Chrysostom, Saint Cyrill, Saint Ciprian, both the
holy Gregory's, Saint Hierome, Saint Augustine, Saint Barnarde, be full of the
like testimonies for this matter, many of them recording wonderful miracles,
that have been wrought by virtue of this Sacrament: Saint Augustine amongst
De. ciu. Dei.
the rest records, how a place being troubled with evil spirits, One of
his brethren (a. religious man* that was a friar or a moncke) went and offered
there the healthful Sacrifice (as much to say as he said Mass) and so the
evil spirits were driven away. Hard you ever any such miracle wrought by
their Communion all this time? I have probably hard how the Devil has
appeared in some of their Churches of late, and in the beginning of this
Queens time when Paul's steeple was burnt, the very communion table from all
other things about it, was burnt in token of Gods wrath and indignation
against that venomous bread of theirs, whereby they poison the souls of the
simple people. In the four general Councels that S. Gregory did honor as the
fouer Gospells, you shall find the blessed Sacrament of the Altar spoken of in
most reverent sort, as called An honorable Sacrament called a most pure and
unbloody sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, a pure and undefiled host, the
lamb of God, and the like: by virtue whereof as we read in Saint Gregory's
dialogues and other holy Fathers, the deaffe have been made to hear, the
dumme to speak, the lame to walk, and many other cured of incurable diseases.
Being abused by Jews, Heretics, and Infidles, it has issued out of blood,
and sometimes bin seen with streams of glorious light proceeding from the
same, as ancient histories do record, and blessed Saints in their writings
do witness. To be breife then this blessed Sacrament and our pure and most
blessed unbloody Sacrifice, being so plainlye declared to be Christ's blessed
body and blood by Christ's own words, the holy Apostles and Evangelists and
all good men, that ever writ since Christ's time, by the general practice of
the Church, by general Counsels that cannot err (because Christ has
promised his holy spirit to assist them, and his Church in all truth) and by
so many and wonderful miracles we may firmly conclude with that holy Father
Saint Hillary, I am de carnis and sanguinis Christi veritate in hoc Sacramento
non est relictus ambigendi locus. The real presence proved by authorities of
fathers.
There is no place lef^e at all to doubt, touching the verity of Christ's body
and blood in this most holy and venerable Sacrament. But yet to satisfy
something more your godly desire, I will set down some authorities as I
find written in a famous late writer briefly collected by him touching this
matter. If every man (says he) is to be credited and ought to have authority,
in his own art and facultye, if when we build we call a Carpenter to
counsel and when we make gardens a gardener; how much more must we esteem
the Doctors of the Church, who are not only cunning by long labor bestowed
upon the science of Diuinitye; but also have so virtuously used them selves
that they have been a boundantlye instructed in all knowledge by marvelous
inspirations of the holy Ghost, whose names be so great that the very
Heretics cannot deny them to be holy Saints in Heaven and therefore they
pretend to have the first six hundred years of their sides.

It is the^ a good sure way to work with the advice of those ancient Fathers,
whose sayings because they be otherwhere (as in many books of common places
and other writters) more at large and more particularlye alleged I will here
be more breife.

First very many Fathers speaking of Christ's words or deeds (when after bread
taken and thanks given he said. This is my body) allege the Almightye power
of God to defend. The veritye of those deeds and words, therefore the same
Fathers believed those words. This is my body, to be true in so wonderful a
manner as they sound at the first sight, and seeing they mean according to
their most usual sound, that this which is pointed unto (though it seem
still bread) is not-withstandinge the substance of Christ's body, we ought to
think that those Fathers believed the real presence of Christ's body,
otherwise they would never have alleged his Godhead or Almighty power and
omnipotency for the instituting of a figure and sign of his own body: since
for the institution of signs and figures, such an authority might have served
as God gave to Moses, who was but servant to Christ and not God.

S. Ireneus says: How can they be sure Lib. 5. cap 34.
the bread whereon thanks are given, to be the body of their Lord, and the
Chalice of his blood, if they say not him to be the Son of the maker of the
world? S. Ireneus was so sure, that Christ through his Diuiue power made the
bread whereon thanks were given his own body, that if the Godhead were
denied, which should work that presence, no man could be sure of the presence
of Christ's body, and he might have been sure of a figurative presence, though
Moses had been the minister of that Sacrament and not Christ.

Saint Ciprian, that bread which our In ser. de cena Do.
Lord gave to the disciples by the omnipotency of the word was made flesh,
what needed omnipotency to be alleged, for a fact that were not supernatural?

S. Hillary speaking of the Sacrament Lib. 8. de Trin.
says: By the profession of our Lord it is truly flesh and truly blood, is
not this thing the truth? it may in deed chance not to be true to them, who
deny Jesus Christ to be true God, as who should say, if his Godhead may stand
his flesh must needs be truly present.

Saint Basil to show that these words. In reg. bre: quest. 172.
This is my body make full perswation, alleges out of Saint John, the glory
or Godhead, and also the Incarnation of Christ, because except he were both
true God and true man, This is my body, should not make full perswation, since
if he were not man he should not have a body, whereof those words might be
verified: If he were not God we might doubt how he were able to make his
word true, but seeing he is God and man, and said, This is my body, there is
no doubt of the presence of his body. de iis qui init. cap. 9. and. li. 4. De
sacra. cap. 4. and. 5. de sacer dot. lib. 3. Eusebius. hom. 5. ^n Pascha.


Saint Ambrose our Lord Jesus himself cries This is my body, he has said and
it was made.

Saint Chrysostom. O Miracle, he that sits above etc. And again, let us
every where give credit unto his words specially in the mysteries. Eusebius
Emissenus. Let the very power of him that consecrateth strengthen thee. Saint
Cirill of Alexandria seeing God works let us not ask how. Damascene, we
know no more but that the word of God is true, strengthfull, allmighty, but
the manner is vnscrutable. No wise man requires us earnestly to believe the
words which himself does think to be figurative and parabolicall, but he
rather should bidd us beware that we mistake them not, as Saint Chrysostom
In Genesis hom. 21.
upon those words ( God repented) cries out, see a gross word, not that God
repented (God forbid) but God speaks to us according to the custom of man.

Likewise Saint Augustine says in respect In John. tract. 4. Mat. 17. John. 1.
of those words ( John Baptist is Elias) Our Lord spoke figuratively, but
Saint John saying I am not Elias, answered properly.

If now these words This is my body were figurative, we should have been
warned by the watchmen of God, to beware of them, as now we are required yea
we are so required to believe them, that it is wonderful to see and to consider
how earnestly Doctors speak in Basil. in reg. q. 172. breuior.
that behalf.

The certainty of our Lords words (who said) This is my body which is given
for you, do this thing for a remembrance of me) in gender full persuasion.
Surely figurative words cannot make full persuasion, because themselves are
imperfect as lacking their proper signification, which is the chief virtue of
words, whereby they should fully inform us: for no figurative speech is so
plain as a proper speech is. Epiphanius, who so believes not In anchor.
sermon. Catech. mist. 4.
the saying to be true as him self spoke, he is fallen from grace and
salvation.

Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus, Seeing Christ him self affirms so, and says of
the bread This is my body, who hereafter may be so bold as to doubt? S. Ambrose
Our De Sacra mento lib. 4. cap. 5. in Matthew. hom. 83.
Lords Jesus him self gives witness unto us, that we take his body and blood,
ought we any thing to doubt of his fidelity as witness bearinge? S.
Chrysostom, Because our Lord said, This is my body, let us not be entangled
with no doubtfulnes, but let us be leene and see it with eyes of understanding.
Eusebius Emissenus, Let al doubtfulnes of Hom. 5. in pasch. ad Calosyrium.
infidelity depart for so much as the author of the guifte himself also is
witness of the truth, S. Cyrillus of Alexandria doubt not, whether it be true
since Christ says manifestly. This is my body, but rather take the word of
our Savior in faith for seeing he is the truth he lies not. And again, Lib.
4. 13
let us take great advantage by the sins of other men, giving steadfast faith
unto the mysteries, let us never in so high mysteries speak the word quomodo
how?

Saint Gregorius Nazianzenus: Eat In orat. 4. ^^ Pasc.
the body and drink the blood without confusion or doubt, if at the least
thou ar^ desirous of life, neither do thou with draw faith from the sayings
which concern the flesh.

The same Saint Hillary, Leo, Isichius, Theophilactus, Paschasius, and diverse
others have spoken, requiring us not to doubt of the truth of this mystery,
and that especialy because Christ's words make full persuasion, and take away all
occasion of doubting: but if they be figurative it is not so, then one may
understand this kind of figure, another that kind, one may think it is to be
a Metaphore and an other that it is Sinecdoche, the third that it is Metonimia,
the fourth that it is altogether an Allegorye or parable, and without all
ground of history; others doubt to expound this is my body as if it were said,
in this, with this, or under this or about this, my body is, yea from that day
wherein the proper and natural sense of those words was denied, I think never
any words have been more uncertain and more doubted of, then ( This is my
body) yet the Fathers were so far from this uncertainty that they counted him
an Infidel, and fallen from grace and salvation who so did not believe them
even as Christ spoke them: to wit even so as they sound at the first sight. If
the truth of Christ's body be the real substance thereof, they that
intreatinge of the Eucharist affirm the truth of his flesh must needs mean
that his substance is really present in that Sacrament whereof they speak.

S. Hillary speaking of the holy mysteries Lib. 8. d^ Trin.
says: There is left no place of doubting of the truth of flesh and blood.
Yet surely if the substance of flesh and blood were not present, not only some
place but the chief place of doubting were left.

S. Ambrose. It is the true flesh of Christ De Sacra lib. 5. cap. 1. de ieiunio
mensis sermon. 6.
which we take. Doubt you nothing at all (Says Leo) Concerning the truth of
christ's body. Be like he spoke to Catholics, for doubles the sacrame^taries
doubt so vehemently thereof, that they believe the truth of Christ's body to be
only at the right hand of his father. Isichius, He receaueth In leuit. li. 6.
Ca. 22. De ortho. side. lib. 4. Cap. 4.
by ignorance who knows not this to be the body and blood according to the
truth. Damascenus, The bread and wine is not the figure of Christ's body and
blood, God forbid, but it is the self deified body of our Lord The like
assertion Theophilact, Euthymius In. 6. Joan in 26. Math.
and diverse other fathers have.

They that name the supper of Christ a figure, a sacrament, or a remembrance
do not thereby exclude the true substance of Christ's flesh, but they mean to
show, that it is present under the sign of another thing after a mystical and
secret manner.

Saint Cyprian* The divine substance In sermon. de cena dom. lib. 8. and. de.
Trinitat.
has unspeakably infused it self in the visible Sacament Saint Hilarious, We
take in deed the flesh of his body under a mystery Lo the flesh the substance
of God is present in truth, but under a sign Cirillus Hierosolymitanus. Under
the figure Catech. Mistag.
of bread the body is given to thee; Who now knowing the Sacrament to consist
of two parts, will wonder that sometimes it is named the one and sometime of the
other? S. Augustine, The Body and Blood of Christ shall then be life to every
man, De verb. dom. Ser. 2.
if that thing which is visible received in the Sacrament be the truth it self
eaten spiritually. Behold, there is a thing in the Sacrament, and so reallye
it is there that it is visibly re^eaued, therefore it is not a spiritual thing
only (for no such matter is visiblye received) but it is there and thence it
must be eaten spiritually and in the truth it self, that is to say, it must
not only be taken in the mouth, but into the heart also, and then it shall
be life to the receiver. This thing so received in the Sacrament must needs
be the body of Christ under the form of bread, for nothing else is to be
eaten spiritually. It were too tedious to allege all that Saint Augustine
has written in this behalf, but his other words being conferred with these
will make it plain, that when soever he names it a figure, he means the
truth hidden under a figure, which is more shortly named a mystical figure.
He that alleges man's flesh, why the flesh and blood of Christ is not
seen in the mysteries, presupposed (allbeit an invisible) yet a most real
presence thereof. Fluctuantem me conuerto Aug. ^n Psalm. 98.
ad Christum, quia ipsum quero hic, and ^^ venio quomodo sine impietate
adoretur terra, sine impietate adoretur scabellum pedum eius: suscepit enim de
terra terram, quia caro terra est, and de carne MARIE carnem accepit, and quia
in ipsa carne hic ambulauit, and ipsam carnem nobis manducandam ad salutem
dedit (Nemo autem illam carnem ^anducat, nisi prius adorauerit) Inuentum est,
quemadmodum adoretur scabellum pedum Domini and non solum non peccemus
adorando, sed peccamus non adorando. Which words may be thus englished I
convert my self being in doubt to Christ, because him here I seek, and find
how without impiety the earth may be worshipped; without impiety his
foo^estoole may be worshipped: for he took earth of earth because flesh is
earth and of the flesh of MARIE he took flesh, and because he walked here in
that flesh, and gave that flesh to us to be eaten for our salvation (but no man
eats that flesh unless he first worship it) It is found out, how the
footestoole of our Lords feet may be worshipped, and not only we do not
offend in worshipping it, but we do offend in not worshipping it. S. Ambrose
says it is not seen in his own form. Vt nullus horror De sacr* lib. 4. cap.
4.
cruoris sit, et precium tamen operetur redemptionis. To the end there may be
no loathsome abhorring of raw blood, and yet the price of our redemption may
work in us: So that by his judgment the truth of blood is present to work
in us the effect of Christ's death, and yet the form of the blood is not seen
because we should not abhor it.

Theophilact. Although it seem bread to us, it changed by unspeakable
operation, because we are weak and abhor to eat raw flesh (specially the
flesh of man) and there fore it seems bread, but in deed it is flesh. If
these words can be glosed with a figure, the^ I know not what shall escape the
hands of these figure makers. They In apol. 2.
that acknowledge a change of the substance of bread into Christ's body, must
needs mean a real presence of that body whereinto the chainge is made. When
Justinius the Martyr denies us to take the things consecrated as common bread
and drink, showing also that we have learned them to be not only sanctified
in quality, but to be the flesh and blood of Christ, which is another
substance; he does us to understand that he means them not to be after
consecration the substance of common bread and wine, but to be the substance,
which Christ took of his mother, when the word was made flesh.

S. Cyprian shows the bread which Cena Domini.
our Lord gave to the Disciples to be changed not in shape but in nature,
there fore the substance is changed.

S. Ambrose, It is not that which nature De iis qui initiat. cap. 9.
formed, but that which the blessing has consecrated, if nature formed the
substance of common bread, and the words of blessing pronounced be This is my
body, it is not afterward any more the substance of bread, but of Christ's
body, grace is affirmed with the denial of nature. This argument is in manner
at large, and that of the real presence, but who so lists to see more
therein, let him read Gregorius Nissenus in oratione catechetica. Cyrillus
Hierosolymitanus in catechesi mistagogica. 4. Eusebius Emissenus in orat. 5 in
pasch. Hysichius in Cap. 6. Leuit. Theophilact, Euthymius in Euangelia.
Damasce^. lib. 4. Cap: 14.

All that affirnie the external sacrifice of Christ's body and blood must
needs teach the real presence thereof, since that thing which is absent cannot
externally be sacrifised. S. Dionisius Areopagita De Eccl. hierar. cap. 3. Luc.
22. Dial. 3.
says. The Bishop excuses himself for that he offers a Sacrifice above
his worthiness or power, crying out decently; thou O Lord said make this
thing for remembrance of me. Heretics admit no Eucharist or offerings (says
S. Ignatius in Theodorete) because they do not confess the Eucharist to be
the flesh of the Savior. A man would have thought this had bin in our time,
against the Sacramentaries, it agrees with old heretics so much.

Eusebius Pamphili: We offer a sacrifice Lib. 1. demonst. E^ang. cap. 10. Can.
18. Lib. 4. C. 32. Lib. 2. ep. 3.
full of God and dreadful, and most holy, we sacrifice after a new manner,
according to the new Testament a clean sacrisice or host Council. Nicenum, Let
us understand by faith the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the
world, being situated in that holy table to be offered up bloudely of the
Priests, and that we take indeed his precious Body and Blood, And again,
neither rule or custom has delivered that they who have no power, to offer
sacrifice should deliver the Body of Christ to them who offer. Hereof S.
Ireneus S. Ciprian S. Augustine, De ciuit. dei lib. 17. cap. 20.
and all the rest may be read, for it is a known matter handled of the fathers
most frequently. What shall Isay that the fathers teach that the Sacrament
ought to be adored with godly honor, as I showed before? That they teach that
evil me^ do receive and touch the body and blood of Christ, and thereby be
guilty of them as Judas was?

That they teach our bodies to be nourished with Christ's flesh and blood,
which cannot be nourished with a thing absent? That they teach us to be
naturally untied to Christ, whilst he dwells Chrysostom. hom. 24. in 1. Cor.
Cypr. de cena* do^.
co^porallye in us? That they affirm Christ's body to be upon the Altar, upon
the holy table, in the hands, in the mouths, and the blood to be in the cup?
That they give it such names as only may agree to the substance of Christ,
calling it Salvation, Light, Life, Lord, Christ, an Offering wholly burnt, a
Sacrament which quickneth, and makes us live for ever?

That they teach every man to receive the same substance, one measure, equal
proportion, which is true neither of spiritual, nor of corporal gifts, but
only of the flesh of Christ reallye present under the form of bread? That they
use Cyp. de ce. na dom. Hier in 26. Mat. 6 Aug: de. ci^i. li. 10 cap. 5. and in
psalm. 39. Chry: hom de prodi^. Jude.
in sheweing how it is sanctified, the verbes, creating, making, working,
consecrating, representing, or making present, and such like, which are not
verefied of a matter only spiritual or abse^t in sub sta^ce? That they speak
of it covertly saying, Nornnt fideles, The faithful know? because if they
should plainly declare the truth thereof, then Infidles would mock at it, as
now the heretics do: for it is a misterye above all reason of man? Which
scoffing were not to be feared Angli. confess. 9. ca. 13. Cypr. li. 1. ep. 9.
Aug de ciu. li 17. ca: 20.
if it were but a mere figure, for all kinds of religion have ceremonies and
figures. That they applied it to the helping of souls departed, as being the
very self same substance which ransaked hell? That they have taught it to be
truth which has succeeded in place of old figures?

That they have used by the known truth thereof to prove that Christ had true
f^eash and true blood in a visible manner, and two natures in one person,
against the old heretics? That they Ieren. li. 4. ca. 34. Theodore. in dial.
20. Ciril: Catech mistag. 4. Act. 5.
have so far preferred it before Baptism and the other Sacraments, that no
crumme might be suffered to fall down or to be lost, which was not so in
the water of Baptism, for men were Baptized in the running water of the flood?
That the Catecumeni, who were admitted to the preaching of the Gospel (which
is an excellent sign of Christ's flesh and blood) yet might not Disonise. in
Eccles. hierarch. cap. 3.
see the Euchariste: because it was also the truth it self under a sign,
that no man might eat it unless he were first baptized and kept the
commandments and yet the Cathecumeni had a sanctified bread also given to
them, which was a sign of Christ as S. August. does witness? Lib. 2. cap. 26.
de pecc. mor: et remis.
Let now the discreet reader weighe uprightly this doctrine so grounded in
holy scriptures and ancient fathers, and he shall perceive, that whatsoever
our adversaries bring for the other side it may prove the Sacrament to be a
figure which we deny not, but it cannot disprove the real presence of Christ's
body and blood under that figure, which is the thing that we stand in against
them. When Protestants to cover their heresies about the Sacrament give it
honorable terms we may say to them Lib. 8. de. Trim.
as Saint Hillarye said to the Arrians, who called Christ Lord: Dominum licet
nuncupes etc. Albeit you name him Lord Yet you mean him not to be the Lord,
because he is a Lord to you rather by a common kind and familiar name then by
nature. Even so pretend what honorable opinion or doctrine the Protestants
list of Christ's supper, yet as long as by nature and substance they think not
that external gift to be his body, which himself called so, they rather
sooth it by a better name, than mean it to be any better thing than a bare
sign or figure. Ebion although he denied Christ's Godhead, Epiphan. Her. 30.
yet (as Epiphanius tells) he affirmed him to rule Angels, and all that ever
was made by God, and his scholars called him a Prophet, and the Son of God,
which notwithstanding (for so much as they believed him not to be God by nature)
the Catholics never doubted to say, that they taught him to be Nudum hominem,
A naked bare man. Right so whatsoever holiness be annexed to bread and wine,
be it the sign of never so great a virtue and efficacy, be it never so much
called the body and blood of Christ, yet if it remain still in the former
substance: if the truth which it is appointed to signify be absent, it is
bare bread, and bare wine, and a bare token of Christ's Body and Blood. Some
signs contain the truth they signify, as a loaf set out, that bread is
there, and is to be sold; another kind of signs signify the truth absent, as
the Iuy-bushe does wine. The latter sign is a bare sign but not the first.
The Catholics say the best and richest kind of seals is in the sacrament,
because there is Christ's body really present, to signify and as it were by
seal to witness his own death and Passion. The bloody sacrifices of the old
Law did better signify Christ's Passion than Protestants bread and wine being
but a bare sign. Melchisedeche likewise had besides his bread and wine, the
real body of Abraham present who^ he offered to God, and in him Jesus Christ
his seed, and so that also far more excellent than bakers bread.

The body of Christ under the form of bread, is of it self both the thing,
and also a figure of the mystical unity of the Church. Res Sacramenti that is,
the thing of the Sacrament is the grace of God. The substance of Christ under
the form of bread is the sign. For Christ comes in his own corporal
presence to seize and to endue us with his grace. Hence it comes that S.
Augustine so often calls this Sacrament a figure, because the body it self is
here, not for it self, but to put us in possesion of so great a grace as the
union with God is. Moreover those that say the body of Christ is eaten by
faith only and no otherwise be against the Gospel, that affirmed Christ gave
his body with his own hands being present, and not at his fathers right
hand. But faith is Heb. 11.
an argument of things to be hoped for not appearing.

If in S. John spiritual eating by faith be only spoken of, why is it said
Dabo I will give? whereas sprituall eating was already given to all that ever
believed and therefore it was not to come, but the bread which Christ will give
is his flesh, and the gift thereof is to come; therefore it is more then a
spirtuall eating by faith which was both past and present.

Note that the place in S. John which Ioh. 6.
heretics take to make most for them, in very deed makes most against them.
What, says Christ, If you see the Son of man ascending, etc. Whereby is
declared the power of our Saviors Godhead, whereby only he ascended, which
if the Capharnaits and heretics would perfectly believe, they would then
never doubt of Christ's real presence in the Sacrament, which through the
omnipotency of his godhead he is able to perform. Consider also against the
heretics these figure makers, that it stands well together the Eucharist to
be a sign and the truth, as Christ is the Image of God, and yet also God, the
higher every sign or Image is the less it differs from the truth, and
therefore the figure of Christ's body and blood differs in form, but not in
substance from Christ him self, and so although the Sacrament be a figure yet
the words This is my Body) be not tropicall or improper. Hoc that is the word
This, signifies not bread but that is contained under bread Hoc facite* do
this; the making of the sacrificed substance also must needs be a Sacrifice,
not only suffering himself to be seen of those that desire him (as says S.
Chrysostom) but also to In John. hom. 45.
be touched and eaten, and teeth to be fastened in his flesh, and al to be filled
with desire of him. Besides the real presence and sacrifice Christ's body also
has a local being in us, in respect that the substance of Christ occupies
the same place, under the form of bread, which the substance of bread did
occupy before, and when we have that kind of bread in us: even so Christ's
being is local in us.

Moreover as Christ at his Incarnation came not from heaven by forsaking his
glory, but by asumpting flesh of the Virgin: so now at the time of the
Consecration his body comes not down from heaven, but the bread is changed
into his body and by that mean his body is present with us. And as after his
resurrection he ascended into heaven: so after the communion (the forms of
bread and wine being consumed) Christ ceasseth to be corporally with us, to the
end we should again desire his presence, and well know these Note well.
two chief points of our belief; the one, that the end of the conioyning
consists in spirit rather tha^ in flesh, the other, that the flesh of Christ
really eaten is the means whereby we have access to the spirit of God with
trust and confidence.

Now Christ cannot be better present in spirit and grace then if he be
present in his self, therein to convert to us his spirit and grace: for the
cause of his taking flesh, was to make his flesh an instrument to deliver his
spirit and grace to our flesh, to the end that no mean of providing for our
salvation might be omitted by so loving a father. In consideration whereof S.
Ambrose says, Thou that Lib. 6. de Sacram. Cap. 1.
take his flesh art made pertaker of his divine substance in that food Note
that the spirit and substance of God comes to us by taking Christ's flesh.

Chap. XXIIII Of the excellency of the most blessed Sacrament and in what
respect it is called a Sacrament, sign, or figure, and yet is the very thing
it self which it betokens
IT is a great glory in the profession of cookery to be able to make of one
kind of stuff (as for example of eggs alone) sixteen or twenty diverse dishes,
but to do that feate much labor, many spices and sawces, great compositions
and mixtures are required. Christ in steed of all those shifts used blessing,
and working words of thanksgiving, which were so sure to work their intent,
that some me^ have doubed whether he gave thanks first, because he foresaw
the whole purpose out of hand should be obtained as himself wished, or else
(which is more probable) whether the very working of the feate were not the
self thanksgiving for the work.

For his blessing and thanksgiving was the saying over the bread. This is my
body: and over the wine. This is my blood. By virtue of which words, his body
and blood being made of the creatures of bread and wine, as well were a
thankful sacrifice themselves to God: as Christ also in his visible form
having wrought this, did praise and thank his Father, for such an excellent
effect, the which body and blood his Apostles eating and drinking, were made
pertakers of the greatest and most excellent banquet that ever was made on
earth. For the better understanding whereof, it may please a man to repeat in
his mind how God in the beginning adorned this world. First with Angels and
heavenly spirits, secondly with the heavens themselves, thirdly with the
elements, of fire, air, water, and earth, and as the Angels occupy the
highest place, so do the heavens with the lights and stars in them occupy
the second place, and the four elements are beneath them. When things were
come after this sort, from the highest order of Seraphins to the earth, which
is the lowest element of al, the^ it pleased the wisdom of god, to make as it
were a revolt of al things and to return his creatures from the bottom of the
earth upward again toward himself: he therefore made the earth to bring forth
green grass, with all such kind of things as have animam vegetiuam, in
themselves to grow and increase, of which kind, al herbs, springs and trees
be: above those in a higher degree were birds, fishes, and beasts, which have a
life sensitive being able to move from place to place. Lastly god made man, who
has not only vegetative power and sensitive in his soul, but also reason and
understanding, in whose body are the virtues of the four elements with the
influence of the heavens, in whose soul is free will and power to govern*
agreeable to the nature of Angels and of heavenly spirits for this cause this
creature has been worthelie called, even of the Christian philosophers
Microcosmos a little world, for that he alone has in him all the degrees of
creatures, both living and with out life, both sensible and reasonable, and
therefore he is called in holy scripture. Omnis creatura, All creatures. Now
when the son of God (taking pittye that this little world, the work of his
great power was by the devil seduced) came down and took flesh of the virgin
Marye, being true God and true man in one person, at that time were al things
briefly brought again to God, whence they first were created and brought forth
Christ alone is all in one. In his Godhead he is all that is above the heavens,
and that fills the world. In his manhood which is the foote-stoole of God,
he is all that is in, or under the heavens, in this manhood are al creatures
most perfectly compiled without blemishe of nature, of mind, or of body, so
that seeing this body of Christ (wherein also all the fulness of the Godhead
dwells) is given and eaten at a banquett, there is no doubt but the same is
such a banquett, as cannot be made with all the creatures of heaven, and earth
gathered together. In this one dishe is a composition most delicate of Angels,
heavens, elements, of herbs, fishes, birds, beasts, of reasonable men and of
God himself, no kind of salett, meat, sause, fruits, confection, no *
Understand here that I mean not that any earthly thing is in the B. Sacrament
after Consecration save only the very Body and Blood of Christ, who because it
pleased him after a humane sort to convert by eating and drincking (bread and
wine and other visible creatures) into his sacred Body and Blood, therefore
though the propriety of such creatures be changed in substance, yet iuxta
aliquid, in some manner and sort they be set on that table still, but wholly
converted into the Body and Blood of Christ.
kind of wine, aqua-uitae, aqua-composita, liquors, sirrops, can be found in
nature, made by art, devised by wit, but it is all sent upon this table and
that in a small room, where it cloyeth not with the abundance, or annoyeth
with the unclean handling, it fills without lothsomenes, it provoke the
appetite without danger of surfeting: to be short were it not a banquett
provided by the son of God, no man would think it possible to have such a
feast made in the de sart of this wicked world. Thus do we catholics teach of
the supper of our lord and believe it agreeable to his word and worthy his
worshipp, this banquett feeds the whole man. There is a reasonable soul to
feed our reason, a natural substance of flesh to feed and nourish our flesh,
there is the spirit of God which quickneth both soul and flesh to life
everlasting. This is the true Manna, which contains the taste of all sweetness,
and has in it self all manner of pleasant refectio^, this is the food of
life, the which who so eats worthily shall live for ever. This is the feast
whereof Solomon speaks. Hoc itaque visum est mihi bonum Eccles. 3: 5. and 7.
etc. This therefore seems to me good that a man eat and drinck and enjoy
gladness of his labor, which words S. Aust. expounds thus. Non est bonum
homini nisi, etc. It is De ciuit. Dei li. 17. cap. 20.
not good for a man, but that which he shall eat and drinck* what more
credibly is he vnstood to say, then that which belongs to the partaking of
this table, which he himself a priest mediator of the new testament, offreth*
or gives (according to the order of Melchisedech) of his body and blood? If
then the Prophet has affirmed the greatest good that man has in this life to
be eating and drincking, and that eating and drincking be long to the supper of
our lord Christ, we may perceive right well, that the matter and substance of
Christ's supper consists not in bread and wine (for then we might not be
better occupied the^ in eating and drincking) but in the real flesh and blood
of Christ, wherein al goodness spiritual and corporal is collected into one
heap, and given unto us under the form of bread and wine, for so God has
appointed Instaurari omnia in Christo que in celis, and que in terra, etc. To
renew al things in Christ which are in the Heavens and which are in the earth
in him. Al those eatings and drinkings which were in the law of nature and in
the law of Moises in faith and spirit, are so far behind the supper of Christ
after his manhood really assu^pted, as the faith of Christ's Incarnation is
behind the Incarnation it self: mark for being deceived with falls doctrine,
Christ by his incarnation gave a real truth to the faith of the fathers and not
a new spirit: So in his last Supper he gives the same spiritual gift to us,
that he gave to Abell, Noe, Abraham, etc. but he gives us another kind of
truth than ever he gave them. The truth made by Christ is the true flesh and
blood which he took of his Mother, and the giving of that truth to be eaten,
is the giving of that flesh and blood under the forms of bread and wine.
Therefore they that now say Christ gives bread and wine with spiritual gifts
wherein our soul eats and drinks Christ's flesh and blood, they grant a
good thing one way: but another way, they take away the greatest goodness that
ever was given to man. Their spiritual eating is not evil, but it lacks some
truth, how so? Because the whole man is not fed, for faith feeds but the
soul, and yet the name of feeding is proper to the body, and thence is
transferred to the soul: that feeding therefore is not fully true, which
eats not in mouth, which it eats in heart, whereas the true supper of Christ
is meat in deed and drinck in deed, and must be the eating of that in our body
which our mind and soul does eat. The meaning of all those suppers,
sacrifices, and feasts in the old time eaten with mouth, were to show that in
time to come the same Messiah (that they looked for and in whom they believed)
should so truly come for our sakes into earth, that he should come also into
our bodies to dwell by his flesh eaten in us, that we might dwell in him. The
whole man in Paradise was overcome by eating with mouth of the forbidden
fruit. Thus then Christ cured the whole man against the Devil persuading Eve
to disobey God, he sent the Archangell Gabriell to persuade the B. virgin
Marye to consent to his will, against the Apple Tree he planted the Cross of
our redemption. For the disobedience of Adam he himself the second Adam came
to be obedient to his father, even to death. For the apple of the forbidden
tree unlawfully eaten, he gave himself the fruit, and apple of that Cross
which is the tree of grace lawfully, and needfully to be eaten and his blood
to be droncken. As therefore the apple that Adam did really eat against the
co^ma^deme^t of God, does make us all that were in his body at that time guilty
of disobedience, and the children of wrath; so the real eating of Christ's
flesh, according to the worthy eating thereof which Christ commanded, does make
us all free from the pain of everlasting death, and the children of grace and
glory. But as every man did not eat the prohibited apple in his own person and
by his own act, but by the act of our father and mother, and as being in them,
and of them: so it is not needful that every man in his own person eat the
flesh of Christ which is given us in the Sacrament to be eaten. But it is
absolutely needful that some or other eat it as really to salvation, as ever
the apple was eaten to damnation, that all the rest who by Baptism enter into
the same body, may be one perfectly with Christ, whilst they are one mystically
with the^ who really eat the substance of Christ's flesh, being the substance
of our true sacrifice, truly roasted upon the cross, and truly ^ising from
death to the intent it might be truly eaten of us without any corruption or
perishing thereof. So that the B. Sacrament of the Altar is a medicine against
that poison, which Adam first, and in him al we took by tasting the apple
against the commandment of god. It is not only profitable but necessary that
as the poisoned apple entered in at Adams mouth, and was not only received by
faith, spirit, and under standing, but by hand, tongue, and jaws, and was
digested into his bowels and poisned Understand our flesh greatly infirm and
sore infected though (as the creature of God) still good, but pestilent through
our own fault.
al his flesh whereby the flesh that we took of Ada^ was also pestilent and
poisoned, and our souls united to that infected flesh were also infected: Even
so the medicine (which is the body and blood of Christ made of bread and wine)
must not only be received by spirit, faith and understanding neither only the
figure of it must be received in at our mouths and so conuaid in to our
bowels, but the body of Christ it self must come to our bodies, and it must be
received as reallye into them by our mouths, as ever the apple came into the
mouth of Ada^ Who ever hard that when a man's body was really poisoned, it
should be sufficient to think of a certain true medicine, and to receive with
all the figure or sign thereof into his body, not at al touching and receiving
reallye the medicine it self? yet such is Caluines doctrine. But he urges how
the holy Fathers call the blessed Sacrament a figure; yea true, but not a
figure alone, or a bare figure, but such a figure as Christ is a figure of his
fathers substance, and yet his substance in deed: so the sacrament is a figure
of Christ, and yet Christ in deed: There can be no more gross or blasphemous
conceit, then to think the word of God like the word of man. Look what
odds is betwixt God and man: So much between his naming and figures of the
old testament, and all other figures But some will say, will Christ give his
body to be eaten and swallowed up of drunckeardes, whore-mongers, blasphemours,
and evil persons? Yea without doubt; for Christ thought it less evil, that
evil men should eat his body, then that his Sacraments by any our infidelity
should be made void, or the gift of his grace shoude be uncertain. But
heretics that seem to stand so much upon scripture, I would gladly here of
them, where they find in holy scripture the body of Christ in the sacrament
called a figure. Truly from the beginning of Genesis to the latter end of the
Apocalipes we find not our Lords supper termed a sign, figure, or token of
the body and blood of Christ. Christ the six of S. John. calls it the meat
which perishes not but tarrieth into life everlasting, He says his bread
which he will give is his flesh which he will give for the life of the world
He calls it the flesh and the blood of the son of man, meat in deed and
drin ke in deed, his flesh and his blood the eating of him, the bread which who
so eats shall live for ever. In S. Matthew the 26. and S. Mark 14 Chap. His
body and his blood of the new Testament. In S. Luke the 22 Chap. His body which
is given for us, and the Chalice which is the new Testament in his blood, which
is shed for us. In S. Paul the first epistle to the Corinth. and 11 Chap. The
bread which we break is the communicating of our Lords body the Chalice of
blessing which we bless is the communicating, or pertaking of Christ's blood.
The new Gospellers, that say they stick only to Gods word, yet cannot find
one Apostle, one Evangelist, one Prophet, or Patriarch that taught our Lords
supper to be a sign. S. Paul 1. Cor. 11.
threatheth damnation to him that unworthily eats it, and he calls unworthy
eating, not only the contempt thereof, or lack of faith, but even the omitting
to prove or examine him himself before he eat our Lords body, and that
because he makes no difference betwixt it and common meats: yet come the
protestants with a new doctrine, affirming that we receive not our Lords body
into our bodies, but an evident sign and token thereof. They admit no
authority, no rule, no trial of matters belonging to faith, but only the
holy Scriptures, and immediately they break their own rule. In so much as
the holy Scriptures calling the Supper of our Lord his body and blood, they
teach it to be an evident token of his body and blood, if they keep not their
own rule, who can they bind to keep the same? But the Protestants will ask
me perhaps whether the Lords Supper be not a Sacrament, if a Sacranient, then
also a sign or token, I answer they that prescribe rules of bleeuing to the
world, they that will have all things proved by the touchstone of Gods
word, they that for pretense of following the Gospel have stirred up so great
strife through all Christendom, must not talk with us with if, and and,
with conditions and peraduentures, but they must bring forth the word of God
for that they say. So that although the Supper of our Lord were never so much
a Sacrament, surely to them it were none, because they cannot prove out of the
word of God where it is so named, to us it is both a Sacrament and a
Sacrifice: a Sacrament because we are so taught by tradition from the
Apostles: a Sacrifice, because Malachie the Mal. Cap. 1.
Prophet in the person of God expressly says. In omni loco sacrificatur, and
offertur nomini meo oblatio munda, quia mag number est nomen meum in gentibus. In
every place a pure oblation is sacrificed and offered to my name, because my
name is great among the Gentiles. There is absolutely no clean and pure
oblatio^, but the sacrifice of Christ's body, and blood which was offered to
death not in every place, but without the gate of Jerusalem alone, and the
same is at this day vnbloudely offered in the Mass in every place, wheresoever
amongst the gentiles the name of God is rightly called upon. Thus both they and
we may prove the supper of our Lord to be a Sacrifice by Scripture, but that it
is a Sacrament we can prove, because our forefathers delivered such a Doctrine
to us, they cannot prove the same seeing they will not be bound to unwritten
Traditions: If they fly to the Church for naming it, it is a Sacrament, the
same Church teaches them there be seven Sacraments: but the Protestants say
they find but two sanctified and delivered by Christ and allowed of the old
fathers Ambrose and Augustine: but concerning the delivery of Sacraments by
Christ, they might have found it in the word of God. Confirmation, in the 8.
cap. of the Acts of the Apostles. Penance, John 20. Extreame-Vnction, Iac. 5.
Preisthood, Luc. 22. Matrymony, Ephesians. 5. And not only Baptism and the
Eucharist. But what talk is this to say S. Ambrose and S. Augustin^ allow the
works of Christ? Was not the delivery and consecration of Christ of sufficient
authority except Ambrose and Augustine had proved it? I thought Ambrose and
Augustine should have been allowed by Scripture, and not Scripture by them. I
stand with them upon* the authority of the word of God. Prove me thence these
two Sacraments alone; yea prove that they are so named at all, what Gospel
called Baptism a sacrament? What holy write names the Supper of our Lord a
sacrament? Da^e they give these things a name, that which is not in the word
of God? What warrant have they for that deed? They will say Ambr^se and
A^gustine call them so, I replye Peter and Paul call them not so: at other
times, and with other men I will stay upon the authority of Ambrose and
Augustine, whom (as I ought to do) I reverence for men of excellent virtue and
learning, but they were men (as they were wont to say) they might err, and be
deceived; hear first the Scriptures to whom Protestants appeal only, and
afterward you shall hear what the Fathers say. But first I say that neither
the old Testament, nor the new calls the Supper of our Lord a Sacrament,
therefore the Protestants that so call it, go from the assurance of the word
of God to the good and laudable inventions and Traditions of men, which
themselves condemn when they list. And yet they so call it a Sacrament, that
upon that only word the authors thereof ground all their doctrine: thence it
has to be a sign, to be a toke^, to be a badge, a seal, a pattern, a
counterpaine: thence all the figurative doctrine rises* thence it comes that
the real body and blood of Christ is denied to be under the forms of bread
and wine. Shall now so much as Christ has plainlye spoken of his body and
blood, so much as his Apostles and disciples have preached and written in that
behaulf, shall now all this be overthrown by an unwritten veritye? are these
the men of God who fly from S. Matthew, S. Mark, S. Luke, Saint John, Saint
Paul, to Augustine and Ambrose? If none but Prophets and Apostles had written,
where had they found two Sacraments? Where had they read, that the supper of
our Lord is a sign and token, they make much a-doe about the word of God,
until they have gotten credit among the ignorant, and then they quite lead
them from all the word of God: I speak to such good Christians as have the
true love of the word of God left in their hearts, to them I speak, give
not over S. Matthew, S. John, Saint Paul for Ambrose and Augustine, give not
over Christ who is God and man to have the opinion of whatsoever Doctor, and
Father in causes of belief. Some men in comparison of others be of great
authority, but in comparison of God all men be nothing at al: God says, This
is my body, now whatsoever man or Angel from heaven tell you this is not the
body of Christ, but only a figure of it, believe him not, but let him be
accursed to you. Shall we not be well occupied if we leave the plain word
of God, to come and see whether* Ambrose and Augustine teach two Sacraments or
more? Saint Paul teaches Matrimonye to be a Sacrament and shall we go from
him to Ambrose and Augustine to se whether it be one or no? was ever such a
practice heard of as to brag of Scriptures, to bost of holy writ, to cry
upon us for coming to the word of God, and now that we are comen thither, to
call us from all Prophets, and Apostles, yea from Christ himself to Ambrose
and Augustine? is this the way to the holy Scriptures? can this fault be
excused? can this hypocrisy be tolerated?

To win the itching ears of the inconstant multitude, to get them the
applause of licentious libertines in the pulpit they call to the word of God,
and when they have gotten them within their netts they teach them out of
Ambrose and Augustine, yea would God they did so at the least: but what if we
prove they deceive the people, in fathering that upon Ambrose and Augustine
which they never wrote nor taught?

The Protestants say, Saint Augustme names but two sacraments, but besides
twain I will bring other two named of him as plainly as possibly may be in
his book de bono coniugali Cap. 24. these be his words, The good (says S.
Augustine) which rises of marriage through all nations and men, consists in
the cause of begetting children, and in the faith of chastity. And in so much
as appertains to the people of God, it consists also in the holnes of the
Sacrament, through which it is unlawful (yea though divorce come between) to
mary an other whilst her husband lives, not so much as for the very cause of
bringing forth of children. Which though alone it be the cause why marriages
are made, yet band of marriage is not loosed (unless the husband dye) albeit
that thing follow not for the which marriage is made. Much-like as if to bring
the people together some of the Clergy should be ordered or consecrated with
holy orders. for although the meeting of the people do not ensue, Yet
Sacramentum ordinationis, the Sacrament of giving orders, abides in them that
be ordered, and if for any fault any man be removed from the office he shall
not lack the Sacrament of our Lord which is once put upon him, although it
remame to his damnation. Thus far S. Augustione in which words he declares
that among Christian men there are other two Sacraments of Preisthood and of
Matrimony, beside Baptism and the Euchraist, and each of them so great and so
strong, that they cannot be loosed and taken away, but only by death of the
party, although the chiefest cause cease why the Sacrament was given. In
another place. S. Augustine Cont. Donat. Lib. 5. Cap. 2. speaks plainly of
the water of Baptism, Oil, the Eucharist and the Imposition of hands, al
signed with the seal of the Cross.

S. Ambroso likewise confesses more Sacraments then Baptism and the Fucharist
lib. 1 de penitentia cap. 7. these be his words, Cur baptizaris, si per
hominem peccata dimittinon licot. etc. why art thou Baptized, if it be not
lawful sins to be forgiveness by man? truly in Baptism there is forgiveness of
all sin: what skilleth it whether Priests challenge this right of forgiving
sins to be given them by Penance, or by Baptism, the mystery or Sacrament is
one in both? But thou will say that in Baptism the grace of the mysteries
works; what in Penance does not the grace of God work? Here is the same
virtue and name of a mystery or Sacrament given to Penance which is given to
Baptism, whereby Saint Ambrose taught there was as well a Sacrament of
Penance as of Baptism.

These few placeshaue I brought out of S. Ambrose and Augustine to show as it
were to your eyes (if you will not be wilfully blinded) how the Protestants
cry out upon the word of God, till they have with sweet words won favor
among the miserable number of these unstable men, that always harken for
news, but when they have them fast, then is the word of God clean forgotten,
and in stead thereof Ambrose and Augustine are (I am urged to speak it)
falselye alleged. For the truth is they that set naught by the word of God
cannot long esteem Ambrose and Augustine, who with all their hearts embraced the
word of God, and expounded the same according to the ancient Tradition of the
Church.

To what end then do our new masters run? truly to set up an Idol of their
own making, in place of the word of God, to set up (I say) a fantastical
religion of their own devising. But if they should cry to the people come
come, bow down to the I doll that we have devised for you, the people would
not come as being feared with the infamous name of an Idol, therefore they
say come to the word of God, come to the holy Scriptures, come to the true
Gospel of Jesus Christ: they say exceeding well, you see we are come, and it
quit^ has and will overthrow them. S. Dionisius and Hierotheus disciples of
Christ* Dionis. de Hierarch. ^ccle. cap. 3.
and S. Paul call the Eucharist the sacrament of Sacraments, which they never
would if there had been no more but two. See S. Dionis: Chap. 4. 5. 6. D^
Ecclesiast. Hierarch. how he teaches more Sacraments. But to return to my
purpose I will not omit to open one subtle shift of the heretic, whereby like a
bugge or fox with a man's visard of his face, he often deceives the simple, and
vnwarye with fair blessings and gaye terms, which unlearned men cannot judge
of nor descerne* He will tell you their communion is a holy sacrament, and that
thereby you ^ate Christ as he sitts at his fathers right hand in faith and
spirit, and that you must ^ate that heavenly bread (sorsooth) that they give
you as the body and blood of Christ, and then no doubt you receive Christ and
the like. But ask the heretic whether that bread he gives to the people be
the very body of Christ or no, and that properly it can be no more called bread
in that it is called transubstantiate, and verily turned into the very body and
blood of Christ in deed, and then you shall perceive the fox pull of his mask
and show his ears, as I hard of a good fellow a minister did, who giving to a
gentleman bread from their communion table and said. The body of our Lord
Jesus: etc.* by chance he let a piece fall, the gentleman esteeming it to be
some holy thing above other bread sanctified by Gods word, would have taken it
up again: no no said the minister Sir let it alone, here is more enough, yea
said the gentleman is it not worth the taking up? truly quoth he^ then none of
it at all shall come into my belly, and so malecontent went his way. This
minister you see in his action declared what their communion bread is, nothing
but bare bakers bread in deed speak they never so gloriouslye of it to
deceive the simple and so bad that it is not worth the taking up, vvheras I
have proved to you before by most sure authority that the Blessed Sacrament
that Christ left us is no more bread, but his very body and blood in deed.

But they say you must receive it in faith and spirit, how in faith and spirit?
they speak a thing that neither they themselus nor any man else understands,
for to say the truth, there Communion is such a minion, that they know not what
to define or make of it, or what to affirm such is the blindness of heretics,
when they have once lost the high way: for was there ever any that hard how a
man could eat Christ in a piece of bread and nothing but bread? or may we
think them so strong in faith and spirit, that with S. Paul they be always
ravished when they come to their comunio^ to the third heaven, that so they may
^ate Christ at his fathers right hand? but these slender ^uasio^s be shifts
for simple babes and over childishe* (saving that they want not malice) to be
answered. Truth it is the holy Catholic Church teaches two kinds of
receiving, the one is Sacramental, that is, when we receive the body and blood
of Christ, not with heart only and earnest desire, but also really, truly, and
substantially in the B. Sacrament Christ god and man, which every christian is
bound to do at due times when he can come to it. Another manner of receiving is
with spirit and fervent desire, when a man cannot or is not prepared
sacramentally to receive, and of this kind of receiving S. Aust. says* Creed
and manducasti believe and thou have eaten. Now heretics confound both these
ma^ners of receiving sacramental and spiritual together, so that when the holy
Fathers speak of spiritual receiving by Christian charitable faith and
desire, which every good christian man as often as he think eth of this B.
Sacrament, or is present at it, ought to have, that so more and more he may be
fast lincked, united, and incorporate with Christ, then do they either
ignorantlye or maliciouslye understand, and pervert the holy Fathers, as
though they speak of Sacramental receiving, and so in brabling of receiving
Christ by faith alone, would exclude him out of the holy Sacrament contrary to
his institution, and so in that Sacrament by denying of Christ wherein our
faith is chiefly excercised, they lost both Christ therein, yea faith,
devotion, religion and all.

But the holy Fathers, which heretics seldom read, or if they do little
understand or not believe them, when these blessed men (I say) spoke of
spiritual receiving, as often they do, they not only teach us the great and
steadfast faith, and earnest desire, we ought to have to this blessed Sacrament,
but the due preparation we ought to make worthily to receive the same, which is
by innocent life and pure conscience, remaining in Christ by fervent love and
charity, which is spiritually to receive Christ, that so he may remain in us
and we in him, and with this preparation, if a man could not come to receive
sacrame^tally the blessed Sacrament all the days of his life, yet no doubt he
should be saved, for that thus spiritually he eats Christ. In like manner the
holy Doctors (namely Saint Augustine) term this B Sacrament a sign or figure
which we deny not, for every Sacrament is a figure of sign, otherwise it could
not be a Sacrament, but in that the heretics call it a bare sign as it were,
or an only figure and sign, that by the holy Fathers doctrine we utterly
deny, and by Gods word prove the contrary. For the Sacrament of the Altar is
both a sign or figure, and yet the thing it self also which it signifies, or
figureth: as for example you see a loaf of bread stand before the bakers shopp
to be sold, it is both a sign that bread is there to be sold, and yet very
bread it self: so the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, is a sign of Christ's
body, and yet his very body it self. How a sign of Christ's body, will you
say? Marry a figure and sign of Christ's body, dead, broken, crucified, in an
other quality, then we receive him in the blessed Sacrament. For in the blessed
Sacrament we receive Christ's body, though a very true and natural body:
yet not subject to those alterations and qualities our bodies be: and therefore
we receive him with all (if I might so term it which is verelie natural) a
supernatural body, an impassible body, a glorified body, though in very
deed before his Passion also he gave to his Disciples the very same body we
now in the same Sacrament receive, giving his own body in his own hands to
his Disciples by his mighty divine power united to that body, to which power
nothing is impossible. So that (as says a late famous writer) we verily teach
and beleene the figure and the truth to stand together; the supper of our Lord
to be the sign of Christ's body, and to be his own body; the weaker part
is the sign, the greater is the truth: but both does not only stand together
in one Sacrament, but furthermore the true nature of every Sacrament of Christ
is to have both, that is to say to have one certain truth and one certain
sign of the same truth, the truth is hidden under the sign, the sign is
witness of the truth, which once being declared you shall se the vain
doctrine of the Protestants. The signs and miracles Christ wrought outwardly,
were tokens of his Godhead hidden from our eyes, likewise the supper of Christ,
is both a sign of his body and also his true body; a sign outwardly and the
true body inwardly: a sign by the sound of words when it is first made, and a
truth by the inward working of the holy Ghost by consecration. So that Christ
(intending to leave certain holy mysteries un to his Church, thereby to convey
unto her the fruit of his Passion and death, as well for regard of his own
self in whose person two natures were united, as for regard of us who consist
of body and soul) made the said holy Sacraments to be of a double sort and
nature, so that the one part thereof might appear to the senses, the other
should lie priuye and only be seen by faith. Saint Chrysostom in an Homely
of the treason of Judas says, Sacerdotis ore etc. that is, The words are
spoken with the Priests mouth, and by the virtue and grace of God the things
set before our eyes are consecrated. This is (says he) my Body, by this word
the things proposed be consecrated. It is to be noted, that how many Fathers
soever call the Sacrament a Figure, yet none of them all teaches these words,
This is my Body, and This is my Blood to be words figurative: For when* they
call it a Figure, they mean not a Figure of Rhetoric, but a mystical
Figure, and calling it a sign, they mean not a natural sign or token, but a
mystical sign, that is to say, a secret, and miraculous kind or token, such
as the state of the new Testament requires, the nature whereof, is to do
that which it says, because Christ the speaker, performs all that by his
divine power and substance, which his word (spoken by the mouth of his
manhood) in holy Sacraments does utter and signify. Now he that would the
Sacrament of Christ so to be a sign, that he should not make that thing to be
his Body in deed, whereof in word he says, This is my Body, he most wickedly
denies the godhead of Christ. This blessed Sacrament of the Altar is such a
sign, as is withal a secret miracle, for it is a miracle not showed to
Infidels, but only to the faithful. For as the birth of CHRIST is a sign to
the faithful only, who believe Christ being God and man truly to have been
borne of a Virgin without seed of man, by the almighty power of the holy
Ghost, according to that Ipse Deus dabit vobis signum, Esa. 7.
ecce virgo ^oncipiet and pariet etc. Right so the supper of Christ is a sign
of his Body and Blood, to the faithful only, who believe the nature of bread
and wine to be turned into his body and blood, without generation or corruption
by the only power of the word of Christ, who said after bread taken, and
blessing made, This is my Body, This is my Blood, do this thing for the
remembrance of me. Behold the making of Christ's Body and Blood for the
remembrance of his death, that is, the sign we speak of, this was the memory
or the remembrance whereof David said, Memoriam Psalm. 110.
fecit mirabilium suorum. Our Lord has made a remembrance of his marvelous
works, etc. And think we that a remembrance of marvelous things is made of
God without a miracle? S. Cyprian Cipr. de Cena. do.
says, the bread to be made flesh, Omnipotentia verbi, By the Almighty power
of the word. S. Augustine calls it Aug. manu. ca. 11. Chris. de Sacerd. Lib.
3.
Mirabile Sacrificium. S. Chrysostom, cries out, O miracle* o the goodness
of God, he that sits above with the father in the selse-same moment of time
is touched with the hands of all men. If thou ask how it is made (says
Damascene) it is enough Damas. de orthod. fid. Lib. 4 Cap. 14.
for thee to hear that it is made by the holy Ghost, even as our Lord made for
himself and in himself a body out of the Virgin Mother of God, and we know
no more, but that the word of God is true, strengthfull, Eus. lib. 5. demonst.
cap. 3. Beda in hom: Vidit Jesus Basil in Liturg. Greg. Niss. in orat: de
Pascat. Hiero. in Leuit. Niceph. lib. 1. cap. 28.
Almighty. Eusebius calls it, Admiralem exitum oraculi, A marvelous event of
the Oracle. S. Bid names it, A sanstification of the holy Ghost, that cannot
be uttered by speech. The like words have Saint Basil. Saint Gregory
Nissenus, Saint Hierome, Nicephorns. Thus much I thought good briefly to say
concerning the manner how the blessed Sacrament of the Altar is a sign,
token, mystery, or remembrance, every word whereof expounded according to
the Gospel, and to the state of the new Testament, does prove the real
presence of Christ's body and blood under the forms of bread and wine. It is
a Sacrament which outwardlye signifies that which is inwardly wrought, it is a
figure containing the truth figured, it is a sign meet for the inslitution
of Christ, whose signs are miraculous, it is a secret token known only to
those that believe, it is the remembrance of Christ's death by the presence of
the body which died, what shall I say more? It is the body and blood of Christ
covered from our eyes, revealed to our faith, feeding presently our bodies and
souls to life everlasting.

When Tertullian and S. Augustine say Christ gave a figure or sign of his
body, the Protestant Grammarians understand a Rhetorical figure as Metonymia
or Synechdoche, or such a figure as it is set up at an Alehouse or
Wine-tauerne: but the Doctors mean a peculiar sign and token miraculously
instituted by Christ, which conteyneth and gives to the faithful the truth
which it betokens. Signs and figures in the Sacraments consist of words and
the matter, as of Water, and I Baptize, etc. Bread, and Hoc est, etc. of Oil,
etc. Christ's words make that which they signify, otherwise neither body nor
figure thereof. Again, which of the holy Fathers teaches that ( Body)
stands to signify the figure of body? Many Fathers say the words of Christ
are plain, manifest, true, and effectual; but no man tells of such a
strainge taking of the words ( Body and Blood) no man witnesses them to be
taken for the figures of body and blood, and no marvel, for no man knew that
interpretation. They Note well.
know that the true body of Christ given after such a sort under the forms of
bread and wine, was a figure of the self same body, either walking visibly
upon earth, or suffering upon the Cross, or sitting now at the right hand of
his Father, or intending to come to judgment. They could tell that a thing
present in a secret manner is a token, sign, and a watch-worde, to all the
faithful of an open manner, either past, or to come in the same thing, by this
means they confessed the Sacrament to be the sign of Christ's body and blood,
but they knew no such figure, as the Sacrame^taries have devised, they never
could tell of Synecdoche or Metonymia, they knew sacramental, and not
rhetorical figures, mystical, and not poetical, holy and not profane. Let
him therefore that will have any thing made at al of Christ's words, acknowledge
them to be proper, to signify somewhat, and to make that they signify, which
is the true body and blood of Christ, under those outward ryndes or visible
forms of bread and wine. For as under the visible flesh of Christ his Godhead
lay privy, but yet was truly present, and had assumpted his flesh into one
person: even so under the visible form of bread the flesh of Christ is really
present in the holy mysteries, and therefore we touch that flesh when we touch
the form of bread, as S. Thomas did touch the Godhead, when he touched the
flesh of Christ, for in each place we touch not, either the godhead, or the
flesh visibly, but by the mean of that thing wherein it is truly present,
that thing (I say) received of us does make his death and resurrection to be
remembered. Has he not all that ever Christ did presently before his eyes, who
has Christ himself present? But take Christ away and afterward it is a
soolishe dream to talk how his deeds be set before our eyes by bread and
wine, the appearance of bread is the token that Ch^istes body is here to be
eaten, and the similitude of wine does show, that his blood is here to be
drunken: but the true showing of his death, life and resurrection, arises of
that truth which is under those forms. When I eat that body that died, I
show the death of it, because no sacrisiced flesh was ever eaten before the
Host was ofr^d: but we eat really the body of christ therefore our fact
cries, that Chirst is dead, we eat the body alive having the blood and soul
in it, therefore our fact cries he is risen again. Thus the Catholics
reason, let him that has common sense, judge who goes nearer the truth of the
Gospel in presenting and showing Christ's death, the Protestant that has but
bread, or the Catholic that has the very body. So that as you may partly
gather by that which I have already said, the necessary mean of necessary
remembrance of his death consists in the real presence of him that died. For
who ca^forget his death, whose body is daily made, worshipped, and eaten, to the
end the death may be remembered: but I may right well eat bread and drink
wine, not yet remembering thereby that Christ is dead for me. S. John
Chrysostom Homil. 52. upon S. Matthew says, We receive Christ as well in our
hand as in our heart. Vide (says he) quid manu capias. This blessed Sacrament
then Aug. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 10. ca. 6. and lib. 9. con. ca. 13.
was not called bare bread, or figurative bread of old, but the Sacrament of
the Altar, because of Christ's table by Malachy called rightly an Altar; the
pure Sacrifice of his body is prepared for us. Parasti in conspectu meo mensam.
Thou have prepared a table in my sight says that divine Psalmist, and in the
ninth of the Proverbs it is written, Wisdom has proposed a table, and the
tenth of the first Epistle to the Corinthians S. Paul says, You cannot be
pertakers of the table of our Lord, and the table of Devils. So that we
receive Christ of his table to our mouths as into our hearts, prepared by him
not by the baker, which can give nothing but bread.

S. Cyrill said Christ's body eaten, shall raise our body Lib. 10. Cap. 13. in
John. Tertullian confessed, that not only our soul, Tertul. lib de resurr.
carn.
but also our body feeds upon the Body and Blood of Christ to the intent our
souls may be made fat of God. Likewise Ireneus writes our flesh is
nourished of the Ireneus aduers. here is. lib. 4* cap. 34.
Bod^e and Blood of our Lord.

We may see now by this what error they fall into, who call Christ's supper
only a figure of his body, yea who assign the body and blood of Christ to
our souls, and bread and wine to our bodies, whereas there is no substance
left of bread and wine, but even our bodies feed upon Christ's body as
Ireneus, Cyrillus, and Tertullian have said, that as our souls be fed with
grace: so by eating Christ's flesh our bodies may rise to glory. Having then
such firm authorities, of Christ, the Apostles, and the most ancient, and
learned Fathers, we little acount of the words of Protestants, who have rather
brought Christ's supper in contempt by bare terms, the^ by any sound authority
or aleadging of scriptures. As for Caluins supper, nothing is wrought therein,
because bread and wine in it remains still, neither is any new thing wrought
in Christ impassible, or possibly can be, whom they say they eat by faith:
therefore their supper is nothing but bread. In Christ's supper, we teach the
substance of bread and wine to be made the substance of Christ's Body and Blood,
and that is the true work made in the supper of Christ, where the mutable
creatures are turned into the immutable substance of Christ. Which work since
the Protestants deny (babble what they will) they teach nothing to be wrought
in the supper of Christ: yet this shift the Protestants have to cover their
falsehood, because they see the Scriptures, Fathers, and Councels so plain for
Christ's real presence, therefore they use terms very smooth of putting on
Christ in Baptism and of eating his body and blood, to the end, their denial
of the thing it self may be less of the unlearned espied. For it is to be
noted, that to make it evident to us, that Christ gave us his very body, and
not a figure thereof, or the effect of the grace of his godhead only; he said
not I give my own self (as Protestants say we receive him) which may be
understood of his divinity as well as humanity in one person; and so ( self)
makes for the receiving of Christ by grace and spirit only. But Jesus
foreseing the drifts of Satan, and what heresies would arise, named expreslie
how he gave his body covered under the forms of bread and wine, which when we
touch, we touch his very body; for even as kissing the hose under which the
Kings knee is contained, we are said to kiss the kings knee: eue^ so in
touching the accidents of bread and wine, we touch the body and blood of Christ
under the^. For (as I said) as S. Tho. touching Christ's flesh, confessed him to
be God, because the godhead lay hid in that flesh: right so when we touch with
teeth and mouth the form of bread in the holy mysteries, we confess that we
touch thereby the flesh that lies hid under that form. Therefore to speak of
his B. body now risen again, which after a spiritual and supernatural manner
and sort (though really and truly the very body of Christ) we receive in the B.
Sacrament, it is (I say) both the true and very body of Christ, and yet the
figure and sign of his body, once in an other quality and condition, the^ now
it is in, that is, a most lively representatio^ to our seules, and memories,
that the very body we receive, once suffered and shed his blood upon the Cross,
and it is also a sign of the union and coniunctio^ betwixt him Christ our head
given us therein, and us his members the holy Cath. Church which by means of
this sacrament are united, incorporate, knit together, or made one body with
Christ, and therefore the B. Sacrament is consecrated of such matter, and given
us under such forms and likeness of such things (that is bread and wine) which
do not only represent unto us most lively the shedding of Christ's blood, and
offering of his body upon the Cross: but also signify unto us the union of
Christ and his Church. For even as you see of many corns one loaf is made; So
of many members in Christ knit together in perfect love and charity (by means
of this most B. Sacrament the most perfect pleadge of Christ's infinite love)
all we thereby be made one body, in, and with him our head, and in this respect
of the representation of Christ's Passion, and knitting together of his members
with him, the very and most B. Body of our Lord (given us at his last supper)
is called a sign or Sacrament, and yet nevertheless the thing it self, that
is his B. Body and Blood, not figured or signified by bread and wine, but given
under the forms, or likeness of bread and wine. For that which before
consecration was bread and wine, is now by Christ's words transubstantiate, or
wholly turned into the Body and Blood of Christ, as I declared before: though to
our outward eyes, and carnal senses, there seems no other thing then
before; yet by our faith we be taught far otherwise, as that it is most
certainly without all doubt, the very Body and Blood of Christ, without which
divine Sacrament a real conjunction betwixt his fleash, and the fleash of man,
cannot be made by faith, spirit, and understanding only: for that is the
conjunction of mind, but not of fleash and bones, as the man and wife by
consent of marriage cannot be one body unless they come together: neither does
Christ come from his Fathers right hand corporally to be joined with our flesh;
but bread by consecration is turned into Christ's flesh, to the intent it may be
received, and made one with our flesh, to the end we may be Concorporei, as the
ancient Fathers term us, one fleash and body with Christ.

Chap. XXV. Declaring how it implies not contradiction that Christ is in
heaven, and in the Sacrament in many places at once, but only declares an
infinite and Almighty power of God, and that Divine honor is due hereunto.
YOu see now in some manner and sort, by this which is said in the former
Chapter, the excellency of this most divine mystery, as our infirmity is able
to declare to you, and in what respect this B. Sacrament is called a sign or
figure and yet the very thing it self: wherefore you se the heretics do most
pitifully and wickedly abuse the poor people to both their damnations, that
contrary to Christ, the received faith of the Church, and al ancient doctors,
would have the B. Sacrament but only a bare piece of bread in sign and
figure. Read the holy Fathers and Doctors, and when they speak of the
Sacramental receiving of this B. Sacrament, they so plainly without all
tropes, signs, and figures call it verily, really, and substantially his body
and blood, so often, so pithylie with so firm reasons, and so plainly, that if
they had spoken against the Sacramentaries heretics of our time, they could
have spoken no more plainly. For what words can be playner then those of that
most famous Council of Nice, wherein Arrius the enemy to the son of God, by
more then three hundred holy Fathers was condemned? The words of the Nicene
Council to our purpose are these Iterum etiam, hic diuina mensa etc. Again
here also in the holy table, let us not basely attend* the bread and cup set
before us, but lifting up our mind let us understand by faith, that Lamb of
God which takes away the sins of the world. Situm ^sse, to be put and laid
on that holy table, Incruente a sacerdotibus immolatum, to be vnbloudely
Sacrificed of the Preistes, and that we (vere) truly, and in deed taking his
own precious Body and Blood, do believe this to be the mystical tokens of
our redemption. For this cause we take not much but little, that we might
know we take not to fill us, but for holiness. Thus far the Council. The
blessed, noble, and most glorious Martyr S. Ciprian Decena Domini, of the
supper of our Lord, is as plain, Panis iste etc. That Bread (says he) which
our Lord gave to his Disciples, being changed not in outward form, but in
nature, through the almighty power of the word is made flesh. And because man's
heart is not quiet till it rest in God, and because nothing can truly fill or
content man save only God, therefore S. Hillary that strong pillar of Gods
Church against the Arrians teaches us in his 8. book of the Trinity how
Christ in this holy Sacrament naturally dwells in us. St vere and^. if the
word (says he) be verily made flesh, and we verily take or receive the
word flesh in our Lords meat, how is he esteemed not to dwell naturally in
us? Seeing then God is by nature the only everlasting meat which perishes
not, and seeing he must be given to us in his own nature, and we are not able
to receive him as he is a spirit, he has done for us, as good mothers and
nources do for their babes, the mother eats bread, and by her eating turns
it into milk, and that milk she gives to the infant, and by that means the
infant eats bread and milk. In the real flesh of Christ is the substance
of God only made meat to be eaten of man. Faith is a great gift of God, but
yet a creature only wherein the fullness of the Godhead dwells not, and
therefore it is not able to attain to the union of Gods nature, and much less
able to give it: by eating of Christ we corporally have, and carry God in our
bodies corporally; no otherwise in the world can be devised for it. As for the
figure of bread, it is the only true figure, because it is a figure without
substance of bread. For whereas S. Augustine in his third book and sixteen
chapter de doctrina Christiana, upon these words ( Nisi manduca^eritis etc.
Unless you eat the flesh of the son of ^an, and drink his blood etc.)
says, videtur facinus etc. how Christ seems to command a heinous act or
sin, it is a figure therefore (says he) but understand you of the Passion of
our Lord, commanding us sweetly to rest in Christ etc. These words are to be
understood of the manner of eating, not as a dead carcass is torn in pieces in
the shambles, but Christ is to be eaten in a mystery and a Sacrament, though
verily and really, yet after a spiritual manner. Eor as the figure which was in
that Paschall Lamb did not diminish the real killing and eating thereof, but
only did refer it to a higher truth: so the figure which is in eating Christ's
flesh* does not diminish the true eating thereof, but only declares the eating
to be a figure, because it is referred again to a higher truth both in Christ
whose flesh that once died is now eaten, and in us who eat it* not so much for
to eat it corporally as to feed spiritually of God him self, who makes that
flesh profitable: August. in John. tract: 26. and 27.
and that S. August. though so it is evident by his own words upon S. John, Ye
know not what is this manner of eating this flesh, but except ye eat it. Lo
the manner of eating was secret, but the thing that should be eaten was
natural flesh: these also be his words to the same effect: Carnem sic etc.
They so understand flesh as it is torn in a carcas or sold in the shambles,
and not as it is quickened with the spirit or Godhead. Here is reported wherein
the Jews did ^rre, they took the word flesh amiss, not concerning the
substance of it (which must be really eaten) but concerning the manner of eating
it, is not ( modo) Latin for the manner? Is not ( quomodo) as much to say as by
what manner? the Jews understood the name of flesh Quomodo dilaniatur, non
quomodo vegetatur, that is by what manner it is torn a pieces, and not by what
manner it is quickened: do not these words import, that the Jews erred in the
manner of eating Christ's flesh? Does not he that finds fault only with the
manner of eating Christ's flesh, sufficiently allow the eating of the flesh
it self, if it be done after a good manner? It is the Passion of Christ, and
the spiritual manner of eating in respect whereof Christ's speech is called of
S. Augustine figurative. For if Christ's flesh were eaten only to fill the
belly without further account of spiritual grace and life, then were the
eating of that flesh natural, sensible, accustomable, and without all figure,
and should be eaten by cutting, tearing, and wasting it, but in that case
flesh profits nothing: the flesh we speak of must be eaten as a figure, as a
mystery, as a Sacrament, as a holy sign of a higher truth wrought in the
soul, then that bodelie eating does work. So likewise in Baptism we are
washed in a figure, because the washing has a farther and higher end the^ only
to cleanse the body. That speech therefore wherein Christ commands his flesh
to be eaten, is figurative, not that we should deny the true eating of his
flesh, but because that eating is referred to a greater purpose, then to the
feding of the body, for Christ's flesh is meat in deed, that is to say* is
eatten in deed as I could prove upon that place: but it is not eaten only,
that it should be corporally received, but to the end we should partake of
the spirit and Godhead which is in it, and so by merit of that Hill* de
Trinit. Lib. 8.
flesh really present in us, obtain life everlasting with it. Whereupon Saint
Hillarie disputing against the Arrians that Christ is not only of one will, but
also of one substance with his father, says, De naturali in nobis Christi
veritate etc. That we say concerning the natural truth of Christ being in us,
except we learn it of him we say it foolishly and ungodly, for himself
says, my flesh is meat in deed, he that eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood, tarieth in me and I in him, there is no place of doubting left
concerning the truth of flesh and blood: for now both by the profession of our
Lord, and by our own^ faith it is truly flesh, and truly blood, and these
things taken and swallowed, are the cause that we tarry in Christ, and Christ
in us: is not this thing the truth? it may well chance not to be true to them,
who deny Jesus Christ to b^ true God. So that Christ as truly as he is God, so
verily and really is he in the B. Sacrament though in an inexplicable and
miraculous manner and sort, invisible and hidden from our corporal senses. For
as after the resurrection the spiritual being which our bodies shall have,
does not deminish the truth of their nature, but declares a wonderful
abettering of them, in that they be made in manner equal to spiritual
substance: even so the body of Christ in his supper is spiritual, not for any
lack of his true substance under the forms of bread and wine, but because it
is fully possessed and replenished with the Godhead and is present after the
manner of a spirit, as being neither seen or felt, nor tasted, but only
bel^ued, and therefore this B. Sacrament, is worthily called of the church at
the consecration thereof, yea of S. Paul 1. Tim. 3. misterium fidei* a mystery
of faith. So that you see, we must understand, that though in the B. Sacrament
we truly (when we sacrame^tally receive) do receive in very deed his B. body
and blood, yet we do not receive and eat Christ's B. body after such a carnal
sort, as the Caphernaits and Jewish Heretics understood and blaspheme. For the
lexes when they heard Christ promise his body to be eaten of us, thought Christ
would hane given his body to have bin cut in pieces, roasted, and ^^te^ (as I
said before) as the dead carcas of an ox is, whereupon some of his disciples
so understanding departed, thinking it a hard saying of Christ that he would
give his body to be so eaten: but he answered the^ right worthily, the spirit
Ioh. 6. 63.
it is that quickneth* but the flesh it profits nothing. How, does the flesh
of Christ profit nothing? what does that flesh profitte nothing that redeemed
the whole world? God forbid any christian should so imagine, how the^ must we
understand Christ's words the flesh profits nothing? but according to S.
Augustins interpretation, that is the carnal or fleshly understanding of
Christ's words profits nothing but hurts much: but put a spiritual and
divine understanding to Christ's flesh according to his promise and word given
us in the B. Sacrament, and the^ the flesh profits much: as for example, the
wicked Jewish heretics of this time thus blaspheme. What do thou (say they)
eat the very body of Christ indeed in the Sacrament? how chances it thou
feel not raw flesh? what, can so great a substance be under the liknes of
so little a piece of bread? How can thou swallowe his bones? o blasphemous
heretic. Lo here you see these men's understanding that thus with the Jews so
grossly conceive of Christ's body in the Sacrament, the flesh profits nothing,
but hurts much. But if they would understand, as Christ taught and the Church
believes, that we receive Christ's Body verily in the Sacrament, not after such
a gross manner but after a spiritual sort, and in an unspeakable mystery,
that is though a true and natural body, yea the very flesh and blood that was
borne of the B. Virgin Mary and suffered death upon the Cross; yet with all a
supernatural, miraculous, divine, glorified, and impassible body. Such a body
as was conceived by the holy ghost, without know ledge of man, and that was
borne of the B. Virgin, without in any sort opening or violating her sacred
womb. Such a body as by his divine power therein with his B. hands multiplied
five loaves of bread to the feeding of many thousands Such a body as being
attempted to be stoned of the Jews, passed through them and was not seen.
Such a body finally that arose from death, the sepulcher fast shut: and such a
body that after his Resurrection likewise appeared to his disciples, the gates
fast shut, without dividing asunder or opening the same. Such a body that
declared himself to S. Paul on earth, and yet at that present sat at his
fathers right hand in heaven. To be brief, such a glorified deficate body, to
whom (by power of his divinity united thereunto) nothing is impossible; this
(I say) if Heretics would believe with us, then to them the flesh of Christ
would profit much. This is my Body, this is my Blood said Christ: the pronoun^
This, points to body or blood, and not to bread and wine, as appears by the
genders contrary, God provided of purpose that the article ( This) therefore
should neither agree with bread, nor with wine, but only with body and blood,
or with the Chalice wherein the blood is contained, and therefore this to be
true, that Christ's very body and blood is in the B. Sacrament of the Altar (as
being most express and plain by the very words of christ) we are bound to
believe, though to declare the manner how excedeth man's reason, because he said
it to whom nothing is impossible. And therefore for ignorant and unlearned me^
especially when heretics ask the reason how it is possible for Christ to be
here, there, and in many places at once, it is not fit for the^ to reason, but
to have recourse to faith which is above reason, and plainly say I believe
Christ that said This is my body, to whose power nothing is impossible, and let
the heretic demand, scof, or flout never so much, go you nofurder with him,
but leave him to the more learned, that ca^handle him better. For with his whyes
and hows he deceueth the simple souls, as the serpent did Eve, who began first
with the woman the weaker vessel, whereby divines understand the sensual part
or inferior part to reason, and proposed things that seemed delectable,
reasonable, and good, and so in the end drew reason and and all awry, making
her to consent by answering first doubtfully, and so made her do the things
unlawful: but if she never had stood to have reasoned or answered the wily
serpent, but had fled him at first, she had never bin overcome. The devil the^
in like manner against the simple children of Gods Church, takes the bodies of
heretics his members, and speaks in the^, as in paradise he spoke in the body
of the serpent, and so poor simple souls listening to his wily crafts, he
deceives under pretense of good, and casts them out of paradise Christ's
kingdom, that is his holy Church: wherefore fly you always the whispering of
that old serpent in heretics that you be not deceived with the^: For heresy
creeps as a canker, and the devils deceipts be diverse and many, and sometimes
he armeth hi^ self against the people of God, with the word of God evil
understood, to overthrow the truth of Gods word in this Sacrament, and other
mysteries of our redemption, as when Christ says, poor men shall you Ioh. 12.
8.
always hau^, etc. meaning passible, and in form of poverty, but not by
withdrawing himself from us, by his corporal presence in this B. Sacram. as
when it is said he is risen and ascended into heaven, we must un derstand he is
nevertheless in his sacred flesh meat indeed in this miraculous mystery, and
so in spirit and truth with us all days even to the end of the world. For
Christ ascended into heaven there sitting at the right hand of his father and
leaving us, the belief thereof as a chief article of our faith. Christ made
his own supper saying, This is my Body, and commanded his Apostles, and
their successors to make the same, saying do and make this thing for the
rememberance of me. Therefore neither the making of Christ's body, neither the
belief thereof can be contrary to the sitting of Christ at the right hand of
his father. Again since nothing is impossible to God (albeit that which
implies contradiction in it self be therefore impossible, because it
repugneth to the truth it felfe which is God) is it not possible to God Christ
should both be in heaven after one visible sort, and in the Sacrament after a
mystical sort? It were impossible for the body of Christ, both to be in heaven
and not in heaven, or to be in the Sacrament, and not to be there in the same
respect: but to be in heaven and in the Sacrament, or to be in many places at
once, that makes no contradiction, but only shows an allmighty and infinite
power in him who works it. In so much as Christ is allmighty to sit at the
right hand of God he is able to perform his own word and gift in the
Sacrament of the Altar: and therefore in the sixth of S. John when he spoke of
eating his flesh and drinking his blood which he would give, he also declared
that he would go up into heaven in his man-hoode where he was before in his
godhead. And that thing he spoke (as S. Cirillus has noted) to declared that
he was God, and therefore able to work that which he spoke of, in so much as
his words were Spirit and Chris. de sacerdoti^ lib. 3.
Life. For this cause S. Chrysostom cries out. O miraculum, O dei
benignitatem O miracle, O goodness of God, he that sits above with the
Father in the same very momente of time, is touched with the hands of men, and
delivers himself to those that will receive and embrace him: seem these
things worthy to be despised and neglected? thou shall perceive our holy
things not only to be wonderful, but also exceed all wondering and astonying
of the mind. Thus says S. Chrysostom. This Blessed Sacrament then thus
miraculously instituted by Christ for a perfect memory of his death, and
pleadge of his infinite love, with all reverence and honor is to be
worshipped, and with grateful memories and pure hearts to be received of
us, seeing he could show us no greater token of unmeasurable love then this
(by giving himself wholly unto us) nor devise any more excellent way to declare
the same. For as a man that in fight is wounded with a scarre in his face for
his friends sake, coming with that in his face puts his friend in more
perfect memory of his love, then if he left or sent him an hundredth other
tokens: so Christ for our love taking a deep wound to death, could leave us
no more perfect memory thereof then his own body, in an unspeakable mystery;
whereby his death is showed until he come to judgment, at the end of the
world. For even as the noble acts which other men have done be written
upon their sepulchers: so in this memory of Christ, his acts are daily
showed and rehearsed. Then his Incarnation is be^okened most mistically when
bread is made flesh, as the word was before made flesh, and that
Incarnation is represented in outvvarde show, also by singing of the Angels
hymn. Glory be to God in the highest. Then See here how in the B. Sacrament
at Mass the whole life, death, and resurrection of Christ is represented.
the going before of Saint John Baptist is expressed by readinge the Epistle:
then Christ's preaching is represented by singing of the Gospel: then the faith
of his Apostles and Disciples is betokened in pronouncing the Creed, or
Articles of the faith. Then the supper of CHRIST is made with no less
authority, then himself instituted it: then his Cross is showed by making the
sign thereof upon the holy mysteries: then his death is inuisibly wrought
under the forms of bread and wine, by turning their substances into himself,
and showing them, as if the very body were divided from the blood. Then the
fruit thereof is sown in the hearts of the faithful people by giving them
the grace to fear him, to love him to come penite^tly to him, and to be made
one with him: then the resurrection is outwardly showed, because the several
forms of bread and wine, each of them contain whole Christ under them: then
the body is elevated and adored that suffered for us: then Christ is glorified
for the redemption of all mankind: then thanks be given to God, blessing to
the people, and prayer is made for all the world. But the incredulous heretic
still obiecteth, is bread turned into Christ's flesh? yea by his infinite power
and unspeakable humility, whereby he for our love disdayned not to take
flesh of our earthly substance, which things considered bread seemed unto his
wisdom the most fit matter where of he would make this Sacrament. For bread
was usually turned into Christ's body whilst he lived in earth: for his body
was nourished with bread, the which bread was turned into his flesh. Wherefore
now also We believe well (says Nissenus Nissen. in orat. catech. Luc. 24.
Aug. ex-Ser. deverbis Euaug. apud Bed
brother to S. Basil) the bread which is sanctified with the word of God to
be changed into the body of God, the word. Nouerunt fideles the faith full
know what I say, they k^owe Christ in the breaking of bread, for not every
bread, but that which receaue^h the blessing of Christ is made the body of
Christ. Let us once deny the flesh of Christ to be really in the blessed
Sacrament of the Altar and here is no perfect building toward the flesh of
Christ, and consequently no reason why we should be called Ephesians: 4. and. 5.
his mystical body or flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones. For as if
Eu^ had not been taken really out of the natural body of Adam, she should
not have been in truth bone of his bones: so we are not flesh of Christ's
flesh in truth it self, except the flesh of CHRIST in the natural
substance thereof be the mean by our natural conjunction to it, that we
are framed and wrought into a spiritual man. And our flesh is I mean^ not
into a mere spiritual substance*
turned with out loss of his own substance or propriety into the nature of
Christ's flesh, because it being the flesh that is dwelt in by the Godhead, is
stronger then our nature: yet although the unworthy receauers do verily
receive the body of Christ, we must conform our lives to the example of
christ, that by receiving this Sacrament we may not procure to our selves
damnation, but for ever live in, and with Christ. For as Saint Augustine
haueing spoken of Judas, who gave himself to the Devil right worthily said.
Non malum accipiendo, sed male accipiendo. De bap. contra do na. cap. 5. and. 8.
etc. Not in receiving an evil thing, but in receiving euilly. For it was the
body and blood of our Lord: Yea to them to whom the Apostle said, he that
eats unworthily, eats and drinks Judgment to him self: as the Apostles
and other Saints did eat the body of Christ (as Saint Hierome affirms) to
their Salvation. Hiero. in. psalm. 21.
The manner of eating this divine mystery, carnal men cannot attain to: all
corporal natures stand of an invisible substance, and of a visible form, the
form of Christ's body was that the Caphernaites saw and could not eat, but
the substance of Christ's body is that we eat in mystery. Hereof said Saint
Augustine you shall not eat the body you see Viz. in visibili forma That is to
say. In a visible form. Yet in another place touching, the veritye of the
thing in this Sacrament, he said. Every man Aug. in. psalm. 98.
ought to adore earth or the fleash of Christ before he did eat it. Did not
likewise Saint Ambrose say To this day Amb. de. spir. sanct. lib. 3. cap. 12.
we adore the fleash of CHRIST in the misterie^? So you see divine honor is due
to this divine Sacrament. But Heretics in steed of due worship, do
worship their own inventions and opinyons like to GODS, as Saint Hierome
upon Zachary the thirteen Chapter well notes. Sicut Idola fiunt manu
artificis etc. Even as Idols (says he) are made with the hand of the
artificer: So the perverse Doctrine of Heretics whatsoever it faineth, it
turns into an Idol, and makes Antechrist to be adored for CHRIST. Saint
Chrysostom exhorting to come to this Sacrament with Zeal and most vehement
love writes. Hoc corpus in presepe Chris. in. 1 Cor hom. 24. Hoc.
reueriti sunt Magi, etc. The wise men (commonly called the three kings)
reverenced this body in the Manger, and being men without good religion and
barbarous, they worshipped it with fear and much trembling after a long journey
taken. Let us therefore who are the Citizens of heaven, at the least wise
follow those barbarous men, for when they saw the Manger and Cottage only,
and not any of those things which thou now see, they came with most great
reverence and quakmge: but thou see that thing not in the Manger, but on the
Altar not a woman which might hold it in her arms, but the Priest present,
and the hely Ghost copiously spread upon the Sacrifice which is set forth,
neither thou look barely upon the body as they did, but thou know the
power os it, and all the order of dispencing things, and thou art ignorant of
none of those things which were done by him, and thou have been diligenly
instructed in all things. Let us be stirred up therefore, let us quake, let
us profess openly a greater devotion then those barbarous men, least if we
come barely and coldly, we ^eopard our head into a more vehement fire. Hitherto
S. Chrysostom: he said before Quando, etc. When thou see it set before
thee, say with thy self for this body, I am no more earth and ashes. This body
which is himself Christ then gave his twelve disciples at his last supper,
under the form of twelve fragments or pieces of bread, bidding every one of
them take and eat, in which deed he shows himself to make the substance
of his body present under the forms of bread in diverse places at one time,
although not after the manner of local situation, because his body has not
in the B. Sacrament actuallie that natural dimension and occupying of place,
which it has otherwise, but as he has ordained it to be, so is it under
diverse forms of bread and in diverse places at once by his omnipotency, to
whom nothing is impossible. Here I am sure many will stand with me and say,
they believe not so: to whom I answer that by so saying they have condemned
themselves John. 6. 64
to be of those of whom Christ said. There are some of you who believe not.
For if CHRIST said by that which was bread before his blessing which still
seemed bread, if Christ said thereof This is my body, and gave it under twelve
pieces or forms, seeing they (for the most of them I think) confess him to
be able to make his body present under diverse forms, and to have promised to
give his flesh, and to have said, This is my body, and to have given it to
twelve, how can they deny that his body was present at that supper under
twelve diverse forms of bread, being whole and all under each form? The
confessing also of that which Christ said is a thing appertaining to faith,
because the speaker is God to whom all faith belongs: to believe this that
God says must needs be a virtue, and to discredit it is a great vice. But
some will still perhaps allege that The flesh profitteth nothing John. 6.
the words of Christ are spirit and life. That is true and therefore I believe
that when he said, Take eat this is my body he gave his body not without life
and spirit, but yet as really as ever by saying. Genesis 1.
Let the light be made. he made the light: for his words be not deadfleash,
which profits nothing but quicken and give life, how and whenever it
pleases him, much better then the spirit and soul of a man is able to quicken
and make liuelye the body wherein it is. These two saying This is my body, and
my words are spirit and life, stand so well together that I believe the one
for the others sake: Christ's words never want spirit and life, and power to
quicken other things, even as his flesh never lacked all kind of spirit in
it self. For when the soul was out of it, yet the Godhead remained and
corporallye dwelte in it, and the soul returned to it again the third day.
Collos. 2.
Therefore when Christ said This is my body which is given for you. I am bound
to believe that his body is neither without soul nor godhead, for else it
were not truly said, it is given sor us if it were not profitable to us. Thus
you see that I believe all the words of Christ together, and that you not
doing so, are (without you repent) certain to be condemned sor not believing
these words. Take eat this is my body, you will say you believe these words,
yet not carrially but spiritually, as it is meet for Christ's words to be
believed. O Sir, he that assigns a mean how he will believe Christ's words in
that very fact shows himself not to believe them. For belief inuenteth
nothing of his own, but follows the authority of God that speaks. I
believe in deed that Christ's words cannot be carnal, as you take carnal
words for foul and gross meanings, but I see it to be a very clean and pure
meaning, that the most pure substance of the flesh of Christ should be given
under the form of bread, to the end it may be eaten of us, and the chief and
the cleanest thing we use to eat is bread: to give therefore the chief and
most healthful flesh in the world to be eaten under the form of the purest
eatable thing, is a very pure and clean work, far from carnality. You will
say it is more pure if it be rather believed to be eaten only of the heart of
man by faith and spirit, then by mouth and body. I answer that it is no pure
eating of a corporal thing, which takes away the truth of corporal eating.
Again both ways of eating are better then one of the^ alone: I believe his
real flesh to be eaten with heart and mouth, to be eaten with body and mind, to
be eaten in deed and in faith. Here fails your belief, because of two true
things you believe but one, the other you discredit. To be short, let us
imagine him that believes the real presence of Christ's body and blood under
the forms of bread and wine, to stand before the seat of Gods judgment, and
that Christ asks him, why he did believe and worship his body and blood under
the forms of bread and wine: may he not well answer in this wise? I believed
so, and did so because your Majesty taking bread and having blessed it doubted
not to say. This is my body, which words all my forefathers understood to be
spoken properly, and to be true as they sounded, and therefore at the
commandment of my Prelates I a dored your body under the form of bread. If
CHRIST reply that he had Preachers who taught him otherwise, and cried to him
to beware least he committed Idolatry: First that objection might not be made
to any man, that died above 80. years past, because no Preacher taught
publicly any such doctrine. Secondly if so much were said to one of our time,
he might answer that he had more forefathers and more Preachets, and those much
more ancient and more honest men, who required him to believe Christ's words,
and to worship the body of his maker. Well now we are come to the point, all
the Catholics have preached with one accord, that it is the true body of
Christ, and the Gospel witnesses that CHRIST said. This is my body: here is
the word of God, and the tradition and preaching of man joined together, I
ask whether it be possible for CHRIST (who requires of us nothing so
earnestly as be^iefe) to condemn that simple man, who being otherwise of good
life believed his word and his forefathers, and the Preachers agreeable with
both, or no? answer me for what fault shall this poor man be condemned? First
to believe Christ it is no fault. Secondly Christ said This is my body. Thirdly
he being an infant was of his parents taught, that to be the body of Christ
which was holde^ over the Priests head. Fourthly as many and more preach to him
when he comes to lawful age, and say this is the body of Christ, as there
are that afterward preach the contrary: tell me then what was his fault for
which he may be condemned? If you say, his eyes told him it was not the body
of Christ, he will answer, that for the reverence he bare to the word of
God, he denied the sensible instruction of his eyes, as giving more credit to
Christ, then to himself, is that a fault? If you reply that by that means he
might have worshipped the rock in steed of Christ he will answer he knows
not what you mean* he never had any rock showed him by most grave authority,
which was said to be Christ, if such thing had been taught him, he (for his
part) was so obedient to believe, so willing to adore Christ, that he would
have done any thing, which had been commanded him under the name of Christ or
of his religion: Is this a fault why the poor man should be condemned? no
surely seeing the prophet David says, Vt iumentum Psalm. 62.
factus sum apudte, I am become as it were, a beast before thee. It is laudable
says Enthymius that in the sight of God we take our selves as beasts, which
being so I can devise no fault in this poor and simple man, who if he be
deceived, he is deciued by Christ, by his forefathers, by diverse Catholic and
virtuous preachers, by the virtue of humility, of obedience, and of pure love
toward God. But on the other side if Christ call one of them before him, who
denies his real presence, and ask him why he did not believe the Sacrament
of the Altar, to be the body of Christ what will he answer for himself? will
he say Sir, I believed your body to sit at the right hand of God the father,
and therefore that your body was not in the Priests hand? Why then think
thou that I am not able to make the same which is at the right hand of my
father, to be also present under the form of bread? Sir whether you are able
or no, I can not say: But I have heard many preachers tell, that one body
cannot be at one time in diverse places. O how dreadfully would Christ answer
in this case; Did not those preachers whom thou pretendest to follow say
always they preached to thee the sincere word of God? did they not by that
color overthrow Monastaries, Churches, Altars, Images of Saints, and mine own
Image and Cross? Did they not deny the sacrifice of the Mass, Praying for the
dead, and such like ancient vsages only for pretense of the word of God? and
now se how inexcusable they and thou art. I said Take eat This is my Body,
I said this to twelve men, I gave each of them my body, and bad make that thing
as it is written in the Gospel, I showed at Capharnaum that I was signed of my
father, and equal with him in power, they them selves believe that I made all
creatures, places, times of nothing: now is it doubted how I am able to make
my body present under the form of bread in diverse pa^ces? Yea to maintain the
better the argument against my almighty power, they say I entered not into my
Disciples the doors being shutt, but either prevented the shutting of them
(contrary to the words of my Gospel) or came in by the window, as thieves
do, or by some hole, as creepers do: yea any thing is sooner believed the^ my
divine strength and working: thou Hypocrite seeing the word of God has it
written four times in the new Testament. This is my body, how co^mest thou to
talk with me of my sitting in heaven, as though one of my works were contrary
to the other, if in deed thou had bin humbly persuaded that I were god, thou
would not measure my almighty power by thy simple wit. Thou art twice
condemned, first for denial of a truth, and again for denying it against my
express word, which thou pretendest to esteem and pronouncest it false. If
the poor man say he knew not so much, nor saw not the falsehood of that
argument, and begin to accuse the false preachers who deceived him Christ may
well say that he was not deceived, for before these false preachers began their
false doctrine he had said. This is my Body and This is my Blood, and all the
world believed and taught the real presence, of Christ's body and blood fiftene
hundred years together; what cause now had thou to believe a new Gospel and
new preachers thereof: forsooth Sir they said the Bishop of Rome had deceived
us. If in this case Christ tell him, that the Bishop of Rome were the successor
of Saint Peter, and so his Vicar, having promise by him not to err in faith,
and yet that he alone taught not that Doctrine, but that all the Bishops,
Doctors, and Preachers of the whole Church taught the same from the beginning,
and that Christ himself had said the same, that all the Evangelists, and the
Apostle Saint Paul had written the same, that all faithful men believed the
same, what excuse can he have who forsook CHRIST, the Apostles, the Bishopps,
the Fathers, the Preachers, and the whole Church to follow an vpstart renegate
Friar, who began his doctrine so ambitiously and proudly, who lived so evil,
and died so terribly, that his very abominable dealing with great princes, his
shameful incest and horrible death, might make any good man weary to think
upon him, much less should any have followed him? To be short, answer the
poor man for himself what he may, yet he cannot deny, but that both Christ
said This is my body, and the Church taught the same, and yet believed he not
this to be the body of Christ, and therefore is one of them who believe not:
and without faith (which is but one) there is no salvation, no pleasing of God,
no part in the kingdom of heaven, which thing if they that be alive will
consider, they may return again to the Catholic faith and Church, and so be
made lively members of Christ's body, whereof Christ is the Savior. O but the
Heretic still urges, if I eat Christ really, then I feed not of him
spiritually, I answer it is the fondest kind of reasoning in the world, by
one truth to deny an other, seeing both stand together. Is my faith the less
because Christ was bodily seen in earth? how is then my spiritual feeding
the worse, because the food of life is in my mouth? Does not Tertullian say,
the flesh is fed De resurrect. cor.
with the body and blood of Christ, to the end the soul may be made fat with
God, and yet will the Heretics say, Christ in his last supper left us but a
figure of his body? Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, is in deed
a figure, and the speaking thereof is figurative, because it was not meant that
a man should be visibly eaten, as flesh is at common tables, but yet that he
should be really eaten, albeit the manner of eating be figurative as we know.
S. Augustine then (as I said before, calling those words except ye eat my
flesh figurative) refers the figure to the manner of eating, but not to the
substance which is to be eaten, for else if by no mean the flesh of Christ
might be eaten, it should not be eaten by faith, but if it may so be eaten, it
may be eaten by mouth also, in that pure manner as it is given us. The whole
man must eat, as well in body as in soul, because the whole is taken and
assumpted of Christ, the whole is incorporated by Baptism, the whole redeemed
by death, and the whole shall be crowned with glory, therefore the true eating
is to eat that meat, which of it self consists of body, soul, and
Godhead, to eat it (I say) in body, soul, and spirit, and not by faith only.

Chap. XXVI of the blessed Sacrament of the Altar showing how conveniently it
was ordained for our reparation, and what preparation we ought to make to the
same.
BUT it is not my purpose here to recount the shifts of our adversaries, or
rather deceipts of the Devil, speaking by them his instruments to delude the
simple to their damnation, but rather for our instruction and comfort. Let us
note here the providence of God, and sweet disposition in the ordinance of
this most divine mystery. Our first parents by pride (in coveting to be as
Gods, and in incredulity, believing the serpent and mistrusting God) fell from
God: contra^^ (...) us like God in deed, and to recall us (...) heavenly
Paradise, which our parents lost (by eating the forbidden fruit) Christ has
ordained a remedy quite contrary, giving us in this B. Sacrament himself the
fruit of the B. Virgin, that bread that came down from heaven, that so with
humility believing Christ's word, and promise far above our reason, forsaking
our selves and submitting our reason to faith in Christ, we may receive him,
(his B. body) that happy fruit of endless life, and by virtue thereof recover
the possession Eve lost by her unbelieving, and tasting the forbidden fruit.
Leave vain disputes then of this blessed Sacrament, and with steedfast faith
embrace the truth, for this high mystery far exceeds man's reason. For of
all the works that ever God wrought, this is So S. Thomas calls it
miraculoru^ maximu^ if any can find a greter vnusquisque abu^det in sensu suo.
Psalm. 100.
most wonderful and miraculous, insomuch that herein God shows as it were
the periode, sum, and perfection of all his works, as he spoke before by his
holy Prophet, Memoriam secit* mirabilium suorum, miserator, et misericors
Dominus escam dedit timentibus se. GOD herein has made a memory of his
wonderful works, he has given meat to those that fear him. So that this
heavenly food is given to the salvation of those only that with reverent love,
and with perfect faith come unto this divine banquet: for what a wonderful and
mitaculous work of Christ is this to feed man with the food of Angels, for
that Christ (whose glory is the repast, dainty, and satiety of Angels in
heaven) is the food of poor pilgrims in this B. Sacrament here in earth; nay
herein God has exalted man above Angels, giving the Priest power by his mighty
word to consecrate his body, so that that which before was bread, now is no
more bread but his body which power he never granted to Angel. Again as God
is all in all, and in every place in heaven and earth, and yet not divided but
whole perfect God and as says the Apostle. In ipso viuimus, mouemur and sumus
In him we live, be moved and are; Even so though the Blessed body of Christ be
not in all places at once where his Godhead is, as the Lutherane Vbiquitary
Heretics (that so they might coarcte the mystery of this Blessed Sacrament in
their reasons) do dream: yet it is most certain (according to our belief,
and Gods truth) that Christ ever sits at the right hand of his father most
glorious, and yet is here sacramentally, and in a mystery in the B. Sacrament,
and as fullye Christ here, perfect God and man, as he is in heaven, and in
many places, and diverse Altars in all coasts of the world at once, and yet
not many but one, and the same Christ indivisible; Yea in every little part, or
particle of the holy Host, and B. Sacrament is as whole and perfect Christ, as
in the whole host, and look where the Blessed body of Christ is, there is his
blood, and where his body and blood is, there is his Godhead by virtue of that
union of the divine and humane nature in one person: therefore it follows,
that where the holy Sacrament is, there is God the son. And because the
works of the Trinity be indivisible, though no person but the second ^erson in
Godheade was incarnate, an^ took upon him our nature, yet there (...) present,
the Father, and the holy Ghost, three persons and one GOD in Trinity by virtue
of the concomitance (as we term it) and hypostaticall union whom all
creatures do worship, to whom Angels singe out perpetual praises, and
before whom heaven and earth do tremble and quake (O unspeakable and
dreadful mystery) An other miracle in this B. Sacrament is that though it be
daily eaten, yet is it never consumed, nor any thing impaired though many
unclean persons and traitors like Judas, do often unworthily receive the same,
yet in it self it is ever undefiled. As you see the clear son that shines
upon the foul clay is nothing darkened, but still remains pure in it self,
which as it is noisome to the watrye and evil disposed eye, so is it comfort
to the clear and well disposed: even so Christ the son of righttuousnes
given us in this B. Sacrament, is comfort, health, and salvation to the well
disposed, but everlasting death, and damnation to those that come with unclean
consciences, ^oaden with mortal sin, without cleansing their souls before,
that is, without contrition and lowly confession for the same, not because the
fault is in Christ: but because the thing that receaueth him is impure and
unclean, yet Christ always perfect glorious in himself, without defect, and
no marvel: for if he suffered himself to be abused, and shed his blood with
wonderful blasphemies against him by those traitorous villains hanging upon
the Cross passibly, no marvel I say though in this B. Sacrament impassible
he suffers himself to be unworthily received of hypocrites and wicked men,
whereof some will not stick to stab their daggers in this By stab understand
prick, thrust, or strike.
Blessed Sacrament, and tread it under feet, al which he suffers wicked men to
work, not withdrawing his divine presence that the good be not defrauded of
so unspeakable a benefit, for by this their abuse they hurt and soil
themselves, but not him who is immortal and impassible. Hereby we may answer
the sond objections of heretics that say, what if cat or rat should eatiet? no
doubt whatsoever takes or abuses it, it is nevertheless the very body of
Christ still: but when the outward species, or form of the Sacrament passes
away from that unseemly vessel, then Christ's B. Body and Blood also passes,
and can be there no more abused. An other wonderful miracle we see, and by
daily experience prove in this B. Sacrament, that is, that whereas Christ has
ordained this B. Sacrament under the forms and liknes of those things that be
most usual and familier to us, that is under the forms of bread and wine
(that the sight and horror of raw flesh and blood should not affray or appall
us, so that to our outward eyes, taste, feeling and other senses, it seems no
other but that it was before) yet is it quite contrary from that it was before,
as far as heaven and earth is asunder, the accidents remaining without the
subject, that is taste, feeling, and seeing bread and wine, but not so, nor yet
any part thereof bread or wine, but wholly and perfectly the very body and blood
of Christ.

Chap. XXVII. Of the Manna, the paschall Lamb, and other figures of the B.
Sacrament.
BUT when as GOD has wrought so many miracles in this B. Sacrament, what
sacrilegious impiety, what damnable heresy, or rather Apostasy is this of any
mortal men, to go about to feed us with figures, and pull Christ out of his
kingdom, remaining in this B. Sacrament in his Church militant here in earth.
These heretics would make us Christians (now in this state of grace, who have
by Christ's promise the things themselves, that were shadowed and prefigured in
the old law) in worse case the^ the Jews themselves. For Manna was a figure of
the B. Sacrament of the Altar as apeareth by Christ's own words. Your Ioh. cap.
6.
fathers (says he) did eat Manna in the wilderness and are dead, but he that
eats this bread that I will give him shall live for ever. For whether think
you Manna that bread that was rayned down from heaven, and fed the children
of Israel forty years in the wilderness was not a more excellent thing then
a piece of bakers bread? and yet these blasphemous heretics vvoulde have the
blessed Sacrament to be no better, and so make it worse then that which was but
a figure of the Sacrament. O but the thing it self (this blessed Sacrament of
ours (Christ's body and blood) as far exceeds that Manna of old, as the
Sun exceeds the morning star the forerunner thereof in brightness.
Almighty Exodus 16.
God when he rayned Manna down from heaven, the Jews knowing not what it was
(for it did lie upon the earth like hoar dew, or the seed of the Coriander
brayed with a pestle) meruailing said, Manhu, that is, quid est hoc what is
this? to whom Moses answered as from God, iste est panis etc. this is the
bread our Lord has given you to eat. Now in this Manna there is a
marvelous and strange quality, which was, that he that gathered more then his
fellows, had but to suffice, and he that gathered less had as much to
suffice, as he that gathered more, and all sufficient and enough. Now in this
blessed Sacrament of the Altar, Christ's body, though it far exceed man's
reason to know the manner how it is, yet we must most certainly, and
steadfastly believe our true Moses which is Christ, who tells us it is the
bread that came down from heaven, that is his very body and blood. What a
goodly figure then was this Manna of our most pure and B. Sacrament of the
Altar? Manna came down from heaven, our Sacrament more: It was to every one
that which he liked best, our Sacrament more: a little suffised thereof as well
as a great deal, our Sacrament more: the murmering Jews repined at Manna, and
our murmering heretics do at our B. Sacrament much more* the bodies of the
Jews were fed with Manna, and our bodies and souls with the body and blood
of our Lord Jesus in this blessed Sacrament much more. Thus you see how the
figure answers and foresheweth that holy thing of our Lord, and what an
excellent and unspeakable thing this B. Sacrament of the Altar is, when the
very shadow of it ( Manna that betokened it so long before) was of such
excellency and so miraculous, then how worthy and miraculous I say, is the
thing it self, and how base conceits have the heretics of Christ, and how
unworthy and unsavory this their Comunion Caluinisticall bread is in respect of
the Jews Manna the very figure of our most B. Sacrament. 3. Reg. 19.
That bread which Elias did eat (by virtue whereof he arrived to the mount of
God Horeb) is a figure likewise that by virtue of our bread of life in the
Sacrament, we shall arrive to the mount of God the kingdom of heaven: that
bread baken under ashes and the bread of proposition likewise ever kept in
store. That Paschal lamb that with such The Paschall lamb
solemnity was eaten when the children of Israel passed through the red Sea
to the land of promise, O what a notable figure is it of the B. Lamb of God
upon the Altar in this B. Sacrament? and what preparation and disposition there
ought to be to receive the same, we be taught by the figure. The lamb was eaten
with Exodus 12
wild lettuse, signifying to us with what sharp and bitter tears, and
contrition for our sins we ought to receive the Lamb of God in this B.
sacrament. They did eat it with their raines girt, betokening unto us the
pureness, and chastity we ought to come with all to this lamb of God. They had
staves in their hands, and did eat with have, whereby we be taught that this
is the true food of us wayfaring-men hereupon earth. They eat it roasted, that
we should pre pare our selves to this sweet lamb of God with hot love, that
is fervent charity: and whatsoever was left was burnt with fire, giving us
thereby to understand that whatsoever we cannot by reason comprehend of this
divine mystery, that we are to consume and burn up in our selves by most
faithful fervent love and charity. For perfect love to God supplieth all our
defects, all this teaches us with what worthy preparation we ought to come to
our most blessed Sacrament the Lamb of God, prefigured by this paschall Lamb
of the Jews, which with such preparation was eaten, but what needs all this
ado for bare bakers bread John Caluins Communion.

Chap. XXVIII. Wherein is touched how this Sacrament is also a sacrifice daily
vnbloudely offered by Priests, and propitiatory for the quick and the dead,
and that it is the only sacrifice whereby God is chiefly honored and
worshipped.
NOW this B. Sacrament of ours is also our own only, most pure, and unbloody
sacrifice of the Church, whereby God is chiefly worshipped, his wrath appeased,
by means whereof grace and salvation is given to us from that most gracious,
and bloody sacrifice of the Cross, once there offered after a bloody manner
for all, as the full and superabundant price of our redemption, but here daily
upon the Altar after an unbloody sort, to make us partakers of the same
sacrifice once bloudely offered, but in both places on the Altar of the Cross,
and here in this blessed Sacrament one and the same Christ. Which sacrifice was
prefigured by that of Melchisedech, who offered sacrifice Genesis 14. 18. Heb. 7.
3. and 4.
in bread and wine, and was the Priest of the most high God, whose father and
mother is unknown: so our B. sacrifice then (though not bread and wine, but
the very body and blood of Christ) is consecrated, and offered under the
likeness of bread and wine. Which blessed Sacrament was offered at Christ's
last supper a sacrifice also, he our Redeemer in his Disciples giuinge
Priests authority to consecrate and offer the same, and so he remains in
them (being daily offered up by their ministry) A Priest for ever according to
the order of Melchisedech, who was without mother according to his Godhead,
and without father according to his manhood, and so figured and foreshewed by
Melchisedech, whereof holy David in spirit called our Savior Psalm. 109.
Christ (foreseeing our blessed Sacrifice) A priest for ever according to the
order of Melchisedech, if he be a Priest, then he must needs offer sacrifice,
but he never offered sacrifice (save only at his last supper) I mean after the
order of Melchisedech. Wherefore we offering or doing the same he did at his
last supper (that is consecrating his body and blood) it follows that this
Sacrament of ours is also a sacrifice, yea and that propitiatorye both for the
quick and the dead, which as prophesied. Daniel the prophet is Judge
sacrificium. A continual sacrifice, that never shall cease to the worlds end
(save that the public administration thereof by Daniels prophecy Daniell Cap.
12. Malachy. cap. 13
shall cease in Antechristes time) but shall (as prophesied Malachie the
prophet) Be offered a pure oblation and sacrifice in every place. What other is
that but the holy Sacrifice of the Mass? Which sacrifice of it self (though
the Priest may often be unworthy) is ever acceptable Ex ^pere operato (as
divines term it) in Gods sight, because this sacrifice is his only son in
whom he is well pleased. If they say the Prophet meant the sacrifice of a
pure heart, it is not so, for no man can say his heart is altogether pure from
sin at least from a soul, or light thought: if they say it was the sacrifice
upon the Cross which the prophet foretold, that cannot be, because it was but
in one place, wherefore it must needs follow the prophet foretold, the one
only, pure, and unbloody Sacrament and sacrafice of the Altar at Mass offered
in every place, and in steed of all those blouddy sacrifices of old. From the
rising Psalm. 112.
of the son to the setting of the same again. Whereby you see this B.
Sacrament was instituted by Christ, not only as a healthful medicine and food
of our souls, but also that it might be offered continually as the chief and
proper sacrifice of the new testament for a sufficient thanksgiving to God the
father, and continual memory of our L. Jesus his bitter Passion, till his
coming again, whereby we eschew the evils of this life, obtain remission of
sins with the grace of God, and glory in the world to come. And because Christ
bad the Apostles and Priests of the new Testament do or sacrifice this in
memory of him, his Incarnation, Life, Passion and Resurrection: therefore as
by Christ's institution it is a sacrifice and lively representation, especially
of his death and Passion: So every thing about the Altar (as the ornaments,
ceremonies, and actions of the priest at Mass) do chiefly represent, and
reduce into our memories the same. And if I would stand to recite the
Scriptures, Councels, and Fathers to this purpose that call it an host, an
oblation, a pure and unbloody Sacrifice, the price of our Redemption, a
healthful Sacrifice, and the like, I might fill great volumes, but I must be
brief. Neither is it my purpose to answer here all heretical objections;
neither to make any long discourse of so unspeakable a matter, for to give or
set down the full doctrine hereof would require and fill (as I said) many and
lardge books, which already of most learned men be written. My purpose is
here but to instruct the simple and unlearned, who ought rather to ground them
selves in true faith and belief, then to look into such high mysteries to
comprehend Gods mighty works by reason. For what is man to compare as it were
himself with God, to think to contain him whom heaven and earth cannot
hold? for what is one man in respect of so many men, or what be al men in
respect of God? Man is (as it were) a mite, like a vanity, a puff of wind; God
is mighty, incomprehensible, yea great in the least things, without variance
or inconstancy, at a beck of whose finger the very heavens, and earth do
tremble and quake, the deapth of whose mighty works we cannot reach unto, no
not in the least things, or creatures we daily see here before our eyes. Who
can number the stars or give a just account of their swift course, without
going one jot out of order from the beginning of the world to this day? the
very herbs, plants, and trees we see do daily grow and increase. Who is so
wise that can discern or say now at this very instant I perceive the
increase? Again when they be as it were dead in vvinter who can say they
shall so flourish in summer, but he that has experience? Imagine some man
brought up in some cave under the earth, never seeing light nor conuersing with
men, If one should come unto him on a sudden, and discourse with him of
colors black and green, and the like, tell him of the spring the course of
the son, moon and stars, would he not wonder and think them above reason,
till he saw and perceived them as we do? If then these things so familiar to
us seem so admirable to those that be unaccustomed to see them, or if we our
selves cannot give a reason to the depth of the least things, can we think to
comprehend God in the greatest? would we have God so little, that he cannot
exceed our reason? And yet (o blasphemy and malicious blindness) such be the
heretics of our time, who because they cannot attain by humane reason to the
depth of this mystery of Christ's body in the Sacrament, therefore they forsake
faith and belief in Christ herein, against both truth and reason. O heretic
shall Christ cease to be with us according to his promise, because thou art
unable of reason? Nay he shall be when thou art not.

Chap. XXIX. Of the great love and humility of Christ in this Blessed
Sacrament, and of the devotion of Christians of old toward the same.
THis Blessed Lord Jesus the^ perfect God and man, which enclosed himself for
our sakes in the womb of the most Blessed Virgin, when as him the heaven of
heavens cannot comprehend, is also with us according to his word in the least
particle of the B. Sacrament whole and perfect Christ, and enters into the
Cottage of our homely bodies, is allwaies delighted to be with the sons of
men, and yet is still incomprehensible, and al glorious with his father in
heaven, and that by his mighty power to whom nothing is impossible. But o how
happy was the time when men believed steadfastly and doubted nothing of Gods
promise in this his so unspeakable a gift, and so worthelye received the
fruits thereof, whereas miscreantes now both deny the truth, and show
themselves most ingratfull in not only denying the truth, but thinking most
basely of his divine ordinance. O horrible ingratitude, in steed of the Prince
and king of heaven and earth left us in this Sacrament, to feed men with a
piece of beead, like to the unclean hogg that refuses the precious pearl,
and feeddeth of the pease shaling in the clay. O what could CHRIST have done
more for us then he did, and how more unthankful can these men show themselves
to him then they do, which most displeases him, and hinders his bountye
toward us, for this unthankfulness is a vice that dries up the fountain of
Gods grace in man's soul. Fly then such lying Masters (I say) and their
wicked devises, taste no more of their bait that draws to death but believe,
and prepare your selves with all purity of body and soul to receive in the
blessed Sacrament, Christ the food of life, and so you shall reap the
wonderful fruits thereof, which be many and infinite. First by worthy
receiving of this most venerable Sacrament, many sins we could not remember
in confession be forgiven us, so hot is the fire of GODS love toward us
herein, if we receive him with fervor, that it again boileth and consumes
in us al defects, and imperfections with the relikes of sin, as fire
purifieth mettalls from dross and corruption, which was signified by the
Pascall lamb roasted and those holocausts, or whole burnt sacrifices of the
law. Besides this, it gives most plentifully of grace to the well disposed,
it infeebleth our passions, and inordinate motions, makes less and weaker all
tentations bodily and ghostly, gives strength that we consent not to them,
but to our great merit may overcome them. Wherefore says a blessed Father. If
thou feel not so often violent tentations of the fleash, thank Christ for the
grace that this holy Sacrament works in thee. Moreover in this B. Sacrament
we chiefly exercise faith, to our greatest merit, believing Christ above
reason, and not our senses, and that right worthily. For if as we read of a
sort of Philosophers, they would c^edit what their Masters said, and never
reason the matter but say Ipse dixit, our Master said it, accounting it a sure
ground: great reason then have we Christians to give credit to our Master
Christ the truth, whose words cannot fail, reasoning no farther but say Ipse
dixit, Christ our Master said, This is my body: that he said it, this is a
sure ground. Likewise in worthy offering and receiving this B. Sacrament we
give due thanks to God for his wonderful benefits, which of our selves we
could never be able: whereupon the holy Prophet in spirit long before
(considering the wonderful benefits of God bestowed herein, which of himself
man could never be able to requite) burst our into these words. Quid retribuam
Domino Psalm. 115.
etc. O what shall I requite to my Lord God for all his goodness bestowed on
me, I will (says he) take the Cup of our Lord and call upon his holy name. See
the mercy of God who bestows such benefits upon us, that none is able to
requite, and yet we in receiving these precious gifts, and offering his
benefits to him again, he accepts it for a sufficient requital. Also in
this B. Sacrament (as I said before) we represent mostliuely Christ's Passion
before our eyes, and imitate him therein. This is a sacrifice propitiatory both
for the quick and the dead, which with the three Sages we ought to honor
with all divine honor and worship, prostrate both in body and mind, as the
holy Prophet foretold, saying, All the families of nations should worship
in his sight. Psalm. 21.
And in an other place, Adorabunr sca^ellum, etc. they shall worship his
footestoole, that is (as S. Augustnie understands) his body or humanity, the
seat, or his footestoole as united to his divinity. By this Sacrament and
sacrifice we worship God, and chiefly acknowledge there is a true God: by
this sacrifice Gods wrath is chiefly auerted, yea and sufficiently appeased for
our I mean it is sufficient of it self, as the example of that upon the
Cross, but to us according to our disposition.
sins, which sacrifice ever acceptable in his sight he never denies, as
being most glorified thereby, which is his only most dear son. So that it is
joyful to Angels in heaven, comfortable to men in earth, and healthful to the
faithful departed, and the chief honor to God here on earth; neither is
there any thing so sufficient a remedy to release the faithful departed
speedely of their pains, and bring them to the glory of God, as this Sacrament
and sacrifice. To be brief, this blessed Sacrament, and our pure and vubloudy
sacrifice Christ's very body and blood in deed, is the very body and blood that
was borne of the B. Virgin, and suffered death upon the Cross* by means
whereof we be incorporate, united, or knit unto Christ our head, made one
flesh of his saered flesh and blood, by means whereof we receive herein a
pleadge most sovereign to appear glorious with him at the last day. Who is
it then, but for to be worthily partaker of so great a benefit if he well
consider, but would willingly loose two hundred marks, for that pain
besides imprisonment (O doleful days) English statutes set down for hearing
one Mass. For so long as we remain in the knot of peace, unity, and charity,
that is be members of Christ's mystical body the Church by worthily receiving
this venerable Sacrament, his very body: so long we be the very flesh and body
of Christ, flesh of his sacred flesh and blood, and may say with a reverent
Father to our unspeakable comfort, we are thy flesh and blood (O Judge) of the
living and the dead, we are thy members how unworthy soever, yet thy members
have we never left off, or ceased to be, we never from thy body by heresy or
schism divided our selves: thy flesh (good Lord) then will thou not despise,
thy flesh thou will not hate, thy flesh thou will never condemn, we have no
hope, no trust, no other glory, but that thou art our flesh, and we thy flesh.

Chap. XXX. Containing a breife recapitulation of things touched in the
treatise of this Sacrament, and declaring that lay persons be not desrauded of
the blood of Christ, nor healthful fruit of the Sacrament in receiving under
one kind.
O The infinite love of Christ to mankind, that with such sweet, pure, and
undefiled kisses and imbracings of love and charity, knits and tieth us fast
together unto him. O Lord it is marvel that o^r hearts do not for love as it
were burst asonder, when we consider the most dear and tender love of Christ
toward us, for love you know deserves love again: but what greater love
could Christ show us, in not only dying for us, but still in this unspeakable
mystery remaining with us? Was there ever Pellicane that so tendered her young
ones, who though she fed them with her blood, yet in the end she forsakes
them? was there ever mother, that so dearly looued her children, as christ does
us, who said and persormeth it, that If a mother can forget the only son of
her womb, yet will he never forget nor forsake us? who not only feeds us
with the sweet milk of his holy word the fruit full dew of his grace, takes
compassion upon us, even with shedding his blood, imbrasing us with his
stretched out arms of mercy upon the Cross: but also still remains with us,
even to the end of the world, fostring us with his very body, be dewing and
washing us also with his most sweet and precious blood. O heart why do thou
not relent? why art thou so hard? how can thou abstain from tears for pure
love of that sweet Savior and Redeemer? why art thou not appalled with fear?
why art thou not stricken with love? why art thou not wholly inflamed with
devotion which is often afforded to the devout receauers hereof? for by how much
this mystery is above man's reason, by so much the fervent love and devotion
(bestowed on us by the fountain of Gods grace given us therein) is of more
virtue and abundance. If S. Peter when he had but one glimce of Gods glory,
when he but tasted as it were a drop of his love in Mount Thabor, thought it
good to stay there, and never to depart. When we receive hear a fountain of
his love, a pleadge of his glory, the celestial dew of all grace, why
should we not fully content, satiate, and repose our selves herein? O if such
disposition is made for the receipt of some noble King in his subjects house,
how ought we to cleanse our hearts and minds, to purify our bodies, to
sweep our spirits with compunction and penitent sorrow of heart for our
sins (which be the only things that be foul in Gods sight and displease
him) to confess with mouth, to satisfy with deed, to apply all the
members of our bodies, and powers of our souls to entertain him, that so our
souls and bodies may be an habition for Christ and tabernacle of the holy
Ghost. But O sweet Savior if my vessel were of the purest metal, far
more excellent then gold, and precious s^ones, it were too base for thy
Majesty whom those glorious Angelical spirits* or the heavens cannot
comprehend; and where is then thy habitation, but only in pure minds and
souls? Give me then grace (good Lord) to fly sin, to serve and love thee,
so to dwell in thee that thou m^yst inhabit in me. For in thee I can do all
things, but without thee nothing: thou art the high Priest and true Sacrifice,
thou art the offerer, and pure oblation it self CHRIST JESUS our Lord and
God, the true MESSIAH, and Savior of the world, thou be blessed for
evermore. To be brief, you see now by this little which is said, the
vvonderfull goodness of CHRIST, in leauinge us his blessed body and blood in
this holy Sacrament, whereby we all have life and grace, and salvation in our
souls: for as our bodies cannot live without bread: so our souls cannot
live without this bread of life Christ's body given us herein* as he said
Unless you Ioh. 6. 53.
eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood, you shall not have
life in you. whereby you see how these new lying Masters heretics be worse
then murderers, that pine and murder men's souls, in that they deprive and rob
you of so unspeakable a benefitte, as Christ's body and most blessed blood
given at Mass, giving you poison in stead thereof (a piece of poluted bakers
bread) wherein is no salvation, but (alas) quite contrary as before I have
proved. No other remedy then (if you will save your souls) but fly their
company and Communion, and so by cleansing your selves from sin by healthful
contrite Confession that you may be justified, make your selves apt vessels
to receive grace (that is become Catholics) reconcile your selves to God, to
the househould of faith, to CHRIST'S holy Catholic Church, wherein only and no
where else (assure your selves as before God the everlasting truth) you shall
receive the bread of life, and salvation. You have heard here, how that which
CHRIST left us at his last supper is a Sacrament and Sacrifice, the very body
and blood of our Redeemer, under the form or likeness of bread and wine,
being perfectly and wholly transubstantiated, or converted into CHRIST'S body
and blood: and how with divine honor we ought to adore and worship the
same. By the way also I have touched a little sum of the vvonderfull effects,
and fruits of the same that we daily receive, and what peril of soul you
be in for want of the same, till you come to better estate. Hasten then out
of Babylon, that is sin and heresy, that you may offer in Jerusalem
Sacrifice, which only may please God, whom only we ought to serve, and
that is in the unity of his holy Catholic Church. The lawful Minister of
this Sacrament is a lawful Priest, wherefore n^ Protestant Minister can
consecrate, because wanting lavvfull vocation and authority he is no Priest.
The matter to consecrate with all is unleavened bread and wine of the grape,
whereunto is putt some water for a mystery, whereunto when Gods son CHRIST'S
own word (spoken by a lawful Priest with intention to consecrate) comes,
of bread and wine is made the body and blood of Christ, who gave that power
to a Priest he never did to Angels, nor his Blessed mother, that is to
consecrate his body. This Sacrament (as I have said often before) is far
above reason, but submitting our reason to true faith it greatly increases our
merit. For as says Saint Gregory, Gods work is not merueilous if it be
comprehended in reason, neither has faith merit where man's reason gives
experience. The chief thing then of this blessed Sacrament is Christ's body
and blood, with the vvounderfull graces and gifts of God bestowed therein,
commonly called the effects and fruits thereof: which that we may not with
Judas receive to our damnation, but with Saint Peter to our rising again and
endless Salvation, I beseech our LORD that we may be armed with true and
firm faith, pure and innocent life, fervent love and charity, that as for our
sins for want of these virtues it now many years has by Gods Judgment, and
wrath been taken from us, to our unspeakable loss and the continual grief
of all good men: So by renewing these virtues again in us, and by amending our
lives, it once again by Gods special grace may be restored to us, to the
honor and glory of his holy name, to the confusion of the Devil and all his
members, and to our unspeakable comfort and endless joy in heaven: that
whereas here we now truly receive CHRIST in this unspeakable mystery,
there we may be fed and enjoy his presence in that endless glory, which
he onr LORD JESUS grant who be blessed for ever. But yet moreover one thing
is to be considered touching the manner of receiving this blessed Sacrament,
which is, that although CHRIST gave this blessed Sacrament unto his Apostles
under both kinds, that is, his body and blood apart, and although both Bishops
and Priests, as often as they celebrate Mass according to Christ's institution,
are to receive under both kinds: yet the holy Church, upon most weighty
consideration gives the lay people but only one kind (that is the holy Host
Christ's body) and that which the Priest or Clarke gives them after in the
Chalice, or in a glass, is but wine to wash their mouths, lest any of the
holy Host should be left behind, or stick in the mouth; neither are lay
persons in this receiving under one kind defrauded of the blood of Christ,
nay they receive in that one kind as fully and perfectly Christ, as the Priest
(that may lively represent Christ's Passion, and shedding of his blood, as the
public Minister of the Church) receaueth both. For though his body be
consecrated apart, and his blood apart in mystery, to signify the effusion
thereof, and his death in his Passion, yet Christ is not divided, and therefore
whosoever receaueth his body, likewise receaueth his blood, as being now
inseperably joined together. For although through the force of the words of the
Sacrament by consecration, the body and blood be severally present upon the
Altar, yet by the concommitance, natural, and inseparable union betwixt them,
it necessarily follows, that where the body is, there also is the blood, and
where the blood, there likewise the body: Yet sor fear of inconveniences, that
might chance (if the common people should receive under both kinds) yea and
for conservation of uniformity in receiving this B. Sacrament (the knot of
peace in all persons, and places of the world) and for other just causes, the
holy Church, who has to dispose of this B. Sacrament (as of the rest according
to time* and place) for the most edifying of the people, gives it them under
one kind only, knowing that Christ has promised as much grace and salvation
to the one kind as to both. For he that said, the 6. of S. John. Unless you
eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, you shall not have
life in you, he likewise in the same chapter said, He that eats this bread
shall live for ever, yea he our Savior likewise as appears the 24. Chap. of
S. Luke gave it two of his disciples under one kind when he took bread,
blessed, and gave to them, and their eyes were opened and they knew him, which
was that bread (as many learned fathers understand) that bread of life (I
say) that came down from heaven Christ himself his blessed body, which would
GOD the heretics in true faith and charity would dispose them selves with
us, yea and the Disciples of Christ's to receive: then no doubt their eyes
would be opened to see and be partakers of the truth, whose eyes (alas)
infidelity, pride, and other sins have so blinded, that whereas at first some
of them began to contend for the cup the blood of our Lord: in breaking unity
and charity, in departing from the church, they have of Gods hea uy justice and
judgment (who in obstinat sinners suffers one sin to be the punishment of
an other) lost both body, blood, the price of their redemption and al. Likewise
as it appears in the acts of the Apostles, they also themselus Act. 2. 42.
and ca. 20. 7
sometimes gave it the people under one kind, as the Church now universally
does through the whole world practice and use, and of most ancient time the
people received under one kind, as by many testimonies and miraculous examples
(when in the Primative Church this B. Sacrament under one kind (as now) was
reserved, carried about, and given to the lay people) if leisure and time would
permit me, I could show and most evidently prove. The Ark of God also carried
about the wales of Hierico with solemnity of trumpets, whereby the munitions of
the impious fell down, betokening this B. Sacrament the Arc of the living God
with all honor solemnly carried in Procession, with all jubely of hearts,
melody of voices, gravity of the Ecclesiastical and noble personages, adorned
with most precious attire and rich ornaments, assisted with troops of the
devout people of both sects, every one occupied in their degree: some hanging
the streets and wales with cloth of their best Tapestrie and Aurice, like the
true Israelites that furnished the tabernacle, and adorned Salomons temple with
their riches and Jewels: others with the devout companies of the Jews spread
their garments in the ways, and strew the streats with rushes, herbs,
flowers, palm boughs, and fragment blossoms: others like valiant soldiers of
that worthy Gedeon carry with exultations torches, and lights in their
hands, and sound out with great solemnity, and pleasant harmony the sacred
bells, material trumpets of Christ and his Church, and other musical
instruments: others with holy Joseph, Nichodemus, and those devout women cover
(as is meet) the most maiesticall and venerable Sacrament the most blessed
body of our Lord with their white and finest sindons, and most precious
Jewels: others with all, or with the greatest part of their riches and
posessions, chiefly in the honor hereof, have erected Altars of the best
marble, silver, gold, and precious s^ones, and have builded most magnificent
temples in diverse nations of the world, little inferour to Salomons temple in
greatness, but far excceding it in true honor and glory by the pure, gratfull,
and sincere worship of God in that healthful Sacrisice. In temples this divine
mystery is reserved in guilt tabernacle with lamp; and light to the comfort of
the faithful, and health of the sick, from hence in solemn procession it is
carried in holy vessel and sacred hands through Church, princely street and
covered path; young and old of all states and degrees prostrating themselves
in body and mind, singing with joyful hearts and sweet consent in voice with
those devout children of God. Hosanna filio Ioh. 12. 13.
David, blessed be he that comes in the name of our Lord. And so the devout
army of God carrying the banners displaied with the triumphant ensign, and
standerd of the Cross, beseech him for Christ his sons sake there present,
al of one heart and accord, that the rocks of sin and walls of Satan may be
pulled down, that the people of God may have true liberty, the weeds of
iniquitye may be rooted out, true virtue may be exalted, justice executed, God
chieflye honored and gloryfied in his people, that so Christ resting in his
sacred tabernacle and remaining in his holy Church, Hierico being ruinated,
destroyed, and quite razed down, the wales of Jerusalem may be builded up.
Then may we sing exultantibus animis, with Psalm. 50.
joyful hearts, Tunc acceptabis sacrificium iustitiae oblationes and
holocausta, tunc imponent super altar tuum vitulos. Then O Lord, we purified
by grace in heart, and soul from sin, with due composition also, and decency
of body wholly offering our selves to thee, as thou offeredst thy self far
more bountifully for us, in contrite and humble heart by Christ here our high
Priest the only pure, and most acceptable Sacrifice; we (I say) will offer
to thee O God, and thou for JESUS thy sons sake Shall accept our sacrifices
of prayers and thanksgiving oblations of justice, the due, sincere, and upright
charitable dea ling to vard our neighbors, with whole burnt offerings of
burning heavenly desires, with fervent love above measure to our loving L.
above, then upon the Altar of our hearts, with incensed and divine affections
kindled with devotion shall we make a feast to God and his Angels, who delight
to rest and dwell with pure souls, devout, often, and worthy receauers of this*
blessed Sacrament: then shall we in thy Church militant here in earth over all
nations triumpth in true and souud faith: then with constant patience the Lady
of wisdom, and procurice of true honor, shall we in all adversities expect
joyfully thy B. coming. Then for thy love with arms of love and charity shall
we embrace both friend and foe, fructifying in good works, wishing and
procuring to our power the good of all men: then shall christ enter into us
with divine presence and holy grace, and we rest and repast our selves of, and
in him by his bountefull savor. Then shall we enter, and repose in him by
tasting his sweetness, and go forth and contemplate his mighty power and goodness
in all creatures, and superabundantly find within and without (which none can
tell but he that has found it) repast and refection of his love, his sweetness,
his power, majesty, bounty, glory, and goodness. So reliquie cogitaticnum etc.
the remnant of spiritual and pure thoughts conceived by the devout tasting,
and most sweet meditation of this divine mystery, shall refresh us, and make in
our hearts a festiual day, a healthful banquet, an immortal and most
delightful supper full of all joy and gladness. Then shall we be so enamored
with his love that with his svveete spouse in her Canticles, we burst out and
say Fasciculus Mirrhe, Cap. 1.
dilectus meus mihi, etc. My beloved to me is a poesy of Mirrhe, of svveete
odoriferous and fragant flowers, I will embrace him, and he shall rest between
my breasts in my very heart. Tenui, nec demittam Cap. 3.
eum, I have kept him etc. I will hold him fast, I will hold him fast, and
never let him go. Thus exulting to GOD here upon the Altars of our hearts and
souls thus offered in his sight, far better pleasing God then oblations, and
sacrifices of thousands of those bloody sacrifices of calves and bulls. Then
finally in that glorious triumphant Church a boue shall we laud, and glorify
almighty god, through christ Jesus his most sweet and only son, that pure and
innocent Lamb, daily offered here in sacrifice upon the Altar in a mystery,
and sitting at his Fathers right hand in a supereminent glory, who to our
bodies and souls is the true food of grace and glory that perishes not, but
remains to life everlasting, who be blessed and honored of all creatures for
evermore.

Amen.
Chap. XXXI. Of holy Order, what it is, by whom it was ordained, and of ho^e
many degrees it consists* and that no man rashly without due consideration
ought to take upon him the same.
THE fifth Sacrament is holy Order: as then in Baptism we be new regenerate,
or borne in Christ, in Confirmation strengthened, in Penance after our wounds
and faults healed, and raised up again, in the holy Sacrament of the Altar
most abundantly fed to make us lively Soldiers of Christ, and that we may last
out to our journeys end, and like royal Soldiers obtain the victory: so by
this holy Sacrament of Order christ's kingdom and common weal his holy Church,
as a most valiant army set in most mighty noble order, is prepared to triumph
over those Princes of darkness, perpetual enemies of mankind, and this
wretched world. For if all things God has ordained be well ordered, much
more his holy Church so dearly beloved of him, that not only all things he
created in heaven and in earth tend to the salvation of it, but he himself
shed his blood for it. For even as God in his triumpha^t Church in heaven, has
some higher, some lower orders of Angels: even so in his Church militant here
in earth there be diverse degrees in holy order all te^ding to the due service
of God, as Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and other inferior orders, whereof some
succeed the Apostles, others the Disciples of Christ, and coadjutors of the
Apostles, al lawful messengers and workmen of Christ, ad Ephesians. 4. 12.
consummationem sanctoru^ in opus ministerit, duly to administer and execute
his wo^ke, to bring his elect servants to perfection. Order then being
instituted by Christ, and given by imposition of hands (as appears by holy
Scripture) is a Sacrament you see ordained by Christ, whereby his Church is
well disposed and governed, yea and defended against all foraine incursions.
Now this holy order which is chiefly and principally called Priesthood
consists of many orders, I mean the other inferior orders appertayning to
it. Four inferior orders Other inferior orders every one in their degree, be
also properly called Order but chiefly Priesthood whereunto the other inferior
be long.
there be, which be preparatio^s to Priesthood, which though they bind not to
chastity as the 3. higher orders do, yet it is not co^nuenient that any take
the^ but such as have mind to be Priests, yet there is first a preparation to
these 4. inferior orders, which we call the first tonsure, whereby a man before
he enter to take holy orders, is taught by thus cutting of the hair to shake
of all worldly cares, to cut of al superfluous desires and transitory things,
that may hinder him from heavenly contemplation and the due service of almighty
God. The first of these lower orders is called the Ostiary, that is the door
keeper, that has by virtue of that office given him (which the keys the
Bishop gives him does betoken) power to keep, and shut the Church doors to
keep out heretics and infidels, and preserve enclosed from profane hands
the holy vestures, and sacred vessels of Christ. The second order is the
Reader, that by the book which the Bishop gives him may read holy lessons
of holy Writ in the Church. The third order is called an Exorcist, which has
power given him to expel and cast out Devils, not by witchcraft and
superstition, as Southsayers, Conjurers, and Witches have, openly and secretly
calling upon the Devil: but by the word of God and authority given him by the
Church. The fourth of the lesser orders is called an Acolite that may bring in
cruets wine, and water to the altar to serve the Priest, clothes, candels,
incense, lights, and other things necessary. And these 4. orders be degrees
toward the 3. higher orders of Priesthood, which declare what a sovereign
thing it is, and that no man ought rashly, or presumptuously to ascend to so
high a dignity without due consideration, preparation, and by degrees. For if
in the old law the Priests had their Leuits and other inferior ministers to
serve them in their bloody sacrifice, how much more convenient is it in this
law of grace, that Priests which serve the living God with the pure unbloody
sacrifice of Christ at the Altar, have due Ministers and seruitors, which none
but they so authorized can properly exercise. These inferior orders in the
Primitive church it seems were better known and practiced with more
solemnity, then now they be, though in Cathedral Churches to this day in
Catholic countries they be solemnly used, neither without them can any take
Priesthood without sin.

Chap. XXXII. Of the higher orders, and how necessary by Gods ordinance one
head is over the rest.
THree higher orders there be that bind to chastity, yea the lowest of them,
which when any takes ipso facto, he is bound to perpetual chastity. The first
is called Subdeaco^ship, which is a degree under a Deacon, and has authority
given him by the Bishop solemnly to read the Epistle, as the Deaco^ has
authority likewise so emnly to read and sing the Gospel, and so to prepare the
Chalice with other things about the Priest at Mass. Likewise the order of
Deaco^ship was in the primitive Church of great authority, as appears by S.
Stephen who was a Deacon, and others. The highest order is Priesthood, which
office and function is given by the Bishop when he gives the Pattyn and
Chalice with bread and wine, using the words, whereby he gives authority
from Christ to consecrate the very body and blood of Christ, and to remitt
sins, when he said. Receive ye the holy John. 20. and. Math 18.
ghost: Whose sins you remit they be remitted, and whose sins you retain
they be retained. This Sacrament of order is one of the three Sacraments
whereof Baptime and Confirmation be the other two, that imprinteth in man's
soul a charecter, that is a note, or sign distinctiue for ever from all other
persons 1. Tim. 4. 2. Tim. 1.
that have not received those sacraments; which three sacraments cannot be
itterated, that is, one person cannot take them twice. For be a man never so
evil if he be baptized he is ever a Christian though he forsake his faith, and
shall be so judged of Christ at the last day, from others that are infidells:
and he that is once a Priest, become he never so evil, let him take a
strumpet, and do what he will, yea though he were degraded yet has he still
that note in his soul of Priesthood, and if he would attempt to consecrate
in never so evil state of life, he does it as verily as any good Priest,
though to his own damnation. For the dignity of the Sacrament depends not of
the power of man, but of God: yet if we know the Priest to be a Schismaticke,
Heretic, or openly excommunicate, we ought then in no case to be present at
his Mass. The Bishop has jurisdiction over the Priest, and the Archbishop
over many Bishops, and the Patriarche over many provinces, and the Pope as
much to say Father of fathers) is the high Priest of God, Vicegerent here of
Christ in earth, Bishop of Bishops, Head and chief ruler in spiritual matters
over all Princes, Priests, Bishops, and over the whole Church under Christ her
head; and who so gainesaith this obstinately is a proud rebellious heretic,
and traitor to Jesus our chief head, Lord, and King, and the sweet spouse his
Church, and deserves severe punishment of body also, as by such obstinacy (as
long as he continues therein) he is already damned in soul: yea in the old
law before Christ it was death to disobey the high Priest, He that is proud,
says holy Scripture, Deuteronomy. ca. 17.
and will not obey the commandment of the Priest, let that man die the death,
that so mischief may be taken out of the people of God. For none be so
pernicious members to Christian religion, as those that go about to break the
peace of the Church, and break unity and concord, which all those do that
bark against the Pope Gods Lieuetenant Christ's Vicar here on earth, yea and
(as the holy Fathers of old do record) it has ever been the custom of
heretics to bark against the rock of S. Peter, that Apostolic Sea the Pope,
because that against that rock heresy never has, nor can possibly prevail,
but falling upon it is burst asunder: yea and says S. Jerome, Christ chose
one Head amongst the rest that a head being made, and so ordained over the rest
all occasion of Schism or division might be taken a way, for we see yea in
very policy that no kingdom, no common weal, or house with out one head can
stand, much less it is fit that Gods house so well ordered, and sure that it
may not be moved, should be without her head or steward. But to be head in
spiritual matters belongs neither to king nor temporal Prince, to no
temporal man, much less to a woman to whom it is Mulieres in Ecclesia dei
taceant. 1. Cor. 14. 34.
not lawful to speak in the Church (as by Gods word I could prove at large)
much lesseto govern in the Church. This power was chiefly given to S. Peter
and his successors, and to the rest of the Apostles in their degrees, whereunto
other Bishops succeed Peter, and his successors, and as a secondary rock,
chief pillar, and head under Christ, govern the whole Church and others, and
his brethren, and fellow workmen be governors of particular Churches, as he
is of the universal Church chief Pastor and Father, having thereof the
chiefest charge. For unto S. Peter (after christ had asked him thrice whether
he loved him) he gave charge to feed his vniuer sall flock young and old,
seed my lambs John. 21. Math. 16. 18.
says he feed my sheep. Upon S. Peter likewise as the rock most sure under,
and next unto himself he laid the foundation of his Church, promising his
faith should never fail, which never has done to this day, neither in S.
Peter nor his successors, or ever shall to the end of the world. Let any
heretic (if he dare) avouch this of any of their Patriarchs at Geneua, or else
where, if any would be so impudent (as in deed they be shameless) all the world
may know him for a liar, as knowing their beginning and evil proceeding which
will have a worse end. But we dare avouch and can prove, because we are
authorized by Christ's holy word, that in S. Peter's chair, that is when any of
S. Peter's successors defines a matter of faith, intending to bind the whole
Church (though in private as a man he may err otherwise) yet therein he never
has nor can err, as being assisted by Gods holy Spirit. For the benefit of
the whole Church I have prayed for thee Peter Luc. 22. 32.
that thy says may not fail said Christ: in so much that we read of none that
ever herein quailed, that gods word may be true. Nay in the old Testament
before Agg. 2. 12
Christ, when there was doubt of any matter of religion, they had recourse to
the high Priest, and those of the stock of the Levites, in whom God ever
conserved true faith, though in a number it quailed in Israel. But the
heretics when they cannot answer by reason and authority, then they turn to
scoffing and railing either commonly by lying, or else like cursed Cham as he
did at his fathers secrets scoff, in scoffing and deriding the same: So do
they in discovering sins and defects of Popes and Prelates of the Church,
deride their parents though in deed above thirty of the Popes next after S.
Peter, did all suffer martyrdom for Christ, and many glorious Saints and
Doctors were of them since that time. Who more eloquent then S. Leo? who more
holy then S Gr^gory, which both were Popes with many more? But these, heretics
maliciously conceal, and if there were any that as men had sins or defects,
those they publish to the world. We grant in deed that Popes as they be men
may sin: but why for that (O heretic) do thou slander the chair of S.
Peter, wherein the Catholic faith shall ever undefiled continue? Why do
thou not remember that God can show the truth by an evil man, yea by a dumb
beast? what, did not Caiphas though an evil man, yet for that he was the
Bishop and high Priest, spoke true (prophesying of Christ) that it was
expedient, that one Ioh. 11. 50
should die for the people, that the whole should not perish? Nay did not
Christ him self say? Upon the chair of Moses do Math. 23 2. and 3.
sit the Scribes and Pharisees, do that they say, but do not as they do: for
they say, and do not. If therefore any Pastors of the Church lead evil lives,
they shall bear their own burden; neither ought we to follow them therein,
but to do as they bid us, that is to follow the truth touching matters of
faith, wherein the the chief Pastor cannot err: yet if we see defects in our
spiritual Pastors, it is not for us (as heretics do) to slander them,
uncover their defects, and that which is worse, to forsake the true faith for
their sakes: but rather with holy Sem and Iaphet to cover their nakedness, or as
that Christian Emperor Constantine did, who said that if he saw a Bishop do
a thing inconvenient he would rather cover it with his cloak then reveal it.
The reason is, that God^ name and the truth for man's fault should not be
blasphemed. Yet (God be blessed) the Church of Christ has ever in all Countries
had some good Pastors, whereas amongst heretics can possibly be none good.

Chap. XXXIII Of Gods severe punishment of diverse for arrogating to them selves
Priestly office, and how^ we are to obey our Pastors.
But admit that many were bad of life, must therefore Gods ordenance be
altered, and therefore any temporal King or Prince, yea that which is more
absurd tinckers and cobblers take upon them to be Pastors, and rulers in
spiritual causes? O why do they not remember, and be afraid how Allmighty
God of old from time to time punished such Luciferian pride, and intolerable
presumption, and arrogance. Chore, Dathon, and Abyron with Numeri cap. 16.
a number more of their conspiracy (who being not called, or chosen of God to
the high Priestly office and function, and yet sacrilegiously would presume to
to offer insence and do Sacrifice) did not fire from heaven consume them, and
the earth swallowe them up quick to hell, to the terror of al generations? That
false King Jeroboam that upon the Altar 3. Reg. 13.
in Samaria offered sacrifice did not god strike him lame? And in like sort did
he not plague those perfidious, and treacherous kings of Israel with sundry
plagues from time to time for their rebellion against that Catholic I^da,
that Preistly and Princely tribe his holy Church? Nay did not God strike Oza
with sudden Oza. 2. Reg. 6.
death but for only touching (with desire to uphold the same) the ark of God,
but a figure only of Christ's very, or mystical body the Church, not to be*
touched, or governed by lay men, but by Priests and Bishops lawfully called by
God as Aaron was? For to them and to none other Christ gave charge of his
^locke at his departure: nay there was neither King nor mighty Prince of many
years after Christ's time that were Christians, and yet the Church never wa^ted
her head and governors in spiritual matters, those were the Apostles and
Bishops their lawful successors unto who^e the holy Apostle exorteth us to
submitt our selves, saying Obedite praepositis vestris Heb. 13. 17.
and subiacete eis, obey your Prelates etc. for they watch as to give account
for your souls, and such Priests as rule and govern the Church well, the holy
Apostle 1. Tim. 5. 17.
accou^teth worthy double honor, those that labor in doctrine and in
preaching the truth. For to them the holy Apostle gave the charge. Attend says
he, Act. cap. 20. 28.
to your selves and the whole flock, wherein the holy Ghost has ordained you
Bishops regere Ecclesiam Dei, to rule or govern the Church of God. By these,
and many like places of holy Scripture it appears, that not temporal Kings
and Princes, but lawful Bishops be governors, and have supereminent power and
authority in the Church. This that noble Emperor Constantine, that was the
first Christian Emperor that most honored and enriched the Church, son to
S. Helene that noble Empress, that went pilgrim to Jerusalem, and
miraculously found out the holy Cross: this (I say) he well considered, that
it was the office of a King to be head of temporal matters in the common weal
only, as to execute justice, to punnish the offenders, to rule and command in
taxes, tribute, and in martial affairs: but not to be ruler at the Altar, not
to be head in the Church, not to give first censure, or judgment in spiritual
causes: in so much that this noble Emperor being called to that first and most
holy and general Council at Nice, where in the Arrian heretics 1300. years
ago were condemned, vvoulde sit at that Council in no other place, but in
the lowest place of all, acknowledging right worthily Priests, and Bishops in
spiritual causes his far betters and superiors, he well knew his duty, and
would not exceed his limits or office, knowing that it was the part of a King
to rule in the palace, but the Priest in the Church, so much did this mighty
Emperor (whom God so highly honored and blessed with temporal power and
spiritual graces) honor Priests, but espeacially the high Priest of God the
Pope, that he gave to him and his successors for ever the City of Rome, and
all the Territories thereunto belonging, giving place to the Vicar of Christ,
and removing the Imperial seat to Constantinople where Christian Emperors
many years after reigned, till that now for sin and heresy it is fallen
under the enemy of Christ that great tyrant the Turk^, with whom our
Protestants in England (o monstrous impiety) shake hands as is said to trouble
the whole state of Christendom, that they themselves may live in more
quietness at home: but no marvel, when they can have no help of God (who
hates the wicked and his iniquity) they run to the Devil, for like will to
like in every degree. Theodosius the Emperor for a slaughter by him committed
at Thessolonica being excommunicated by S. Ambrose Bishop of Millaine, and put
back by him from entering into the Church, entreated the Bishop he might enter
into the Church: for that (says he) David committed man slaughter, and yet
after pleased god. Yea says S. Ambrose, David offended which many Kings do,
but David did penance which many Kings do not, let me first see fruit of your
penance with David, and after we shall consider further. The Emperor fearing
Christ in his Priest the Bishop, returned with humility and tears, and many
days in his Palace did penance, till at length he was reconciled by S.
Ambrose and admitted into the Church. O how far did this worthy godly Bishop
differ from these false counterfeit Bishops of yours, that like flattering
Parasites to feed themselves and children, give Princes superiority in the
Church, so far be they from gainsaying any vice raygning amongst the^, which
one day they will have cause to curse, as contrariwise Theodosius for his
amendment had cause to bless the true Bishop S. Ambrose that plainly told him
of his fault, using the rod and authority of the Church over him, in so much
that therefore the good Emperor after more loved and commended him for it above
all men, esteeming. Ambrose worthy in deed to be Bishop. These noble
Emperors Constantine, Theodosius, and the like, that so feared, honored, and
reverenced Priests (which in England you see here tyrannical heretics so
greatly dishonor and cruelly murder) were of no less wit, learning,
valor, courage, honor, and power, then heretical Princes be now a days, nay
they were not only of far greater, worthyer, and of more excellency in all
princely qualities, then any such now living: but withal they were of more
profound humility, had greater fear of God, and reverence of Priests his
messengers, honoring Christ in them, which virtues Princes (alas) deceived with
false heretics now want. They considered and feared right worthily these
words of God. Qui tangit vos, tangit pupillam oculi mei, he that touches you
(that is lawful Priests Gods anointed) touches (as it were) the very aple of
his eye: remembering likewise what God said to Samuel of the Jews. They have
not despised 1. Reg. 8.
thee, but me, that I reign not over the^. And our Savior says. He that
despises Luc. 10. 16. Mat. 10. 40. John. 13. 20. Math. 10 15.
you, despises me, he that hates, you hates me, he that receaueth you,
receaueth me. Again he threatens those that refuse his messengers coming in
his name. That at the last day it shall be more tolerable to Sodom, and Ghomor.
Whereby it appearrth what great reward good Catholic christians at this day
in England shall have at Christ's hands one day for receiving Priests,
coming in his name, and lawfullye sent by Christ, yea though it be loss of
goods, lands, and life to the receauers, so much greater is their merit: and
what peril and danger not only those stand in, that for dasterdly love to
themselves, and fear of the world refuse them: but in what most damnable
state those be that persecut^ Priests, and their receauers with most vile
deaths; and so glory they never so much of Christ, yet they in deed persecute
Christ in his members and servants, unto whom what good, or evil is done he
accepts as done unto himself.

Chap. XXXIIII. Of the goodly order of the Clergy, and Monarchy of the Church,
and of the Anarchy, and disorderly confusion of heretics.
YOu may see by this little which is said the reverend order of Priesthood, how
much it has ever been honored by good men, but ever impugned and persecuted
by enemies of the truth, because the shepherd once taken away the flock is
easily dispersed, which makes the heretics so to rage, and tirannize against
Priests in England for the hatred in deed they have against the whole flock of
Christ, to the end there should be left never a good christian or catholic in
England, that in deed is their drift, though to blind the simple, they pretend
all dye for treason not for religion: and under the cloak of elemencye and
mercy with a lingering persecution they use one of the most subtle and greatest
tyranny that ever was used since CHRIST'S time* For making some out-warde show
of clemencye ever, they have and do, and will do (I fear me) the worst they
can devise in their proceedings, till it please GOD either to convert their
hearts (which I beseech him of his mercy for their good, and salvation he
vvoulde) or else otherwise to chastise them as it may best please him, to the
terror and example of all pos^erity. You see likewise how Priesthood most
necessarily was ordained by Christ for conservation of his Church, and what
godly order is in the same, and what a valiant army hereby the heavenly
Monarchy the Church of God thus set in order is: how bountiful and amyable to
the good in their sight it is, and how terrible to the wicked, the Devil, and
all his power: see I say, in what decent and noble array this Monarchy of Christ
stands. First the lay people as feet or inferior members though they rule
not the head, yet as necessary members be expedient for the body, as other more
noble members are: next to the temporal, and lay people, be those in lower
orders, or degrees toward Priesthood, which as hands or arms in this
christian Monarchy maintain and help the head, as subdeacons and deacons
which in holy Order be eyes (as it were) to the Priest and Bishop: and so in
order the Priest, and preacher is (as it were) mouth to the Bishop, helping
him to administer the Sacraments and preach Gods word: and so Bishops with
their vigilant care (as it were) with their head and shoulders do support that
most heavy burden Angelicis humeris tremendum, and so uphold altogether and
maintein the head: whither the head guides and directs, all the inferior
members go that way. The feet bidds not the hand do this, neither any of the
inferior members have domination over the higher, but every one uses his
office and function, and is governed by the head, that is Christ's Vicar, and
chief Pastor of our souls S. Peter's successor, whose faith Christ promised
should ever hold, and never fail: and therefore when tribute was to be paid
for heads of houses our Savior bad S. Peter go to the water, and take a fish,
in whose mouth he should find a piece of money, and that he bad Math. 17. 27.
him pay for them both for me and theo said Christ: mark here for whom this
tribute was paid, for Heads of houses only, not for the rest of Christ's
disciples but for Cephas only, that is S. Peter the rock, and head of Gods
house under Christ tribute was paid. Thus you see what unity, peace, and
charity is in Gods Church by reason of one head under Christ the Pope. Whereby
you see how the city of Gods Church by this order in what sweet disposition
it is, as that city Jerusalem well built, and noe marvel: for as we read
Saba hearing of 3. Reg. 10
the wisdom and worthiness of Solomon, coming out of the uttermost coasts of
the earth to see him, when she hard his wisdom, saw the temple of God which
he had built, the princely Palace wherein he dwelt, the godly order and
disposition of his servants, the variety of dishes, the goodly service at his
tables, with great admiration burst out saying Beati serui, qui astant coram
te, and audiunt sapientiam tuam. Blessed be thy servants that wait in thy
presence, and hearing thy wisdom, minister at thy table. If Solomon then
which was but a shadow or figure of Christ the eternal wisdom of his father
could so dispose his house, no marvel then though Christ the truth, and
wisdom it self, in most noble, decent, and wise order could dispose his holy
Church, which S. Paul calls the 1. Tim. 3.
house of God, the pillar and foundation of the truth, and this is done
especially by the Sacrament of Order, for want whereof all discord and confusion
is amongst heretics; whose rude company like the proud builders of the tower
of Babylon, confound one another, and lifting their mouths to heaven to pull
God from his throne, be divided into innumerable sects without all order.
Wherefore the conuenticle of heretics for her miserable confusion, is properly
called in holy Scripture the strumpet of Babilo^, drinking of the cup of Gods
wrath, justly forsaken of him, as destitute of his spirit for want of peace,
unity, and concord, and the Church of the malignant, whereof that terrene
bloody Cain was the first builder as Abell that innocent Martyr was the first
builder of the city of God.

Chap. XXXV Wherein is more at large described the Babilonicall confusion of
sin and heresy, and how God has blessed this Country of old, for honor and
obedience to the Church and Priesthood.
THerefore in heresy this Sinagogue of Satan is such a discord and disorder,
that it is a very figure of hell, vbi nullus ordo etc. where as testifies holy
Job, there is no order, but everlasting horr^r dwells therein. What biting is
there of one another, never agreeing with them selves, nor their followers?
what bitter inuectiues? every one braggeth of the spirit of God, every one
would be a teacher, an other Paul as it were, numquid omnes Apostoli, numquid
omnes Doctores? The Apostle teaches the Church of Christ that every one should
not take upon him to have the office of an Apostle, or Doctor: but with
heretics it is quite contrary, every one looks amongst them to be a teacher,
at least to expound the word, every one thinks himself* a Priest though
never called to that function by any lawful authority, and they would seem to
have Scripture for the^, but falsely wrested. Al we Christians in deed in holy
Scripture be called genus sacerdotale a priestly stock generation, or kindred,
but what then? So we be called al kings in the scripture, or a princely
generation. *As therefore we be not all properly kings, but in some respect
it is that we be so called, for that we by Gods grace live well* and reign
in Christ, well rule our inordinate passions and motions, and well govern our
selves, that it is which is a greater matter, then for some loosely to govern
a kingdom: So, and no otherwise a^l lay Christians be called Priests, not for
that they be properly Priests which none can be but those, which by order are
lawfully chosen and ordained, but because they offer upon their hearts
spiritual sacrifice of praises, prayers, and thanksgiving to God, which be not
properly sacrifice, but metaphorically: no more be all Christians Priests
properly, but figuratively, as we be not al properly Kings, but improperly and
in signification. But heretics like unclean beasts and unreasonable
creatures out of all order, make no distinction of any thing, but confound
all: therefore no marvel though amongst them the feet stand where the head
should, and the head in steed of the feet. Every maid amongst them by
Luthers opinion is a Priest, and every Minister amongst the Puritanes would
be head of the Church, every one may start up into the Pulpit, and say what
the spirit moves him; the man controleth his Master, and women, men for not
preaching the word sincerely: if there be any form of order at this day in
England amongst Protestants, as wearing of Surplices, Rochets, square Caps, and
keeping Belles and Churches, and the like: all these ceremonies that bear a
laudable show they have, and steal from the Catholic Church, insomuch that
Whitgift their chief Superintendent of Canterbury, could not defend such
ceremonies as appears by his book against Puritanes, but only by Catholic
arguments. Wherefore they (though unworthily) call him Pope of Lambeth: But in
deed (as heretics term them) those be but Popes rags in deed. The
Devil cares not to leave amongst heretics a a few ceremonies of
Catholics to deceive the simple in making a show, so the Sacraments (that is
the things them selves whereby men should receive gods grace) be taken away, so
they take the shell, and leave out the kernel, take but only our rags as it
were (if I might so term such laudable ceremonies when they be well used in
Gods Church) and all to cloth with all, and cover the unclean filth, and
abomination of their ragged heretical flock, which be divided almost into as
many superstitious heresies and contray opinions, as they be men, and yet would
imitate us catholics in their outward ceremonies, as apes do me^. In so much
(but that it has pleased God to leave some seed of catholics yet in England,
that keeps the^ in some awe) they before this (I may justly think) had all
become Turks or worse, openly denying Christ, God and all, as many of them
already (by the relation of some that be of their secrets more then I) deny
him in their hearts. Thus you see by the truth it self, and the contrary how
necessary and worthy this holy Sacrament of Order is, in so much that S.
Chrysostom and other holy Fathers comparing the office of a Priest with the
office of a King, prefer the Priest by many degrees before the King, by how
much spiritual and divine matters exceed earthly, and these base corporal
things. For in taking away Priesthood is taken away sacrifice, whereby God is
chiefly worshipped, and so God thereby is most dishonored, as by the contrary
when Priesthood is had in reverence, then is he most honored, and those that
thus honor Christ in his Priests be most blessed and prosperous, yea
oftentimes in this life. For what Country for example was more puissant, more
virtuous, more religious then England was, so honorable in her self, beloved
of her neighbors, and feared of her foes * English men were first converted by
Pope Gregory the great, through the preaching of Augustine the Moke about 1000
year ago.
as long as she honored Priesthood, and was an obedient daughter to the high
Priest of God, by whom she first received the Gospel? From whom since she
fell what Country is in more misery and danger at home and abroad? hereof be
verified, the words of holy Scripture. Qui contemn^t me erunt ignobiles. The
holy Prophet foretold that Kings and Queens should be norishers and feeders
of gods house the Church and defenders of his Priests, but those that contemn
her and them shall become base, and unworthy.

Chap. XXXVI. Of Matrimony, and what it is, and when it was ordained: of the
chief good, end, and effect thereof, and how Virginity is preserred before
it: also of vowed chastity annexed to Priesthood.
THe sixth Sacrament is Matrimony which is the lawful conjunction of man and
woman, instituted by God to live socially together during life, with out breach
of mutual faith, and promise given in marriage the one to the other: which
state of life though heretics falsely against Gods word and the Apostles
doctrine prefer before Virginity and chastiry, yet that they may show
themselves heretics in all things, and leave nothing undefiled, they deny it
to be a Sacrament, contrary to S. Paul, Ephesians. 5. 32.
who calls it a great Sacrament in Christ and his Church, in Paradise also
first insinuated and in some sort ordained by God. For by that conjunction of
man and woman in that honorable state of Matrimony, is represented the
conjunction of Christ and his Church, as his most faithful wife and spouse, a
pure virgin, which in his endless kingdom he shall make glorious without spot
or wrincle. The heretics that deny matrimony to be a Sacrament, not only
gainsay Christ and the Apostles doctrine, confound all good and civil
government: but also induce Iudaisme, Turcisme, yea Paganism amongst
Christians, who are taught by Christ and his Church that man and wife (as one
body or rather two bodies in one flesh) ought not to be divided during life by
plurality of more wives, or husbands, and why? but because matrimonye is a
Sacrament, wherein they be joined together, so representinge the conjunction
of Christ the head of his only body and spouse the Church, as man is head of
one wife. But deny once with heretics matrimonye to be a Sacrament, and so
to want this mystical representation of Christ and his Church which makes it
a sacrament, yea though it were in no other respect, but in that
representation; and then what follows, but that marriage is nothing but a
temporal pacte, bargain, promise and a mere natural act, and then may a man
according to the Turks law have as many vviues as he can maintain and
keep: which beastly absurdity you see follows of protestants Doctrine, yea
and of their practice in many places we see, from which fleshly heresy our
Lord deliver us. But in this Sacrament worthily received is the grace of God
given diverse ways, and a remedy against unlawful concupiscence: but the chief
goods hereof be Fides, proles, and sacramentu^. The troth first, and fidelity
that ought to be betwixt the parties married, that rather they should suffer
death than once break. Secondly issue or children to Gods honor ought to be
cheiflye desired whereby God may be served. Thirdly in that it is a Sacrament
is the greatest benefit, for so thereby grace is given to perform these things
better, and to live in sweet conversation together in the fear and love of
GOD, whereby appears how heinous this sin of adulterye is that breaks
so holy a state, and violateth so high a misterye as the representation of the
conjunction of CHRIST and his Church: yet though Matrimony be good Virginity
or chastity is far better, insomuch that our Savior affirms that some
there be that have ever kept Chastity for the kingdom of GOD, and he
exorteth those that can (that is those that will take the holy state of
Virginitye or chastitye) to take it: and the Apostle wishes all to be as
himself, that is chaste: therefore he says. He that gives his Virgin to be
1. Cor. 7 38.
married does well: but he that keeps her continual Virgin does better,
though none ought to be forced thereunto. Matrimony is granted also for
fear Note that I hear do not say that the Sacrament chiefly for that end was
or day ned.
of a worse matter, that is to avoid fornication, and in that respect to those
that be at liberty, and have not before vowed, chastitye, Better it is (as
says the Apostle) for them to marrye then to burn, though such (as he
testifies) shall not live without trouble of fleash. But if once they have
vowed chastity, they must seek otherwise then by women, that is by fasting,
prayer, study, discipline, and the like spiritual exercises to keep them
selves chaste, otherwise they damnablye offend like those vvanton widows the
Apostle speaks of, because 1. Tim. 5. 12.
Prima^ fidem irritam fecerunt: they brake their first faith made in vow, that
is to Christ their husband, and so were damned: and therefore it is altogether
unlawful for Priests to marry, because in being Priests they make vow of
chastity. Therefore let every one before he take holy orders well consider with
himself whilst he is at liberty, for after it is too late: and though some of
the Apostles had wives, yet when they were called by Christ they forsook their
wives, as it appears by their own words, we have forsaken all things and
follwed Mat. 19. 27.
thee, a wife belike was some thing: neither do we deny now a married man to
become Priest, so that he has married a maid only, and that she be dead, or
else has her full consent that never after she will desire his company. S.
Ambrose shows the reason why Priests of the new Testament, now in this law
of Christ, and grace ought not to have wives, for if the Priests of the old
Testament before Christ, when they were to do their office, and sacrifice at
certain times in the year, every one in his course did then for that time,
and a little before abstain from their wives; yet notwithstanding their
sacrifice was (without comparison) nothing so noble as ours: the Priest then of
the new Testament that offers up dailye sacrifice most excellent, that pure
and B. lamb of god, how pure ought that heart to be? how undefiled those hands?
how chaste that body that offers up so noble and so unspeakable amistery?
which because he always daily does and when conveniently he may ought to do,
therefore ought he always to abstain from wife. Besides that the cares of
house, wife and children must needs distract, divide, and withdraw man's mind
that he cannot so attentively attend to spiritual things, not so carefully
look over his flock, nor so liberally feed the poor.

Chap. XXXVII. That vows may be lawfully, and meritoriously made, and ought to
be kept, and that Matrimony is a band inseparable during life, and wherein it
consists.
Heretics deny it to be lawful to make vows especially of Chastity, but we
prove the contrary by Gods word, who biddes Vow and render, Psalm. 75. 12.
or pay your vows, though in deed no man ought rashly to make vows, but with
good advise and consideration, but once made they ought to be kept, those that
be lawful, and in keeping them is greater meritte: but yet we do not so
extol Virginity, that we condemn Matrimony, but in all we say with the
Apostle (save those that have vowed chastity) Matrimony is honorable Heb. 13.
4.
so there be no impediment, yet many sins may be committed both in manner of
the contract and after, which I cannot stand to reckon: I say first that it is
not lawful for a Catholic to contract matrimony with an heretic, or
infidel, till they become both perfect Catholics, otherwise it is sin,
neither can any within the fourth degree without lawful dispensation contract
matrimony, otherwise it is no matrimony, Likewise the women of al vowed Priests
be not their wives, though so termed, but the worst harlots, and sacrilegious
strumpets that may be, save incestuous Nuns. Which positions I could prove
by authority divine and humane, as I have done others, if the shortness of the
time (studying for breuity) would permit me. Moreover in lawful matrimony may
many sins be committed, more fit to be taught in Confession to be avoided,
then set down in this place, For as a man may kill himself with his own
sword; so he may kill his soul with his own wife, and therefore the holy
Sacrament of Matrimony is to be used with great reverence, and in the fear of
God, and chiefly for the honest procreation of children, remembering that God
and his holy Angels look upon them, and not in passione desiderii, in the
passion of unlawful desire, like to the horse and mule Psalm. 31. 9.
in whom there is no understanding, as those 7 unchaste husbands of Sara did,
coming Tob. 6. 17.
to her for desire of the flesh only, and not love of children, nor in the
fear of God, and therefore the first night ever before they came together,
they were destroyed of the Devil, till holy Toby came that armed himself with
fasting, watching, and prayer, desiring only a holy generation before all
carnal pleasure, and so chased the Devil away. This Sacrament of Matrimony is
chiefly made by the consent of the parties, by words or sufficient signs,
when there is betwixt them no impediment to the contrary, though without the
parish Priest and lawful witnesses, where the holy Council of Trent is
received, consent of the parties between themselves is no matrimony at all,
and in this Country those privy matrimonies and contracts be ever sin. He
that solemnizeth the matrimony ought to be a lawful Catholic Priest with
jurisdiction, for before that solemnizatio^ they ought not to lie together: and
though for any notorious fault of either of the parties there should be
separation of bed, or a perpetual divorce, yet such is the virtue of this
Sacrament in this law of grace, that this knot of matrimony (I say) is so
sure, that during the parties life neither can marry any other, otherwise
(according to the Evangelical and Apostolic doctrine) adultery is committed.
Nam Mat. 19. 7
quod Deus coniunxit homo, non separet. Many other things were to be said
touching this Sacrament, but I hasten to an end.

Chap. XXXVII. Of extreme Unction, that it is a Sacrament, and ordained by
Christ, taught by S. James, and practiced by the Apostles and Apostolic men.
THe last Sacrament is extreme Unction, which was instituted by our Savior
CHRIST, as we be taught by the tradition of the holy Church. This to be a
Sacrament the heretics deny, but we prove it by Gods word, and doctrine
of the holy Apostle S. James. First this Sacrament being a sacred sign
instituted in holy Oil, inwardly conferring, or giving the unction and grace
of the holy Ghost, as it was undoubtedly ordained by Christ, so was it by him
our Savior insinuated or fortolde, when he sent his Apostles and disciples to
heal the diseased, and annoint them with Oil. Secondly it was practiced as a
Sacrament by the Apostles Mare. 6. 13.
as S. James teaches, exhorting it to be given to the sick. If any (says he)
amongst you be sick, let him bring in the Jacob. 5. 14.
Priests of the Church, and let them pray over him, annoynting him with oil in
the name of our Lord, and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and our
Lord shall raise, or lift him up agame, and if he be in sins they shall be
forgiven him. Lo you see here by the Apostles doctrine, in this holy Oil
(which we call extreme Unction, or the last anointing) is the grace of God
given: Wherefore we are to believe the holy Church founded in Christ and in the
Apostolic doctrine, teaching us that it is a holy Sacrament, and most
expedient in sickness to be used, scoff the heretics never so much, whose
manner is, when they want matter, reason, and authority, to make supply by
scoffs, whom the holy Scripture calls in deceptione illusores, deceiptfull
taunting 2. Pet. 3. 3.
Masters. Filium Dei ostentui habentes, mocking the son of God, treading
under their feet his most precious and sacred blood; but we may not forsake
Gods truth for their scoffs. The matter of this holy Sacrament is holy oil,
consecrated by the Bishop, the lawful Minister hereof is a Priest, and it is
to be given to none but to those that be sick, and likely of that sickness
to die. The two chief effects of this Sacrament be (as apeareth by the words
of S. James above said) that a man (if God think it expedient, and most to his
honor) is restored to his former health, and has the greater merit, and
salvation: whereby it appears that it ought not to be given to those that go
to war, the Sea, or in such like danger of death, nor to such as are
presently to be executed, but only to the sick, in whom is often a great fault
that they never send for the Priest til others do for them, and till they be
at the last gasp, so that the^ they can neither receive this holy Sacrament
with such devotion nor fruit, as being in perfect reason they might. The sick
then ought to desire this Sacrament, which many fondly do not, thinking if
then they do they can live no longer, not considering one fruit and effect
thereof which is, that if God see it expedient it is a mean they may the more
spedely recover their former health. The second and chief fruit and effect
thereof is, that it forgiueth all such sins we could not remember in
Confession, as appears by the words likewise of Saint James, who says. If the
sick be in sin, it shall be forgiven him. Lesser sins then and defects, yea
and greater too (if we could not remember the^) be herein forgiven. Wherefore
our good Lord Jesus is ever to be blessed that by this Sacrament thus makes
perfect the work of our Salvation. For by means hereof in that last hour of
death, when tentations commonly be diverse, most great and dangerous, and the
Devil most busy to get his pray, then lo I say by this Sacrament our
tentations be infeebled and made less and our souls more strengthened and
comforted, that we be not dasled with temptations, nor overcome, but may
joyfully in God pass this life. For as in the old time Champio^s before the
combat had wont with oil to anoint their naked bodies, that their adversaries
might take less hold: so by means of this Sacrament, the outward matter
whereof is oil, the soul being inwardly anointed by the grace of the holy
Ghost, that subtle adversary the Devil can take less hold of it, that so
it may pass out of the troublesome warfarre of this life, to that enlesse
glory where it shall receive a crown of endless reward for ever. This
Sacrament is ministered upon those outward senses, whereby we most usually
offend, and whereby sin is drawn into our souls, as by our eyes, hands,
and the like. The form of the holy words used is. By this holy anointing, and
his most pitiful mercy our Lord pardon, and forgive thee what thou have
sinned, by the eyes, mouth, and so forth is said of the rest of the members
that may with decency be named. Whereby you see how fitlye and according
to the Apostles Doctrine, this Sacrament is ordained and ministered. First
instituted by Christ, both prayer and the holy matter concurring together: yet
this holy Sacrament (though none under pain of damnation may despise it, but
every one in time ought to desire it, yea often times if the party fall sick
and recover again it may be given) yet I fay it is not of such necessity if a
man cannot (with desire and sufficient means made) have it, but he may be
saved without it by the special mercy and grace of God, Author and Institutor
of all these seven Sacraments, and giver of all grace: to whom be all honor
and glory.

Chap. XXXIX. Touching briefly by the way, the matter of Justification, and by
whom, and how we be justified.
THus you see (good Sir) I have touched briefly all the Sacraments, which that
good Samaritane (curing the sick and wounded by pow^ing in wine and oil, that
is Jesus Christ full of mercy and justice) ordained as vessels of grace, and
committed to Priests and Pastors of his Church to be dispensed, and bestowed by
them on his people for their salvation. These seven Sacraments (I say) have I
briefly touched, and the grounds thereof, proving every one by the very and
express word of God, tradition, and general consent of the whole Church,
which may suffice any simple or unlearned man, desirous to know the truth, for
in behalf of such like especially I have taken these pains, with as much
plainness, and simple style as possibly I might in so high matters: neither
was it my intent to give any full doctrine of these matters, but only to touch
the principal grounds. If any desire morefull and large discourse, I refer
him to the books of the learned, wherein he shall find many treatises in all
tongues of some one Sacrament or other, and of every matter almost, or
altogether at large, by me here briefly touched, and so passed over. But
because the Sacraments be for the most part the principal points of our
religion next to the B. Trinity, Incarnation, and Passion, those briefly for
your sake (because you desire to know the truth for your salvation) I thought
good to touch. For as God almighty by Christ Jesus our meritorious Savior is
the chief efficient cause of our justification: So his Sacraments be the
ordinary means, and isntrumental causes whereby a man in receiving the^ (if
he be well disposed by the grace of God, and put no let of his part) of a
sinner and child of the Devil, is made a just man and the child of God,
renewed and raised up again (in Baptism especially) from Orjginall sin by
Christ the second Adam as he was vitiated and fell from original justice by
Adam our first father. And though God works commonly his grace in matter
disposed, yet he it is that so preuenteth, disposes, and freely gives the
grace first to dispose a man's self. So that when man first receaueth Gods
grace, whereby ex impio fit iustus, that is, of a wicked man, and vessel of
perdition, he is made a just man, which is called justification, and the first
grace preventing a man: that (I say) by grace of God is wrought of his mere
love and goodness, without any work, meritte, or desert of man, for
otherwise grace should not be grace which is first given without any desert or
merit of our part, whereby we be so made just. And hereof the holy Scripture
says as from Gods own mouth Quia dilexite, ideo attraxite miserans, Ier. 31.
3.
because I loved the therefore (said God to man) I have drawn thee unto me,
having mercy, and pity upon thee: by the which love of his he chose man before
all worlds. But understand me well I pray you, when a man has first of gods
goodness thus received his first grace, the true foundation and meritte of all
our good works, then lo by man's true faith, hope, charity, good works, and
endeavors (being thus first prevented and after helped by God) he may, and
must (if ever he will be saved) not only conserve that first grace of God
wrought in him by his goodues, by fleeing sinneand embracing virtue: but also
in so doing greatly increase Gods grace in him once received, whereby he is
rightly said to meritte and deserve his salvation: and in this respect it is
said. Qui iuscus est iustisicetur Apocalip. 22. 11.
adhuc, he that is just let him yet be more just. We once then by Christ our
Saviors grace being first truly justified, our proper justification
secondarily, is the keeping and doing of the Commandments of God, as holy
Zachary and Elizabeth the parents of Saint John Baptist (who contrary to the
Hereretiks of our time that affirm that none be truly just, and that the
Commandments of God be impossible to be kept) Luc. 1. 6.
were both just before God, walking in all the Commandments and iustificatio^s
of our Lord. Which Commandments of god a man duly observing, he may more and
more as it were deserve by this second kind of justification Gods grace and
merit his salvation: and in this second kind of justification, whereby of a
just man, a man is made more just, a man must lay to his hand and work with
God that first without our deserts gives his grace, and so Saint Paul calls
us, as it were Romans 2. and. 8.
workmen with God calling and stirring us up first, who for our greater glory
and reward in heaven will not save us without 1. Cor. 13. Galat. 5.
our own works and endeavors, but will reward every one according to his.
This matter of justification then is not as Heretics teach, that a man can
be saved by faith alone, without any good work or meritt of his own, or
that a man can meritte nothing, for that it derogateth from Gods grace: but
rather (when man first founded in true faith thus with GODS grace works his
salvation) it is a higher commendation of his grace, that so strengthens our
frail vessels by his grace to work our merit and salvation: neither must we
believe heretics that say no man is just in deed but that God so imputes it,
or is so accounted as that the justice of God whereby he is just and justice
himself, is imputed to us, so that the heretics would have us to have no
true inherent justice in us, but a kind of imputative justice, as that man's
sins by Christ were not truly forgiven, nor quite wipte away and cleansed to
his great dishonor, as though his works were imperfect and we still
deformed, as having our sins but blotted and razed over, not quite put away,
contrary to the Apostles doctrine, who teaches us how Christus nos saluos
fecit p^r Baptismum 1 Peter. 3. 21.
and that we be truly washed, and sanctified in deed in the* name of our Lord
Jesus, and so have true Justice and sanctification inherent, and remaining in
us, not that justice in us whereby he is just, but that Justice is in us
whereby by his grace he makes us just. Therefore you must affirm and
steadfastly believe that a man in Christ is just, sanctified, and perfect by
Gods grace in his soul in deed, though we compare not our Justice here with
God, no nor with his Saints in glory. Beware also of that vain fiduce, or no
faith of heretics, whereby they say they believe they be justified, and know
certainly they shall be saved, making them selves their own Judges. For
although every one that believes and does well may be in good and steadfast
hope of his salvation, yet no man is sure thereof in this life without some
special revelation from God, but rather must Work his salvation with Phil. 2.
12*
fear and trembling, knowing that perseverance to the end is the great gift of
God, when as the holy Apostle that was ravished to the third heaven did
chastise his body, and brought it in subjection, least when he preached to
others he himself might become a reprobate.

Chap. XL. Of Predestimation, and that as no man is saved without Gods grace:
So no man shall be damned without his own fault, and that we must not
curiously dispute hereof.
NEither must you believe that most cursed and damnable opinion of heretics,
that say do what you will, if you be borne to be saved you shall be, or
damned you shall be. For God which is all good and just will damn no man but
through his own fault, nor save no man but with his good will and labor,
wherefore if a man be damned it is his own fault, and not Gods, but if he be
saved he is to thank God that he has given him grace to work his salvation.
Truth it is, that God would all men to be saved, yet will he give his grace
effectually Nota been, that I ever mean that Gods good will and providence is
of Predestination, and election the chief cause.
to none to be saved (though not his foresight, but his good will is the chief
cause of predestination and election) but to those which he forseeth will work
his will, and those be predestinate to everlasting Salvation, and be properly
called his elect, and be by God before all worlds predestinate to be saved:
not whether they do well or ill as heretics say, but because God to whom al
things be present In this seeing of GOD, I mean his good will is included,
which giving me^ grace to keep his Commandments is the chief cause of
Predestination, and election as I said before.
sees they will follow his will and Commandments, and do the things that
be good, and yet withal gives them the grace first effectually to do those
things whereby they may be saved. Whereupon S. Gregory has these words in
his first book of Dialogues and 7. chapter. Obtinere nequaquam possunt, etc.
that is to say, Holy men or good men cannot obtain by their prayers the
things which have not bin predestinate: but those things which holy men do
bring to pass or obtain by prayer, are so predestinate or ordained by God
before all worlds, that they may so obtain those things by prayers, for that
very predestination of that endless kingdom also, is so disposed of almighty
God, that the elect may com^ unto it by labor, that so they in prayer or
earnest desire may deserve to receive that, which almighty God has disposed
to give them before all worlds. And a little after he says, without doubt it
is plain that Predestination is fulfilled by prayers, when as he whom God
has predestinate to multiply his seed (that was Abraham) obtained by prayer
that he might have sons. Now why God of his mercy chooses some out of the
mass of mankind by his grace to be saved, and ^ustly leaves others to
themselves, not so effectuallye helping them with his grace, that is his
hidden and secret justice and judgment, which we are not to enter to discuss:
for none shall be unjustly damned, or without their own fault. For as we see
though the Sun shine never so bright, if we open not our eyes we receive no
comfort thereof: so though Gods grace be abundant and ready for all, shining
round about, yet none be pertakers thereof but such as by Gods special grace
will open the eyes of their souls to follow Christ's example, and keep his
holy precepts, which by Gods help (which is ready for all) a man may do.
Neither is it our parts (as heretics do) much to meddle with these matters by
curious disputes, but let every one unite himself to Gods Church, become a
faithful catholic Christian, fear God, and keep his Commandments, and then
he may be in good and steedfast hope of his salvation, remembering God is
faithful of his promise, and will reward our good will and well doing, and
suffer none to be tempted more then he is able to bear, and leave the rest to
Gods holy disposition, and stand not to dispute of his secrets, not saying (as
heretics do) I know certainly I shall be saved, for that is in Gods hands
and judgment, but as I said before in the former chapter to have a good hope of
our salvation, working our salvation with phil. 2. 12
fear and trembling, as S. Paul did chastise his body and bring it in
subjection least says he, whilst I preach to others I 1. Cor. 9. 27.
my self become a Reprobate.

Chap. XLI. That man has free will, and that Gods Commandments are possible
to be kept, and that every one must work his salvation with fear and trembling.
LIkewise one of the chief points wherein they these blasphemous heretics
chiefly err, is in this matter of Predestination, for that they would have a
man to have no free will, but that God is the mouer and doer in man as well of
evil as of good, ^yea and that all our actions are evil, though done in state
of grace, whereof this horrible blasphemy must needs follow, that they would
make God the author of evil as well as of go^od. But the truth is though man's
free will by Adams trespass is sore wounded, yet not quit lost, but that it
concurreth to every reasonable action of a man in reason, and so he with Gods
grace may work his salvation, and not of necessity is forced to work his
damnation. For where in holy Scripture it is written God has done evil, As in
Ezechiell c. 6. ver. 10. Et scient quia ego dominus non frustra locutus su^ vt
facere^ eis malu^ hoc Et alibi planius intelligitur malu^ poene.
we must understand that just revenge, or the evil pain and punnishment due
unto sin, but in no wise sin it self: Again where in holy Scriprure, it
is said God has hardened man's heart etc. it is to be understood that for
man's sin God has justly forsaken him, and so suffered him to be hardened,
not that he forces any of necessity to do evil in being so hardened: for as
appears by diverse other places of holy Scripture God has put good and evil
in man's sight, he may choose whether he will. Hereupon it comes to pass, that
the Commandments of God contrary to the heretics opinion, * The holy Prophet
said, Elegi abjectus esse, etc. Ps. 8^ Iac. 2. 19.
may (as I touched before) by Gods grace be kept, without keeping whereof no
man have he never so great faith may be justified, but deserves damnation. For
as says S. James the Devils also believe and tremble. And again faith without
good works is dead in it self, as shall one day appear, when those that have
done good shall goes into life everlasting, and those that have done evil into
everlasting fire. The Apostle Romans 7. 16
postle moreover, though he said he did that which he would not, etc. we are to
understand that these like sayings of his are so much from making against free
will, that they make most for freewill, which consists in the principal
part of the soul, which we see hereby cannot be inclined to sin, unless
a man will, though the inferior part of the soul, as passions inordinate,
inordinate motions, concupiscence, and external motions of the body, may come
against our will: which be so far from sin, that they serve to our great
merit if we by will and reason consent not, but manfully resist them, and
therefore though by the grace of God in Baptism they be so mortified and
buried in CHRIST that they be no sins, but occasion of meritte, yet they be
left ad luctam and agonem, for us to strive and fight against, that so virtue
in us coming to perfection in infirmity, GOD may be more glorified in us, and
we in the end more worthelye and highlye rewarded. Understand well then that
there is two actions, or powers in man, that is in the higher part of the
soul, and in the lower sensitive part and body, which inferior part never
induces sin, as long as the superior part yields not thereunto, for in the
baptized sin (as says S. Augustine) should not be sin unless it were
voluntary. But one thing here I am to admonish you of, that although (as I
said) the Commandments of God be possible to be kept, yea sweet and easy,
which when a man by Gods grace to the uttermost of his power performs, he may
be in sure hope of salvation, yet he must beware of that vain fiduce (as I
have often said) or presumptious faith of heretics, bragging they know they
shall be saved. For although we must believe to the well disposed there is
remission of sins in Gods Church, yet no man knows whether he be worthy
love or hatred, neither is he certain of that great gift or perseverance to
the end (ordinarily I mean) but I hasten to an end.

Chap. XLII. Of Christ's descending into Hell, and of the intolerable blasphemy
of Heretics against Christ in this point.
FVrther the Heretics of this time leave nothing undefiled, no not the very
articles of the Creed: for some deny Christ descended into hell, and say that
upon the Cross he despaired (O horrible blasphemy I am afraid to speak it) and
in his B. soul suffered the pains of the damned. Can any christian ears
hear this? yet they are not ashamed to affirm it. Was it not enough, that
that B. Lamb of God, that most innocent, and sacred flesh which Christ our Lord
took of the B. Virgin without spot, and united to his divinity, should shed his
precious blood a sufficient ransom for the whole world unless withal he
suffered in his sacred soul the pains of the damned? as much to say as he
despaired and blasphemed God his father whom he at that instant fully
satisfied for our sins, and ever pleased. This needs no answer it is so
hateful of it self (I suppose) to your ears, and yet in their writing
Protestant-puritanes (especially that blaspemous heretic John Calvin their
Master in his unorderly Institutions) do affirm it. But that his B. soul,
all glorious descended into hell not to suffer pain, but to the unspeakable
comfort and release of those that were faithful souls there in that Limbo
patrum (a place the brime or edge as it were of Hell, where the holy Fathers
shut from the vision of God remained, that for so many hundred years desired
his company) is most plain not only by the Apostles Creed that might sufice
any Christian man, but by the Prophetts, Apostles, and holy Scriptures. In one
place is mention made, His soul was not left in hell, and Psalm. 15. 10. Ephe.
1. 20 et. 4. 9. 1. Pet. 3. ^2.
in another place it is said of Christ That he asended what is it but because
he desended also first into the lower parts of the earth, that was into hell:
of the torments, or sorrows whereof (as being the death, or vanquisher of
death, and the biting or deuourer of hell according to the Prophets) he could
not be detayned or holden. But these fellows that deny Christ was in hell
(the cloisters whereof he once broke, binding that old serpent) and so deny
their Creed, no marvel though they make so small reckening of Purgatory,
but account it as a buggard to fear children. In which place in deed I warrant
them they shall never come, unless they amend their manners and monstrous
opinions. There is a lower place prepared for all such incredulous infidells,
and heretics, that is In inferno infernori, In the deepest bottomless pit
and gulf of hell and damnation, wherein is no redemption.

Chap. XLIII. Of Purgatory what sort of people be therein punished, and for
what manner of sins, and defects they be there detained, and that Prayer
Sacrifice, Almsdeeds, and the like be healthful for the departed.
Now that there is a Purgatory or a cleansing place for some lesser sins, and
the relics of sin, or the pain and satisfaction due unto sin in the next
life before the soul can be in quiet rest, and enjoy the glory of God, we
prove it by diverse reasons, and authorities of Scriptures and Fathers, and the
common received faith of the universal Church at all times. First then we are
to note, that the everlasting pain due unto sin is forgiven by virtue of
Christ's Passion in the holy Sacrament of Penance, so that if a man die in state
of grace, by that Sacrament a perfect penitente sinner, with out doubt he shall
never perish everlastingly, yet there be many lesser sins, many inordinate
passions, many defects and imperfections, and the payment and satisfaction due
to those greater sins, which all and every (if they be not perfectlye wipte
or cleansed from the soul in this life, by perfect love to God and works of
Penance) shall no doubt thereof be cleansed and paid for in the next, before
the soul can see God and enter into his kingdom. For no spotted, or unclean
Apoc. 21. 27.
thing shall enter thereunto, as witnesses Saint John. Gods great mercy it is
I say then that forgiueth the sin by Penance here in this life, that it be
not punished everlastingly in hell, but it is in his justice we do some
satisfaction for it, which if it be not here it must be done there, that is in
Purgatory before the soul can attain the glory of God. Many there be that
speak of Purgatory, but few that deeply consider the fearful, and terrible
pains thereof, which be so great that no pain in this world is comparable
thereunto. The fire of Gods justice there, as noteh Saint Augustine as far
exceeds the fire we see here, as the fire in deed exceeds fire painted
upon a wall: insomuch that the pains of Purgatory differ little from those in
hell, but that the one has end, and the other has none, and those in
Purgatory be blessed souls in state of grace and salvation, but those in hell
be cursed, desperate, and sure of everlasting damnation. Three sorts of people
as names S. Augustine there be that depart out of this world, one sort so
good, that they need not our prayers. As the B. Martyrs and Confessors, that
gloriously confessed CHRIST, and with seruent love shed their blood for his
sake, that through Christ be washed, and cleansed in their own blood, those
washed their stoles as says S. John Apoc. 7. 14.
in the blood of the Lamb, and with that fervent love to God be so cleansed
from all spot of sin, that presently without stay they enter into his
kingdom, walking in white garments of honor and glory with him for evermore:
these need not our prayers, but pray for us. An other sort there be, that be
so badde that we may not pray for them after their death: as all Infidells,
Jews, Turks, Heretics, Schismatickes, and all whosoever die out of Gods
Church, without which is no Salvation; or in deadly sin, those the holy
Church prays not for, as being by gods judgment damned in Hell, wherein is no
redemption or recovery for evermore. An other sort of departed there be, for
whom only and no other we pray, that is for the faithful departed in peace
and charity, which can in no sort be, but in the faith and unity of Christ's
holy Catholic Church, that is for faithful Christian catholics dying in
state of grace: for them we pray that sooner they may be released of their
sins and defects, and enjoye Gods glory. And that we ought this to do,
we Eccles. 7. 37. 2. Macha 12. Math. 5. 27. 1, Cor. 3. Phil. 2. 2. Tim. 1. 1.
John. 5. Apoc. 5.
prove it by diverse authorities of holy Scripture, as where we bidden to do
well to the dead, and again forbid not favor to the dead, with diverse
other plain places of the old and new Testament: but according to the places
here alleged, how should one do well to the dead but by almesdeed or prayer?
or how can we hinder them of benefit, unless we omit, and cease to do and
pray for them.

Chap. XLIIII. More at large of Purgatory and prayer for the dead, and how
heretics not only corrupt, but deny the plain Scriptures in avouching the
contrary.
IN an other place of holy Scripture it is written how a noble captain having
of his soldiers slain, sent monye to Jerusalem to be offered for the
departed, thinking well and religiouslye of the resurrection of the dead, and
that his soldiers died with piety or virtue, and in the end the Scripture
concludes 2. Match. 12. 46.
thus: Therefore it is a good, or holy and healthful thought to pray for the
dead, that they may be loosed from their sins. These places by me alleged
here be the word of God most plain you see, written in the holy and sacred
Bible: but how think you do the heretics answer these plain places?
Truly they deny the whole books and all to be the word of God and the
Scripture, so shamlesse be these companions, that whatsoever is so plain they
cannot possibly gloss upon, or wrest to their own purpose, that presently they
cast away. So Luther denied Saint James Epistle for that it made for good
works, and others other parts: what kind of men think you be these that brag
before the simple in their pulpits of the word of God? why dare you commit
your salvation to such? who as long as they can in any sort wrest Gods word to
their own lust, so long they cry the scripture scripture, and word of the
Lord: but when it is so plain they can no way gainsay it, but that it
condemns flatly their damned heresies, the^ they put out of Gods word and
holy Scripture whole books, as namely this book of the Machabees, whereout I
took the latter authority, which book as certainly is Gods word, as S. John's
gospel. For who kept for me undefiled from others writings S. John's gospel?
or how do I know it to be the word of God, but that our holy mother the
catholic Church has kept it for me, and teaches me that it is Gods word?
which church tells me as certainly, that these books of Scripture that so
plainly make for prayer for the dead, be also the word of God. If therefore I
believe the holy Church in one, why should I not as well believe her in the
other? as therefore I am certain by no other means but by the Churches
authority that S. John's Gospel is true, and Gods word: so by the same means
I know most certainly every Christian is bound to believe this book of the
Machabees, and other the like that heretics d^ny to be the word of God. Thus
you see then we have the plain word of God, that it is a good and healthful
thought to pray for the dead: yea our Savior himself teaches there is a place
a man shall not come out of it, till he have paid the last Math. 5. 27. and.
12. 32.
farthing, after which once paid a man may come out: but in hell a man shall
never have release, wherefore our Savior speaks this of Purgatory. The same
is taugh^ by S. Paul's doctrine also where 1. Cor. 3. 13.
he compares pure works and imperfect works, the one to gold and silver, the
other to wood, hay, stuble, and says: that the fire shall try of what
qualitye every man's work is. The like I could prove by the same Apostle and
others the Apostles in other their writings in holy Scripture, but I make
have: neither can I stand to allege authorities of holy Doctors for this
matter, it is needless their works be full. S. Augustine (as it is most plain
in his books of Confessions) prayed and desired others to pray for Monica his
mother departed, yea he wrote a whole book of prayer, and care to be had for
the dead: if we consider what holy men did of old to avoid this cleansing
fire of Purgatory in the next life, it is strange Historia. Angloru^
and almost incredible. Saint Bede makes mention of one, that being in a
trance or ecstasy paste this life, saw some glimce of the joys of the
blessed, and of the pains of those in Purgatory, and by Gods sufferance
returning back to his body, he ever after took such penance that it seems
intolerable, sometime standing in cold nights in freesing water even to the
chin: his friends would ask him why he so greatly punished himself, he would
answer no otherwise but meekely say, I have seen, or felt more pains or
cold, and suffered harder things, meaning (no doubt) of the pains in
Purgatory in the next life. This same holy Doctor makes mention likewise, of
a Religious Priest saying daily Mass for his brother that he thought dead (but
in deed bound prisoner being taken in wars) how every day at the holy
oblation at Mass his brothers chains burst aso^der. Many such strange
miraculous visions, and revelations it pleased God to show of old and later
time also, manifestly declaring Purgatory. That which helps them there is
chiefly the holy sacrifice of the Mass, because that B. Sacrifice is of most
virtue and most holy, and of it self pleases God: also fasting, prayer,
almesdeedes, pilgrimage, and the like godly works devoutly performed be
healthful for the faithful departed, and so likewise be pardons of Pope, and
Bishops rightly applied auailable for the same: which pardons that we may
avoid those pains in the next life it is very good, meet, and expedient we
seek for in this life, not so to get pardons that we should be loyterers our
selves, and do nothing, for so pardons little avail. For they profitte not,
but to those that be in state of grace, and well disposed to receive them.

Chap. XLV. Of Pardons, and what they are, whereof they come and in what sort
they be available both for the living and the dead.
Now what these Pardons be that heretics so slander, you shall better
understand. First our sin after that by the Sacrament of Penance (as I have
said before) it be forgiven, yet some satisfaction and penance remains
therefore, which if it be not done in this life it must be done in the next,
because God as he is merciful, so is he just, and will have us do something of
our selves: insomuch that for some one deadly sin of ancient time, nere unto
the Apostles time were 7. years of penance enjoined, which if a man in this
time should do for every deadly sin, his life would not endure, a few
persons excepted (whom God preserves from those greater sins) very rare to
be found upon earth. These Pardons then of the Pope be not properly
forgiveness of sins, but of the pain due unto sins. The reason is,
because the Church that has authority from God justly to inflict satisfaction,
and penance for sin, the same Church likewise has power given her to release
such pains and satisfaction, that be of Gods justice laid on us for sins:
and the Church, that in the Sacrament of Penance by her Priests has the
authority from Christ to forgive sins, the same Church likewise by God has
authority given her by means of Pardons and fuffrage to release the pain due
unto sin. Now the Pope being head of the Church is chief dispensator and
steward of these Pardons, and they be properly called the treasure of the
Church, that is specially granted out of the merits of Christ's Passion, and
his holy Saints. For this is to be understood in every good work that there
be 2* things, the one is merit and reward that properly appertains to the
doer procuring him greater glory: another thing in this work is satisfactory
penance, or pain due unto sin, which sin first our Savior Christ was
void of, without all sin of his own virtue, and so was his B. Mother by his
special grace ever preserved from all sin, and many of the Virgins, Martyrs,
and great friends of God did more pen^nce a great deal then ever their sins
deserved: hereupon the holy Apostle said Adimple^ ea quae desunt passi^num
Christi, I fulfill Col. 1* 24.
(says he) those things which be wanting of the passions of CHRIST for his
body which is the Church. Lo S. Paul did fulfill or satisfy those things that
were wanting of the passions of Christ, not for the redemption of the world
(for Christ therein needed no helpe-fellowes, for his Passion had been enough
for many worlds) but that which he fulfilled of the passions of Christ were
satisfactions, pains, or penance, which every one for himself (that he may
suffer with Christ, and so be pertakers of the fruit of Christ's Passion of
such infinite value) is bound to do. This satisfaction and pains (I say)
Saint Paul did not only for himself, but for all the faithful people the
mystical boof Christ's Church, that so they mightfully be pertakers of Christ's
merits, and passions of such infinite value, and so be released quite from
sin and pain due thereunto. These satisfactory pains of S. Paul and other
holy Saints who satisfied, and did more penance for sin then ever they
deserved (as I said before) be properly called the treasure of the Church, in
which Church because we be members all of one body, that is as we believe there
is a communion of Saints: so therefore we by Gods grace be pertakers of the
merits, and prayers of I mean this participation takes effect in such as be
in state of grace. For according to our due disposition every one is pertaker
of another good actions, merits, and prayers.
the Saints in heaven, as we in earth be pertakers of an others good actions
and prayers, and they in Purgatory of our merits, and of the merits and prayers
of Saints in heaven, because there is a communion of Saints in Gods Church, and
being all members of one body under Christ our head, we thus mutually help one
another: whereupon it is (I say) that these satisfactory pains put into the
treasure of Gods Church, not only help us to release us, and satisfy our
pains due unto sin, which perhaps we are not able of our selves in this life
to satisfy: but also be a release by means of suffrage for those in
Purgatory.

Chap. XLVI By what means Pardons may be applied to our souls, and that we
must justly do that which is appointed us to be pertakers of the same
NOw the Pope as having the keys of this spiritual treasure, gives out
thereof to all faithful people (so they apply it to themselves, or the
departed) by such ordinary means as by him is ordained, as by fasting, prayer,
almesdeedes, pilgrimage or the like: as for example to those that be contrite
confessing and receiving, and saying but only our Ladies Psalter, or the Beads
once over, or the 7. Psalms, or Letanies having but only a token on them (as
it were) from the Pope, that is a Cross, holy grain, a bead sanctified, or
blessed or the like, that bead o^ Cross is a sign and certain token to the
party so disposed and doing, that the Pope grants he has so many days or
years of Pardon, yea perhaps a full Pardon for all his sins past, that is
the pain due unto sin: for as I said the eternal trespass of sin is
forgiven before in Confession, which debt or pain is to be paid either in
this life, or in Purgatory. The heretics slander the Pope and the Church, and
say he grants Pardon to such for money, but they belly him: for most commonly
Pardons be granted to such, as devoutly confess, receive, and say certain
godly prayers for the Popes intent, and benefit of the whole church. If any
almesdeed be at any time required, it is not for the Popes coffers, as being
(God be blessed that so exalts his Church, spite of all infidels and
heretics) an absolute Prince of himself, needing no such matter, but rather
maintayning as a general father poor people children of the Church of al
nations in the world: but if any alms be given, as very seldom is when
pardons be granted, the Pope assigns the parties to give it with their own
hands to their poor neighbors, or to the building of some notable ornament
to all Christendom, as to S. Peter's Church, or for the defense of Christendom
against our great enemy the Turk and the like. These Pardons, Stations, and the
like how frequent, or much used they were in S Gregory's time a thousand years
ago it appears to those that be conversant in his works: and other men's
holy writings of old, and though in the primative Church they were not so
needful then, when men were more charitable and fervent in Gods love, the
blood of Christ being yet warm in their hearts, and because when any offended
they of themselves did such penance, as might suffice: yet in the very Apostles
time these Pardons were given. For S. Paul after excommunication of the
incestuous Corinthian, whom he gave to Satan in body 1 Cor. 5, 5
to be punnished that his soul might be saved, after a time when he saw his
sorrow and amendment (least the enemy might have too much power over him, and
least with sadness he might be overwhelmed) gave him pardon, remitting his
pain for the rest of his penance due, saying, To whom you pardon, 2. Cor. 2.
20.
or forgive any thing, I likewise did the same, who if I pardoned any thing I
did it in the person of Christ. What other thing was this then giving of pardon?

Chap. XLVII. Of Excommunication, and how dreadful a thing it is, and how
heretics being excommunicated in the highest degree their excommunication of
others is ridiculous and contemptible.
BY which words not only appears the value and practice of Pardons even in
the Apostles time, but the heavy rod of Excommunication the heretics so little
fear, by which excommunication the Devil had power over the Corinthians body
to torment it, as he has over the heretics souls that despise it, who though
they feel not the smart in this life and by miracle to the terror of others,
as they did in the primative Church: yet doubtless it is a leprosy which will
stick to their souls in the next life, far more fearful then any torment
can be here to the body. For all Heretics and Schismatickes be excommunicate,
that is cut off from all grace of God, the Sacraments, good deeds, and prayers
of the Church, and be in the hands of Satan. Heretics that would do like
Catholics, as Apes would be like men, they forsooth being excommunicate
themselves would excommunicate others, but they have no authority, their
excommunication is nothing, fear it not a straw, a happy thing it is to be
excluded out of their Sinagogue, to be out of their company, with whom in
prayers and divine service none ought to converse: sear excommunication of the
Church in deed, obey her truly, and care not for any censure of the wicked
Church of Satan.

Chap. XLVIII Of some abuses about Pardons, and of the late reformation of the
same, and of the covetous humors of English Ministers.
But for these Pardons I spoke of before, I deny not but some abuses might be
in those that carried them up and down called Pardoners, some of them seeking
their own gain, but the Pope or Pardones ought not to be blamed for that, but
the abuses and faults taken away, the good uses ought to be left still: for
nothing is so good but it may be abused, yea the very Sun in the firmament,
by light whereof as good men use to work good works and their Salvation: so
evil men a buse it to the works of darkness, that is, to work vvickedlye,
and their damnation. The Pope then and the holy Church has not disalowed
pardons the use whereof be requisite, but he has ordained by consent of the
whole Church, that Pardoners no more so abuse the people, but that they receive
pardons from their ordinarye and lawful Curates, and that without all hope of
gain, or money hereafter. As for your ministers, (good men) they be all in the
spirit, they desire no money, women, nor no worldly nor corporal thing, they be
so full of the spirit: yet because you know them better then I, tell me (I
pray you) whether they be not some thing greedye of duties that were paid to
Priests, and the Church of old, yea of very pence or half pence given of
devotion of old for maintenance of Church lights, holy Water, and holy Bread,
and the like, now employed to feed their brats with, or to light themselves or
their wives to bed, who if they be greedy of that which is nothing their due,
yea be the most beggarlye couetuous wretches in England of all men, then let
them not complain of the Popes couetuousnes for pardons, no nor of any thing
which was given to Priests, or the Church, which in deed was due: as Peter
pence and the like.

Chap. XLIX. Exhorting all to do their Penance meekely here, and not to trust
to much to the help, and prayers of their friends left behind.
But thus by the way in speakinge of pardons, (which by charitable faithful
men alive may be applied by means of suffrage, to the faithful departed for
their speedy release) I am digressed from my purpose in speaking of Purgatory,
and prayer for the dead. Before I touched certain places of the Scriptures,
and authority of the Church, and Fathers that makes for this purpose, and how
fasting, prayer, pardons, but especially the holy sacrifice of the Mass, is
the most sovereign remedy for the faithful departed. But as I exhort all to
pray for the departed, and forget them not considering they cannot help
themselves (though Divines hold, that the more charitable we are to help the
departed, by so much the prayer of our friends shall help us after our death)
so vvoulde I vvish all not to much to trust others, which oftentimes be
forgetful of their friends departed, enjoye they never so many of their
posessions and goods. But let each one do well yea the best he can for
himself, and perform his penance meekly whilst he is here, that he may have
a pure and perfect soul: for happelye even in those that be careful of their
Salvation some dross of sin, imperfection, or corruption may be found to
stay them in that fire of Gods justice, and there many a light thought, many
a vain word, many a headstrong passion, and unmortified affection, which we
little regarded and lightly passed over in our selves without correction,
shall be found stiff matter for Gods justice to work on in that cleansing
fire, where nil inultum remanebit no sin shall be left unpunished: the
sharpness and severity whereof (in that it is inflicted by Gods judgment for
sin) who is it if he deeplye consider, but he may easilye perceive? The
greatness of which pain is such and so subtle, that God can lay such
punishment on the soul in one hour, that it may seem and serve for a
thousand years, whereby you see, that those that at the day of judgment
shall be taken in debt of pain due to sin, may fulfill it in an hour,
though they deserved a thousand years, so greatly can GOD Almighty increase
the punishment in that space: so that when the Pope grants pardon for many
thousand years (when as, Purgatory shall remain no longer, but till the day
of judgment, which perhaps may be with in an hundredth years) yet his
pardons be right just, and auailable for the reason abouesaid. But (as I said)
I exhort all to do their Penance here, and leave it not to that place, for
besides that one day there is more then a whole year here, and yet that one
day of penance here may satisfy for a whole year there, yet though a man
were there a thousand years he should nothing merit thereby, but only
satisfy for sin with pain and due punishment, but here in doing penance, he
both satisfies for his sins, escapes greater punishment, and increases his
merit, more plentifully receiving here the grace of God in this life, and glory
in the next.

Chap. L. Of Pilgrimage proved by examples of Christ, and his servants.
AS for pilgrimage of devotion, or vow to holy places, where it has pleased
God to work his wonders, if it be well used it is laudable and highlye
commended in holy Scripture, as appears by that solemn pilgrimage, that not
only of the Jews, but also Act. 8. 27.
of the Gentiles proselites, yea and by our Savior himself and his blessed
Mother was made to Salomons Temple, where God did accept of their prayers
better then in other places, though he be in every place, and hears those at
any time, that in spirit and truth worship him, and call upon him. The three
kings that by guiding of a Mat. 2. 2.
stare found out Christ; what other was that then a pilgrimage to Jerusalem
and Bethleem? So S. Helene a noble Empress went in pilgrimage to Jerusalem,
and miraculouslye found out the Cross. S. John Chrysostom, had such a desire
to have seen, and kissed the very chains of Saint Peter at Rome, wherein he
was bound, and to see the place where Saint Paul shed his blood there,
where three fountains miraculously at his death sproung up, that he said. If
he were at liberty from charge of his Bishoply, and pastoral care, he would
have gone in pilgrimage from Constantinople to Rome him self. Many like
testimonies and examples for Pilgrimage might be found, which we are to
believe and follow, scoff M. Minister never so much in his chair at home. For
holy Saint Hierome that in Pilgrimage travailed about Jerusalem and all the
holy land, and with Paula, Eustochium, and many other B. Virgins and Widows
(as having care or charge over them) most sweetly visited, and religiously
lived and died by the holy Manger at Bethleem, where the sweet babe Jesus was
borne, may and shall be to me ever of more reverend authority, then all the
taunts of heretics in the world, to move me a jot. For I had rather be a poor
Pilgrim with S. Hierome in that poor devout Cave at Bethleem, then a proud
heretic in a Princes Palace.

Chap. LI Of the relics of Saints reverently to be used and kept, and of
miracles wrought by means of them.
AS for the B. bodies and relics of Saints who shed their blood for Christ,
which once were and shall be ever after the resurrection lively temples, and
tabernacles of the holy Ghost, which heretics blasphemously call dead men's
bones, though we neither worship them nor their Images as Gods, neither think
any divinity in them, or worthy any divine honor, yet honorably to conserve and
keep them, devoutly to behold or kiss them, and to show certain reverence
toward them, in that they be relics, and tokens left us by such dear
servants and friends of God, we be taught both by the holy Scriptures,
practice of Gods Church from Christ's time, and the testimony of all good men,
which declare that by the relics of Saints, that is dead men's bones (as the
heretics term them) many great miracles have been wrought. Bid your
Ministers look in the 4. book of Kings and in the 13. chapter, and see
whether they cannot find there in holy Scripture, how when certain men cast a
dead body into the grave of Elizeus the Prophet, as soon as the body touched
the holy Prophets bones, it rose up alive again, and stood upon his feet. Can
heretics blame us for keeping vestments, and clothes of Saints departed,
when we read in holy Scripture that Elizeus by 4. Reg. 2.
keeping his Master Elias his cloak, received with all his double spirit, and
coming to the river Jordan striking it with that cloak the river divided, and
by virtue thereof gave him passage Mar. 5. 28. and 29. Act. 19. 12. Act. 5. 15.
over? What, did not the very hemme of Christ's garment, napkins, and little
clothes taken from S. Paul's body, and the shadow of S. Peter, heal and cure
the sick, lame, and diseased with incurable diseases? what need we go farther
for Relics of Saints, then to plain Scripture itself? were not all the
Patriarchs buried with great honor? did not Joseph according to his father
Jacobs commandment carry his body dead into the land of promise? And were not
Joseph's bones 400. years after his death with great honor by the children of
Israel carried into the land of promise also? and dare heretics burn the
bones and sacred bodies of Martirs and Saints, and cast their ashes into the
wind and waters, rent and tear their vestments asunder, yea most vilanously
break down and abuse the Image and sacred Cross of CHRIST, the very ensign
of our redemption, and yet say they have Scripture for it? But these bodies of
Saints be they never so much abused by them, shall appear glorious in the
resurrection, when Infidelles, and Heretics that tear CHRIST'S mystical
body his Church, and his coat asunder, shall without all doubt fry for it
in Hell. I could show diverse miracles likewise since CHRIST'S time (but time
serves me not) which have been wrought at the bodies of Saints. As Saint
Augustine makes mention Aug. lib. 22. de ciu. Dei. cap. 8
of the Relics of Saint Stephen, whereby were cured diseases: Yea by the
very flowers that touched the Cophin wherein his Relics were put,
miraculous things were wrought. We read also how that by the veil of a
certain blessed Virgin, and Martyr the outrageous, and furious flames of
fire, which threatened ruin to some whole City, have been quenched: by
Saints bodies the Devils expelled, to the blind their sight restored, and the
lame made to walk: How miraculouslye were the two Chains that at Jerusalem
and Rome bound Saint Peter, of themselves knitte together, and the like?
whereby it appears how mighty and high their Lord is, how good and
gracious that so highlye honors the very bones, or relics of his dear
friends that truly served and loved him here, giving other thereby
encouragement to follow their example. Which honor given by GOD to his
friends and servants, when the Holy Prophet considered he wondered at,
sayng. Thy friends O God be Psalm. 138. 17.
too too much honored. But the heretics that not only deny prayer for the
souls departed, but withal burn and so dishonor the relics of Saints,
both which (the honorable relics of Saints, and prayer for the souls
departed) be great hopes, and comfortes of the resurrection, truly in my
simple judgment do shoot fast to deny another article of our Creed, that is
the resurrection of the body and all: with which denial as I do not
alltogither charge them, yet to confess the truth I iustye suspecte them, and
let them not say, but they have been forewarned.

Chap. LII. Of honor and invocation of Saints, and how Saints pray for us, and
may hear and relieve us by their prayers: as also that our prayers to Saints
and their intercession for us is no injury, but glory to Christ our Mediator.
TOuching the Saints in Heaven, our prayers and honor we do to them, such
honor and prayers be by far and by many degrees inferior to those that we
do to God: nay what honor we do to Saints it tends chieflye to Gods
honor, who is honored in his Saints, who accepts the least service we
do to any of his friends as done unto him. Now you must understand their be
diverse kinds of vvorshippes and honors, according to the worthiness of the
persons we show it to: as one kind of honor is due to father and mother,
another kind of worship or honor to gentlemen our betters, another higher
honor to temporal Lords, Princes, Bishops, and the like: and yet when we
do this honor to them, which by Gods Commandment is due because they take
power of him, there is no reasonable man that can say we dishonor God
therein, but rather honor him in so doing. So likewise we honor Saints as
great friends of God, Princes and Senators in that heavenly court, with an
honor due unto them, which kind of honor the Greeks call Dulia: and we
right worthily worship and honor our blessed Lady, as being nearest Christ
with another kind of honor call led Hyperdulia, higher then that again: but
we honor GOD alone with that most high honor and service called Latria,
which honor is due to none but to God only, to whom finally, and alone in
this high seruic^ is due all honor and glory, and with this most high service
which is Sacrifice, we only vvorshippe God and no Saint. For we say not we
offer to thee Peter, or Paul: Sed offerrimus tibi domine deus, We offer and
do Sacrifice to thee O Lord, for in this manner of honor that is Sacrifice,
he will give his honor to no other. Heretics now confound all these honors
together, making no distinction, or difference between them, whereby they
deceive them selves, and others, we then neither honor our Lady, Saints, nor
Angels with that honor due unto God, but with such honor as is meet for his
friends, and most noble creatures, in whom God is chiefly honored and
praised: but touching Sacrifice which is proper to God, that divine worship (I
say) consisting in external sacrifice and in acknowledging the parties
worshipped to be Gods, is it which may be done to no man nor creature, and
therefore the Apostles refused it with all possible diligence, and all the
Angels and Saints in heaven refuse that adoration by Sacrifice. The Catholic
Church suffers no Priest, nor other so to worship any Saints in heaven or
in earth, she has but one external Sacrifice of Christ's body, and blood that
she offers to God alone, which is the holy Mass. And neither to Peter, nor
Paul (says S. Aug. lib. 8. de ciuit. Dei. c. 27.
Augustine) though the Priest that sacrifiseth stands over their bodies, and
offers in their memories. But other kinds of honors, and duties inferior
without all comparisons (how great soever they be) to this we do as the
Scriptures, and nature teach us to all superiors in heaven and earth, according
to the degrees of grace, honor, and blessedness that God has called them
unto, from our B. Lady Christ's own mother, to the least servant he has in the
world. For which the heretics would never accuse Christian people of Idolatry,
if they had either grace, learning, faith, or natural affection. As for that
the Angel would Apoc. 19 10.
not let S. John worship him, it was because (as he said) he was his fellow
servant, especially now after Christ's incarnation, and to instruct us, that
what good gifts, virtues, or holiness we receive of God we seek not honor to
our selves for it, but for God: Saint John then being in an ecstasy knew not
so perfectlye whether the Angel was CHRIST oran Angel, which if the Angel
had not told, it might have been Saint John vvoulde then have worshipped him
as God, which he forbad, bidding him adore or worship God, that was with the
honor due unto God: and in other places of scripture when Angels appeared to
men, as for example to Iosue they knowing them Ios. 5. 13
to be but Angels, then they never forbad men any such worship: but Angels
and holy men, when they had due honor done unto them, did not dissalowe it,
but rather commended it, as by many other places of scripture may be showed,
but I would be brief. Now that Saints pray for us you shall find it in the
holy Scripture of Jeremy, in the fifteen Chapter of the second book of the
Machabees, where is mention made how Jeremy long after his death prayed for
the people, and that for the merits, and prayers of Saints (though they be
departed) God gives many good gifts, and graces to his servants; you shall
find it in diverse places of holy Scripture: as for example in the old
Testament almost in every book, you shall find how God for his servants
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and for David his servants sake and the like,
spared and did not punish his people when they deserved it, but gave them
benefits for their sakes long before departed. Neither be our prayers to
Saints any iniurye to Christ our mediator, no more then when we desire one
another to pray for us, as Saint Paul did the Romans and others, To. 15. 30.
desiring them to help him in their prayers. For though Christ be Col 4.
Ephe. 6.
our only mediator of redemption, yet there be many mediators of intercession
to make us partakers of that redemption once vvroughte for all. Neither is it
marvel the Saints can hear our prayers: for as appears by the Gospel,
they be as Angels of God, who rejoice at the conversion Math. 22. 30. Luc.
15. 7.
of a sinner, and therefore no doubt see our needs, assiste us with their
prayers, and rejoice at our victories. For if the Devils by Gods permission
see and know our actions, much more then doubtless do the Saints of GOD by
his gracious favor see and perceive our actions, and necessities. Neither is
this contrary to that, that God alone sees man's heart, for we Dan. 2. 1. Reg. 5.
read of Daniell, and other men that have known the secrets of man's heart by
Gods revelation: much more do the Saints in heaven that in seeing God as in a
clear glass, see themselves, our necessities, and all things that are
requisite for any creatures to know. Gre. lib. 1. moral. in Job.
For as says Saint Gregory, how is it but that they know all things that see
him that knows and sees all things?

Chap. LIII. Declaring how God for his holy servants sakes hears our prayers,
and how the holy Fathers of old prayed to Saints.
Now all the Scriptures be full how we men on earth be relieved, and helped
by Angels in heaven, as appears Tob* 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.
by holy Tobie guided by an Angel that delivered him and his wife from the
Devil, and helped him to his money, made that holy marriage, cured his fathers
eyes, and offered their prayers to God: what will you have more? Holy Jacob
the Patriarch when he blessed his grand children the sons of Joseph, these
were the very words in the eight and forty Chapter of Genesis saying. GOD
which feeds me from my youth even to this present day: the Angel which
delivers me from all evils, bless these children, and upon them my name be
called, and the names of my Fathers Abraham and Isaac. As much you see said
this blessed Prophet and Patriarch, as we do when we say God and our Lady
bless the child, GOD and Saint John help you, and the like, which heretics
scoff at, and when Jacob said my name and of my fathers be called upon, did he
not plain^ie declare, that their children and posteritye should beseech GOD
for their sakes to be merciful to them, or else pray to them to pray for
them, as when we pray to them and others saying, Lord, for David thy
servants sake have mercy upon us, O all Patriarchs and Prophets of GOD pray for
us, Saint Peter pray for us, Saint Paul pray for us, and so forth. Do you not
see here what substantial grounds of holy Scripture we have for honoring,
and praying to Saints, though in a far lower degree then we honor and pray
unto God, as I have declared before? for we say to God in our prayer, God the
father of heaven have mercy upon us, and not as we do to Saints pray for us,
signifying thereby that all honor we give to Saints tends to GOD, and that
all grace and goodness comes principallye from God; neither that the Saints
have any goodness, or graces as of themselves without God, but all from him, so
that we pray not to Saints for any want or insufficiency in God, but in respect
of our own unworthiness, that be not so worthy, nor can be so speedily heard of
God by our own prayers, as by the prayers of his Saints, of his Saints and
dearest friends. And this appears plainly by the last chapter of Job, that
where Jobs friends were reprehended for their faults, yet would not God accept
their prayers for their unworthiness, but bad them go to Job to his servant.
My servant Job says God shall pray for you. Now that all holy Fathers from
Christ's time to this day have made their humble prayers, and petitions to the
Mother of God, and all Saints, their works, and devout prayers declare: time
serves me not to repeat them, they vvoulde fill whole books.

Chap. LIIII. Touching by the way the B. Virgin our Lady, and the injuries done
unto her.
ONly this I cannot omit without grief of heart, the shamfull dishonor and
blasphemy the heretics do and say against the B. Mother of God, some
Ministers esteeming her no better then their baggage wives, and some naming her
with such compatisons and terms, as I am afraid to recite. But O filthy and
blasphemous mouth, dare thou call with such base terms the Mother of God,
the tabernacle of Christ, and very temple of the holy Ghost, his dear spouse,
the perfect figure and flower of his Church, that star of light, in whose
blessed womb Christ rested nine months, taking flesh of her sacred flesh and
blood, she bearing him in that sacred vessel of hers, whom heaven and earth
could not comprehend? She that the holy Ghost spoke by, that all nations shall
call her blessed, dare thou (I say) compare to her a drabbe, yea any woman
that ever was, or ever shall be? She that is the flower of women; She that
bruised the Serpents head, as repayring by her virtues that which Eve lost by
her vice; She that was a pure religious Virgin, in, before, and after her
Sons birth; She that is clothed with the Sun and stars, having the Moon
under her feet; She that shines for ever with pearls and precious stones
of honor and glory: that mystical Ark of God, that royal throne of the very
true Solomon, whom he chose before all other creatures for his chief and
elect vessel, in whom he is well pleased, who for her incomparable beauty,
admirable perfection, unspeakable glory and splendour of all magnificent
virtues, far surpasses all the praises of those Angelical Citizens and
humane creatures. She that in giving suck to that blessed Lamb of God, sucked
with all of him divine wisdom, ever duly serving him, never displeasing him,
conseruing all his words and sayings in her heart: who sits at the right
hand of her Son in a golden vesture (as prophesied holy David) all glorious,
that is, compassed about with all variety of vnipeakable virtues and merittes,
there rewarded with honor and glory, where (as says S. Bernard) The Son
shows his wounds to his Father, and the Mother placed above all Angels,
Cherubyn* and Seraphin shows her breasts to her Son. There says he the
devout p^nitent sinner can have no repulse or gainesay. And therefore against
all heretics in the world follow my counsel with S. Bernard. In omnibus
anxietatibus tuis Mariam cogita Mariam inuoca, In all thy heaviness and
necessities whatsoever, devoutly think upon Marye, and call upon her, and seek
to follow her example, as a pattern to all faithful Christians, remembering
that the injuries done to her, Christ (no doubt) accepts as done to him, and
the honor done to her as done to him: for the Son cannot but love the
Mother: but I go forward.

Chap. LV Of Images, and of the Cross of Christ, and of the reverend and
laudable uses of the same.
IMages I touched in the first Commandment, yet to say more: heretics that
will keep pictures of their wives, husbands, or friends, and may not abide
the picture of Christ, his blessed Mother and holy Saints, me thinks post
fast forwards to deny the Humanity of CHRIST with the heretics of old:
otherwise I see not why they should deny his Image and picture. As for pictures
that put us in mind of GOD the Father, and the holy Ghost, they do not go
about to express his divinity, which is incomprehensible and unspeakable,
which neither can be painted, feigned, or imagined, but only some propertye in
GOD: as his fatherlye care, his eternitye, his meekness, mercy, and the like
expressed by the do^e and holy lamb, which I touched before. But that there
were pictures ever of Christ, and his Saints al antiquity does testify, yea
Christ himself imprinted the very figure of his face in a cloth in kissing it,
or laying it to his face, which picture is reserved to this day whereby
miracles have been wrought: And Saint Luke painted the Image of our Lady,
reserved to this day, borne in Rome in solemn procession in S. Gregory's time,
whereby miracles (as I have probably hard) have been wroughte. There is
mention made likewise in the Eusebius. lib. ^. 14. ^is.
Ecclesiastical histories, of an Image of Christ made by the woman that was
cured of an issue of blood, by touching the hemme of our Saviors garment,
which Image she set up in memory of that benefit, and the * hemme of the Yea a
plant there planted or a flower when it gre^ so high as the hemme of the Image
of Christ, cured.
same Image did also miracles. This Image Julian the Apostata threw dow^e and
set up his own in steed thereof, which was immediately destroyed by fire from
heaven, but the Image of Christ broken in pieces by the heathen, the Christians
afterward gathering the pieces together, placed it in the Church, where it
was, (as Zozomenus writes) unto his time. But I hasten on, and let this
suffice any reasonable Christian that these Imagebreakers in general Councels,
and by the consent of all Christendom have been condemned many hundred years
ago, as is most meet. For surely such as cannot abide the Image of Christ, his
B. Mother and Saints, prepare the very way to Antechrist, the Devil, and his
army that shall have Imaginem bestiae scripta^ in fro^tibus Apoc. 14.
eoru^, the Image or Idol of that beast written in their foreheads in steed and
despite of the Cross of Christ, which these Antechristian heretics already
detest and abhor. And this moreover I say and confidently affirm, that if
the King, or a noble man would not take it in good part to have their arms
razed or pulled down, assure your self Image-breakers and spiteful razers
down of Crosses shall not be unpunished, as God has showed already some
tokens of his wrath. Therefore heretics that slander us we worship them for
Gods, belike think we have not so much wit, or sense as a dog, who knows
an Image from a ^iuing body (I warrant you) even by his very nose. Let proud
foolish heretics then auaunt, and preach trifling toys to babes, and Idiots,
Christians know what they do in keeping, and reuerencing Images and Christ's
Cross, neither need they heretics counsel. For touching that we do to
Images, and Relics, we want neither Scripture, nor sufficient authority:
otherwise I deny not but some abuses about Images in some simple people might
creep in, but that good Pastors and Bishops may easily reform, and Images
stand still, which being well used Saint Gregory rightly terms as it were
lay men's books, as representing to the unlearned in figure, that which the
history does to the learned in books: but I cannot stay.

Chap. LVI. Of Service in the Latin tongue: and how meet and convenient it is
that the Scriptures be reserved, and service said in the ancient, and sacred
tongues.
THe heretics to deceive the simple, made them a great while believe there
was no difference between the Catholic Service, and their heretical
ministerly prating prayers, between the old religion and the new, the old
service and the new (as they term it) but if you mark well which I have
said, you may see there is as much difference as between heaven and hell, truth
and falsehood. For the heretics either deny, or with their foul hands defile
almost every article of the christian faith and religion, and yet forsooth they
brag, Oh now you have the light in that forsooth they have the Bible, and
yet dismembered and very much corrupted, translated into the english tongue, and
that they have the Lords prayer and service in the english tongue. O have you
so? but I will prove by your light (as you term it) you bring in all
darkness, and in making a show of the truth, you be very imposters, or
juglers. Have you not heard of some A Similitude.
juggling companion that could (with his familiar Devil) cast such a mist in
some Parlour before men's eyes, that ships there, as in the Sea should seem to
be sailing, men rowing, the Sun glistering upon the waves, and yet neither
Sea, ship, man, nor Sun in deed, but only by knavery their senses deluded?
But a worse juggling of heretics is this in deed, by how much the worthiness
of man's soul exceeds the body. For juglers deceive and blind the eyes of
the body, but these imposters heretics blind and deceive the eyes of man's
soul, and true understanding, whereby they be deprived from the sight of God,
light of grace, and salvation. For whereas the holy Catholic Church
instructed, and taught by her Master and her Pastor S. Peter, does acknowledge
2. Pet. 3. 16.
(as he says) that there be some things in holy Scripture heard to be
understood, which the unlearned and unstable do deprave, as the rest of the
Scriptures to their own damnation: therefore now she as a tender Mother over
her children, knowing hard meat not fit for all, but that some as infants are
to be fed as it were with milk, and other such light meats, more easy to be
digested, knowing also that too much light dazeleth man's eye, but a competent
light is comfortable: therefore she I say as a prudent Mother lets her
children see no more light of the Scriptures, then their weak senses
unaccustomed to such high mysteries can well conceive or bear, nor gives
their souls no harder places to fee^e upon, then their infirm conceits and
^^oma^kes be well able to digest, as the holy Apostle did; when he said, As to
1. Cor. 3. 2.
little ones in Christ, I gave you milk not strong meat: eue^ so the holy
Church guided ever by the wisdom of God, seeing the infirmity of her children*
knowing the Scriptures to be good, yet not fit for every man's reach, gives to
every one thereof in measure according to their capacities. Wherefore she most
commonly has reserved and kept it vncorrupt from other writings, in the three
most ancient and sacred tongues as in the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin,
appointing learned men always to instruct the simple out of that learned book
with such histories, and holy lessons as might be most fit to edefie, and help
them, esteeming it sufficient for them to know there ever was, is, and shall
be one God in Trinity that made, and would save them that kept his law, and
Commandments: and that Christ the son of God was borne of a Virgin, dyed on
the Cross, rose again, and that they receive his very body in the B.
Sacrament for the health and food of their souls. So the Church thought it
sufficient for ignorant men to know, and believe the articles of the Creed, to
know they were bound to keep the Commandments of God under pain of deadly
sin and damnation, to confess and be sorry when they fell, with full
purpose of amendment, to say their Pater noster, Aue, and Creed, and to leave
other high mysteries to learned Divines. But now these new iuglers set the
Scriptures to be read, heard, and judged upon of young, old, learned, and
unlearned of all sorts, and so they say they have brought in the light: but
appose the ignorante when they have read and heard them, what they then
conceive of such, and such parables of the Gospel, such places of holy
Scripture, you shall find them so variab^e among themselves, to have such
foolish, fantastical, and fleshly; yea childish conceits thereof, that
whereas they brag of the light (alas simple souls) you shall find nothing
in their minds but ignorance, error, and darkness: they think they see a
ship, and it is but a fantastical shape: they enter in deed into a whole Sea
of the depth of Gods inscrutable mysteries, but alas they know not how to row
therein, and so be drowned and overwhelmed with the floodes thereof: they
think they see men in steed of trees: they imagine they see the light of the
sun and they embrace darkness, Hereof comes such innumerable opinions, such
proud and blind arrogance, such monstrous heresies, such horrible sins and
vices for that every simple soole would be a tamperer with Gods book, which
they understand not, but by mistaking of the text, go about to defend what
they list: yea what humor they be most given to. Upon these and many more
weighty considerations the holy Church keeps the scriptures in the latin
tongue for the most part, and so likewise upon the like consideratio^s that
every saucy presumptuous fellow should not deride the mysteries he
understands not, if they were spoken in the plain vulgar and english terms:
therefore the church uses at mass in her prayers and public service the latin
tongue that I say the holy Sacraments, should not grow into contempt, being
made common to every base rogne to desca^t upon, thinking that it is sufficient
the ignorant sort take the fruit thereof, though they know not the mystery, yet
the Church does not disalow any to pray any godly Catholic prayer what he
will, yea the Pater noster, Aue and Creed in the english tongue, so he do it
not in dispight of the Church, co^demning others that they do not well that
pray in the latin tongue, yea though they understand it not. For often times it
may be that the poor plough man, that says his pater noster not under
standing the words, may pray with more devotion and please God better, then
the greatest doctor that can make a sermon of every petition of the same: for
God in prayer does not so much atte^d to man's word, but to his will, affection,
and lifting up of man's heart to God, which is properly prayer. Nay what doctor
is so learned when he reads the Psalms, though he can english them never so
well, that understands them to the depth? yea of some verse or sentence
perhaps he knows noe one perfect sense, and yet though he understand them
not perfectly, he prays of them nevertheless, knowing God understands them,
and his devout meaning therein, as being indicted by his holy spirit, and that
he accepts his devout intent. The little children of Jerusalem when Christ
on Palmesunday entered the City, cried or sung in his praise: Osannafilio
David, which Luc. 21. 9.
words being children they understood not, yet Christ was well pleased, and
delyghted more with their praises, then with the wise Doctors, Scribes, and
Pharisees that understood the Scriptures. So you see it is not the
understanding, but the devotion, affection, and men's good will to which men of
good will the Angels Luc. 2. 14
came to show that everlasting peace (by Christ made betwixt GOD and man)
that pleases God. So that thou unlearned man whosoever, fear God, serve him,
keep his Commandments, pray in what tongue thou will in obedience of GODS
Church, and though thou understand not, have a good will in thy prayer to
please God, and I warrant thee my soul for thine, God will hear, and accept
thy good devout prayer, and desire.

Chap. LVII. Wherein the Apostles words touching praying, and preaching in
unknown tongues are expounded, and of the goodlye order of the Churches
service, praying, singing, and praising God night and day in her cannonicall
hours, feasts, and times of the year.
Now whereas Saint Paul would 1. Cor. 14.
have one speak in the Church in a tongue that may be understood, rather then
a thousand words in an unknown tongue, truth it is we deny it not as Saint
Paul means: for he speaks there chiefly of Preachers. For you know if a
Priest or Jesuit should preach in latin to the people, it would nothing
edefie, because few understand, and therefore the Church ever causes her
preachers to teach the people, and preach in the vulgar tongue of the Country,
and so Saint Paul would have it. Again Saint Paul spoke to those that in his
time had the gift of tongues, which many for want of order did abuse upon
ostentatio^, or indiscretio^ by praying, or speaking, or preaching, altogether
alowde, some in one language, some in another, that bred confusion and
disorder, that such fruit could not be gathered of that gift of the spirit of
diverse tongues given, as was requisite. This S. Paul sought to reform that all
things might be done to edification, which the Church does in her prayers in on
tongue by uniformity, and otherwise as I have declared before: yea this godly
order the holy Church observes in the course of her service, vicissitude, and
disposition of the feasts according to that hymn of hers, Temporum das
tempora, vt alleues fastidium. Lord thou art he that give us times upon
times to lighten our weariness; yea the very appointed hours of prayer in the
night, and day in the Church, declares the watch and ward, this holy mother
(according to Christ's and the Apostles counsels) has over her self and
children, as when she prays, prayseth, and sings to God most sweetly
throughout the whole world, at the prime, early, in the dawning of the day, at
the third, sixth, and ninth hours, in the evening, at midnight, and the like,
as we be taught by the Scriptures the Apostles did, that went to prayer at
the ninth hour, and David rose at midnight, and in the morning to confess the
name of our Lord, as at evening every night he prayed to God, and watered the
couch of his former sins with contrite and gracious tears, and the like
godly orders at other times (but at these statuted hours especially, and not
without mystery, remembrance, and due signification chiefly of Christ's passion
for us and gifts bestowed by his holy spirit of us) godly and holy apostolic
men used in observing hours, scoff heretics never so much. For though God
may be served at all hours, times, and places, yet times appointed by the
Church be best for obedience sake, and that we may join our selves together,
thereby in prayer tanquam acies been ordinata as true soldiers of Christ well
armed, and in good array at all times, and against all assaults of the
foreign and common enemy.

Chap. LVIII. Of the Beads, and of the fifteen mysteries of the Rosary, or
our Ladies Psalter: and of the great good, and spiritual fruit by devout
saying the same.
SO they scoff at Beads that be directories, or (as it were) guides by the
numbers, to bring men in mind of the mysteries of our redemption. The 1
first ten Auies, and Pater noster put us in mind of Christ's incarnation: The
second 2
of the visitation of Elizabeth by our B. Lady: The third of Christ's nativity: 3
The fourth of his presentation in 4
the Temple: The fifth of the finding out 5
of Christ by his Mother once lost. The 6
sixth ten Auies, and Pater noster put us in mind, how Christ for our sakes
sweat water and blood in his agony, and prayer for us in the garden: The
seventh, 7
how he was whipped: The eighth, how 8
he was crowned with a crown of thorns: The ninth, how he bore his Cross: The
9. 10.
tenth, how he was crucified. The eleauenth, 11
how he rose again: The twelfe, 12
how he ascended in to heaven: At the 13
thirteenth, we are to remember the coming down of the holy Ghost: At the 14
fourteenth, the assumption of our Lady: And at the fifteenth her coronation.
Of 15
all which mysteries (besides the comfort thereof, and confirmation in our
faith) we may apply something morally out of the acts of our Savior, and his
B. Mother to our instruction and edification. And we are taught by the often
repeating this number of ten, to have ever written in our minds the 10.
Commandments of God, by observing whereof we must enter into life everlasting,
whereunto for us to atchiue is required perfection in us, which perfection is
signified by this perfect number of 10. And as saying the Pater noster once, we
acknowledge one god: so in saying the Aue Mary 10. times, we intend not (as
heretics taunt) to pray to praise or worship our Lady more then God, or like
to him, but with devout and thankful minds in so often together reciting his
own words, which he sent to the comfort of us all by his messenger the
Archangell Gabriel, we protest in that mystical number of ten so often repeated,
our loving heart without measure to God, for so unspeakable a benefit, having
nothing but love to seek to requite him for the same: which love because it
consists in observing the ten commandments of God, which we cannot do
without his grace, therefore we so often beseech his B. mother to pray for us,
and in respect of our unworthiness, that she most worthy, to our aid and
comfort would be a messenger for us to her son, as the Archangell Gabriell
from God was a messenger to her of comfort to the relief of all mankind: So
that all good men, but especially simple persons being renewed in memory of the
work of our redemption by means of Beads, we are not to forsake them for
their taunts. For though God be not delighted with the number of prayers so
much as with discreet affefection and desire to him: yet these mystical and
godly numbers help to increase our devotion and affection, and therefore we had
now more need to use Beads then ever, when as devotion waxes cold, both to
pray for heretics amendment, and that we fall not in their blindness, and for
diverse other holy, godly, and reasonable causes and things.

Chap. LIX. Of the Aue Maria how it is a most devout prayer, grateful to God,
joyful to Angels, terrible to the Devil, and most healthful and
comfortable to all mankind.
AS for the Aue Maria it is the very words of the Angel Gabriell, Elizabeth,
and the holy Church, now where as heretics say it is no prayer, but a
salutation, they bewray their ignorance, for many sentences and words be in
Scriptures, that seem no prayers, and yet effectual prayers, as in the
Psalms and other places may appear, where Gods mercy, justice, might, bounty,
love, and the like, is praised or called on, not in form of prayer, but yet a
most effectual prayer, to obtain his mercy, goodness, bounty, and grace. So in
the Au^ Mary our B. La: is saluted to the intent to pray for us and thanks
given to god that voutsafed by that unspeakable mystery of his incarnation of
her body to be incarnate and made man for us, whereby man is recovered from
damnation, the Devil overcome, the ruins of Angels be repaired: so that the
Aue Maria was the most joyful tidings that ever was brought from God to man No
marvel then though Infidels and heretics members of the Devil, abhor the Aue
Mary: for as often as it is devoutly said, as it is joyful to Angels in heaven,
so it makes the Devil, and al' his Angels to tremble and quake. But some
Puritanes would have no Pater noster neither, nor any stint prayer, so long
they have babbled of the Lord and spirit, that now you see they deny Ladies
prayer and Lords prayer too, I am afraid in their corrupt consciences Christ
and God too, neither do I marvel: for improbity and wickedness never
consists in one degree (as one said) Sed cum incipit labi, ruit, and
praecipitat, till it come to the deapth of all evil and mischief. For being
fallen from the Church, and having once lost the high way, they must needs
ever be further from the truth (wanting a sure ground and foundation to stay
themselves upon, that is the true Catholic Church 1. Ti^. 3. 15.
of God, which Saint Paul calls the foundation, and pillar of truth) til once
they return back again.

Chap. LX. Of diverse holy ornaments and things belonging to the Church, as of
lights in Churches, of insence, Dedication of Churches, and such like godly
ceremonies.
AS for sacred and holy bells, vestmentes, holy vessels, as Chalices and the
like, Heretics beat them in pieces, make gunnes of them, and chamber pots,
and fill their purses. The like did heretics and infidells of old
espeacially Julian the Apostata that made water in the Chalice, wherein the
blood of Mary's Son (for so the Infidells termed it in contempt of him and
her) was offered, but he and his fellows had foul ends, as these fellows
have and will have unless God give them grace to amend. For if the people of
God before Christ had their holy Trumpets to call the people together; the
Leuits and Priest their holy vestiments, sacred cups and Phyals, and other
vessels though we follow not now Jewish ceremonies (as heretics be-ly us)
yet why should we not have our ornaments Sanctified by Gods word, and that in
more devout and exquisite sort then the Jews had, by how much Christ's law
exceeds the Jewish ceremonies. For we see these outward ceremonies much help
to increase inward devotion, as for example the very candles, and Church lights
do signify unto us the light of Gods grace; the Gospel the purity of
conscience and good works we ought to have, with many more significations
which well weighed excite, and stir up devotion. The Majesty of our temples or
churches adorned with sumptuous ornaments, and Images of Christ and his Saints
in a lively history (as it were) setting before our eyes by their glorious
death and martyrdom, their triumph and victories over hell and death: these
temples (I say) thus adorned being solemnlie dedicated to God, yea and their
dedication yearly renewed or remembered do they not teach us to dedicate our
bodies and souls wholly to the service of God, as being lively temples of the
holy Ghost, and daily to cleanse them more and more from sin, to adorn them
with virtues, and to renew, confirm, and furnish them up eftsoons with those
effectual signs and seals of our redemption those divine mysteries the
healthful Sacraments? If God promised to hear the prayers of those that
called upon him in Salomons temple, how much more will he hear our prayers
and lawful petitions thus made in our Churches, who serve God now in spirit
and truth, and not in presence of that vmbraticall Arc of the old testament:
but in that most high misterye before Christ's most B. body, our only mediator
and redeemer, whose intercession is evermore acceptable in his fathers sight
the Arc of the living God that reigns for ever. If when two or three in
Christ's name be gathered together he has promised to hear them, how much
more when many hundred or thowsands be so collected, and united in prayer in
one Church, will God be amongst them, and perform their good desires: surely
heretics that thus ruinate, despise, and pollute Monasteries, Oratories, and
christian Temples, set up an Idol in their own imaginations in steed
thereof, and prepare the way for that general, and Antechristian abomination
of desolation, which was prophesied by Daniell the Prophet. O Christ when thy
sign shall appear in the clouds that lightneth the whole world, then Church
robbers, Image breakers the razers down, and cursed enemies of thy Cross,
then, then shall come to confusion, when thou shall make al thy enemies thy
footstool. Moreover when as in our Churches any ceremonies of ince^se, and
sweet perfumes (which signify and betoken the sweet odor and savor of good
life, that ought to be among us) be used, it is well and commendable: which
and the like ceremonies though in some sort of old they were used, yet seeing
that Christ came not to break the law but to full fill it, any such ceremonies
as be not euacuate, and frustrate by Christ's coming (as the bloody sacrifice,
circumcision and the like) are now not to be observed, because we have the
things themselves whereof those ceremonies, and sacrifices were figures: yet (I
say) any thing that tends to nourishing of pie^y, devotion, and charity are
to be kept still, as fasting, knocking, kneeling, or any such godly ceremonies
which concern the body, as devotion does the mind: both which we must offer to
God as being all his own, and due unto him.

Chap. LXI. Of religious persons* of their sanctity, learning* and perfection
of life: and of the vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience which make a
religious man: and of the heavy judgment of God to vowe-breakers, and how our
Lady vowed virginity.
AS for our god^y religious men that with great fervor of love to God dedicate
themselves in holocaustumin a whole burnt sacrifice (as it were) both bodies
and souls* to GOD making a sacrifice to him of the chiefest powers of their
souls by obedience, and of their bodies by chastity and pouertye were they not
prefigured by the Rechabites, Nazarites, and diverse orders of the Prophets,
that led a more perfect order of life, then the rest of the people? Was not
Elias, Saint John Baptist, and many more as it were religious Hermit? Be not
our religious Jesuits, and Friars a plain pattern of apostolik life that with
the Apostles forsake al honor riches and promotion for Christ, living in
common, preaching Christwith hazard of their lives to Heretics, Jews, and
Gentiles, and al barbarous people through out the whole world. These be most
wise, most learned, and yet most innocent, just, simple, and virtuous men, such
as the world, especially our cuntry is not worthy of, which a long time has
most impiously and ingratfully rejected them, notwithstanding that God
prospered our ancestors of old far better by their merits and prayers, whiles
they prayed, preached, and served God in our country both night and day: by
them our commons were maintained, by them fatherless children widows and
servant sustained, and relieved, all states in body and soul by them greatly
enriched and supported: The loss of which religious houses, for all virtuous
training up of youth in learning, and other-wise this country now feels. And
here I cannot omit the subtilty of the devil who by little and little, as the
wily serpent gets in his head and the^ after his whole body, he bore me^ in
hand that by suppressing of religious houses, the country would be greatly
enriched, but they being once down the country within a few years after was
spoiled in a great part of al ver^ue and riches, both for that the king that
was the first breaker down of the wall (that scourg of God for our sins) spent
all the money he scraped of religious houses and his co^mo^s too and that in a
fewyears in vanities and in besiedging of cities in other countries little
benefitting him or his posterity: and also divided him self and the whole
Realm from Gods church and so spoiled himself and others of virtue, opening
the window to al vice and heresies. Insomuch that shortly after though not in
his time, Lutherans (and worse than Lutherans that he seemed so much to
abhor) corrupted the realm, abrogated Mass, and all: see by what degrees
sin and heresy enters, which by religious orders was long restayned.
Hereof then came presently the spoil of the fairest flower in Christ's
garden, next to Martyrdom, that was virginity, which both S. Matthew the 19.
Chapter: S. Paul the first to the Corinth. and 7. Chapter: and S. John in his
Apocalipsis the 14 Chapter so highly commmend, as S. Paul preferring that state
before marriage saying, he that joins his virgin 1. Cor. 7. 38.
in Matrymonie dothwell, but he that does not, does better. As for breaking
vows of virginity, chastity and the like, as obedience and poverty, which
three vows be proper to religion, and make a religious man: These to keep
heretics dissuade and be the cause of the breach of such vows, whereby
indeed good actions as devoted to God be a great deal more meritorious
especially in religious men, whose meat and sleep in doing it of obedience is
to them meritorious. Such vows heretics (contrary to the Scriptures) say
ought not to be made, but we prove it by the Scriptures as in Genesis. Did not
Jacob vow if he returned safe such and such things he would do in the honor
of God? Likewise in the books of the Leuits. Numbers, Deuteronomion, Indges,
Kings, Psalms, Prophets, and thorough the course of the Scriptures lawful
vows be commended and practiced by good me^, and damnation threatened to the
breakers of them. As S. Paul to Tym. the 1. Epistle and 5. Chapter pronounces
damnation to those that break the vow of chastity. But woe, woe be the^ to
runnegat vow-breakers, Friars and Nuns, and woe to those that be the
procurers. For if man be jealous over his wife, much more in most just sort is
gods zeal, indignation, and just wrath against those that defile his spouses
vowed virgins, once dedicated to him. Nay did not the B. Virgin Mary vow
virginity? I will prove out of the Gospel, and that by the exposition of most
ancient, learned, and holy Fathers that she did: For when the Angel told her
she should conceive a son, how comes that to pass (says Luc. 1. 34
she) for I know not a man? and yet was she already espoused to Joseph, whom
if she would, or ever had determined to have known carnally, she never would
have asked any such question, how that might come to pass. For she the most
prudent Virgin knew that by knowledge of man, was the way ordinary to conceive;
but she (says S. Ambrose had made vow of Ambros. in Luc.
virginity, which she might not break; and therefore she asked the question
how? not doubtful of the mystery, but desirous to know the manner, to whom
the Angel answered not by man, but by the holy Ghost, which was without breach
of vow, and then she was satiffied: thus you see our Lady was a vowed Virgin
but be these the fruits of new gospellers that bereave us of all virtues, yea
virtuous and religious persons also: whereas the most learned and most virtuous
men that ever were since Christ, and the Apostles time were religious men,
Ftiers, and Monks; As S. Augustine of the Latin Church, S. Basil a Greek, S.
Anthony Hilarion, S. Giles, S. Hierome, S. Bennet, and S. Gregory, S Bernard,
S. Dominick, S. Frauncis, all Monks or Friars, the most of them saying Mass
every day: Good Lord what miraculous men were these? so triumphing over the
Devil, so mastering themselves, so supporting others, what continual fasting?
what prayers, what earnest and profound studies were they daily exercised in?
some of them curing incurable diseases, some raising the dead, others with a
word expelling Devils, some giving themselves for the help and redemption of
othres, some knowing the very thoughts of men by divine revelation, whom
neither serpent nor poison could hurt, some by continual meditation of Christ
having the eyes of their souls watered in his blood, and reposing themselves
in his wounds, and open side, had the very tokens and impression of those his
sacred fixures imprinted in their hands and feet. O what candor? what
simplicity? what innocency what purity of conscience were in their un spotted
breasts? O what helhounds, what members of the Devil and Antechrist be these
heretics that pull down the Abbeys and Monasteries, raze the momuments, break a
sunder and burn the orders, godly rules and statutes of these religious
fathers left to their children and posterity? can Antichrist do more when he
comes then pluck not only religious men but pure virgins and religious women
that served Christ their spouse and husband out of their cloisters, and make
them harlots and common strumpets: yet had we a number of most B. men
Carthusian Monks with some others also, that in defense of the truth manfully
shed their blood.

Chap. LXII. Of holy water, and how creatures being blessed by the word of God,
miracles sometimes by the same be wrought to the expelling of Diuelles, and
confirmation of Christian religion.
AS ^or ceremonies of holy water, and holy bread, and Agnus Dei blessed by the
Pope, heretics at the beginning, before they plucked off their vizardes,
began to set little store by, as they did by religious folks and so by little
and little not only denied sacramentals, but sacraments and all: see by what
degrees mischief gets the upper hand. But we be taught by holy Scriptures
that all things which God has created or made, and whatsoever is rightly
blessed or sanctified by his holy word, is good; yea by means of his word is
bettered and more sanctified: For so when Eliz^us cast salt into the water it
was amended. Others you shall read of old that by Gods blessed word were made
healthful, and multiplied to profit of body and soul, and the confusion of
the Devil that is afraid of one drop of water blessed with Gods word, as we
daily see by experience in some possessed. This holy water we take then
remembering Gods grace given us once in that healthful water of Baptism, and
in taking of it with faith and devotion, sprinkling our selves, the wicked
spirits have less power of us, and the places where we be with many other
fruits that follow: yea among Infidels that never heard of Christ before,
sometimes miracles are wrought by one drop of holy water, as in the Indians
in diverse places to this day. Now, because our faith when it was first planted
amongst us, was then confirmed with miracles therefore it is not requisite that
miracles be so ordinarily wrought amongst us, though sometimes it pleases God
to show them, where they may do good, and be not derided as heretics would do
if any were here wrought, and attribute them to sorcery and witchcraf: but God
will not have his pearls cast to hogs. Fit it were for heretics (good men)
to bring some miracles to confirm their new no faith. But our Catholic faith
has been, and is God be blessed by miracles sufficiently in all ages confirmed
to this day.

Chap. LXIII. Of holy Bread given the people in remembrance of that most
blessed Sacrament, and in some sort taught us by Christ in those loanes
blessed, and multiplied by him in the desert.
HOly Bread we use to take on those days we receive not the blessed Sacrament,
and this holy Bread is a remembrance of the blessed Sacrament, for you must
understand, that in the primitive church they received the blessed Sacrament
almost every day, such was the devotion of the people whilst Christ's blood was
yet warm in their hearts, but in process of time, as devotion ever by little
and little decayed: so did they less use the same, so that the holy Church
Council. later. can. omnis vtriusque sextus etc
was constrained to make a law, that once a-yeere at least about Easter every
one should receive, and that under pain of deadly sin if one have no lawful
impediment: Yet the holy Church wishes men often to receive yea with due
preparation, the oftener the better if it were every week or fortnight. But
because every one is not thus disposed, yet in many countries she gives holy
Bread somewhat to nourish charity thereby in the people, and in remembrance of
Christ in the most blessed Sacrament, the bread of life that came down from
heaven that fed the people miraculously with holy blessed Bread in the
wilderness, and shall feed us with life everlasting once, as now daily in the
mean time he feed^th us with his grace.

Chap. LXIIII. Of receiving under one kind, and how the same fruit is reaped
by one kind as by both: and that peace, unity, and charity is the end of this
blessed Sacrament.
THough when I entreated of the B. Sacrament of the Altar I spoke something of
receiving, under one kind, yet I thought good to give some further admonition
in this place touching the same matter, for that I find by experience many
unlearned persons, that after receiving of the blessed Sacrament when wine of
decency and co^ueniency is given them to drinck, do take it for the very blood
of our Lord, which notable negligence and gross ignorance in them may either
come by forgetfulness, and over little care and due consideration of this blessed
Sacrament, as not duly preparing themselves well and often to remember, what,
and how they are to receive: Or else perhaps sometimes for want of good
instruction, and due information of those that first admit these simple lay
persons to this blessed Sacrament, which every good Priest that has charge of
men's souls, as a prudent dispe^sator of the mysteries of God ought to be
careful of, that nothing be wanting of his part, but that either publikly, with
great discretion or at least privately, his voice when he enters into the
sanctuary of our Lord may be heard. For if the people in the old law could
discern, when the high Priest went to offer sacrifice by the noise of his bells
hanging at his vesture, how much more in this law of grace ought the Priest of
God to take heed he be not dumme, but so to extol his voice that the very
simplest person of reason may hear him, and receive sufficient food of his
doctrine to their salvation: and that they discern not only when they are to
offer their prayers to God by his sacrifice: but what, and how they are to
receive with him, that is (as I said before) that although Priests more lively
to represent Christ's Passion receive under both kinds, that is both Christ's B.
body in the host, and blood in the Chalice to represent more effectually
(according to his institution) the shedding of his blood upon the cross, to
which end he said to his Apostls only (no lay person being present) and to
their successors bibite ex hoc omnes, drinck ye all of this: yet all lay
persons (upon weighty considerations, as for fear sometimes of shedding of
the sacred blood of christ in being given to so many, which neither without
great indecency, and inconueniency could be consecrated for so many to
receive) but under one kind, that is the blessed Host, and body of Christ, but
not the Chalice as Priests do: yea if it were convenient to use so great
vessels for so precious and sacred a thing yet hard it would be in some places
far north to get wine sufficient to consecrate for so many. And therefore
whether the Priest or another give you that be lay persons wine in the Chalice
or in some other ^up, you must take it as no part of the Sacrament, but as wine
only to wash your months that none of that holy Host the body of our Lord
remain in your mouth still, for in the least part or particle of the holy Host
is perfect Christ, wholly his body and blood: wherefore lay men receive the
Sacrament as fully that receive under one kind, as the Priest does that
receives under both, therefore lay people are to content themselves with the
food their holy Mother the Church gives them, who knows best how to feed
her children, and will give them that which is meet: and dispute no further.
For heretics disputing for the Chalice to receive it as well as Priests,
disputed so long that in the end they denied body, blood and all of Christ in
the Sacrament, from which damnable heresy and blasphemy God bless all true
Christians.

Chap. LXV. Of fasting, and the fruits thereof, and how it has been used, and
commended by Christ and his Saints, and how it is commanded under pain of
sin by the Church, and to what persons: and how such as disobey the Church in
this precept of fasting or any other, disobey Christ.
WE read moreover in holy Scripture fasting high^y commended, yea Moses,
Elias, and our Savior fasted sorty days, insomuch that when any great graces
were to be given to men, or any reuelatio^s, or strange visions made to the
Prophets, it was commonly done to them in fasting. Insomuch that look as by
eating we fell out of Paradise: So by fasting Christ began our recovery again,
affirming one Devil there was that Mar. 9. 29.
could not be cast out, but by prayer and fasting. Many other virtues there
be, which I cannot stand to reckon, as chiefly modesty, temperance,
liberality, and the like that follow of fasting, whereas drunkenness and
belly cheer is the nurse of all vice, and destruction of body and soul. When
as then fasting is so highly commended, the holy Church seeing the slacknesse
and indeuotion of some, that would never fast unless they were commanded, and
besides that all things might be done in order, and that we may to our greater
fruit and merit, as all members of one body, suffer altogether, and join our
selves together in fasting, has ordained the lent forty days fast by the
example of Christ, and very tradition of the Apostles. Likewise in England onr
custom binds us to fast Fridaies, and abstain from flesh on Satterdayes: So
likewise the Church commands at four times in the year to fast, that so by
prayer and fasting not only the holy Ghost may be more plentifully powered down
upon them, that then receive holy orders: but also that we may pay to God at
such times, tithes of our bodies and souls, in thanksgiving for fruits of the
earth, and fruits of his grace, as we do in the Cross, or rogation week,
with solemn procession: which or the like S. Gregory used in Rome against
plague and pestilence, as this rogation week was first ordained by another
holy Bishop to that end, and after received of the whole Church to pray for the
living and the dead, and to arm us against all incursions of the Devil both
bodily and ghostly. As for the ember days so called of our ancient forefathers
in this country, because of those fasting days me^ eat bread baked under
embers or ashes: these solemn feasts (I say at four times in the year have
been in use, above these thousand years, as by S. Leo it evidently appears,
and as may be proved by many other ancient Fathers, and so solemnly kept in the
Church, for such good purposes as above said. So likewise many other Eues of
our Lady, the Apostles and Martirs are to be observed of great antiquity, and
most ancient custom, teaching us thereby that as by fasting the Eues of Saints
here we must keep holy the days after, that is their feasts in earth: so by
penance, patience, and long sufferance in the day or short time of this life,
we after may keep a festival day, that is, possess eternal joy and glory
with God, and his Saints in the kingdom of heaven. Yet she as a discreet
mother commands none to fast, but as they may: for she bears with poor
laboring men that are not able with fasting to work, those the Church does
not constrayne, though of devotion in our country the poor plough-man (after
his manner) would fast as devoutly as Priest, or King, and do his work
nevertheless. The holy Church likewise bears with children, old folks,
sick folks, women with child, or with any such that have lawful impediment,
though it be meet they do it with leave of the Priest. These holy feasts,
lolhards and heretics spightfully break in despite of the Church, but as
often as they do it they offend deadly. For Christ our Redeemer and lawgiver,
as he commends fasting by his word and example, though he set downs in the
Gospel written no prescript days, or certain days of fasting; yet he in the
Gospel expressly commands us to hear and obey the holy Catholic Church, who
upon due consideration (as I said) sets down certain days and times of
fasting: which Church whosoever will not obey, he disobeyeth christ, who bids
us account such a disobedient person that will Mat. 18. 17.
not hear the Church no better then a heathen man. Now therefore then (as I
said before) the holy Church commands us to fast on such and such days,
which commandment of hers whosoever breaks, he breaks Christ's
commandment, that bids us obey his Church, and therefore heretics that
break fasting days, and lent commanded to be fasted by Christ's holy church
(yea and that of contempt) are to be accounted no better then Heathens and
Turks; though it be not the meat as unclean that enters into the mouth, but
the disobedience in will, and act that displeases God and hurts the soul.

Chap. LXVI. Of traditions, whereof they came, and what they be, and of what
authority: and that by tradition and and authority of the Church we know the
Scriptures to be the word of God, which be ever most reverently preserved by
Catholics, but evil understood, corrupted, yea some quite raz^d out by
Heretics.
THE like is to be said of those that of spite break any of the rest of the
holy canons, statutes, and precepts of the Church, as those that marry out of
due season, hear not, or desire not to hear Mass on the Sundaies when they
can, and will not come to it, and the like: For Infidels likewise those are to
be accounted, that will not believe and follow the traditions of the Church
which heretics scoff at, and yet S. Paul says, stand and hold the
traditions 2. These. 2. 15. 1. Cor. 11. 2. Ioh. 2. 3. Ioh vlt. verse. 25.
which either you have learned by our speech or writing. Yea S. John in the
holy Gospel affirms, that all things our Savior did, be not written,
insomuch that if they were, he supposes the world would not be able to
contain the books, but what if we had never had Scripture left us? should we
not have believed the mouth and tradition of the Church, who was believed, and
taught her children to believe, and follow her before any Scriptures were
written, whereof we want (as appears some part of that which the Prophets,
and Apostles writ and left us? and those parts we have, as they be most
special rules, testimonies, directions, and stays for the Church: so we
believe and keep them with all reverence, as delivered us by the Church. For
infallible truth whose authority chiefly, moves us so to do. Now these
traditions are nothing but godly precepts, orders, uses, rites, ceremonies, and
infallible truths of Christ, God, his Saints and Sacraments, and due
administration of the same, which we receive by word of mouth without writing
of our forefathers, as they did of theirs from one generation to another, from
Christ and his Apostles time. Hereupo^ S. Austen gives this notable rule, that
when any thing is generally received of the whole Church, the first beginner or
author whereof cannot be found out, or is unknown: acknowledge that for
certain, for an apostolic tradition, and we are to believe it as certainly to
be true, as though it were written in the Scripture. For the church was, and
traditions were, as I said before the Scriptures was. Nay says an holy Doctor
and blessed Saint, what if the Scripture had never been, should we therefore
not have believed the Churches traditions? Nay says S. Augustine I would not
believe the Canonical Scripture, or gospel, but that the Churches authority
moves me thereunto. Se here of what authority the Church is unto whom the
word written is but a rule and stay as it were. When S. Paul had taught the
Corynthians 1. Cor. 11. ^4.
the truth of the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, and forewarned them of some
abuses amongst them about the same, he told them that at his coming he
would dispose and set in order other things about administration of the same,
which what he did therein it is not written: yet we are to think he was as
good as his promise. And therefore many things used at Mass this day, as the
holy canon and other ceremonies, we no doubt have the^ by the institution of
Christ, and Apostolical tradition. For though the Church according to diversity
of times what she thinks most fit to edefie the people, may alter (especially
some external rites and ceremonies) or put to as she thinks best: yet there
be certain things she never does nor will alter as Christ's words therein,
and the traditions of the Apostles wherefore I am bound to believe the Church
as well when she says of tradition this is the word, or deed of Christ or
the Apostles, as when she tells me of the Scripture, this is GODS word,
which Scripture we reverence more then any people in the world, as I declared
before, but not the Scripture, but the false understanding is to be blamed*
again though the Scripture be profitable to instruct, teach and the like, yet
many other things that be not written be expedient, and necessary to be known
as the word Trinity is not written in Scripture, yet necessary to be known,
and believed where S. John says in the Apocalips that no man shall add or
put to that book or draw from it, he means that no man ought to corrupt his
writing in that book, or any other books of the Scriptures, nor pull out any
books, but Heretics, as Protestants and the like, not only corrupt the text
of Scripture, both by false translation and false understanding them, as of
late has been proved to their shame if they had any: but also mangle and pull
out a number of books of Holy Scripture that make against them, as I declared
before, wherefore upon them and such as they be, that so add, and pull out of
holy Scripture, must needs lie that heavy curse, God by S. John threatens
against such evil men deprauers, sacriligeous robbers, and defacers of the
Scriptures, and GODS word.

Chap. LXVII. Of God that he is one in substance and three in persons: and of
the horrible blasphemy of heretics and Athistes against his divine Majesty.
But some other heretics of this time have neither lest Christ, nor God, the
blessed Trinity untouched. One heretic blasphemeth and compares the blessed
Trinity, our most mighty and merciful Lord God, one in nature and substance,
but three in persons, which S. John calls the father, the word, and the Pater
ver bum Spiritus Sanctus.
holy Ghost. These three (says he) be one that is (as I said) three persons
and one God of one substance, power, and eternity: these divine persons (I say)
that horrible and most monstrous heretic compares to Cerberus the dog of
hell with three heads, oh blasphemy why does not the earth open? Oh merciful
Lord God long patient? Other like men there be, that worse then beasts desire
to dispute, whether there be a God or no: a thing that very heathen men having
use of reason never scarsely doubted of. For I never read or heard of any
nation for the most part so barbarous but it either worshipped a true God or a
false God: but see how sin and heresy has blinded men's hearts. O if Atheists
would but lift up their eyes, to heaven and behold the heavens that all
Philosophers, and Astronimers know by reason never cease moving, and how one
plannett or orb, has superiority, or domination over another, and how the
lowest and all the rest be in continual circuit moved by force, and virtue of
the highest that primum mobile: if senseles men (I say) would but only consider
this common, plain, known, natural reason they in the end might find some
first and chief mouer above the rest, and so when man's mind is so high it can
attain or reach no further, that incomprehensible thing so far above the
reach of man's reason is God, summum and perenne bonum, that most high, chief,
essential, and endless goodness the beginning of all things, and yet of himself
without beginning orend, that contains all things, and whom nothing, not
heaven and earth can contain or hold, and yet whole and perfect God in all,
and every part of heaven and earth, whose mighty power reaches to the
uttermost coasts of that bottomless lake: but alas what need I say this to
Christians, and yet there be that go under that name, and in our country too
that call these matters in question with no less vanity and leuity (would GOD
with no more blasphemy) then to talk of Robin Hood, these be such whereof the
Prophet speaks: dixit insipiens in cord suo, etc. the foolish man said in
his heart there is no God.

Chap. LXVIII. Of hell and of the just punishments therein for sin without
release for evermore.
AND truly a number of Heretics live as though there were no God indeed,
hell nor heaven, what* they stick not to confess some of them, that hell is
only in the breast and but a darkness of the mind and conscience, or some
biting of the same, but they shall feel unless they speedely amend, another
hell indeed as Christ said, where that deadly worm gnawing upon them shall
never dye, and where that everlasting fire that he at the last day shall
command the wicked to depart into, shall never be quenched, where is weeping
wayling and gnashing of teeth. Truly I my self knew an usurer now become a
Master by his honest trade that said who is able to say there is a hell? and
yet this man would seem to be wise: indeed it is seldom seen, that any
return from hell to bring news back, especially usurers: but if he would
believe God to be just, or believe Christ, he would not doubt of this matter,
for our just Lord thretneth hell to the wicked, as he promises endless reward
of glory to the just, yea our meek and merciful Savior says there is a
hell, and that with no small nor short pains and punishments but with
unmeasurable and endless torments: For what do you think that rich glutton,
which Christ speaks of in the Gospel, would give that could not have a
drop of cold water, to quench the thirst of his tongue end, being punished in
flames of fire? What think you would he do at this day to be released, of his
torments who would not look at the poor beggar nor spare him a mite, or give
him a piece of bread lying in misery, the dogs licking his sores when the
rich glutton fared deliciously every day in silks and veluttes, what thinck
you would he do to be with that poor beggar in heaven if life but for seven
years vvpon earth might be granted for his salvation; but that time is past
for ever, in hell is no redemption, where the tree falls there forever it
lies; that is whether a man dye in state of salvation, or damnation, after
death passed it cannot be altered, because his soul is hardened in malice
dying without just sorrow and with affection ever to sin if it might be,
wishing there were no GOD to punish sin, and so dying in displeasure of his
Majesty which is infinite deserves endless torments, but those we pray for
departed, that dye in state of salvation (as I said before) and neuercome in
that bottomless pit I now speak of. But touching those in hell with them the
gate is shutt up, which once shutt there is never hope of salvation, the night
is come when man can work there no more his salvation; therefore would God this
rich usurer and all of his mind betime would know there is a hell, as christ
tells, and work their salvation as he exhorts which this rich glutton if
he might would, but being in hell he can do no more, as being in an end of
that, which shall never have end.

Chap. LXIX. Of heaven which worldlinges contemn and how we may obtain it,
and of the glorious and most happy estate of the body with the soul for ever
after the general resurrection.
BUT you se what opinions heretics and usurers have of hell, I would gladly
know what they think of heaven. I have heard of some that have had so good a
conceit thereof, that if God would ever let them live here, they would never
desire him (as they say) to trouble him in heaven, nor no more I warrant you
they shall unless they have a better desire to come thither, whether to arrive
a man must leave affection to this worldly trash or else quite forsake it, which
worldlings cannot abide to hear of, for heaven is high and cannot be obtained
with too great a burden on our backs nor without labor pains and earnest
desires as says Christ, The Kingdom of heaven suffers violence and men must
take it as it were by force, that is, swinck and sweat for it, as an
inheretance of greatest importance let therefore a man joyfully give himself and
all he has for it, and he shall win it, As the wise man that found the treasure
in the field sold all he had to enjoy that field and treasure, whereby is
understood the Kingdom of GOD the treasure and fulness of all good things:
wherein we shall find Christ the full delight and infinite treasure of man's
soul. Heretics would some of them have us now in no better case (since
Christ has by his bloodshed opened heaven gates and removed that wall betwixt
God and us) then the Jews were before Christ, when none entered into Gods
glory till Christ had delivered them, but Heretics be-ly the truth and think
too basely of Christ's victory over the devil, hell, and death, who would have
men's souls That some gather out of Luthers works was his opinion and of others
or rather worse. Note the perfection of man is greater by how much he approach
eth nearer to angelical nature
to lie I know not in what, obscure places, and hidden receptacles till the day
of judgment, but truth it is as we be taught by the Scriptures our Savior
with the rich spoil of Saints and many blessed souls entered into his fathers
glory, with whom Saint Paul desired to be when he said I desire to be loosed
(from his body that was) and be with Christ, so that Christ is in heaven no
doubt now, and Saint Paul and al his blessed friends, and innumerable saved
souls since his Ascension with him, and he has prepared the way for us if we
well and perfectly do live, to be with him as soon as the soul is from the
body and at the glorious resurrection with Christ, then shall we be clothed
with a glorious stole of our bodies also in which respect we shall be better by
it in some sort, then I mean not that humane nature exceeds ange^icall but
thus I speak chiefly for the honor of our Lord ^^svs who in himself has so
highly exalted our nature.
Angels that want bodies, which body as it was pertaker with the soul of the
grief and pains of Christ, so it shall be for ever pertaker of the glorious
resurrection with him, where after with Christ shall be more joy and happiness
of all good things the^ may be thought or imagined.

Chap. LXX. Of the Pope, that he is the Vicar of Christ, and lawful successor
of Saint Peeter.
LAstly the heretics rail much against the Pope for he is ever in one end of
their sermons, and therefore I will end with him in this little treatise, I told
you before and proved unto you in one of the notes of the true Church (which is
succession) how the Pope is Vicar of Christ, and successor most lawful to
Saint Peter, to whom and all his successors in him, Christ committed chief
charge and authority over the Church wherein at the first general consell he
made decree, and gave first sentence, he raised the dead, healed the incurable
with his shadow, and struck two dead at his word to the terror of all
excommunicate and sacriledgious persons, and to declare the authority he had to
bind and loose, to kill and raise again, wonderful were the things that GOD
wrought by those that succeeded in his place, 30. and more of the first Popes
were all most glorious Martyrs. One of I mean Marceline who in that per
secutio of Dioclesia^ Thus ad hibuit de orum simulacris. ex Damas. and Platina.
the Popes indeed with his predecessor S. Peter denied Christ for fetre of
death but with S. Peter presently rose again, and condemned his own fault,
whereas other Bishops for that he was the high Bishop would not condemn him,
saying in the Council, Prima seeds a nemine indicatur, The first seat or S.
Peter's chair is judged of no man: Wherefore before the prosecuting Tyrant
confessing his fault, and accusing the denial of his Master with just reproof
of the Infidel, and incredulous persecutor, the impious and cruel Tyrant put
him to death, and so he dyed a glorious Martyr. Another Pope there was (as some
affirm) a favorer of the heresy that holds, that souls before the day of
judgment shall not see God and was about to have ascended the chair, that is
to have made a decree intending to bind the whole Church thereunto for This
story have I heard, (...) to my reme^br^ce I never read it neither c^n I call
to memory the (...) of th^^ Pope of (...) by relation of others I heard this
matter as also of his sode death.
maintenance of that erroneous opinion. But it pleased God to strike I am with
sudden death, that he could not do his intended purpose. See the providence o
God how he defended his Church, and how faithful he is in his promise, that
told S. Peter his faith thou d never (...). For though Peter and Marceline of
frailty for fear denied their Master, and this other Pope as a private man
became a favorer of heresy, and did err as men, some in act of themselves,
and another in opinion. Yet when they came to make public decree, inte^ding to
bind the whole Church thereunto ^o give judgment as it were ex Cathedra in that
place which is the highest tribunal seat in Gods Church, wherein they spoke in
the person of Christ there o they never did, nor any successor of S. Peter ca^
ever possibly err, as partly appeared* by this dreadful example of this
aforesaid Pope prevented with death, so that if there were any one Pope amongst
an hundred (as they be but men) of evil life or conversation, Gods truth of
heretics ought not to have bin slaundered therefore, neither has the true
faith in the Apostolic seat of S. Peter failed, though any ill man for the
sins of the people may have possessed the same, but ordinarily the Popes have
been, and be (God be blessed for it) the most godly and virtuous men upon
earth as I before showed by the glorious number of those that be Martyrs and
Confessors, such Saints as the heretics cannot deny.

Chap. LXXI. What most admirable, virtuous holy, zealous, and most worthy and
charitable men many Popes have been of old and of late years also, even to
this present day.
FOR example, of what virtue was Leo the Pope that meeting Attila a great and
mighty tyrannical King that had spoiled almost al Italy, and coming to Rome
to have destroyed it, Le^ then Pope desired him to return, who though he came
like a Lion, he obeyed the Popes words and returned as meek as a Lamb, his
soldiers meruailing their Master would be so ruled by a Priest, he answered
that he durst do no other. For whilst Leo the Pope talked with him, he said
he saw one stand by the Pope in Priestly attire, with a drawn sword
threatening him death if he would not obey the Pope. By the same virtue and
holiness, another time he put back Gensericus from the burning and sacking
of Rome Yet we do know though Rome were destroyed, that Saint Peter's
successor should nevertheless be Pope of Rome though he were in any place of
the world. As for Rome it has often been sacked, and the Popes persecuted
and driven away: and yet God has had ever care to provide a Pastor for his
Church, though God has often and as we may well think, will for his servants
sake above other places defend that City, what should I speak of that
Apostolic spirit that was in Gregory the great, first Pope of that name, and
our Apostle of England. His religious acts and worthy works extant to this
day, declare the excellency of the man for all eternity; when heretics that
call him the first Antechristian Pope, shall with confusion be buried in hell,
to omit most famous and worthy men, and be short, what singular virtues had
Gregory the thirtenth of blessed memory? what Seminaries did he erect? what
learned Colleges did he maintain? what seeds of virtue and learning by
religious Apostolic Fathers and men, did he sow almost throughout the whole
world, who with infinite expenses, sought the conversion of heretics and
the whole world besides especially our country, to whom he was a most loving
father, often lamenting the miserable state thereof, and that with tears. How
miraculous and worthy the acts were of P^us Quintus his predecessor against the
Turks, all Infidelles and Heretics, all the world knows: I need not
speak of the virtue and religious piety of our holy Father Clement the eight
that now is Pope of Rome, for all good men there know it, what excessive
expenses he has bin, and daily is at, in defending the whole Christian world
against the commou enemy the Turk, what fatherly care he has upon those
Princes and States that bound upon him, what gifts and dignities he has
bestowed on such as have showed them selves valiant Champions in defense of
Christ's truth, and christian countries: how with sighs and tears he has
lamented such Princes and countries, that have withdrawn themselves from their
christian brethren, winking at the Turk, finallye to their own harm and
ruin, with what Apostolic, serious, zealous, and most prudent divine letters,
and grave messengers to the contrary he has exhorted and admonished them: to
be brief, France, and Spain, yea and all Europe to their comfort and joy,
sees and feels the fruits of his labors, in reconciliation of Christian
Princes, quieting of Countries, seeking to the uttermost of his power for
perfect peace betwixt God and man throughout the whole world, a man surely
right worthy his name, a right Clement full of Clemency, mercy and piety, in
charitable alms good deeds, and most worthy thoughts toward all men. The
Popes sometimes after a great and sure proof of their Godly lives and miracles
have canonizd good me^ departed for Saints here to be accounted and reuerensed
in earth, as they be with GOD in honor above in heaven, but the glorious acts
of these holy Popes, not only of old but also of latter years (God ever be
blessed for it. Cuius manus non est abbreuiata) approve them to be Saints
canonized with GOD indeed as having their names written in the book of life
whose worthty and famous memory for all generations shall never decay.

Chap. LXXII. Wherefore he wears his Crown is borne of men's shouldrrs and
suffers devout persons to kiss his foot.
THe heretics say the Pope is proud, for that men kiss his foot, and bear
him on their shoulders, and that he wears a triple crown and the like,
first for wearing a crown, they ought not to blame him, for he is not only
Bishop but also a king over that country and city and requisite it is for him
and his counsel the Cardinals to bear some show of majesty and estate
otherwise the infirm people that must be houlden in awe would despice and not
obey them. Again if God suffer wicked Princes to have glory and reign, it is
for the glory of his name then that sometimes his dearest servants may have
peace and honor even upon earth for the comefort of the faithful and that
infidelles may have less cause to triumph and blaspheme the name of Christ, as
though he could not exalt his Vicare and Steward but would forsake altogether
his dearest servants. As for being borne of men's shoulders, yt is for that he
may the better be seen of the people, as he passes to Saint Peter's Church of
some solemn feast that they may all see him and have his blessing which they
could not a number see if he went in the throng, whereas there is such press
sometime of such a high feast, many thousands being gathered together (so great
is the devotion of the people) to serve Christ honor him in his Vicar, and
visit the bodies of the holy Apostles. In that some of devotion, kiss his
foot, though he command nor require any so to do, yet considering for whom
they do it, that is, that it is for Christ whose person by Gods providence he
represents, he dissaloweth not their devotions, and we se therein the word of
the holy Prophet in some sort according to the letter verefied that before
Christ prophesied Inimici eius terram lingent that his enemies shall lick the
earth, that is those that sometimes were enemies to Christ as Rome was before
it received CHRIST faith afterward shall become so obedient and subject to
Christ that they shall worship his very footestoole, and not only kiss his
foot, but the very earth his Vicar treads upon. Moreover whereas Saint
Gregory, Saint Leo and all holy Fathers Popes in that seat, writ of themselves
(though most humble men) yet (I said) they affirm of themselves that they
supplye the place of Saint Peter and CHRIST yet This I heard of such
inhabitants ^ Rome tha^ well knew it that this was the custom of Pius quin tus
and Gregori^^ 13.
as every one may easily perceive, they be most humble and lowlye men of
themselves in so much that the Popes that now be, in their own persons give
audience, and will hear and help the cause of the poorest men in the world,
yea once every day from his most weighty affairs the Pope alotteth a time to
hear himself, the complaints of the poor insomuch that in his writings such
is his humility he terms himself with no higher a style then calling himself
always the servant of the servant of GOD.

Chap. LXXIII. Why heretics have ever slaundered the Pope, and how GOD
turns their malice to the benefitte of his elect, and how heretics be
forerunners of Antichrist, and of Christ's victory over his enemies in his
Church.
ANd yet will heretics can the Pope proud that with all humility watch and
care, seeks their salvation both night and day? But it is not without cause
heretics slander and bark against the Pope for they like wolves, as long as
he the lawful pastor is sound cannot have full scope to invade and de^oure
Christ's slock and therefore as holy Fathers do note it, has ever been the
manner of heretics to bark against the Pope and yet see how God can turn all
to the best, for truly the brabling and most impudentiying of your Ministers
against the pope gains them little, for it gives some occasion that never
almost heard of the Pope, to enquier further what he is and so finding him in
the end to be Christ's Vicar and Pastor of their souls by good inquiry of the
truth they forsake their woluish Ministers as liers and enemies to Christ the
truth, who because they be Antechristians themselves, therefore the more primly
to go masked and unknown them selves they call the pope Antichrist not unlike
to that drab and unnatural mother whereof we read in Scripture, that that
having oner-laine her own child, malapertly would have faced down the
natural mother and have had her living child in keeping: But wise Solomon
decided the matter; So you see it is the property of naughty women ever to
sclaunder the good that their own naughtines may either seem more tolerable,
or less suspected. So I say this corrupted whore of Babylon, this strumpet
heresy ever slaundereth the good woman the natueral mother (the spouse of
Christ his Church) but especially the head thereof Christ's Vicar the Pope
calling him Antechrist, Christan Rome Babylon and the like, whereas as I
declared they themselves indeed be very antichristians preparers of
Antechrists way, his prophets and very forrunners, and their many fold
heresies be nothing but a very heap of deadly damnable dregs and
corruption, a very babilonicall confusion; But Christ (our true Solomon) the
wisdom of his father has and ever will judge and discern our natural mother
his dear spouse, the Catholic Churches cause will restore her weeping for her
children lost wilv according to his promise preserve his Vicar her lawful
pastor the Pope in all truth that his faith shall never fail, and send the
drabbe and strumpette of heresy and sin packing and make her folishnes and
wily deceipts known unto all men, yea will cast her into the fiery lake,
burning with fire and bristome in sacula saculorum world without end. Where all
her fawters that maintained her here and fled not out of her be time, al
Kings Princes and nations of the world that with her whordome were corrupted
shall cry Woe, woe, Babylon, Babylon, that great City is fallen down, and so
of the cupe of Gods wrath with her shall they drink for ever who were corrupted
with her prostitution, and who followed her plefures and delights here in this
life. When Christ in his Triumphant Kingdom the Church, spite of that old
Dragon the strumpet and all her Merchants shall reign for ever.

Chap. LXXIIII. Of the assistantes of the Pope as first of his Cardinals, and
why they be so called, also of religious men Priests and Godly men of this time
that dyed Martirs and of the dying obstinately of heretics.
Heretics to show all their spite when they cannot answer Catholic
arguments nor touch the Pope for or in his life, yet will they slander all the
Popes assistantes, Bishops and Priests with their old worn out terms of
Papists and popery etc. The Cardinals (as is well known) be Princes, men of no
small virtues, and of the greatest gravity, learning and ciuility in the world
maintaining virtue and learning and justly punishing vice and heresies in all
places, refusing many of them no labors nor pains to help the poor, and
uphold Gods Church amongst whom our late Cardinal Allen of blessed and worthy
memory (a most rare man and father to this country as all good english men, and
the Christian world besides knows) deserves not the least praise and they be
called Cardinals (amongst other reasonable causes) for this reason because even
as the door is stayed and hangs of the books, so under Christ and his
Vicar, the safeguard health and well doing of the flock of Christ is sustained,
and depends much upon the vigilant care and wisdom of this most grave
senate their prudent and mature ounsel. If any of them (as men) do offend as is
seeldome seen, the Pope as judge over all next to God, leaves it not
unpunished. As for Bishops and Priests here in our country of old, though
many of them most reverend virtuous men, yet we are not bound to defend the
lives of all, but such as were naught indeed be the shame of your ministers,
and their new broched heresy for who but loose Priests and religious men of
lewd life were ready so greedely to teceiue heresy yea became the first
brokars of heresi, as in Germany Luther a runnegat naughty Friar. Bawdy Bales
here in England and many mo not worthy memory. And who resisted, and dyed
rather then they would yield to sin and heresy, but good virtuous me^
indeed? Who more learned, wise graueand virtuous, then John Fisher ate Bishop
of Rothester who for that he would not yield to the Kings unlawful desire,
nor conseut to abrogate the Popes authority (who neither would nor could
dispense with the King in a thing contrary to Gods law) whereof he fell out
with the Pope, and so you see upon what grounds here in England begane
heresy. This holy Bishope (I say) nothing consenting unto the Kings unlawful
desire (in putting away his wife and forsaking the lawful Pastor of his soul
the Pope) whereby he forsaw all heresy and mischief would follow. Most
gloriously in the defense of the Catholic and Apostolik faith apposed him
self as a wall for the house God and sealing that in act which before he had
preached, and thaught by word most constantly and victoriously shed his blood.
So did that wise and honorable learned man Sir Thomas Moore so the Moncks of
the Charter House who at their death praying for the King and realm, sealed
likewise the truth with their blood, not like heretics in Queen Mary's time
that at the stake like hell-houndes barked against the Pope, and rayled against
the Queen and state, dying as furiously and obstinatly; as these Martyrs in
King Henry's time, and our Priests in this Queen his daughters time die
meekely and constantly, and no marvel, for heretics be Martyrs of the
Devil, as Catholics be Martyrs of Christ. For as S. Augustme says, It is
not the death, but the cause that makes the Martyr. For heretics in his time
were punished justly by Christian Princes, yea some desperately of old killed
themselves as we see now some wicked and perverse persons do; so that
voluntary to die you see is indifferent both to good and badde; So that our
Savior called not every one blessed that suffer persecution but such as suffer
for righteousness sake

Chap. LXXV. Of Antechrist forerunnners, of his falselymg signs and deceits,
of his intolerable Luciseria^ pride, subtilty, and short reign, though most
violent persecution of his life, birth, death, and ministers.
Heretics then dying against the truth which is Christ, what other be they
then Martyrs of Satan? very Prophettes and forerunners of Antechrist; which
most wicked man against the latter day shall come in all salse and lying signs
and wonders flatly denying 2. These. 2.
Christ and God, extolling himself above God, as says S. Paul, with such
subtilty that the very elect if it were possible should be deceived: But our
good Lord JESUS for his elect sake will shorten those perilous dates. For as we
gather out of the holy Prophettes, especially the Apocalips of Saint John, he
shall Dan. 11. leb. 12. 13. 14. 17. 19. 20.
reign but three years and a half, whom our Lord JESUS shall destroy with
his power, yet in that short time he shall so persecute the Church, that all
the persecutions we now seele, or that ever were since Christ, be but as it
were a shadow in respect of that of Antichrist. For as the power of God was in
Christ to convert and win souls; So by Gods sufferance, all the power of the
Devil shall be in Antechrist, to pervert and deceive men. Though the Devil
shall not be incarnate in Antechrist, as God was in Christ, wherein not by
confusion of substance, but by unity of person two distinct natures in Christ
be but one person. This persecution shall be both openly and secretly, openly
in might and power, slaying the innocent, and secretly in his forerunners,
that prepare his way before his coming, and after his coming in his ministers
that by sleights and wiles under the color of virtue, shall bring in all
horrible sin and vice, deceauing the innocent and simple sheep. He shall be
borne as many affirm of a Jew of the tribe of Dan. See how far all these
qualities be from the Pope of Rome which the heretics call Antechrist; For
Antechrist is as much to say, as contrary or against Christ. The Pope he most
honors and preaches, and causes Christ to be preached. Antechrist shall call
himself God, the Pope calls himself servant of the servants of God;
Antechrist as some gather out of Genesis. Fiat Dan. Coluber in via etc. Shall be
borne of a Jew. The Pope is commonly an Italian, Frenchma^, or Spaniard borne,
and chosen for his virtue and learning out of these or some other christian
country. The Jews chiefly shall receive Antechrist at his coming whom they
look for as their Messiah and Savior to come and conquer the whole world with
great pomp and glory as our Sauifore told them that another should come in Ioh.
5.
his own name, him they would receive, which al Fathers understand to be
Antechrist, that the Jews shall receive in steed of Christ, whom they crucified
coming in his fathers name. To be brief, there has from Christ's time to this
day bin many Popes, but Antechrist borne of the tribe of Dan or of some other
tribe shall be but one man and as S. John in the Apocalips affirms he shall
slay Enoch Apocal. cap. 11.
and Helie whom Christ shall send to preach against his false miracles, and
to comfort his afflicted flock the Church which he shall never forsake.

Chap. LXXVI. How the Devil and Antechrist be compared to that monstrous
serpentine tayled Dragon drawing numbers with them into everlasting perdition,
and that one certain man Antechrist is yet to come though he has many
forerunners.
LET any man, of learning, read but only S. Gregory upon Job, and he shall
find all this, and much more then I can say upon Antechrist, comparing that
great monstious serpent and dragon Behemoth which streatcheth out his tail as
the Cedar tree unto the Devil, and Antechrist his vessel, that (as says S.
John) with his tail draws Apoc. 12.
the third part of the stars of heaven, that is men in great account and
authority in the sight of the world, for learning and other qualities, he by
promises gifts and threatenings shall draw down with him out of Gods Church to
destruction and damnation, as his forerunners heretics and Infidels do, you
see a number that for fear of loss of life gain pleasures and commodities,
forsake Christ the truth and their salvation, so that many Antechrists no doubt
as Ioh. 1. 4.
says S. John be now in the world, denyers of truth and adversaries of the
same: but yet one man of perdition, properly called Antechrist, is yet to come
as we by Scriptures and authorities of holy Fathers and Doctors be taught: of
which wicked man heretics of these times, as I have often said be no doubt
Prophets and forerunners, affirming that darkness is light, and light darkness;
that is, that the Pope (which as by sufficient authority I have already proved,
is the chief servant and member of Christ) is Antechrist, so that when he
comes faith being decayed, Antechrist indeed may rule and take place without
controlement or gainesaying: but yet Christ will have his Church and faithful
Apoc. 11.
flock even in the heat of Antechrists time that shall boldly gainesay him,
and with their blood testefie the truth which shall never decay. From which
perilous times which seem now to approach our Lord deliver us: For truly of all
heretics that ever were since Christ these heretics aproach the nerest to
Antechrist and seem to be his very forerunners. For Antichrist at his coming
shall deny Christ God and all as heretics have by times since Christ, denied
some less articles of the Christian faith, some more for of some heretics we
read of old that denied the co^substantiality of the son of God with his
father as the Arrians, some the grace of God, other free will as in Saint
Augustine time. Some denied Pelagius Iouin an. vigila^tius Eu^ches
invocation of Saints, derided their sacred relics and scoffed at pilgrimage
gate, or devout visitation of their holy Sepulchers; as in Saint Ieromes time,
one denied the resurrection of the body in Saint Gregory's time; Others began
to bark against the blessed Sacrament before, and in Saint Bernards time and so
from time, false heresies have start up against the Church of God, for her
better trial and exercise, of wisdom of mind: as by bloody persecutions of
pagans, and infidelles she before was exercised in body. But these protestants
with their fellow puritans, and other of their brethere^ heretics of this time,
deny almost or corrupt all articles of our faith and religion, their faith
stands all of negatiues, and therefore like and most like Antichrist, which
shall deny all goodness God and all. As for example the heretics of our time
deny the true Church, deny free will, deny all the Sacraments save Baptism,
and that I told you how they abuse also, they deny purgatory, prayer to the
Saints of GOD; deny pardon; Pope, pilgrimage, fasting, prayer, yea have some
most erroneous and badde conceits of Hell, Heaven, Christ, God, and all, be
not these Appollionists, Apoc. cap. 9.
Abbadonists, those destoryers whereof Saint John speaks, the very messengers
of the denill and forerunners of Antichrist, that thus raise up all old
heresies from hell and thus by heaping a fardell of them and al sin and
mischief to geather make an open gappe to an universal defectio^, and general
Apostasy the very high way to erect an ydol, to adore Antichrist instead of
Christ our only Savior and true God, wherefore hold them for certain to be
very forerunners, percursors and members of Antichrist which we justly fear
will shortly follow.

Chap. LXXVII. In a sewe words touching the chief matters that have been
spoken in this treatise, and how the unlearned especially in matters of
religion ought to leave disputes and simply to believe the truth founding
themselves in Christ and in the Catholic Church.
THus (good Sir) according to your desire; I have declared unto you the truth
of those matters, you desire to be informed of: I have set you down by what
certain marks and notes you may know the true Church from the false Synagogue
of Satan; I have likewise more in particular, briefly declared unto you the
truth of the seven Sacraments, how they be grounded of Christ's holy word,
and instituted by him, and by the Scriptures have discovered to you the
falsehood of our adversaries the heretics. I have also briefly touched almost
every thing at this day in controversy, as justification, freewill, prayer for
the dead, prayers to Saints, pardons Pope, fasting, prayer, pilgrimage, with
other like. These points and articles that every Catholic is bound under pain
of damnation to believe, I have not only proved unto you by the Scriptures but
also by the churches authority that every Christian is bound to believe, for
when you have once found out the true church (which by those notes I set down
you may easily do) though we have authority sufficient for every thing the
holy Catholic Church uses and teaches: yet it is not meet especially for
unlearned, folks to stand to reason or dispute with whies and howes but to
stay them on that sure rock, foundation, and pillar of truth the holy Catholic
Church, that so they may not be wavering as the reed nor borne away with
every blast of new doctrine, as circumuented with error and blindness in the
craftines and subtility of men, always learning and never coming to the
perfection of true knowledge which indeed can never be had, but in captiuating
the understanding in obsequium fidei into the obedience of the true Christian
Catholic faith working by charity for we see by too lamentable experence, how
unfit it is for the common people (deceauing themselves that know not neither
what they speak nor whereof they affirm) to iangle and dispute of Scripture
matters which (as says Saint Peter) the unlearned and unstable do deprave to
2. Pet. ^. cap. vlt^.
their own destruction wherefore it behooves the simple people especially that
(being thus forewarned by the chief Pastor of their souls under Christ Saint
Peter) they be careful never to fall or decline from their proper and sure
stability in Christ, and his dear spouse the holy Catho^icke Church but say in all doubts when the heretics asks you what reason you have for this, or what
Scripture for that, or what believe you of this or of that, Say you no more,
but I believe the holy Catholic Church, as she belieueth in all things so do
I: if he ask you again and again, how she believes; answer the heretic,
even as I believe and I believe as the Catholic Church believes, and so stay
and quietre your self, and so first begin to believe, and then after to
understand. For as God said by his holy Prophet unless you believe you shall
not understand; yea it is sufficient to salvation, if your life be according,
though you cannot understand, the chief and highest mysteries nor bring
Scripture for every thing, so you believe as the Catholic Church does
grounding your self therein who is able to direct and guide you from and out of
all errors incombrances and darkness of this world, into a most sure and stable
light. For to the holy Catholic Church Christ promised to send his spirit the
holy Ghost, after his departure to be, with her and guide her in all truth,
even to the end of the world. I have many things to say to you (says our
Savior to his Disciples) but you cannot bear them away now but when I shall
go I will Joan. 16.
send you the holy ghost the comforter he shall teach you all truth. Lo you se
by Christ promise his holy Spirit shall guide his church in all truth, that it
never fail err nor be deceived, that is (as I have proved before at large)
only the true Catholic and Apostolic Roman church and no other, in this
Church what simple man so ever contains himself and truly follows the
same he cannot go astray, and out of this Church, if he were the greatest
Philosopher or learned man in the world (as there be some, Falsi nemmis
scientiam sibi promittentes) Yet most certainly he shall err and be
deceived. To this Church then without which is no Salvation, join your self,
her obey: her follow her believe in all things and you cannot err, (my soul
for yours) nor go astray to damnation, this Church if you forsake (as I said
before) if you had all the wisdom of men or all the learning of Aristotle, and
the wisest Philosophers that be or have been you should without al doubt err
walk in darkness and perrish for ever.

Chap. LXXVIII. Against schism and that it is altogether unlawful and
forbidden, under pain of damnation to go to the churches of heretics or
schismatics to their prayers sermons Sacraments spiritual exercises, or in
any sort directly or indirectly to communicate, participate, yield, consent or
assent to the some, also a precaution is given to beware of dissembling
Catholics which indeed are schismatics.
BUT when you be thus once established in the one only truth of Christ and his
^oly Church though this be the foundation, first to begin to believe well,
yet you must then do according to true faith and believe, else you can not be
saved for says (as I said before out of S. James) without good works is dead,
Epist. Iacobi cap. 2.
take heed then when you be once well grounded in true faith and religion that
you not only flee sin and seek to exercise good works and true virtue, but
withal beware of dissembling Catholics that flatter themselves to be Catholics,
and be none indeed, they co^sesse themselves to know Christ in words, and yet
deny him in deeds. These men be as daingerous as heretics them selves in
some respects worse, and will under pretense of religion more easily deceive
the simple, and those we call Schismatiks: not only lay persons, but such as
be and were priests of old and yet for fear of loosing their livings will
teach you (as thee term it) to bear a little with the time till a better
world come and in the mean time unlooked for death comes For thus they will
come unto you and say. O Sir you keep a good house you might badly be spared
amongst your neighbors, infaith this world will not last alwalyes, and then he
will with Judas whisper in your ear and tell you how you shall hear news err
it be long, and then will say unto you. Cannot you go to church in the mean
time, and keep your conscience to your self, by God there is never a knave of
them all shall take advantage of me and yet God knows my mind. Lo this
dissembling Schismatike with these and others foolish persuasions which come of
love of his flesh and want of love and fear of God he deceaueth him self and
others, For the truth is whatsoever you believe yet if you do contrary to your
belief you damn your own soul doing contrary to your conscience. For we may
not dissemle with God For he that denies me before men says Christ, I will
deny him before my father which is in heaven. For God has not only made man's
heart and soul to believe in him, but has given him a body And mouth to
confess Romans 10.
him, which we must do to be saved: For we believe in heart to
righteousness, (as says Saint Paul) and confess in mouth to Salvation. Now
to go to the heretics church is to deny Christ for Christ is the truth. Who as
he is God in all, and all in all, so is he wholly in every part of the truth,
and therefore he that denies any article of his faith denies the truth, and
so denies Christ, yea but you will say, I say nothing there, but sit down
and say my prayers, yea but your very being there, your very action or deed,
is an allowing of their evil doings or sayings, for Christ and his holy
Sacraments be there abused and blaspheamed, so be his blessed mother and his
Saints: and therefore if I be present in such a company, joining my self with
them by my presence, I allow of them, whatsoever I think to the contrary: you
see if one be drawn in amongst thieves, perhaps partly against his will to be
at a robbery, as to hold the horses, he shall be hanged for his pains. The
Church indeed was built by our forefathers for Gods service, and good purposes,
and was dedicated to God, consecrated or hallowed, but now is defiled with
unclean birds, and become worse then a den of thieves; as haunted by the
Devils, and ministers that daily blaspheame Christ's truth, and holy Sacraments.
Wherefore if you will not be damned with them, she such damnable company, if
you were in company where your Lord and Master were evil spoken of, and you
should give them courage by your presence and silence: do you think your Master
would not pluck his coat often from your back, and thrust you out? so God will
deal with dissemblers, cast them out of his kingdom and service, that see him
and hear him dishonored, and dissemble it, besides many dangers ghostly, that
follow by going to heretics prayers and Churches; so that if you will be a
Catholic Christian, and know the truth to your salvation, you must leave
going to heretics Church and Service. For if you go to their Church, yea but
once a year, you can be no more a member of Christ's Catholic Church: as long
as you continue in that state and mind, it casts you out from it, yea once
at any time going to their prayer, and service, sermons, or Sacraments: Nay the
Pope himself cannot dispense with any to go to the heretics Church, to be
present, or hear their service, because it is by Gods law forbidden. Moreover
we gather out of Saint Paul: he that consents to sin, is guilty of the
same sin, he in any sort consents tot The Protestants of this time then be
condemned for heretics, by all Christendom; and be indeed most detestable
heretics, and their service contrary to Gods ordinance, and sacrilegious
sin, but to go to the Church, is by my action and deed, a consenting to
sin, in that I allow of them by my presence, and otherwise, wherein I sin
damnably: therefore to go to heretics service and prayer, is a damnable
sin, yea schism and unlawful, and cannot be dispensed with. First then it
is against Gods holy and eter nall law to go to heretics Churches, to fit
or be with them in their Church at their prayers, or service, whereof said the
holy Prophet, Odiui Ecclesiam malignantiam and cum impiis non sedebo. I hated
the Church of the malignannt, and will not sit with the wicked. Yea you
shall find in all the whole course of the holy Scriptures, in the old
Testament how God separated his people, from foreign Nations, and people of a
contrary religion: so far from praying or marrying with them, that they
should not eat, drink, nor converse with them. Thus for example God speaks
of marrying, or conuersing of his people with women of a false religion.
Certissime enim auertent, corda vestra a domino vestro, beware of strange and
foreign women, because most certainly they will auert, or turn your hearts
from your Lord God: See here how carnal conversion is forbidden to Gods
people, with idolatrous, herericall, or ill persons, how much more ought we not
to commerce, or meddle with them in spiritual or divine matters: for then
certo certius, without all doubt, they will pervert our souls, who by gay
painting words, and sweet speeches do reduce the hearts of the innocent, the
Devil using the mouth of heretics, to seduce the simple as he did the body,
and whispering of the serpent to deceive our first mother Eve, insomuch, that
for fear of this inconvenience of being seduced, and chiefly for not to break
the law of God, which forbids to pray and go to heretics Churches: the
perfect believers of old of the tribe of Judah, did not pray nor use in many
other respects, to converse with the Samaritans, (as appears in S. John)
which Ioh. 4.
Samaritans were Schismatiks, fallen into Schism, and Idolatry, from the true
Chtholicke Judah and Jerusalem, the City of God. And although Peter, John, and
others of the Apostles went to the Temple of the Jews, after Christ's
Ascension, they did that lawfully, because she law of Christ then being not so
manifestly known, nor his faith and Gospel spread through the world, the
law of Moses was by degrees to be buried with honor, yea and the Apostles
went chiefly thither, by their preaching, doctrine, and miracles to confound
the obstinate Jews, and plant Christ, and the truth in their hearts; in which
case, a learned Doctor of the Catholic Church that is to make a Catholic
sermon, or to convert, or confound an heretical preacher, might go to Church:
yea some hold, that for some mere temporal respect; as for example, to bear
the Princes sword, or his cushen, or the like, one might so wait of his Lord
and Master to Church, so it be known to all men that that temporal action or
office, is only the cause of his so doing, and so one neither pray, nor show
any reverence to their service, and so he presently return, when he has done
his temporal office, this was the case (as some suppose) of Naaman the Syrian,
who asked leave of the holy Prophet, to wait of his king to the idolatrous
temple, to do his te^porall business, to be brief, God is jealous Zelotes, and
even as the man may not abide his loving spouse to be familiar or converse with
another, but will cast her out rather; so God will not have the soul for his
spouse, that is, double in heart or goes two ways, perdi disti omnes qui
fornicantur abs te, thou have destroyed all that commit fornication from thee,
O Lord. No man can serve two Masters, but must either pleaseone, or displease
the other, we cannot serve God and Ma^mon, Christ and Baliall: God our true
father, will not have his child divided, but will rather leave it in the evil
woman's keeping. But what shall I say of some monstrous minds, drawing every
thing to their own humors, as that forsooth a man may go to heretics church,
so he pray not with the^, because the 3. children of Israel were amongst those
that ado Nabucadonosers statua, or idol, and yet worshipped it not, whereas
these three children in that they there openly confessed their faith, suffering
themselves, to be east into the hot fiery furnace, rather then they would
dissemble the true faith, one iott in worshipping a false god, or yielding to
an untrue religion, do condemn all schismatiks, most evidently that dissemble
all things, in taking oaths, goeing to Church, kneeling, uncovering the head,
hearing blasphemy and keeping silence; yea for fear saying often as they say,
but suppose they but only be present at Church, yea though it were with a
protestation, of a contrary religion to heresy either under the color of
obedience, or the like. Yet it is unlawful because such a protestation
declares, that he comes to do a thing, that of it self is intrins^ce
malum, very naught, and evil of it self: as I proved before, and so this
protestation aggrauateth the sin as those do that more publicly sin, and
yet excuse, defend, or rather glory in it. The like may be said of that
obedience, of theirs, to an unjust law which intends thereby, that a man
should allow and conform himself to heresi, and injustice, in which case we
are neither to obey Master, Mistress, Parents, Husband, Magistrate, nor the
greatest Prince in the world, but we must boldly say with Saint Peter, we must
abey God, Act. cap. 4.
rather then men, as for the presence of these three children, before the
people adored, to say therefore one may be amongst heretics at their service
is very childish, and foolish, for either these three holy men, when they came
thither, knew not of any such worship there to be done, but that it was some
other spectacle, or else as being principal persons, they came as magistrates
for some temporal service, to the King over the people or else they came by the
very instinct of the holy Ghost, to reprove the people, of their sin and
false worship, and to acknowledge and worship the living God (as the
glorious profession of his name, in the midst of the flame, with that
angelical Society) well declares. Secondly this matter was talked of, and
debated by certain great learned men, at the counsel of Trent, and was found
most unlawful, both by the law of God and the Church, and therefore no power
on earth, no not the Pope can dispense with any, to go to the heretics
church, no more then he can dispense with any to kill, steal, commit
fornication, or the like, neither was it needeful to make any new canon, or
decree of this matter, because in former general councelles, yt was ever
holden unlawful yea an express canon of the Apostles, forbids al
Christians to go to heretics churches or service, much less to receive with
them, or communicate with them in their Sacraments: If any say Cardinal Allen
thought it not such great sin, to go to heretics church, it is most false,
and impudent, as his letters and writings well understood; yea his life and
death declares, and as the lives and deaths of his scholars which (if I may
so term it be vere signu^ Apostolatus sui) make most manifest to the world,
and he that holds it lawful to go to Church of heretics, condemns well
near a hundred of B. Martirs in our days, that might have lived if they once
would have yields to have gone to Church. Thirdly the Pope himself and all
learned divines of our time utterly deny it in any sort to be lawful: and no
doubt his holiness, if in any sort, it could have been tolerated of his
commisseration, and fatherly pity of our affliction, would most willingly have
dispensed with us, surely the Apostolic father the Pope, alone his iudge^t
ought to satisfi any true Catholic Christian in the world. Fourthly goeing to
heretics Church is most dangerous, for fear of infection: can a man touch
pitch and it not defile him? can he lie by a Serpent, and she not sting him?
then then may he conuers with an heretik, much and be not infected or corrupted
with him; and therefore S. Paul exhorts us to fly the heretik man, because
his heresy creeps as the ca^ker, it has been noted in great learned men,
that in reading of heretics books have bin thereby inclyning to heresy: how
much more dangerous then is it, for lay persons; Yea simple unlearned men to
hear their voice, in sermons, prayers, and the like, wherefore heretics books
also under pain of excommunication be forbidden, to all to be read. For fear
of infection, unless they have lawful authority or faculty granted them.
Fifthly as we read in the Ecclesiastical histories, true Christians evermore
abhorred the Churches, conuenticles and companies of heretics, yea Saint John
the Evangelist would not bath himself, where Cerinthus the enemy of the truth
had been before, lest the bath should fall upon his head, and exhorts us not
to salute the heretic which we ought not to do in any sort to favor his
heresi, though to win heretics to God and true religion. The church in this
time permits us to eat drinck, and traffic with heretics and schismatiks in
temporal matters only, as our B. Savior, and his Apostles conuersed, eat and
drank with sinners, to win the^ to his fathers kingdom; yea to converse with
heretics was so odious and a thing so well known in the primitive church, to
be unlawful that the people would not say Amen, or abide in the Church, whilst
the Arrian Bishop was amongst them: nay (that which is strange) the very
children, made a conscience to play with the ball, (with out expiacion before)
that ran under the heretics horses feet, what should I say blessed Martirs
of old, yea tender Virgins and Women, accounted it nolesse then very denial of
Christ, who said He that denies me before men, I will deny him before my
father in heaven either to go to churches of heretics or temples of Idolaters,
which be in effect one; For as Idolaters worship the works of their hands, so
do heretics their fond opinions, and imaginations, and Idolatry a great deal
worse then that of the gentiles. If these blessed Saints of old (I say) would
but have yielded to the time, in but once putting up the fingar to the wicked
demands of the persecutors, to have gone to their churches, and service, then
had, we wanted many glorious Martirs in heaven, which those sharp times of
persecution most fruitfully afford us. Sixthly this dissimulation in being
present at heretics service, is scandalous, and offensive, to the infirm and
weak in faith, inducing other to sin, and do the like, which sin of
scandal, is one of the greatest and most general in the world, and shall be
most severely punished; against which Christ thundereth that most terrible woe,
affirming it were better one with a millstone about his neck, were cast into
the sea, then to scandalize one of such litleweaklings in christ and religion.
Whereupon the holy Apostle affirmed, he would never eat flesh, rather then
offend his weak Brother. Yea old Eleazarus a Jew, before Christ (which may be
a confusion, to many Christians) would rather suffer death, then but only seem
to do against the law, for fear of drawing weaklinges, and younglinges, to do
the same. Seauenthly and last (for it is my purpose to be brief) and refer
you to more large and learned substantial treatises, written of this matter, in
goeing to heretics Churches, or being thus present at their prayers,
Sacraments, or service in any place, conuenticle, or congregation of theirs be
a man never so Catholic in mind, yet in so doing he becomes a schismatike,
and excommunicate person, which is a thing more terrible then the two edged
sword or any torment in this life. For thereby a man is cut from God, Christ,
and all the Sacraments, prayers, and merits of Saints in heaven, and the
prayers and good deeds, of all good men in earth, and so is exposed to the
Devil, and damnation. For (as said S. Augustme to Peter the Deacon) hold
steadfastly and doubt in no wise, not only al Paynims and Jews, but also al
heretics and schismatiks, that dye without Christ's Catho. Church shall go into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil, and his Angels, a terrible token
whereof God showed, yea even in this life of schismatiks, as Chore, Dathan and
Abiron, that were of the same religion Moses was, and yet because they divided
themselves, from Moses and Aaron, offering sacrifice of themselves and not
being lawfully called thereunto, fire consumed them from heaven, and their
adhere^ts. Yea the earth swallowed them down quick to hell, and therefore S.
Augustine bids fear nothing so much as division, and separation that is
schism; for what ^^ schism, but a cutting of, and division from the whole: so
that such Christians as in all points believe, as the church does, and yet in
their action do contrary to their belief (as such dissemblers do, that for
fear or other temporal respect, as here in England go to church) such
properly be schismatiks, so called because by their separation they not only
divide, and cut of themselves quite from Gods church but also tear in sunder
the mystical body of Christ (which is one) worse the^ the soldiers, that cast
lot upon his vesture, not cutting it a sunder: schismatiks then first be
divided in themselves, pretending one thing in body, and thinking another in
mind: indeed if we in substance consisted only of soul, the case were
altered, but seeing we consist both of body and soul God, (as I said before
out of Saint Paul) requires action and confession of body; and belief of heart
to concur together, as both in the end shall have reward or judgment
together, secondly schism is so grievous in Gods sight, because it
extinguisheth charity, without which nothing can please God: for charity
proceeds of unity, which schism by separation and division quite takes
away, God almighty then which in himself is one, as all things proceed from
him by unity (as the root and lively perpetual fountain) so must they tend
and have reflection to him again by charity in unity, wherein whosoever
gathers not with Christ he scatters, as he affirms hereupon; it comes
according to the Apostles doctrine, that we be all one body in Christ's holy
Catholic Church, from which whosoever is divided by schism, he cannot have
life of Grace and salvation from Christ the head, as being a divided member
from his mystical body; even as any member of our body dies, we see that is
divided from our natural body. Therefore S. Augustine right worthily exhorts
to fear nothing so much as separation (that is schism) whereby we loose the
grace of God, al merits of prayers, good works, life, and salvation, this ought
to appale our Schismatiks, if they had any feeling or fear of God, but these
of our times be more absurd, hard hearted and blind, the^ those of old, for not
only schis matiks of old, but heretics little differed in external rites and
ceremonies from Catholic service, nor in administration of the Sacraments from
the true Catholic service and sacraments, but our schis matiks frequent a
Caluinisticall puritan rabble of reading. For their service with heretics, no
more like the Catholic true service of Christ's Church, save only but for the
new Testament, which notwithstanding they most falsely interpret, and corruptly
translate, no more like (I say) set Baptism aside, the^ the Jewish
superstitious reading and ceremonies is like to christian service. Moreover, in
going to heretics service, no true priest can administer unto them the
Sacraments of the Catholic Church, as penance, and the Sacrament of the Altar,
which once a year you are bound to receive, and therefore if it were nothing
but in this respect you be in most miserable state of da^nati on, as never
receiving the food of life without which your soul cannot live, no more the^
the body can without corporal sustenance, but neither can you be present at
Mass on holy days, nor receive at Easter (which under pain of deadly sin
you are bound, unless you have some lawful impediment) as long as you go to
heretics service, and therefore you see, how on every side you are plunged in
sin and misery, so long as you continue in this damnable state of schism:
therefore I exhort you in the name of Jesus, as you respect his honor that has
so dearly bought you, and tender your own salvation, fly out of Babylon
presently, that is out of this miserable confusion of sin and heresy, out of
this sinful, wretched and most abominable city, that you be not overwhelmed
and perpetually lost in the ruins of the same. Fugite de medio Babilonis, fly
out therefore I say out of the midst of Babylon, and be not of those which
Paululum fugiunt, which fly but a little, least you be corrupted with her
prostitution, and inwrapped in her snares, and if you will, or look ever to
be saved by the truth, I have here taught; First, after you have learned to
believe well, then do penance that is, be sorrowful, confess your sins, (with
full purpose to amend) to a lawful Catholic Priest, and then do the worthy
fruits of penance, and that chiefly by his good counsel, direction, and
appointment, and so I beseech you with the holy Apostle, for Christ's sake be
reconciled to God, be reconciled to Christ's holy Catholic Church, and then
be careful so to amend your life, that you take heed of recidiuation, or
falling back to your former vomitte, least the latter end be worse then the
beginning, though what falls soever of infirmity a man may have had, yet
quickly he ought to rise again, fight manfully and grow not weak hearted, how
sorrowful or penitent soever; work then busily and virtuously, be ever
sorry whilst you have time and space, for that is past, though by Gods grace
already in the Sacrament forgiven: according to that de propitiato peccato noli
esse sine timore, of thy sin forgiven be not without fear during this life,
come no moee at heretics Church, nor service, nor Sacramenrs, no not to die,
but suck of the sweet breasts of your dear mother, and Christ's true spouse
the Catholic Church; follow her counselles, listen to her sermons, frequent
devoutly her Sacraments, and so you shall believe well, live and die the
servant of Christ, and attain your salvation: otherwise as long as you live in
this state, that is, out of the unity of the Catholic Church, without all
doubt you be in state of damnation; and therefore, seeing there is no other
remedy, speedely amend and do penance.

Chap. LXXIX. Admonishing to amendment of life, seeing the time is short, and
the hour of death uncertain, when as ignorance shall excuse no man.
For this life is short and uncertain, but death most certain, and yet the
honre most uncertain, remember my words I pray you; I have told you the
truth, ignorance cannot excuse you if you follow then my advise, you shall
win your own soul, if you do not, I must be a witness against you before
God and his Angels at the last day. Then Princes cannot excuse you, nor
rulers, for though they indeed shall bear the greatest charge or burden; yet
every one nevertheless in his degree shall bear his own sin, according to
that of the Apostie, Vnusquisque onus suum portabit. Wherefore as in discharge
of my duty, I have truly set down before you, and declared the truth as I
will answer before Jesus the dreadful judge at the last day, who is that
everlasting truth, for which undoubted Catholic truth, I trust by Gods great
mercy and grace, I shall be ready to shed my blood, if I be called thereto. So
on the other side I most humbly and instantly again and again, exhort, pray,
and beseech you, for that great love of Christ toward us all, whereby for our
sakes he shed his most precious blood, that you would deeply consider the
importance of this matter, and remember your salvation: Consider first what
perilous times we live in now toward the end of the world: consider withal
the shortness and instability of this life, and how daily of all sorts by death
you see men taken awa^e before your eyes: Remember at least when you see as it
were the heavens open with lightnings, and perceive the earth sometimes chime
and tremble under your feet, and when to the terror of al mortal creatures,
you hear the most high and mighty Lord (at a beck of whose finger heaven and
earth quaketh) thunder from above, the^ I say learn to fear and not for get
him after. But remember and deeply consider, that everlasting punishment and
vnque^chable fire prepared for the wicked, and those unspeakable joys prepared
for the just: consider the strait way to salvation, how few shall be saved,
in respect of those that shall be perpetually lost and damned. Eight persons in
the whole world were but saved from dro vning, in the universal deluge Noes
fludde. But one just Lot could be found in five Cities, Sodom and Gomorrah and
the rest, for sin consumed with fire and brimstone from heaven here, and
burning in hell for ever: but twelve Apostles CHRIST chose amongst all the
Jews, and yet one was a traitor, good things therefore you see, but especially
good me^ indeed are hard to be found, and therefore you see how true Christ's
words be many are called but few are chosen, and yet I hope, and most
confidently trust in God, you and all those that will read this little treatise
and follow it, and avoid the heresies and sins herein refelled, and
disproued, you and every one (such I say that will this do) my full confidence
is in God, and you may be in sted fast hope, you shall be of that few number
that Christ has chosen: consider moreover, wherefore you were created and made
of God, not to eat, drinck, sleep, and live here, but to pass this life with
dutiful service to God, that you may enjoy his endless kingdom. The end then
God has made you for, is to be pertaker of his glory in heaven, and therefore
all things you have here in this world on earth you ought to refer to the
service of God, for what is this life but (as says Saint Gregory) a continual
death, wherein every day we dye a little, something of our life is cut of
daily; account then this world, and all worldly possessions and habitatio^s
but as it were an Inn, wherein you are but to stay as it were for a night and
away, and therefore seek not to make you a dwelling place on earth, chiefly
(though to have moderate care of our bodies also is not forbidden us) but look
for and build you a place in heaven. Alas what be al pleasures this world can
afford you? You see they be but vain and can never content man's mind; the
covetous man is never full fraught or contented with gold and riches but ever
coueteth more: the dronkard and glutton ever seekerh how he may more and more
delight his taste and fill his belly and panch, (the lecherous man more fleshly
pleasure, he has (like the wood set on fire) he desires and burns faster
therein: riches fade, beauty decays, memory saileth; all the glory of the
world passes away, as the shadow, nothing can truly satiate, and content the
soul, but God himself, which is had by enjoying of his divine glory. To
obtain this then you must bend all your might and power. Nam regnum calorum
vim patitur and violenti rapiunt illud (Says our Savior) we must by violence
as it were obtain his kingdom, not only sighting and striving against our
selves, that is this froward and corrupt nature of ours that is too much given
to self love and liking of this world, and our selves in being ready to
forsake this tra^sitory life of this body, to enjoy the eternal life of the
soul, but what lettes or impediments soever you have to the contrary, manfully
and joyfully remove them, and shake them off, as if the Tyrant threaten thee,
or with flattery or fair words and promises seek to allure thee, yea if thy
parents that begot and bore thee, or thy children that be part of thy
substance of thy flesh and blood, or thy own wife that is as it were thy one
body and sleeps in thy bosom, would hinder thee from thy salvation, GOD is
nearer and deerer to thee then them all. Forsake comfortably thy parents with
their weeping eyes, respect not they children with stretched out hands, pass
by thy wife though on thy threshold she lie at thy feet with spreadde and
torn hair; Yea be cruel to thine own body in this case and as says Saint
Jerome fortiter ad crucem Christi euola, fly with that simple sweet Dove: in
cauernas petrae into the holes of that sure rock, the open wounds of thy
redeemer and manfully with good courage, and all joy embrace the cross of
CHRIST thus by violence you must obtain his kingdom; thus bend all your might
and power (I say) to win CHRIST and please him. For him I say be content to
forsake wife, children, livings, possessions, yea this life it self to win a
better, taking up the cross and following him. For so all have and must do
that will enter into his kingdom, remembering we must suffer with him, to be
glorified with him and if he our head would not enter into his kingdom but by
Passion and labors: then we his servant and members cannot look to follow
him, but by the same way of pains and sufferance the disciple is not better
then his Master, neither a delicate member is comely under that head that
wears a Crown of thorns. If then thus you by patience follow and win
Christ, you shall have al things, him if you forsake you loose all: If you
truly cleave and stick to him and his commandments, he is mighty and will
desend you, he is merciful and will pardon you, he is bountiful and will bestow
al gracious gifts of you, he is rich and will sustain and nourish you, he is
pitiful and will comfort you, and knowing your weakness, and bearing the
heavier end of the yoke or cross with you, will lay no more of your shoulders,
the^ you are able to bear, nor will not suffer us to be tempted above our
strength, as he has said by his true messenger, wherein he is faithful and
will perform his promise, he is loving and just, and will make us for our
labors (crowning his graces and gifts in us) pertakers of his glory, where art
we ought all to shoot comforting our selves ever in the troubles of this life
with hope of that fruition of God, our final rest, and perfect delight.

The 80. and last chap. How though every one ought to be prepared to suffer,
yet none ought rashly to cast themselves into tentation but if we be called
thereunto then we ought to be most glad to suffer, as being Gods cause we
suffer for.
BE desirous then to suffer for Christ and the Catholic faith (and though none
as long as without denial of their faith they may escape affliction, ought
rashly to cast themselves into tentation as knowing not the measure of their
strength) yet if you be called thereunto, be not ashamed but joyful and glad
you may be found worthy to suffer for Christ's truth; For it is the way, Christ
himself (as I said) and his glorious freindes the Apostles and Martirs, have
trodden before, yea it is the most glorious cause, and most comfortable that
ever any suffered for Gods cause, I say, his faith and truth, for which one may
be killed, but never overcome. For which whosoever have suffered, and no other
have entered into his heavenly kingdom. Consider what labor and care men take
for some small living for this short life. The Merchant man to attain gold
refuses no perrill, the husband man to gain fruit or corn refuceth no
labor, nor the huntsman for his pleasure oftentimes without his dinner a whole
day running together accounts it any pain, and shall we refuce troubles
pains, grief, labor, or loss of any thing in this life to find out Christ
the invincible truth, and so truly to follow him whereby we shall avoid
perrill of damnation in hell; live with a pure and quiette conscience in this
life, wherein if we live to an hundred years yet is it soon spent and passes
as a shadow, and after this transitory life obtain everlasting salvation and
life where never after we shall need to fear death, hell, nor damnation; well
good things cannot be had without pains, much less the endless good with
sleeping and no labor can be obtained, but with earnest and the greatest
endeavors. Suppose then, you at this very instant were to depart this life (as
you know not whether you are to live till to morrow) and should be had before
that dreadful judge, the searcher of hearts, where of all your life a strait
reckoning must be made, yea of all gifts bodylie and ghostly as of wit,
learning, power, goods, riches, lands, possessions and of all other talentes
God has bestowed of you, how you have spent and bestowed them during the short
time you were here steward thereof, if then at that hour, which is so
uncertain you would wish you had done, yea though it had been never so much, to
have served and pleased God, do then something now while you have time, that
then you would wish to have done, and so then you show your self a wiseman
indeed, laying a sure fondation here in earth, the fruit of which building
you shall enjoy in the kingdom of heaven, which to enjoy with God for ever
account you little or nothing of all things here upon earth: for look what
beauty sweetness and glory be in all things here on earth, they be but a
shadow as it were of Gods glory, for what brightness or beauty soever is in the
sun, moon, stars, men, women, children, vvhas sweet savors soever be in
perfumes, flowers, fragrant blossoms, what delights soever be in music,
birds, mountains, valleys, rivers, or in any other thing, that is delectable
to any of our senses, that be seen, felt, or understood by man here ou earth,
all these and infinite more pleasures, and most sure and perfect delights in a
far more excellent sort, shall the blessed saved souls enjoy in that
heavenly kingdom in beholding that glorious face and vision of God, from whom
all these good things do proceed, and in whom they be contained as the
perfect mirror and sum of all perfection, with all swetee peace and
tranquillity in ever enjoying the same, and with all security never to loose the
same, there we shall see God face to face, and the more we see him, the more
we shall desire him; and the more we desire him, the more we shall love him;
and the more we love him, the more we shall be delighted and fully satiated with
him, as said the holy Prophet, Satiabor cum apparuerit gloria tua, O Lord when
thy glory shall appear, then shall I be satiated, for as says S. Augustine
God has made us for him, and our heart is unquiet till we come to him, there is
that lively fountain and pleasant river, clearer then the crystal; that
celestial paradise the force whereof makes joyful the whole city of God,
and that waters the whole earth, making these carnal hearts, and terrestrial
bodies of ours by virtue thereof, celestial and divine, in this river is
found the Chrisolite, Topaze, Carbuncle, and all other gemmes, and precious
jewels, there is light without darkness, day without night, glory without end,
when as certain then it is that you shall be a saved soul and S. with God, if
you labor for it, or else (which Christ forbid) a damned reprobate for ever,
therefore so labor and work your salvation, whilst the light of his mercy and
grace yet shines open for you during this life, that you may after enjoy that
endless life; pluck up the^ your heart (man) intend prospere proceed and
regna, march manfully forward, and joyfully in Gods ways, and take heed then
of looking back, for such are not fit for the kingdom of GOD; comfort your
self, the labor and pains be little and short, but the reward great and
endless; good laborers be content with a slender dinner, in hope of a full
and joyful supper, and with all take heed above all things, you defer not
your conversion to GOD and amendment from day to day. For it is a subtilty of
the Devil to cause a man to make delays, and so then death comes when he
least looks for it, and takes a man unprovided: wherefore for our greater
meritte and security, we ought to be provided at all hours for CHRIST'S call,
whose mercy and grace is ready for all that come in time, yea more ready to
receive us then we be to come. So that if a man be not pertaker of Gods
grace and favor, the fault is in himself and not in God, for even as you see
when the sun shines, a man cannot have the light of the sun unless he
will open his eyes: No more then can any man have the light of GODS grace
(though Gods grace also works the due disposition) but he that will open the
eyes of his soul, offer his will and affection wholly to God, and dispose
himself to receive Gods mercy and grace, who is ever ready to help us, and who
ever stirs and moves man to receive the effect thereof that is of his grace
and goodness, yea God ever stands knocking at the door of man's heart and
soul, some times by prosperity, and otherwhiles by adversity, daily by his
benefits, and often by his holy inspirations, ego stoad ostium pulso, I stand
(thus says God) and knock at the door, that is of man's heart and soul, (as I
said) to the end a man should incline his heart, and lay to his hand to believe
and follow his holy ways, yea so loving, bountiful, and gracious is God, and
so desirous of man's salvation, that it is not the worst person in the world,
but sometimes he shall have good motions, and holy inspirations to amend his
life, and the more a man has, and yet follows them not but is hardened and
dies in sin the greater shall be his damnation: Mark then O man whosoever
the motions and stirrings of thy heart, and noli contristare spirituns, do not
as it were make sad the holy Ghost, by ingratefully repelling his most
blessed and holy instincts, beware you put not back Gods holy motions; nothing
falls on the earth without Gods will and holy disposition, no not the very
bird, neither can any thing be done without his permission, whereof if we may
make good, and therefore nothing can happen to us in this life, good, nor ill,
but if we will we may take occasion, thereof to remember our end, and and
dispose our selves more and more to our salvation: and therefore I say to you
especially for whom I have taken this labor to write this treatise) it ought
to be a more evident and effectual motive and sufficient warning for the
perfect amendment of your life, by your reconciliation to GOD, who because it
is he, that as he straightly commands us to keep his commandments and
follow his holy ways, so without his grace and help, we cannot fruitfully
do, nor execute the same. For whether Paul or Apollo plant or water, yet Deus
incrementum dedit, God is he that ever has and must give the increase. And
therefore seeing upon this ground S. Augustine said unto GOD, good Lord give
that which thou command, and command what thou will. Let us then follow his
counsel, who said Ask and you shall have, seek and you shall find, knock
and it shall be opened unto you. Let us therefore not cease to knock, humbly
and instantly to crave grace and mercy at his hands that the sweet and
seasonable rain of his gracious fountain may be plentifully instilled into
our hearts, yea let us make instance at least to obtain one drop of grace, to
mollify and strengthen our hard and weak hearts. Open then the eyes of our
souls O Lord, and they shall be opened, water them with the dew of thy
heaueuly grace, strike our hearts with thy fear and love, that we ever may be
so watchful over our souls, that we never prefer any pleasure of the flesh,
any worldly riches, credit, or honor, before thy true service and everlasting
glory. Let us then work busely our salvation, as the matter of greatest
importance, whilst this life indureth: for as says our Savior, the night will
come when no man can work, from which dark night of sin, hell death, and
eternal damnation, CHRIST the everlasting truth of his infinite mercy deliver
you and us all; convert all heretics, and poor deceived souls, make us all
members of one body, his dear spouse the Catholic Church, that as heretofore
by diversity of minds a number have been divided from Christ, so knitting our
selves altogether in the knot of peace, unity, and charity in Christ's holy
Catholic Church here on earth, we may then once enjoy his endless glory
altogether in his triumphant, and most glorious Church in heaven, where all
errors, sadness, sorrows, pains, lamentations, and mournful tears shall
quite cease and pass away, where more joy, felicity, and true happy
blessedness, then ever eye has seen, ear has heard, or man's heart can
imagine or conceive, whereunto hespeedely bring us, our Lord and Savior CHRIST
JESUS. To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory.

A SHORT TREATISE AGAINST ADIAPHORISTS, NEVTERS, SVCH AS SAY THEY MAY be saved
in any sect, or religion, and would make of many diverse sects one Church.
AMongst many shifts of Heretics, and Schismatikes, (which by the example of
their Master, that old and wily Serpent, be commonly versipelles) one is that
they would bear Catholics in hand, they be of one Church with them still,
that so more easily they may draw the simple into their nets and perdition.
For the Majesty of the church is so great that the very name thereof makes the
enemy appalled, either to seem to resist it, or to live with out it, for
though oftentimes in their pulpittes, and writings, (especially amongst
themselves) heretics will not stick most impude^tly to affirm, the visible
Church especially was decayed for a thousand years, and more, and glory, that
they be the men sent from God, to restore it again. Yet when they be pressed
by the learned to show their vocation, who sent them because (as I declared
before) they have neither extraordinary vocation by miracle, nor ordinary by
succession as is plain, and so evidently to all learned men, show themselves
false Prophets not sent of god, (for no man according to the Apostles doctrine,
ought to preach unless he be sent, by lawful authority) which the Heretics
perceiving so plain by Scriptures they cannot deny: diverse shifts they have
used, some to show their vocation like the Apostles extraordinary by miracle.
As Luther that by miracle would have expelled the Devil out of one possessed,
but in his exorcismes was driven to such hard shifts as hardly he could get
honestly out of the place himself clean; a merry jest, but scarce honest to
be reported: so Calvin killed a man which he hired to feign himself dead, and
to rise at his call to confirm his Apostleshippe who by GODS judgment falling
dead indeed his wife bewrayed with exclamation the matter, therefore these two
new Apostles having no better success for their mission and extraordinary
calling. Beza (Caluins successor) devised another shift for his lawful
embassage, and ordinary calling, and election; For in that great and solemn
meeting and most famous dispute in France, betwixt Catholics and Hugonots at
Poissee; Cardinal Guise being In conue^tu Poissiaceno. lib. 1. de stat.
religionis in Gallia sub Carolo 9. part. 1. and lib. 3.
moderator himself, asked Beza who sent him, from whence come you; but Beza
being not able to answer, he fell to this shift and most seely refuge; that
he was lawfully called and chosen of those people, that chose him, to be
their Pastor: leaving so Luther and Calvin his forefathers in the lurtch, who
were chosen neither of the Clergy, nor people to preach, having none to preach
to, and therefore intruded themselves first not sent; like thieves that by
violence enter into another man's house, or the adulterer that by stealth
ascending another man's bed corrupts his wife; so corrupts these false
Apostles (Luther and Calum) the Churches; they invaded, the seely poor people,
the flock and spouse of Christ in some particular countries, and cities, with
adulterous and false doctrine, so sending themselves, before they could be
chosen and received of the people, which Beza (Calums honest successor) said he
was called of. But such a calling as this is both Marcion, Ebion, Arrius,
Photinus, Sabellius, Pelagius, yea Mahomet and Sergius, with all old Heretics,
may as well allege as Luther, Caluyn, and Beza; which that learned assembly
seeing might well be ready with hands and feet, out of their company to
explode: yet Beza so unable to defend his Masters, or his own calling, and
yet so frontlesly still auouching the same, to be by election of his people. A
learned divine of Paris then urged him to give but one instance, from the
Apostles time of such an election or vocation: which Beza plainly confessing,
though such an example indeed, could not be given, yet still he shamelesly
affirmed that his doctrine, by the number of those he converted, were
sufficient to declare his lawful calling? yea miraculous as great a miracle
(as said Sir Thomas Moore) as to see a stonefall downward, as though people of
all nations, be not ever most prone to embrace licentious liberty, especially
under the pretense of virtue, and authority as appeered in Mahomet, and others;
who have had greater flocks following them, then yet Luther, Calvin and Beza
have. But the truth is as it most evidently appears by the Scriptures, the
tradition of the Church universal, and all true Ecclesiastical writers; none
ever from the Apostles time to this day have, or can be, as true Pastors
lawfully called, sent, and ordained but such only as can show their vocation
and lawful succession, from and of the Apostles or Apostolik men; As S. Paul
for example made Timothy Bishop and Timothy others: so such Bishops as can
lawfully show their succession, from the Apostles may (by the approbation of
CHRIST his Vicar especially) make other Pastors, and Bishops to teach, feed,
and govern the Church of GOD, as sons, lawful heirs, and successors to the
Apostles. And so because the heretics have neither miracles, lawful
succession, nor ordinary vocation, seeing withal how the claim of the
consent, and election of the people for their vocation and mission; is so
frivolous, and vain, yea most shameful as against all authority of the
Scripture, and practice of the whole Church (whose name is yet of such
authority, that they dare not avouch, that any can be saved without it.) See
now another shift, and as it were the last refuge devised; (though by some
foreign heretics yet now chiefly of late by one Buny, and many of such
ministerly companions) which is this forsooth; that Lutherans, Caluinists,
Papists, Protestants, and all be but one Church, and why? But because say they,
we differ but in some small points, but in the chief articles and ^nbstance of
our religion do agree well. I will omit here to set down how well the
Lutherans and Cal^inists agree; when as Luther to his dying day (as appears
by his writings yet) condemned Zwinglius to the pit of hell, and all his
followers; and so in like manner the Caluinistes the Lutherans, to let these
men and infinite more Heretics of this time agree amongst themselves, who al
make one Church indeed, but the Church of the malignant only, that is the
Synagogue of Satan: and to let here pass also schismatiks, who though they
agree with the Church of GOD in true faith, yet most miserable me^ they cut
themselves off from the same church in doing contrary to her laws and
precepts, and so by their own judgment, alas condemn themselves, in that
they best allow. This only I say against the Lutherans, Protestants, and all
Heretics in the world, you uncircumcised Philistians what have you to do with
the host of the living GOD the Catholic Church; which you blaspheame,
contemn, and by all means possible, go about to depresse, rent, and tear a
sunder, can any be truly accounted a lawful subject, and due member of that
common weal, the sovereign Prince whereof he betrayeth, defieth, and with all
hostility impugneth? can any be called a natural and dutiful child to his
mother, that with Nero goes about to exenterate, rent, or tear her bowels
asunder? or shall he be heir in his fathers house, that weary of his fathers
good ordinances, life, and discipline, becomes a paracide? shall that
Shepherd have his hyre at the years end that steals and deuoureth his
Masters sheep? or shall that member be left in the body, that being become
pestilent and contagious would corrupt, spoil, and destroy the rest? Or to be
brief can any ingenuous, or generose honest well minded Husband, accept those
children, preferring them to as good portions as his own, which his wife
confesses to be conceived in adultery, Then surely will Christ accept
protestants for children of his Church, which she his dear and most faithful
spouse so justly execrateth, and abhors as bastard slaves for corrupting his
word with adulterous doctrine, for abolishing his Sacraments, persecuting his
servants, profaning his holiness, and extreme horrible blaspheamy of his holy
name, what I say? shall Protestants be with us members of the Catholic Roman
Church, whom they so blaspheamously term the whore of Babylon, whose head
Christ's Vicar they call Antechrist, scoffing at him in their rimes and jests,
deriding him upon stages, railing on him in their pulpits* yea joining him with
the Turk in their new made Psalms, saying, from Turk and Pope defend us
Lord, teaching ^o their children from their cradels to sing and pray against
the Vicar and substitute of Christ, in their new congregations, as the old
cankred Jews teach their young b^oode to pray and blaspheame. Christ in their
rotten outworne Synagogues, nay the Lutherans in the beginning (much more now
their followers, being come to the perfection of the fifth Gospel) preferred
the Turk before the Pope, wishing rather to live under him then under the
Popedom, nay have not Protestants of late shaken hands with the Turk, wishing
him all good success in his affairs, yea some of the chief Princes amongst
Protestants, as appears in their letters, making him an open gappe (to their
powers) to invade all Christendom; vvil these be accounted children of the
Catholic Church, that thus go about (might and maine) to ruinate her whole
corpse, by word and sword, now at length as their first father Luther, at
first dash went about to cut off the Popes head, when the Lutherans drove For
that army co^sisted most of Lutheran hired Soldiers out of Ger many, for whose
out rage against Rome Ca rolus 5. was not to be blamed, they making spoil of
that holy City against his will.
him into the Castle of S. Angele, sacked Rome, robbed the Churches, and made
themselves Cardinals of derision in the Popes Palace; yea made hauock of
all: which yet by GODS just judgment they long enjoyed not. For as their
chief Captain ascending the wall, died a sudden death, so the rest of that
sacriledgious army within a few months after lost all, yea the most of them
dyed miserably. O impudency: be these children of that Catholic Church with
us, that thus like vipers endeavor to burst her bowelles asunder, yea most
tyrannically cut out of her very breasts; whereof notwithstanding, her holy and
sweet spouse Jesus her head, sings in those divine Canticles: Meliora sunt
vbera tua super vino fragrantia vnguentis optimis. The sweet milk of these
two breasts of the Church, be Gods word, and the blessed Sacraments. First,
have not heretics with their false corrupt interpretations, and translations
(framing scriptures to their own fantasies) most wickedly perverted the same,
but also have quite pulled out, and razed whole books and notable members
thereof, which most flatly condemn their damnable heresies, and therefore they
plainly deny those most sacred books of Scripture, to be holy Scripture at al.
As for the Sacraments though they confess two, yet in effect they deny al,
saying they be but bare signs, conferring no grace at all; and though Baptism
they have still (but not without damnable heresies about the same, in their
opinions) yet their communion bread is poison, which they crect and set up
against the true Altar and sacrifice of God in his church, which sacrifice of
the Altar, they blasphaemously call an Idol, treading those divine mysteries,
left for the food of our souls by christ's holy institution, under their
feet. The rest of the Sacraments they utterly deny, and contemn the sacred
Virgins, which the church, as the dear darlings of Christ imbraceth in her
bosom, they profane religious persons by vows dedicated to God, they deride
their Oratories, and sacred places they pull down, riotously consume, and
bestow their livings, the sacred Priests of God in great numbers for
professing of their faith, and execution of their function, they most cruelly
persecute, and put to death. This England can testefie, that besides the
consumption of many in prison of al sorts, within this forty years has had
above an hundred Priests (be sides women and lay persons) some of them after
long and most hard imprisonment rack, and torment at length, all of them, most
cruelly put to death, hanged, drawn, and quartered, the most of them alive: In
the inferior Germany, but in France especially have Priests there found more
favor falling into the Hugonots hands? surely no; it will seem to posterity
almost incredible, what the holy anointed of God have there suffered for the
Catholic faith: some of them have had their bowels drawn out quick, and
that on spittes, winding them out before their faces to their greater torments,
and lingering death; from others they cut off their members, and gave them
roasted to eat; others they buried quick, leaving out their heads as pretty
marks to bowl and play at, with many more exquisite torments, by those most
cruel Caluinists, full of instinct and spirit of Beza, exercised upon the
servants of God, and shall these be accounted of one Catholic Roman Church
with us? whom Jews, Turks, Vandalles, Goths, nor most barbarous Scythians
could never more cruelly persecute. Shall these I say, inherit and be
pertakers of the fruit of that vineyard of Christ, that with cursed Cham
reveal their fathers nakedness, as if there were any Pope, Bishop, Prelate,
Priest, or religious person that showed some infirmities (as we be but men)
most scornfully and odiously they set it out, to the scandal of the infirm,
and reproach of the whole host of God his Church, whose ordinances and laws
which all Christen men ought to obey (otherwise they be heathe^s and publicans)
they break; whether it be in fasting, prayer, or any other good order, and
that most spightfully, for that it is commanded by the Church to give a plain
instance hereof. The old Lord Treasurer ( Cecill) thought it in policy meet,
or at least moved the matter, that the late Gregoria^ Calender should be
received, Elmer start up and said, though otherwise Superintendent of London.
it were requisite, yet would he never consent to receive it, because it was
ordained by the Pope. With more moderation the Treasurer replied: My Lo^if any
thing good and laudable be instituted by the Pope, why may not we follow it.
Surely quoth he it is vnbishoply spoken, but John of London learned this lesson
of his grandsire Luther, to hate the Pope in all things, knowing that where the
Popes laws may take force, their heresy can have no sway nor entrance.
Insomuch that Luther being dead and buried in hell (though the Pope according
to Christ's promise, shall live, and govern the house of God to the worlds end)
yet, to show his blody mind, and of his followers thus (have I heard) is it
written of his Sepulcher, Morstua ero O Papa etc. See whether these be not
fit children, and members for the Catholic Roman church (the death of whose
chief father and Pastor, they imagine and intend to their uttermost power,
and last breath, yea if it were possible even in their graves) Shall any
Protestant ministers the^ be Pastors of Christ's flock, whose true Pastors they
so mortally hate, whose sheep they infect, and devour indeed they shall have
their hire, but with Chore, Dathan, Abiron, and their accomplices, whom hell
devoured and swallowed up for ever, and that for a less sclusme, pride and
disobedience, then Protestants daily and now many years have used, most
obstinatly against the whole Church of God, of whom they are no more meet to
be members, then those rebellious Ch^rites were to be of the host of Israel,
the army of the living GOD, if we be so straitely commanded in holy Scripture
to fl^e the heretik, not to salure or converse with him, if Saint Paul did
bid, auferte malum de medio vestri. For fear of corrupting the rest if the
excommunicated the Corrinthian for a less fornication then heresy is, and if
the whole Church of God near the Apostles time, have cut of less heretics
then these from her society, yea for holding the same heresies that these
heretics, of our times do (these holding withal many worse besides) will now
then the same Church contrary to her self, her Masters precept, and Apostolic
doctrine, yea al sense and reason ingraffe such rotten members, (so virulent an
pestiferous every way) in her body: yea will Christ her spouse I say embrace
them in the lap and bosom of his Church; then surely will he admit Turks
and all; and then wherefore was he incarnate, and suffered for us on the cross,
which blessed passion as the Turks deny, so do Caluinists the effect thereof
and that in more blaspheamous sort, then Turks; Insomuch that I may safely
affirm that protestant puritanes, be further of from the true Church of God,
and have less excuse to make of their Apostacy, at the day of judgment then
the very Turks. As for example the Turks have to show almost a thousand years
now for their antiquity, and continuance in great glory prosperity, and
victories, especially now within these two hundred years, with the applause
consent, and following of many nations, with great show of alms, hospitality,
long prayer, fasting, and other good deeds; all which our heretics want. As
for the Turkish opinions though in a gross and carnal sort, yet they believe
there is one God all good and just creator of all things and rewarder of well
doers. But our devilish heretics most blaspheamously affirm, he is the author
of evil, that his commandments are impossible to be kept, and therefore it
follows he is unjust, and most unmerciful to punish men with endless
torments for breaking those laws that none can keep, besides that they hold
that men want free will, and whether he do well or ill (if he be predestinate
to be saved, or damned) he shall be, all is one. Calvin affirmed that CHRIST
despaired and blaspheamed his father upon the cross, suffering in his soul
the pains of the damned: Yet the Turks hold him ever to be a holy Man, the
Son of a Virgin, and the most blessed man that ever was or shall be, yea
punish such as deny it, but you will say Calvin and his followers hold him to
be GOD, which Turks do not, I deny that Calvin and his adherents acknowledge
Christ for GOD unless they will have mo GODS then one, and in so affirming
they be worse the^ Turks: For what means Calvin when contrary to the Churches
creed, and faith, he denies the Son of God to be Deus de Deo, God of God
that is everlastingly begotten of his fathers substance, but he will have him
Deus ex se or per se as much to say as of another substance from his father,
and so of the holy Ghost, and so it must needs follow that either there be
three Gods as of diverse substances or else that the Son, and the holy Ghost be
no Gods at al, by this doctrine of Calvin and his followers; but the first
cannot be, and yet if the son be of another substance from his father, then
whether he be less then his father, equal or greater then his father, yet
being of another substance from his father, (as Calvin blaspheameth) then must
it needs follow there be two Gods at least, which consequent because Calvin
denies, and yet obstinatly affirms the precede^t: therefore he affirms
Christ, or his father, or both, to be no god at al. And truly in my opinion it
seems more tolerable to affirm there is no god, the^ thus with Calvin and
other heretics to blaspheame his infinite goodness, which indeed cannot consist
with the very essential nature of God; as to say he is unjust, unmerciful, the
author of evil, so that Protestants be worse the^ very atheists, how much more
tollerabe then be Turks then they, who though they deny the passion of Christ,
yet do they not hold that ever he dispayred or blaspheamed God, as Caluinists
do teaching likewise (but especially the Zwinglians) that not only Turks, and
all heathenish children, if they be predestinate be as well saved as Christian
men's children Christened, who dying yea in their infancy, they say if they be
not predestinate, though Christined, yet can they not be saved, but also that
the old heathe^s as Socrates, Hercules, Numa, etc. be saved, as much to say as
christ dyed in vain for the world if such as never had respect to him could
be saved without him as well as the B. Virgin, Peter, Paul, and such: for these
and old heathens Zwinglius joins together telling the King of France in his
Epistle to him, exhorting him to embrace his Gospel which if he would do, he
tells yea and promises him, he shall see these and many more there together
in one kingdom. Do you thinck this doctrine of these two men Calvin and
Zwinglius (which our english Heretics chiefly follow and teach) can join the
followers and believers thereof in the Catholic Church? suerly then as I said,
Turks, Atheists, and all heathens, be of the Church: does not Calvin utterly
These be Caluins ownewords Epist. ad Polonos. page 946. vt cognoscant te vnum
Deu^ id est Trinitatem hoc non modo tanquam insipidum sed prophanu^ quoque
repudiamus.
utterly mislike and forbid that any should call upon, pray to, yea or use
this word Trinitye: as to say o holy Trinity one GOD have mercy upon us, for
though he can abide (in that manner as he teaches) to hear named the Father
the Son and the holy Ghost yet can he not abide this word consubstantiality
(which one viz. Luther said his soul abhorred) nor this word Trinity neither
as a papisticall invention: For me to recite these places of theirs written at
large would be too long and tedious, but their books be extant in every
stationers, shop and their doctrine herein so manifest, to the world that
none can deny it, howsoever our politik courtly parlame^tary religion here in
England to dazzle simple men's eyes, will have such words as of Trinity still
used to content the vulgar sort though they iump with their Apostles Zwinglius
and Calvin in conceit and opinion in the deepest degree. Thus you see how in
the chiefest points of our religion as of God, Christ, and the Blessed Trinity
heretics quite differ from the catholic Church, as also in that great matter
of justification by faith and good works in Christ Jesus, which the holy
Apostle S. Paul in his Epistles so divinely teaches, whose meaning S. James
after so perfectly explaneth, yea S. Peter the Prince of the Apostles exhorting
us by good works to make our vocation suer and stable forwarneth Christians to
take heed how they understand his brother Paul who according to that hye
divine wisdom of God given him, wrote many things hard to be understood,
which the unlearned and unstable deprave as the rest of the Scriptures to their
own destruction says he; good Lord do not these wavering unstable heretics of
our time (as S. Peter right worthily terms them) never long contynuing in one
opinion but full, with themselves and others, of sects and dissentions do they
not most peruersly and corruptly interpret chiefly this holy Apostles Epistles
against the true matter of justification, confounding faith and good works, yea
affirming faith alone to justify, which is a very diabolical faith, affirming
man has no true justice in him, with many absurdities and heresies. As about
the merrits not only of our good works, and the Saints in heaven which they
affirm to be none, but about the merrittes of JESUS Christ himself: the like
absurdities they hold about predestination free will, the Sacraments,
invocation of Saints, prayer for the dead, images, pilgrimage, pardons,
fasting, prayers, and every point all most of the Catholic Churches faith. And
be these of the Church of God who hold not one sound opinion almost of God,
Heaven, Hell, Purgatory, nor of the Church of God it self militant here on
earth, sparing neither the souls of the glorious S. in heaven, nor their
bodies and sacred relics here in earth, but dig them out of their tombs,
consume them with fire, and cast their ashes to be dispersed in the water, and
the wind to try (perhaps with the old heathens) whether they shall rise
again at the last day, and can we make these men (or rather monsters) members
with these glorious Saints in heaven, as of the same Church whose faith they
despise, whose good manners they so little follow and regard, and whose very
bodies and ashes they so rack, tear, and ransacke here o^n earth. If we can
of chalk make cheese, make the Ethiopian white, or firmly conjoyne brass
and earth together, then perhaps we may join Catholics and Protestants in
one Church and make them beautiful and acceptable in Gods sight, and not
before; no, no, these two as* far differ in Gods sight, in his grace and
favor, as the other things do in nature, and much more: Heretics that divide
their love from the whole Church of God, divide their lives, divide their faith
and religion, can be no more acceptable of God (the natural head and spouse of
his one only Church) then it could be pleasing to the natural mother by
Salomo^s motion to have the child divided, who chose rather to leave it in the
evil woman's keeping: even so God our true father will have us one (as he is
one) in unity of true faith and religion in his Church, or else we cannot be
true children with him in his house, which is one and not divided. Hereupon my
first ground 1.
is this, that neither Lutherans, Protestants, Puritanes, nor any other sect
whatsoever in the world, dissenting from the common known Catholic and
Apostolic Roman Church, can be members of the true Church of GOD, nor
canpossibly be saved; because as God is one, so his true Catholic spouse the
Church (as one wife of one husband) is one, one in faith and religion, and that
in every point and article, tuam vnus Dominus, vna fides, vnum Baptisma, and
without true faith it is impossible to please God, which is only the one
Catholic faith, and Church, without which vvhosoedyeth, shall most
certainly perish everlastingly, as all did bodily out of Noah's Ark, testemonies
hereof be abundant, the Prophettes, Saint Paul, and all the whole course of
Scriptures and Fathers, so expounding them, namely holy Athanasius whose
Creed is received of the universal Church of God, which Church is rightly
called, vna Columba mea, amica mea, of Christ her spouse, viz: my only dove, my
darling, one, chosen out from amongst a thousand: all heretics then
dissenting thus from Catholics, and amongst themselves can never be members
of Gods Church, as long as they remain in this state, divided from that one,
and only Catholic Church. Secondly, if we look inwardly into the most
essential parts of our Catholic faith and religion, you shall find them
chiefly to differ from us therein, for if they were but incertaine indifferent
matters left for learned men to use their opinions and judgment in, and not
articles of faith defined out of holy Scripture by the Church of God, (the true
keeper and expositor of Scripture) wherein they differ from us, they were
tolerable; but they differ from us, not only in less articles, but in many,
and the chiefest, substantial, intrinsicall parts and articles of faith, the
least whereof, every one under pain of damnation, is bound to keep pure,
and undefiled. Now Buny in his Pacification page an hundred and eight,
following some of his fellows, Bullinger, Musculus, and the like (who finding
themselves miserably entangled with this question of the Church) devised
certain principles and foundations of faith, wherein whosoever agreed, they
should be accounted all members of one church, these Buny imitating (of his
bounty) is so liberal toward us poor Papists; insomuch that more then once
he affirms that in substance of religion we and they agree, and therefore
that we be all one members of one Catholic, and Apostolic Church, and
blames his fellow Ministers; that very rashly, and inconsideratly they reject
Papists from the communion of the true church. For (says he) unless we confess
the papistical Church, to be the true Catholic and Apostolic Church (whereof
we are members no less then the Papists) we cast our selves into a great
difficulty to find any other Carholicke and Apostolic Church, which being
planted first of the Apostles, has always continued to our time, wherein we
as members may be ingraffed, which if we cannot find or perform, then are
we constrained to confess our Church to be more new and later then the
Roman Church, thus far Buny: whereby, you may see what shifts heretics are
driven to, that would make the world to believe we differ in small, or no
substantial parts of teligion that so by seeming to creep into one Church
with us (though vvanting altogether the virtue, and for the most part the true
faith of members of the Church) yet at leastwise they may cover themselves
under the bare title of the true Church; the more to cover their badde
dealinges, and to deceive the simple. But what frontlesse brazen faces of
Protestants be these to affirm that their sects agree with the CATHOLIC
CHVRCH not only of all former times, and of all Nations in the world, but
also that they be not contrary to the universal Church at this day. Let us
then briefly consider all the essential, or substantial parts of the Church
of ancient time and of this age which is all one, and let us see in what one
principal point of faith or government, Heretics agree with us. First they
have instituted another regiment or politic government of the Church quite
contrary to that of the true CATHOLIC CHVRCH, for in steed of the Bishop
of Rome (general and only chief Pastor of the whole Church) they have made
temporal Princes heads of the Church, whereby as for example here in England,
making first a Man, then a Boy, and now a Woman head of the Church, they
change religion as often as Princes, whether the Prince be Lutheran,
Adiaphorist, half Catholic, as King Henry was; Zwinglian (as his daughter is
said to be) trinitary, Arrian as another may be, or Turk as perhaps the other
may be; if to be supreme head of the Church be so annexed to the Crown as a
matter of inheritance as our English Divines now of late have made it, yea
and that by Gods law we be bound to obey them in spiritual matters, then
by this divinity, every new King may coin a new religion, quite contrary to
his predecessor; and all good and holy. Whereas to Pster and his successors,
Christ's Vicar, by Christ's ordinance made head of his Church, to keep
uniformity of faith to the worlds end: in the same is certainly promised to
the confusion of all heretics in the world, that his faith (ever one) shall
not fail, which promise Christ has hitherto kept with his Church and general
Pastor, and shall do to the worlds end, let me see now whether any heretic
in the world, can, or dare avouch so much for his sect, whereas we dare
boldlye affirm, that CHIST his prayer to his father for our true Church is
heard, Ego rogaui pro te Petre vt non deficiat fides tua. Well this ordinance
of CHRIST (of such importance for the government of the Church) heretics
have altered, and you see how it proves with them; Quot capita, tot fides,
tot senten tiae. Secondly, they have quite taken away Priesthood, and
Sacrifice, and have induced a new ministry altogether, which is a matter of
so great importance, that it alters the whole law. Thirdly, of seven
Sacraments they have taken away quite six, is this a small point think you;
which in effect takes from us, the chief effects of CHRIST'S Passion and
Redemption, insomuch that a true Catholic rather ought to suffer death, then
deny the least Sacrament, but Buny and such like can swallowe up any thing.
Fourthly, they have quite abolished certain articles out of the very Apostles
Creed, as for example, whereas according to the Scriptures, we are taught to
believe how CHRIST dsscended into hell: if the Apostles creed be not
substantial parts of our religion, wherein we are taught chiefly what to
believe (whereas this unity of the faith Apostolic is one chief foundation
of christian religion) then nothing at all is material or of substance to be
believed: Fifthly, as I said before, touching predestination justification,
free will, reward of good works, Protestants have coined such new opinions
(besides old heresies which they holdt about some of them) as were never heard
of before. Sixthly, they deny authority to many of the canonical Scripturs.
Seauenthly, (as I also touched before) of the nature of GOD, of the blessed
Trinity of three persons and unity of one substance, of the death of Christ,
and redemption, heretics have devised monstrous horrible opinions and
blaspheamyes, horrible for not only Christians but very Turks to think or
speak of, and be these the fellows that make not a Church a new of their own
but amend the old, do they differ from us I say but in small indifferent
matters; Fie upon such palpable lies, fie upon such impudency, that ever men
that would be accounted reasonable creatures, can have faces to avouch such
absurdities, to go about to huddle up such gross inconveniences all in one
bowgett; and most miserable and weak senceles and ungracious be those men that
can believe such lying Masters, that under such pretense of piety, or rather
the profession of open impiety bring in such sects of perdition, to the
subversion of many seely souls. Thirdly as I here 3.
before have noted, in taking away external priesthood and sacrifice, they
have quite in a most essential point altered the whole law of Christ; for
according to the Apostles doctrine and Haeb. 7. 5 12. translate enim sacerdotio
necesse est vt and legis translatio fiat so that say Bullinger Buny or any
other Protestants in the world what they will they must go seek a new Church,
from the Catholic Church to mask themselves in: for here possibly can be no
hold for them, whose priesthood they have taken away, whose sacrifice they have
aboleshed, which priesthood and sacrifice is one great part of the chief form
and substance of the whole law of Christ, for hereby we be taught the law of
God, hereby we be governed and conserved in the law of God, hereby we
chiefly acknowledge god, hereby we be severed from false believers and
worshippers of GOD, and heareby we truly worship, honor, and adore the most
high and only God, and with such supreme worship, as is due to no creatuer
neither in heaven nor earth, so that you see what heretics hane done, in not
only altering, but leaving no external priesthood nor Sacrifice at all: First
they by quite altering the law of Christ have made them a new Church of their
own to dwell in more then ever GOD made; they have also abrogated all good
discipline and orderly government, both to learn how to believe, and how to
live and conserve themselves in the grace of GOD, and openly to be known for
his servants, yea in taking away Sacrifice the chief service of GOD, they
frustrate in themselves the coming of Christ, the fruits of his Passo^, and
make an open gappe to all sin, infidelity and plain Atheism, as by
lamentable experience we see at this day, whersoeuer Protestants have planted
their fifth Gospel, that quite supplanteth the^ out of the true Church of
Christ into the malignant church of Satan. Fourthly heretics truly
acknowledging now by force the Roman church for the true Catholic Church
justly condemn themselves as being justly censured and condemned for
blaspheamous obstinate heretics of the same which if she be the true Church (as
they say desiring to be accounted members of the same) then is she not
contrary to her self as being guided with the holy Ghost as Christ promised
his true Church ever should be, and thus you see the Apostles words verefied in
heretics who be damned by their own judgment (says he and therefore biddes
us. Flee them after the first and second correction, to such Christ shall
justly say at the last day. Ex ore tuo te iudico serve nequam, who for their
impiety and misbeleeuing being openly condemned accursed and quite cut of by
excommunication by his spouse and from her (who yet being urged they durst not
but confess her to be the true Church) yet still they disobayed her, to their
own perdition and of their deceived followers, like to those proud devils who
confessing Christ to be the Son of God, yet given over in desperate obstinacy
to a reprobate sense, still by their sleights and tentations, draw as many as
they can from God, blaspheaming his holy name though to their own pain ever,
and greater damnation, heerevppon it is so hard to hear of a learned chief
heretic truly converted, if he have long continued obstinate, because he
sins of malice, and commonly in the beginning especially against his own
conscience, and so damned by his own judgment, in the end, is by Gods just
judgment quite blind in soul and understanding, and so being become obdurate
or hardened in heart, is given over in reprobum sensum. Thus you see how
heretics make an argument against themselves in accounting themselves members
of that Church which they rebelliously disobay which by Christ's commandment
they are commanded to hear and follow contrary to whose precept from which
they be runnegates and plain Apostates and of the same Church be publikly
condemned. Fifthly it yrketh me to find any so feeble or weak if they be but
once well inclined to the true Catholic Church, as once to think that the
heretics of our time can be in any sort members of the same, to yield reasons
for the disproofe of so manifest an untruth, seems to me as needeles as to
prove that the Devil is alyar or that the Sun shyneth at the noone day: For
besides (as I touched before) the Heretics of our time one sect or other,
either quite deny or else damnably err in the most principal and substantial
articles of Christian faith and religion, yea so far and deeply that Turks
may as well yea and Except that heretics bear the name of Christians, etc
better (though both be naught) be admitted as Christian Catholics and for
members of Gods Church as they. For the heretics of this time raise up from
hell, al old heresies (whereof Turcisine first arose) for the most part that
have been from Christ's time to this day, and such as many hundred years agone
have been condemned by the general consent of al Christendom and now knitting
altogether in one fardell with a number more of their own and the devils new
devising they make rather a general apostasy denying al things in effect that
good is, then an heresy from the Church making the hye way to the Devil and
Antichrist, learning yet this lesson of false Mahomet their grandesire, to
admit al sects and religions, that in outward words confess GOD, to be of
their Church or to be saved and, so by the Devils drift endeavor to their
power, to send all the world packing to Hell. Butlett us suppose (which would
GOD it were true) that Protestants differed from the Catholic Church, but in
some one point; or the least article of our faith now in question at this day.
As for example invocation of Saints, or the use of images, yet I say and am
able plainly to prove, that for the obstinate denial of the less of these
points, or any such like they should quite cut themselves off from the unity of
Christ's Catholic Church; which we are bound by Christ's own word, and by the
instruction of our creed to hear and believe, and because as there is but one
faith and Church, so but one truth therein, which is plain and simple and
cannot be intermedled with any lie, therefore whatsoever this church proposes
as matter of truth and faith to be believed. I am bound to believe it or else I
discredit her for a lying Church and so not the Church of Christ which is
truth, so that deny the Churches truth and belief in one point, deny her in all, and the mis belief and obstinate gain saying against one article of
faith, makes one an heretic, and so offender against the whole, for God is
truth and wholly in every part of truth, so that to deny any received truth of
the Church, which is matter of faith, is to offend against the whole, insomuch
that S. James says qui totam legem seruauerit offender it autem in vno factus
est, omnium reus, he that keeps the whole law and offends in one point is
guilty of al, now the true Church of GOD eight hundred years agone condemned
image breakers, (for example) quite cutting them off from the corpse and unity
of the Church commending to al as a matter of faith that good Christians ought
reverently to keep and uses sacred Images of Christ and his Saints, the same
does the Church of God still believe, teach and confirmed it in her last general
Council, holden at Trent and as these image breakers for that one heresy were
many hundred years agone condemned by the consent of all Christendom and cut
of quite from the whole Church, so were those that denied invocation of Saints
and their holy relics as Ioumian and Vigilantius in S. Ieroms time against
which heretics and their heresies as new Idols Saint Jerome himself
thundering with Note here that Beza in Actor. Apo. cap. 23. v. 3. Is angrywith
S. Jerome forwriting against Ioumian and vigila^tius saying Ego cora^ Deo and
Angelus e^us affirm, intoller an dan^ esse multis locis in de torque dis
Scripturis Hieronimi andaciam vt in libro contra Iouinianum and Vigilantium:
see here how Beza approoueth elde heretics of his opinions condemning S.
Hierome.
authority of Gods word and his church very sententiously and learnedly burst
them asunder; many other such like heretics for other opinions as the Donatists
in Africa in S. Augustine time agreeing many of them in all other points with
the Catholic Church yea many of them differing little or nothing at all in the
outward rite and form of the Churches service, yea some of the^ but
Schismatiks in the beginning yet were they all cut of the Church, no true
Christians ever Communicating with them in Sacraments or prayers the holy
fathers so vehe me^tly writing against the least of those heresies that rather
then they would have admitted the least of them into the Church of God, they
would have suffered many deaths, and come now heretics that cast down Images
Saints yea Christ himself out of the Church and pulle down churches and all,
and think to be accounted member of gods Church, nay that Church has ever
taught us another lessone who has ever been so careful to keep her faith
with Saint Paul that rejoicing said fidem seruaui: In all points, so pure and
vndefilled (remembering her chief pastors lessone) that therein she must
resist the Devil; seeking ever his pray whom he may devour whom he bidds us
resist Fortes in fide, strong in the Catholic faith especially; That even as
the Church triumphant in heaven with God can admit no impure or unclean soul
distained with sin, so certainly the true Church of God militant here on
earth neither may nor can admit into her society any open obstinate leaporous
heretic infected with the least heresy, and why? but because as treason is
most hay nous to the Prince and common weal, so is heresy most grievous in
the sight of GOD, and most pernicious to his Church: many other great offenders
the Prince often spares, but very seldom is treason pardoned, because it
tends to the ruin of the Kings person, and dissolution of the whole state
and Monarchy. So the holy Church often times with great compassion, is forced to
tolerate grievous sinners, yea with sighs and tears ought to sorrow and
lament them, expecting donec formetur in eis Christus, and as long as they be
not obstinate in sin, as in theft, fornication, or more grievous faults, so
long often she expects I say their amendment, not quite cutting them off, but
releeuing them with prayers and good Counsel that so she upon their recovery
with joy may embrace them in visceribus misericordiae Christi, but even as the
vigilant shepherd immediately drives away the Wolf or seperateth the scabbed
sheep from (...) flock for fear of killing his lambs or infecting his sound
sheep. So the true Pastors of the Church never tolerate heresy, nor the
least heretic in Christ's flock the Church, because it creeps as the canker,
and destroys the corn of Christ; Darnell, Cockle, and such other weed,
though it be permitted to grow still with corn till the day of reaping, yet
venomous black flying vermin, that consume the corn at every bitte, must
diligently at all times be driven away. For heresy opposes her self by
division against God which is one preferring her own wit before the wisedeme
and ordinance of Christ in his Church, sins most highly in Luciferian pride,
which God so detesteth: breaks charity and the knot of peace in his Church
which he chiefly loves: and so shoots against GOD himself the chief
Monarch in most traiterous and rebellious sort by pride, and goes about to
shake and pull down the soundation of his common weal his Church, in steed of
true faith (where of it stands) perverting the understanding the eye of the
soul, that is by false doctrine whereof the tower of Babylon the very
Sinagogue of Satan is builded. So that the Church ever carefully conserueth
true faith in every point clear as the apple of the eye, the sight whereof, as
it cannot tolerate the least moath to cleave to it, so cannot the Church of
God admit the least heresy, or join himself in society with the least sect
of heretics or schismatikes in the world, no more then a generous minded and
most royal Princes can admit in her kingdom, some new unworthy vpstart
that seeks to be her equal or superior, or the jealous husband can
permit the adulterer he suspecteth with his wife, to lie in bed by her side,
no, no, coang^statum est stratum nec pallium breue vtrumque operire potest,
neither is there any agreement in the least things betwixt light and
darkness, betwixt GOD and the Devil, betwixt his true CATHOLIC CHVRCH and
that false Babilonicall strumpet heresy. Hereupon it comes, that most
blessed holy divine men ever so detested heresy, and the least society or
affiance to the same, Saint John would not come in the bath where the
heretics had been. An other holy man (though most innocent) could tolerate
himself to be accounted a whore-master, an unclean person, and the like, but
when one called him an heretic, he could bear no longer: So Saint Basil
talking with the Emperor of matters of religion: the Cook coming in saucely,
and telling the holy man his opinion, that it was but a small matter to yield to
his Master the Emperor in a word or two, and needed not to stand so precisely
in divine matters, which seemed indifferent, or of no great moment, yea sir
Cook (quoth S. Basil) it is your part to tend to your Pottage, and not to
boil or choppe up divine matters: and then with great gravity turning to the
Emperor said, that those that were conversant in divine matters (with
conscience) would rather suffer death, then suffer one jot of holy Scripture
(much less an article of faith) to be altered or corrupted. What think you
now, if such a one as M. Buny or a less heretic perhaps, as some Arrian
heretic should have come in and denied with protestants, not jors, nor words,
but whole books of Scripture, not one article, but almost all the Sacraments,
with many articles of the Catholic faith, and that such, as be the chief
substance of the same, and yet for all that, with such unclean fingers
seeking to make a Pacification betwixt them, and Saint Basil with the
Catholics, and should say we believe all one God, and so are of one Church
with you, let us not pass of this article, or that this place of Scripture and
the other, but without more ado, account us as we are Catholics with you,
what may we think this grave divine Basil would have answered to such a
motion, how would he have shaken up such a nullifidia^ Minister of the
Devil? how vvoulde he have drawn out that weapon so terrible to the wicked
and more percing then the two edged sword, and told him flatly with his
Master CHRIST, ^owe in that case, n^^ ^^^^ ^itt^re pac^m, sed gladium, and may
not we say to such Ne^ters as Bunny and his fellows be, which be the worst
kind of heretics in the world, which be^ neither hot nor cold, make a
hodge podge of altogether. Master Buny, you that thus unskillfully behave your
self in divine matters (and yet not altogether unlearned in compositions)
better it will become you to make some compoundes of Apothicarie stuff, or if
that be too difficult or painful for you, some meash of a pot of good Ale
and diverse sundry spices, as you sit in your chair by the fire side, then
thus without all skill* learning, or reason in divinity to make a conjunction
of two things, that be as far as heaven and hell asunder, as heretics of
our time especially be, from the Church of God; Nay the heretical and
schismatic Greeks and other old sects in the east, and by north, which be
far nearer in faith to Catholics then Protestants be, have many of them many
hundred years ago by the just consent of Christendom bin* quite cut off from
the true Church of God, yea schismatiks here in England that in all articles
believe as the Catholic Church does, yet in doing contrary to their faith Ipso
facto they cut themselves off from the Church of Christ which can admit none
nor acknowledge justly for hers but such as keep unity of faith both in thougt
and action, such as are not ashamed to confess the truth before men, such as
believe in heart for justice, and confess in mouth to salvation I Petr^^ Aboto.
heard once of a learned divine, who earnestly disputing in schools, of the
authority of the holy Scriptures, one merrily (though unfitly in that place and
matter) brought in the example of Tobies dog that wagged his tail so to
infirm the authority of the whole books as that he was not bound to believe
that, what said the divine do thon make a jest of it, the verity whereof I am
ready to defend with my blood, which was right worthily spoken, for though some
places of holy Scripture be more mistle all then other and con^aine not all
profound ma^er alike; Yet some places for faith and other for mortal life,
another for mystery, another auowching some circumstance apperreyning to the
verity of some history, (as this for example of Tobyas dog) in their degree
be all true alike, which books of holy Scriptures and every sentence
contained therein being proposed to us by the Church to be believed to be true,
a good Christian ought rather to suffer death then deny one sentence thereof to
be true for so discrediting the Church and Scriptures in one point he might
make the rest uncertain and so doubt in all. But heretics that deny the whole
book of Toby, Hester, Judith the Canticles, the Proverbs, Ecclesiasticus, the
two books of Machabies, Bar^ch, yea Or if they call not in question these whole
books yett some notable sentences and chapters of the same.
some call in question whether Mark, Matthew and Luke be true Gospels, and
whether the Apocalipsis be a true book of Scripture, some flatly denying Saint
James Epistle as Luther their chief Apostle, and corrupt the rest of holy
Scripturs shall these men be written in the book of life, that lay such
violent hands of Gods book shall we admit such rebellious traitors in the
host of Gods Church, that thus first robbing her of her armor whereby she may
defend her self, endeavor quite to subvert her, scatter and disperse her a
sunder, these Protestants new Masters and teachers. 6.
Sixthly, If they were of God who is not author Dissentionis fed pacis, they
would agree together and with their first masters especially, who many of them
in the beginning and since quite disclaim from our Church as quite decayed,
and come they now to us with their foul feet, when many of their fautors, and
all wise and honest men are weary of them. Seauenthly, such heretics as can 7.
admit any sect in their Church, show themselves to be of no conscience, no
fervor, no faith, no religion, and be^ the most dangerous persons in the
world and commonly the worst and hardest to be reclaimed to good? These be the
persons God most abhors wishing they were either hot or cold, Sed quaniam
taepidus es, because thou art luke warm (says he) I will even spue thee out of
my mouth signifying GOD can digest no such Neuter Nullifrdian sots; in figure
whereof it was forbidden in the law to have a garment wouen of linne^ and
woollen signifying that the mixture of contrary sects, Christ cannot admit in
his garment his spouse the Church, which though it was well imbrodered wholly
over, declaring how his Church should be adorned and glister with variety of
all noble and golden virtues in every state and degree yet should they, all
tend to charity and end in one, signified by the same garment whole with out
seame, which the cruel soldiers yet divided not, then which; heretics be
worse that rent and tear with barbarous cruelty and sundry heresies: asunder
the mystical body and garment of Christ his Church, and this to do the better
now in the latter end of the world, and most dangerous days by subtly
creeping into her, they vvoulde make of her as it were a linsey wolsey medley
garment for themselves a while to mask in, till they might if it were posible
rob and spoil her of al virtues, and heavenly treasures of scriptures, Saints,
sacraments, God and all such drone bees that seek to their own ruin, and of
others, to suck the sweet of other men's labors, CHRIST JESUS will ever have
his watchmen to drive back from his sacred enclosed garden whereinto none shall
truly enter, but the right in faith nor any enjoy the fruits thereof
everlastingly but the righteous in heart, for if the Church (as I said) has
justly shurt out at all times before and since Christ's time heretics for less
heresies) then these of our days be by many degrees) yea if God himself has
not spared just revenge of many of them in this life, yea sometimes to the
terror of others has inflicted terrible sudden death for less sins then
heresy, yea spared not Angels in heaven for that vice proper to all heretics
(which is pride) then though he be long, patient let no heretik think he shall
in the end escape the heavy hand of God, in token of whose heavy wrath and just
indignation for this sin of heresy, all good Christian Emperors, Kings,
and Magistrates have most severely punished it with fire to the terror of the
wicked, and preservation of the good. Lastly heretics 8. Heretics be most fit
to be linked in one Church with the Turk who have pulled down that most noble
and religious order of the Knights of the Rhodes, ordained to defend
Christendom against the Turk, to whom Protestants now show al homage in
most humble letters gift and other tokens of benevolence yea co^plotting with
him to the ruin of Catholic states and princes as both by their letters
intercepted and evident actions ap^eereth.
that would be of one Church with Catholics by what joints and sinnewes would
they be knit to and with them, surely they have lest none, for if they run (as
many of them have done) to the primitive Church, and the Apostles time, they
may indeed falsely and foolishly brag of the head, but then they must
absurdly without body and other members, join their soul feet to their
monstrous Chymerical head of that old dragon, but not of Christ whose Church
has ever visibly continued, and shall do to the end of the world, but if they
will join themselves with us now that by Gods grace be Catholics: I see not
one bond of faith, Hope nor Charity left in them to make this co^nextion
between us, they that have rased out or defaced the whole Scriptures which by
Gods grace we keep to our defense, they that contemn whole general councels,
where on we stand firmly, they that nothing regard all holy Fathers, which as
watchmen in GODS house teach us how to govern our selves, they that take away
Sacraments that ^oster and feed us to life everlasting they that abolish
sacrifice, whereby we are to worship God only, they that blaspheame God the
blessed T^inity on whom we are to believe they that take away Saints in heaven
from praying for us, and the Church of GOD hee^e from all authority to guide
and govern us, all which articles and diverse others which they deny we
steadfastly believe, here is no way left you see to conioyne us in faith. As
for hope with us in GOD they have none left neither but in themselves only who
they make judges over themselves of their own fancies: Knowing without all
doubt (as they say) they shall be saved before CHRIST come to judgment, and so
they be past hope. As for Charity how can they agree with us so quite contrary
to them, that can agree in no one point amongst themselves saving that they in
one point conspire together (yea all heretics in the world) that is to rail
against, and impugn the Pope our chief pastor under Christ the Bishop of Rome
him the Lutherans, him the Caluinists, him Protestants, him Anabaptists, him
Trinitaries, him the family of love cry out of with one uniform consent
(crucifige) but in other matters how many men so many opinions, commonly
reign, cursing one another like devils whom they serve, deriding and scoffing
each one another; see but only the inuectiues of puritanes, against protestants
here in England, and go no further, and note how they be entertained again
by Whitgift and others, and it will give some taste of the rest how they agree
first amongst themselves goeing about to thrust one another out of temporal
possessions, yea to cut one another throat. As for their charity toward us
it is no other then that of Julian the Apostate toward Christians of his
time, who spoiling them of their goods, and many of their lives, said he did
them a benefit, because according to their Master CHRIST'S promise, they should
receive a hundred fold for things lost so, here in this life, and after the
Kingdom of heaven, Such charity heretics show to us that imprison us, spoil
us of goods and livings, consume many with a lingering persecution (most
terrible) dispach others with violent death, infame us, slander us make us,
odious to the state and Princes where we live, as traitors, impouerish our
widows, beggar o^r children, infeeble and corrupt our youth, profane our
virgins, rob our churches kill and murder our Priests: be these in peace and
charity with us? That offer open hostility against us in word, deed and in
every libell they make or paltry sermon they preach. Fie upon such hipocrisy,
fie upon such fained charity Jesus preserve all true believers from such a
church as heretics have now devised, from such a peace or pacification which
they pretend, Qui enim paris fideli cum infideli, qut q^^ conuentio Christi ad
Belial aut quis consensus templi Dei cum Idolis, and peace is to those only
that believe truly in God, to those that have steadfast trust in him, to those
that loving him above all things, live in unity and peace, by perfect charity
with their neighbors all which firm bonds to tie themselves with us, because
heretics want, therefore as long as they contyneu in this state, they can have
no portion with us, nor in the land of the living, nam non est pax imp^is
dicit Dominus, would GOD therefore they would truly and unfeignedly seek to be
one with us, which to our grief and unspeakable loss to them selves, they
have first ^orsaken; that so we might be one with them, most joyfully should
they be embraced of us, yea to win them to this, we would adventure our
lives, spare no labor perrill nor pains, yea with many heavy sighs and
tears c^ying to our sweet and blessed Lord Jesus that he would move their
hearts to come now at length least it will be to late, we beseech them for the
love of Christ (with the holy Apostle to be reconciled to God by doing true
penance without which alas they shall certaynlie perrish evermore. We humbly
beseech them to be sorry for their enormious crimes, to recant and abjure their
heresies, and so with all humility of heart and mind sweetly to embrace the
cross of Christ which so long they have been professed enemies of. And this is
the ordinary mea^es they must use if ever they will be members of one Church
with us or be saved, in the unity of which church our blessed Lord speedely
in graffe them. I humbly beseech him though it were with the effusion of my
blood to their endless good and glory of his name. And here now finally, I
insta^tly beseech all good Catholics with due thanks giving to be joyful in
God and constant in that true faith and Catholic Church, out of which to our
comfort and confirmation we see our very adversaries confess none ca^ be
saved, in which true Church of ours I say though our enemies by force of truth
confess we may be saved, yet (alas) they living and dying out of the same, we
know most certainly they shall be damned, yea by their own judgment and
confession: O how happy had they bin, if never they had broken down the wall
by forsaking that unity unto which (unless they return again) they ca^ never
embrace charity nor enjoy grace nor glory. O Lord then open their eyes that
they may see, for without thee, they may, and have fallen* but without thee,
they can never see, nor find the means to arise again, grant us al grace
the^ we beseech thee most bountiful Savior, that we (that by thy special
grace be called of thee from amongst many lost sheep to be of thy flock,
servants in thy house, workmen in thy vineyard, members of thy mystical body
the Cath: Church) may ever be so thankful to thee in sound virtue, pure life
and conversation for our state and gracious vocation, that having no other
thing (as of our selves) to rejoice and glory in, but that we are thy members
(O B. Jesus) which thou have redeemed with thy precious blood, that (I say we
are thy flesh and blood, and members of that body, whereof thou art the head,
we may so answer by thy grace to this high and heavenly vocation, and happy
state, that being worthy and fruitful members of thy body here in earth, we
may for ever after this life, see thy face in glory.

Amen. Laus De^. I. R.

Finis.
THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS Contained in this Book.
CHap. 1. Of the tru^ way to Salvation. page 1. chap. 2. Of the (...) certain
note of the true Church* page 17. chap. 3. Of the second certain note of the
true Church. page 27. chap. 4. Of the third certain note of the true Church.
page 33. chap. 5. Of the fourth certain note of the true Church. page 45.
chap. 6. Of some other signs and tokens, of the true Catholic Church, etc.
how without it none can be saved. page 52. chap. 7. Of the Sacraments in
general. p. 68. chap. 8. What a Sacrament is, of the effects of tho Sacraments,
and why they were ordained. page 71. chap. 9. Of the holy Sacrament of
Baptism, and of the necessity thereof. page 75. chap. 10. How necessary and
f^uitful Christ's passion is to all that follow him in patience* and good works,
and how by Bapt^sme the virtue thereof is appli^d to cur souls. page 81 chap.
11. Declaring what Baptism is, and that Baptism remitteth all sins, and ho^
it truly justifies us. page 84. chap. 12. Of the impiety, and abuse of
heretics about Baptism. page 90. chap. 13. Of the holy Sacrament of
Confirmation. page 95. chap. 14. Of the holy Sacrament of Penance, and of the
three parts th^reof, and of the necessity thereof to all sinners aft^r
Baptism. page 100. chap. 15. That Confession of our sins to a lawful Priest
is necessary. page 107. chap. 16. Of Conf^ssion more in particul^r* and of some
sins against the first and second commandment. page 113. chap. 17. Of the
rest of the commandments, and of some sins against them to be co^fesled to
the Priest. page 118. chap. 18. Declaring what sin is, and how grievous in
the sight of God* and how severely it is* and shall be punished for ever. page
124. chap. 19. Of the great ingratitude of man to God by sin* and that there
is a difference of sins, with an exhortati^ to Confession, and am^dment by
penance. p. 131. chap. 20. Of whom the Sa^rament of Penance was ordained, and
that Priests have authority given them by Christ to forgive sins, and of the
matter, form, and effect of Penance. page 136. chap. 21. Of the most blessed
Sacrament and sacrifice of Christ's body and Blood substantially, really, and
truly upon the Altar. page 142. chap. 22. That Heretics which deny Christ's
body in the Sacrament, ^uacuate the fruits of Christ's death and Passion in men's
souls, and prepare the way to Antechrist. page 148. chap. 23. Wherein is
declared that we ought as really, and as truly to receive his Body with our
mouths to health and salvation, as Adam did eat the forbide^ apple to death
and damnation. page 152. chap. 24. Of the excellency of the most blessed
Sacrament, and in what respect it is called a sacrament, sign, or figure, and
yet is the very thing it self which it beto keneth. page 181. chap. 25.
Declaring how it implies not contradiction that Christ is in heaven, and in
the Sacrament in many places at once, but only declares an infinite and
almighty power of God, and that divine honor is due hereunto. page 226. chap.
26. Of the B. sacrament of the Altar, showing how conveniently it was ordained
for our reparatio^, and what preparation we ought to make to the same. p. 262*
chap. 27. Of the Manna, the paschall Lamb, and other figures of the B.
sacrament. page 269. chap. 28. Wherein is touched how this sacrament is also a
sacrifice daily vnbloudely offered by Priests, and propitiatory for the quick
and the dead, and that it is the only saerifice whereby God is chiefly honored
and worshipped. page 274. chap. 29. Of the great love and humility of Christ in
this B. sacrament, and of the devotion of Christians of old toward the same.
page 281. chap. 30. Containing a brief recapitulation of things touched in the
treatif^ of this sacrament, and declaring that lay persons be not d^frauded of
the blood of Christ, nor healthful fruit of the sacrament in receiuieg under
one kind p. 288. chap. 31. Of holy Order, what it is, by whom^ it was ordained,
and of how many degrees it consists, and that no man rashly without due
consideration ought to take upon him the same. page 305. chap. 32. Of the
higher orders, and ho^e necessary by Gods ordinance one head is over the rest.
page 309. chap. 33. Of Gods severe punishment of d^uers for arrogating to
themselves Priestly office, and how we are to obey our Pastors. page 318.
chap. 34. Of the goodly order of the Clergy, and Monarchy of the Church, and of
the Anarchy, and disorderly confusion of heretics. page 325. chap. 35 Wherein
is more at large described the Babilonicall confusion of sin and heresy, and
how God has blessed this Country of old for honor and obedience to the Church
and Priesthood. page 330. chap. 36. Of Matrimony, and what it is, and when it
was ordained: of the chief good, end, and effect thereof, and how Virginity
is preferred before it: also of vowed chastity annexed to priesthood. p. 336
chap. 37. That vows may be lawfully, and meritoriously made, and ought to be
kept, and that Matrimony is a band inseparable during life, and wherein it
consists. page 342. chap. 38. Of extreme Unction, that it is a Sacrament,
and ordained by Christ, taught by S. James, and practiced by the Apostles and
Apostolic men. page 345. chap. 39. Touching briefly by the way, the matter of
Justification, and by whom, and how we be justified. page 350. chap. 40* Of
Predestination, and that as no man is saved without Gods grace: So no man shall
be damned without his own fault, and that we m^st not curiously dispute
hereof. page 357. chap. 41. That man has free will, and that Gods
Commandments are possible to be kept, and that every one must work his
salvation with fear and trembling page 361. chap* 42. Of Christ's descending
into Hell, and of the intolerable blasphemy of heretics against Christ in
this point. page 365 chap. 4^. Of Purgatory what sort of people be therein
punished, and for what m^nner of sins, and defects they be there detained*
and that Prayer, Sacrifice, Almsdeeds, and the like be healthful for the
departed. page 367. chap. 44. More at large of Purgatory and prayer for the
dead, and how heretics no^ only corrupt, but deny the plain scripturs in
avouching the contrary. page 371. chapter 45. Of Pardons, and what they are, whereof
they come and in what sort they be available both for the living and the dead.
p. 376 chap. 46. By what means Pardons may be applied to our souls, and that
we must justly do that which is appointed us to be pertakers of the same. page
380. chap. 47. Of Excommunication, and how dreadful a thing it is, and how
heretics being excommunicated in the higbest degree their excommunication of
others is ridiculous and contemptible. page 384. chap. 48* Of some abuses about
Pardons, and of the late reformation of the same, and of the covetous humors of
English Ministers. page 385. chap. 49. Exhorting all to do their Penance
meekely here, and not to trust to much to the help, and prayers of their
friends left behind. page 387. chap. 50. Of Pilgrimage proved by examples of
Christ, and his servants. pa. 390. chap. 51. Of the relics of Saints
reverently to be used and kept, and of miracles wrought by means of them. page
392. chap. 52. Of honor and invocation of Saints and how Saints pray for us,
and may hear and relieve us by their prayers: as also that our prayers to
Saints and their intercession for us is no injury, but glory to Christ ou^
Mediator. page 397. chap. 53. Declaring how God for his holy servants sakes
hears our prayers, and how the holy Fathers of old prayed to Saints. page
403. chap. 54. Touching by the way the blessed Virgin our Lady, and the
injuries done unto her. page 406. chap. 55. Of Images, and of the Cross of
Christ, and of the reverend and laudable uses of the same. page 409. chap. 56.
Of Service in the Latin tongue: and how meet and convenient it is that the
Scriptures be reserved, and service said in the ancient, and sacred tongues*
page 413 chap. 57. Wherein the Apostles words touching praying, and preaching
in unknown tongues are expounded, and of the goodlye order of the Churches
service* pra^ing* singing, and praising God night and day in her cannonicall
hours, feasts, and times of the year page 421. chap. 58. Of the Beads, and
of the fifteen^ mysteries of the R^sary, or our Ladies Psalter: and of the
great good, and spiritual fruit by devout saying the same* page 424. chap. 59.
Of the Aue Maria how it is a most devout prayer, grateful to God* joyful to
Angels, terrible to the Devil, and most healthful and comfortable to all
mankind. page 427. chap. 60. Of diverse holy ornaments and things belonging to
the Church, as of lights in churches, of Insence, Dedication of churches, and
such like godly ceremonies. page 429. chap. 61. Of Religious persons, of their
sanctity, lea^ning* and perfection of life: and of the vo ^es of poverty,
ch^stity, and obedience, which make a religions man: and of the heavy in
^geme^t of God to vow* b^eakers, and how our Lady vowed virginity. page 433.
chap. 6^. Of holy Water, and how creatures being blessed by the word of God
miracles sometimes by the same be wrough^ to the expelling of Devils, and
conf^rmation of Christian religion. page ^40. chap. 63. Of holy Bread given the
people i^ remembrance of that most blessed Sacrament, and in some sort taught
us by Christ in those l^aues blessed, a^^ multiplied by him in the desert. page
442. chap. 64. Of rece^uing under one kind, and how the same fr^ite is rea^ed
by on^ kind as by both: an^ that peace, unity, and charity is the end of this
blessed Sacrament. page 444. chap. 65. Of fasting* and the fruits thereof, and
how it has be^e used, and co^^^nded by Christ and his Saints, and how it is
commanded under pain ^f sin by the church and to that persons: and how such as
disobey the Church in this precept of fasting or any other, disobey Christ.
page 447. chap. 66. Of traditions, whereof they come and what they be* and of
what authority: and that by tradition and authority of the Church we kno^ the
Scriptures t^ b^ the word of G^^, which be ever most reuere^tly prese^ued by
Catholics, ^ut evil understood, corrupted, yea some quite razed ^ut by
Heretics. page 452. chap. 67. Of God that he is one in substance and three in
persons: and of the horrible blaspheamy of heretics, and Athistes against his
divine Majesty. page 457. chap. 68. Of Hell and of the just punishments
therein for sin without release for evermore. page 459. chap. 69. Of Heaven
which worldlinges contemn and how we may obtain it, and of the glorious* and
most happy estate of the body with the soul for ever after the general
resurrection. page 462. chap. 70. Of the Pope, that he is the Vicar of Christ,
and lawful successor of Saint Peter. page 465. chap. 71. What most admirable,
virtuous holy, zealous, and most worthy and charitable men many Popes have
been of old and of late years also, even to this present day. page 468. chap.
72. Wherefore he wears his Crown is borne of men's shoulders, and suffers
devout persons to kiss his foot. p. 472* chap. 73. Why heretics have ever
slaundered the Pope, and how God turns their malice to the benefitte of his
elect, and how her^tikes be for^runners of Antichrist, and of Christ's victory
over his enemies in his Church, page 475. chap. 74. Of the assistantes of the
Pope as first of his Cardinals, and why they be so called, also of religious
men Priests and Godly men of this time that dyed Martirs and of the dying
obstinately of heretics. page 479. chap. 75. Of Antechrists forerunners, of
his false lying signs and deceits* of his intolerable Luciferian pride,
subtility, and short reign, though most violent persecution of his life,
birth, death, and ministers. page 483. chap. 76. How the Devil and Antechrist
be compared to that monstrous serpentin^ tayled Dragon drawing numbers with
them into everlasting perdition, and that one certain man Antechrist is yet to
come though he has many forerunners. page 486. chap. 77. In a fewewords
touching the chief matters that have been spoken in this treatise, and how
the unlearned especially in matters of religion ought too leave disputes and
simply to believe the truth founding themselves in Christ and in the Catholic
Church. page 490* chap. 78. Against Schism* and that it is altogether
unlawful and forbidden under pame of da^natio^, to go to the churches of
heretics, or schismatiks* to their prayers, sermons, sacram^ts, spiritual
exercises, or many sort, directy, or indirectly, to communicate, participate,
yield, consent, or assent to the same* also a precaution is given to beware of
dissembling Catholics, which indeed are Schismatiks. page 495. chap. 79.
Admonishing to amendment of life, seeing the time ^s short, and the hour of
death uncertain, when as ignorance shall excuse no man. page 517. chap. 80.
How though every one ought to be prepared to suffer, yet none ought rashly to
cast themselves into temptation, but if ^e be called thereunto, then we ought
to be most glad to suffer, as being Gods ca^se we suffer for. page 525. A
short treatise against Adiaphorists, Neuters, and such as say they may be saved
in any sect or religion, and would make of many diverse sects one Church. page
537.
FINIS.

