The most horrible and tragical murder of the right honorable, the virtuous
and valerous Gentleman, John Lord Bourgh, Baron of Castle Connell.

Committed by Arnold Cosby, the foureteenth of January.

Together with the sorrowful sighs of a sad soul, upon his funeral:
written by W. R. a servant of the said Lord Bourgh.

Tempus, fortuna, flent. printer's or publisher's device

Printed by R. R. 1591.

The most horrible and tragical murder, of the right Honorable John Lord
Bourgh: Baron of Castle Connell, committed by Arnold Cosby the 14. of January.
NOt to painte it out with vainglorious terms of a large Exordium in a matter
where throbbinge sorrow breaks of superfluous circumstances, and over
werying plaints abreuiate the liberty of speech: nor to use the choice
invention of a pleasinge discourse, where nothing but heavy misfortunes
minister cause of melancholic and pensive contemplations: But to explain a
tragical truth, and set forth the lamentable order, of a premeditated
murder, I will briefly prosecute my own grief, and the general wayling of
every gentle mind. Wherein as well superiors, as inferiors, (cast from the
quiet stay of their former affectes) seem to bear their indifferent parts.

If the loss of true nobility, whereon as upon a rock of safe protection,
consists the happy government of every flourishing common weal, though by
honorable service in war, or by sickness at home, the appointed scurge of
human frailty: be a grievous maime to the state, inferring a common lament
through every part thereof. Then much more may the state complain, and every
private person shed tears of sorrow, when the one loses the hope of
expected virtues, and the other is bereft the strength of their peaceable
fortunes, yet not by repulsing the injuries of foreign pride, or natural
summons of divine election, but by the poisoned rancour of domestical
treachery, as by this horrible murder executed on the right honorable the
Lord Bourgh may well appear, whose virtuous desires, were steadfastly fixed
upon true honors exercises, and whose heroycall constitution, ever abhorred
the base practices of vicious and ignoble qualities. But as the fairest rose is
apt to be consumed by a cancker, so Envy the malicious handmaide of honor,
continually seeks the ruin of noble personages.

For in the court amongst the princelike train of her Majesty's followers,
there wanderd (as the pureste wheat is associated with infectious weeds) one
Arnold Cosby, a man of proud conceipte, borne to mischief, and predestined
to destroy that which his lothed life is too far unable to redeem.

This Cosby, what for countries sake being an Irishe man, or for the curtious
affability of the Noble man (whose ingenuous towardness carried a good
conceit of every one) was so favored and well esteemed of him as he thought
nothing lost wherein he might pleasure him, til at last (as is the custom, of
ouerbold inchroching vpstartes) by too much familiarity he grew contemptuous,
and the more to manifest his arrogancy and the malice of his swelling
spirit, took a sleighte quarrel, (after sundry dispightfull disgraces
offered) to provoke and challenge the Lord Bourghe by a vile and impudent
letter, which one night under sign of fawning subtilty, secretly he clapped into
his hand. And though the offense did not proceed by him, but principally rose
by the reports of an other gentleman of Cosbyes acquaintance, which offered
to maintain them to his teeth, daringe him to the field, yet did he refuse to
fight with him, bendinge the force of his conceived hatred, only against the
Lord Bourgh, and would not forsooth otherwise be pacifyed, but with his life
and ruin of his carcass, for such were his words in his impudent letter,
stuffed with a rabble of bumbasted braues, scornful terms, and odious
comparisons, binding him upon his honor and manhood, the next morning to
meet him in Wansworth fields.

The noble gentleman whose modest ears did glowe at the immodest and
shameless lines, as his mild and courteous demenour, was never seen to iniure
the simplest, so being impatient of the least wrong smiled at his folly, and
thought, though he were no way his equal, yet in so much as he was a Soldier
and in that respect a gentleman, it would not be much preiudicall to his
honor, if he met him, and with the chastesment of his sword taught him his
duetye with better manners, and therefore not in hatred of soul, thirsting
after blood, as it appeared by his oppribrious letter he did: but in sobriety
sent him word back he would meet him, which resolution I suppose was
contrary to Cosbeyes expectation, who imagined be like the Lord Bourghe would
have stood upon terms of superiority with him, or else he would not have
been so liberal in his challenge.

But the night drue on, and Cosbyes stomach that of late did blow forth from
his windy puffed breast the sound of horror and death, began now to quail, at
the hearing, of two or three words, spoken in a mild and temperate vain, and
therefore as fitted the opportunity of time he entered into counsel, with ye
curssed ruler of darkness, how he might work mischief, and yet defend his
own credit from blot of infamy. Well somewhat was devised and concluded
upon, as after by his actions might be gathered: for the day no sooner
appeared, but as prefiguring some dismal accident, it covered the earth with a
lowering countenance, and black clouds in sign of ensuing miseries, distilled
repentant teres from their watrie brows. When Cosby well studied for his
purpose, and pricked forward with a desire of deceiuinge hope, which his
wicked thoughts had before hatched in his brain, left his lodging and came to
the Lord Bourghe with a case of Rapiers, bidding him take his choice, for those
should be the instruments of life or death betwixt them.

After this they mounted themselves and rode on toward Wansworth, neither of
them having made any one privy to their intent the one would not, in regard
of his honor, the other in fear his villainons pretense should be
discovered: I need not aim at the thoughts of Cosby by the way, they may
be coniectured to be such, as commonly proceed from a mind premeditating
murder. When they were come to the place appointed, Cosby as it should seem,
being first arrived, had made himself ready to fight, the Lord Bourgh
coming somewhat later, was not altogether so ready, yet had cast of his
cloak, tied his horse, and drawn his rapier.

Now mark the fear, wherewith treacherous hearts do continually tremble,
though they have never so perfectly studied the platform of their pernicious
devises. For Cosby although he had trained this fresh springing hope of
cheualrie and honor, into a solitary place far from resort, and earlye in
the morninge when few had occasion to be in the fields, yet did he (as
ministers of devilish stratagems use) faint and gladly would have bin at home
again, as by his delays is evident, for first he entreated the L. Bourgh to
measure rapiers, the equal length whereof he knew sufficiently for him self
provided them.

Then did he request him to break his rapiers point (auouching it was trial
enough of their manhoods, in that they had met in field) and to scarre their
faces, and so return and say they had fought. But the L. Bourgh as one that
lothed his former brags, and detested yt dastardlike motion, told him flatly,
he scorned such pusillanimity, nor came he to play boys play. Why then quoth
Cosby my L. it were best put of your spurs least they chance to hinder you.

Now had the devil which all this while had been absente from his servant,
fitted him at length with a policy to work his will and endamage his own
soul. And now, even now, the fatal hour was come, wherein the bloody
homizide gaped to quench his thirst in blood, and to act the tragidy of his
former scelerous inventions. For as the L. Bourghe (whose noble mind
suspecting no treachery) kneeled down, putting his rapyer in his left hand,
and with his right, intended to unbuckle his spurs, the monsterous
treachetour, taking the advantage as it fell, not like a Soldier, or a
Gentleman, but like a brutishe manquellour, and murderous conspiratour, void of
all virtue and humanitye, with all the violence his coadiutor the devil could
lend him, ran his rapyer twelve intches into his breast, which stuck so fast,
as he was constrained to set his foot upon him and pluck it forth, and
being cast down with the force of the thrust, Cosby, that wicked and bloodye
Cosby, could not be content with one mortal wound, nor might his insatiate
fury be staunched, except his vital blood streamed in sundry conduites, to
gorge the fell outrage of his greedy mawe, therefore letting fall his rapier,
took his dagger in his right hand, and therewithal gave him three and
twenty wounds more. Which scarce could suffice, for that he feared, if any
breath remained in his body his tongue might bewraye the manner of that
horrible murder, and therefore would not have left so, but that he saw rescue
near, which made him take his horse to escape, which was when he came unto
that place, a lusty strong Geldinge as any is in England, but he was no sooner
on his back, but he presently fell lame, and was not able to carry him, such
is the just judgment of God that abhors murderers, and will not their
villainie be concealed.

Besides for all those wounds, which the Lord Bourghe had received, it pleased
God he should live two or three hours after, time enough to commit him self
to his mercy, and to reveal the treacherous manner of his death, which he
did in the hearing of the right honorable the earls of Essex Essex and
Ormewood, in a house in Wansworth, whether he was conuaied by the means of
one John Powell yeoman of the bottels in her majesty's house, who coming to
the rescue, pursued the murderer until he shrouded himself in a thick
wood, where he might easily have kept him self close a long time, but that
the providence of God having nowtaken place to punish, where before the devil
had kept possession, for sin he would not suffer him to rest, but so soon as it
was night, brought him back to Wansworth, and the first house he came to was
ye house wherein ye breathles body of the Lord Bourgh lay, whereunto he was no
sooner approached (which is a thing especially to be noted,) but his wounds bled
more freshlie then when the were first given, whereby the people in the house
being aghast at that sudden and strange spectacle made forth to search, for
surely they supposed the murderer was not far off, he hearing the noise of
their coming, fled to Newinton, where he was apprehended and carried to
N^wgate, and from thence brought the five and twenteth day of January to the
Sessions house in Southwarke, where he was arr^ined and condemed of wilful
murder, which murder he had committed the fourth day of the same month. And
thus have I disburdened the heavy clogge of my grieved conscience, and done my
latest duty to him dead, whom whilst he lived, I loved and honored.

Then Noble minds, whose hearts full of lenity harbor no suspicion of
treachery, banishe all secure, mildness from your souls, that suffers eueri^
base, and ignoble Sicophante to enchroche into the leniry of your favorable
conceit. And nourish not with your courteous countenance, the contemptuous
aspirers of inferior reput^tion: For thereby grows such bosting vanity from
the baset insolent, that would frame nobility to the inferior tipe of their
unworthiness. As well is manifested by the sudden death of this noble
gentleman, and the published villainy of this t^agicall murder, a sufficient
caveat for every mistrustlesse mind to be admonished.

The sighs of a sad soul upon the unfortunate death of the Right Honorable
the virtuous and valarous gentleman the Lord Bourgh.
The sighs of the Night.
THe gorgeous Sun has spent his holy fire,
and scowling clouds are wrapped arm in arm,
The morning to the salt sea does retire,
and deadly sleep does cast an endless charm:
Fore-figuring some everlasting harm.
The Nights fair Queen does bend her iuory brows
And gleames a gloomie beaming on the boughs.
And Mercury forerunner of the evening,
Has bathd his golden wings in clotted blood,
And every gentle plannet sits greiuing,
And that does move that ever firmly stood:
A pitchie fogge does cover every flood.
And while the day break strives with the stars
The Sun and Moon maintain continual wars.
The mountains sincke unto the valleis deep,
And rivers swell unto the mountains hight,
No pleasaunce does his wonted order keep:
A wind remoues the waves: there tears do sighe
And liquide moisture turns to sulphering drith:
So sorrow burns when dreirie tears are spent:
And over heat does make a soft relent.
A swannish tune becomes my morning song,
And in my sight her feathers turned to black,
No day is seen, but night is ouerstrong:
For still the morning blush is turned back,
Because no mourning eye shall sorrow lack,
A quire of Owls instead of Nightingals,
With Elegies my fainting sorrow quails.
The dew that falls is like the sent of death,
And brings a mortal Serene with the fall,
A grave is all the pleasure of the earth,
and springing bliss is but as barren gall,
and with our feet we dig our burial,
What booteth all the pride of boasting lust
When martial armor is a tomb of dust.
Buried alive within the grave of Night,
Where darkness guides my lamenting grief,
I lie bereaved of my former light,
As one that in distress did find relief,
And placed sorrow in his soul for chief,
For that sweet lamp of life that I so loved,
Is from my wonted guidance quite removed.
I loath the cheerful joy the day does bring,
because the day mainteines the thing I hate:
Sweet is the music that the Screchowles sing
And in good time are Minutes ouerlate,
For in my fancy love is black debate,
And when I see my withered senses strive,
Then do I think my sorrows are alive.
I look and see the daughters of great Jove,
That loud his noble virtues that I love,
Sit sighing in a melancholy grove:
and to combine a coronet have strove,
Of all the plants that in the field do roue,
For that swet Lord I hold the world in skorning
and hate day, night, the evening and the morning.
The sighs of the Morning.
Now as a mourning gods comes the Morn,
Like to a wretched Pilgrim clothd in gray,
Her lowering looks like one that was forlorn,
Gusht showers of tears upon that dismal day:
And when she saw his deep and mortal harms,
She took my Lord within her loving arms.
Meeting the Lark that mounted with her notes,
Her Crystal body brusht upon her breast:
and by that su^monce tunde their warbling throts
To sing the burden of my great unrest:
And when I sigh the birds with heavy heigh,
Trebble their sonnets, and approach me nigh.
If she had lost her glimcing Lucifer,
That is familiar with her bright vprise:
No sorrow could such greiuousnes infer,
As now departed from her tearefull eyes.
And if hereafter I do see her clear,
I Will fly from her, as an inconstant pheare.
Her crimison Mantle fell into the Sea,
And almost made the Lordly Neptune mad,
But when he knew the mourning of the day
His royal hall with mistie fogge was cladde,
And understanding of this sadfull end,
He sighed, and said that he had lost a friend.
When as the Nymph did know this cursed hape
and what brute soul did act that damned deed,
a heavy clangor of her arms did clappe,
To bid all true Nobility take heed,
How they did trust to flearing Sicophants,
Or favored proud contemptuous miscreants.
Between their brows see mischefe fyrmlie knit,
And yet a fawning sweetness in their lips:
Within there hearts does ouglie treason sit,
And Adders venom from their pleasure sips.
Take heed fair Lords, and fear ye to embrace:
The mark of nature in a flattering face.
The Goddess ending with a grievous sobbe,
Went up, to tell within her stately court:
How vice the noble did of virtue rob,
And there did write his honors rare report.
When I beheld yt I was well content,
And yet me thought I wished the Nights assent,
The Third sigh of Winter.
My fire is greater than whole Forests flames,
Eternal Winter kindles in my breast:
And in my heart a Regester of names,
Of balefull storms the season has impressed.
Sometimes the winds do diue in to my heart,
And call them forth to renouate my smart.
Then every storm does take a several limb,
And in those limbs possesses several veins:
And like Saturnus makes my body grimme,
By letting forth my blood in paynfull streynes.
And when I sigh I raise a bremie storm,
So all my joys are spent in winters form.
This winter comes by that flowers fade,
Whose color brought bright comfort to my sight:
Whose sweet perfume my joyful pleasure made,
Whose leaves reflexed like a starrie light.
The coward malice cropped it from the ground,
And now in summer is no pleasure found.
As heavy as the frostie grayberdes weight,
Lies congealed sorrow on my heart:
And yet my burden seems but a slight,
Lightning, and thunder griefs and sighs do part
The one with sudden flashes blinds mine eyes,
The other with a wasting terror flies.
A frost of care has nipt my springing youth,
My Sun is down should make the ice relent:
And heaps of snow are gathered by my ruth,
All which are hillockes of cold discontent
And if this wintering chilnes ever burst,
A washing storm must waist the frozen crust.
Then from the brazen prison breaks the winds,
And from their swelling mouths do send out showers:
And drive me to the thought of that which binds,
Bundels of thorns to build up darkesome bowers
Under that gloomy shade I sit and sing,
The grievous loss of such a precious thing.
Woe is my Winter for so great a miss,
And in that season on his sadful hearse:
A hermitage I Will build shall be my bliss,
And call on age my yongnes to reuerse
And in his worthy praise my pen shall dwell
Whose virtue did all base contempt expel.
I Will sit until my breath ingraue this grace
Upon the stone does cover his sweet corse.
Here virtue in a milkewhite mildnes stays
Until eternal glory by his force,
Conioyne his body to his precious soul
In his sweet bosom that does all control.
The fourth sigh of the Spring.
The Sovereign of the Planets never rose,
But in a cloudie vale did shroud his head,
His Chariote covered like a mourning hearse
Rejected quit his golden furniture,
Ceres and Flora suffered such a dearth,
as never happened on the barren earth.
When first the cursed hand, by cowards watch
Did separate that life that loud my light,
The spring did sprout, but black was al her sap
The violete turned to a tawnie hew,
Dim was the rose, yet yallow were the seeds,
For mourning minds, betokening mournful weeds.
The wind with tragic music wiffeth sighs,
Through the linnow stalks that shook the flours,
and Ajax blood that breed the Hyacinth,
Congealeth care upon the grassie bancks,
But then the dainty Lilly lost her leaves,
and they were bound amongst the reapers sheaues.
The lofty Pines did pine within the valleys,
and stood like stripped champions in a storm.
They that are cut and dance upon the billows,
are careless in the cold extremest chances.
and as the deepest brooks do murmur least,
So they say little, that did love him best.
Upon a springing oak does keep Joues bird,
That lets fall a feather every flight:
His sorrow lets the Iuie have his growth,
That turns the Eagle to the bird of night,
When Oaks and Eagles die for grief not age
There fear and ruin run in equipage.
Tmolus her self whereas the Safron grows,
Has intermixed her spice with loathsome weds,
Black woll does grow on the Arabian shrubs,
as hard as are the quils of Porcupins,
Of Rauons color looks the Cotton tree,
a glorious spring again shall never be.
Thus is my spring become the leaves decaie,
Where Charecters of endless grief are writ.
The dewfull tears do trickle from the boughs
That lost their clothing when I lost my love,
and aye to me my sorrow writs the worst,
My joys are barren and my self accursed.
If any care be buried in the earth,
Some quaking fury send it from her breast,
and lead my lump that being over pressed,
I may conucie this dead time to my rest,
Where wrapped up in bright archangels wings
I may behold that which my comfort brings.
The Graces Funeral.
Since first the morning and the evening mourned
Since winter and the spring time are bereaved,
Of all the joys my inward losses breathed,
angels rejoice my love is now received,
The Graces have his lovely body balmed.
and have the centure of the earth perfumed,
Whereas that body shall not be consumed,
and that which wrents the ground is ever calmed
Their golden robs his body now has covered,
and Dians Doves their Iuory breasts have plumed,
Which by his body yet alive have houered,
and his fair resting is by heaven assumed.
Four morrall virtues have his soul conveyed
And spightfull fates his virtues have deceived,
And great Jehovah has his work surueied,
And with that blessed sacrifice is pleased.
Who knew my noble lover whilst he lived,
And will not say his virtues have deserved,
In fames huge books to have his name described
And every honor that he had revived.
My wandering wit in sorrows sourse is drowned
and when I wrought his praise the Muses frowned
My shallow brain his noblesse has not sou^ded,
Nor has my pen his worthiness renowned.
Now has immortal sorrow near approached,
And on my mazing wretchedness has ceazed:
And has my ruler night again conducted,
whose gaping horour cannot be appeased.
Then of his souls sweet safety assured,
Which our redeemer by his death procured,
And since my sorrows cannot be redressed,
They are embrac'te as evermore distressed.
FINIS.

