LABOR FORBIDDEN, AND Commanded.

A SERMON PREACHED AT St. PAVLS CHURCH, SEPTEMBER 28. 1634.

By EDWARD RAINBOVVE, Fellow of Magdalen College in Cambridge.

Praeca^eamus ne aut labor irritus sine effectu sit, aut effectus labor
indignus, aeque enim ex his tristitia sequitur, si aut non successit, aut
successus pudet. Sen. LONDON: Printed for Nicholas Vavasour, and are to be sold
at his Shop at the Inner Temple, near the Church, 1635.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, SIR JOHN WRAY, Knight and Baronet, and to his truly
generous Brother, EDWARD WRAY of Rycot, Esquire. Lovers and Incouragers of
Learning and Piety.
IF the attentive eye may be as gainefull to the understanding as the listening
ear; if the fugatious words, which escape the ears pursuit, by that may be
arrested to the doom of judgment, if it can scruple at Errata, when the ears
credulity sums up with approbation, then may I discharge my self, and
frustrate censure, of an apology, for exposing to a more deliberate review of
the eye, what posted by the laborynths of the ear with less delay. I must
confess, in those forward births of Pamphlets (the usual brats of pregnant
impudence) nothing uses to be more legible, than Ignorance, inspired by
Ambition: where the itch of public prostitution breaks forth into the very
Frontispice: and those Characters which the Author fancies to be glorious on
the front, the Reader deemes stigmaticall.

Although my private resolutions to the contrary, have stooped to some
assaults, and made my weakness now as public as the rest, yet this must be my
confidence, that some of my judicious friends have promised to share of the
censure, if not as causes, yet as provocations to the delinquency.

If in the subject there be any thing satyricall, the patronage to which I have
commended it, dare read without any conscious starting at invection. Their
observations may throw it at the guilty world, and this shall truly number them
in the pancity of the guiltless. Innocence is no superecilious Patron, nor
expects the manners of an Apology from those that intrude into its protection.
Nevertheless, I was compelled to invocate yours, for if I have gained any
thing from obscurity, the light of your encouragements have led me to it; and
as the College, whereof I am a member, so my own private duty shall ever
prompt me to rank your name amongst the chiefest of my Benefactors, and
endeavor to make nothing more public (excepting Gods glory in the good of his
Church) then your virtues, and that I am

Yours in my devoutest prays and Observance, EDW. RAINBOVVE.
Mag. Coll. Novem. 15. 1634.
Labor forbidden, And Commanded.
JOHN 6. 27. Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which
endures unto everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto you: for
him has God the Father sealed.
MAn is borne to labor, as the sparks fly upwards: with the pangs of labor
and pain his mother delivers this burden to the world; and that receives him,
not as an indulgent father, but a censorious taskemaster: and, as if he began
not life* but an Apprentiship, he breaks his fast with tears, cries aloud
e're dinner, and if he live till night, it is much if sickly groans be not some
parcel of his breath. Our necessities, like niggardly step-dames, lock so
fast the cupboords of refreshment from us, that none but the key of labor can
open them, this being their peremptory law, He that will not ioyle, must not
eat.

But meat being made the end of our toil, gives more alacrity to endure it,
and the hopes of that, sweeten the bitterness of this: let Apelles paint the
grapes by the boy, and the birds shall be more enticed by them, than affrighted
by him; those goodly grapes lessen the stature of those Anakims which withold
them; pictures those Giants with a milder countenance: and if we hear of a
land that flows with milk and honey, Jordans stream is easily strided over;
if our famisht appetites hear of meat, they fear no Colloquintida, but now
shake hands with Labor, are friends with Industry, can hardly be compelled to
rest; they will not listen to the call of ease, their bellies have no ears,
till this sad morsel fill their mouths: O man of God there is death in the
pot, and we have labored all this while for meat that perishes.

Slack then your sails, says the voice of my Text; pursue those gilded baits
no further, nor pull those fugitives into your walls which will betray you to
the worms: but arm your labor with an holy violence; assault the kingdom of
heaven; re-enter Paradise; the Angel now has sheathed his flaming sword; the
tree of Life's unguarded; Labor no more for the meat, etc.

The occasion of these words take briefly thus: When Occasion*
our Savior was told of Herod's* cruelty against Saint John the Baptist, and of
the inquisition which he made after himself, as in a doubtful amazement,
fearing him to be redivivum Iohannem, John risen from the dead; and albeit his
Omniscience was conscious that Herod's plots, and his determined end could not
be cotemporaries; nevertheless not relying upon the arm of miraculous
preservation, with the wind of this rumor he sails over the Sea of Galilce, on
purpose, as the three first Evangelists harmoniously agree, to getout of Herod's
Jurisdiction: and although his first abode was in the desert, yet the eager
multitude (now greedy in pursuit of miracles) trace him out. Christ being
found, answers their expectation by dispensing of his twofold cures;
generally, with his Doctrine upon their souls; and, when particular maladies
cried for aid, his mercy had miracles for their bodies.

The day posts on, and is likely to attain a period, before he can remember to
end his days work of mercy, when his Disciples (though not more feeling of
man's frailty than himself, yet now, perchance, after his lengthned Sermon,
more sensible of their own) thus admonish him. The place is desert, the
Towne's remote, the day'^ far spent, the people weary; and if they hunger,
victuals are not plentiful in the desert, therefore send them away. But Christ
who had power to broach the rocks and give them drink, to turn the
fruitless deserts into kitchins, even replenisht with Manna for bread, and
Quails for meat, had likewise at this time compassion enough to fill their
bowels* and the companies being sat down (now not more hungring after the meat
than the miracle that could provide it) found that two fishes, with five loaves
and Christ's blessing, were enough to fill five thousand; and when that was
done, (as if each Spawne had now been hastened into a perfect Fish) to overflow
into twelve baskets of fragments.

As if each word he spoke had become a feeding morsel, themselves might now
have witnessed with him against the Devil, that man lives not by bread alone,
but by every word which proceeds out of the mouth of God. That the oil in
the Cruise did not fail, and meal in the barrel did not wast, they had
heard; but that the eating should make the remainder exceed its first
proportion; this, had not sense stretched it out, might justly have exceeded
their faith. Certain it is by the event of the story, that this miracle being
well digested, had a stronger operation in them than any that they had seen
before; and now their pampered bellies could prompt them to a devout sedition,
and they durst, in despite of Caesar's power, attempt to make Christ their
King: Their carnal wisdom easily might suggest him a fit General for a
conquering army, who could so cheaply, and so suddenly victual his hungry
Camp. But Christ, who knew his kingdom of another world, slights these poor
ambitions; nevertheless to declinethe violence of popularity, having given his
Disciples the watchword to sail over the Sea, himself glides, first from the
people, then on the waters after them. Hot was the multitude in their pursuit,
and the first opportunity imbarque themselves and follow; and being now landed,
they find their yesterdayes steward arrived before them, which strange
celerity, makes their first salutation this question, Rabbi, quando huc
venisti? Master, when came thou hither? But Christ discerned full well which
way their stomach stood, that over all this water they did but follow the bait
which they yesterday tasted of, that no other god than their bellies brought
them thus far to sacrifice; he therefore, neglecting their curious question,
shapes an answer fitter for their affections than their demands, will not tell
them when he came, but why themselves came thither. Verse. 26, Not because they
saw the miracles, but because they did eat of the loaves, and were filled. Thus
first he daunts them, and what they might think he would applaud for piety,
he condemns for gluttony; he was able to anatomize their intentions, and found
those goads which pricked them forward to be in their stomach, nor their
brain; to fill their bellies with the bread of miracles, not their souls with
the Manna of his Doctrine. And when he had cooled their fervency with this
reproof, prepared their appetites with this sour reprehension, then gives he
them my Text as a more wholesome bit to chew on, and thus addresses it, Labor
not, etc.

The scope of which words import thus much; as if Scope.
he had said, Poor, and beguiled men, whom the greedy hopes of a filled belly
could flatter into all this industry! Was this the cause why from town to
desert, from desert to sea, from sea to land, your untired limbs could follow
me? What went you out into the wilderness to see? a reed shaken with the wind
of miracles? or rather whether he could furnish a table in the desert? But what
went you out into the wilderness to see? The son of man clothed in the soft
rayments of mercy and righteousness? or rather whether he could satisfy the
hungry with bread: But what went you out to see? A Prophet? or rather a
Purveyour? Was all this toil to satisfy your understandings, or your
appetites? to feed your minds or your bellies? I know 'twas the wind of carnal
appetite inspired your sails this way; it was the sought-for loaves brought
you to this Market. But, since the limbs of your industry are so strong and
laborious, make me your over-seer, and they shall be employed in amore worthy
labor; not for those melting morsels, as fading as the taste, those apples of
Sodom which dye betwixt the hand and the mouth; that meat that fades even
before your pots wax hot with thorns, which brings an angry destruction even
whilst the Quails are yet in your mouths, that meat which is more perishing
than the creatures whence 'twas dug, that dying meat which makes your throat
its sepulcher, is scarcely longliv'd enough for digestion: But for a meat which
breeds eternal blood in your veins, the bread of souls, whose equal temper
crambs to no diseases, but fills each part with spirit and life, and enables
your stomachs to digest eternity. Pant and breathe after this long-winded
food, pile up all the loose minutes of your labors for this purchase of
perpetuity; in the sweat of your brow eat this bread of everlasting rest: if
you have any breath, sinews, orlimbes, Labor, not for the meat, etc.

My Text, me thinks, is a map of Paradise, and in it Paral.
you shall find both commanded, and forbidden fruit, only thus they differ;
the forbidden fruit there stood in the midst, here in the entry of the garden;
the tree of life there not tasted of, is here an offered dish; the tree of good
and evil wholly there forbidden, here distinguished according to its fruits,
the good to be pursued, the other to be neglected; there the fruit it self
forbidden, here only the laboring for that fruit; there, after the eating
labor followed as a curse, here to rest from that labor is both a precept,
and a blessing: thus again they meet and agree, that both the forbidden meats
perish, the eaters with themselves, and both deprive the soul of the desired
tree of life: So that thus holds both the parallel and the antithesis: There,

If thou presumest to eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, that act
shall damn thee from the tree of life, from which an Angel of God shall stave
thee, armed by the Lord of hoasts. Here,

Fly that perishing meat, and thou shall crambe thy self with food of
everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give thee, whom God the Father
has sealed; the Angel of the Covenant.

In the words then are to be discovered these four Divisio^n
parts:

1. Praeceptum. 2. Praecepti Proemium. 3. Proemii Dispensatorem. 4.
Dispensatoris Potestatem.
1. A Precept^* Labor not for the meat that, etc. 2. The Reward of the
Precept, Everlasting life. 3. The Dispensour of the Reward; Which the Son of
man, etc. 4. The Power of the Dispensour; Whom God the Father has, etc.
The Precept here is double, Preceptum non faciens, and Preceptum faciens; 1.
Negative: 2. Affirmative. 1. Labor not for, etc. 2. But labor for, etc. And
in each of these Precepts there is, 1. an Act: 2. a Specified Object. In the
Negative, the Act, Labor not; the Object, for the meat that perishes. In the
Affirmative, the Act, But labor; the Object, for the meat that endures, etc.
and both of these objects carry along a specification as a reason enforcing the
object: In the Negative, the inconvenience of the Object must deter us, it is
specified by Perishing: In the Affirmative, the conveniencie of the Object must
allure us, being specified by meat which endures to everlasting life. Therefore
labor not for, etc.

The reward of both precepts is the specified object 2.
of the second, Everlasting Life: in which there is 1* the substance, Life* 2,
the perpetuity, Everlasting life.

In the Dispenser of the reward two things are considerable: 3.
1. The person dispensing, The Son of man: 2. The manner of his dispensation,
will give.

The power of the Dispenser tells us likewise of two 4.
things: 1. who is the Author of this dispensatory power, God the Father: 2.
the manner of his authorization, has sealed: the dispensor, the Son of man;
the Author of his dispensatory power, God the Father; the manner of his
dispensation, will give; the manner of his authorization, has sealed. Labor
not for the meat* etc.

Did we hear of Labor, and no Everlasting Life; or of Everlasting Life, and
no Son of man to give it; or of the Son of Man to give it, and not of God
the Father to scale him for that purpose, we might hide our heads in our
bosom, or labor to slip our necks out of the yoke. Harsh commands when the
eye cannot look over the burden to the reward; doubtful reward where the
giver is not known; suspected giver, whose abilities are not manifest: But
here the precept may be more pl^asant, being sweetened with a Reward; the Reward
ascertained, being assigned its Giver; the Giver enabled, being thereto
authorized. Labor not then, etc.

And thus me thinks my Text may afford a large field of discourse, and after
this pains I have taken in the tillage and opening of it, your apprehensions
may enter into it as into a plentiful harvest, if this first word be not a
Scarecrow to some, Labor. Nor yet can I see any reason why the Laborers
should be few, the increase being so certain, and so precious, that whosoevers
labor shall carry away but one sheafe, and husband it aright, may knead
thereof even bread of Life: therefore to handle these parts in method I intend
first to join the precept with the Negative particle; secondly, them both with
the Object; and thirdly, all of them with the Specification.

And if we begin with the parts in order, the two first words of my Text
seem to tie up our hands and to save us a labor, thus beginning the negative
Precept, Labor not. Labor not? Why what can the dainty pallat of flesh and
blood relish with more delight? May not the greatest part of this company
aver with the young man in the Gospel (if this be all the precept) All this
have I observed up from my youth, not to labor, nay, even for the meat which
perishes, much less for the other: and perchance may be glad to have got so
favorable a shelter for their idleness, as this porch of my Text, Labor not.
But if we attend the words, not the Act of laboring, but the following
Object, is here by this negation deprest. The Original reads it, (...)* Labor
not: Saint Hierome (whom almost all antiquity follows) Operamini non, work
not: The Syriacke Translation, Ne operemini, do not work; yet all of them
fastening the Negation to the Object, not the Act* and therefore some later
Interpretors make a Comma at the word Labor, as if we must read it thus,
Labor, but not for the meat, etc. perchance out of a diligent cautile, left
the duty of laboring should from this place seem rather to be forbidden than
commanded.

But none, that I ever heard of, urged this place as a lurking hole for
sluggishnesse in the general, or a manumission from all kind of labor, but
yet I may well conjecture, that many in their practice have lived as if this
Text gave some convenience to a cessation from bodily labor for necessary food
and raiment, (which they call meat that perishes,) that the practice of many
has laid them open to this accusation we may collect; because many of the
learned Interpretors, and ancient Fathers who have written upon this place,
amongst whom Saint Chrysostom especially, have been very laborious in
invection against such, and in vindicating this Text from giving any connivence
to their Laziness; and therefore to overthrow all such pretenses, some have
diversely expounded and limited the Act, Labor; some the following Object, Meat
that perishes; some the Negative particle. Hugo Cardinalis would have to be
meant by the object, Meat that perishes, Mala opera, evil works, because
they are the kirnels and causes of all man's perishing: So that man is not
plucked away from all labor and working by this precept, but only from the
works of darkness. But those that expound the object more largely, yet
understand the Act more strictly; that although labor for bodily means be
here forbidden, yet not all kind of labor; but as Rupertus (after Saint Basil,
Saint Augustine, and others) expounds it, Nimiam sollicitudinem prohibet,
operationem iubet; it is too much solicitude and anxiety which is forbidden, to
labor too eagerly, not to labor at all: for, Pigritari (as another has it)
idleness is maxim cibus periens, the meat that soonest perishes; the bread
of floth is soonest moldy and corrupt. And Bonaventure's joint exposition of
the Act with the Object is agreeable. Operari cibum qui perit est affici
secularibus* To labor for the meat that perishes, says he, is to be too much
taken and affected with secular affairs; and he adds, Quam vis in usu operis
quandoque sit temporalitas, tamen in intention semper debet esse aeternitas;
though in the act of our labors sometimes we place temporality, yet ought we
always before our intentions to set aeternity. Nay, some there are who yet
straighten the act more narrowly, and will not have this negative precept any
general rule, but limited by the like occasions as it was here. Now, when the
people had opportunity to receive from Christ the bread of life, they lingered
again after the five loaves to have more of the meat that perishes; which
when Musculus thought on, he thus inferres, Non praescribit normavi generaliter
omnibus, sed nimium et intempestivum ventris studium, ubi occasio spiritualis
cibi effertur, abjiciendum esse; That this precept is not intended by Christ as
a rule, (...), to be at all times observed, but here hec teaches that the
unseasonable care of filling the belly is to be laid aside when we are invited
to spiritual banquets; that Martha's incumbrings were therefore culpable,
because then she had the choice of the better part: that the marrying of
wives, the buying of oxen, and earthly purchases, are only then to be left
aside, when our souls are invited to heavenly feasts.

But Cardinal Tollets rule, if there were any, takes away all the difficulty
of this place, by limiting the negative particle: for, says he, particula,
non, saepe in Scripturis non negat, sed solicitudinem excludit; the negative
particle does not always deny, but excludes a solitariness of interpretation:
as if it had been said, Labor, but not only, or not chiefly for the meat that
perishes, but also, etc. And we have, amongst many others, one pregnant
example of this, Ioh. 12. 44. He that believes on me, believes not on me,
but on him that sent me. He that believes on me, believes not on me? how
can this stand together? the rule reconciles it; that is, not only on me, or
not on me chiefly, but on him that sent me: and thus it must be here
expounded, Labor not, that is, not only, or not specially, for the meat that
perishes, but for, etc.

So that it is plain, not Labor, but anxiety, unseasonable and importunate
labor for the meat that perishes, is only here forbidden.

But imagine awhile, the feet of our industry should be fettered, the limbs of
our diligence should be dis-jointed, and if we were asked with those in the
Gospel, Why stand you idle all the day? We might answer, Not only because
none has hired us, but because we are forbidden to labor: What then should
we do for food and raiment? Must we supinely gape till the showers of
providence shall rain down Quails into our mouths? Must we grovell in the
dew for miraculous Mannah? or expect the stony rocks to cleave into cups, and
present themselves to our thirsty pallats? Shall we sit under those Vines and
Figge-trees which free Nature has husbanded, till their voluntary fruit drop
into our mouths? Shall we, in the conceits of a lawful sloth, what the
Prophet did out of holy inspiration, wait for the Ravens to be our Caterers;
expect bowls of mercy from Birds of prey?

Shall we slumber and sleep, and fold our hands until the Handmaids of Nature
cloth and get us ready? Shall we sit with the Lillies in the field, neither
labor nor spinne, and expect that apparel and ornament shall grow upon us?
Shall we glow in the cold, till the pitiful sheep resign its coat to be
our garment? or lie in the shade till the ashamed Figtree drop down its leaves
into aprons, to cover our nakedness? What more can we do, nay, what less can
we expect, if this command be peremtory, Labor not? Why it is as if he had said,
Lull your selves into the laps of everlasting idleness, wake not your silent
thoughts with noise of care, cherish your tender hands in the bosom of sloth,
nor expose your dainty limbs to the rude employments of labor and travel,
Nature that sent you naked into the world upon hererrand shall cloth you at her
own expenses, and strew her Dugs of nourishment at the doors of your
appetite, labor not.

Contenti cibis nullo cogente creatis. Meats shall spring out of your platters,
and the earth shall crowd her harvests into your ample garners, labor not. Lay
the burden of your necessities upon the shoulders of an higher providence: if
you be lame and lazy Providence has nimble feet to post on your occasions, if
you be weak and fainting the hands of Providence can hold you up; are your
eyes dim and drowsy? the eye of Providence sees all things: Are you injured?
Providence has a sword: Are you in danger? Providence has a Buckler: sit still
and smile at Providence your officious servant, but as for your selves, labor
not. Why take ye thought for food? sow with the Sparrowes and be fed even to
wantonness: Why take ye thought for raiment? Spin with the Lillies and be
clothed even to pride, but labor not. Thus might pillowes be sowed and voices
heard, which warble out nothing but softness and delicacie: thus might we
make us beds in the field, and clothe our Vineyards with Cushions: thus might
we turn our Carts into Coaches, our painful Plowes into instruments of
pleasure, our fields into gardens, our garners into Theaters, our Shops into
Dancing-Schooles, and all become most experienced professors of the arts of
idleness, were this Precept merely negative, Labor not.

But not to divorce the Act any longer from the Object, that we may better
discover what it is we must not labor for, let me in the second place set, for
a while, before you the meat that perishes. In addressing of which, I entend
more clearly to discuss how far our labor may be extended for it, and
where again it must retire and breath.

And first, I doubt not but I shall befriend your patience if I pass over the
diverse acceptations of the word Esca, or Cibus, Meat, and expound it with the
most ancient and best Interpretours in this one signification, for all bodily
and outward necessities. Nor is the Synechdoche too violent, which in this one
word involves thus much; meat being that which nature has made the monarch of
all our necessities; that if we be not allowed to labor for meat, there is
nothing which may set our industry on work. And therefore, no doubt, our
Savior intended to make the negative precept against solicitous and
superfluous labor more Emphaticall, by eccluding in the Object, even what
daily is both to be prayed and labored for, Meat; Labor not for the meat. For
if this injunction had been more restrained (as indeed the rules of
Interpretation may do it) and only had taken from them their superfluity, it
might seem to have carried along with it both reproof and counsel enough.
What if he had allowed them to toil for their meat; nay, have made that
ancient curse a new Injunction, In the sweat of thy brow thou shall eat bread!
have compelled them even to sweat for their daily bread, but not allowed them
to stir at all for dainties? have forced them to eat, even their bread with
carfulness, but suster'd them to labor for no other sauce? What if he had
said unto them, Let not your labor perplex it self for such superfluity of
meat, and pride of raiment, but confine it within the narrow banks of
necessity? What excessive madness is in that gluttonous care which spreads
tables not where hunger, but ambition may best be sutisfied? which disperses
purveyours for the mouth into remotest Countries, that the wanton pallat may
feed on what the eye till then never saw? Spare your superfluous pains in
fetching in the whole brood of nature to make one meal, one bait for gluttony:
Tell me, Could not the five loaves upon the homely grass refresh your hungry
appetites, as well as all those glutting morsels spread, in so proud a method,
upon your finer linen and purples? cannot the stomach fill, but when the eye
is dazzled? nor meat digest, except received from the richest metals? Is not
gluttony at ease but in a wardrobe? nor Iunkets sweet but served in Jewels? If
labor should be allowed for these, time has not hours enough to dispatch it.
Nor must this Labor be less restrained from other superfluities; though
raiment be within its reach, yet pride is far too high for it; leisure may be
allowed to cloth, when it cannot to adorn. The sheep, that is near at hand,
gives us shelter enough from the cold, why should we hunt after more costly
furs and wrappings? Is the skin of the beast too cheap, that the bowels of
worms must be wrought into clothing? Natures help is a shorter cut: Must you
send for apparel to the utmost bounds of the earth before you can be ready:
must all the creatures lend their aid to dress one man? and is he not hansome
til anticke beasts have given him a shape? must a Jury of Trades be busied to
verdict him ready? and every disordered hair be allowed a time for
reformation? Certainly, if we may labor for this outside perfection, then no
labor is forbidden. Again, had it not likewise been a check to have
forbidden their excessive labor and toil in the rearing up of their ambitious
Babels, as if they meant to go to heaven by the stairs of their houses; or
rather to fetch down heaven thither, and so make them their everlasting
habitations; to make each angle of their dwellings like the polished corners of
the Temple, and every stone a Statue; to ingrave to posterity the stories of
their vanted pedigree, and epitomize the history of the world in their
superfluous carvings; to fill each chamber as a wardrobe, and stuff every
room with the treasures of the East; to extend their walls to an admired
vastness, and give their private mansions capacity for the trains of
Princes! If labor for these extremities of excess had only been forbidden,
the wonder would not have been great. Therefore, more strictly to forbid
superfluities, in my Text, not only vanities, but decencies; not only
surfeiting, but feeding; not only excess of meat, but even meat it self
seems to be forbidden to made the Object of our Labor, Labor not for the
meat, etc.

But to continue to show the force of the negative precept as it is joined with
the Object Meat, (besides superfluous Labor) in this word, Labor, here are
these two kinds of it forbidden: Labor importunus (or importunatus) and non
opportunus. The conjugates of the first word may bear both Importunate, and
Importune Labor; the first denotes an unlawfulness in the manner of the Act;
the second in the circumstance of time; the first is labor too earnest, too
sollicitous; the second is labor out of its due time, unseasonable. And if we
attend to the occasion of our Saviors delivery of these words of my Text
(namely, when the people pressed after him, both with violence, and that
likewise for bodily food, when they had opportunity to seek and obtain the
food of their souls) thus far, and thus only shall we perceive his command
to be negatively extended.

First then, Labor not for outward things; that is, with immoderate labor.
Non ne habeat praecipit sed ne solicitus habeat; non ne in domum sed ne in
animum intromittat: Not but that we may have these outward supplements, but not
with solicitude; we may lodge them in our houses, but not our hearts: we may
buy them for our selves, but we must not sell our selves to them. Let not the
full bent of your endeavors stand that way; hurry not your selves along with
the eagertide of praecipitation, but let moderation stand at the stern, and
hold the reins of your industry; and let the feet of your affections go, but
not run after this perishing meat: Let not the storms of violence, but the
milder blasts of indifferency waft your sails through these straights of
humane wants; take not the wings of Vultures to fetch in meat as prey, nor eat
the bread of violence, but seek it daily at the hands of Providence. The Lions
lack and suffer hunger, notwithstanding all their ravening and roaring,
whereas the meeker brood of nature meet with a shepherd that brings it to
their mouths. The wild and savage beasts ramble for their food in the desert,
whereas the tame ones obtain the mercy of man's fertile habitations: the
vehement and sturdy winds hold up and drive away the rain, the softer gales
moysten the earth with fruitful showers. We may herein take some resemblance
from God himself, and seek his blessings in so calm a way as he declares
himself to give them: Not, as he brought the Locusts, by some mighty blustering
wind, which might rend the rocks of barrenness; not by plowing up our ground
with prodigious earthquakes; not by burning up the tares and brambles with some
impetuous fire, but by the still and sweet voice and aid of his providence: The
kingdoms of this world are not to be taken by violence; nay, we must not
snatch, but pray for daily bread: Let not man assault his earthly affairs with
all the engines of his wit and strength, but rather win them by wary
composition: Let not his hot pursuit broyle him in an Egyptian furnace to
purchase brick and stone, the base materials of an earthly Babell: Let him
indeed labor to the exercising of his limbs, not the cracking of his sinews,
where anxiety must needs accompany Labor, Labor not for the meat, etc.

Secondly, as this Labor must not be with importunity, so neither must it be
against opportunity; that is, though we be allowed to labor for perishing
meat, yet neither chiefly for that, nor unseasonably, when we should labor
for that other which perishes not. That indeed of the Moralist is as true as
plausible, Ad virtutem tendenti etiam fortunae indulgentia est necessaria, etc.
The Indulgence of outward sustenance is necessary, whilst yet the soul*
wrastles with the infirmities of a fainting body, whilst it strives to untye
this knot of flesh, and break through all the chains of mortality; but yet
so, that there must be a subordination both in place and time, betwixt the
fading and the permanent; and to bestow those hours on that which are due to
this, were to lose both. Season and time are of such powerful consequence,
that the neglect of them turns even sweet into sour, good into evil; makes
those actions which in themselves are lawful, to be despised and sinful: They
wait upon thee, says the Psalmist, and thou give them their meat in due
season: Even meat, out of season, is the burden, not the food of the stomach;
to labor therefore for it out of season, were like Asses to couch under a
burden which no necessity imposes on us; nay, which necessarily diseases us.
Labor out of season could never exact its wages: the seed that is sown before,
or when the time of sowing's past, never blessed the sower with maturity, it is it
wherewith the mower fills not his handful, nor he that binds sheaves his
bosom: he that so sowes that he may reap, makes the season of sowing the
chief pillar of his hopes of reaping.

The sum then is this, If you have hours to bestow on moderate labor for
meat and outward necessities, yet rob not the souls opportunities to allow the
body time; slack not that task which God has commanded to obey the belly;
lose not that time, nor hide in the napkin of gluttony, which, well employed,
may gain the Talent of Eternity: Believe me, it is the height of sacrilege to
steal time from the Sanctuary; and hours which should serve at the Altar,
sacrificed to business, makes our affairs our Idols. The hours of Devotion
run in their own constant revolution, nor must we count it arbitrary to
prorogue them. The Sabbaths of grace stand in their own unalterable
Kallenders, nor is it man's power to make the souls feasts moveable; to be
serving ourselves when we should be serving of God, is to turn day into night,
to make the armor of God a work of darkness.

The Sun and Stars, the worlds great Clocks and and witnesses of time, have
taught our Dials to measure out God's by inches, and man's by else; he that
would pilfer from that, is too ungrateful to live a spanne of life. Shall we
doubt to give him his fullness of time, who has both invested us with time,
and made us capable of Eternity? When he is lessoning our souls, shall we be
crambing our bodies? or rather leave the best Junkets of the body, to gain one
morsel for the soul. Whilst that is feeding on the bread of Life, Labor not
for the meat that perishes. And this is both the Specification of the Object,
Perishing Meat; and the reason enforcing this negative precept, why we must not
labor for it, because it perishes.

But before we enter into this, were it no tworth the labor to enquire why our
meat should be called Perishing? Certainly, as it is man's meat, his food and
sustenance, it is that commune vinculum, which knits and marries the soul to
the body; shall it be then the cause of their divorce? When man perishes,
surfeiting indeed may be a cause; but meat seems to be a Catholic Antidote
against all malignant poisons and enemies of natures continuance. Is it not
Meat which arms our perishing flesh against the powers of death, and
dispatches new supplies to nature, when the former spirits begin to fail?
Does not the tender suckling seem apprehensive of this truth, which knows the
dugge that feeds it, before the mother that brought it forth? Being cannot
continue without sustenance; and shall the Author of our continuance be
likewise the cause of our perishing? Shall that which inlarges the epitomy of
infancy, and sets it forth into those early editions of growth and stature;
that which spins the thread of life to such a length be likewise the knife to
cut it off? If honey be meat, dip but the tip of Ionathans rod; and besides the
continuance of life, it may add a victorious courage to his limbs. Drink,
taken but from the brook in the way, may make the languishing soul lift up
his head: Even poison, having taken acquaintance with the pallat of Mithridate,
as meat, could now sooner nourish than destroy. The flying spirits with the
taste of meat recoyle to their tabernacle; and famisht bodies, even dropping
into their earthly principles, receive this doom from food, Return ye sons
of Adam: then how can meat be perishing? To make meat perishing, were to
metamorphise bread into stones, fishes into Scorpious, honey into gall, even
food into poison: how then can meat be perishing? Are not two Sparrowes sold
for a farthing? and shall we buy our own destruction, and set a price on those
petulant creatures that come within us to undo us? Arise, Peter, kill and eat,
were the words of the vision; but, if this were true, these words might well
have followed; such creatures as will rise in thy stomach, kill, and devour
thy self. It Is true indeed, our fathers eat Mannah in the wilderness, and are
dead, and perished, but was the Mannah the cause of their perishing? And have
we not read how David when he was an hungered went in and eat the Shewbread,
and regaind more vigor, and was further from perishing by the eating of it.
Man lives not by bread alone, says our Savior: whence we may gather, that
bread is a partial cause of his life; shall we then think, that little leaven
unleavens man's whole lump? that those treacherous grains prove Amalekites,
and Iebusites, thorns in our eyes, and pricks in our sides, or seed us into
putrefaction? How then must we do to join this epithet of perishing, with
meat? Nevertheless, if we attend, the doubt will not be very intricate, why
our Savior should make use both of the metaphor of meat, and the
specification, perishing; the former both befitting the present occasion, meat
being that which they now sought for, and likewise most able to bear the whole
latitude of the signification for all outward necessities: and for the latter,
although as it is food it cannot be said to be causally perishing, yet in regard
of its substance, it is both perishing in it self, and likewise by accident
proves as commonly the cause of man's perishing as of his sustenance. Ever since
the eating of that forbidden fruit, a curse having cloven to our meats; and as
Gods grace makes them nourishable, so that primitive malediction makes them
perishable; as they proved sour grapes to our first parents, so they have
continued to set our teeth on edge, and sin necessarily accompanying their
enjoyment, corruption and death the sting of sin, must needs ensue: and
therefore we may well prosecute the specification as a reason to fly the
object, and so to enforce the negative Precept, Labor not for the meat which
perishes; or as now I am to handle it in genere causae, because it perishes.

For why should we struggle and strive to attain that which being attained
will not abide the use. So childishly to spend our breath for bubbles, and
hunger for meat which cannot stay to satisfy: Shall we, like foolish
Merchants, compass sea and land for a purchase which will not last the
bringing home? Shall our pains reap the soonest decaying fruit? or shall our
desires long for that which is shortest of continuance? Do we not desire to
invest our bodies with raiment of the longest wear? and mark the highest
prized stustes with such lying names as may boast of their durable continuance?
Is it not a perpetuity which Nature aims at? and has she not clothed the
weeds, and mildest of her creatures with most perishing garments? The vanishing
smoke and vapors, the languishing clouds which roll themselves into their
own hasty consumptions, the shortlived meteors, and all the children of the
melting air, fill the same day in their Calendar with their birth and death;
whereas the purer heavens involve themselves in their endless orbs; the lively
Sun and Stars, those Jewels of Natures garment, shine in an everlasting
constancy of glory; nor can all the Arithmeticke of time subtract from their
native vigor, but each new day sends them forth as Giants ready to run their
course. Why then is it the more perishing part of nature which we aim at, and
build our senses on the slippery sands, when there are rocks so near? Amidst
an whole Paradise of fruit, only the tree of Life is never tasted* We sow
within our selves the seed of our own corruption, and choose such meats for
the belly as will make God destroy both it and them; our meat is received into
us as fiery hulks into a Navy, which ruin themselves and those that admit
them. Accepimus peritura perituri, mortals feed on mortals; nor can Natures
salt turn season into Eternity, preserve either the eaten or the eaters flesh
from corruption. Go now, vain Paracelsian, and extract for men the
quintessence, nay, the souls of perishing beasts, and yet shall man be like
the beast that perishes. Let that luxurious heathen feed his fishes with the
flesh of men, that they again may feed man's flesh: let all the troops and
herds of nature lay down their life at his kitching door, and sacrifice
their fatness for his health, yet shall not thousands of Rams, nor ten
thousand of Oxen, the blood of Bulls, nor the Sheep on a thousand mountains,
with all their lives, redeem one day of his. Si non perit et expelltur hic
cibus, says Saint Basil, perimus nos citius. If the meat we take in should
not perish and corrupt by our concoction, our selves must perish more speedily.
Labor not then for the meat that perishes; if it be for no other reason, yet
because it perishes.

But enough of that meat, that was the first, but now there remains a second
course, Everlasting Life; for which, I may presume, every religious appetite
does hunger. In that other indeed are many varieties, here but one dish; but
yet like the Mannah, able to represent (nay be) to the pallat whatsoever the
soul shall lust for. But before we admit you to this, we must needs examine, a
while, how you have behaved your selves with that, and whether your stomach be
not too full with it. For whosoever eats the meat, and drinks the drink,
even that perishes, unworthily, is in great danger to be denied this other. To
make therefore our application more methodicall, we must needs thus address
our censure; first, on them who sin against the Negative, by not laboring at
all; and secondly, on those who entrench too far upon the Affirmative, in
laboring too much; and that with their eyes and cares fixed upon this Object,
Meat, nay and under this specification of perishing meat.

And first, me thinks, its even necessary to invocate the whole quire of holy
Prophets, Apostles, Fathers and Interpretors, again to clear this parcel of
our Saviors precept, Labor not, from warranting this our spreading idleness:
Labor not? why the whole world is a gaming, or a sleeping, and even Saint Paul
in the pulpit were not able to waken their drowsy consciences, having first
bin lulled by this soft voice of Labor not. Why, 't has given the truanting
world a desired play-day, 't has fetched them from the Brick-kilnes of Egypt,
and now like vagrants in the desert, providence owes them a sustenance; and you
shall find all their Tribes hanging this motto at their Escutchions, Labor
not. You shall observe them to out-Epicure the fool in the Gospel, and before
they have their garners filled, or laid up treasures for many years, to sing
their requiems, Eat, and drink, and take thine ease; this precept is their
happy portion, Labor not. So that certainly if this precept were presented to
the suffrages of men to confirm it as a law, and to set a penalty on their
heads that needs would labor, such Courts of Censure would scarcely in an age
find one offender, but every one would most zealously endeavor to keep his
hands from labor.

And I am afraid, our invection may here be as pertinent, as in any City of
the world, this being an hive which swarms with innumerable drones, which come
hither to suck the honey and fatness of the land, which in this place flows;
and all they labor for, is to thrust their stings into the more thriving and
laborious sort. It is far beyond my young discovery, and (I thank God) my
experience in evil, to find out the innumerable ways which idleness has here
invented to maintain it self; but my informations are infallible, that sloth
has now, to support it self, set up, if not a Trade, yet a mystery; and it
will one day be a wonder that it is banner is not displayed with the solemnity of
the rest; for, I am sure that all your twelve have not a more numerous company
than that of idleness.

And the Masters, or first of these idle companions are those who may well be
accounted a Company by themselves; for they are such whom the world, (...), has
called Good Companions. Good Companions? good for what? to suffocate the time
with smoke and vapors, to drowned the drying cares with a deluge of drink? the
tedious time afflicts and persecutes them, they cannot be rid of it till such
as these shall drive it away. This indeed is the only company which (as an
Idol) set up Idleness and profess it; and spend their whole estate on
purpose to spend the time: and of precious hours (of which only a
covetousness is lawful) they are most desperately prodigal: And those days
works they think the best employed, whereon they have, without weariness,
done nothing: Except this be to labor, with the Belides in hell, ever to be
filling Danaidum dolium, bottomless vessels; ever to be measuring in drink
at their mouths by whole sail, and still retailing of it again by vomiting:
If this be to labor, to have the liquor work and be more busy in their
brains, than themselves are in their Shops and affairs! If this be to labor
to swill their lungs, till they soake them to spunges, to make their veins
which should administer blood and spirits, become hydropicall, base and abject
Water-bearers! If this be to labor, to invent scurrilous libels, and with the
dregs of wit, and their liquor, bespot their apparel, and temperate neighbors.
If this be to labor, to propagate unworthy quarrels, to seek for wounds
without a cause, to flush their complexion to the drunkards ruby, to make this
blush on their face like the bush at the door, a sign that good wine usually
dwells there, if all this be to labor, then these are never idle. Certainly,
all their toil might seem to be to build Castles of smoke in the air, they
may be said to dwell in the middle region, amongst smoke and moister vapors,
and themselves commonly perish as meteors. Nay, why may we not say that they
dwell in our American Isles, whither they have transplanted their affections,
and as others have gone from amongst us (God knows upon what grounds) to
purchase that earth; so these send to purchase the basest part of that earth,
the very weeds of it, nay and the basest part of that weed, the very smoke that
arises from it.

Nor is this all, but a second sin of Idleness, namely Wantonness, is
necessarily stumbled on by this; for the Poets, no question, were not less
significant than witty, who always made the Satyrs attendants on Bacchus,
lasciviousness and petulancy, being the birth of their frothy cups, as Venus
was feigned of the froth of the Sea; and those who spend their time and
themselves on this vice, I dare say are idely given, and you may be sure they
labor not; for Labor is the only antidote against the poisons of lust; and
therefore this Cities providence was very suitable, to quell lust with a
Bridewell, to work; and to censure whorishnesse with the emblem of labor, the
Cart; and were these with greter severity required at the hands and laid upon
the shoulders of more of these wantons, they would quickly drive lust out of
their bones.

But thirdly, there are another sort who come more seldom within the lists of
labor than these, and those are our Common gamesters, whose every days work
is to have played all the day; this seems to be their vocation; and truly they
are more diligent in it than any. And as if they had learnt of those Idolaters
in the Scriptures, that place seems to be but a prolepsis of their custom,
the people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play; the price, and
place, and hours of gaming succeeding in their ordinary courses, as well as of
eating and drinking. It Is strange to see that these unbusied persons can
continue in this playing idleness till it become atoyle, and thus exercised,
can confound the day and the night, make the evening with the two mornings but
their Natural day! Shuffle off the revolutions of time without taking any
notice, endure the course of the Sun, the succession of the Moon and
Stars, as if they were Candles for them to play by; and turn that most godly
counsel of the Apostle, of watching and praying, into a most Divellish
Paranomasie of watching and playing.

Certainly, these are those terrors of the night, who when they prosper not
in their hazards, are ready to fetch up all the curses can be invented, nay to
hale the devils themselves from hell into their luckelesse losses: and if Judas
betrayed our Savior for thirty pieces of silver, these are ready to open his
wounds with oaths, and fetch out his blood again at the loss of but one.

And what is the reason of all this, but, besides the excess of time spent at
it, their very adventures fall deep into their estates; and the cross winds
of fortune makes their goods meet with a shipwreck, though far from the Sea;
and all their substance may even in a parlour sink and be gone, and themselves
and patrimony with one dismal throw quite overthrown, when at last they find
that they have cast away money, time, and grace, and have met with robbers, as
Pharaoh did with Frogs at their very chambers. For now there are sprung up a
wiser generation in this kind, who have the Art to coy the fonder sort into
their nets, who have now reduced gaming to a Science, if not more thriving, yet
more getting than any of the Liberal ones: Birds of prey who live by the
fruits of other men's labors; Eagles which fly about the slothful carcasses;
and what those have scarcely obtained in a year by working, these gain from
them in one hour of playing: they stay till, like Spunges, they have sucked in
the moisture of many years gains, and then they squeeze them in a moment, and
make the very gleaning of Ephralm, better than the vintage of Abiezer.
Certainly their limitago were fallen to them in a goodly ground (where so
small a part of an Aker is so fruitful and yielding) and they might term it,
not the lot of their inheritance, but their inheritance of the Lot, if this
wheel of Fortune could be held from turning; if God would give them grace to
keep, what the Devil has given them cunning to get; but commonly as they are
shuffled together with the Knaves, and cut off with the scouring of the world,
so you shall hear them rattling the bones, till their own are ready to rattle
in their skin; and at last become materials for Dice, that which made them
living, being now made of them being dead: But to reform these, were to undo
an army of Tapsters, and to make waste the most goodly and fruitful ground in
all your City, the Bowle-allies and Dice-houses, which are so much the more
fruitful, because these weeds are suffered even to grow and flourish there to
rankness.

But I will not particularize in more that labor not; those that I have
already named had the ring, and you may find most of the rest dancing within
it; it is strange to observe, how many are busy, but for an after-idlenesse, and
what care they take, that they may take none: it is not the love of labor sets
any on work, but the Pismire's providence; indure't in Summer, lest they
should suffer't in winter; or else employ themselves in such as the Moralist
calls desidiosanegotia, serious trifles; like children besmeare themselves for
toys, otherwise labor not.

But secondly, as these may offend in the Negative, so many there are which
trespass upon the Affirmative force of this precept, namely, in laboring too
much, and that in these three respects, either in supervacuis, importunis, or
immoderatis laboribus: In labor that is either superfluous, unseasonable, or
immoderat; all which (by the antithesis of the censure with the thesis which
lay in the parts) fall directly within the censure of this negative precept.

First then, I doubt, we shall spy the most of those which keep such a
bustling in the world, as if it were they took all the pains, to do it for
sinful and superfluous Objects; and if they sometimes cast but a look or a
thought after righteousness, yet are they frequent workers of iniquity;
pursue that but with the eye, this with the hand and industry. We do not
usually say with Jacob, Genesis 28 20. If God will give me bread to eat, and
raiment to put on, then he shall be my God; but if my meat flow in with
abundance, and my Cup overflow, then shall my belly be my God, my meat and
drinke-offerings it is morning and evening sacrifice: We would all be God's
Beniamins, and if our Messes do not exceed, and our change of raiment go
beyond the rest of our brethreu, we are not well dealt with. We cannot
content our selves to dwell with Virtue in a mean, but our desires fly to the
utmost of our achievements, and never think themselves far enough, unless
they can get no further. Hunger is not satisfied only to take in enough,
unless it may likewise leave enough.

Does not superfluity daily cover our Tables? and meats which must make wanton
as well as strong, fill up our stomachs? Are not those the feasts of niggards,
where Luxury is not Caterer? and our meetings too homely and disordered, if
riot be not the Steward? Ancient gluttony was then at the height, when Iunkets
of the Land could be fed on at Sea, and the Sea send her varieties to the Land
for a requital; but now both Sea, Earth, and Air, must concentour at one
Table, as if Noah from hence were to fill his Arc with all manner of
Creatures; or as if their Tableclothes must imitate Saint Peter's sheet,
represent the Species of all Creatures, clean and unclean: nay, as if their
very stomachs were to be Noah's Arc, where those Creatures must not be
preserved from, but perished with a deluge of drink which follows after; and
he a very just and upright man that can be saved from it. Me thinks some of
those Tables verify what they tell us of the beasts meeting promiscuously in
Africa, and by their confused ingendrings, sending forth yearly new Species
of Monsters into the world: For hither they all come, and Cookery has taught
them so to engender, to make such medlies of Creatures, that were some of our
more thrifty Ancestors alive to see them, they would wonder what monsters of
meat were crept into our platters, and had need have kitching Dictionaries, or
Interpretours to tell them the name and use of every dish. And they must needs
conclude, that man who feeds on them, and is nourished by them, is the most
various and devouring monster of them all. How strange it is that so much of
our labor and providence should now belong to the belly, that wit and art
should keep School in the Kitching, and turn professors of Cookery; that the
invention of provoking Sauces should be their Lectures and Critticismes, that
the belly should have so good capacity; and the pallat, though so much cloyed
and dulled, should attain such ingenuitie.

That a man should turn his friends to Cannibals, and invite them to devour
his own substance, and eat him out of house and harbor, that he should purse
up so much of his revenues in his belly, and make a feast at the departure of
his patrimony; that he should labor and travel, and be big with
superfluity, and not delivered of it but with his estate* that the Apostles
penalty should be eluded, He that will not labor, let him not eat, for those
have now the best stomachs, and he that labors least, eats most.

What should I tell you of abundance of superfluous labor in the pride of
those who are inter pectinem speculumque occupati? whom the Looking-glass
sends on perpetual errands to the Comb; who are their own umbra's, the
servants and shadows of their own reflected shadows; whose daily labor is
to court and study themselves, and had rather an whole Corporation, or
Commonwealth, than any Appendix of their pride should be out of order. Whose
bodies are their golden Calfes, and whatsoever time they can spare from
idleness and gluttony, is altogether sacrificed to the dressing of this Idol.

Thus might we find superfluous labor in the ambitious yawning after outward
dignity and honor, whilst we labor to make worth the gift of pedigree, and
read deserts written in Escutcheons; whilst honor is raked from the graves of
our parents, and the monuments of their virtues, must be the pillars to uphold
our crazy fame, whilst the Arms of their Nobility is, indeed, the device of
our own; and the Emblemes of theirs, the life of ours. Whilst we beguile
posterity with usurped motto's, and would make them believe that to have been
the pencill of virtue, which was but the painters. Fond ambition, that
struggles to be eternal in a stone, and thinks that a painted Sepulcher can
dawbe over, or bury committed faults; thy memory shall rot before* thy
monuments, and Satyricall infamy shall hale thy vices to a resurrection before
thy bodies.

Is it not superfluous to have your houses that must even over*top the
Churches, as if they were their overseers; when, indeed, they have been their
underminers: Who will not grieve at that irreligious and scandalous
superfluity, to see, where their mansions stand, their very Stables like
Churches, and ne are adjoining a Church like a Stable; Gods house like a
Cottage, their own like a Palace: the zeal of such houses have indeed eaten
them up; nay, and perchance the house of God too; or certainly the most of its
revenues.

Lastly, can we find no superfluous labor for wealth and riches? Are you all
content with a competency? Is a viaticum enough to carry you through the
journey of this life's pilgrimage? or do you seek for unnecessary baggage and
burdens to retardate your speed? Why then do those winged vessels cut the
water and air, and visit Nations as distant in language as situation? to
fetch necessities or superfluities, purchases suitable to your wants or
desires? Could we ever know the abode of a man that was rich enough, and
thought so himself, or was there not still in his aim some further purchase?
Will a mad man believe he is mad? or was superfluity ever accounted superfluous
by him that had it? Look into your houses, where if seelings be an ornament,
what are scrupulous carvings? Are not hangings wrought by the tedious needle,
and not longer in working than in bringing home, near of kin to superfluity?
Has not wealth turviated into costly inventions, and made wood and stone which
homely Nature lent you, proud of their gilded clothing, and even ready to
shrink under the burden of their superfluous trappings? 'Twere an homely
complaint to say that glass is become Crystal; have you not vessels whose
very fragility raises the price even danger, whereas it should make more cheap,
with those wantons of wealth makes the instruments of ostentation more dear.
Has not the whole world helped you to furnish one house, and the Sea lent such
Jewels as may weigh down the ransom of many of your brethrens lives and
estates? What need we peep into their Closets? It would dazzle your eyes to see
how they make each Chamber (...) a Sanctum Sanctorum, or like the Kings
daughter, all glorious within, their clothings being by some degrees
transcendant to needle work even wrought with gold.

But this superfluity might seemeto be inveighed against by the envy of
poverty, that, like the Fox in the Fable we speak against grapes we cannot
reach; if that labor that attaines it were but seasonable, if it flowed within
the banks of just moderation: But if it were so, what means the bleating and
bellowing, the noise and clamor, the cry which goes along with us in scenting
out these perishing objects, when as if without superfluities we were famished;
we ask them with the voice of barren Rachell, Give me superfluities or else I
dye; and break through tho stone-walls of cost and difficulty, not for hunger,
but wantonness; meat, but dainties! when we eat not only what the sweat of
the brow, but what is purchased with the price of blood; when with stomackefull
children we bawle for Rattles, nor can have the cry of our labors appeased,
till our humour's fulfilld.

Do they not dig their Jewels from rocks of Adamants, and screw their gold
from the center, whereas the earth has offered our more easy pains daily
bread, and all things necessary; she has drowned and hid those noxious metals,
and laid her whole weight upon them; how violent then is that labor which rends
up the bowels of our common mother, for dross and dung, haling up Iron from
the same obscurity with gold and silver, that neither* the Instruments nor the
price of our destruction may be denied our superfluous toyling.

Climbs not Ambition up an Icy mountain? Are not all lower degrees diseases to
it? from which when it is cured, is it not over-toyled with danger of relapse?
How in its ascent it wrastles with each rougher knot to conquer its
supportance! what panting, what breathing, what courting the slippery holds!
does it not break and corrupt its ways over those Alps, as Hannibal did with
Vinegar? with the sour and smart of all their Industry; mounts the steps by a
motion not more tedious and violent than contrary to nature, though perchance,
when al is done, with one just fall, breaks both the back, the estate, the
credit, and the heart of him that thus attaines it?

But thirdly, Is this labor in seasons always beseeming it? I fear me, as it
is importunate and instant, so likewise that it is both in season and out of
season; and what our Savior would have his Disciples deprecate, as likely to
prove a greater augmentation to their afflictions, namely that their flight
might not happen in the winter, nor on the Sabbath day; the hot pursuit of
these can feel no winter, nor their cold devotions acknowledge any Sabbath
day, but all seasons must be their harvest, and they not only pluck, but
reap their ears of corn on the Sabbath day, though it turn their carnal
ears from hearing the word of God.

And thus like ungrateful thieves that rob their benefactors, when God
bestows blessings on them, they steal time from God to fetch them home: and
because Eternity, of necessity, belongs to their souls, they employ all the
hours of time for the good of their bodies: hold it methodicall eno^ugh to set
grace only after meat; and though the object be never so needless, and the
labor never so immoderate, they fail not to add this third aggravation, to
make it unseasonable.

And thus we find the whole world either idle or, ill imploy^d, either
triflers or busybodies; not laboring at all, or laboring and toyling
importunately for the meat that perishes. Some who deserve our Saviors
complaining question, Why stand ye idle all the day? Some who have cause to
complain to our Savior, Master, we have labored all the night, but caught
nothing! Some on their slothful beds to muse mischief, some rising up early
to act it; sloth moulding some, anxiety consuming others; some folding their
hands so far in idleness that they cannot work, some folded and inwrapt so
far in business that they have no leisure: some so unused to toil as was
that Mindyrides whom Seneca tells, that seeing one take great pains* in
digging, himself was weary to behold him, and commanded that he should work
out of his sight; and that he was wont to complain, that a leaf amongst the
Roses, on which he lay, being doubled under him, did hurt him: Some again, as
pragmatticall as was that Turannius, of whom it is related, that undergoing a
laborious, and no profitable office, until he was ninety years of age, that
then the Emperor of his own compassionate accord sent him his exemption, and
that now he might rest: which news the busy old man received with no less
horror than if it had been chesentenee of his condemnation; and composing
himself* upon his bed, he commanded his family to mourn for him; as if the
office of his soul had, with the loss of that other, for saken his body; nor
must the face of this funeral sadness be laid aside, until that providence
which eased him of his burden, must be so pitiful as to restore it to him
again. Adeone luvat occupatum mori? Can the least wind of labor thus blast
some, and others be recovered with the noise of care? Certainly, some have that
Roman Knights pillow (which Augustus desired) whence the noise of debts, and
poverty, coming as an armed man cannot waken them: some have none other than
Augustus his, whereon no melody could hush him into sleep. Some would lie on
the top of Olympus, above the Clouds of disturbance, and Winds of molestation.
Some on the top of Aetna, and are not warm enough except in a combustion of
business. All are divided betwixt those that labor not at all, and those that
labor too much; but for the meat that perishes.

And now whilst I would find Arguments to enlarge my invection (besides the
admonition of time) that, me thinks, of Seneca sounds in mine care; Vide, non
tantum an verum sit quod dicis, sed an ille cui dicitur very patiens sit: Take
heed, not only that thou speak the truth, but also that those to whom thou
speak can brook that truth: Truth, it seems, is a physic, but whereof
every diseased is not patient; a salve, but too corrosive for some sores; and
though counsel sometimes finds entertainment, yet reproof seldom misses of
contempt; Wasps being known to sting more deeply than Bees: He therefore that
is sharp with vice, round with fortune, that debases ambition, chides luxury,
scourges lust, and hangs a rod at the fools back, shall be thought to speak
words, no matter; and men's ears, not their minds shall lend him attention. Nor
did he speak besides, though before these times, who said, Mayor est qui
iudicium astulit, quam qui meruit; He shall be the multitudes Magnifico, who
steals not, who deserves their judgment. I will therefore, to conclude all,
make our Saviors method mine, who in the verse before my Text chid, here
exhorts, and turn my invection against the lazy, and those that overtoyle
themselves, into a brief exhortation to leave that, and use this more
moderately; the inconveniences which follow being my reason to deter us from
offending on either fide.

For let me tell the sluggish, What is Idleness, but the sediments of some
sinful disease, and a disposition to fall into all. The Church is Ager Dei,
Gods field; and what avails it to shape out handlesse Christians, or to
expect any harveh from such as Labor not? The Church is Civitas Dei, Gods
City; and none are free of this, but those that have some function. Tell me,
you that never heard the call of any Vocation, that are free of no other
Company than your idle companions; that shirke living from others, but time
from yourselves; tell me, may it not be said of Idleness as he said of Envy,
that it is tormentumsut, its own scourge: and is there any wrack to the bed of
sloth? If it be asked of what function you are, is it sufficient to answer,
Gentlemen? as if generosity were turned vagrant; and the business proper to
Nobility, were to sleep in a Chair of State. Tendit in ardua v^rtus, Virtue
is essentially in action, and all her Clients work their passage to her. The
greatest of our Commonwealth have enrolled their names into the protection of
some Corporation in this City, no doubt, that their examples may tell the rest,
that Labor is an honor as well as a burden; and may he that shrinkes from
it, never have a trencher of his own, but let his stomach be always
attendant and wear the perpetual livery of other men's leisures. Let this
shirking generation be cast out (as Christ would have the Devils) by Prayer and
Fasting, Devotion and Hunger, their most feared enemies; and when they want
their penny-worths of news, let their very apparel pay for their Ordinary:
Let the very Constables and Marshals of the City be the undertakers to draine
and scour this fenny and viciously over-growne, this untilled, unfruitful
ground: O let not those gardens of our selves be over-growne with the weeds of
sloth, let not customary sluggishnesse make us unweeldy for any thing but
gossipings, and to be the tradition of tales and reports; let not us be that
unfallowed ground where the Devil may sow his tares; or standing pools which
ever end in stinch and corruption; but let us gird up our loins, and though it
be the last hour of the day, yet adventure into the field, and labor. But yet
not too fast, nor too eagerly, for this falls into as dangerous an extremity on
the other side; and when you have dug as deep as you can, and followed the
game as far as it is possible, you prove but th'unprofible servants of your
unlimited desires, and all for which you tugge thus diligently, shall perish:
Foresee your heaps of silver sunk to the center from whence it came, your
houses buried in the ruins of your Cellars, your wardrobes entombed in the
bellies of contemptible Moths, your pampered carcasses baits for the worms;
then say, here is meat that perishes: All those things that swell thine heart,
and hoist thy mind above the memory of mortality, which barricado'd with bars
of Iron, snatched with the servile lives of others, defended with thine own,
for which the furrows of the Sea were smoothed with blood, the walls of Cities
shaken, the leagues of affinity, friendship, and blood, have been so often
broken, are now no longer thine, they were but lent; or if they were thine
own, they are perishing.

Go now, vain man, and spread thy Factors through all Languages, fetch both
the Indies to thy capacious Cellars, make all the Kings of the Nations thy
debtors, pile up thine house with obligatory parchment, umbra's and fancies,
empty shadows of wealth and substance, farm out the usurious time (
sanguivolentae indies duplicentur centesimae) and let each day redouble thine
hundreds, bless thy speculations with the volumes of thy riches, and survay
the Maps of thy purchased Territories, Pride thy self at the sight of thy
great Babilons which thou have built for thine honor; and now when thou
come to eat the fruit of thy labors, to use that felicity which all this
while thou have but served, know and consider that it, and thou thy self shall
perish.

O then let us turn the eyes of our appetites, and the limbs of our labor,
after that meat which indure's to Everlasting Life; that Manna that came down
from heaven, and carries man up thither; that Angels food which luxury never
looked at, bread made and composed of the immortal seed of the Word. Lord give
us evermore this bread! Let the froward appetites of worldlings thirst after
their broken Cisterns; leave those that never felt the sweets of Canaan, to
breath after Aegypts Onions and Leekes; letearthly pottage be those Esau's
birthright; surfeit poor prodigals with your Swinish husks? Lord give us
evermore this bread. Turn, O the storms of our earthly tuggings into a calm!
be still O you waves of overflowing desires! Say unto God, Thou art my Rock;
my heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed there. Fly away, O thou Sea of
pleasure; and be thou driven back, thou swelling Jordan of pride; Skip away,
ye mountains of Ambition, like Rams; and ye little hills of Riches, like Lambs.
Tremble, O earth of care, at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the
God of Jacob. Let the Spirit and the Bride say, Come; and let him that hears
say, Come; and let him that is athirst say, Come; and whosoever will, let him
take of this water of life freely. And come, O Son of man, and with that meat
make men the Sons of God. O blessed Father, scale to us the love of thy
Son, which is our life; and sanctify that living meat, O holy Spirit. Now to
that Son of man that gives, and God the Father that seals, and God the Holy
Ghost that sanctifies to the unspeakable glory of Everlasting Life; Ascribed be
all praise, dominion, life, and glory.

In secula seculerum, Amen.
FINIS.

