THE PROPHECY OF OBADIAH OPENED AND APPLIED IN SUNDRY LEARNED AND GRACIOUS
SERMONS PREACHED at ALL-HALLOWES and St MARY'S in OXFORD, BY THAT FAMOVS AND
IVDICIous Divine JOHN RAINOLDS D. of Divinity and late President of Corp. Chr.
Coll.

Published for the honor and use of that famous University, and for the
benefit of the Churches of Christ abroad in the Country, BY W. H.



AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL my Reverend and right worthy friend Mr D. AIRAY,
Provost of the Queens College in Oxford, Grace and Peace.
RIght Worshipful, whom I reverence, and love in the Lord Jesus; The gifts and
graces of this humble, and holy, religious, and judicious man of God, were so
glorious and resplendent in the eyes of all that could discern the beauty, or
prize the value of such things: that he needs not my candle to light his sun,
nor any pen or style of mine to make new Impressions of honor and love in the
hearts of them that knew him. Only I say, the Lord had powered the precious
Spicknard of his Spirit upon his head, filling his mind with spiritual
understanding in heavenly things, and the virtue and vigor thereof had lok'd
down into his heart, giving him both seeling and fruit of that he understood.
Jacobs body was never embalmed with so sweet (...), as this man's name and
memory, is seasoned with the savor of his virtues, and ever shall be honored
with variety of fresh praises. His breast was as a treasury for the repair of
the Temple, and building up of Jerusalem: It was also as an Armory for the
ruin of the Synagogue of ^athan, and rasing of Babel even to the ground. And
whereas Counsel and strength are for the war, even in fighting the Lords bat
tells, he Lord by his wisdom taught his hands to fight, and his fingers to
war: and though his flesh were not of brass, yet did the Lord so strengthen
his arm, that he was able to bend, to draw, to break even a bow of ste^le. He
was a chosen shaft of the Lords quiver; yea his little Quiver was full of
chosen shafts and keen arrows, to wound the hearts of the Kings enemies. In
brief he was a John, and as John was, that is, a burning and a shining camp,
wasting his own oil, lamp, and life, that his light might be continued for
the comfort of others, that rejoiced in his light. To which purpose he being
dead, yet speaks, his lantern being broken his light yet shines, and though
his vine be cut down, yet his wine yet smells as the wine of Lebanon I
cannot deny, but having some mo numents of his learned and painef^ll (...),
along time lying by me, I have sometimes lighted my candle at his torch, stored
my self of his treasure, refreshed my soul with his sweet wine, rcioiced to
hear his dead lett^r speak, in the power of his own spirit, and voice unto
me But after long waiting, if by any other means, rather then mine own, they
might be published for a more common good, and finding by diligent inquiry no
hope, no help te^ding he evnto: I could no longer offer such hard measure to
such, as hunger and thirst after good things, as to eat my morsels alone but to
bring forth my provision, of another man's cost indeed, yet not without some
labor an^ ca^e of mine own, to prepare the table, and s^ things in some order
before the^. Hereunto I was the rather induced, and drawn by his own both
opinion and practice, and that concerning one of these sermons upon this
Pro^het Obadaiah, holding it a withholding of goods from the owner thereof, if,
having any thing of special use, we keep it back from them that need it,
such Needers being indeed, and in his account the true owners of it. When the 4
leapers had found in the camp of the Aramites, meat and drink to refresh
them, gold and silver to enrich them, and raiment to cloth them, they took
what sufficed for present necessity, and hid the rest as provision against
further extremity: yet remembering at length other men's penu^y in their plenty,
and other men's necessities in their superfluities, we do not well, say they,
this day is a day of good tidings, and we hold our peace, if we tarry till day
light some mischief will come upon us, now therefore come let us go and tell
the kings household, so reckoning that Needers were owners of that which
themselves did possess. Me thought when I considered this story, it was
marvai^ous pregnant for my purpose. I have been refreshed, and well satisfied
my self with these Lectures, as with spiritual provision and repast, and a
long time I have hid them and kept the^ from public view. Certainly I do not
well, this is a day of good tidings, this a message of glad tidings of the
gospel, by a messenger, whose very feet were beautiful in the house of God,
and yet I hold my peace; if I stay any longer, I may rather fear some cross
then find any comfort in such stay. What then? I will forbear no longer, but
now at length resolve to make others partners in my gain, and partakers of my
joy. And therefore Right Worsh. my worthy and much respected friend, I am bold
eve^ first of all to present these glad tidings unto you as a bunch of grapes
fallen from that vine, whose very shadow was a shelter and sweet refreshing
unto many, which grew sometimes in that soil, and brought forth his sweet fruit
in due season, where now you are the chief husbandman. It will do you good, I
know, to commune once again with your nearest and dearest friend. Read him,
observe him, you shall acknowledge his spirit and speech, his gracious wisdom,
his marvailous learning, his rare and exquisite gift of interpretation, his
entire and sound judgment for observation, his faithfulness and
conscionablenesse in serious, discreet, and sound explication. Now for my
self, Right Worcester ^ever acknowledge such a debt of duty and love, into which you
many and great ^avours have drawn me, a that, unless thankful
acknowledgement may be taken in part of payment, shall yet run upon the skore
st^ll My hope is though ^runne in debt of this nature, yet shall not come in
any great danger, seeing your favorable acceptance of this, or a^y other, the
poorest pledge of my love, may forthwi^h seal mean acquittance, and prevent
a^l f^ther greevance in this kind. And so reioicing in your welfare, and
praising God for your faithful, wise, provident, and religious government in
that College, whereof being once a member, must ever be mindful, as a ch^ld
of h^s Nurse, or son of his Mother, I commend you to the provident
protection, and gracious direction of God Almighty. Bunbury in Ch^shire, July
19. 1613.

Your VVorsh^ps ever assured in all Christi^n affection VV. HIND.

THE PROPHECY OF OBADIAH.
OBADIAH 1. 1 The vision of OBADIAH. Thus says the Lord God against Edom; we
have heard a rumor from the Lord and an Ambassador is sent among the heathen:
arise, and let us arise up against her in battle.

2 Behold, I have made thee small among the heathen: thou art utterly despised.


BEfore I come to the exposition of the Prophets words, I think it convenient
to show unto you the cause, why leaving the epistle of Peter, which I had in
hand, I have taken upon me to handle this Prophecy. Saint Peter having
testified, that the Gospel of Christ, was the truth of GOD, preached to men
for the salvation of their souls, exho^teth them, that, not withstanding the
fury and malice of the wicked, which had set themselves against the same, they
would per sist in the do^trine and truth, which they had learned, to embrace
the same fait^fully, and express the force and fruit thereof effectually in
their life and conversa tion: and that in general, to fly from evil, and
follow that which was good, and in particular toward GOD, and man, especially
Subjects to honor their kings; servants to obey their Masters; wives,
husbands; children, parents. In all which, that their endeavors might not be
hindered by enemies, he exhorts them to patience and constancy: And finally
beseeches the Elders and Pa stors to feed the stock of CHRIST committed to
their charge, as the principal means to bring the^ to their duty, and to
establish them in grace unto the end. Now in expounding these things I came to
the duty of subjects, wherein I declared, that the Princes received the sword
and supremacy, over all persons; and it followed that afterward I should show,
that it was also in all causes. But because, since that time it pleased GOD to
call me to prove it else where, and to commit the same to writing, it seems
not so necessary to handle that point in this place. As for the other points
concerning the duties of servants, wives, Parents, for that there are very few
such come hither, least I should preach to them that were absent, I thought
that part might conveniently be omitted. Wherefore the last point remained
which was concerning the enemies of the Church, whom for that the LORD will
most certainly destroy, we must have the greater patience to ^ndure and
continue in the stedfastnes of our profession. For which cause also he
exhorts the Pastors diligently to feed and tend upon their slocks. Which
matter being right necessary for us to know, and for that I hoped this doctrine
would pierce the better into our hearts, if we had the same handled out of some
continued place: I chose this Prophecy of OBADIAH, where this thing is handled
orderly and jointly; namely in the 16 first verses the destruction of the
enemies of the church and in the five last the salvation thereof by the
ministry of the Pastors: whom in the last verse he calls Saviors, for that
GOD by their Ministry works the salvation of his people. And this also have
I the rather chosen, because I may use Peter as an Interpreter of the Proph^t,
whereby comparing them together, the one may give light to the other; that so
being built on the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets we may grow up into
that building, whereof Jesus Christ is the chief corner stone.

The Title, The vision of OBADIAH.

Whence we gather the commodity and excellency hereof by the Matter, and
Author.

1 The matter is termed by the name of vision which is a doctrine Revealed
from GOD, so called because GOD Revealed them so evidently, and delivered them
for such certainety, as though they had presently seen before their eyes the
things which they foretold. And the Lord, not only by visible sights, as he
did to Ezechiel, Daniel, etc: at sometimes, but also very often by his word
without visible signs, is said to have delivered these visions, for so is he
said to have spoken to Abra ham in vision. I am thy great reward. The words
which Esaias saw, etc: and of this sort is this vision. That is, a doctrine
Revealed from GOD, no^ by sight, but by word only.

2 The Author is supposed of some to be that O BADIAH who was governor of King
Achabs house who hid the Prophets of the Lord. But by the circumstances,
especially by that in the 11. verse, it seems 1. King 18. 3.
not to be he, seeing mention is made of the taking of Jerusalem, which was 800
years after Achab. But whether it were the same, or another of that name,
whether he before in the spirit saw, or afterward spoke by experience: It
suffices us, that he was the Minister of the Lord, and servant as his name
imports, and that these prophecies came not by the will of man, but holy men
of God spoke, as they were moved by the 2. Pet. 2.
HOLY GHOST. And for our parts, though w^ know not the earthen vessel, wherein
this treasure was enclosed, yet let us b^ing faithful and humble hearts to the
receiving and embracing of the same, for he was but the messenger, the message
was the Lords.

Edom, otherwise called Esau, conceived a deadly hate against Jacob, because he
had got from him, first the prerogative of the birthright, and then the
blessings: which rancor and hatred descended unto the children and seed also of
Esau, so that when the Israelites their brethren would have only passed
through their land, they would not show them such mercy, but gainstood them:
and when the king of Babylon had taken Jerusalem, and spoiled it, they set the
work forward by what means they could, calling on them, as it is in the Psa.
Ra^e it, raze it, even to the foundations. Wherefore the Ps. 137 7.
Lord comforting his people, with promise to execute his judgment on such as
had persecuted them, names Edom as the chief amongst them. Now where he
says, I have made thee small among the heathen, He speaks of a thing to
come, as though it were already past, to signify the undoubted certainetie
thereof, and so it is expounded in the 10. verse, Shame shall cover thee. Now,
because the means he would use, is war raised against them by nations
confederating together, the Prophet opens it, as though it were in doing; GOD
having revealed it to his servant: for here is an Ambassador sent from one
nation to another, to stir them up against Edom, and mention is here made of
a full and perfect destruction.

Here note three things. 1. Witnesses, O^ADIAH and the Prophets; we have heard,
etc. 2. Means, Heathen raising one another to war. 3 Event, An utter
destruction of land and country.


One point, which we are to mark for our instruction, is the ground, which
the Prophet lays for our faith, whereon the Church of God must rest, which is
this. Thus says the Lord. Which doctrine is first necessary for such, as are
teachers in the Church, that the words, which they must teach, must be words
of the Lord, that as Peter commands, who so speaks, may 1. Pet 4. 11.
speak as the words of GOD And the^ is it needful for the hearers, that they
beware how they receive any thing for the ground of faith, but this word:
Nothing for assurance of building but this rock. He is like to a wise man Luke
6. 48.
that built his house on a rock, who hears the words of Christ, and keeps
them, and one is our master e ven he And for the teachers, go and teach those
things which I have spoken. This is Christ his lesson both to Mat. 28. 20.
hearer, and teacher, and his promise we see is tied only to this word. This is
the ground whereon we must Heb. 12. 28.
build the house that must not be shaken, and this is the food of life, whereby
the children of God must be fed. What ever ground of Fathers decrees,
traditions, cou^ cells, or ought else, (...) it is but ^and, which will not hold
our building; only hereto we must stick, this must be our only Rock and stay.

In the first book of the kings, mention is made of Chap. 13. 1. Kin. 13. 1. 2.
a man of God, who was sent to preach against the Idolatry at Bethel. He came
thither, and did the message, V. 2. 3. 4
crying out against the altar, according unto the word of the Lord. The king
first threatened him, and after allured him to come and dine with him, and
receive a reward. 7.
But the man of GOD answered the king that though he would give him half^ his
house he would not; for that he had Received word of the Lord against that. 8.
When he was departed from the king, there meets him an old Prophet, he
wills him to come home and eat 11.
bread with him, he denies, telling him, what word he had received of the
Lord. The old Prophet replyeth, 15. 16.
that he was a Prophet also, and that an angel had spoken to him, by the word
of the Lord, and bade him bring him 1^. 18.
again. The Prophet yields and leaves the word, which he heard the Lord
speak, to believe an old prophet. But for this cause, because he obeyed not
that commandment which he heard of the Lord, he received this answer that his
body should not come into the 1, King. 13 21 22.
sepulcher of his Fathers. And when he was departed a Lion met him, and slew
him. This is a good lesson for us, V. 24.
that when we have once learned the will of GOD, we go not out of our way, we
leave not this word though Prophets, ancient Prophets, yea such as tell you
Angels from heaven have taught them, yet I say Gal. 1. 8.
that we leave not the word of the Lord to go with them. Now many tell you of
these things, Fathers, ancient Fathers, apparitions of Saints, Angels. Would to
God, there were not many deceived by them: but we see that this was a prophet
of the Lord, ancient in years, godly in religion, for he came not up to
worship at Bethel, faithful, for he believed the prophecy sent by God, and had
a care to be buried by the Prophet; yet when he said that an Angel had spoken
to him, he lied, whereby we see that prophets, old etc: may deceive; for each
man is a liar. So that we have none assurance, but of them in whom the holy
Ghost spoke, and that were guided by him, and they are alone to be our
foundation. Wherefore who^soever the Lord sends to Bethel to preach his truth
against sin, and heresy, Ephesians 2 20.
let him not rely on any Prophet, but on that word, which he has received of
the Lord: least, not that Lyo^ which stood still by the carkas, but that Lion
which goes 1. Pet. 58.
Roaring about, seeking whom he may pray upon, meet the^ and rent them in
pieces, when there will be none to deliver them. But you that are appointed
messengers to foretell, or rather to tell of Reformation already made, Hos 514.
(...) 5^ 22. M^l. 27. 1 Cor 39. 2 (...) (...) 1. Co^ 4. 1. (...) (...) 2. 3.
and 47.
husbandmen to sow the seed in the Lords ground, Ambassadors to do the Lords
messages, Stewards to minister food to his household, captain^s to fight the
Lords battles; Remember that the word of GOD, is the only seed, which you
must sow, milk which you must Mat 13 24 19 1 Pet 22 Luke (...) (...) Heb. 4 12.
give meat which you must divide, and sword where with you must fight. Which I
speak not, as though it were not lawful to use the benefit of that, which is
taug^t by Fathers or Philosophers; for I know, that the Apostle is said to have
sanctified those sayings of the Poets in the Acts, Corinthians, Titus: but for
that, he only Act 17 28. 2^. 1. Cor. 15 33 (...). 112.
alleges the Prophets to them that believed the Prophets; and these proofs
they used not as necessa rye proofs, but probable arguments against the^, that
gave credence thereunto. Even as though in this matter we should allege against
the Papists, not one of their Poets but their chief Prophet and captain,
Aquinas teaching, that the canonical Scriptures are only of necessity to
prove, etc. and again, that he who goes 1 Part Quaest. 1. (...). 8 and 32
(...) (...).
about with other arguments to prove the truth of Christian Religion, makes it
ridiculous. And yet is the ground of their divinity in the points, wherein
they dissent from us; This says Augustine, Chrysostom, Damascene, this says
Aristotle etc. But seldo^e come they with, this says the Lord. Wherefore by
t^eir own mout seeing they bring not rat^ones congrue^tes, they make Christian
faith ridiculous. And for us, what ^aue we to do to fill our pulpits with
man's words, as though they were the ground of our faith. Loath we (...) 10.
(...) 78 ^4 (...). (...) 11. 45.
now the heav^nly ^anna, and ^esire we to return to the (...) of Egypt?
Remember we not, that the flesh which the (...) (...) fall among the Murmurers
tents came out at their nostri^s? Remember I pray you, that if we may allege
them, it is that the word of GOD by them may be enlightened, but in no case
shadowed, for we are Ministers appointed to publish his word, and not the
fanctes of me^. There is a promise to the preaching of his word, and a blessing
to the hearers thereof. This have we a commandment to teach. Then this ought
to be as fire in our bowels, to inflame us to teach, and in others, with
reverence to hear and attend to it, and unless we know this, we have not
learned the very principles of Religion. But let us, that are brought up in his
Church, be content to be fed with this food of Angels.

The event is; That he should be made small: the fulfilling whereof, is
mentioned by Malachy. I have made Ch 1. 3. and 4.
his mountains wast, and his heritage a wilderness for dragons. For, though
after Malachy, Idumeans dwelt there, yet since is that of the same Prophet
fufilled: They shall build, but I will destroy. Now when we see things so long
before told of, in their due time fulfilled, this must be a ground, and stand
for our weak faith concerning things to come, as the last and eternal
judgment: that, as we have seen the particular judgments fulfilled on Edom,
Jerusalem, etc. we assure our selves, that what has passed from the mouth of
the Lord, Numb. 23. 19
shall most certainly come to pass Genesis 41. 32.

Now as the Apostle writes, the things which were written before, were written
for our learning, etc. For as Romans 15 4.
he says in another place, the examples of the punishment of the Israelites,
are for our use, on whom the ends 1. Cor. 10. 11. 6. 8.
of the world are come, that we lust not as some of them lusted, neither
commit fornication, neither Idolatry, as some 7.
of them. Even so these things will serve us for example: Rom 9 6. 10.
for those are Israelites, that are of the faith of Israel, and the Edomites
are all the enemies of the Church. Wherefore let us assure our selves, that as
certainly as GOD threatened destruction to Edom, so surely will he power it on
all our enemies. The Papists are the Idumeans, elder brethren. as they say;
though they disdain to be called our brethren, yet are they our brethren, as
Edom was the Israelites. And they have dealt with us, even as the Idumeans
dealt with the Israelites. When that Obad 10.
we would have entered into the land of promise, they have withstood us with all
their might, and having, as they say, the keys of knowledge would neither
enter them. selves, nor suffer others that would. Again, when the Luke 11, 52.
Church was afflicted by the king of Babylon, they were at hand to set the
work forward, and to cry, raze it, raze it, even to the foundations. Now let
us remember the Ps. 137 7.
words of the Apostle, that God can recompense, to those 2. The 1. 6.
that afflict us, sufficient recompense; and if we see it some way
recompensed, and some measure of his judgments fulfilled upon them, let us
bless his name, who revengeth the blood of his servants, and assure our selves
Rev. 16. 6.
that he will not cease from this work of his hands, but, as it is said in Amos,
that his people should possess the Amos, 9. 12.
Remnant of Edom, as Peter also speaks in the Acts, so no doubt are there
many among these children of Edom, that shall inherit with the Lords people.
But they also must be destroyed: or rather the errors must be destroyed, that
they may be raised, their heresies put to flight, that they may be recalled,
and, as the Lord has promised to consume Antichrist, so shall these heresies 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.
be destroyed by the breath of his mouth. But be not a f^aid though heresies
abound, and though Jordan overflow 1. Cor. 11 19
in the midst of harvest; for at his time Jordan Rev 6 10. 11.
shall retire, and keep himself within his bounds, and in good time the Lord
will destroy these Idumeans.

Concerning the witnesses, they are the Prophets, who received it from the
Lord. Wherefore he says, we have heard, not naming himself alone, but others.
With this we are to compare a place of Jeremy speaking Chap 49 14.
of the same matter, saying, I have heard. This Jeremy spoke before the
destruction of Jerusalem, OBADIAH after, both agreeing not only in the same
matter, but even in the very words. Which consent confirming the message, is
well worthy the noting. I need not here to stand on that point to show unto
you the consent of the Prophets, and Apostles together, using the very same
words; as of Amos and Iocl, Micha and Isaiah, Am 1. 2. Joel. 3. 16.
Judas and Peter, etc: But I heartily wish, that we would all learn to speak
one thing, that there may be in us, Mich 4 1. (...). 2 2.
as the Prophet speaks, one heart, and one wa^e. At least that the Prophets
would remember, that, by these ex Iud Ep. 2 P^ 2. Phil. 2 2.
amples of the Prophets, and messengers of the Lord, they might say, we have
heard a message from the Lord. For the time is come, that we had need to cast
our selves in a ringe and cleave together, that we may be the stronger against
our enemies.

As touching the means, it was battle raised of the heathen by mutual consent,
sending amb^s from one to another to stir them thereto. So you see that to
overthrow Edom a battle is necessary, and ambassadors must be sent: for when a
strong man possesses the house. there is need of a stronger to cast him out.
Christ Jesus is our captain general, and prince of the army, and all
f^thfull men are his soldiers. The Prophet speaking of our battle, which we
are to fight under Ps 110 3.
our captain, says, thy people shall be ready and willing in the day of
battle, all the servants of God, shall be in a readiness, most willingly to sight
the Lords battles. But alas! where is this readiness? where is this
willingness, which we are to show, having to fight daily against (not outward)
but inward enemies? who has put on that complete harness, which the Apostle
ministers unto Ephesians. 6 11. 12
him, therewith to strine against spiritual wickedness even in high places?

The ambassadors, who are to raise the soldiers to battle are the servants
and ministers of the Lord. Now 2 Cor 5. 20. Romans 10. 15.
how can they preach, unless they be sent? They therefore are al sent, that
are his ambassadors. The Apostle testifies, that there are ambassadors for
Christ, as though GOD did beseech us through them, they pray 2. Cor. 5. 2^.
us in Christ's steed to be reconciled to GOD. This was indeed an embassage of
peace with him, but consequently of battle with his enemies. For the same
covenant has he made with us, that he made with Abraham, Genesis 12 (...). (...).
Pet 5. 8. 9. Rev. 12.
namely, that all his Friends should be ours, and all his enemies, ours.
Wherefore we must be at war with Satan, and all his Angels. Here, let them
who are called to this function, remember to do his message, and to raise up
his people against his and their enemies. These ambassadors were sent to the
heathen, some to this nation and congregation, some to that, having particular
people allotted, on whom they should call: others there were sent in general,
to every nation, as Mat. 28. 19.
were the Apostles: and they, as they most faithfully in their own persons
exercised this function, so have they exhorted us to execute the same charge,
committed to us, with the same diligence; and hereto belongs that exhortation
of Peter unto the Elders for the feeding and instructing of Gods slocke.

But how far are we from this care? And how 1. Pet. 5. 2.
many either preach not, neither feed not at all, or feed Ion. 1, 2, 3.
not such, to whom they are sent. Jonah was sent by the Lord to preach at
Niniveh, but he prepared himself to go to Tarsus; the ship wherein Jonah
sailed was trou bled, and he knew it was because of him. Wherefore V. 4.
he bade them to cast him into the sea. Tarsus was a V. 12.
famous University in Cil^cia as Strabo writes, and for some respects
preferred before Athens. Jonah would Strab. Geog lib. 14.
not go to Niniveh, but would go to Tarsus. Ye see what I would say, or
rather, what I would not say. Are there not many that have been sent to
Niniveh, but would go to Tarsus? The ship of our common wealth has been
troubled and tossed with rebellions and conspiracies: I may say truly, that a
great cause there of has been, for that Jonah sent to Niniveh, would needs go
to Tarsus. But would to God there had been in them that zeal of Jonah, to have
been touched in conscience with the remorse of their sin, and confessed the
same, and have desired to have been cast in to the sea. Yea happy were they,
if they were cast into Mat 18. 6. Hos. 4 6.
the bottom of the sea never to rise up again, rather then that one of those
little ones, of whom thousands are perished through them, should have
miscarried. Wherefore I beseech you in the name of Christ, and by that duty and
love, which you owe him, if there be any care in you, any fear of his name,
that you would go to Niniveh whither you are sent; and though Tarsus be a
famous University, yet seeing GOD has sent you thither, that you would arise
and go to Niniveh.

As for us that remain in Jury, let us arise against her to battle: against
Satan and his angels of darkness, against the power of darkness, those
principalities and powers, and spiritual wickedness, against our own Ephesians. 6.
11.
lusts and concupiscenses, against the old man and law of our members; for all
these are enemies to GOD and enemies to us, and against all these must we rise
up to battle: As also against al errors and heresies which fight (...) Pet 2. 1.
against the truth. Against these let us arise, and let us rise up against them
to battle. For it is not now a time for us to say with Solomon's sluggard, a
little slumber, a little solding of the hands together, least poverty come upon
Prove 6. 9. 10.
us, is one that travaileth by the way, and necessity as an armed man. There is
great necessity in it, for the Idumeans Prove. 24. 33.
are even within us, we have no need to fold our hands together, but rather
to rise up with that good (...), who arises whiles it is night, and gives the
portion to her household, and the ordinary to her maids. Prove. 31. ^5.


In the book of Genesis we read, that Abraham hard, that his brother was taken
by his enemies: whereupon he brought forth of them, that were borne, and
brought Genesis 14. 12. 13 14.
up in his house, 318 and pursued them, and that he and his servants divided
themselves by night and smote them, and brought again his brother Lot. Our
brother Lot, nay many of our brethren are taken and carried away, but they are
not yet so far gone, but that, if we make have, they may be recovered. And if
ever it behoved Abraham to arm his household, it is now time. Ye that are in
the place of Abraham, arm the^, that are brought up in your houses, to the
bringing back of our brethren. Arm them and your selves with that spirit of
Abraham, with that brotherly love and care over others. I cannot say to every
one of you as is said to him in the Poet, Nate Ded potes hoc sub casu ducere
somnos? Virg. Aev. 4. v. 560.



But I say to each of you, Nate Deo potes hoc sub casu du cere somnos? And so
much the rather for that the danger was but near him, but it is within us.
Wherefore let us use the sword of Gods word, against these enemies. And cursed
be the man, that withdraws his sword Ier. 48. 10.
from blood. I mean not, to flay the person bodily, but I speak of the
spiritual sword, and of the spiritual slaughter, to kill their errors, to slay
our wicked and ungodly Romans 7 24. Colos 3. 5.
lusts, and mortify the body of sin, which we bear about with us. Which the
Lord grant that each of us may do.

VERSE 3. 4. 3 The pride of thine heart has deceived thee, thou that dwell
in the cleftes of the rocks, whose habitation is high; that says in his heart,
who shall bring me to the ground?

4 Though thou exalt thy self as the Eagle, and make thy nest among the
stars, thence will I bring thee down, says the Lord.


THE Prophet, having showed in the former verses, that GOD would bring to pass
the destruction of Edom, by nations stirred up against them, sending messengers
from one to another, to rise up against her in battle; does in this place
refute a reason, with the which they were prepared to come against this
Judgment of GOD. For whereas the land of Edom was mount Seir, a country full
of Rocks, their cities were strong, situated on hills, or amongst hills, seated
upon rocks and by nature mightily fortified, for which cause they imagined,
that it was impossible to conquer them; this conceit of theirs the Prophet
does here open and reprove, saying, the pride of thy heart etc. Wherefore in few
words he says thus much, GOD will destroy thee, notwit^standing thy great
strength; which he has confirmed by the infallible word of GOD. Hererevnto
they opposed the fond and vain imagination of man: for they said, who shall
bring me down to the ground? Because I dwell in the Clefts of the rocks, and
am strong on the high mountains. This co^ceipt is said to proceed from pride
of heart; thereby being advertised, that notwithstanding their vain conceit
of defensed places, as though by reason of them it were impossible they should
be subdued, yet they should find it false, as issuing not from the truth, but
from the pride of heart. The truth also hereof, that GOD would assuredly bring
them down, is amplified by comparing their defenses to the neast of an Eagle,
Aristot. histor. animal. lib. 9. cap. 32.
which is wont to be builded aloft in the top of high and craggie mountains, as
Aristotle also writes. And when he says, that though their neast were made
among the stars, by the hyperbole he signifies, that nothing should hinder,
but he will subdue them; The Lord telling Edom, that, though he make his neast
never so high, yet he will fetch him down, and therefore will also destroy
him, though he dwell in the Cleftes of the Rocks.

And although these things were proph^cied against Edom. yet were they
delivered for instruction to Israel Wherefore it seems, that he turns the
person; for having s^id before in the second person, I have made thee small;
the pride of thy heart; he immediately turns to the third person, saying,
whose habitation is high, that says in his heart, etc. This thing then, as it
is spoken to the terror of the Idumeans, so it is for the consolation of
Israel. Israel is the Church of GOD, that is the house of GOD, whose house are
we, if we hold fast unto the end, the confidence, and the rejoicing of the
He^ 3. (...).
hope. These things then are written for our learning, and comfort, that we
should be neither puffed up with a vain opinion of any gifts in us whatsoever:
neither yet discouraged with any fear, though the Idumeans dwell in the
Cleftes of the rocks, and say in the pride of their heart, who shall bring us
down to the ground? For though they exalt themselves, as the Eagle, and make
their neast among the stars, yet thence will the Lord bring them down. Pride
goes before destruction, and a high mind before a fall. Well may the wicked for
a while Prove. 16. 18.
flourish as a green bay tree, and draw forth their sword against the godly,
but their sword shall enter into their own bowels, and they shall be rased
out, that men shall Ps. 37. 35 35.
say, where is he? or with the Prophet, This is Pharaoh. Ezekiel 31. 18.

The Iebusites, that held the fort of Zion, so trusted in 2. Sam. 5. 6,
the strength thereof, that the blind, and the lame said, David shall not come
hither. So sure thought they them selves, that, though there were none to
defend it but blind and lame, yet were they safe enough: yet behold GOD brought
them down, and that which before was the strongest against David, became the
strongest for him.

The king of Babylon, who said he would ascend up, and set his seat by the
st^rres, received this word from Isai. 14. 1^.
the Lord; How art thou fallen thou Luc^fer, son of the morning? Which place
many unskillfully apply to the fall of the Prince of darkness, but that name is
in no place of Scripture given him, but is here attributed to the king of
Babylon, who shone as the morning star in beauty and glory. So that those,
which before marvailed at his power, did after wonder at his f^ll.

Tyrus shone, as a Cherub in the garden of Eden, but Ezec. 28. 14. 18
when he had defiled his sanctification by the multitude of his iniquities, it
was threatened him by Ezechiel, that he should be cast to the ground, that a
fire from the midst of him should devour him, and that he should be brought
to ashes in the sight of all that beheld him.

It seemed impossible to the Jews, when our Savior told them thereof, that the
glory of Jerusalem should Ioh. 2. 20. Luke 19. 43.
be brought down; for which cause it was laid against Stephen as an especial
matter, that he should say that CHRIST would destroy that place: yet was not
that generation passed, before it was made an heap of Acts. 6. 14.
stones, the temple rased, and not one stone left standing on another.

And what shall I speak of the latter Babylon, which in like sort persecuted
the faithful Christians, as the other did the faithful Jews? How did she lift
up her self, and say, who shall bring me down? Who was worshipped as a
goddess; and the city called Vrbs aterna, as appears by writers, grounding
themselves with all on that oracle of the Poet, Imperium sine fine dedi. Virg
Aen. 1. 2. 283.

Was it not taken, burnt, and laid wast by the Goths and ^ 10. and lib. 14.
(...)? By which examples of the Iebusites, the kings of Babylon, ^d Tyrus, the
cities of Jerusalem, and Rome, we see this, which is spoken by the Prophet of
the Idumeans, to be verisied in all them, that follow the pride of the Idumeans.

And to come nearer home, to the state of the^, that represent the heart of the
Idumeans, and desire to raze Jerusalem even to the ground and foundation: I
mean to the state of the Papacy, in which is revived the Image of the former
beast, but much more lively resembling, Apocal. 13. 15
not only the cruelty, but the pride also of Edom, for neither the Iebusites,
nor kings of Babylon, or Tyrus, nor Jews come so near, as they, being
partakers with us of the same Sacrament, baptized eve^ as we, no otherwise then
as the Idumeans were circum^ised as well as the Israelites. But as they
(notwithstanding the sign of circumcision,) were chief enemies unto Syon:
even so the state of the Papacy (notwithstanding the sacrament of baptism) are
chief enemies to the truth of the gospel of Christ, which proceeded out of
Syon.

For these also have their dwelling in the clefts of the rocks, persuading
themselves, that that is the rock, on which the Church of GOD is built; making
their brags by reason of their power and league with so mighty Potentats, that
they cannot be moved: lifting up their nests as an Eagle, as the Emperor, whose
ensign is the Eagle, the sp^ Eagle for that he was Emperor of Constantinople
and Rome, but spoiled of both, for that the Pope has deprived him of one, even
as the Turk has done of the other. He has lift up his nest to the stars, and
not said in his heart, but proclaimed by written books, and shameless libels
cast abroad among us, that by reason of his flourishing estate and great power
he can not be brought low. Wherein they have showed greater arrogance, then
ever the Idumeans did, in that prophecy, Imperium sine fine dedi. Lib. 3. de
(...) (...) cap. 10.



Aquinas to prove the stability of the papacy alleges the Prophecy of
Daniel. 2. chapter, where having spoken of the four kingdoms, and coming to
the last, which should destroy the other, and endure for ever: he applies it
to Christ's kingdom, but so, that it belongs to the Papacy, adding, if they
feed the flock. Now for that they hold, that it cannot fail in doctrine, they
conclude, that the estate of the popedom must endure for ever, according to
the words of that prophecy. I stand not to show how true the former part is,
that Rome should destroy the other kingdoms: but on that, that he says it
shall be eternal. Which blasphemy is as great, as that which he uttered in the
former chapter, applying to the Pope that, which is spoken of our Savi our, of
his fullness we have all received. But though hereby they may say, as great
B^bylon, I sit as a Queen, and Rev. 18 7 and 21
shall see no sorrows, yet the mighty Angel took a stone like a millstone and
cast it into the sea, and said, with such violence shall the great city Babylon
be cast, and shall be found no more.

But the maintainers of them say, that this cannot be by reason of the
flourishing estate of the Papacy in Rome, which has so mighty friends, and
has been of so long continuance. But let them remember (that Nineveh had
been a people of many generations) that the Edomites were of greater standing.
For it is scarce 500. years passed, since the usurped authority over kings and
princes, and the whole church, began, but not 800. since the Bishop of Rome set
himself against the Emperor, not 1000. since he first claimed authority
over the Bishops of Constantinople: which is a less time then Edom flourished;
for we read, that there reigned 8. kings in Edom, before there was a king over
the children of Israel, that is, before the government of Moses. Genesis 36. 31.
32 etc.
So then they flourished til the days of this Prophet even no less then 1200.
years, neither were they the^ straight extinguished, for they lived to see the
ruin of the second temple, as we find in Josephus. Wherefore let us assure
ourselves, that though they say, who shall De be^lo Iud l^b. 7. c. 22. al. 30.
bring us down? yet in due time this shall be verified to them also for so
shall it be to al, that have said in the pride of their heart etc.

And that, which has been said of the state of the Papacy, extends also to
the doctrine. For that in as great arrogancy of spirit, they magnify their
works, making their nests among the stars, and claiming everlasting glory,
as a reward of their deeds. For so the Remish Upon the 1 C. (...). 3.
notes say, that eternal joy is a merit; and least we should not know by those
general terms, how basely they think of GODS mercy, how prowdly of their
own works, they expound themselves, and say, that it is as a stipend
answering in weight and time to the work. The^ Ibidem.
which, what could be said more grossly, or profane? that the works of man
should answer to eternal joy equally in time and weight! as though you
should say, that ten thousand pounds were equal in time and weight to his
works that had labored one hour. But I come far below in this comparison,
for there is some proportion, between an hours work, and the greatest sum
of money, for they be finite; but between the everlasting, endless, and
infinite joy of heaven, and man's works, that is between finite, and infinite,
there is no proportion. But how could it be, that any men should thus speak,
if the spirit of Antichrist, had not thus puffed them up, to utter such
blasphemte in the pride of their hearts? But what shall I say? when the same
men in their notes on the 8. Romans grant, that if we look to the time, the joy
of heaven is a great deal more, and here forsooth flee they to the grace of
GOD: but, they must consider, that grace serves them not, that they may claim
it by desert: for whatsoever good the servants of GOD do, it is by grace; Luke
17. 10.
yet is it said, when they have done all, that is commanded, they have done
but their duty, and that which they owed to the Lord. So that seeing we do, but
our duty, there is not owing to us so much as thanks, and does then GOD owe us
the reward of eternal joy? The man, that pays no more then that he owes,
does his creditour owe him anything for the payment of it; unless he count him
indebted to him, as he in the poet said? Pla^.
for that the world is so naught, that a man thinks himself pleasured, that
receives in debts. But seeing we can never pay all, for who can say my heart
is clean, I Prove. 20 9.
have not sinned? And if we have not fulfilled the whole law, done all that it
commands, w^ have not paid our debt; how then can we come hereby to merit
it, or buy it as it were, which yet though we had most absolutely kept, should
be ours but by promise.

But how far from this presumption was Ioh? Job. 9 3.
when he said, that if GOD would enter into judgment with him, he were not
able to answer, no not one for a thou sand. How far was David? when he said,
that in his sight no man living was justified. How far was Paul? Ps 143. 2.
when he said, that none were righteous; therefore con Rom 3. 9. and 24.
cluding, that all, both Jew, and Gentile, are justified freely by grace. For
to him that works the wages is counted for debt, not of favor. But to
Abraham was faith imputed for righteousness. And where the Apostle says slatly,
that there is no man just, and that no flesh is justified; they say that the
Virgin Mary and Apostles must needs be exempted out of this number: but if it
be not so, that it is verified of all then is the Apostles argun e^t to no
purpose, neither can the conclusion, which he l^boureth to prove be so
inferred which is that by the works of the law, no flesh can be justified. ^ut
let us be assured, that whatsoever they say, though they speak never so
proudly, yet the time shall come, when this doctrine, by the breath of the
Lord, shall be brought to the ground.

Neither do I here enter into the depth of their pride, as concerning
supererogation. For herein have they set their neasts, not among, but above the
stars. When they say, that men may not only merit for themselves, but the
abundance thereof is sufficient for other men also. But is not this to build up
to Babel, and is Genesis 11 4.
not this pride, like that of Pharaoh, who hoped by his own strength to pass
over there, where others had Exodus 14. 23.
passed over by grace and favor? Is it not with Iezebel 2. King. 9 30.
to set a color and paint on our foul faces? But the builders of Babel were
confounded, Pharaoh drowned, and Iezebel after she had painted her face was
cast down from the window, and had her brains dashed out. These men, that
think it a beggarly thing to receive the kingdom of heaven of alms, shall
never have it of debt, for those that say in the pride of their heart, etc.

Lastly, here we have to mark, that the Lord is said to be the author of this
vengeance, and yet it was said before, that this should be brought to pass by
nations stirred up against Edom, and sending messengers from one to another, to
provoke them to battle against the Idumeans: whereas in the 2 and 3 verses he
says, I will. where we are taught, that although it pleased GOD to use men, as
instruments, to bring his purposes to effect, yet would he have all the glory
to be proper, and peculiar to himself. For though the instrument work, yet,
since the whole efficacy comes from him, therefore the whole glory ought to
be given to him, and not to the instrument.

In the 63 of Isaiah, the Prophet demands, who it is that comes from Edom,
and why his garments be Esai 63. 1.
read? Whereby, answering to the question, he shows that it is Christ: and
that his garments are red: because he alone had t^n the winepresse, and of all
the nations, there was not one with him; which is meant of treading the
Edomites and enemies of his Church, and bringing them to confusion. Yet he
says, he trod the press alone, not that he uses not messengers, as is
mentioned V. 3.
in this Prophet, or other means, as seems best to him; but for that the
force and efficacy alone proceeds from him. So that for this cause, he is
said alone to work. For Paul indeed planteth, and Apollo waters, but neither
he that planteth is any thing, neither 1. Cor. 3 6. (...).
he that waters is any thing, but God that gives the increase, is he that
works all in all things.

In the 5 of Luke the Apostles labored all night, Luke 5 5. 6.
and caught nothing; but when at Christ his commandment, they had let fall
their nets for a draught, the net was filled with fi^h. The King prepares an
host against the day of battle, but the victory is from the LORD. No Pro^ 21.
31.
king is saved by the multitude of an host. A horse is count^ a vain thing to
help a man, etc. Wherefore that was a profane thing of Nebuchadnezzar, who
when he had taken the Jews, as fishes in a net, he sacrificed Hab. 1. 15. 16.
to his net, and offered incense unto his yarne: profane was that opinion of
the Gentiles, attributing their prosperity to fortune. And that of Varro, who
attributed the success of husbandry to water. Whereas they might have learned,
by that ceremony, which the Romans used in their triumph, that the success of
things was to be attributed to GOD. For the Laurel crowns, which they
carried, when they ascended into the Capitol and sacrificed to Jupiter, they
laid down in the lap ^.
of Jupiter, as (...) recorded. But let us remember that the 24. Elders (...)
w^e their crowns at the feet of the (...)

Now, as all gl^ry is due unto GOD, so on the other side, we ^ust remember that
he calls Ministers, to do his work, who must not be (...) in the thing,
whereunto he appoints them. He would lead the I^raelites through the sea, but
he would have M^ses to l^ft up his rod. A^ine, he would divide Jordan, but he
would ^od. 14. 16. (...). 3. 3. 16. (...). (...).
have the Priests ^eet to be dipped in Jordan, and to carry the Arc. He meant
to cast down the walls of Jericho, yet would he have them to blow the trumpets,
and compass the city. He would build again the Temple, when the people
returned with Zerubbabel, but the Angel showed Zachary a golden candle stick,
a bowl upon it, Zach. 4 1. 2 6. etc.
seven lamps in it, seven pipes to the lamps, and two (...) trees over it:
and that Angel asked him, what those were; who answering, he knew not, the
Angel tells him, that he should say to (...); neither by an armi^, nor by
strength, but by m^ (...) says the Lord. Yet follows it, that (...) should
lay the foundation thereof, and the people should cry, grace, ^race. Wherefore
the Ministry of (...) is necessary, that he strike the sea with his (...)
necessary that the Priests feel^ touch the water of I^rdan; necessary that
they blow the trumpets. But if these things be considered in themselves,
wit^out the (...) of GOD, they are of no more power, to bring this to pass,
then the rod was to make a s^a stand like a w^ll, the feet of men, to make a
river run back, the sound of a trumpet, to cast down a strong wall.

Wherefore whosoever they be, whom God will use, they must be obedient to his
appointment, as Moses, the Priests, and Zerubbabel were: And I would to GOD,
that they, who have the place of Moses, etc: would vouchsafe to humble
themselves, and stir up themselves to do their duty: To strike the waters
with their rod. This rod is the publishing of the word, which the Prophet says
he will send out the rod of his power, that he may rule even among his enemies.
The Priests must Psalm. 110. 2.
carry the arc. In the arc were the tables of the law: and 1 Kings 8 9. Heb 9
4.
in the month of the Ministers ought the law of the Lord to be. The Priests
feet were dipped in the waters of Jordan: the Ministers feet must enter first
the water, and beautiful are the feet of them, that bring good tidings. The
Priests blew with the Trumpets; the Minister must set the Trumpet to his mouth,
and sound out a loud both the law and the gospel; the law to bring down the
high walls, and the gospel to raise and build up.

Is it any marvel, if the Idumeans be so courageous and promise themselves a
day, wherein they may cry out, raze it, raze it even to the foundations: if
means be not used to beat back their pride? If the messengers, which should
stir up the people to war against the^ be sile^t! if Moses will not strike
with his rod! if the priests strain courtesy, who shall first step into the
water! if the trumpet be not in their mouths! I am loath to name them, in
whom this fault lies, but sure too common it is amongst us; and that partly
through such as have spoiled the churches of the livings, whereby faithful and
painful messengers should be mainetained. As by Impropriations the first
begotten child of the Pope and Satan; and by the theft of such as some where
have charge, and go not to it; by the negligence of others, who are somewhere,
and will not instruct the people; and by the ignorance of many, that are dumb
dogs, and cannot bark. So that by reason hereof the people sit in darkness,
and those Merchants, whose wares are the souls of men, enter on the slock to
spoil them of that comfort, which they should have in Jerusalem. But seeing
our words cannot prevail in this matter, let us befeech the Lord to be
gracious and favorable to Jerusalem, and that it would please him to move the
heart of our Sovereign, that she would provide, that an army of able men
might be provided and mainetained, that by them the Idumeans may be
discomfited, a way opened for the children of GOD to pass without danger, the
walls may be brought down, and the children inherit the kingdom of promise.

VERSE 5. 6. (...) If thieves had come unto thee, if robbers by night, (how ^rt
thou (...)?) (...) they not b^ stolen that which were enough for them? If
grap^gatherers had come unto thee, would they not have left some grapes?

6 How are the things of Esau sought out, his secret things are searched?


THE ruin and destruction of the Idumaeans is set forth by the spirit of God
in this prophecy, for the instruction and comfort of the Israelites: to
assure them, that God will execute justice, and judgment on their enemies, in
the day of his visitation, when he will save them. In the former verses (as I
have showed already) the ^phet declared the sentence of the Lord against the
(...), that they should be destroyed; (...). (...) 2
the witnesses thereof, himself, and other Prophets, who (...) it (...); the
means, that he would work by, the warr^urs (...) against them to battail^,
(...). (...) 4.
the weakness of their helps and holds to the contrary, which, though they
exalted as the Eagle does his nest among the (...) th^e should they be brought
down, says the Lord. Now, in these that follow to be handled presently, the
greatness and grievousnesse of their destruction is opened: to wit, that they
shall be spoiled and wasted, eve^ unto the uttermost, insomuch that their
things shall be sought out, yea their hidden things and secret places shall be
searched. And this is amplified by 2. dissimilitudes: the one of thieves, the
other of grape gatherers. Thieves, who rob by night, do steal for need
commonly, and so they take no more then may suffice their need: neither stay
they lightly to search all things and places, for fear least they be taken.
Grapegatherers among the Jews, were accustomed to leave some grapes behind
them, according to the law: Thou shall not gather the grapes of thy vineyard
Lev. 19. 10.
clean, nor the grapes that fall down; thou shall leave them for the poor
and for the stranger. But the warriers sent by God against Edom, shall not
deal with him as thieves, or as grapegatherers. They shall not be contented
with that which is enough, as robbers by night are. They shall not leave
somewhat of his things behind them, as men do grapes in the vineyard. They
shall seize on al, on more then enough; they shall seek out the things of
Esau, that is, Edom, they shall seek the^ out, and by seeking finding them;
yea they shall search and Genesis 25. 30.
rifle the corners, the dens, the secret places, wherein the Idumaeans would
hide themselves and theirs. By which means there should be such havoc made
of them, that the Prophet utters it with admiration, and, as if he saw it
done; saying first to Edom, How art thou destroyed! And then of him and his,
How are the things of Esau sought out, his secret things are searched! Thus is
foreshewed, that the desolation of Edom, or Esau, that is, of Esau's offspring,
the people of the Idumaeans, shall be great and grievous, as being wrought by
warriors, who shall spare naught, either of fear, as thieves do; or of
compassion, as grapegatherers. If thieves had come unto thee, if robbers by
night, (how art thou destroyed?) would they not have stolen that, which were
enough for them? If grapegatherers had come unto thee, would they not have left
some grapes? How are the things of Esau sought out, his secret things are
searched?

Saint Peter advertising the Jews and the Proselytes, that they should receive
the gift of the holy Ghost, if they Act. 2. 38.
repented, and turned to Christ: for to you (says he) is the promise made, and
to your children, and to all them that shall be long hereafter, even to as many
as the Lord our God shall call: the same in like sort may I say unto you
(fathers and brethren) touching this promise of bringing your enemies to utter
ruin and destruction. For, God said to Genesis 12. 3.
Abraham, I will bless them, that bless thee, and I will curse them, that
curse thee: meaning, that he would make a perfect league with him, and be at
peace with his friends, at war with his enemies. But the league and covenant,
which God made with Abraham, he made with Abraham and his seed. And the seed
of Abraham Genesis 17. 7. Gal. 3. 7.
are all faithful Christians. To us all therefore is the promise made, that
God will bless our friends, and will curse our enemies. Moreover, his
particular curse and plague ensuing it, upon the Idumeans, is a pattern of
that, which shall fall on such as tread in their steps. For the punishment of
the Jews, who lusted after evil 1. Cor. 10. 6.
things, is threatened to the Gentiles, if they lust as the Jews did: and if
ye be partakers of the sins of Babylon, Rev. 18 4.
ye shall receive of her plagues. Now, among the eni mies of the faithful
Christians, others do more resemble the Philistines, or Ammonites, or
Moabites, or Amalekites, or Cananites, or Assyrians: there are none liker to
the Idumeans, then are the Papists, as it has been showed. The Idameans borne
according to the flesh of the seed of Abraham: the Papists by offspring come of
Christian parents. The Idumeans circumcised as children of the covenant: the
Papists baptized in the same that we be. The Idumeans served not the God of
their fathers according to the law: neither do the Pa pists in spirit and
truth after the Gospel. The Idumeans persecuted the Israelites to death, and
vexed the^ with all cruelty: the Papists have butchered the godly with
massacres, and made themselves drunken with the blood of Saints. Wherefore the
spirit of the Lord assures us, that the Papists shall be consumed in his
wrath, when it shall burn suddenly: and as they have followed the facts of the
Idumeans, so they shall feel their punishments. I speak not herein of all,
that are Papists: as neither did the Prophet of all Idumeans. For the remnant
of Edom shall inherit with Israel, and Papists with us: as many as shall seek
him, whose name is called Amos, 9. 12. Act. 15 17, 8.
upon them. Which God grant they may do by faith in his mercy, that Papists
may live, and papistrie may die. But I speak of all who stubbornely persist in
the Popish heresies. In whom shall be fulfilled the Apostles prophecy touching
the man of sin: the Lord shall consume them with the breath of his mouth. And
so, that 2 Thessalonians 2. 8.
which is written of Edom by the Prophet, may be said by us to the Romish
Antichrist: If thieves had come unto thee, if robbers by night (how art thou
destroyed?) would they not have stolen that which were enough for them? If
Grapegatherers had come unto thee, would they not have left some grapes? How
are the things of Antichrist sought out, his secret things are searched?

Howbeit, as S. Paul, though he were assured, that al who sailed with him,
should escape alive, yet said, that Act. 27 24. V. 31.
they could not escape, except the mariners abode in the ship: so, though it
be certain that Antichrist and his members shall be consumed, yet cannot that
be, except they be set upon by warriers For God does work by means
ordinarily. And this is the means, that he has ordained for the atchieuing of
that conquest, as we saw before in the Ambassadors message, Arise, and let us
rise up against her to battle. The warriors, whose Obad. 1.
service the Lord does use thereto, are all his servants in a sort; his people
most willing in the day of his army: but specially Preachers and Ministers of
his word. For his Psalm. 110. 3.
word is the rod of his mouth, the breath, the sword, whereby he does destroy
his enemies: and Ministers are soldiers, Esa. 11 4. 2 Thessalonians 2 8. Rev 19. 15.
Ag^e 1. 1.
by whose hand he weeldeth it. For which cause their function is compared to
warfare, in that it is written by S. Paul, Who goes to warfare any time at his
1. Cor 9. 7. 2. Tim. 2. 4.
own cost? And, No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of
this life, that he may please him, who has chosen him to be a soldier. And
God says of the^ by the Prophet Esaias: I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O
Jerusalem, Esaias 62. 6.
which all the day, and all the night continually shall not cease. The watchmen
and warriors therefore of the Lord, the keepers of his Church, the conquerours
of his enemies, the spoylers of the Idumaeans, the consumers of Antichrist, and
Antichristian impes, are Ministers of his word, Pastors, and Teachers, who to
please him, by whom they are chosen soldiers, should not be entangled with the
affairs of this life; to discharge their duty, should be sent forth and kept
on public cost; to preserve their flock, should watch day and night
continually over it. The less marvel is it, if in our English Churches
Antichrist and Edom be not consumed yet; nay, if they attempt to consume us; if
by Popish policies, by superstitious tokens, by blasphemous writings by
traitorous libels and conspiracies, they undermine our state; if they take
crafty counsel against the people Ps. 83 3. V. 12.
of God, and say, Let us possess his habitatio^s by inheritance, if they look
for a day, when they may cry once again, raze it, raze it to the foundation
thereof; in a word, if they range through the land like woolues, and suck the
blood Psalm. 137. 7.
of sheep and lambs: since the shepherds fail, the watchm^n are asleep, the
warriors do not fight, through want, somewhere of will, somewhere of
ability. Of will, where they entangle themselves with such affairs as draw
them from their warfare, and are not content to be watchmen in Jerusalem, but
they must have a watchmanship in Caesarea too; or, if they have one stock
alone, yet do not feed it, but take their ease in Sion. Of ability, where
there is not sufficient provisio^ for training of men to make them good
soldiers; nor mainetenance sufficient to find them being trained: that,
setting all other cares of life apart, they may attend their charge wholly. To
them here amongst us, who, through want of will are backward in this service
of the Lord God of Hoasts, so much has been spoken, so often, so earnestly,
both out of this and other places: that I am half ashamed again to solicit
the^ with Precept upon precept, Precept upon Precept. Notwithstanding, as I
have read, that when we had gotten Esaias. 28. 1^.
Calice from the Frenchmen, there was one appointed to put them in remembrance
from time to time of Calice, in all their solemn meetings for State
consultations, till they had regained it: so I am persuaded, that till the
amendment of this fault be woone, it is most convenient for the Lords
remembrancers in all our Church Assemblies to wish it to be thought of.

Wherefore, to put you in mind even now also of our Spiritual Cal^e, I
beseech you fathers and brethren (whom it touches) now at length to regard the
state of the Souls, the precious Souls of men committed to your charge: whose
blood, if they perish for lack of that attendance, which you ought to give
them, will cry for sharper vengeance, then did the blood of Abel. Or, if my
persuasion cannot prevail with you: yet Gen 4 10.
let his prevail, whose prayer has prevailed for you; who died himself, that
you might live; who said, and all things were created; whose word the winds
and seas obey. Consider the function, that he has called you to; the duty laid
upon you, the reward, if you do it; the punishment, if you do it not. Who is
(says he) a faithful Luke 12. 24.
and wise Steward, whom his master makes ruler over his household, to give them
their portion of meat in due season' Blessed is that servant, whom his master,
when he comes, shall find so doing: verily, I say unto you, he shall make him
ruler over all his goods. But if that servant say in his heart, my master does
defer his coming, and begin to smite the servants and maidens, and to eat
and drink, and to be drunken: that servants master will come in a day, when
he looks not for him, and in an hour, that he is not ware of, and will cut
him in pieces, and give him his portion with the unbelievers. Our Savior the
son of God, the king of kings, and Lord of Lords, having entertained men and
women of al degrees to be his household servants, is careful to feed the^ with
convenient food, that they may serve him in their vocation fruitfully. This
food is the doctrine of his holy word, which must be divided in diverse sorts
unto his servants, according to their diverse states: some to be sed with
milk, some with strong meat; some humbled with the law, some raised with the
gospel; each to have his portion of meat most wholesome for him. Nor only must
they have it, but have it too in due season, as often as they need it: which is
so often, that the holy Ghost (to show the continual necessity thereof) does
will it to be given them in season and out of season. For, as men's bodies
should loose 2. Tim 4 2.
their temporal life, unless, as they decay still, so they were repaired with
sustenance of meat and drink: in like sort men's souls are fainting still
also, to their hazard Amo^. 8. 11.
of life eternal, unless they be refreshed with the food of Gods word.
Wherefore that his servants and maidens be not furnished: the master of the
household has made you his stewards to minister meat unto the^. If you behave
your selves, as wise stewards, and faithful; wise, in discerning what portion
of meat they need each, and when; faithful in giving it to them in due
season: your master shall come, who now is absent as it were and gone into a
far country, but he shall come again and fill you with blessedness; he
shall make you rulers Luke 19. 1.
over all his goods, and honor you as highly as Pharaoh did Joseph; yea, he
shall reward you with a crown Genesis 41. 40. 1 Pet 5 4 Dau. 12. 3.
of glory, an incorruptible crown, and ye shall shine as stars for ever and
ever. But if ye think his coming to be far of, and so begin to smite the
servants and the maidens; nay, I would to God ye did smite them only so that
ye taught them too, for that were a benefit; but if ye famish them, and play
the good fellows your selves with the world, and eat and drink, and be
drunken: your master will come in a day when ye look not for him and in an
hour, that ye are not ware of, and will cut you in pieces, and give you your
portion with the unbelievers. By the Roman laws of the 12. tables, if a man
(...).
owed money unto sundry creditours, and after judgment (...) de (...) iudicata.
given, did not agree with them himself, or o there is for him: his creditours
might (after certain days respite) cut his body in pieces, and take them each
a part thereof Phavorinus the Philosopher reproved this law A Gel. Noct. (...).
l 20 c. 1
as cruel and barbarous. But Caecilius the Lawyer replied well upon him, that
so great a punishment was appointed of purpose, that they might never come unto
it. For now we see many (said he) laid up fast, and fast into fetters because
the pain of fetters is contemned by lewd persons. But I never read nor heard,
that of old time any was cut in pieces: because they could not set light by
that punishment. Metius (...), the Prince of the Albanes, having promised the
Roman king Tullus Hostilius to succor him against his enemies, did
treacherously deceive him: by whom he was therefore tied to two carts, his
hands to the one, his feet to the other, and so (the horses being driven
contrary ways) he was torn in pieces. Livie Hist. ab Vib. Cond lib. 1.
misliketh this punishment as over sharp, and says that there was small regard
of humane laws had in it. But Virgil weighing better the greatness of the
fault, Aeneid lib. 8.
allows it with grave censure, At tu dictis Albane maneres. Traitors in our
days, though they be not torn But thou O Alban Prince, thy promise should
have kept. Epist. de persequut. Angl.
with horses as Metius, yet are they rent in pieces, as Metius was, and
quartered. The Papists complain thereof to foreign nations, as of outrageous
tyranny, when they are put unto it for traitorous facts against our Prince.
But it is usual and lawful for the Pope (as Leo the tenthes practice in
Gu^ciardin does witness) to quarter me^ for treason wrought against him. Now,
Hist. Ital l. 13
this severe punishment, which has bin thought fit by mortal Judges to be
laid upon unfaithful debtors, upon treacherous persons, upon rebellious
Traitors, is the same, that Christ the immortal judge denounces unto you, if
ye be disloyal to God, your Sovereign Lord, if ye break promise with him
and his servants, if ye pay them not the debt, which ye owe them, and give
the^ their portion of meat in due season. A very grievous punishment: yet
nothing to that, which Christ imports by it. For he does import (as the words
following show) that ye shall have your portion with the unbelievers. And the
unbelievers shall have their portion 1. Rev. 21. 8.
in the lake, that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.
Of Damocles a Heathen man it is recorded, that when Dionysius the Tyrant
entertained him magnificently and Princely, although at the first he thought
himself happy, respecting the train of men, attendant on him, the plate of
gold and silver, the gorgeous cloths, the sweet perfumes, the Viands most
delicate, all furniture rich and royal: yet after, seeing a sword hanging by a
thread let down over his head, he could take no joy of his entertainment, nay
he took grief, and desired earnestly to be dismissed from it. How much less
joy should you take in your eating, your drinking, your pleasures, with which,
as wordly baits, the Prince of this world does pamper your flesh against the
day of slaughter: since there hangs over your necks an axe of vengeance, not
that may perhaps, but that will assuredly, not kill your bodies only, but both
bodies and souls, not with tem porall death, but with everlasting into hell
fire; there shall be weeping and ^nashing of teeth. O consider this, Mat. 24
51.
ye that forget God! least he tear you in pieces, and there be none that can
deliver you. The warrior, that spoileth the Idumeans, shall honor him: and he
that watches over the Israelites to save them, shall see the salvation of God.
And thus much to the^, who through want of will, search not the secret things
of Esau.

As for the defect, which this exploit suffers through want of ability,
because such as should do it, are either not trained or not maintained to it
in sufficient sort: that is so much hurt fuller to us then the former, by how
much the contagion of it spreads farther. For soldiers ought to learn and
practice feats of war, (as expert men have noted) before they V^ de re ^e
milit. lib. 1 cap. (...). Lib 2 cap. 19. Lib 3. cap 3.
deal in martial affairs with their enemies: and as they should employ
themselves to no business, but to their service only, so should they be
allowed victuals, and other necessaries, that they need not to do it.
Whereupon the Lord appointing Priests and Levites to serve him in this warfare
(as Moses terms it) and ministry, allotted them, offerings, first fruits,
and tithes of all the land Number 4 23. Numb 18 9.
to live by, with Cities to dwell in, and grounds annex Number, 35. 2.
ed thereunto: and, beside the convenience of their abode together in Jerusalem
and other Cities, that they might the better be trained from their infancy to
skill of the priestly and Leviticall duties, to teach the law of Deuteronomy 33 10. 1.
Sam 10 5. and 9. 10 (...) (...). 2 3. and 6. 1.
God, and offer incense, and Sacrifice: there were also Colleges and companies
of Prophets, wherein the youn ger learn^d under the elder (as children under
fathers) to be men of God, to praise his name, and teach his will. These orders
received by the Church of Israel should be followed by ours: though not in all
particulars; yet in the general equity. For, as they who served about the
holy things, did eat of the temple; they, who waited at the (...) Cor. 19 13.
Altar, were partakers with the Altar: so the Lord ordained too, that they who
preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. And Tim^thee, who was chosen to
serve in this warfare, as a soldier of Christ, did not only know the
Scriptures from his infancy, but also was brought up to 1. Tim 1. 18. (...).
2. Tim. 2 3. 2. Tim. 3 15. Act 16 3. 2. Tim. 3. 10.
the ministry by S. Paul, whose doctrine and behavior framed him unto it. In
which consideration our Ancestors provided Houses, Glebeland, Tithes, and
other profits, for the commodious dwelling and maintenance of Pastors: and
endowed Bishoprics, Cathedral and Collegiat Churches (as we call them) with
lands and revenewes, that learned godly Teachers being placed As appears by
the grounds thereof in S. Cyprian, Eusebius, Gregory, the Councels of To
(...), with other Councels, Fathers, and and (...) Ecclesiastical: and M. Bucer
show eth in his book entitled, De reforma^ione Colleg^ Canonici. Mat. 21. 41.
there, might instruct others by their doctrine and behavior, as S. Paul did
Timothee. For the fuller perfecting and finishing of whom to all the Lords
work, they founded Universities and Colleges therein also. But I would to God
these nurseries of Pastors and Teachers of the Church, were husbanded in such
sort to the Lords advantage, that we need not fear his sentence of the
vineyard, that he will let it out to other husbandmen. Then should not so many
raw untrained soldiers receive the Lords pay, who do him small service in the
day of battle. And yet there were less cause to complain hereof, if they,
who be trained, were procured to serve him. But the impressed money and wages due
to them, the livings (I mean) appointed for their maintenance, are so impaired
and minished: that, being not able therewith to find themselves in
souldiourlike state, they refuse the calling; or if they undertake it, they are
distracted from it, with cares how to supply their need. Whereby it comes to
pass that, the Levites flying each into his land for lack of their portions,
Neh. 13. 10.
the house of God is for saken. And to fill their rooms others are taken, who
will be hired for least: not according to the proverb, Best is best cheap;
but to the common practice, Best cheap is best. Who, though not to serve the
calves of Dan and Bethel, yet are made Priests, as those by Jeroboam, of pieces
of the people, not 1. King. 12. 31.
of the sons of Levi. Who, if they had the grace, should say, I am no Prophet,
I am a husbandman: and return to Zac. 13. 5.
the trade which their friends have taught them.

Who are not endued with necessary gifts for the Prophets duty: and therefore,
howsoever men have call led them to it, God has not called them. For, whom God
calls unto any function, the^ endueth he with gifts to perform it: as
Bezaleel, to make his tabernacle; Exodus 31. 2. Ier. 1. 9. Act 2. 4.
Jeremy, to do his message; the Apostles to preach the Gospel. So the slock
of Christ, is desolate of shepherds; and his camp of soldiers: while such
have the places, as cannot strengthen the weak, help the sick, Ezech. 34. 4.
bind up the broken; nor destroy his enemies with the two edged sword, and
defend his subjects. A great cause Heb. 4. 12.
hereof are Patrons of Benefices. For, whereas the interest of choosing the
Pastor belonging of old time to the Congregation, is now conveyed to them,
because their predecessors did benefit the Church some way, and therefore were
put in trust as Patrones of it: they, a number of them, do deal with the
matter as Polymest^r did with Polydore, that is, as evil gardians do with
their wards, and turn their patronage into pillage. The lust of their hearts
has defiled their hands with the sacrilege of Acan: to take gold and silver,
and Ios 7. 21.
Baby^onish garments, of the spoils of Jericho consecrated to God. Or, if not
with so soul sacrilege, as his was, (...) 6. 19.
because their Predecessors gave some of it perhaps: yet with the sacrilege of
Ananias and Sapphira; yea, though themselves had given it. If Act. 5. 2.
they think to cover their profane dealing with Acans conveyance by hiding the
pray, or to wash their hands with Pilates pretense, that they are giltlesse
Ios. 7. 22 Mat 27. ^4.
of it, they gave the advowsons freely to friends or servants: they deceive
themselves. For God is not mooked. And he will find them out in a day, when
they look Gal 6. 7.
not for him, and in an hour, that they are not ware of, and bring them to
shame with more dreadful punishment, then either he did ^can, or Ananias, and
Sapphira. Ios. 7. 25.
Wherefore I heartily beseech the young Gentlemen Act. 5. 5.
that be here present, and all that are or shall be Patrones hereafter, in a
religlous reverence and fear of the Lord, to keep themselves pure from this
abomination. At least, to remember the miserable end of Richard the Usurper:
who being made Protector of the King and Realm, got the realm himself, and
robbed the King of it. That, if they deem their patronage to be merely civil,
and the goods of Benefices to be as common men's, not sacred to the Lord: yet
being made Protectors thereof, and of the Pastors, they follow not his fault,
whose end they detest. Though, the very truth is, (which I wish they weigh
too,) that the Churches goods, allotted to the maintenance of Pastors and
Teachers, are not profane but sacred: and therefore the sin of them, who
purloine them, is sacrilege, not theft: wherein God is spoiled, as himself
pronounces, Will a man spoil God, that ye do spoil me? And ye say, wherein
Mal 3. 8.
do we spoil thee? in tithes and offerings. Howbeit, if church livings were
impoverished by none, but by Patrones: the case were not so evil, because it
is against the law. But they are distressed also (beside other pensions and
incombrances) by Appropriations, as the lawyers term them; or, as they are
named commonly, Impropriations. Whereof the condition is the more grievous, for
that in many parishes there is not a Vicar well and sufficiently endowed to do
Divine Service, and instruct the people, and keep hospitality: which yet the
law A^n 4. Hen^ 4. cap. 12. 2. Chr. 34. 3.
commands, if it were obeyed. Josias, in the eighth year of his reign,
began to seek the God of his father David; and in the twelfth year he began
to purge Judah and Jerusalem from the hie places, and the groves, and the graven
images, and the molten; and in the eighteenth year he sent Saphan Verse 8.
and others, to repair the house of the Lord his God. Refor mations of
disorders cannot be made all at once: chiefly, when the Church has of long
time been overgrowne with them, as then it had under Idolatry, and has with
us under Popery. King Henry the eight, a Prince of noble memory, began to set
forth the holy word of God. And his son, (another Josias, had he lived)
began to purge England from Images, and Masses, and Massing-altars, and
superstitions. I doubt not, but our gracious Queen and sovereign Lady
desires in the steps of her Father and Brother, to add this unto them, that
workmen be mainetained for repairing of the Church. But it lies not in her
Highness alone to bring it to effect: the Lords and the Commons have a stroke
in it. Wherefore, seeing now a Parliament is summoned to be held shortly: let
us desire God in hu^blenes of spirit to incline their hearts, that, although it
be with loss of some part of their own commodities, yet they will follow the
zeal of the Israelites for Exodus 35. 21.
the tabernacle of assembly. And as the religious professors of the truth have
showed, that Church Livings appropriated to others, should in conscience find
the Pastors of the Church: so God grant, that they who have the authority may
see it with a single eye, and bring it to pass with an upright hand. Martin
Bucer (in D^regno Chr. (...). 2 cap 7.
his godly requests and advises presented to King Edward) treating of skillful
Pastors to be ordained throughout the realm, says; that their mainetenaunce
ought to be required of them who receive the profits of the parishes by
appropriation, or any other way. Bishops Exposit of Agg the Pro phet, chap. 1.
Pilkinton (upon Aggaeus) complaining, that the Pope robbed parishes to feed
his Monks, wishes, that the Gospel may restore that justly, which he took
wrongfully away, and gave them yet a right name of impropriations, because
they be taken away improperly, and properly belong to the parishes. But what
should I mention Bishops and Divines (of whom there have (...). Latimer. in his
1. and 6. Se^m. preached before King E^. M Fox in the Acts and m^n. lib 4 All
the Bish^ps of England (300. years since) misliking in the monks that they
had gotten Benefices to be appropriated to them: as appear by M^. ^ (...)
(...) Do 1261
many declared the same mind,) when as Master The peram bul^ of Kent in (...).
Lambard, a gentleman and Lawyer, speaking of a Kentish Benefice converted to
an appropriation, does censure it with these words: One (amongst many) of those
monstrous birthes of covetousnes, begotten by the man of Rome in the dark
night of superstition, and yet suffered to live in this day light of the
gospel, to the great hinderance of learning, the impoverishment of the
ministry, and the infamy of our profession. Hard may this seem to such as
have the livings: and some peradventure will say of these speeches, The land
cannot bear them. But it is harder to suffer the land to stand in those Amos.
7. 10.
terms, in which God says to Judah: Ye are cursed with Mal. 3. 9.
a curse, for that ye spoil me, even the whole nation. And if heathen men.
Philaeni, Codrus, Curtius, have give^ their lives to benefit their country with
a temporal blessing, and that uncertain too: what should Christians do to
draw that blessing on it, which he, who cannot lie, does promise? Bring ye
all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and
prove me now Verse. 10.
herewith, says the Lord of hosts, if I will not open the windows of heaven
unto you, and power you out a blessing with out measure: and I will rebuke the
devourer for your sakes, that he shall not destroy the fruit of your ground,
neither shall your vine be barre^ in the field, says the Lord of hosts: and
all nations shall call you blessed, for ye shall be a pleasant land, says the
Lord of hosts. Wherefore let us (beloved) of the University, get our country
this blessing, as much as lies in us, by providing, that Pastors, where we
have appropriations, may be mainetained with their tithes, that there may be
meat in the house of God. I mean not hereby, that we should give away that
by which our schools and scholars be maintained. For God has ordained
Ecclesiastical goods to find, not only Priests and Levites, but their
offspring; eve^ them, who are brought up to be Priests and Levites, and them who
bring them up; the children of the Prophets, and the Prophets themselves. That,
if there be enough in our Appropriations for the Pastors maintenance, beside
that which we have for the nurserie of Pastors, as commonly there is: we may
with good conscience receive our own revenue. My meaning is therefore, that,
the rents reserved, we should allow the rest of the Livings to Pastors: which I
speak not so much for those, that publicly our University has, to be let by
Convocation, whereof the greater part has showed well already themselves to be
of this mind: as for those that privately belong to our Colleges, to be let by
the Heads thereof and the Fellows.

It is of an humane and honest affection, that we sometimes would pleasure
other men therewith, our friend^, suing for them. But if Job said to Sophar and
his partners, Should you speak wickedly for Gods defense? how Job. 13. 7.
much less ought we to do unrighteously for the favor of men? And may we not
look for the plague, that fell on Eli, if, as he did honor his children above
God, so we do our friends? Levi is commended by the holy (...). Sam (...) 29.
Ghost for saying of his father and of his mother, I look Deuteronomy. 33. 9.
not on him; neither does he acknowledge his brethren, nor know his children:
but they observe the word of God, and keep his covenant. All Christians are
bound herein to be Levites, regarding neither father, nor mother, son, nor
daughter, in respect of God, when his wo^d and covenant Mat. 12. 37.
comes into question. Wherefore, since this is a special point thereof, that
all the tithes be brought into the storehouse, that in his house there may be
meat: we should observe and keep it, though with the disfavour of friends
whatsoever. And as it ^ehoueth us to do it our selves: so, to wish that others
enjoy the bless^ng with us In which case, the duty that we owe to Kings Tim. 2
2.
and all (...) authority, does bind us to pray for the high court of
Parliament, that by their ordinance the Church may be repaired, and we may
lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. When, Eliasib
the Priest Neh. 13 4.
(the high Priest of the Jews) had made for his kinseman Tobias a great
chamber, where they before time didlay the meat offering, the incense, and the
vessels, and the tithes and offerings, appointed for the Levites and Priests:
as soon as Neh^mias (the Prince of the people) understood th^reof, it grieved
him sore. Therefore he cast out the h^ushold vessels of Tobias out of the
chamber: and brought thither again the vessels of the house of God, the meat
offering, and the incense. And perceiving further, that the portions of the
Levites were not given them, who therefore were fl^d each into his land: he
repro^eth the rulers, and said, why is the house of God for saken? and ass
mbling them he set them in their place again: and all the Jews brought the
tithes into the storehouse, to be divided to them. The Pope in the iniquity of
his high usurped Pr^hood over Christians, endowed his kinsmen the m^ks with
tithe^ and livings, by which aforet^ the Pastors were maint^ined. Whereof it
has ens^d, that many a Tob^ does hold them until this day. O that it might
g^ue that it might (...), our Nehemt^, the Parli^ment, that they might
dispossess Tobias thereof, and again apply them to maintain Pastors. The
Antichristian council assembled at Trent, took order for Co^c. Trid. Sess.
22. de reform. c. 11.
restoring of the goods of Benefices, and Sess 24. de reform cap. 18.
setting learned Priests in them, with Cap. 19.
a^ sanulling of advowsons, and Sess. 5. de reform cap. 1.
erecting Lectures, and maintaining Teachers, and Sess. 23 de reform cap. 18.
Seminaries of Scholars in all Cathedral Churches, to set Popery forward, and
build up the the houses of Idumean Idols. I^uk. 16 8.
The children of this world are wiser in their generation, then the children of
light: and (...). King 18. 19
Baalites more zealous for their superstition, then Israelites for the truth.
But thou can O Lord, and wilt, (unless our sins provoke thy wrath against
us) cause the light of thy countenance so to shine upon us, that the Christian
Court of our English Parliament shall be as careful to build up thy house, and
advance religion: that the vessels of thy temple, which 2. Chr. 36. 10. Dan. 5.
2. Ezra. 1. 7.
Nabuchodonosor took away, and Baltasar did drink in, be restored by Cyrus,
to whom they are befallen, that Elizabeth thy handmaid command the people to
give the 2. Chr. 31. 4.
portion of the Priests and Levites, that they may be strong in the law of the
Lord, as did thy servant Ezekias, that Pastors may be set again in their
places, and all the Tithes be brought into the storehouse to be divided to
the^; that none of them want, as Nehemias provided, and thou command by thy
Prophet. So shall they by whom this noble work is wrought, be remembered in it,
and the kindness, that they show on the house of God and Neh. 13. 14.
the offices thereof, shall not be wiped out. So shall the windows of heaven be
opened to us, and a blessing poured on us without measure, a temporal and
eternal blessing: Mal. 3. 10.
for godliness has promise of them both. So shall the devourer be rebuked for
our sakes: and the Locusts (the Jesuits 1. Tim 4 8. Re^. 9 8.
and Seminary Priests) shall not destroy our fruit, neither shallour vine (our
Christian vine) be barren. So Esaias, 5. 1.
shall we be called blessed by all nations: for we shall be a pleasant land,
a land that shall flow with the word of God, more to be desired then gold,
more sweet then honey. Finally, so shall Israel triumph over his enemies, and
the Psalm. 19. 10.
things of Esau shall be sought out, his secret things shall be searched: that
is, Christ shall reign, and Antichrist shall be confounded. Which GOD grant
for his mercy sake in Jesus Christ, through the operation of his Holy Spirit: to
whom, three persons, and one GOD, be all praise, and honor, and glory, and
power, for ever and ever,

Amen.
VERSE 7. 7 All thy confederates have driven thee to the borders: the men that
were at peace with thee have deceived thee, and prevailed against thee; they
that eat thy bread have laid a wound under thee: there is no understanding in
him.


THE Prophet hitherto set down first the certainety of the destruction of the
Idumeans, and then laid before them the grievousnes of the same: comes now
to this point, which insueth, which implies both the former: show ing that all
their confederates and friends, such as were nearest unto them should join
together utterly to destroy them. Which circumstance as it argues, that they
should certainly come to ruin, and that no hope remained, that they should be
delivered from it seeing such as they hoped, should help them from it, should
be prepared to bring them to it* so does it amplify the bitterness of it. David
co^plaineth grievously that his familiar friend, who went with him into the
house of God, whom he trusted, and Psalm. 55. 15. Psalm. 41. 10.
who did eat of his bread, that such a one (...) (...) his heel against him.
If an enemy ha^ do^ (...) that (...) shonor, he says he could have borne it.
Caesar contain^d (...). 55 13.
himself when the rest of the Senate stro^ke him wi^h their p^nkniues: but
when Br^us ^ote him he ^d. ^t tu quo^ (...) fil^! Even so is the (...) of this
(...) (...) X^ ^x di (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
ction herein declared, that it should be wrough^ (...) their friends and
confederates. All thy confederat^s (...). The same thing also in effect is
repeated and (...) (...) verse ways to lay it deeper in their hearts, and to
put them the better in mind thereof. For they that were in league with them,
are called their confederates The me^ that were at pea^e with them, they that
eat their bread; and their ruin signified, when it is said, have driven thee
to the borders, have deceived thee, ^revailed against thee, laid a wound under
thee. All which is set out after the Prophets manner, when he says, have
drive^* have deceived, etc. when he means that they should, for that it
should so surely come to pass, as though it were done already. The means is
said to be by fraud and gu^le, when it is said, they shall deceive thee, etc:
wherev^to is also added, to make up the mischief, that this treacherous
dealing should be so crafty, that they should not epsy, much less prevent
it: When it is said, there is no understanding in him. Whereof he also speaks
more at large in the next verse saying, shall not I^ that day says the Lord,
even ^estroy the wise men cut of Edom?

The point, which I would here commend to your considerations is, that the
Lord will (...) (...) (...) of Edom by his friends, which is meant in these
wor^* Thy confederates have driven thee. The Judgment of the Lord executed by
his law, upon enticers to Idolatry, disobedient to magistrates, unthankful
children, etc: is in sundry places of Deutronomy, knit up with this sentence,
Deuteronomy 4. 10. and 13. 11. and 17. 13
So shall all Israel hear and fear. Whereby is declared the end of
punishments appointed by GOD, and executed in justice upon offenders, namely
that the rest might hear, and fear, and learn not to offend in like manner,
lest they incur the like vengeance. The point then that we have to learn is,
to understand by the ex ample of the Justice of GOD executed upon the Idumeans,
that all their confederates should drive them to the borders, etc: that if any
have such hatred against the servants of GOD, as Edom had against Israel, then
that this Judgment is denounced against them. For the Lord has determined,
that who oppresses his friends, must be deceived and plagued by their friends,
and such as they reposed greatest confidence in. The Madianites, as it is in
the history of the Judges oppressed Israel very sore, so that for fear of
them, the Israelites Chap 6.
made them dens in the mou^tains and caves: when Israel had sown, they came up
and destroyed the fruit of the earth, and left no food for Israel. Against the^
the Lord sent Gedeon; and to overthrow them he used not the hands of the
Israelites: but after that Gedeon and the co^ pany, that were with them had
blown their trumpets and broken their pitchers the Lord set every man's sword
against his neighbor. Senacherib the king of Ashur came Chap 7. 2 King. 19.
against Jerusalem and Ezechiah the king thereof with a mighty army, thinking
to make thrall to him all the people, and Rabsakeh with most arrogant and
presumptuous words, defied the Lord, who (he said) could not deliver them. But
the Lord first confounded his army and by an Angel destroyed them, so that he
was feign, with shame to flee home, where he armed his two sons, Adramelech
and Shareser against him, who, when he worshipped his God in the temple, slew
him with the sword.

But the cruelty of Nero against the Christians far exceeded that of the
Madianites, and Senacherib: in so much that he sowed them in the Sulp. Severus
(...). 2 and Tacit. lib. 15. cap. 10.
skins of wild beasts, and so cast them to dogs to be devoured: tying them
also to stakes to Sul^it, and Tacit (...) supra, and (...) ^nal. Sa^. 1. ver.
155.
burn in the night for lights. But the Lord raised against him his council,
his friends, captains, subjects, etc: so that he found not that favor, which
Senacherib did, for he could neither have Su^. (...) Neron. cap. 47 Sulpit. lib
2. Eu^op. lib. 8.
friend nor foe to do so much as kill him.

Yea if men would not conspire against these enemies of GODS people, rather
then they should lack friends to destroy them, the worms out of their own
bowels should devour them, as befell to Act 12 23.
Herod and Mi^h. Gly^s in fi^e part. 2. annal.
Antiochus.

Wherefore, whosoever have followed the cruelty of the Edon^tes against the
Israel of GOD, let them remember for their instruction, that they shall be parta
kers of the same punishment with the Edomites. And let us consider, that if the
wicked draw his bow to shoot at the poor and needy, though they whet the
sword to slay the innocent, yet their sword shall enter into their own heart,
and their bow shall be broken, which the Prophet threatens not without
exception, namely if the Psalm 7 12. 13. 14. 15, 16.
wicked turn not, then the Lord will when his sword, etc. And whereas he
trav^led to bring forth a lie, his mischief shall light on his own head and
the wrong which he imagined against others, shall fall down on his own ^lpe.

But the godly are at league with the stones of the field, and the beasts of
the earth: but such as are not at Job 5 2^. (...) 2 (...). (...) (...). ^3. 2
(...) (...). 25 Rev 22 11.
peace with the Lord, a stone shall fall on their head, as on Abimelechs, or
Lions shall fall on the^, as on the Samaritans. Wherefore such as are godly,
let them yet be more godly, and let the wicked remember, that all their
confederates shall drive them to the borders, etc.

Yet must we take heed, that we imagine not, that all such, against whom their
confederates deal, are in nature and condition like the Idumeans. For as other
chastisements are common to the godly, with the wicked, though the effect fall
not out alike in them both: so also in this, to be deceived by friends, and
principally by those we be at peace with, do often happen unto them. For we
read of David, that his familiar friend had laid a snare for him, and such as
were near unto him as A^tophel, and his own son Absolon. 2 Samuel cap. 15
(...) 1^.


That which befell to David, happened also to Jesus Christ, of whom David was a
figure, as is plainly declared in ^e (...) of John, where as the very words of
(...) are applied to Christ, to teach us the dealing of (...) (...) (...) 41. 9.
(...). He that eats bread with (...), has lift up the heel against me. Now
we know, that it is the chiefest blessing Romans 8 ^7.
of Christians, to be made like to the image of Christ. No marvel then, if
they have been so dealt withal, and that such as have eat their bread, have
lift up their heel against them.

The example of the noble Admiral of France traitorously Vid. part. 4 Comment.
de sta^u Relig and Reip. in Gall^, sub Carole 9 A^ 1572.
murdered in Paris, now 12. years since, in this case is so pregnant, that we
need not go further. With whom there were so many thousands murdered, by
such as professed themselves their friends. Whereby we may perceive, that
this is no certain sign of Idumeans, but that it is apparent, that even in
the Church of God, there is falsehood in fellowship, and in trust treason.

The difference therefore in this point betwixt the wicked, and the godly, is 1
in the cause, 2 in the comfort.

1 In respect of the cause; the wicked and ungodly are worthily so served,
making their confederacy in world ly respects: but the godly unworthily; so
that David justly protests, If this wickedness be in my hand, etc. yea, if
I have not delivered him, that without any cause was mine enemy, etc.

2 In respect of comfort; for that the wicked, when they be so entreated of
their friends, have no manner of succor, or ease, which they can betake
themselves unto: whereas the godly in this case fly to the Lord, whom they
find to be a sure rock, and certain defense, when the help of man fails,
and is set against them, as David being persecuted by Absolo^, cries out how
are my adversaries increased? how many rise up a Psalm. 3.
against me but thou Lord art a buckler for me, my glory, and the lifter up of
my head. Wherefore trusting in the assured confidence, and invinciblenes of the
Almighty, he fears not, though ten thousand had set themselves against him.
This therefore brings a terror to the wicked, when they be forsaken of their
friends, and have nothing to trust in, but their wickedness: but a notable
comfort is it to the godly, when continuing in their goodness, they have the
Lord always to be at their side. So the wicked dare look for no help of the
Lord, but the godly are full of the consolation of the holy spirit. So that the
wicked may say, if our friends be against us, who shall be with us? but the
godly may say, Romans 8. 31.
If God be with us, wh^ shall be against us?

Which consideration of the state of the godly, that such as profess
themselves their friends, have set themselves against them, may teach us, how
to answer that objection of the Papists, who because many have revoulted from
us to them, yea of our Ministers, would persuade the ignorant that our doctrine
is naught. A worthy matter, no doubt! if some for 30 pieces of silver to be
paid in their Seminaries, have gone thither that they may betray Christ Jesus.
And what say they herein against us, which the Jews might not have said
against our Savior, that one of his Disciples, yea of his chief Disciples was
set so against him, that he had betrayed him. Another reason they have like
unto this, though not in all circumstances, yet in the maine ground; which iss
the dissension amongst us, and such as are of other Churches beyond the sea,
concerning certain ceremonies, wherein we differ from them. But seeing that
the Lord knows how to turn it to the profiting of his Church, and when it
pleases him, can reveal these things to us: why should any make an argument
hereof, against the truth of our doctrine? seeing we find, that God has turned
the like to his greater glory, as that dissension of Paul and Barnabas, and
Paul and Peter.

But as I showed by comparison of other points, that Act 15. 39, Gal. 2 11.
the Papists do most lively represent the Idumeans: so also falls it out,
that they should be betrayed by their own confederates and friends, as were
the Idumeans: as by Albertus Pigh^s in justification by faith only: by Arias
Controv. 2 Q^ (...) (...) P^ ^9 qu^ (...) reprehen^ R^ardus T^ tom 2 d^ ficat
page 32.
Mo^tanus in the sufficiency of the Scriptures; by And. Masius in Relics, by
Alphonsus de Castro, Espencaeus, Caretanus, etc: and the schooleme^ in the rest
of the points of superstition. And Luther, Calvin, Bucer, Occolampadius,
Zanchius, Beza, etc: the most worthy warriors in the Lords battles, we know
were sometimes of their friends, some being Friars, other Priests and Canons,
and they who were least nursed up in Popery. So truly is the saying verified of
them also; Thy confederates have driven thee to the borders, etc. Whose godly
example I wish may move them, if there be any here of their co^federates, to
deceive them, and help to drive them to their borders by the example of Saul,
who being made a Paul, revolted from the Pharisees, and destroyed that which
before he had builded.

Josephus reports, that Cyrus, who caused the Jews L^ 11. cap. 1. A^ Iudai.
I^ 45. 1.
to build the temple, and gave the^ back the vessels thereof, was moved to do
it, by reading the prophecy of Isaiah, who 200. years before had named him,
who should do it. I beseech GOD, that these men also reading this prophecy,
that the friends of the Idumeans shall destroy them, may be encouraged to do
it; that this may prevail so much with them, as that did with Cyrus. For
though they be your confederates, friends, brethren, parents, children, yet
must you not be afraid to wound them spiritually, for the wounds of a friend
are sweet. We must destroy not their persons but their errors, and to be cruel
herein is piety. And such cruelty as this is commanded by GOD; Cursed be he,
that withholdeth his hand from this blood. Ier. 48. 10.


When Aaron had entised the Israelites to Idolatry, and provoked them to the
offending of GOD, by worshipping the golden calfe: Moses proclaims, who so
pertains to the Lord, let him come to me, and all the Exodus 32. 26.
sons of Levi gathered themselves -- So they went from gate to gate through
the host and slew every man his brother, every man his companion, and every man
his neigh bour: and so they consecrated their hands unto the Lord and drew a
blessing upon them. But alas! how far are we from doing this same in the
warfare of Christ, against our friends, kinsfolks, and neighbors! Would to
GOD many of us were not carried away with that foolish pity of Achab. When
Benhadad had come up 1 King 20 31, 32. etc.
to fight against Israel, but was discomfited, and was feign to flee into a
secret chamber to save his life: It was told him, that the kings of Israel were
merciful kings. Wherefore he sent to him certain men, who said, thy servant
Benhadad says, I pray thee let me live. To whom Achab said, is he yet alive?
he is my brother. Yea, said they thy brother Benhadad, etc: and so was he
content to make a covenant with him, and Achab confederated himself with
Benhadad. But there was sent a man of God to Achab, who told him, for as much
as he had let a man escape out of his hands, whom the Lord would have slain,
his life, should be for his, and his people for his. There be this day too
many Achabs, who can ask, whether their brother Benhadad be alive, and
willingly spare him, hoping, that he will one day remember them with the like
courtesy; so long as he is alive he is their brother Benhadad, yea their
brother Benhadad: but because they let them escape, whom the Lord would have
to be slain, their life shall be in steed of theirs, and their people insteede
of theirs. Yet O Lord spare thy people, and power out thy wrath on them, that
know thee not, and on such as have not called upon thy name: yea O Lord power
thy wrath upon. Benhadad and let him not escape thine hand, etc.

VERSE 8. 9. 8 Shall not I in that day, says the Lord, destroy the wise men,
from out of Edom and understanding from the mount of Esau.

9 And thy strong men O Teman shall be affraide, so that the valiant of the mount
of Esau shall be cut of by slaughter.


THere be two things, whereby we purchase to our selves safety against our
enemies, wisdom, and strength: wisdom in foretelling, and preventing,
strength in repressing, and withstanding the attempts devised and practiced
against us. The Lord having showed, that he would utterly destroy and bring to
confusion the Idumeans, for that the matter seemed not very likely, and the
message not easy to be credited, seeing they were furnished with wisdom and
strength, wherewith they were able to prevent and subdue any mischief; ^e
shows how these things shall nothing let his purpose, for as much as he would
deprive them of their wise men in the 8. verse, and spoil them of their strong
in the 9. verse Shall not I, etc: wisdom and policy bear the greatest sway
in State matters; for arms abroad are of little force, unless there be sage
counsel at home: and seeing things must by advise be determined, before they
can well and duly be practiced, therefore the Prophet declaring the course,
which the Lord will take in bringing his purpose about, begins at the
wisdom saying. Shall not I, etc: and understanding from the mount of Esau,
that is mount Seir, on which Esau dwelt; and by Seir is meant the land of
Idumeans, the part for the whole. Out of this land, says he, he would destroy
the wisemen and understanding, and bring to naught the strength and power, and
that partly by taking from them wisdom and understanding, as Jeremy Cap. 49. 7.
shows, partly by cutting of, by slaughter, the vali ant of the mount of
Esau. The time also is specified, when it is said, in that day, a day though
uncertain to them, to whom it pertained not to know the times and seasons
Act. 1. 7.
which GOD had hid in his own power, yet most sure and certain to him, who in
his secret counsel had appointed it. Which thing is also uttered by
Interrogation, to make it more effectual by sinking deep into their minds.
And so first having removed their wisemen, their strongmen follow after, of
whom he says, and thy strong men: and to assure them of it, with piercing
their hearts by conceiving it, as though it were laid before their eyes, he
turns his speech to them, when he says thy strong men, O Teman, which was a
part of that cou^ trey, inhabited by a nation which came of a Nephew of Esau of
that name.

Some translations, have every one of the mount of (...). Gene^.
Esau, but since the Hebrew word (...), signifies a valiant man, differing from
(...), as vir does from homo, and (...) from (...); I take it here to be so
understood, that as in the former verse he showed he would destroy the wisemen
of Edom, and understanding from the mount of Esau, so in this verse, he says,
that the strong men of Teman should be afraid, and the valiant of the mount of
Esau should be cut of by slaughter.

Thus are the faithful assured that the Idumeans should be destroyed,
notwithstanding all their policy and power, because the Lord had appointed a
day, wherein he would dispoile them of their wise and strong men. Which point
ought of us diligently to be regarded, not only in respect of the means,
whereby but also of the time, when this work was appointed to be wrought.

To begin with the day, we be hereby taught, that as all the works of GOD
are justice and wisdom, so also that he appoints wisely and justly the times
to ex ecute judgment in. For he punishes not by and by such as offend, but
is long suffering and gentle toward Romans 2. 4.
sinners, giving time of repentance, that they may know the truth and come to
amendment, out of the snare of the Devil. For which purpose he calls them,
by benefits, (...). Tim. 2. 25. 26.
exhortations, threatenings, punishments, and exam ples, as the Prophet sets
out by the ^militude of a husbandman; Does the plowman plow all the day, and
sow? does he break the clods of his ground when he has made s^. 28. 24. etc.
it plain, does he not then sow? Fitches shall not be threshed. For having
threatened, that GOD would destroy the^, he answers to such scorners, as
despised the long suffering of GOD, showing that since the husbandman has
diverse times for several works, so that he does not all at once, but first
ploweth, then sows, reapeth, thresheth, and that fitly according to the
diversity of the grain and corn, which is by the wisdom which GOD has
given him: in like sort or rather much more, will the Lord, who is perfect
wisdom, appoint his time of calling, exhorting, threatening, etc. and when
none of these will serve, of mowing and threshing also.

Great was the wickedness of the old world, when as the sons of God seeing
the daughters of men; that they Genesis 6 2.
were fair, and following their lust, not their duty, took them wives of all
that they liked. GOD was displeased with their sins, and gave them a long
time of repentance, even an hundred and twenty years. At which time they not
repenting, he brought the flood of waters over them. When the Lord had promised
to Abraham the land of Canaan, he told him, that first his seed should be a
soiourner in a land that was not theirs even 400. years, for that the sin of
the Amorites Genesis 15. 16.
was not as then full, showing plainly, that he had given them a day of
repentance, which being come, if they brought not forth worthy fruit thereof,
they should be mowed down. The wickedness of Achab received such judgment as
it deserved, yet even for that shadow of repentance, the plague was cast of to
his posterity. In the days of Josiah, Israel was not plagued 1. King. 2. 27.
and 29. 2. King. 22. 19.
etc. because his heart melted at the hearing of the law of God. The rest of
the threatings of Isaiah, and Jeremiah, are of like manner against the Tyrians,
Babylonians, Assyrians, Moabites, etc. appointing to some certain express
years, as three, other lxx. some short, but not mentioned: a short time, but a
time also is threatened by John Baptist, when he said, Even now is the axe laid
to the root of the tree. Mat. 3 10.


That which we are to regard more specially is, that the times of judgment
appointed for the Amorites, Achab, Jews, etc. are not only to be respected for
themselves, but to be considered as figures of that great judgment, for which
there is a time appointed, which is called a day in Scripture for an
excellency: as the Apostle preached to the Athenians, that GOD had appointed a
day in which he will judge the world in righteousness by that man, which he
has appointed. And though Act. 17. 31.
he seem slack in coming, yet is he not, for he says, till the number be
accomplished. The Lord will come as a thief in the night, and he shall sit on
his throne of Majesty, before whom the earth and heavens shall fly away, the
earth and sea shall yield up their dead, the books shall be opened, and each
man shall receive his judgment. Which point St Peter having handled exhorts
us to consider 2. Epist. 3. 11.
what manner of persons we should then be, in holy conversation, and
godliness, who should look for, and hasten unto the coming of this day of
God. On which occasion I am also to desire you, that you would diligently
consider, if God have appointed a day for temporal and eternal punishments,
how patient each one of us ought to be in all afflictions, how wise in all
behavior. Patient, that we fre^ not our selves nor be carried away with any
evil affection, when we see God not presently execute his judgments, that
therefore we should set our hearts to evil. Wise, (...)
that we stand in the fear of GOD, and offend not as wicked persons, for whom
another day is appointed, the last and worst of all other. Wherefore we have
need of patience, etc: as we are exhorted thereunto by the Apostles: Heb 1 (...)
that we be not discomforted, though we see the wicked prosper, and live in all
iollity, lest otherwise we fall into the sin of murmuring, as did the
Israelites, being ready to fall away from the profession of GOD, because the
rod had rest upon them for a while. And having seen so great works wrought by
Gods hand in Egypt, yet at the red sea they feared, least they should have
been swallowed up of Pharaoh. But Moses bids them be still, and see the
salvation of the Lord; for Ex. 14. 13. 14.
that he knew there was a day appointed, when Pharaoh should be discomfited:
which thing is not only of the Israelites concerning Pharaoh king of Egypt,
but also to the comfort of all true Israelites, and to the revenge of all, that
are like Pharaoh. For though they shoot out their branches for a while, and
flourish, as a green bay tree, yet so so one as you shall pass by the^, they
shall be so gone, that their place shall know them no more. What greater
affliction abode the Jews, then under Antiochus, yet from the time, that the
abomination was set up, as Daniel shows, it was less then 4 years. The
Saints of God indeed are troubled with impatie^cy, and would gladly see their
desire upon the wicked that Gods name might be the more glorified in the
salvation of his Saints. which is set down in the Revelation, where the souls
under the Altar do cry, how long Lord, holy and true -- but white long robes
were given unto them, and it was said, that they should rest for a little
season, etc: let us not the^ discourage our selves with impatie^cie, let Rev.
6. 10. 11.
us not fret our selves, lest we be moved to evil, for the Saints confess
that God was holy and true, true in his promise, who will no doubt take revenge
of his enemies, holy in gra^ting repe^ta^ce to sinners. Let us call to mind the
end that fell upon Pharaoh, Antiochus, etc. and other miscreants, and let us
wait the Lords leisure, remembering, that to the Saints were given white robes
the sign of grace in this life, and of glory in the life to come.

Moreover, as we hereby do learn patience, that we sret not at the
prosperity of the wicked; so are we also to be wise, that we offend not after
the manner of the ungodly, through hope of escaping the judgment Romans 22.
of GOD, having before our eyes the day, which the Prophet here speaks of,
and much more, that whereof this is a sign and figure, remembering, that the
slower our punishment is in coming, the heavier will it be when it comes.
When Amnon had defiled himself, and his Sister Thamar following his filthy
lust, he straight was so displeased with her, that he could 2. Sam. 13. 14. 15.
not so much as abide her sight, which is the first plague that GOD lays on
such lust. There followed after another, when he was put to the sword: but the
third most heavy, and grievous was behind, which was to 29.
be cast with whoremongers into the lake that burns. How little joy had
Absolon after he began to rebel a against his Father! for within few days
the senseless creatures, practiced the like disobedience against him. 2. Sam
1^9
that he did against his Father, so that they, which were made to have served
his benefit, wrought his destruction. The rich man's soul which was set at ease
for many Luk 12. 19. 20
years, as he thought, how suddenly heard he his judgment, that in that
night it should be taken from him! The heathen and enemies of Christ promised
themselves great good by Julian, hoping that he should live to root out all
Christianity: in so much that Vid (...). l^b. 6 (...) 2. (...). (...). and
(...). (...). lib 6. ^p 44. and (...). li^ 10. cap. 35.
Libanius the Sophist meeting with a Christian Schoolmaster, asked of him in
disdain what the Carpenters son (for so in contempt they termed our
Savior) was then doing, to whom the Schoolmaster made answer that the
Carpenters son was making a coffin for his master Julian. And so it pleased
GOD, that Julian in his war against the Persian king was Hist. tr^t. lib 6
cap 47. Niceph. (...).
slain and brought to a shameful end.

Now these things are written to let us know, that not only such as offend in
lust, as Amnon, in disobedi ence, as Absolon, in coveteousnesse, as the
richman, in impiety, as Julian, shall be punished even as they were: but that
it is undoubtedly true, which Solomon says, that GOD will bring into judgment,
every work with every secret thing, be it good or evil. Wherefore let us learn
Eccl. 12.
his exhortation, to fear God and keep his commandments, which is the whole
duty of man. Which though I have sufficiently declared by examples of the
Scriptures, yet as the Apostle used the sentence of the Poet Menander, after
other sound proofs, so for the youth, that would hear what a Poet says, I
will allege the saying of the prince of Poets. When Turnus had taken the
spoil of Pallas he received this threatening; Turn^ tempus erit, magno cum
optaverit emptu^;
Intactum Pallanta, and cum spolia ista diemque Virg. Ae^d. 10.

Oderit --
which how truly it fell out, is in another place declared, when being stricken
to the heart he heard these words, -- Pallas te hoc vulnere, Pallas Aeneid.
lib. 12. in sine.

Immolat, and poenam scelerato ex sanguine sumit.


We are to deal with Pallas, (not Pallas Pallantis, but Pallas Pallados) that
is, with the wisdom of the high est, we our selves are his, both body and
soul, he has redeemed us, and made us his own. If then we make our selves
thrall to sin, and wickedness, we spoil and rob him, and then let us assure
our selves, the time will come, when we shall wish, that we had forgone these
spoils: when it shall be said, go ye cursed into hell fire.

Let us learn then to remember that day, and out of this place, that God has
appointed a time, wherein he will avenge himself of his enemies; and not only
that, but which is another point, the means by which it shall be wrought,
which is, by taking away their wise men, and bereaving them of strong men, that
being thus bereaved of such as might stand them instead, they may receive the
vengeance prepared for them. How GOD does deal with nations in these matters,
the histories show, and the Prophet Isaiah plainly, when he says, he will
take away the wise-eloquent-artificer. Meaning, Is. 3. 1, 2, 3
that howsoever they persuaded themselves, that by those means and enemies
they could not be destroi ed, being furnished in such manner against all manner
assaults, yet GOD would do it by taking away whatsoever might any way stand
them instead. It was not to be thought, that Babylon having in it such strength
and wisdom could be so taken, as it was by Cyrus: but we read, that at such
time they gave themselves to drunkenness and riot. Wherefore let us not put
our confidence in flesh and blood, persuading our selves, that because our
nation is mighty in strength of people, our prince wise, our cou^sellers
provident, our munition great, victuals sufficient, etc. that therefore we are
sure, and out of all danger; for GOD can take away our wise and strong men, and
though he leave us the men, yet he can take all wisdom and strength from
them, and whatsoever we bring home seem it never so great, yet can the Lord
blow upon it, as the Prophet speaks, and it shall fall away. Hagg. 1. 9.


Here then is good comfort for us, if we serve and love the Lord: for from
whom will the Lord take understanding, not from David, but from Absolon, not
from Israelites, but from Edomites, not from Ezechiah, but Senacherib: or if he
take understanding from Israel, David, Ezekiah, yet not from David, to destroy
him, not from Ezechiah, when he calls upon him, and if he failed the Jews, yet
the true Israelites shall be strengthened from above: though David be troubled,
yet shall he not want his wise Cushai, and strong Ioab: and although 2. Sam.
17. 8. 9.
the counsel of men fail, and strength be nothing, the Isa. 37. 36.
Lord will send an Angel to slay the Assyrians: but as for Edom let his
strength be never so great, his wisemen never so many, they shall be quite
destroyed. Though Absolon have with him Achitophel, yet GOD can make his
counsel foolish; though Senacherib his armies be strong, yet may he loose
them all, and himself also be murdered by his sons in the temple of his
Gods. And as the Scripture teaches us this of Absolon, Senacherib, Idumeans,
so must we think it to be verified against all that deal as they did. Wherein
not to call you to consider the Scribes and Pharisees dealing against our
Savior and his Apostles, I come to the Papists. Wherein J commend the
consideration hereof to such as pervse the slory of the Church, how GOD has
taken wisdom from them, and bereft them of their stout men. Even from the
time that Wickliffe in England, John Husse, and Jerome of ^rage in Boheme, made
profession of the Gospel, how things amongst them have fallen from evil to
worse, even their own complaints do sufficiently show, namely by the Councils
of Constance, and Basil, and of ^neas Sylvius, and by whole countries falling
away from them. Luther against whom they most speak all wicked speeches, how
wonderfully was he helped by the mighty hand of GOD, when as they by their
dealing set forward, that which he preached: which seeing they will reject,
when it is taught them (...). lib 1. (...) 23. (...). lib (...). ^d (...) 1520.
^t (...). (...). (...). Angl. ^27
out of Sleidan, let them learn of Guicciardine declaring, that Pope Leo the
10 was the cause of that, which was done in Germany, when his Bulls and
Indulgences were sent in such vile and beastly manner, that they were sold in
sheppes, and so that the sellers and Merchants pla^ed the money they took for
them at dice: and all the world knew, that the money was not gathered (as they
pretended) to make war against the Turks, but indeed to maintain the Pomp
and lust of the Popes Sister, who had made a Bishop her deputy for that
purpose. Wherefore he says, that the Pope went about indeed to suppress that
Luther had preached, but he used not fit medicines, and though he
excommunicated them, that followed him, yet he redressed not the fault he spoke
against. Whereby it is declared, how GOD took away wisdom (from the
Idumeans,) from Pope Leo: since which time what success has followed i^
England, Scotland, Poland, and other countries, the world sees, and we
perceive how GOD in part has fulfilled, that which he here threatens, that
their wisemen should fail, and their strong men perish. The full
accomplishme^t we yet see not, the time being not yet come for GOD has his
degrees. But howsoever the Jesuits make show of wisdom and knowledge, yet GOD
can take both wisdom and knowledge, from them: as we see he has done, both
in their doctrine, discipline, and ceremonies especially, wherein their folly
most notably appears. Let any man read their Pontifical, and let him say,
whether GOD has not taken all their wisdom from them LORD finish thy work,
which thou have begun, take wisdom and strength from the mount of Esau, that
mount S^on may rejoice, etc.

VERSE 10. 11. 10 For thy cruelty against thy brother Jacob, shame shall cover
thee, and thou shall be cut of for ever.

11 When thou stoodest on the other side, in the day that the strangers carried
away his substance, and strangers entered into his gates, and cast lots upon
Jerusalem, even thou wast as one of them.


OUR Savior to kindle the minds of his Disciples with a desire to go on
toward heaven and not to look back to the intiseme^ts of the world, wills
them to remember Lots wife. Whereby he teaches us, that in the stories of
Luke 17. 32.
the Scriptures, we are not only to note the event, as namely that she was
turned into a pillar of salt, but the causes also, as for that she being
delivered from Sodom, yet contrary to GODS commandment, looked back again
to it. The which thing the Prophet sets here before us in the destruction of
the Idumeans: for having hitherto declared the event, which should fall on
them, namely that they should be brought down and destroyed by such means, as
GOD had appointed, notwithstanding all their wisdom, and strength: he in this
place shows the cause hereof, which was their cruelty against their
brethren. For thy Genesis 25 25. 30
cruelty against thy brother] -- The nations of the Jews and Idumeans came by
descent from Abraham and Isaac for which cause they are called brethren, and as
the proper name of Edom, is used to signify his offspring, so are the Jews
noted by the name of Jacob brother of Edom: wherefore denouncing here utter
destruction to the Idumeans, for their hard dealing toward the Jews, he
says, for thy cruelty against thy brother.

The cruelty showed was, that when strangers and aliens even the Chaldeans
took Jerusalem and spoiled it, dividing the prey by lot, after the manner of
soldiers, and carrying away their substance, they stood on the other side, not
only not helping the^ in this their great necessity, but even furthering, what
they could, their destruction. For when Nebuchadnezzar (as it is recorded in
the 2 of the Chronicles, the last chap.) carried away 2. Chr. 36. 17. 18. 19.
the treasure of Jerusalem, burnt the temple, pulled down the walls, made
havocke of the people: the Idumeans stood by crying, raze it even to the
foundations. Psalm. 137. 7.
Neither only exhorted they the Chaldeans to this cruelty, but put their hands
also thereunto, and did even as they, which appears in the 12, 13, and 14
verses, by the rehearsal of the particulars. But at this time it shall be
enough to observe in general the cruelty of the Idumeans against the Jews in
these two verses, for thy cruelty against thy brother Jacob.

The Hebrew word used in this place signifies any wrong done by force and
injury; and so for the agreement (...)
of Simeon and Levi in that cruel murder of the Sichemites, it is said that
the Instruments of cruelty were in their habitations. Sometimes also it is used
for such Genesis 49. 5 7.
wrong as is done by fraud and subtlety, as when false witnesses are called
witnesses of cruelty or cruel witnesses. Ps 35 11.
In this place it is taken for both: for they are accused of cru^lty not only
for that they entered into the g^te in the day of destruction, laid hand on
their substance, stood in cross ways to cut of them that should escape, but
also for that they helped them not, but looked on their affliction, and
reioiced at it. Whereby we are taught to withhold both our hands and hearts
from all kind of cruelty, whether it be wrought by force or fraud, neither to
have any by deeds, nor by affection, and that we are not to suffer any to be
harmed, whom we may rescue and deliver. Which is a lesson for us to be learned
and practiced toward all men. For GOD created man in his own Image, standing
in perfect righteousness, which although by the sin of Adam it be defaced,
yet is Genesis (...). 27.
this Image remaining in some part, and very notable monuments thereof as yet
remain even in the most corrupt: wherevpo^ the heathen, by the light of
nature, gathered, that because of that conjunction of men in human^ty, they
were one to love another, and detest all (...). (...). li^. 1. and 2.
cru^lty; whence those general laws of courtesy arose, to show the way to him
that wandreth, to suffer another to light at our candle, not to debar any of
our water stream^, to help with our counsel, such as needed it. And so we see
the Samaritane finding the wounded per Luke 10. 30. 33
son (though likely a Jew, who were because of their religion so great enemies,
that they would neither eat nor talk, nor have any familiarity one with
another) yet moved with natural affection, when he saw him he had compassion on
him, and went to him, bound up his wounds, powered in oil and wine, put him on
his own beast, brought him to an Inn and made provision for him. Which duty,
that it binds all by the general law, which is, love thy neighbor as thy
self, our Savior shows, when hereupon he wills the Scribe to whom he
tells this hi Verse. 37.
story to go his ways and do likewise. Wherefore seeing by the law of nature,
and reason, and the bond of humanity, we are to love all men, it is manifest,
that then we are to abhor, and refrain from all injuries whatsoever.

But if neither the law of GOD, reason nor nature can move us hereunto, let us
consider the punishment which is threatened, and has light on them that have
not fulfilled this law. For albeit the punishment, which is here laid down, is
not threatened to each sort of me^ that show cruelty to another whatsoever, yet
in the holy Scriptures there are some plagues denounced against every one
whatsoever. The cruelty of the old world was chiefly showed upon the brood of
Cain, yet Genesis 6. 13.
the Lord said to Noah, that the earth was filled with cru elty, wherefore he
would destroy it. The Sichemites were aliens to Israel, yea they unlawfully
possessed that, which belonged to Jacob and his sons: yet because Simeon and
Levi murdered them in so cruel manner, Jacob curses their wrath, because it
wa^ cruel, and their rage, for that it was fierce, wherefore he says, that
they Genesis 34 ^5. Genesis 49 7. Genesis 49. 7.
should be divided in Jacob, and scattered in Israel: a man would have thought
the zeal of Saul had been praise worthy, when he sl^w the Gibeonites, which
were a remnant of the cursed Amorites, but the Lord plagued Israel for it,
neither ceased the famine, till such 2. Sam. 21. 1.
time as David delivered up to be hanged, of Saul's sons, seven, as the
Gibeonites demanded; which being done the plague ceased. So greatly does the
Lord detest tyranny and cruelty, though it be showed to the brood of Cain,
toward uncircumcised Sichemites, or profane Gibeonites, yea on such whom he
has in his judgment appointed to destruction, though not by that means.

Whosoever he shall be therefore with whom thou shall have to deal, I say not if
he be a Papist, but a Jew, but be he a Turk, or Atheist, or whatsoever
infidel, remember to use him as a man, even because he is a man. Man cannot
be GOD to man; it was an higher title then ought to have been given either of
Cicero to Lentulus, or Virgil to Augustus: but if any man play the part of
Lycaon and become a wolf, then shall not Eclog. 1.
the punishment of Lycaon be removed from him. The Pausanias in (...), Ovid
Metaph. lib. 1.
Idumeans how wicked they were, and how they were threatened we see here: yet
when the king of Moab had taken the king of the Idumeans son, and burnt him on
the wall, in hope to get by that means the victory, the Lord threatened by Amos,
For three transgressions of Moab, and for four, I will not turn it away,
because it Amos, (...) 1.
burnt the bones of the king of Edom into lime. Therefore I will send a fire
into Moab: I will cut of the Judge out of the midst thereof, and will slay all
the princes thereof with him. For with what measure we meat, with the same
shall it be measured to us again. The Idumeans were wicked, yet because they
burnt the kings son so cruelly, they shall be burnt for it themselves.

As God is the creator of all, so is he also the Savior of all concerning the
blessings of this life. But as he is called the Savior of all, but chiefly of
the elect, so detesteth 1. Tim. 4. 10.
he all cruelty that is done to any but especially that, which is showed
toward his people. Which is clear by this, which is here said, that because
of his cruelty toward Jacob, etc. Such are all his chosen servants, as Psalm.
135 4.
the Prophet in the Psalm says, that the Lord has chosen Jacob for him
self, and Israel his chosen treasure. By the name then of Jacob are all the
chosen represented, for all believers are of the seed of Abraham, the children
Rom 9 4 7. 8.
of Jacob, they that are his chosen. Of whom he has such care, that he
rebukes even kings for their sakes. Abimelech when as unaware he would have
taken Sara, whom Abraham said to be his Sister, the Lord in a Genesis 20. 30.
dream forbids him, that unless he withheld himself, he was but a dead
man. Pharaoh oppresses them, Exodus 14. 27.
the Lord delivers them, and drowneth him. For GOD remembers for ever the
covenant which he made with Abraham, and the oath which he swear unto Jacob.
Yea though they were but a few and strangers in the Ps. 105. 12. 15.
land, yet he suffered no man to do them violence, bu^ r^pro ved kings, etc:
Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm. All Christians are the
Lords anointed, and all are Prophets in some sort, though not in special, as
was Abraham: and this promise is made to a thousand generations. Wherefore as
the Lord promises, that he will punish Damascus, Tyrus, etc: for their
iniquity, and cruelty toward his people, so assuredly A^ cha. 1. and cha 2.
shall just punishment follow all them, that shall behave themselves in such
order; yea the punishment that is threatened Moab is in some respect for Isreal's
sake, because that cruelty was showed on the king of Edoms son, when the
Idumeans took part with Israel. For three tra^sgressions, and for four, - as
though he should say, though they have committed many iniquities, which I have
spared, yet because they continue to oppress my people, I will power out my
vengeance on them, so that the fire shall fall upon their walls and consume
them, even according to their iniquity against the people of GOD. And the
Metaphor of fire here used, puts us in mind of the general promise of GOD
to all his children, namely that he will be a wall of fire about them, to
shield and defend them, that who 7 ac. 2 5.
approaches to them shall be consumed. For GOD takes it as done to himself,
whatsoever is practiced against his servants: whosoever touches them, touches
(...). When Senacherib had bragged against the Jews 8.
and threatened them in most cruel manner, the Lord speaking to him by the
Prophet, says, not because thou handlest my servant so cruelly, but because
thou ragest against me. I will put my hook in thy nose, and bring thee home.
As the Lord did indeed, where his own sons, while he Is^. 37. 29.
was worshippings his Idols, murdered him. I need not speak of Herod,
Diocletia^, Julian, etc: of whom the Ecclesiastical histories write, which
plainly show, that (...). (...) lib 2.
like sins, provoke like plagues. To be cruel therefore against Jacob is an
offece, which draws with it great vengeance.

Which as it is great, by whomsoever it be committed, so is it of necessity
much more, if it be committed by him, that is brother to Jacob. Wherefore the
Prophet says, for thy cruelty to thy brother: the indignity whereof is
amplified in the words following, where speaking of them, that spoiled and
ransacked their city and slew them, he says, and thou also wast as one of
them. For although we be bound to abstain from all inhumanity, yet are we more
bound to refrain from it, toward such as are of the same country, city,
society, kindred, etc: and though we be to love all men, yet are we not to love
all men alike. For our Savior himself, though he loved all those, whom the
Father had given him: yet certain it is, that he loved John more entirely then
any of the rest, so that he is noted by that title the Disciple Ioh. 21. 20.
whom Jesus loved. So that here by the name of brother, added by our Prophet we
may gather the sin of Edom to be the greater, because he dealt thus with him,
that was his kinsman according to the flesh. For the bonds of Nature remain
still, notwithstanding religion which comes by grace. The heathen entreating
of the duties which men owe one to another, makes the first degree to contain
all men because they be men. The Cic. lib. 1. Offic.
next such as are of one people, language, city, kindred, the nearest of all,
man, and wife, children, etc: which doctrine is a remnant of that light,
wherewith Adam in his perfect knowledge was endowed. For even so GOD requires
greater courtesies to be showed by the Israelites, to the Idumeans, then to
other strangers, and Moses gives the reason, because he is thy brother: and
yet greater of the Jews one to another; greater also of such as are of the
same kindred, as S. Paul teaches, If any have Nephews or kinsme^, etc. Whereby
he shows, that he is first to provide for them, and again, if there be any
man that provideth not for his own, and namely for them of his household, he
denies the faith, and is 1. Tim 5. 8.
worse then an Infidel. He has denied the faith, for faith dissolveth not
these duties, which children owe to their parents, parents to their children,
etc: He is worse then an infidel, because amongst them the fathers cast not of
their children, the children do their best to help their parents in their need.
Let us learn therefore to be wise in performing the duty we owe to all men
according to the degrees by God prescribed; considering the Prophet here
shows, that the Idumeans should have been more courteous and gentle to
Jews, because they were brethren. Si fratrem Pollux alterna morte redemit V^g.
Aen 6. v. 121.

Itque reditque viam toties --
GOD forbid we should show such deadly hatred as was between Eteocles, and
Polynices! From this affinity which is of them, which come of the same parents,
(...) C^.
we are to rise to them of one city, nation, etc: and so to them also of one
league and one accord. Hiram and David though not brethren by the flesh, yet in
amity and league, so that Salomo^ the successor so also calls him. If I
require the same of us toward the French and Scots, 1. King. 9. 13.
and other our confederates, it is no more, then the Tyrian Prince received at
the hands of David and Solomon. Now how much more if an Englishman do an
injury to an Englishman, may he that stands by say, why strive you
together, seeing you be brethren? I come nearer to the^, that are of one
corporation, yea of one Society having as it were one father, joined in one
fellowship of study and learning, wherein Cicero requires a likelihood of
manners and affection. But the nearest band of all is Religion, where of they
be al brethren by one father of heaven, borne of one mother the church, fed
with one Mal. 2 1^. Gal. 4 26. 1. Cor. 10. 3 17
bread of life, preserved by one hope, justified by one faith, sanctified by
one spirit, serving one God, the only Lord of all, etc. For, though the
Papists speak skornefully of this name, that the faithful call one another
brethren, they being desirous to defend that peevish and superstitious
distinction of such as call themselves Friars or brethren, yet in the Acts of
the Apostles we know, that the name is common to all Christians, and not
proper, as they would have it, to any one sect, no more the^ the name of
Jesuits, which some of them would appropriat to themselves.

Now as S. Paul would have us to do good to all men, Ephesians 4 4.
but especially to them, that are of the household of faith; so are we with this
bond of Religion, tied so much the faster, as grace is superior to nature.
Wherefore we are to remember the exhortation of the Apostle herevpo^, that no
man oppress his brother, for the Lord is a revenger 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6.
of such things. What then shall become of them who neglecting the bonds of
nature and grace, deal with their brethren no otherwise, then did the Idumeans
with the Israelites, carrying away the substance, rejoicing at their harms,
standing on the other side? What shall we say of the^ who deal with their
brother Naboth, as Achab and Iezabel did? Whose hands be full of 1. King. 21. 1.
blood, and their houses stuffed with bribes, which grind the faces of the
poor, pull the skin from their flesh, break Mich. 3. 2, 3.
their bones in pieces, and chop them as meat for the pot, of such as eat and
devour up their brethren with usury, which consume them by law and suit,
which spoil the^ by monopolies, by engrossing, by false wares, subtle
bargains, by enclosing of commons, enhaunsing of rents, by robbing the Church,
in pulling away the mainetenance of the Ministers, possessing their right, by
impropriations, by impoverishing Colleges, by thrusting laborers and
husbandme^ out of their house and ground, and placing there a shepherd with
his dog, by ioining house to house, land to land, living to living, as Is 5.
8.
though they meant alone to live upon the earth; and shall not the dogs once
lick these men's blood, and the fowls of the air feed on their carkases, or
shall not hell open her mouth wide, to swallow down their glo ry, riches, and
themselves also? shall not the Lord say in that last day to all these depart
from me ye wicked to dwell with the devil and his Angels. Nay shall it not
be more dreadful for them then this, if any thing may be? For he cannot say to
these men, depart from Mat. 25. 41.
me* for I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I thirsted Mat. 25, 4 etc
and ye gave me no drink, etc. but rather he may say, depart from me, for I
had meat, and by force you took it from me, I had drink and you spoiled me of
it, I had a house and you thrust me out of it, I had clothes, and you pulled them
from my back, I was in health, and ye drove me into sickness, I was at
liberty, and you imprisoned me. Who is wise to consider this while it is
time! least that hour come on him unawares, which shall come on all of them as
a snare: wherefore let us remember the words of the Prophet For thy cruelty
toward thy brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee. But the hand of the Papists
has been chief in cruelty, and therefore we may be sure shall be chief in
the punishment. For their brethren which only desired redress, and sought
after reformation of their disorders, they have not only cast of, but destroyed
and that in most savage manner. Yea they have done that which hardly has been
found in any Barbarians. Having taken up bodies when they were dead (yea
rotten) Vid. narrat. de ex^mat. Buceri and Phagii, Tracaei, Wiclesi, An. D^.
1528. wit nesse Guliel^. Li^wood (who then lived) Glos in Provinc. co^stit Angl
tit. de Magist. cap 2. for Wi^ffe died 1385 Walsing. in Hypodig^. N^str. p. 537.
and have burnt them as lime. To speak nothing of their lesser cruelty, as of
those great numbers which they have roasted, but to take away al pretense, the
first whom they murdered John Hus, called to their council by safe conduct of
the Emperor, did they not co^ trary to all right, and their own faith burn
him, when he had committed himself into their hands. Insomuch that the
Emperor Sigismund could not be satisfied for the breaking of his promise,
till by their decree which is in the 10 Sess. of that council they signified
that their authority was such that they might disanull what he had appointed.
And a seely shift is that of our country man, who to salve the matter says,
Imperator promisit, orbis Christianus mayor Imperatore Campian rat 4. Caesar
(...), Christ anus orbis resignavit mayor Ca^e.
dissoluit. What I pray you calls he orbem Christianu^, but the Bishops
gathered together thither? and had they authority over their Emperor to cause
him break his word and faith, etc. Even so Saul thought it lawful for him to
break the oath, which Joshua had 2. Sam 21. Ios 9.
made to the Gibeonites. But themselves do at last begin to be ashamed of this
dealing: howbeit it is recorded to their eternal shame and reproach, that they
not only have burned men's bones as lime, but that against all equity, their
own word and promise: so that they are enforced to defend it with that Axiom
of theirs, which the very heathen would be ashamed of, fides data haereticis
non est servanda.

Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets and Mat. 23. 27.
stonest them that are sent to thee, how often would -- therefore is thy
habitation left desolate. If their habitation was left desolate because they
slew the Prophets, then much more Papists, for they have slain both Prophets
and people. I will not speak of the fires, which they have kindled in all
places, neither of the Spanish Inquisition (which for the cruelty of it is even
become Vid Comment de Relig and Rep^b in R^ Gall.
a proverb) The Massacres in France, leave no excuse in the world. But they
have not here made an end, but from Prophets and people, they have set upon
Princes, as the late attempt against her Majesty plainly declared. For though
God suffered not the light of Israel (as David's people spoke of him) to be
extinguished, 2. Sam. 21. 17.
yet it was no less cruelty in them, who had fully purposed to have done it,
and whereas they have had some pretense for their other dealings, there is none
in the world for this. The Rebels in the North made Protestation, that they
meant not to take away the Prince, but See Cardir. Alanes Epistles.
certain bald counselors (as they said) who were about her. The late libeller
(concerning Ireland) says that the Pope has of old had title unto it, and
princes are not wont to loose their titles, though they have no possession, but
this commending of the practice of the altar, the suborning of such a subject,
to dispossess his lawful Prince, not only of living, but of life too, what
man not besotted, can choose but detest? When there was war betwixt Pyrrhus
king of Epirus and the Romans, Pyrrhus Physician made promise unto Fabritius
Cic. de offic lib. 3. and in L^lio.
that he would privily dispatch him: which Fabritius refused, and sent him
back to his Master declaring the matter unto him, and cou^selling him to look
to him self. Oh Lord! how much worse are the Popish Romans, then the old
Romans! they would not receive a man that offered to do such a mischief,
these prick men forward, and seek after with great rewards such as will
attempt it, they discovered it to their enemies, and warned them to look to
themselves, these haste^ the matter, by what means they can, they thought it
altogether unlawful, and detested it as abominable, these commend it as
lawful, and defend it to be meritorious. When Pyrrhus for a recompense sent
them back some of their soldiers which they had taken they would not receive
the^ as a reward, for that which they thought humanity required, but sent him
back as many prisoners of theirs; these labor by all means to keep the
matter close, and think it happy for him that can do it: and may we not then
say that undoubtedly Fabritius shall rise at the last day in judgment against
them. The blood of Abel cries for vengeance against all these, who thirst
after the blood both of Prophets, people, and of prince. Behold O Lord thy
sanctuary with the eyes of mercy and compassion, infatuate the counsel of
Aehitophel, disappoint the practices of the blood thirsty and cruel men, that
we being safe under the shadow of thy wings against all the cruelty of thy
enemies, may see thy judgments upon the cruel Idumeans, and glorify thy name
therefore.

VERSE 12. 13. 14 12 But thou should not have beholde^ the day of thy
brother, in the day that he was made a stranger; neither should thou have
reioiced over the children of Judah, in the day of her destruction; thou
should not have spoken insolently, in the day of affliction.

13 Thou should not have entered into the gate of my people, in the day of
their destruction; neither should eve^ thou have looked on their affliction,
in the day of their distress; nor have laid hands on their substance, in the
day etc 14 Neither should thou have stand in the cross wates to cut of them,
that should escape; neither should thou have betrayed the remnant, in the
day of their destruction.


THE Prophet having generally in the former verses delivered the cause of the
destruction of the Idumeans, namely their cruelty, which they showed to the
Israelites their brethren, when Jerusalem was sacked, at what time they showed
themselves, as their enemies: he does now in these words particularly lay the
same out, that the poisoned sore of their barbarousnesse, being declared the
justice of GOD in cutting them of, might be showed unto them.

Which causes in particularitie are delivered by way of admonition, wherein is
opened what they should have done, and they concern Either their 1.
Affections, 2. Actions.
1. Affections Hatred Envy
testified by their gladness and reioicing at their harms and afflictions. 2.
Their actions are either concerning words proud spightful
thou should not have spoken insolently. deeds, spoiling the^ of goods.
Entered into the gate. laid hands on substance. life. Stood in the breach to cut
of them that escaped. Betrayed the remnant.


Wherefore in these points consisted the cruelty of Edom in wishing, speaking,
and doing evil against Israel.

Welwillers cannot look on our miseries, or abide to see them, for grief and
sorrow. As we read of Agar the mother of Ismael, that, when her son was like
to die for want of water, she cast the child under the tree, and went and sat
over against him a far off, for she said, I will not see the death of the
child. But here the evil will, that the Idumeans bore, appears, and the Genesis
21. 15. 16
harm they wished them, in that they reioiced to look upon the affliction of
their brethren.

Neither could they keep this evil will within the^, but they uttered it in
their speech, speaking proudly a against them, or as it is in the Hebrew, making
their (...)
mouth great or wide. Which here being plainly set down is by others
elsewhere more plainly opened, Ps. 137.
when they cried, raze it, raze it, even to the foundations; Ezec. 3^ 10. and
25 8.
and again, behold the house of Judah is like unto all the heathen.

Besides here they stayed not, but to their evil will and naughty words, they
added naughty deeds, for they entered into the gate, laid hands on their
substance; and as though it had been a small thing to rob them, they proceeded
further, and took away their lives, by killing some by present death, for whom
they waited in the breaches, others by lingering death, whom they betrayed, that
so they might die in torments and captivity. And all these albeit very grievous
in themselves, yet are more increased by the circumstances.

Of 1 persons, 2 Times.


1. Persons by who^. a brother, wherefore add, neither ought thou: to note
the indignity against whom. a brother, not beholding the day of thy brother. My
people.

2 The circumstance also of the time increases the cruelty, in the day he was
made a stranger, in the day of affliction. Whereby is declared, what marveilous
savage hearts they bore; for then even enemies are moved to pity. Wherefore to
show the grievousnes in respect hereof, this clause is repeated in each branch.

And when it is also said that they stood in the breach and betrayed the
remnant, not sparing such as had escaped, we see that on all sides their
cruelty is amplified.

Wherefore they are justly reproved, when they are admonished not to have done
that which they did. By which reproof of Edom, we are admonished to have two
things, if we will neither be idle nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ, namely 1 Patience. 2 Brotherly love
in that they did. should have done.


1 It is a heard and heavy message, that the children of GOD must suffer so
great misery and cruelty, and to bear it also: a great grief it is, that our
enemies should look on our affliction, and rejoice; greater to enter into our
gates and take away our goods; greatest of all to take away our life: yet is it
more then this, to kill us after we have escaped; especially to suffer all
this of our brethren. Yet is there no remedy, the godly in all this must be
patient and suffer all these things, and that not only of strangers, but also
of our brethren.

The gate that leads to life is narrow and strait. We are to sit down and
cast accounts, for we are to build a costly work. We are borne as the sons
of Jacob under the bondage of Pharaoh, so under the thraldom of Satan that
spiritual Pharaoh. Christ is our Moses by who^ through Baptism, as through
the red sea, we are led to the land of promise: but before we come thither, we
are to pass through the wilderness where is want of meat and drink, and
other necessaries, besides wild beasts and noisome serpents, etc: Yet this must
we pass through, before we can come to Canaan, that is heaven. Which flows,
not as did that with milk and honey, but with such joy and comfort, as tongue
cannot utter, neither have at any time entered into the heart of man.

Now seeing unless we pass through the wilderness we cannot enter into Canaan:
we must be content to bear whatsoever affliction is therein. But if we
murmr and rebel, he has sworn in his wrath, that we shall not enter into
his rest. So hard a thing is it, nay so impossible, to enter heaven, but
through many tribulations.

If any man will come after me, says our Savior, let him take up his cross
daily, and follow me. The death of the cross was not only most grievous, but
most shame full also, and so much the more, for that such as were to be
handled most despitefully were put to carry their cross themselves; for they
had favor showed the^, who had others to help: yet were not this worst, if
they were to do it but once, or to die but once, but when we are commanded to
do it daily, it is a sore matter: yet must those that will follow Christ be
content to do it, to bear all affliction even most grievous and shameful,
even the cross. For Christian men's life is death, and that daily: that they
may say with the Church, for thy sake are we killed daily, not the whole day
only, but every day. Christ Jesus the son of GOD, who thought it not robbery
to be like unto God, was content for our sake to endure all miseries, even the
death of the cross, with all the indignities, that Edom put Judah unto. For
they in the day of his affliction stood staring and looking upon him, they
reioiced against him, those goods he had they took and divided amongst them:
Lastly they put him to a most villainous death, as himself had before showed by
David a figure of him. I am become a stranger to my brethren, an alien to my
mothers children. They stood staring and looking on me, they gave me gall, etc:
all that look on me have me in derision, etc: dogs have compassed me a bout,
etc: they part my garments amongst the^, and cast lots on my vesture, they
pierced my hands and feet, etc: For albeit, that some of these things were
performed against our Savior by the heathen: yet were both Pilate and the
soldiers but ministers of the Jews his brethren, who were they, that sought
for him, betrayed him, delivered, accused him of treason, and that cried out
against him, cru^fie him, etc.

This example of Christ who was thus cruelly entrea ted and put to death in
such pitiful sort by his brethren, is set forth for a pattern to us, to
learn by like patience to suffer the like cruelty. Because indeed that we are
prepared and ordained for the like: As Peter declares, here unto are ye
called: for Christ also suffrea for us, leaving us an example, that we should
follow his steps. And Paul 1. Pet. 2. 21.
says that we are hereunto predestinate, to be made like un to the Image of
the son of God: and if we will reign with him, we must also suffer with him.

The Primitive Church which immediately followed Act cap 7.
Christ had sufficient proof hereof, as in the stoning of Steven, the
Imprisonment of Peter, the often persecutions even by the professors of the
faith, and such as in part had it of all the Church, especially of Paul, who
was abundant in labors, in siripes above measure, in prison ple^teously, 1.
Cor. 1^. 23.
in death eft, in perils among his own nation, among false brethren.
Afterward how barbarously the true Christians were dealt withal by the
Donatists, Circumcellians, etc: who dismembered their bodies, put out their
eyes, beheaded and burned them under the Emperors Valentius, etc. the
monuments of those days and the Ecclesiastical histories do abundantly show.

And in our time the Papists have in this point dealte so outragiously, that all the other, which we have mentioned, seems nothing to it. A fresh example
whereof is that committed by them about this time 13. years in Paris under
Charles the 9. when in that realm there were slain 30000 Christians, and that
not in war or Vid. comment. de sta^ Relig. and Re^n Regno Gall par. 2. etc.
battle mentioned, as was this of the Idumeans, but under the pretense of
friendship, shadowed by the marriage of the kings Sister to a Christian prince.
In which most treacherous and bloody practice were all the points observed, that
are here noted in the Idumeans.

Looked. For it is recorded that on Bartholomew night the Queene-mother with
the rest went out of the palace Vid part. 4. sub Ca^ 9. lib 10. 11. 12 fol 39.
etc. 42.
to see the carkases of such as they had murdered in the city. And besides
when they caused the body of that worthy Admiral, to be hanged upon the
gibbet, they went out of the city to fill their eyes with that cruel sight.

Reioiced. They caused for joy hereof procession to be made throughout Paris:
and when Gregory 13. heard of it, he caused the like joy to be showed in his
city, the gunnes to be shot of from his castle of Saint Angelo, and mass to
be song in honor of this noble deed in Saint Vbisopia, fol. 56.
Lucies Church a French Saint. And so that in that city where neither Sylla,
Caesar, nor any other ever triumphed over citizens though overcome with just
war, not traitorously murdered by vninst cruelty. Moreover by Parliament it
was enacted, that in memory hereof there should be kept each year on St
Bartholomew day a general procession through Paris.

Opened the mouth. Which appears by the words of the king, who, swearing
after his manner, said, that heaven with its weather seemed to rejoice at their
deeds. Words of the murderers of the Admiral, etc. And by the words of the
President of the Parliament of Paris, who signified, that all was done by the
kings Christop. Thuanus Ann 1572. vid. (...) supra; fol. 43.
authority (contrary to that, which he had in his letters, signified to
other princes) commending the whole deed with that saying of Jews one of their
kings, Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit regnare. Loco supra citato this speech
co^ mended by ^huanus.

He knows not how to reign, that knows not how to feign.
Besides the thing commended with an Oration, and the Cardinal of Loraine set
up monuments of it, which Lib. 10.
also Genebrard, and Surius, the most impudent Bolsecks that ever wrote, have
in their Chronicle commended Vid. cos anno 1572.
with this sclander, that it was done because of their conspiracy. Fol 42. ib.


Ransacking substance. They not only entered into the gate but houses of the
oppressed, rifling them at their pleasures, yea so greedy were they of gain,
that they slew some that were very Papists, to the end that (...) ^ol. 41 and
pass^.
some of their accomplices, which were next to possess their goods, might by
that means be enriched.

Slain. How they slew not only those that fell into their hands, but such as
were escaped also, may appear by the sending of their letters after this (...)
done at Paris, to Lions, and other places, that they Fol 44, 45 etc.
might, to fill up the measure of the kings iniquity, destroy the remnant.

We here in England have not yet (GOD be praised) felt this manner of cruelty,
but seeing it is our lot to abide it, we must for our part be prepared for it,
and arm our selves with patience against it come, though we be not free
presently, for all that they date do. For there want not among us false
brethren, as such as in their hearts murder us. And albeit we suffer not so
much as Abel did of Cain, yet feel we as much as Isaac did of Ismael, namely
sco^es, and sclanders. Such were David's brethren, of whom he says that they
tore him in pieces. His familiar friends with whom he took sweet counsel,
etc. which is so certain to befall likewise unto us, that our Savior out of
the Prophet Michah, says that the son shall rise against the father, etc.
and a Chap 7. 5. 6.
man's enemies shall be even they of his own household. But as it is there by
the Prophet laid down for a comfort to the godly. Let not the enemy rejoice,
for though I V. 8 9. 10.
fall, yet shall I rise again etc. mine ^es shall behold her: now shall she be
trodden down, as the m^re in the streets.

2 The second thing to be of us considered, was in that which they should not
have done; wherein as has been said, we are moved to brotherly kindness.
Wherein I request you to remember the points of cruelty which have been laid
out and said to have been sound in them.

1 Rejoice. This joy at others harms ought to be far from us, being a token
of hatred and envy. For if we go to the root as it is delivered elsewhere, it
is evident, Ezec. 35.
that it proceeds from an evil mind. For who^ men hate, him wish they evil
unto, and would gladly see it Cic. Offic. lib. 2. Quem qui^ odit. p. r^sse
expe^.
fall on him. Wherefore it proceeds from the heart, as even the outward
gesture also: which our Savior declares, when he says, that out of the heart
proceed evil thoughts, etc. and an evil eye, meaning the effects of an evil
eye and envious. For many there are that see well, and yet have evil eyes.
Namely such as delight at the harm of their brother, and sorrow at his good.
Wherefore we must beware of both effects namely, that we neither behold the
prosperity of others with grief, nor their adversity with joy.

And for the former, we must be so much the more diligent in avoiding it,
because a good mind is sometimes subject unto it. When a young man told
Ioshuah, that Eldad, and Modad, prophesied in the host, he Number. 11. 27
willed Moses to forbid them. But Moses rebuked him; enviest thou, says he,
for my sake? yea would to God that all the Lords people were Prophets, and that
the Lord would put his spirit upon them.

But as for the latter, which is to rejoice at the adversity of others, it is
not so incident to the heart, which is sprinkled with any drop of grace;
because that eve^ naturally, we pity such as be in misery. Howbeit, if there
be any such among us, let him remember what the wise man says; That he who
reioiceth at the harm of another, shall not himself escape unpunished. The
sum is this, that we look to our heart the fountain of these affections, and
purify it. The heart, as the Philosophers say, in natural generation is
first framed, and in spiritual regeneration it is first formed. Wherefore we
are first to look that it be pure. For what the heart conceives, that the
tongue utters, and what the tongue speaks, the hand practices.

2 The second thing is, that we speak not against our brethren, Neither
exhorting the enemies. scoffing and deriding our brethren, as Ezec. 25 35.
the Idumeans.
To exhort men to do evil, I hope we may learn how dear it will cost us by
the example of the Jews; who exhorting the Romans to slay our Savior, and
being admonished of the great wickedness, answered, his blood be upon us and
on our children, and so it was indeed. But how sore it was upon them the noble
history of Ierusalems destruction, which followed within the compass Vid.
Egesip. lib. 4 etc.
of their childrens life, does sufficiently declare, of whom were slain
1100000.

For taunting, as not only doers but abetters are culpable in faults, so these
scoffers as well as the doers of evil; and so much the more, because they
scoff the Lord himself, as when they said, The land wherein the Lord is. How
heavy the hand of the Lord was on Rabsakeh for this blasphemy, we have an
evident example. I will not go so far in this assembly as to speak of such
gross blasphemy; but if there any among us, which are not afraid to abuse the
words of Scripture in scoff, as did those wicked Jews which had in their
mouth. The burden of the Lord, etc. Let them consider the punishment threatened
against such scorners and be afraid thereof. A shame it is, if the counsel of
Trent condemn such wickedness, for us to use it. Wherefore if any profane
cogitations concerning GODS word rise in our minds, let us betime quel these
Impes of Babylon, dishing them against the stones, that they go no further.

3 The third thing is, that we take from them as not their life, so neither
their living, whereby their life is maintained. For although we go not so
far, as to come to sacking, yet if we lay hands upon the goods of Judah,
whether public, or private. we play the part of Edom: I am loath to speak
that which I should hear touch. Do not they commit this wickedness, which
take money for that which was provided to main taine the poor, either in the
University publicly or privately in any college: which sell the poor for
shoes, or come not so low as those beggarly judges, but make their own
advantage by what means soever. ^ut they will not say that they lay hands on
them, but that they take that which is offered. Alas poor souls! do they
offer it, yea even as men their, purses on Salisbury plain, they yield their
goods to save their lives. Vid. (...) Vertia. 5.
This was right Verres answer, he took nothing but what was offered him. Or
they will say that themselves receive nothing, but yet as Master Latimer said,
their In his S^ before K E^w
wives shall, or the steward of the kitchen.

Now if this be blame worthy being done in private goods, how much more in
public. The wise Steward when he should be put from his office, meaning to
pro vide for a dear year, called together all his Masters deb ters, saying to
the first, how much owe thou to my Master, ^uk. 6.
and he said an hundred measures of oil, and he said take thy writings, set
down quickly and write fifty, etc. The Steward ca^celled not the obligations
but made the^ a new, and so made him friends of his masters goods. I would to
GOD this practice were not too common among us by pub lique goods to make us
private friends in our own suits, etc. The Lord commended the wisdom of this
vnthristy Steward, he commended his policy, not his hone stie. And if he were
among us and were to speak of Stewards, he would commend the policy of our
Stewards no loss then that of the wise steward. The Pharisees gave 30. pence,
which were indeed 30. sicles, about in value two shillings a piece, which they
took out of the public treasury unto Judas to betray our Savior, when Judas
had returned them, they would not put them again into the treasury because
it was the price of blood, but bought therewith a potters field, to bury
strangers in. The Pharisees gave 30. pieces of silver, if it had been 30.
pieces of gold, or thrice 30. it had bin fitter for my purpose.

For the sin is such of them that have given much more out of the public
treasury, to compass such things, as when they have them, they may betray the
souls of Christians. And whether this practice be rise among us, I leave to
their consideration, who wisely consider the dealing of the world. But let
such men as be faulty herein, consider the end of the givers and takers,
whereof the one strangled himself, the other were overthrown in the
destruction threatened against them. And for the money, what end it had, we see:
I speak not because it buried strangers, but it served to no purpose, but to
bury carkases: and so shall this money serve to none other end but to bury, not
the carkases but the souls of such in hell fire, which stain their hands with
it.

4 The fourth thing is to abstain from murder. I will not propose unto you so
high a degree of this sin: But exhort such as to whom it appertains to
beware, that they murder not the souls whereof they have charge. The surest
death and most pitiful is the famine of the soul, and the want of the
preaching of the word is famine. And reason in the mouth of the Poet has
taught us, that it is a most miserable thing to die with hunger. Wherefore in
this case it belongs to Masters, who have charge and care of servants,
Pastors of flocks, Magistrates of people, to see that they be not negligent in
their duty, and that their hand be not deep in this iniquity, and that they
be not defiled with the blood of souls, which Christ has redeemed with his
precious blood. Oh that they would at length consider wisely of it! And here
should I speak to the Magistrate of the city, if he were present, in that
matter, which has been often moved unto him, for the provision for such as
might minister the word unto them, which in the Apostles judgment is
necessary: No man at any time goes to war on his own charges. And if this
city can be content to set out soldiers for the prince, will they not be
persuaded to furnish soldiers against Satan, the enemy of their souls,
against whom they are continually to strive? The example of Cambridge, has
been proposed unto them: but if they were not worse then them of Achaia and
the Barbarians of Macedonia, they would be moved to do somewhat herein; these
were content to send relief to the Saints at Jerusalem, but they will not
succor such as are amongst them, which are not troubled with bodily but
spiritual hunger.

VERSE 15. 16. 15 For the dayof the Lord is near upon all the heathen: as thou
have done, it shall be done unto thee. They reward shall return upon thine head.

16 When you have drunk upon mine holy mountain: all the heathen shall drink
continually; yea, they shall drink and swallow up, and they shall be, as though
they had not been.


THE thoughts and affections of man's heart are so corrupt and froward, that he
is seldom by commandment restrained from evil, unless there be adioined
to the breach of the commandment, somepunishment. Neither are we always
moved therewith all, especially if we know or be persuaded that, that which is
threatened be far of. For it befalls very often, that the pleasant lust and
pleasure of sin for a season, overweyeth the fear, which we should conceive
of the punishment which is yet to come, according to that of the wise man.
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the
heart ^ccle. 8. 11.
of the children of men is fully set in them to do evil. The Prophet waying
this, thought it a small thing to teach us, by the wickedness of the Idumeans,
that we should fall after the same manner of sin, and therefore puts us
also in mind of the punishment which was to light on the ungodly. Which also
he does the rather to comfort the godly; for so grievous are the calamities,
which for the present time, the best are both to see and feel, that unless
they went into the sanctuary of the LORD to see the end of these men, whom GOD
has set in slipperie places, it must needs fall out, that their seet should
slip, and their goings slide. Wherefore Psalm. 73.
to raise up the spirit which strives against the flesh, and to beat down
the flesh which fights against the spirit, the Lord says by the Prohhet, for
the day, etc.

By the day of the Lord, is meant the time of the Lords judgment, that is,
the time which he has appointed to execute judgment. By the heathen are
meant the nations set against the Jews. As were the Philistines, Tyrians,
Medes, Babylonians, etc. and such as were mentioned Jeremy. 25. where the
matter, which is here handled generally, is more fully in particular opened.
And as Edom is amongst them there counted, so here, having in the former verse
opened the threat against a lenimies, in the verse following is He namely
mentioned. Howbeit least the Jews should in the mean season be discouraged
and broken, with the manifold miseries which they abode, he shows that their
enemies should suffer far greater, and this also to their greater comfort is
uttered in GODS person, On my mountain.

Afflictions by a Metaphor are here called a drinking of strong drink, as of
wine, because that as me^ by taking more the^ enough, become drunk, so that
their heads wax giddy, their bodies distempred, etc. and some so disquieted,
that they die of it. So men by suffering afflictions become astonished, their
bodies disordered, etc.

The meaning then is this, that though they endured for a while many and sundry
miseries, yet should their enemies feel far greater: for it is said of the
godly, that they should drink on his holy mountain. But the heathen
continually: implying that they should abide this punishment for a time, but
the enemies forever. Again, that they should drink, but the other, should
drink and swallow up, and be as though they had not been. Which difference
is yet more fully declared by Jeremy, Take a cup -- stagger -- wax mad, vomit
-- yet Ier. 25. 2. 15.
of the Jews which were carried captive to Babylon he says, that after 70
years they should be delivered.

We are to note that sundry temporal things in the old Testament, are
shadows of things eternal. Noah his arc which was borne up by the waters,
signified the Church, borne up and saved by that which baptism represents;
the punishment of Sodom figured the eternal fire. The land of Canaan
whereinto Io shua brought the Israelites, was a sign of the kingdom of
heaven, whereunto we are brought through the wilderness of this life by Jesus
Christ. So this chastisement for the time of his children, and continual
drinking of the ungodly, are figures of the short correction, which GOD will
lay on his children, and the most dreadful and eternal punishment, which
shall fall on the head of the ungodly.

For the mountain signifies the Church; the Jews, the godly; their drinking,
afflictions. The heathen all ungodly; their continual drinking, their eternal
punishment; their swallowing, etc: their torments most grievous. Which though
we see partly, accomplished in this life, yet shall it more be seen in the
life to come. For when the godly have a little suffered here, they shall have
all tears wiped from their eyes, and the ungodly shall drink and swallow, etc:
that is, suffer endless and unspeakable torments.

Here out are there many things to be observed.

1 Cause of these punishments. For respecting the sins in the former verses.
2 Time when, near. 3 Equity of the punishment, as thou have done to them. 4
Freedom of the godly, when you have drunk. 5 Grievousnes of the punishment,
continually. 6 By way of the Metaphor of drinking, the filthiness of
drunkenness.
1 The iniquities, which the Idumeans wrought against the Jews were they, that
provoked this dreadful vengeance. And because the heathen were like unto them,
they are to be punished also in the like manner. The sins of the Idumeans
consisted as has been before declared in rejoicing at the affliction of their
brethren, in speaking evil against them, in spoiling them of their goods and
substance, and in killing of their bodies. Wherefore, as has been said, if we
offend in the like if in greater, we must look to receive the like reward.

So that if our hearts be open to all manner of ungodly thoughts, and wicked
lusts, our tongues prepared to unrighteous speech, out hands set to rob,
whether it be the goods of private or public persons, if we kill not the
bodies but the souls of men, let us learn this lesson, and dread this severe
punishment. For the wrath of God for such things comes on the children of
unbelief. For such things, says the Apostle, not only for the same. Enoch
prophesied of such, saying behold the Lord comes with thousands of his
Saints, Iud. 14. etc.
to give judgment against all men, and to rebuke all the ungodly among them of
all their wicked deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all of their
cruel speakings which wicked sinners have spoken against him. The Lord will
come to judge the wicked for their deeds, for their cruel speaking, and for
their thoughts the fountain and spring thereof. This was prophesied by Enoch
before the flood and then performed: Jude applies it as spoken against all the
wicked. Paul uses this 1. Cor. 16 22.
execration, If any love not the Lord Jesus, let him be accursed Maran -- atha.
The Syriake words signify, the Lord comes, and are the first words of that
prophecy of Enoch, adenouncing of that severe punishment, which shall come on
the head of al sinners, as certainly, as the Lord shall come to judgment. Here
that we deceive not our selves in judging of this love to Christ our Savior
has set down a ready note to discern it by. If ye love me, keep my
commandments. I come not to the particular note of Pastors, which our Savior
has laid down to be this, If thou love me feed my sheep. if thou love me feed
etc. so earnest, so tender, so careful a charge noted in this repetition, would
be deeply considered of them that are in that place, if there be any love in
them: if there be not, the^ I pronounce not this curse against Non residents,
but Saint Paul does; If any man love not the Lord Jesus (as these do not, which
feed not the lambs and sheep of Christ) let them be accursed Maran^atha.
Here also all hypocritical Christians, are warned to consider their ways:
which content themselves with an outward profession, and think themselves safe
while they remain in the visible Church. But our Savior shows, that he is
the vine, we the branches, his father the husbandman, so that each branch
though he be in the outward bark fastened to the vine yet if he bring not forth
fruit, he is cut off, and cast into the fire. It profitteth him nothing to
have been in the vine, if he be fruitless. But if these speeches of Enoch,
Jude, Paul, and our Savior do the less touch us, because they be far of,
and so we pamper our selves, esteeming the pleasures of sin for a season,
greater treasures then the kingdom of heaven: let us consider the next point.

2 That is, near. When Jonah sent to the Ninivites cried in their streets, yet
40 days and Niniveh shall be aestroyed, the people of Niniveh believed God,
proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth from the greatest of them unto the
least. I have not the function of Jonah, but the commission of John Baptist, to
tell you that even now the axe is laid to the root of the tree, and every tree
that brings Mat. 4.
not forth good fruit, is cut down and cast into the fire. How near or far
of, it is to every one can I not tell, yet I am certain, that seeing the axe
is even now laid to the root, that it is not long to any. Wherefore while it is
yet called to day, let us not harden our hearts; while it is light, let us
walk in the light; while it is day, let us work; the night comes where in
we shall not work, and before Heb 3.
that day come, which shall make an end of all days. For it is assuredly
pronounced to be near upon all the wicked.

This is spoken not only of the particular judgment of each man, but also of
that day, so called by an excellency, the day of judgment, which GOD has
appointed herein to judge the world by Christ, as Paul taught the
Thessalonians, which before GOD with whom a thousand years are but as one day,
is no doubt near: though as men count far and near, I know not whether it be
far or near. It is not for us to know the times and seasons, which the Father
has placed in his own power. He speaks not only of the certain hour, but
of the times in general, so that there is condemned the rash presumption of
those which take upon them to deliver the year and season of the Lords coming
to judgment. As that fond Prophecy of Eliah, not the Prophet, but a Ribbin of
the Jews, who has written, ^
that the world should endure but 6000. years, which is a Talmudicall dream,
worthy that sincke of the Jewish filthiness, which yet neither the Jews from
whom it came do believe, for the^ must they believe that their Messiah is come,
which they deny. The world having continued 5530 years. So much the more blame
worthy are some Christian Chronicles, which have alleged this dream, as a
thing of some weight, and that is worse, have fathered it upon Eliah. Wherefore
whether that great day be far or near off, I know not; neither will I
deny, that it is near, for it may be nearer then any imagine. For it shall
come as a thief in the night. And although mockers and scorners do laugh at
it, yet shall they once no doubt feel it.

The particular judgment of the wicked, as it was then said to be near, so
may we say that of al such it is so now. For though there were no more but the
general administration of things on the earth, we are thereby sufficiently
taught, that man which is borne of a woman, has but a short time to live, etc.
which if it may be truly affirmed of all men, then how much more of the
wicked, which shall not live out half their days. Who thought that Sena cherib
in all his power should have been murdered of his own children in the temple
of his own Gods? who would have believed that Baltasar in the midst of his
banquet should have received his sentence of destruction, and so suddenly to
be slain by the conspiracy of his subjects. The rich man whose land was very
fruitful, even then when he bad his soul take her rest, had her taken from
him. There is none of us has greater Charter of his life then Senacherib,
Baltasar, or the Rich man. Since that each particular man's judgment cannot be
far of, and may be very near; for the old cannot live long, the young may
die very quickly. Let us remember to abstain from such sins, which then
shall be revealed to the confusion of those, that have committed them. Let us
not flatter our selves with long days, hoping the punishment shall be
deferred, least that befall us, which is reported of the young man, in the 7. of
the Proverbs, whom the har^ with her craft caused to yield, telling him, that
her husband was not at home, but was gone a far journey: so he was entised
with her flattering lips, and followed her straight ways, as an ox that goes
to the slaughter, and as one fettered to the instruction of fools, till a dart
struck through his liver.

Christ is a prince, which indeed is gone into a far country, yet he
looks, that his talents, which he has left behind him, be employed till he
come. And he is not gone so far, but that he will come on the sudden again,
and happy is that servant whom, when he comes, he shall find doing his duty.

3 The Equity, which the Lord will use in this judgment, is declared, when it
is said, as thou have done, it shall be done to thee: thy reward shall return
upon thy head. ^eason plainly shows, that the punishment should ^e equal to
the faults, as the ancient laws of the Romans, which they received from the
Grecians, have plainly ^eclared: but more evidently in the laws of the
Hebrews, wherein we must needs think, that equity appeared most clear. The
law commanded a tooth for a Lev. 24. 19. 20
rooth, etc. as he has done, so let it be done to him. Adonibesek acknowledged
this for a just judgment even by the light of nature, when he confessed, when
the thumbs of his seet and hands were cut of, that GOD had rewarded him, for
that he had caused 70. kings having their thumbs cut of to gather scrappes
under his table. Absolon killed Amnon his brother and was not Iudi^. (...).
(...)
he himself slain? Ioab slew Abner and Amasa, but he himself was slain,
whilst he laid hold on the horns of the Altar. But what speak I of several
men, seeing this equity of Gods judgment shines most clear 1. Reg 2 31
in Empyres and kingdoms? The Assyrians, Macedonians, Babylonians, etc. who as
they had spoiled many nations, so were they themselves also spoiled: but most
notable in Rome who in few years was so often sacked and spoiled by the
Goths, Vandals, etc. In our days we have seen, that Abbaies and Monkeries,
which had made havocke of Churches, and their patrimony, how that GOD had
taken vengeance of them and spoiled them also.

Now seeing the judgment is one, where sin is one, let such take heed as
possess the goods of the Church by their punishment, least that these goods so
gotten, as a canker consume the rest. Woe to thee, says the Prophet, that
spoilest and was not sp^d! when tho^ ceasest, thou also shall be spoiled. Look
with what measure we meat, with the sa^e measure, shall we be measured to. His
iniquity is his own, and no other shall return upon his own head.

But here we must beware that we condemn not GODS punishment, if the
punishment seem greater the^ the offenses in that they are to be punished
continually, which have sinned but for a time, for the circumstances besides
increase the greatness of the fault. I will stand but on one, which is the
person against whom the offense is committed. It is of Babylon: give her double
according to her sin. How agrees this? Double punishment: and yet according
to the sin. Rev. 18.
Forsooth because an offense against the godly is two fold greater, then that
against another. Semei cursed David: it had not been death toward another,
but because it was against the Lords anointed, he was just ly slain by
Solomon. Now if the punishment of traitorous words against a temporal Prince
rightfully deserve a temporal death, do not traitorous words against an
eternal king deserve eternal punishment? Wherefore seeing they have offended
the Majesty of him that is infinite, it is reason that their punishment should
be in time infinite, that so some way the proportion may be answered.

The foundations of those parts of doctrine and instruction, which hitherto
have been opened, are yet advanced higher in the 16 verse, by these two points.

1 That the godly are afflicted in this life for a while in measure. 2 That the
punishment of the wicked is without measure or end.
But before I enter into the declaration hereof, I will note the harm which
proceeds of excessive drinking, which the Prophet sets here before our
eyes, when he calls afflictions and punishments, by the name of drincking:
for thereby are we taught that as men oppressed with grief have their hearts
troubled, their bodies distempered, their spirits la^guishing their life
shortened, etc. so the excess of drinking weakeneth also the body, endangereth
the soul, draws on many diseases, etc. Yea many go so far, that they even
quaffe up their death with it. As it is reported, that Alexander proposing a
reward to him that could drink most, there were 21 presently killed thereby,
and (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
he which got the victory died within three days after. And although I have
less cause to fear this vice in Christian men, much less in Englishmen,
least of all in Oxford, yet the great plenty of wine sellers lately increased,
causes me to dread, lest by degrees we come unto it. Wherefore let us consider
in this Metaphor of drinking and swallowing up, that not only the great
afflictions of this present life are signified, but also the dreadful and
endless torments of the life to come. Which yet is not so meant, as though the
very drinking were condemned. For wine was created of GOD to cheer the heart
of man, not of the evil man alone, but of the good likewise, as GOD has made
his sun to shine not only on the good but on the bad also. And although in
the law, the high Priest were forbid to drink wine, when he entered into the
tabernacle of the congregation, that he might put a difference between the
holy and the unholy, the clean and the unclean, etc. yet in the Lev. 10. 9.
New testament, where the ceremonies being abolished, the things only remain,
hereby sobriety and temperance is commanded us. Wherefore Paul counseled
Timothy to refrain from drinking water, and to use a little wine for his
stomach: wherefore the moderate 1. Tim 5 23
use of wine is lawful, but to use it immoderately brin geth drunkenness.
Wherefore Paul wills us not to be drunk with wine, wherein is excess. The
word which Ephesians 5. 18.
the Apostle there uses is more forcible expressing the desperate estate of
drunkenness, whom ^afetie it self can s^se save. For by it we are not
brought to most unseemly deeds, as that of ^oah, and wicked, as that of Lot:
but more grievous also, if they may be which the wise man most lively has
expressed; To whom is Prove. 23 29.
woe? to whom is sorrow? to whom is strife to whom is mur^uring? to whom are
wounds without cause? and to whom is the redness of the eyes? Even to them
that tarry long at the wine, to them that go, and seek mixed wine. Look not
thou upon the wine, when it is red, and when it shows his color in the cup,
or goes down pleasantly. In the end thereof it will bite like a serpent, and
hurt like a cockatrice. Thine eyes shall look upon strange women, and thine
heart shall speak lewd things. And thou shall be as one that slee^eth in the
midst of the sea, and as he that sleeps in the top of the mast. They have
stricken me, shall thou say, but I was not sick: they have beaten me, but I
knew not, when I awoke: therefore will I seek it yet still. How excellently
descrybeth he the evils and inconveniences, that proceed from this
intemperancie, the woes, sorrows, co^tentious, wounds, sores, not only of the
body, but also of the soul! to what filthiness and grievous offenses it
prepares us, how dangerous and perilous, whose biting is like that of a
serpent, and cockatrice, the senslesnesse of sin or punishment, with the
indurance and continuing with hardness of heart in the like wic kednesse. Which
yet were all the less, if they were on ly temporal, but they are also
eternal, the woe is continual, and endless. woe to them, says the Prophet,
that are mighty to drink wine, and to them that are strong to Isai. 5. 22. 24.
power in strong drink! The Prophet in the words following describes the
woe: as the flame of fire co^sumeth the stubble, and as the chafe is consumed
of the flame, so their root shall be as rottenness, and their b^d shall rise
up (...) di^st. Let us therefore hence learn, that our Prophet by the Metaphor
of drinking representing the endless and unspeakable troubles of the wicked,
commends unto us sobriety and modesty in the use of GODS creatures, least
that we draw upon us plagues spiritual and corporal, temporal and eternal.

Now leaving the words let us consider the things themselves. It is said here,
that the Jews themselves should drink; to signify, that all the godly must
suff^ tribulatio^^all must drink but in some measure. Which thing also our
Savior taught his Disciples, and that al so by this similitude, ye shall
drink of the cup that I shall Mark. 10 39
drink, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with: whereby he
signifies, that they should be partakers of afflictions with him. The
difference betwixt the sufferings of Christ, and Christians, is this, that his
were so infinitely great, that ours compared to his are nothing; and yet so
great they are, that although not for the same cause, yet are we ready to say,
father, if it be possible let this cup pass. But it is not possible. For as
M^. 26 (...)
it behoved him first to suffer, and then to enter into his glory, so must we
through many tribulations enter into the kingdom of heaven.

What Prince more godly then Josiah? what Prophet then Jeremy? yet were they
not freed from afflictions. Yea so was Jeremy therewithal humbled, that he
cries out for the bitterness thereof. ^o is me, my mother that thou have
borne me, a man of strife, and with whom this whole land contendeth. I have not
lent on usury, nor Ier. 15. 10.
have men lent me, yet every one does curse me. These are blessed times and
like to those of Josiah; yet assure thy self, that there is a measure of
affliction for thee to abide. Even they that lived under Josiah were to go in
to captivity for a season. But eve^ in Babylon the Lord promises comfort and
peace unto the^, and after 70. years return to their own land. Now these
things were spoken also for us, that we might have comfort and sure hope, that
there shall be an end of our tribulations.

It is written of Xerxes, that when he beheld from the Herodot. lib. 8.
top of a high mountain his great and mighty host, how he wept in recordation
of their mortality, for that of a huge number, within the compass of a few
years, there should not be one left alive. We may behold in spirit a great
army, of Christian soldiers, throughout all Christendom, whom when you
remember, you do I hope, my self know that I rejoice, to remember, that within
these few years, they shall all be delivered from Babylon, that is, from all
adversity and misery of this present life, and be brought to that heavenly
Jerusalem where we shall rest in all ioic and safety.

It is when you shall have drunk. The godly then as we have said must needs
drink, and that more is, they must drink before the heathen. For Judgment
must be gin at the house of God, as Peter teaches; after that the Lord has
punished his people, then will he visit the proud heart of the king of Babel.
When Jerusalem must be destroyed, it must begin at the Sanctuary. See Ezec. 9.
6.
how the Apostles in the Acts are first persecuted and afflicted, when as yet
the bitter potion was not given to the Jews, namely the sacking of Jerusalem
and destruction Vid Sever. lib. 2. and G^ annal (...). 3 Eg^sip. lib 5.
of the people, such is the lot of GODS servants, not only to be afflicted,
but also first and foremost: but hereunto is annexed a great comfort, that they
shall drink but for a while, not continually; that they shall not swallow up,
but drink. Both which the Apostle has declared: our light affliction which is
but for a moment. And in another place, there has no temptation 2. Cor, 4. 17.
taken you but such as appertains to man, and God is faith full, which will
not suffer you to tempted above that you be 1. Cor. 10. 13.
able, but will even give the issue with the temptation, that ye may be able
to bear it.

On the other side the punishment of the ungodly is continual, as is here
declared, for it is said they shall drink continually and swallow up and be
as though they had not been. In the hand of the Lord says the Prophet, is
Psalm. 75 9.
a cup, the wine is troubled, and the wicked shall drink the dregs thereof,
and suck the^ out. The godly must drink of this cup, but they must drink the
upper part, the ungodly they must swallow down the dregs and le^s of it. These
dregs are the torments everlasting, and endless punishments ordained for
Satan and his Angels in hell, where the worm dies not, and the fire is not
quenched. On the wicked as it is in the Psalm, will the Lordraigne Psalm. ^1 6.
snares, and brimstone, storm and ^pest this shall be the portion of their
cup. They shall be as though they had not been, for their temporal punishment,
they shall be worse, then if they had not been, as was said of Judah.

Here then is a lesson for all ungodly persons, Papists, infidels, mur^erers,
who^e mongers, etc: and all such as receive not the truth, but have pleasure in
ungodliness: namely, that, unless they return from their wicked ways, they
shall have their portion in this cup and swallow the dregs of GODs heavy
wrath and destruction. In the Revelation it is said, that all which receive the
mark of the beast shall drink of the wine of the Rev. 149. 10. 11.
wrath of God, yea of the pure wine, which is powered into the cup of his wrath:
and shall be tormented in fire and brimstone before the face of the Lamb, etc.
Wherefore let us learn this for our instruction and comfort, that we follow
not the wicked to sin for fear of their plagues, but continue in the obedience
of the Lord, that we may be sure of that stay and comfort, which is here
promised to the faithful. Howbeit if there were no more comfort but this, that
our enemies should be punished more then we, it were not enough to
countervaile the heaviness of the cross, which in the mean while the godly
must bear. The Prophet goes farther and raises us up higher in strong
consolation, setting before our eyes the infinite ioies, which the godly shall
e^e, when being delivered from all afflictions they shall triumph over their
enemies.

VERSE 17. 18. 17 But upon mount Sion shall be deliverance, and it shall be holy,
and the house of Jacob shall possess their possessions.

18 And the house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, and
the house of Esau stubble, and they shall kindle in them, and devour them, and
there shall be no remnant of the house of Esau: for the Lord has spoken it.


THE first sense and meaning of these words is, that the Jews, which should
be carried captive to Babylon, should return again to their own land, and
destroy the Idumeans. By mount Sion the fortress of Jerusalem, the beauty of
Iewrie, is meant all the land of Judea, and there by all the people. By these
words then but upon mount Sion, etc. The Prophet meant, that the Jews should
be delivered out of captivity, cleansed from their sins become holy and
righteous, reposs^sse their possessions, and by adding that the house of Jacob,
should be a fire, etc. and Esau stubble, that they should be kin^led and
burn, and be consumed till none were left alive, and that the Jews with the
Israelites should destroy the I dumeans, even as the flame and fire consumes
the stubble till none be left; which the Prophet seals with this infallible
mark, the Lord has spoken it.

As it has been said before, that the temporal things in the old Testament,
are figures unto us of things spiritual: so is there in these words, another
further mea ning then that which I have opened; namely, that the Church of GOD
shall at length be delivered from bondage, and cleansed from sin, e^dued with
holiness, and so recover that everlasting inheritance, which they were deprived
of, and that they shall adiudge the wicked and ungodly all their enemies, unto
eternal fire, whereby they shall all be consumed. And in this sense is that
lively doctrine fully verified, which in the other is not so fully. Wherein as
in a picture slenderly shadowing the lineaments, some part only is obscurely
expressed. For although the Jews after their return conquered the Edomites,
yet were they not consumed 1. Match. 5 3.
as that none of them remained. For Josephus writes that some leved even at
the sacking of Jerusalem to Lib. 4. cap. vl.
^indle and set on fire the Jews. Wherefore the especial meaning of this
place is, that the Church of GOD shall be delivered from the captivity,
wherein it is held, endued with holiness, inherit heaven, whence they were
exiled their inheritance, and consume till none of them be left, because the
Lord has said it.

The Church of God therefore, that is, all the godly shall be delivered, the
enemies from whom, their sins, the chains and bands, from which they shall be
loosed, are the pains and torments due unto sin. These cords are loosed,
when we believe and embrace the Gospel, wherein Christ Jesus is preached unto
us, who saves us from our sins, and from the consequents of our sins: and
as they who were carried away captives, returned to their possessions, who were
content to receive the proclamation of Cyrus; so all such as upon the
proclamation of Christ's Gospel, receive and embrace the same, are most sure to
be delivered. This deliverance is to return back from Babylon to Jerusalem,
that is, from the captivity and slaverie of this world, to the kingdom of
heaven.

In those, which are thus to be delivered there is required holiness of life.
For so also it is said in the gospel, that we are delivered from our sins to
serve God in holiness, etc. and it shall be well, says the Prophet, but to
whom? to the just and holy, not the wicked and profane: to such as are careful
to perform their duty toward GOD and man, to such as sanctify the Lord in
their soul and body. There is a book of remembrance written Mal. 3. 16.
before the LORD, but it is for them that feared him, and thought upon the Lord
there is life for them that seek immortality, and glory etc. Let us then
assure our selves, that if we mean to attain deliverance, and the fruit
thereof, the repossessing of our inheritance, we must be holy and just, yer we
be delivered from the hands, etc. For although it may be, that some of them
were not holy at such time as they were dispossessed, yet needs must they be
holy, before they can possess them again. Such were some of you says Paul,
but ye are washed; let this then be especially noted of us, that none can
receive the crown, but such as fight. The possessions 1. Cor. 6 9, 10 and 11.
are the kingdom of heaven, which we possess by inheritance. No Canaanite or
polluted person ca^ enter into the Lords inheritance, into the kindome of
heaven. And as the godly are delivered, so is there another benefit promised
the^, namely that for their sakes the wicked shall be consumed. For it is said,
the house of Jacob shall be fire. Where first we may note; the Emphaticall
speech, when he says, the house of Jacob shall be a fire, when he means, that
it shall be like the name of the thing, as it is usual, being put for that,
which is Resembled to it. Which indeed were not worthy the noting, but for the
fanaticall Imagination of Transubsta^tiation, which they will needs prove, for
that it is said, This is my body, whence they conclude, that therefore it is
his body indeed. But so might we hence also gather that the house of Jacob, was
fire indeed, etc. For all mystical speeches be not like to that of our
Savior, yet this is common to them, that the names of the signs are given to
the thing signified, and so Christ is called Vid. August. e^. 23. ad B^nisac.
a Vine, his Father a husbandman, his Disciples branches: and if the Papists,
had had any occasion to maintain any error on this place of the Prophet, as
they have upon that of our Savior, they might hence with greater show have
gathered that Edom was transubstantiated into stubble, for that it is in the
Hebrew, that Edom shall not only be stubble, but into stubble. For their own
Schoolmen confess, that those words of Christ do not prove, that the bread
becomes Christ his body.

It is said that the godly shall consume the^, etc. Which is also meant when it
is said that Christ shall Receive his chosen to judge the world, which is not
only meant of the Apostles, but of all the Saints. As S. Paul says, know ye
not that the Saints shall judge the Angels, the wicked Angels. God indeed is he
who judges, but because he works it for his chosen sake, they are said to do
it. As it is said that whatsoever is done to one of the little ones, is done to
him, and whosoever Receives the Apostles Receives him, because this is done
for his sake. So that it is attributed to the godly, which GOD does for their
cause. As it is in the commandment, honor thy Father etc: that thy days may
be long. The words are, that they may prolong thy days. That is, thy parents,
not as though they could do it, but for that the parents pray to GOD, for the
prosperity of their obedient children, which they therefore are said to work,
because God for their sake does it: In the 16 of Luke, we are commanded to make
us friends of the unrighteous mammon, that when we have need, they may Receive
us into their habitations: not as if the poor and needy whom we help, should
do it, but for that GOD for their sakes does it. Even so is it here said, that
the people of GOD should consume their enemies, because God would do it for
Heb. 12. 29.
their sakes, which is gathered by the Apostle, that our God is a consuming
fire.

The last point which is the seal of all is this, the Lord has spoken it.
This is the only ankerhold indeed in all tempests. For if we would lean on
the words of man, let us remember they are liars. Flesh and blood is not
sufficient to assure and strengthen us; but only the word of the Lord, who
performs all that he says, who is not as man to lie, nor as mortal man that
he should repent, shall he speak, and not perform? For so certainly Numb.
23. 19.
as he cannot deny himself, so certainly will he perform, what he says.
Which his name (...) that he here uses confirms unto us. As he says to
Moses I have appeared to the^ not in my name (...) but in my name Jehovah,
which is he that makes his promises to be: and so would he then be called,
for that he would then make good the things which he had before promised. In
like manner let us remember, that he has appeared unto us in his name
Almighty, in the works of his creation and regeneration, but in his good time
he will appear to us in his name Jehovah, and most certainly perform all
his promises.

VERSE 19. 20. 21. 19 And they shall possess the South with the mount of Esau,
and the plain with the Philistines, and they shall possess the fields of
Ephraim, with the fields of Samaria, with Benjamin, and Gilead.

20 And this host carried into captivity of the children of Israel, shall
possess that which was the Cananites unto Zarephath, and they of Jerusalem
that were carried into captivity shall possess that which is in Shepharad with
the cities of the South.

21 And Saviors shall come up to mount Sion to judge the mount of Esau, and
the kingdom shall be the Lords.


OF these three verses, the two former are diverslie translated and expounded
by reason of the diverse significations of the words. And the difficulty
seems to be such in my eyes, that I dare not take on me particularly to
avouch the meaning of the Prophet in each word, but submitting my self to your
judgments, and to any, that shall yield reason of any other exposition. I will
impart unto you, that which in my opinion see meth most likely. Which is that,
which agrees with the circumstances of the text, and general drift of the
Prophet. Which is evident by that which has been set down already, and that
which is afterward added in the last verse. So that we shall not greatly
err, if in in this or that particular word we hit not on the particular
meaning of the Prophet, so long as we keep the general doctrine without error.

It has been said before, that the seed of Jacob. should possess their
ancient inheritance, and destroy their enemies. These points are here again
handled, but so that it is promised they should not only repossesse their
ancient right but also much more by extending the bonds and limits of their
possessions every way.

The land of promise is so situated, that it has on the South the land of the
Idumeans, called here the mount of Esau; on the West a low plain, which was the
country of the Philistines; on the North lay Ephraim and Samaria, and on the
East, Gilead, etc. as Joshua the Ios. 13.
best Geographer has taught us. The meaning is then that look how far the
borders of their dominions in former times extended, so much should they repos
sesse, yea that they should stretch out farther on every side, and possess
much more. Samaria is here mentioned, with certain shiers as it were on the
north, because of the difficulty which seemed to be in winning them, for that
the king of Assyria having taken Samaria and led away the people captive, had
peopled that city and the country about with many strangers. And for the like
cause it may seem that Benjamin is here named, for that being little and
seated among many enemies, they were in greatest danger to be dispossessed,
etc. had they not received this pro mise, that eve^ their borders by the seed
of Jacob should be inhabited. Now whereas they were divided into two people
Israel and Judah: the Israelites were carried away captives by Salmanasar, and
Judah by Nabuchadnezzar. Wherefore in the words following, the promise is made
unto both, laying down the borders of both the kingdoms, etc. This being laid
down follows the other point of the destruction of the enemies. Saviors
shall come up to mount Sion to judge the mount of Esau. Where by the name of
(Savior) the rules and governors are meant: for to judge, is to rule and
execute judgment in right of the oppressed, as it is commonly used in the
book of Judges. And this they shall do by coming up to Sion, the strongest
fort in Iewrie. Finally the kingdom (it is said) shall be the LORDS: to note
the happy state of the faithful, having such a one for the governor, so
mighty and therefore able, so merciful, and therefore willing to keep them
safe from all evil, and to participate with them all good things.

The performance of all this was in part represented by the bodily restitution
of Judah and Benjamin, when by proclamation of Cyrus, Zerubabel, Joshua, etc.
came and built Jerusalem; and continued by Judas Macabeas, who judged the
Edomites, and so are these called Saviors, where notwithstanding GOD does this
by them his lieutenants, as he also said to Samuel, they have not refused thee,
but me. But this fully performed and perfected, in the deliverance of our
souls, by Christ who himself preached to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel, and then by his Apostles, sent from mount Sion into all the world, and
so were Idumea and Palestina, etc. subjected, when all were joined to make one
flock. As also the kingdom is Christ's, king of all kings and Lord of all
Lords, of whom the Angel said that he should reign for ever. And out of
controversy, the Prophet meant not so much the former bodily as the latter
spiritual deliverance, and restitution; even as the event plainly showed. For
although that the men of Judah returned, under Nehemiah, etc. yet the people of
Israel were never so restored; so that assuredly we are to think that by
corporal benefits, spiritual blessings are signified. By the Jews and the
Israelites, the spiritual seed of Abra ham; by repossession of Canaan, the
possession of the graces of the holy Ghost. A mystery touched before, and to
be had in remembrance for the better understanding of Moses and the Prophets;
For it pleased GOD by lively figures to foster the expectation, which his
people had of Christ. Joseph and Sampson, the one a Nazarite of his brethren,
the other for his brethren, figures of Christ, who should come out of Nazareth,
as the Eva^gelists show, sold by his brethren as Joseph, slain for their
salvation, as Sampson. Blood on the posts. Angel must not touch those that are
marked with Christ's blood. The high Priest with all his ornaments, figures of
his redemption, as the Apostle to the Hebrews shows. Serpent exalted. Christ
raised on the cross. the sting of the Serpent, and dragon in the Reve. shall
not hurt us, looking on him that saves us from all our sins. For as Moses
brought the Israelites to the border of Canaan, and sight of it, but none
except Joshua could bring them into possession of it: so the law may show us,
the blessings and promises of GOD, but Christ by his gospel makes us enjoy
them. So David's stone refused. Jonah in the belly of the whale, and his
torments, Christ's death and resurrection. And even so these things here handled
are by the Apostles expounded of Israel and Judah according to the faith. That
place of Isaiah 9. Zabulon and Nepthalie, Mat. 4. when the light of the truth
shone amongst them. That which is in the last of Amos, James, 5. Acts, 9.
applied not only to Israel, according to the flesh, but according to the spirit
also. In the place where it was said ye are my people, fulfill led in
Christians, when they are called the sons of GOD. As James, Paul, Matthew
expounded those, so we these. Namely that both the Jews and Gentiles chosen to
be the people of GOD, shall repossesse that, which was signified by the land of
Canaan, of which we were deprived by our own sins. Which opinion is
diligently to be marked against the frantic dreams of Jewish Rabbines, who
dreaming their men that now live, to be they who should be thus set in
possession, do not expound that which here is said of such as were led
captive, of them that Salmanasar and Nebuchadnezzar, Vid. Io^eph. and Sever.
lib. 2. and (...). annal part 3 and Egesi^. l. 5 Cyrill in Esai. lib. (...).
o^at. 1, 2, 3, 4.
led away, but of those that Titus in the destruction of Jerusalem made
captives. And because they saw themselves since dispersed through diverse parts
of the Empire, by Canaan they say is here understood Germany, by Zarephath,
^rance, and by Sepharad Spain. And so when it is said they should possess the
South side, and the plain, they say is meant, that they shall not have the
hills which are not for tilling, but the plain and bottomes of the hills.

Against which peevish exposition we need not say much: only we may note, that
it cannot stand with the circumstances of the text. For when it is said this
host, it is evident that he spoke of his own time, that is, of such as
presently were here carried into captivity. 2. Zarephath is elsewhere in
Scripture, 1. King. 17. Genesis 10. set down for the border of -- as for that
which they allege out of a tradition, that with the^ the names signify these
countries -- so deserve they to be blinded that believe such dreams. For they
say that when Joshua expelled the Cananites, many of them fled into Germany,
whereas in the 1. 2. 3. of Judges, it is said of such as were not slain, that
they remained in this and that tribe. 3. Where here the Prophet speaks of
Judah and Jerusalem, as of two distinct parts, it is manifest that Titus only
led away them of Jerusalem. For the Israelites after their captivity by
Salmanasar were never restored. 4. Where they add that Zepharad being a proper
name comes near to the name wherewith they call Spain, it is plain that
although the Chaldee Paraphrast expounds it as a proper name, yet is not the
name of Spain, and it might be the name of some place then known, that now is
not. But the Hebrew word may be taken for a common name, signifying as much as
a bond or limite of dominion, being made of two words, which have that
signification. But these be like the dreams of their Ancestors, of the
sitting at the right and left hand in the kingdom, and of the Chiliasts, and
Mahomet, whose bliss they say shall be to Vid. Just. dial. ^um Tryphon.
Hieron. lib. 18. in Esai in pres. and de scriptor. (...) verbo, Pap^as.
Prateol. de ^aeret. lus.
pamper up their bellies, etc. But the Prophet meant spiritual blessings, the
joy of the faithful in the service of GOD, and glory of the Saints: which was
begun by Christ at his first coming, is continued by his servants till his
latter coming, which shall be then perfected. John saw scaled, not only of
the twelve tribes, Rev. 7.
but of all tongues. A point to rejoice in. as 13. Acts, the Gentiles were glad
and glorified the word of the Lord. By Act. 13. 48.
this means the true Israelites are admitted to partake of the twelve tribes,
and of those trees that grow on both Rev. 22. 2.
sides the river.

The means by which all this shall be accomplished is lastly set down by
Saviors coming up to Sion. This in figure was performed, when Zerubbabel
Christ a Savior.
with the rest came up from Babylon to build Jerusalem, these which restored
that city and temple are called Saviors, as in truth such as restore us to
our ancient inheritance, etc Properly indeed none, but GOD can be called a
Savior, as in Isaiah and Hosea, I even I Me^ Saviors.
and there is no Savior besides me: but he is so called as a principallagent,
men as ministerial instruments. So the name of Jesus proper to our Savior,
because he should save his people. Otherwise Paul exhorts Timothy -- for so
shall thou save thy self and them that hear thee: so all the ministers of the
gospel: yea all Christians after a sort are called Saviors; as James, 5. If
any err from the truth, and another convert him, let the same know that he
shall save a soul from death, and cover a multitude of sins. Which is
understood of every one, that by admonishing another keeps him, or
withdraws him from sin. Some save with fear, pulling them out the fire of
Jude. Which is the duty of every Christian man, For that is a question worthy
of Cain, am^ the keeper of my brother? There should be such a care in us
toward our brethren as was in Joseph, who not only dealt with his father for
them, but counseled the^ not to fall out by the way. Would to GOD we had many
Joseph's, and few Cains, who when they have murdered their brethren, demand
whether they are their keepers. Now if this be required of all, how much more
of Ministers, into whose mouth the word of salvation is put. For which cause
Timothy is expressly warned to continue in exhortation, etc. for so he should
save himself 1. Tim. 4, 16.
and his hearers... if he do not exhort, etc. and continue therein, he is no
savior but a destroyer. The condition of his own salvation is this, if thou
do thus thou shall save thy self, else not. Let the^ then which are in that
place, which Timothy was in, consider to what they are called, even to teach
and exhort, and that not only all in general, but every particular wicked man.
As GOD gives in commandment to his Prophet. If thou tell the wicked man, if
not, his blood shall be required at thy hand. What then shall become of such
watchmen, as either cannot or do not warn, of the unlearned that can only
read, and not teach, of dumb dogs, that cannot bark, non residents, who
teach not at all, and though they preach their Quarter sermons yet are not such
as perform the commandment of Paul to continue. But such Shepherds shall have
their portion with goats, and not with the sheep. Both the blind, and the
blind guide shall fall into the ditch.

They also who are to be taught are here to leatne their duty. For if none can
be saved, but such as call upon the name of the Lord, and none can call on him
that believe not, and none can believe unless they hear. it is evident, that
if we will be saved we must hear. 2. Kin. g 4. The Sunamite tells her
husband, that she would go to the man of GOD, he asks her what she will do,
seeing it was neither the sabbath, nor new moon. Whereby we gather that it was
the use of this good woman, at such time to resort to Carmel where the Prophets
did then use, to instruct the people in faith and religion. There be few women
amongst us like this Sunamite, she went certain miles, these will not walk a
few paces, to hear the same doctrine which she learned. As for the men of
this City, neither will they take the pains to come; I would they did provide
that the man of GOD might come to the^: or that there were in the^ that love to
Gods Ministers which was in this woman who provided for Elizeus, a chamber, a
bed, etc. that when 2 King. 4. 10.
he came that way, he might come in and abide there. It was said that this
matter was in good forwardness, but is hindered, if so be it be, I must say as
Paul, O ye foolish Galathians who has bewitched you that having begun in the
Gal. 3. 1. 3. Mat 8. 34.
spirit, you would now be made perfect by the flesh: made you such account of
your hogs, that for them you request Christ to depart from your coasts.

We should here speak of the second effect of GODS word, whereby it is a
savor of death in them that perish, when it is said, they shall judge Esau. But
of this has been spoken heretofore. It remains then to say somewhat of the
last point, which is of Gods kingdom, whereof I need not speak, because we
are taught daily in our petition to say, thy kingdom come. Only consider what
a happiness it is to be of that kingdom. If the Queen of Saba thought Solomon's
servants happy, that had him to rule them: how much more they which have a
greater then Solomon, Christ Jesus, the Lord of Lords, and king of kings!
Wherefore we are willingly to submit ourselves to his commandments. GOD forbid
any of us should say, why should this man reign over us? No greater selicitie
then to be under his gracious, peaceable, and righteous government. For if
we feel some taste of comfort in the government of Q. Elizabeth, what and how
great shall we enjoy under him? Which the Lord in goodness make us partakers of.

Amen.
FINIS.
A SERMON UPON PART OF THE eighteenth Psalm.

PREACHED TO THE PVBLIKE assembly of Scholars in the University of Oxford the
last day of August, 1586.

BY JOHN RAINOLDES: Upon occasion of their meeting to give thanks to God for
the detection and apprehension of Traitors, who wickedly conspired against the
Queens Majesty and the state of the Realm.

PSALM. 20. 6.

Now know I that the Lord does save his anointed, does hear him out of his
holy heavens, by excellent strength, the safeguard of his right hand.



Printed at Oxford by Joseph Barnes. 1613.

JOHN RAINOLDS, TO THE REAder, grace and peace in Christ.
THE reasons that moved me (good Christian Reader) to preach this short Sermon
upon shorter warning then gladly I would, have prevailed with me to set it
down in writing also at more leisure, and to publish it. For both the godly
subjects may be stirred up thereby to greater thankefulnes for the manifold
blessings, that God by her Majesty's means, and in her safety, has bestowed
upon us: and the discontented may be put in mind to content themselves with
Esai. 8, 6.
the w^ters of Shiloah, albeit running softly, least the great and mighty
waters of the River go over all their banks, break into Judah, and overflow
it. The former whereof I know that I cannot be deceived in: because rain and
snow do not fall in vain upon fruitful ground. In the latter, I hope, I shall
not altogether. Unless with Religion both wit and reason have forsaken them:
that they care as little for honestly, as for piety; for profit, as for
honesty. For what can they look for at the hands of foreiners, though knit in
never so strait confederacy with them, and joined in profession of the same
faith, or perfidiousnes rather, of the falsely named Catholic religion, more
then the Jews had of the Assyrians? By whom, for all their 2 King. 16. ^0
altar erected to the pattern of the Assyrian at Damascus, 2. Chr. 28. 20 2
King. 18. 14.
they were often grievously vexed and pilled. Platin. devitis Pont. in Johan.
24.
When the citizens of Papia in. Italy were at dissension by reason of the
faction between the G^lphes and the Gibellines: the Gibellines procured a
favorer of theirs, called Facinus Canis, to come and assist the^ with a power
of men, upon agreement and covenant; that he should have the goods of the
Guelohes for his pay. But he, being come once into the city with his men of
war, spared neither of them: his soldiers would be served. Whereof when the
Gibellines did complain unto him, saying, that their goods too were spoiled
against agreement: he answered, that themselves were Gibellines, and should be
safe: but their goods were Guelphes, and must pay for it. The Gibellines of
Papia could not foresee this: our Catholics by them may. Let them leave their
brainsicke desires and divelish purposes of bringing a Faci^ Canis into their
country: least by experience they f^le (which God forbid) that though
themselves be Catholics, their goods may be Heretics; perhaps some
Heretike-blood in their bodies also, by contagion of ours. The Lord take away
this stony heart from them, and give them an heart of flesh, a new spirit: that
we may all jointly praise him for the deliverance of our gracious Queen, and
pray for the continuance of her blessed government, to the honor of his name,
the furtherance of his gospel, the welfare of his Church, the peace and
prosperity of our English Judah, the grief and disappointment of Popish
Assyrians, and the confusion of Antichrist. At Corpus Christi College in
Oxford, October. 24. 1586.

PSALM. 18. VER. 47, 48, 49, 50, 51. 47. The Lord lives, and my blessed
strength: therefore let the God of my salvation be exalted.

48 The mighty God, that gives me revengements, and brings people under me.

49. That delivers me from mine enemies: yea, thou have exalted me above them
that rose up against me, thou have delivered me from the cruel man.

50. Therefore will I confess thee, O Lord, among the Gentil^, and I will s^g
unto thy name.

51. He gives great deliverances to his king, and shows mercy to his
anointed; to David, and to his seed for ever.


IT has been a godly custom of the faithful, although not observed so
customably always as by Phil 4 6. Col. 3. 17. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18.
the Rules of faith it ought, that when they received any special benefit,
either in attaining to things commodious for them, or (...) avoiding of
discommodities: they lifted up their voices to the author of it, the Father of
mercies, the God of all comfort, and did honor him with giving special
thanks for it. Melchisedek king of Salem, a man of power and credit in the
land of Canaan, had not so great cause to care for the state of Abram and Lot,
two strangers in the land. Yet when Abram had rescued Lot being taken, and had
spoiled the spoilers: Melchisedek brake forth into his praise who gave the
victory; Blessed be the high God, which has delivered thine enemies into thy
hand. The Genesis 14. 20.
state of the Israelits touched Moses nearer: how much the less is it to be
marvelled at, if he thought it his duty to magnify the Lord for guiding them
out of Egypt Exodus 15. 1.
through the red Sea, and drowning Phara^ with his host. Though that the
children of Israel themselves, an unthankful, murmuring, and stif^ecked
nation, should join therein with Moses, all, both men and women it is a
president worthy to be noted to the shame of Christians, if in greater measure
of the grace of God we show less gratitude for his graces. The feasting and
joy that the Jews kept for their own deliverance out of the snares of Haman,
and for his destruction with Est. 9. 17.
the partakers of his conspiracy, might seem to be only a pro^ne rejoicing
as worldly ^ded men c^monly do use at their good successes. But, that it was
holy and seasoned with a sacrifice, such a sacrifice as lawfully they might
offer there, where then they were dispersed, the circumstance of sending parts
unto the poor, with precepts and examples of days in like sort Deuteronomy. 16. 14.
(...). (...) 11.
kept holy to the Lord, does argue. We are assembled at this present, fathers
and brethren, beloved in the Lord, to give him most humble and most hearty
thanks for his great and singular goodness showed unto us in discovering the
traitorous intent of graceles wretches, who vilanously conspired to take away
the life of our gracious Queen (whom God long preserve!) and to kindle flames
of vprores through the realm, to the utter wasting of her faithful subjects.
O that we had the hearts to praise him for it with the like religious
affection of spirit in zeal and sincerity, as Melchisedek did for Lot
recovered by Abram, as Moses and the Israelites for the Egyptian yoke broken,
as the Jews for their safety and the destruction of their enemies! Sure we
have greater causes so to do, then any of them had. For Lot was but one, and
that a mean man: nor much endangered more then of loss of liberty. Here a
most excellent Princess was in hazard, not of liberty, but of life, with God
knows how many righteous Lots besides. And the bodily t^s which the
Israelites endured in Egypt under the taske-mast^s that Phara^ placed over
them, were nothing in comparison of the spiritual bondage of Antichristian
tyrants, to whom, might these Egyptian imp^ h^ had their wills, we should (it
is likely) h^e been most lamentably enthralled. Neither has the Lord so
mercifully delivered us out of the Lions mouth at this time only, but at
sundry other heretofore often: that the Jews could not be so much beholding to
him for that of Haman, who did not live to put them more then once in danger.
Wherefore that we may accept the more thankfully and dutifully esteem of his
inestimable goodness, in saving our gracious Queen and us her subjects from
so great, so many, so (...) M^iefs; I have thought good to take for the ground
of mine advertisement and exhortation, these words, which you have heard,
written by the godly Prince and Prophet David in the eighteenth Psalm, aso^g
of thanksgiving, which he made, when the Lord had delivered him out of the hand
of all his enemies, and out of the hand of Saul. Forso is it noted in the title
thereof; and manifested farther by the course of the story i^ the second of
Samuel, where the same is wholly registered again wellnigh word for word, as a
most worthy and memorable monument to be thought upon eft^s of all 2. Sam. 22.
1.
posterity, that on like favor received of the Lord they might show
themselves alike grateful to him. In these words therefore comprehe^ding
briefly the purport and (...) of the whole Psalm by way of conclusion, two
things are recomm^ to our considerations: one is the benefit of God in
delivering David from his enemies; the other, the thankfulness of David unto God
for the deliverance. The benefit of God in delivering David is signified by
that he faith. The Lord (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) that the Lord (...) (...)
spec^ of his being, his everlasting (...), (...) wh^ sense notwithstanding be
is said to live, and to ^ly: Act 14. 15. (...). 106. and 157. (...). (...). 6.
16.
but in respect of his works, his effects to David ward, in whose preservatio^
he shows that he (...)? and saves his and rules all things by his (...)
providence. Which meaning David opens in that he adioineth, and my blessed
strength: calling God his strength, his fortress, his rock, his blessed
strength and fortress, his rock, his blessed strength and fortress, because
his life, his safety, his welfare is maintained by the might and mercy of the
living God. As in the beginning he testified also: The Lord is my rock, and my
Psalm. 18. 2.
fortress, and my deliverer, my God, my strength in whom I will trust, my
shield, and the horn of my salvation, my refuge. And this is the benefit of
God unto David. The thankfulness of David unto God follows: Therefore let
the God of my salvation be exalted. Wherein, by the way, the cause of his
thankfulness, to wit, the benefit, is repeated. For though in our tongue the
name of salvation is by common use referred to the blissful state of life
eternal in the kingdom of heaven, whereto the scripture phrase does likewise
often refer it: yet is it amplified in the Heb. (...)
Prophets language here to bodily safety and temporal preservation of this
present life. As (...)
salvatio^s also are afterward mentioned, or (as our English translation
interprets it) deliverances: and before, Verse. 51.
he set down the general proposition with the Verse 3.
same word, I call upon the Lord who is worthy to be praised, and I am (...)
safe from mine enemies. Unto this author then of his safety he renders
praise and honor: and that in such sort as may stir up others thereunto
withal, that God by the thankesgiving of more may be more glorified, let him
be exalted. To the performance of the which duty, that he may give a sharper
edge and hotter zeal to himself and others; he amplifieth and opens more
particularly both the cause of the duty and the duty it self, in the verses
following. Touching the cause of the duty, he says, The mighty God, that
gives me reuengeme^ts, and brings people under me, that delivers me from
mine enemies: yea, thou have exalted me above them that rose up against me,
thou have delivered me from the cruel man. A summary but pithy rehearsal of the
specialties of the favor done him by God against 1. Sam. 18. and 19. and 23.
and 24 and 26.
Saul, against 2 S^ 2 and 3. and 4.
Saul's son Ish-bosheth, against the 1 Samuel 5 and 8
Philistines, the 2. Sam. 8.
Moabites, the 2 Samuel 8 10.
Syrians, the 2 Samuel 8. and 10 and 11.
Ammonites, the 1. Sam 30. and 2 Samuel 3.
Amalekites, and the 2. Sam. 8. Psalm. 60
Idumaeans, against 2. Sam. 15. and 17 and 18.
Absolon, against 2. Sam. 20.
Sheba, with their rebellious accomplices of Israel and Judah too. Of whom a great
many were punished in justice: the Lord avenging him of some, by other men's
hands; of some, by his own, as being armed thereunto with Romans 13 4
the sword of vengeance. The rest, though their lives were spared in mercy, yet
were they brought in awe and subjection under him. So himself, his enemies
either not remaining or not remaining enemies, at the least not daring to
practice their enmity, was delivered from them. Yea, (which ^ 2 Samuel 4. 8.
he utters more emphatically by turning of his ^ 2 Samuel 10. 18 and 18. 31.
speech to God) God did exalt him and advance him higher then any of his
adversaries, that rose up against him, and delivered him from Saul, who of long
time pursued him most fiercely and put him often in present danger Heb. the man
of violences 2. Sam. 22 49.
of his life, from the cruel, violent, the most violent man. Touching his duty
whereupon, he adds, Therefore will I confess thee, o Lord, among the
Gentiles; and I will sing unto thy name: he gives great deliverances to his
king, and shows mercy to his anointed; to David and to his seed for ever. To
confess the Lord, is to acknowledge him to be the author and giver of
whatsoever good we have: to sing unto his name, is with joyful melody of
voice to acknowledge it. But these things does David vow that he will do: and
therein will testify, even before the Gentiles, that the Lord, who made him
king and anointed him, does give him great deliverances, and shows him mercy,
nor only him, but his too, his seed, his posterity and progeny for ever. The
very literal sense of the which words does import an excellent thankfulness in
David, that would yield such tokens thereof, among the Gentiles, the heathens,
whom he had subdued: a more excellent goodness and graciousnes in Psalm.: 8.
43.
God, who raised him to royal state, and mightily preserved him in it, and rid
him out of many dangers, and showed mercy still to him, yea to his of spring
also that should reign after him. But all this is base in respect of that
which the holy Ghost in a spiritual meaning does hereby signify and betoken.
For David was anointed king of the Jews, made conqueror of the Gentiles, cast
into perils, troubles, pains of death, and by special grace again delivered
from them, to the intent he might be a figure (as we term it) an image and
picture, an historical picture, and a living image, that should resemble and
represent the person of another Ezekiel. 34. 23. and 37. 24.
David, Ier. 23. 5. and 33. 15.
his son, our Savior Christ. Which mystery Act. 2. 30.
himself knowing as a Prophet, did write (by inspiration from God) sundry
things, whereof the full and perfect accomplishment appears in Christ and his
kingdom, as Mat. 27. 35. Mat. 12. 10. Ioh. 2. 17. and 19 28. Act. 4. 25. and
13. 23. Romans 15. 3^ Heb. 2. 12., and 10 5.
the scriptures teach us: though a thin and slender performance of the same
was before expressed and drawn out, as it were, by lineaments and shadows of a
type and figure in David and his state. So the great deliverances and
salvations temporal, given and assured to David, and to his seed for ever
after a sort, that is for long continuance of many years succession, did
prefigure greater spiritual delivera^ces, and salvatio^s simply and absolutely
eternal, which should be likewise give^ to Christ and to his Esai, 53, 10. Ier.
33. 22.
seed; that is, to Ioh. 1. 12.
the faithful, the chil dre^ of God, who^ 2. Cor 5 20.
Christ does beget in his church 1. Pet. 1. 23.
by the inunortall seed of his word. To Genesis 3. 15.
Christ and to his Romans 16. 20.
seed is given the treading down of the Serpent, Rev. 12 7.
the overthrow and victory of Satan and his Angels. To 1. Cor. 15 v. 25.
Christ and to v. 55.
his seed is death quelled, the grave vanquished, the power of hell daunted,
and all their enemies put to flight. To Mat 4. 6.
Christ and to Heb. 1. 14
his seed is Psalm. 91 12
a guard of Ang^ appointed for their safety, Heb. 9. 12. and 10 19.
an entrance into Heaven opened, and Psalm 16. 11. Act. 2. 28. Rev. 21. 4.
the ioies of life, of everlasting solace, of endless rest, assured. Which
most excellent mercies, deliverances, salvations, as the Prophets commonly in
the end of their prophecies do commend to men by figurative speeches of
Israel, of Judah, of Sion, of Jerusalem, and blessings incident thereto: so in
this conclusion of his song of thanks does David ascend to them by the other,
to show himself grateful unto God for them. A proof whereof we have in the
last words that he concludes with. For therein he seems to respect the
promise, that 2. Sam. 7. 12.
the Lord would set up his seed after him, and stablish the throne of his
kingdom for ever. Which the Angel Gabriel, sent to the Virgin Mary, expounds
of Christ, telling her that Luke 1. 32.
God shall give unto him the throne of his Father David, and he shall reign
over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom shall be no end. And a
farther proof in the former clause touching his confessing of God among the
Gentiles: considering that S. Paul? declares the goodness of Christ in Romans 15.
9.
receiving the Gentiles to his glory to be meant thereby. As if the holy
Prophet had said, that he would use a new and unaccustomed thankfulness to
God for his passing singular and unspeakable benefits: neither would confess
him among the Jews only, as then the faithful did according to their order
of praying in the Temple; but among the Gentiles also in time to come, when
they being called to the church of Christ should be made acquainted with his
Psalms and Hymns and learn to praise the Lord with him. So that I may say the
same of these words, that on like occasion our Savior did of other, Luke 4. 21.
This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears. Howbeit not only these
words of this Scripture are fulfilled this day: but the other too, that lay
forth the favor of God unto his children in saving his anointed. For what more
commodity did the Jews receive by King David's means, then we by our sove
reign Lady Queen Elisabeths? What enemies, what dangers, what deaths did he
escape, from the like whereof the Lord has not as often, as wonderfully,
preserved her Majesty? The arc of the covenant, wherein Exodus 25. 16
the testimony was laid, whereon the mercy-seat was placed, from which Number. 7.
89.
the voice of God was hard, at which 2. Sam. 6. 2.
his name was called upon, whereto 1. Chr. 13 3.
they had not sought in the days of Saul, 2. Sam 6 ^2
King David brought into his city: and caused 1. Chr. (...). 1^
the Levites joyfully to play on instruments of music, and lift up their
voices at the bringing of it. Queen Elisabeth has brought us the body and
truth of that where of his ceremonies were but shadows only, the free use and
Christian doctrine of the Gospel, the word of God, the holy Scriptures, the
prayers and public service of the Highest, all in a language known to all:
and has moved her Subjects to receive these means of their instruction and k
salvation with l Psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing 1. Cor. 14.
19 2. Tim. 3. 15. Col. 3. 16.
with a grace in their hearts unto the Lord David to those heavenly treasures
added earthly, and enriched his kingdom with silver and gold. The purity of
coin restored by her Majesty for brssae and copper moneys 2 Samuel 8 1^. and 12
30.
wherewith she found the realm pestered, does say no less for her: beside
plate of silver and gold with other ornaments in so great plenty, as if God
would verify according to the letter that which he promised his Church in a
mystery, n For brass will I bring gold, Esai. 60 17.
and for iron will I bring silver. Much did it make for the safety of Jury,
that o David put garrisons in Syria and Idumaea, countries that bordered upon
the North and (...). 3.
South thereof. Much! But more for England, that Elisabeth (to pass over the
fortifying of borders) has furnished it with all sort of armor, and munition,
never more or better: and thereto with a royal navy of vessels, so stately,
so strong so well appointed for wars, that our land is fensed with walls, not
only of wood P as Herodot. in Polymnia.
Graecia was against Xerxes, but of brass and iron too against foreine
enemies. The people of Israel confess sed of themselves that q they were
delivered out of the 2. Sam. 19. 9.
hand of the Philistines, and other enemies by that King. The wars which our
Queen has had for our safeguard in France and elsewhere, even Lod. (...). and.
it. (...) (...). de (...) memora^ (...) (...). ^op lib. (...). (...). (...).
(...) l^. 16. and 17. Comment. de stat. rel. and reip^n Gal. lib. 5. and 6
aliens have seen and showed to the world, that they were achieved with
mavelous honor and advantage to her self and her realm. As this (by Gods
grace) which she has presently The Queens declarat touching (...) given to
the low cu^t (...).
upon the like ground in the low countries, shall be in due time also. Again,
how sweet a peace have we so long enjoyed under her at home, as under a 1.
King. 4. 25
Solomon in that consideration rather the^ a David? The fruits whereof, if
nothing from abroad had sprung to our wealth and welfare (which has
notwithstanding in no small abundance) might countervaile the profits 2. Sam
8. (...).
that did grow to Jury by David's wars and victories. Yea our dearth and
sickness, the chastisements and afflictions that now we do taste, or did
heretofore, (as Heb. 12. 7.
needs we must some, and Ps. 119 71.
expedient we should) have been but gentle threats to her Majesty's subjects,
in respect of his: 2. Sam. 21. 1.
the famine, that lasted three years together; the 2. Sam. 24. 15
plague, that consumed seaventy thousand men. And though by occasion of
difficulties and wants, what of men, what of maintenance, her Highness has not
yet bin able to provide that wise and faithful work men, for the perfect
edifying of the house of God with doctrine and discipline, should be set in
every Church through her dominion; as neither was b David by reason of his
wars to build up the Temple: yet, as he 1. Chr. 22. 8.
prepared things necessary for it, that it might be the better done when time
should serve; so has she by fostering Colleges and Schools, the nurseries of
the ministry. Her princely care whereof has appeared specially of late unto
us in a branch of Olive, that was almost withered, the state of Queens
College. Which she has refreshed, confirmed, advanced, with benefits and
immunities so bountifully and noblely: that we and our posterity have as just
cause to think of Queen Elisabeth in the name thereof, as of Queen Philippa.
Our whole Olive tree did generally feel it before in the famous and worthy Act
of Parliament 18. El c. 6.
for the maintenance of Colleges and the relief of Scholars in both the
Universities, and also Winchester and Eaton. An Act that I have heard men of
judgment say, and I am persivaded that they said truly (God grant the care of
Heads and industry of Students do bring it to effect!) may prove as
beneficial for the increase of learning, as might the erecting at least of two
Colleges. The commodities then, which we have received by her blessed
government, are as great and many, as those which the Jews did receive by
David's. That we cannot choose but acknowledge Gods favor to have been as
singularly extended unto us in preserving her, as it was to them in preserving
him. For although her Majesty has not been assaulted by so many foreign
enemies as David: yet by more domestical. Wherein her deliverances are to be
esteemed so much the more precious, by how much it is easier to beware of open
foes, then of secret; of vipers that are farther of, then in our bosoms; of 2 Samuel 2. 22.
Abners, though valiant, who profess hostility, then of treacherous 2. Sam 3.
27. and 20. 9.
Ioabs, who pretend amity. First (in Queen Mary's time) the house of Saul, I
mean the brood of them who 1. Sam. 15. 21
prefer will-worships before obedience to God, fearing, as 1 Samuel 20. 31
Saul did, that their seeds succession should not be established as long as
David lived, desired and devised to bring that to pass which D. Story. Sander.
visib. Monar. lib. 7.
one of them sithence made moan it was not done, the boughs were cut of, the
root was not hewed up. But the axe, which he wished to the pleasant root, fell on
the root of bitterness his own hairie scalpe: the devises of the wicked were
disappointed by the Lord, and their desires frustrated. Afterward the usurper,
the Ish-bosheth of Rome, indeed an That is to say, ama^ of shame and confusion.
Ish-bosheth, when She was anointed and settled in her throne, sought to
dispossess her by his accursed curse and Antichristian sentence declared and
published in his Bull. Moorton sent from him, to stir up wicked spirits to the
executing of it. The Earls of Northumberland and West-merland in arms, with
thousands of rebels. When they were fled and scattered: their outrage renewed by
Dacres and his legion. The Bull it self proclaimed, as it were, by ^elton, to
gather more conspiratours to it. All in vain still. For the hand of the Lord
was over his handmaid, and made his word good, that Prove. 26. 2.
the undeserved curse came not upon her: (...) Ps. 109. 17.
came to them who louedit, and they were clothed with it as with a garment. Now
what should I say of the traitors in Ireland? of Stukeley the rakehell
Pontificiu, Piaefectus, Marchio Hi berniae Gene brard. Chron lib 4.
the Popes Irish Marquis, sent thither to subdue it, slain in Barbary by the
way; of Sanders the Priest, the firebra^d of sedition, dead there agreeably to
his life; of the arch rebels, the Earl of Desmond, and his brother, served
both like 2. Sam. 20 22
Sheba; of the whole rabble of their mates and soldiers, Italian, Spanish,
Irish, feeling by the vengeance of deserved miseries the folly and f^ie of
their ^ewd attempts. What of the brainesicke youth, Summerfields Whose
enterprise in substance like unto Achitophels, did purchase 2. Sam. 17 23
Achitophels event and end unto him. What of Parry, the proud miscreant? who
having opportunity to work his divelish vow, and being resolute to do it, The
declarat. of W. Parries treasons.
the Pope incensing him with allowance of the fact and plenary pardon of his
sins, the Cardinal of Como with co^me^datio^ and request the Papists some with
counsel, some with prayer for him, some with remembrance at the altar; and
Allens traitorous libel making it clear in his conscience, that it was lawful
and meritorious, every word therein a warrant to a mind prepared: there was but
1 Samuel 20 3.
a step between her and death, had not God bewrayed him by his Ionatha^, and by
the hand of justice given him that meed which his vow did merit. An intent as
mischievous and more pote^t means had the next conspiracy, The disco very of
Fr. Throcmort. treasons, etc
which, dealt in before by Fr. Thorckemorto^, was after prosecuted by others.
The Popes aid (as always) ready, to gain kingdoms; the Spanish Kings
assistance; the Duke of Guyse with forces to invade the realm; the plots of
coasts and havens for his fit arrival; the names of Recusa^ts with hope of
their furthera^ce; the heathens ^aging, and the people murmuring, kings ba^ding
the^selus, and princes taking counsel against the Lord and his anointed. Yet
eve^ in that also, were their powers and policys never so out-reaching, there
showed himself above the^ a mightier and wiser: Psalm. 2. 4.
who sits in the heavens, and laugheth the^ to scorn, discovering and
dispersing the smoaky puffes of their endevors. Which of his accustomed goodness
and bounty he has done in this to, the last, and I beseech God it be the last,
that now he has disclosed. In the discomfiting whereof, and of the former, his
outstretched arm has appeared the more glorious, because the underminers of
her Majesty's state have cloaked their attempts with pretense of Religion, and
salvation of souls, most subtle means and forcible to inveigle men: and, to
steal away her subjects hearts from her, have reconciled the^ to her deadly
enemy as to their sovereign Pastor: and made the^ sure unto him by badges and
pledges of hallowed grains, of medals, of beads, of Agnus-deis, of crucifixes,
of pictures, with A Po^sh e^ bleme (...) A theists. See Prove. 23. 26.
Fili, da mihi cor tuu^, et sufficit, Son, give me thy heart, and it suffices,
and other such spiritual sorceries. A practice more dangerous the^ any of
David's adversaries did use, yea the^ 2 Samuel 15 1.
Abso lom himself, the cunningst of the^ all; who had no High Priests that
would take upon the^ to depose David; nor meritoriousnesse to see devils
incarnate with to murder him; nor The Popes Bull granted to D. Harding and
others, anno Dom 1567
autorities for Harding, and others, to assoile the^ that would revolt from
him; nor The exec. of justice in Eng for treason.
faculties for Parsons, and Campian, to instruct the^ to Ne Bulla P^j Quinti
oblige^ Catholicos rebus sic stantibus: as they sto^d anno Dom. 1580.
obey, or Tum dem^ quando pub lica eiusdem Bullae exequutio fieri poteti^.
rebel, as things should fall out; nor Jesuits, and Seminary Priests, (like
the Augustine. cont. epist. Parmen. l. (...). (...). 9 and l. 3. c 6.
Donatists) to spread seditious doctrine, and bear the world in hand, that
Bristow Mo tiu. 15. C^ certat. eccl. cath in Angl. ad verse. Cal^. (...) Pu^it.
Eccle siae Anglics nae t^ophaea. Ro^ae.
when they were punished for it, they were Martyrs. Wherefore all the words of
the text that I treat of, which do lay before us the most provident care and
fatherly love of God in saving and delivering our most excellent Princess out
of the hand of her enemies, of Papists, of Atheists, of Malcontents, base
noble; secret and open; external and domestical; are fulfilled and verified in
our ears this day. It remains that the rest, which concern our duty to God
for this benefit, be likewise fulfilled and verified in our ears, or in our
hearts rather, nay both in hearts and bodies also. The foremost degree and step
whereunto is to acknowledge that the Lord, our blessed strength, our mighty
God, is the author of (...): it is he that lives, that saves his anointed,
that gives her reve^geme^ts, that brings people under her, that delivers
her from her enemies, from the cruel man, that exalts her above the^ who
rise up against her, that gives great deliverances, and shows mercy to her,
yea to al his servants, the children of God, the seed of Christ, for ever. And
this has our Sovereign provoked us to do by her own example: The Q^eens
^euers to the L. Mayor of Land. and his brethren.
ascribing not only the present detection and apprehension of traitors to the
great and singular goodness of God; but also the infinite blessings laid upon
her, as many as ever Prince had, yea rather as ever creature had. The Lord has
endued her Majesty's person with most rare prudence; her state with Cou^sailers
very wise and faithful; her Realm with many thousands of dutiful loving
subjects. Nor is it to be doubted out that sundry circumspect eyes and loiall
hands of these have bin occupied in finding out and bringing to light the
conspiracy. Yet because the Lord is Iam. 1. 17.
the father of lights, and 1 Cor. 4 7.
what has any man that he has not received? neither ca^ he effectuate ought
with that he has except the Lord bless it, Psalm. 127. 1
except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it; except the
Lord keep the city, the keeper watches in vain: therefore does her Highness
in the means themselves and above the means acknowledge the working of the
principal agent, under whose protection her self rests safe, and sees
vengance powered on the^ that wish her evil. Which I would to God the
disloiall hearts, if there be any more yet, of that brood of Cockatrices, did
acknowledge also: and, as Ps. 4 4.
the Prophet wills, did weigh it with themselves, and think upon their bed
of it. Then were it to be hoped that in consideration thereof they would be
still: and after 1 Sa^. 24. 5 and 26 8.
his example, whose advise that is, detest the very breath of such as make
mention of laying violent hands upon the Lords anointed. For though it were
true, as The ans. to the ex^ of just cap. 5.
the traitorous libeller endeavors to persuade men, that the Popes sentence
against her were as lawful, as Samuels was against Saul; which yet is most
false, and D. Bilso^ of Christian ^ubiect. part. 3.
proved so to be; but grant it were true: yet had they to remember that David
did refrain to lay hands on Saul after Samuels sentence; neither of humanity
only, but of duty: 1. Sa^. 26 9
for who ca^ lay his hand on the Lords anointed (says he) and be giltles? At
least, if they would not be still, as he was, for conscience sake, yet for Rom
13. 4
fear they might be: seeing that Eccl. 10. 20.
a foul of the air shall carry the voice and a bird shall declare the matter,
if they but speak evil of the king, yea in their thought, much more if they
intend to do him any evil. And sure, Ps. 7. 12.
if they turn not, if they whet their swords, bend their bows and make them
ready, and getting themselves deadly weapons prepare their arrows for
persecutors: they have traveled with lewdness and conceived mischief, to
bring forth a lie; into the pit, that they have dug, they shall fall; their
mischief shall return upon their own heads, and on their ^wne pates shall
their cruelty light. For God does give revengements unto his anointed, and
shows mercy to his Queen advancing her above them who rise up against her.
But whether they do use this benefit of God to their good, or no: let us, my
dear brethren, let us and our houses (as Ios 24. 15
Joshua said) serve the Lord. And that not by acknowledging only Gods goodness
in this and all his benefits, the foremost step to thankfulness: but the
next also, I mean, by confessing of him among the Gentiles, and singing to his
name with yielding him all glory for it. For the Heathens themselves, in that
small knowledge of God which sin left the^, did acknow ledge him to be the
worker and author of the commodities that they had. In the Greek Poets (...).
the Gods are surnamed, by a common title, the givers of good things. Plin.
hist not. lib. 15. cap. 30.
The Captains of the Romans having conquered their enemies, took part of the
laurel (which they did bear in sign thereof) and laid it in the lap of
Jupiter. The Caldaea^ king subdued diverse nations, took their holds, spoiled
their cities, seized on their wealth, Hab. 1 11
ascribing that his power and force to his God. But Ro^. 1. 21.
they did not glorify God as they ought, neither were thankful. They robbed
him of his honor and gave it unto 1. Cor. 8 5
many Gods, Dan. 5. 4.
their own Idols, and Ro^. 1. 23.
Images of mortal creatures. Yea part of the laurel they kept to themselves:
Hab. 1. 16
sacrificing to their nets, and burning incense to their yarne, because by the^
their portion was fat and their meat plenteous. The time of this ignorance is
overpast, brethren, and the days are come whereof it was Esa. 11. 9.
prophesied, that the earth should be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as
waters cover the sea. How much the more excuselesse shall our foul ingratitude
and ungodliness be: if we be no thankfuller to him then the Heathens, the^ the
Greeks, the Romans, the Caldaeans were. Chiefly since beside the temporal
benefit of the preservation of our Prince and us, we have received graces more
excellent and precious to endure for ever: name ly, the enjoying of his Son
Christ Jesus, 1. Cor. 1, 30.
our wisdom, our righteousness, our sanctification, our rede^ptio^; the Spirit
of adoption, Ro^. 8. 15.
whereby we have boldness to cry Abba father; the peace of conscience,
tranquillity of mind, contentednes of heart; the inheritance immortal,
undefiled, and that withers not; the comfort, the protection, the assurance
of his love: in a word so many blessings both of this life, and of the life to
come, as never any nation under heaven greater. Wherefore I beseech you by the
mercies of God, who spared not his own Son for our sakes, but gave him to the
death, the vile death of the cross, that we might live through him: let us
confess him sincerely and faithfully, Tit. 1. 16.
not only in words, but in deeds; and confess him among the Gentiles, eve^
those which are strangers and alie^s from the faith, that we may win the^ to
the Lord. Let 1. Pet. 2. 12.
our co^versatio^ be honest among the^: that by our good works, which they
shall see, they may glorify God in the day of the visitatio^. Let us cast away
profane songs of wantonness, of lightness, of vanity; and sing unto his name:
using both our voice and speech in all respects Ephesians. 5. 3.
as it becomes Saints. To be short, let us show, let us strive to show by all
parts of duty a thankful acceptance of the great saluatio^s, that he has
wrought for us, and zealous remembrance of the end whereto: Luk 1. 75
that we being delivered out of the hand of our enemies, should serve him
without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
life. The godly Prince and Prophet, whose virtuous example as in all the rest,
so in this specially should be a spur unto us, calling into mind how God had
delivered his soul from death, his eyes from tears, and his feet from
falling, brake out into these words: Ps. 116 12
What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits toward me? I will take
etc. Neither said he more therein, the^ he performed. For when 1. Chro. 16. 2.
he had offered sacrifices of thanksgiving, he made a holy banquet therewith
unto the people, in remembrance of the manifold safeties and deliverances, that
he had received. He praised the Lord, and called upon his name: his Psalms
do witness it to this day. Ps 57. 2
He promised that he would judge righteously: 2. Sa^ 8. 15
he did it. Ps 132. 2
He vowed to bring the arc into a place of rest: 2. Sa^. 6 16
he brought it. How great cause we have, fathers, and brethren, to say as he
said. What shall we render so the Lord? your selves do well know. How small care
we show of doing as he did, in praising God, and paying our vows before his
people: the world does see. Our slacknes in freque^ting of sermons, of prayers,
of celebrating the Lord supper, and taking the cup of the salvation of
salvations, I wish it were amended rather then reproved. We have made vows and
promises to God, al, of perpetual holiness in baptism: some of special duties,
in their several callings. And is it to be hoped that every one of us, though
not with David's zeal, yet with some measure of it, will pay them to the Lord?
Sure the greater hope thereof is to be had, if that, which has been moved of
order to be taken for ordinary sermons and preaching of the word on our
Sabbath-daies in the afternoon, not the forenoone only, may be effected by the
godly forwardnes of the^ who should say, Heb. 6. 3
And this will we do if God permit. The father of mercies and God of al
comfort, who has raised unto us a most glorious light, and placed a most
gracious Princess in the throne of government among us, sanctify us
throughout with his holy spirit: that we may offer up the sacrifices of
righteousness, the fruits of our lips, of our hearts, of our hands, to the glory
of his name for all his benefits powered on us And (...) has hitherto giv^
(...) (...) deliverances and showed mercy to his anointed: so be (...) we him
for his Son our Saviors sake to do it still. Save her, O Lord, save her out of
the hand of al her enemies. Let their root be as rotte^nes and their b^d as
dust who rise up against her. Bless her with the zealous spirit of Josias, with
the peace of Solomon, with the years of David that she may long reign a godly,
a happy, an ancient Mother in Israel. Finally continue thy fatherly love and
favor toward her for ever, and toward us her subjects, the children of thy
covenant: that we both in this life and in the life to come may confess thy
good nes and sing unto thy name with thy blessed Servants and ^lect Angels,
Rev. 7. 12
Praise and glory and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and power, and might, be
unto our God for evermore.

Amen

