THE House-holders HELP, For Domestical Discipline: OR

A Familiar Conference of Household instruction and correction, fit for the
godly government of Christian FAMILIES.

Dedicated to all religious House-holders by R. R. Minister of Gods Word.

REVEL. 3. 19. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore
and repent.

Printed at London by George Purslowe, for John Budge, and are to be sold at
the great South door of Paul's, and at Britains Bursse. 1615.

To all Religious house-holders, their Children and servants: the saving
knowledge of Gods holy Word, most heartily wished.
IN the first Chapter of the Proverbs of Solomon, it is written thus in the
eight and ninth verses: My son, hear the instruction of thy father, and forget
not the law of thy mother: for they shall be an ornament of grace unto thy
head, and chains about thy neck. From which words may be drawn a double
doctrine: First, that all godly Parents should teach and instruct their
children in the Law of the LORD: Secondly, that their children should learn
and obey their wholesome instruction. For the first, we have both practice and
precept thereof in the sacred Scriptures: the practice in David; who 1 The
practice of godly Parents in teaching their children.
taught Solomon his son, saying, And thou, Solomon my son, know thou the
God of thy father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing
mind, 1. Chron. 28. 9. Solomon also says, that his father David taught him
and said unto him, Keep my commandments and live: Get wisdom, get
understanding, etc. Prou. 4. 4. This was the practice, always, not only of
godly fathers, but also of godly mothers: So did King Lemuels mother, she
taught her son lessons of chastity, of temperance, of defending the
afflicted, of choosing, using, and commending a virtuous wife; as appears
throughout the 31. Chapter of the Proverbs: and in this first Chapter thereof,
in the eight and ninth verses, Solomon presupposes that al godly mothers will
be helpers to their husbands, in the religious and godly instruction 2
Precepts of this duty requiring it of Parents.
of their children.

Secondly, we have in the Scriptures plentiful store of precepts, requiring
this duty of all godly Parents: As Deuteronomy. 4. 10. Deuteronomy. 6. 6. 7. Deuteronomy. 11. 19.
Psalm. 78. 5. 6. Prou. 22. 6. In which place last mentioned, Solomon says:
Teach a child in the way that he should go, and when he is old, he will not
depart from it. And Ephesians. 6. 4. Fathers, provoke not your children unto wrath,
but bring them up in nurture and information of the Lord.

Thirdly, there are many reasons and 3 Reasons to persuade Parents to perform
the foresaid duty.
motives in the sacred Scriptures, to persuade all godly Parents to the
performance of this duty: which I will hereafter in another place more largely
relate; mean time remember (O Christian Parents) and look back to Salomons
motive 1 By the practice thereof, they shall make them virtuous and gracious,
adorn them and dignifie them; yea, enrich the^, and advance the^.
in this text, Prou. 1. 8. 9. to wit, that Parents shall (by the blessing of
God) upon their good instruction, make their children religious and virtuous,
as God promises, Prou. 22. 6. Yea, they shall thereby adorn them and dignifie
them, enrich them, and make them honorable and gracious, both with God and
men; which Solomon also means, when he says: that Their instructions shall
be an ornament of grace about their head, and chains about their neck.

Contrariwise, do thou neglect this 2 By neglect of it, they make them most
miserable, poor, naked, loathsome and odious, both to God and men.
duty of instructing them: then do thou make them most miserable, poor,
filthy, naked and deformed: yea, most loathsome and odious both to God and men:
as were the Laodiceans, by their blindness, Revel. 3. 17. and 18. and Elye his
sons by their profaneness, 1. Sam. 2. 12. and 17.

Yea, assuredly, it may be said of thee, that through thy negligence, thou
make thy Children, as Aaron did the people; (Even naked unto their shame:)
Exodus 32. 25. yea, and unto thine own shame and ruin for ever without
repentance. Remember Elyes downfall, and his sons, though Ely were an elect;
because he did not continually admonish them, and duly correct them: he
admonished them earnestly for a fit, 1. Sam. 2. 23. but not constantly, say
some; neither did he correct and chastise them accordingly, 1. Sam. 3. 13. But
hereof we have nearer examples, even at home; for if we cast our eyes upon
the World, we may by daily experience see, that such Children as are left unto
themselves without Discipline, they shame themselves and their Parents, and
live in all outrageous evils, in Swearing, Besselling, Whoring, Mocking, Lying,
Murmuring, Sabbath-breaking, stealing; etc. till at length they come to
fearful ends: accusing then their Parents neglect of discipline; who drew
them to destruction, as the Dragon drew down the Stars with his tail, Revel.
12. 4.

Remember (O Parents) that your 3 The necessity and equity of this duty, to be
performed by Parents.
Children have received corruption from you by natural birth, and by
conception: having therefore polluted them, you should be careful to purge
them: they are conceived, you know, in sin, and shapen in iniquity, Psalm.
51. 5. They are by natural birth, as all others are, The Children of wrath and
condemnation, Ephe. 2. 3. O therefore, let Christian equity and pity move
you to use all good means, that they may be gotten again by the seed of
regeneration, 1. Pet. 1. 23. To which purpose, prepare them for the spiritual
seed, by catechizing them, and when it is sown in them, endeavor by daily
admonition, and good instruction, to harrow it and to root it into their
hearts: in so doing, 4 A farther enlarging of the vtility and benefit of good
instruction; by specifiing some particulars of it.
whereas they are by natural birth only carnal, Ioh. 3. 6. and fleshly,
having not the Spirit, Jude 5. 19. and so do resemble Satan, and are his
Image, you shall cause them to become spiritual, and so to resemble God
himself, John 4. 24. and to become the Image of God, Colos. 3. 8. 9. Ephe. 4.
23. 24.

That seed of Regeneration sown in their souls, will keep and preserve them
from the dominion and power of sin, so that they shall not sin as do
others, 1. These. 5. 6. and Cant. 5. 2. nor as Satan and his sons do sin
in a constant course, nor to condemnation, Romans 8. 1. because Gods seed
remains in them, and because they are borne of GOD, 1. John 3. 8. 9.

Lastly, by that seed of Regeneration once received, they are made Immortal,
as the seed it self is; which is therefore called Immortal seed, 1. Pet. 1.
23. 24. 25. because it makes them Immortal, and to live for ever which do
receive it, John 5. 24.

Marcus Aurelius, speaking sometimes to such as were to teach his son, said,
that he himself being a Mortal man, had made his son Mortal by
generation; but yet he hoped that his teachers by good instruction, would make
him Immortal. So may we say of our sons and daughters; that by generation
we have made them Mortal, even subject to a double death: yet may we comfort
our selves in this, that by Christian instruction we may make them to become
Immortal.

See then by this, and consider (O 5 A Corolary conclusion from all the former
reasons.
Christian Parents,) what special privileges and dignities you may procure
for your Children by Christian instruction; thereby you may enrich them and
adorn them with all general saving graces, and with outward wealth and
honor; in particular, you may make them of carnal, to become spiritual; of
being Satan's Image, to become Gods own Image; and of Mortal to become
Immortal, and to live for ever.

But what course must I take (will some 6 Questions and Objections answered. 1.
Question Answer.
say) with my Children, when they are well instructed in the principles of
Religion? I answer, that after they have been fed with milk, they must be
nourished and fed with meat: when they have attained knowledge and
understanding, then their affections must be much moved and wrought upon, by
the word of admonition, reprehensions, consolations, etc. otherwise they will
be hardened by the custom and deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3. 13. you should
therefore daily admonish them, as Job did his sons, Job 1. 5. without which
course taken with them, the word preached will not work upon them so
effectually, as otherwise by that means it might.

I know no cause, nor need, say some, Job: yet Ib. Job. 1. 5. For as Job
always feared even his best works; which who so does not, cannot be be
blessed, Pro. 28. 14. so he considered that man's heart is a sink and sea of
all iniquity, Genesis 6. 5. Mat. 15. 19. and therefore he says, that man Is
abominable and filthy, and drinks iniquity like water, Job 15. 16.

You say, you see in them the true David did: yea, if they be not oft-times
admonished, they cannot discern the greatness and dangerousnes of their
grossest sins: for as the custom and deceitfulness of sin hardens, so it
also blindfoldeth, as in David's example you may perceive, who, till he was
reproved by Nathan, did not effectually repent, because he considered not, nor
saw not the greatness and dangerousnes of his sin, but by means of
admonition, 2. Sam. 12. 13. Hence is it, that the Apostle wills us to rebuke
the works of darkness: so calling them, because they darken our
understanding, and compares the light of reproof and admonition, to the light
of a Candle, because it discovers our sins that were hid unto us without
it, as the light of a Candle does the things which we cannot without it epsy
and see, Ephesi. 5. 13.

They are, you say, Gods image, endued with true righteousness and holiness:
yea they are undefiled, Can. 5. 2. without spot, unblemished, not to be blamed,
Ephesians. 5. 27. I answer, that Christians are perfectly pure, by the purity of
justification, by Christ's righteousness imputed; but not by the purity of
sanctification, or by righteousness renewed: in respect of the latter purity,
we are commanded continually to purge our selves from all filthiness of flesh
and Spirit, 2. Cor. 7. They are Gods Image also, by true righteousness renewed,
Ephesians. 4. 23. Cap. 553 Imago Dei, sicut est abolita corruptione vitiorum, sic
est obscurata fumo peccatorum.
24. Take heed therefore, that Gods Image be kept undefiled, and as much as in
you lies, unspotted of the world, James 1. 27. The Image of God in us, is much
defiled by us: it is daily obscured by the fume and smoke of our offenses;
(says Augustine in his Manuel:) Wherefore, you should often set before you and
yours, the looking-glass of Gods Law, that thereby beholding, both inward and
outward blemishes, daily received by the deceitfulness of sin; you and they
may be moved and directed, how to wash them away by repentance. Who would
endure his own, or his friends Image or picture to be polluted, or his own
apparel, or his face or hands, to be stained; and would not often have them
purified, and preserved from pollution? And shall we carelessly suffer the
polluting and defiling of so great and worthy a Jewel as Gods Image is? See
the danger of it, consider it: If any man defile the same, him shall God
destroy, Genesis 38. 10. 1. Cor. 10. 10. Number. 25. 9. But now Why servants should
be catechized as well as sons and children.
should have a fatherly care of his servants, as if they were his sons or
Children, and is not to use them as they use their beasts, respecting only
their labor, and the feeding of their bodies, as many Masters do: Abraham,
whose family consists as well of servants as of Genesis 17. 13. and charged his
whole household to do Justice and Judgment, Genesis 18. 19. If such as provide
not for Tim. 5. 8. then they must needs be much more worse then Infidels, which
provide not spiritual food for them. But what, are not thy servants thy
brethren in the Exodus doing, as he says; The will of God from the heart, with
good will doing service unto thee, as to the Lord, Ephesi. 6. 6. 7. 8.

These motives therefore, let them be 7 A final conclusion from the end and
use of all the former Arguments.
well meditated and pondered, that Parents may be stirred up thereby to
catechize and instruct their Children, in regard of their welfare and their
own: Secondly, let Children be willing for their own credit and profit to
hear and obey their Parents instructions: Thirdly, let Masters for the like
respect of Gods Commandment, and their own commodity, in making them to
serve themselves in the LORD; be diligent to catechize, instruct, and admonish
them, accordingly.

THE House-holders Help, FOR Domestical Discipline: OR A familiar conference
concerning Christian instruction, and correction, fit for Godly Families.
The first conference betwixt a gracious Gentleman, and his eldest son and
heir, concerning household instruction omitted.
FATHER. Son, I have sent for you, as Job sent for his sons: who, though
his sons dwelt apart from him, and had houses, and Families of their own:
yet he sent and called them home to his house, to give them needful Fathers
are to admonish their children, though they dwell apart from them, and have
Families of their own.
admonition. Job. 1. 4. and 5. Verses.


SON. GOod Father, I thank GOD for that your Christian care of me, and
according to my duty, I will be willing and glad to receive any good
instruction from you.


FATHER. I Desire to have some religious conference with you, and to admonish
you, concerning The subject or matter of the whole conference, concerns
domestical Discipline.
domestical Discipline; For I have heard that your Family is not The occasion
of this first conference.
catechized, admonished, nor corrected, according as formerly it was wont to
be, by your wife, when you are from home; and which more is, I hear that your
self do oft-times fail in the foresaid duties, when you are at home; Is it
so, my Son, is it so?


SON. GOod Father, with shame, and sorrow for it, I do confess it, to be
so: we are much subject to Spiritual idleness, and to Worldly carfulness;
I pray God give us pardon of, and power against these sins.


FATHER. I Am sort, my Son, I am very sorry for Parents should be grieved
at their childrens ungodliness, and pray for their reformation.
you; I pray God forgive you, and amend these evil manners in you: I perceive,
by your tears, and speeches, that you are humble-minded; and you do well to
confess your sins, and to crave pardon of them, and power against them; We
should prayas earnestly for power against sin, as for pardon of sin.
as David did, Psalm. 19. 13. And as Christ directs us all to do, Mat. 6. 12.
13. Consider also, my son, that unless you do as well forsake your sins,
as confess your sins; you have no promise of the pardon of them, Pro. 28.
13. 14. Esaias 55. 7. nay, pardon is denied to them that go on in their sins,
Pardon of sin is denied to them which continue in sin: and their destruction
is denounced.
Deuteronomy. 29. 20. Psalm. 68. 21. in which places, you may also see, that
unavoidable destruction shall seize upon all such.


SON. O My Father, my hearts desire is, not to love sin, nor to live in
sin, but to loath and to leave all sin; show me, (I beseech you) by what
means I may subdue and ouermaster these my predominant sins; these so strong
and mighty giants.


FATHER. IF you desire to overcome these strong corruptions, these mighty
Champions: The means to overcome our strongest corruptions, and our
predominant sins.
you must be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, wrestle
stoutly, and constantly encounter with them, Ephe. 6. 10. you have hitherto let
the spiritual sword too much rust in the sheath: if you had often drawn that
spiritual sword, and skilfully with courage and constancy resisted Satan with
it, as you are willed, Ephe. 6. 10. etc. and verse 16. 17. 18. Satan would
have fled, as God has promised, James 4. 8. Ephe. 6. 16. and as Christ for our
consolation and direction has showed, Matthew 4. 11.

Now therefore you must be better armed with more courage and constancy
against the next encounter; mean time you must judge your self, that you may
The means to prevent future judgments, is to judge our selves before they
come.
prevent future judgments, 1. Cor. 11. 31.


SON. What (I pray you) is it, and how are we to endeavor it, to judge our
selves aright?


FATHER. AS a temporal Judge does first examine the malefactors, and their
evils done, what, how many, how great, etc. and then proceeds to punish; so
must we in judging our selves; The degrees of judging aright.
first examining our selves, what, how many, and how great evils we have
committed: next, we must proceed to a spiritual judgment, censure, and
punishment, by arraigning our Souls and Spirits, with indignation inditing
them of high treason and rebellion against GOD, at the Tribunal seat of God:
Thirdly, Cor. 7. 12. by watchings, fastings, and by restraining our selves from
many lawful delights, Joel 2. 16. Fifthly, we must cross our corrupt courses
by Dan. 4. 24. for as the rule is: Contraria contrarijs curantur. Contraries
are cured by their contraries. And lastly, if afterward all these means being
used, you be again and again overcome with these corruptions: yet cease not
to encounter; bid battle always unto them, and with greater force afresh resist
them; considering that true Christians have always crucified the flesh, Gal.
5. 24. and do daily mortify their earthly members, in regard of that glorious
life that they look for, Col. Bernard, Si labor teterret, merces inuitet.
3. 4. 5. Job. 31. 2.


SON. Dear Father, this your counsel and comfort is as sweetness to my
Soul, and as healing to the bones that are broken, Pro. 16. 24.


FATHER. Give ear then again, and I will yet go on in this argument, of
judging, punishing, and correcting your self; upon often relapse and falls
into one and the same offense, (which if you do) you shall prevent both
temporal and eternal judgments of sin, and in time overcome the sin it
self; of what sort, or how great soever, the sin be, with which you are The
vtility of judging our selves.
in war.


SON. O But yet, some sins are much more stronger then that I can (weak
wretch that I am) ever be able to overcome them: of which sort are those, (I
fear me) aforementioned.


FATHER. O Nay, say not so, my Son; have you ever aforetime overcome lesser
sins? yea, I do know you have; you say you have overcome rash anger,
swearing, etc. why then, mark what comfort from thence you may conceive unto
your Soul: Comforts to encounter with our strongest corruptions.
he that can ouer-uercome rash anger, wrath, pride, lust, or any other like,
Is stronger then he that ouercomes a City, Pro. 16. 23. Saint James does
affirm that the tongue is an unruly member, and no man can tame it, James 3. 8.
It is the only grace and gift of God to tame it, which whosoever has, not sinning
as before in word, he is a perfect man, and able also to bridle all the body,
James 3. 2.


SON. SIr, I remember well that ancient rule in religion; An ancient rule in
Religion, (viz.) that the weakening, wou^ding, and death of any one sin, is the
death in time of every other sin.
that the weakening, wounding, and death of any one sin, is the weakening,
wounding, and death in time of every other sin: and S. John says, that All
that is borne of God, overcomes the world, and that this great victory is
attained by faith, 1. Ioh. 5. 4. 5. Lord therefore, I pray thee, confirm and
increase my faith, Luke 17. 5. O my good God, give unto me the shield of faith,
wherwithall I may quench all the fiery darts of the devil. Ephesians. 6. 16



FATHER. YOu say well, concerning that rule; and it does me good at my heart,
that you collect the same in sense from scripture, and conclude thereupon so
well with earnest prayer: I will therefore in conclusion of this counsel,
encourage you by some examples of such as by chastising and correcting
themselves, have overcome most strong corruptions: Examples of such, as by
chastising and iudgeing themselves, have by denying themselves overcome
themselves that is, the strongest corruptions of their flesh: or their
strongest natural, and occasional corruptions.
Hemingius on the 15. Psalm shows; that he being at Witenberge, there came
thither to hostage, a man exiled and banished for the profession of the
Gospel: this man, when he did often times swear, through an evil custom, and
did at length consider with himself, how he might amend this evil custom; he
came to D. Luther, and requested his counsel, how he might by some means
correct that custom and abuse of swearing. To whom, D. Luthers counsel.
Luther gives counsel, saying: Command (says he) thy wife, thy children, and
the rest of thy family, under a great penalty, to admonish thee of thy fault,
as often as they hear thee swear, and that straiteway thereupon, they require
of thee a great forfeiture of excellent gold. The honest Guest observes and
follows Luthers counsel: he swear, as before he was wont, he is thereupon
admonished, and pays for every oath he swears, much, and very good gold:
but after a while, upon much payment, he happily, at length left this custom
of swearing; so that afterward he was never heard to swear at all.

Other such like examples Heminge in Latin shows upon the foresaid Psalm.
Chrysostomes counsel.
Chrysostom also gives counsel in like case, to appoint a penalty of
refrayning some dinner, or some supper.

And another learned Author counsels such Householders as know their own
pronenesse, to fall often in the same offense, whatsoever open sin it be, to
determine with themselves; yea, to resolve and vow, that as often as they fall
again into the same offense, to make open confession to the family of the
first offense, if the fault be known to the family: for the second fault to
use abstinence, and to eat but only bread, and to drink water only for one
or two meals: For the third fault, to refrain all ordinary food for one or
two meals, and to give it to the needy and hungry: For the fourth fault, to
forfeit and to give away much money to many poor and The counsel of ancient,
and of very excellent authors.
needy men.

Such examples are seldom showed, nor found in families: Three examples,
experienced by the Author of this Dialogue; yet such examples are very seldom
to be seen: howbeit without this care of correcting and iudgeing our selves,
we cannot prevent temporal judgments, 1. Cor. 11. 31. Neither is our
repentance renewed effectually. Herehence it is, that many of Gods dear
Children, not using conscionably and diligently, as well these as other
ordinances of God, are so often overcome by some grievous corruptions, as were
the Disciples and the Corinthians, Matthew 18. 1 etc. Luke 22. 23. and 1. Cor.
3. 1. etc.
Howbeit I have seen only three such examples, which I will prescribe for
patterns. The first was a very religious man, who in the hearing of all his
family confessed his fault, saying: I have forgotten one maine and most
principle doctrine, this Sabbath day delivered, which I intended to have
repeated, confirmed and applied to mine own use and all yours: and therefore I
am verily grieved at my own forgetfulness: I will assuredly thus, and thus,
chastise, judge and correct my own fault.

Again, I have seen a second example hereof showed by an honest hearted
householder, who upon some open show of discord betwixt his wife and him,
before the family, was presently humbled for it, confessed it, etc. And
compared himself and his wife, to the couple pieces of the house, which if
they fall asunder, they cause other timber of the house to shrink and to go
out of order: so we, says he, having fallen at variance, and openly reproved
one another, (which reproof should have been in private) have caused all the
family to go out of order, and to imitate (as they are apt to do) our evil
example: and thereupon will the less reverence our counsels, our persons or
reproves hereafter: we will therefore (say they) confess our faults, and
chastise our selves etc. that thereby we may remove these stumbling blocks from
our family, and learn to wax wiser hereafter.

A third example, an other time I saw, Third example seen.
when the Heads and Rulers of a Religious family had heard a Sermon on the
Sabbath, and had received a good monition from the Minister their Preacher:
namely, that Masters and Mistresses must not be like Nabal, froward, and
angry; for anger rests in the bosom of fools, Ecclesiastes 7. 11. and
great frowardness is a note of great wickedness and foolishnes, as Nabals
example shows, 1. Sam. 25. 17. Afterward they repeated the principal
doctrines, which before were taught them in the Church, the which being applied
to the humbling of their own hearts, before in hearing, and then more
particularly in repeating: they confessed themselves before all the family to
have been in time past very foolish; for by frowardnes and continual
correcting, chiding and threatening, which the Apostle wills Masters to put away,
Ephesians. 6. 9. they saw they had exasperated and hardened the hearts of their sons
and servants, made them more froward, and provoked them to wrath, Ephesians. 6. 4.
and caused servants to counterfeit that, which they should not, Titus 2. 9. for
as they had heard from the Preachers mouth, that day, such as are always
chiding, threatening, or correcting, are as little feared as the thunder would
be feared, if it did daily thunder. The fruit of this last example.
This their foresaid confession wrought in them such a change, and a renewed
conversion, that they vowed as they were taught and directed to do: To wink at
and pass by many faults; either not Zach. 7. 12. Psalm. 130. 4 Mal. 3. 17. Pro.
19. 11.
reproving but seldom, or else not so sharply, but more mildly reproving, and
correcting with less severity. Thus afterward they became Lambs, which before
were Lions, through the power of Preaching, as the Prophet prophesied it should
be performed, Esaias 11. 6. 7. 8. 9. This caused their Children and servants,
(they seeing them to rebuke and correct themselves, and to reform their
manners,) to bear all rebukes and corrections with more humility, yea, both
to be ready without gainsaying to yield, confess, and acknowledge a fault
committed, with meekness and amendment ever afterward. The general end and
use of these examples.
By all this that you have heard, you may evidently see the dignity and
commodity of this domestical Discipline, which should first be imposed by
Householders upon their own shoulders, before it be laid upon their servants.


SON. I Pray you (good Father) go on yet a little farther, and as you have
showed good general remedies, so I humbly desire you to apply to my sores some
more special salues, and corasiues to mine A good hearted hearer of Gods word
is glad of sharp reproves, 1. Cor. 14. 25. and desires to be smitten as
David did, knowing that to be the only way to bring solid comfort and health
to soul and body: But on the contrariwise health is far from the ungodly,
because they regard not Gods statutes, says the Psalmographe, and they hate to
be reproved, Psalm. 50. 17. Pro. 1. 22. 1. Thessa. 4. 8.
ulcers.


FATHER. Since I see you so willing to have your sores thoroughly searched into,
and thoroughly healed; in particular therefore, for spiritual idleness and
sluggishnesse, to salve that sore, consider how Gods own hand does discover
the foresaid sore, and first, how he bids us to beware of so great a harm and
hurt to our souls, Gal. 6. 9. 2. These. 3. 13. Heb. 6. 12. Romans 6. 11. 2. Peter
1. 8. Prou. 6. 9. Math. 20. 6.

Secondly, consider more specially the evil effects thereof, spiritual
idleness is checked and blamed, mocked and shamed.

1. Arguments or motives against spiritual idleness.
Checked by Christ, Mat. 20. 6.

2. Disgraced by Solomon, Prou. 6. 6. Pro. 19. 24.

3. It brings beggary, and spiritual poverty speedily, which we can
neither, resist nor easily afterward overcome, Prou. 6. 11. Revel. 3. 17.

4. An idle person shall have Gods livery and his badge pulled off from his
back, sent out of Gods house and service with shame: he shall be without
speedy repentance afterward at last, perpetually imprisoned, Luke 8. 18. Mat.
25. 28.

Lastly, consider A special comfort applied to the repentant.
that they which by idleness are brought to such extreme poverty, that they
are utterly vnapparelled, and vnmonyed, as were the Laodiceans, Revel. 3. 17.
18. yet they are called and counseled to come to Christ, who if they come
humbly and faithfully unto him, will adorn them with royal robes, and enrich
them with all spiritual treasures, Revel. 3. 17. 18. as in the foresaid place
he promises.

Now next I come to cure the second sore: The curing of covetousness, a sore
very hardly healed, yet a common co^tagion, a very dangerous, and deadly
disease.
which is worldliness and covetousness, in which consider. First, that by
covetousness we are made slaves and servants unto riches, Luke 16. 13. Secondly,
by covetousness we commit spiritual whoredom against God, making the world
our god. Ephesians. 5. 5. Col. 3. 5. Thirdly, by worldliness, we choke the growth
of the Word of God, Luke 8. 14. Fourthly, by covetousness al evils are
occasioned: for, it is the root of all evil, 1. Tim. 6. 10. Fifthly, meditate
often, and consider the end wherefore God gives us much goods, and riches: They
are (says one) Gods wages wherewith Note.
he binds us to obey and do his work. When God gives us wages to serve him,
shall we serve the world, Gods enemy? We cannot serve God and Mammon, Luke 16.
13. Now, that riches are Gods wages, to occasion us to fear to offend GOD our
master the giver of them, it may be plainly proved from Satan's own
confession, Job 1. 9. 10. And from Deuteronomy. 28. 47. From which last place, we
also learn, that when Note and mark this well.
Gods work is lessened by us, Gods wages shall be lessened to us: yea, if for
plenty, we serve him not with alacrity and cheerfulness, we shall have
worldly want, in place of worldly wealth. And so much (I hope) shall suffice, for
the saluing and healing of that other sore, of worldliness.


SON. Heal my soul, O Lord, for I have sinned against thee: Heal me A
Prayer.
soundly with these thy salues applied to me. Amen, Amen.


The second Conference, concerning Household instruction to be renewed.
FATHER. Our last conference was, concerning Household instruction omitted: The
subject or matter of this second conference.
our next shall be now, how the same should be renewed. And because you have no
public catechizing, we will first consult what order and manner of
catechizing is fittest for your family, on the Week days, and then what
instruction is most meet for them on the Sabbath days.


SON. We have indeed no public Catechizing in our Church to be followed
and exercised in our houses: otherwise, I suppose you would wish us to use the
same in our Families


FATHER. YEs, so I would do, in that case: but it being not so, I would have
you to use a certain Catechism, commonly printed: called, I do not extol
this Catechism, to impair the credit of any other, but only commend it for
the breuity and addition of some needful things, which larger Catechismes have
not, howbeit Master Nowels, Perkins, and Pagets Catechismes are very excellent
in many things: Yet no one man has all things.
Mr. Attersoles Catechism, which has many things needful, which other have
not: as first, the difference of original and actual sins: also, rules for
the true understanding of the Commandments, and the Sacraments, which no other
brief Catechism has hitherto prescribed: it is a very pithie and an
excellent Catechism. Now, to prescribe an order and manner of using it: After
your Sons and servants have learned by the book the meaning of the
Commandments, then teach them the sense, by use and experience: for all arts
and tongues are better taught (you know) and learned by use and experience,
then by rule and precept only: and so are also the grounds of Religion.


SON. EXplane your meaning (I pray you) by some example.


FATHER. I Would wish, I say, after the meaning of the Commandments learned by
the book, that you would teach the understanding of each Commandment, by use
and experience: Mark this and continue this course this order and manner of
Catechizing.
As namely, by daily occasion thus: When any in your family shall deceive, lie,
swear, murmr, curse, mock, rail, etc. then presently thereupon examine,
and show them by the book, what Commandment they break: and when any duty to
God or men is omitted, examine, and show them by the book, what precept they
offend against, teaching the^ to express the sense in other words, that you
may know they understand the meaning; and teaching them not only by the book,
but also by lively voice and speech. Thus to teach them, (I say) upon occasion,
the use and experience of that they have learned, will, as I have by trial
perceived, both help their capacity, confirm their memory, and work upon
their affections, the more effectually.


SON. AFter this course of catechizing, continued daily in the Week days,
what other order of instruction would you wish chiefly to be continued upon
the Sabbath day?


FATHER. I Would wish you always upon the Lords day Conference concerning
Sabbath days instruction, to be used the^ in each reformed family.
to examine all your Family in those things which are every day taught them on
the Sabbath by your Minister, who is a godly, learned, and a zealous Preacher:
and examine them so, that you may know how every one does mark and remember,
what things were taught, and how they were confirmed and applied. The
carelesnes of common Christians, of lukewarm Laodiceans, and Protestants at
large, which abound in this our age, and are even glutted with heavenly Manna.
Many men are exceeding careless herein, for where almost is one among many,
that questioneth with his servants, about Religion at all? It may be, sometimes
(says one) that they will send the^ to the Church: but when they return, what
do they ask them of their learning or profiting there? unless perhaps once
at the hundreds end, he vouchsafe to know the Chapter, and the Verse of the
Text, (which betwixt the Church door and home,) even a Parrot would be taught
to pronounce. Let such send any of their people upon some worldly business,
and they will be sure to ask his servant how he sped, and nothing will he
leave unasked to understand the effect of the arrand he sent him about: but
for Gods business, and Soul matters, be they performed negligently, or not
done at all, it mattereth not.

And almost all men do now content Note this.
themselves with a flight examination; hence is it, that their sons and
servants can neither show the sum and division of the Text, nor what
doctrines were drawn from it, much less how they were confimed and in the use
applied, but only they bring certain words, and sentences, or similitudes,
not understanding the purpose whereto any thing was spoken by the Preacher. I
Note this.
would wish you therefore, I say, to examine your Children and servants with
such diligent care, that you may know how every one does mark and remember,
what things were taught, and how every doctrine was confirmed and applied, and
where any one fails, let the next that stands in order by him, show and
teach him: and when all have brought out their store, and showed their best
endeavor to make repetition, then you your self are also to help them
therein, by a diligent repetition, confirming and applying to your whole
Family (and to your own heart and affections) Note this.
all the doctrines that were delivered: which I would wish you to do with all
Godly zeal and feruencie, forthwith and immediately after your coming from
Church, before you receive your bodily food.


SON. Where that course is continued, men are commonly accounted Puritans,
and we that have used it, have been much derided, scorned, and mocked for it,
and many men (you know) in the Country, do call it and term it a private
Preaching, and do not cease to say, that therein we show our selves to be
more precise then wise: what say you of such scorners?


FATHER. FIrst I say, that though such esteem Who scorneth the scorner, Pro.
3. 34. and says, that fools despise wisdom and instruction, Pro. 1. 7.

Secondly, I say therefore, that such Gal. 4. 24. Heb. 11. 36.

Thirdly, because such men account Antiquity, I would wish them to consider
well Saint Austens censure, who says; That every Paterfamilias concionator est
in domo sua, iuxta Augustini sententiam dicentis; quod concioator est in
suggestu, hoc quilibet paterfamilias in domo sua.
Householder should be the same in his own house, as the Preacher is in the
Pulpit, or in Gods house: That is, that he should diligently teach and
instruct his household, as Abraham did, who commanded his household to do
justice and judgment, Genesis 18. 19. And as the Mother of Lemuel did, Pro. 31 2.
3. who by their sedulitie and earnestness in teaching, did set as it were, an
edge upon their doctrine, in applying it to the affections of their hearers,
that it might move much their minds, and pierce deep into their hard and
stony hearts. Now the same that they did, you and every Householder is
commanded to do, Deuteronomy. 6. 6. 7. where the Hebrew reading is; Thou shall whet
these words on thy Children: and agreeable thereto is that, Heb. 10. 24. 25.
Let us whet one another, as it is in the Greek: pointing at, and noting, by
that metaphor of Whetting, our spiritual dullness, which like blunt tools,
have need to be whetted by daily teaching and admonishing, Heb. 3. 13.


SON. I Perceive by the former places, that such as are Parents and governors
of Families, should not be like Lukewarm Laodiceans, whom the Lord Jesus
wills to repent, Revel. 3. 14. and 19. For none indeed do truly repent till
they be fervent, (says one) for feruencie or zeal is an effect of true
repentance, 2. Cor. 7. 11. I perceive also by the former places, that not only
minsters, but also all Christians should be zealous, according to that general
precept: Be fervent in Spirit, serving the LORD, Romans 12. 11. And that
therefore they should set an edge upon their admonitions and instructions, is
not that your meaning, sir?


FATHER. YEs assuredly, for it is the very life of good doctrine, to move
affection much, being well applied, without which, it is but like a plaster
kept in a pocket, and not applied to the place infected. A Similitude.



SON. Since then, in teaching, it is so needful to move affection, show me (I
pray you) some helps and means, to make my household admonitions and
instructions powerful, to work upon the affections of my Family.


FATHER. TWo things are needful in teaching, and presumptuous, do it not as
some do, with a smiling countenance: but as our Savior did with an angry
countenance, mourning also, as he did, for the hardness of their hearts. Mark
3. 5.

Secondly, in admonishing the unruly, Charge and command them to deal
religiously, justly and truly, as Abraham did.

Thirdly, in comforting the feebleminded, Romans 12. 8. and he loves a
cheerful giver, (chiefly in giving spiritual gifts:) be not therefore in
comforting, drowsy, heauy-hearted, and leaden like: but show your self in
comforting, comfortable, and to be comforted. Thus much concerning feruency.

Again, to make your instruction powerful, you must teach and admonish
constantly and diligently: for as the drops of rain cannot wear through an
hard stone, without often dropping, how sharp soever the water, or the
dropping be: so the Word applied not often, but seldom earnestly, will not
pierce through the stony heart of man; though doctrine well applied be as the
dropping of the rain upon the stone, or earth, Deuteronomy. 32. 2. which must have,
to Deuteronomy. 32. 2
make it fruitful, both the early and the latter rain.

The heart of man is more hard then the Adamant stone, and yet by often beating
upon it, by the hammer of Gods Law, it may be bruised and humbled, Ier. 23.
29. The powerful applying of Ier. 23. 29.
doctrine is as the nails, which unless they be with many blows hammered
and beaten up thoroughly unto the head, will not hold a strong and thick
shipboord, Ecclesiastes 12. 11. Eccles. 12. 11.


Lastly, the effectual applying of doctrine, is like unto the grindstone or
whetstone, which will not without much grinding and often whetting make
edge-tooles (being much and often dulled) fit to work withal, or keen to
cut: So our hearts and affections being hardened, blunted, and dulled by the
deceitfulness of sin, had need to be much whetted, that they may be made
fit for Gods work, by daily and earnest admonition and exhortation, Heb. 10.
24. 25. Heb. 3. 13.

Therefore Moses in the foresaid place shows, Deuteronomy. 6. 6. 7. That we must
Deuteronomy. 6. 6. 7.
make our admonitions powerful to pierce: first, by having and feeling the
power thereof abiding and working in our own hearts, and then next in whetting
the same upon our children and others, by continual talking and conferring of
the sacred Scriptures: when we walk in the way, when we lie down, and when we
rise up. Lastly, if you do desire to teach and instruct your family so, that
you may move much and thoroughly work upon the hearts of your hearers, even all
good and holy affections: Consider then also of other needful helps
thereunto belonging: namely, that in your family you must walk wisely, Adjuncts
to the former means
praise orderly, reward worthily, and correct accordingly.


THE THIRD CONFErence, concerning the four last mentioned helps and means to
make Household instruction powerful, to work good and holy affections in the
HEARERS.
SON. Explain and confirm, I pray you, in particular, these former
directions.


FATHER. Colos. 4. 5. Ephe. 5. 15. shun therefore all gross and open vices,
otherwise that which you build with the one hand, you pull down with the
other, and are in Gods account a murderer, 1. Cor. 8. 11. 12. Romans 14. 15.

Secondly, walk wisely, in all good ways, that so doing, you may adorn ye
doctrine of our Savior in all things, Titus 2. 10. In particular, pray
heartily Tit. 2. 10
and daily for (and with) your Family; and in special, for every one, upon all
occasions as Job did, Job. 1. 4. 5.

Next, look and prye upon every Week day, into their carriage; and on the
Lords day, see that every one from Sabbath to Sabbath, do diligently frequent
the public ministry, and how they profit in knowledge, and grow in Grace, 1.
Pet. 2. 2.

Secondly, you should praise and commend Cor. 1* 5. 6. Revel. 2. 3. 6. 13. 19.
Revel. 3. 8.

Thirdly, reward them when they do Reward is as a precious stone, says
Solomon, it prospers whithersoeuer it turns, Pro. 17. 8. That is, as one
expounds it, a gift or reward has great force to gain the hearts of them to
whomsoever it is given.

Fourthly, correct them also, when Elye did, 1. Sam. 2. 19. yea though for a
fit you do earnestly reprove them with Elye, 1. Sam. 2. 23. 24. 25. His
cockering of his Children, brought destruction upon him and his, and general
calamity (as you know) to the Church of God, 1. Sam. 4. 10. 11. etc.

Yet Carelesnes of correcting.
many careless Christians, like lukewarm Laodiceans, never correct their
unreformed Family, for dishonouring God by swearing, Sabbath-breaking, or for
other faults against the first Table, but only in such cases as concern their
own persons, their own credit, profit, pleasure, etc. But, let all such know,
that not correcting such foul offenses, they draw on themselves and others all
common calamities, as Elye did, 1. Sam. 4. 10. 11. 18. 19. 20. Correct
therefore your unreformed Family, if you desire to free your self and others
from fearful and grievous judgments: The order and manner of correcting
children and servants.
And correct the^, in this order and manner:

First, after due monition, conuincing, if possibly it may be, their
consciences; otherwise they will wax worse, and become more obdurate, stubborn
and subtle.

Secondly, correct after anger, not in anger, and in passion; for anger
ofttimes can keep no measure. Anger, said a Philosopher, is a short madness:
and therefore when Tarentinus was to correct his servant, he said: I would
beat thee, but that I am angry with thee.

Thirdly, correct also chiefly and principally,

Fourthly, correct not with too much lenity; for too much lenity causes (as
Ephesians. 6. 4.
And therefore, says one, Correct not, nor beat not thy servants with staves,
as if they were dogs, nor with too many stripes, as if they were bondslaues:
but keep always an even hand betwixt these two extremes: and when thou
correctest, be thou humbled to God; considering in them, thine own natural
Gal. 6. 1.
or occasional corruption, Gal. 6. 1.

Fifthly, delay not correction too long, left they grow sturdy and incorrigible,
Ecclesiastic. 30. 8. 12. Proverbs 13. 24. Proverbs 23. 13. 14. Proverbs. 19.
18. and lest any root of bitterness spring up, and thereby many be defiled, Heb.
12. 15.

Sixth and lastly: if private correction in the Family reform them not; bring
them (if their vices be openly nocious and scandalous to many,) before the
Magistrate; or Church-gouernors, to be openly corrected, Deuteronomy. 20. 21. Mat.
Deuteronomy. 21. 21 Mat. 18. 17 1. Cor. 5. 5.
18. 17. 1. Cor. 5. 5. And if neither private nor public correction work upon
them, to their reformation; expel them, and rid thy house and Family of them,
as David's example should direct thee to do, upon that occasion, Psalm 101. 7.
Psalm. 101. 7



FINIS.
A Prayer uttered by R. R. Minister, and Preacher of Gods Word, in time of his
sickness: Penned for a remembrance, etc. (*)
O Most glorious and most gracious God, who killest and make alive: bring
down to the grave, and raysest up again: 1. Sam. 2. 6.
who use sickness as thy Sargeant, thereby aresting us, to renew our
reckoning with thee, and our conversion. 1. Cor. 11. 31. Ioh. 5. 14. Psalm. 38.
3.
There is no health in my flesh, O Lord, because of thy displeasure: nor any
rest in my bones, Psalm* 38. 3
by reason of my sin: I have deserved a double death, both temporal and
eternal, by original and actual sin: Romans 5. 12. Romans 6. 23 and Deu 27. 26.
O that I could chatter like a Crane, and mourn like a Dove, Esaias 38. 12.
as Ezekias did. Grant me (O my God) to mourn and sorrow more for my sins,
then for my sickness, for through my sins, thy Gospel has been blemished,
thy glory impaired, thy Spirit grieved, good men offended, and evil men
emboldned. O gracious Father, forgive me, and grant unto me, both pardon of my
sins, and power against my sins: Psalm. 19. 12, 13. Matthew. 6. 12, 13.
O subdue sin and Satan speedily: thou have promised to tread Satan shortly
under all our feet. To. 16. 20


Reign thou wholly over us, and suffer Satan no longer to subdue us, to Mar.
6. 10 Romans 7. 23. 24.
captiuate or to imprison us: Break off his bolts, hale me from his holt: draw
me from his dungeon. cant. 1. 3.
O draw me unto thee and we will run after thee: Father of Heaven hear me,
and make speed to help me. O grant me grace, henceforward (if I live) always
to adorn Tit. 2. 10.
thy glorious Gospel, that heretofore I have blemished, to Mat. 6. 13
augment thy glory that in time past I have impaired: to cheer Re. 3. 20
cant. 4. 10. 11.
up thy Spirit, that heretofore I have grieved Ephesians. 4. 30. cant. 5. 2. Esaias
7. 13. Esa 7. 13.
: To glad the godly, whom heretofore I have made heauie-hearted, Psalm. 119.
136. 139 2. Pet. 2. 7. 8.
and to reclaim others from evil, which heretofore I have emboldned unto
evil. 1. Cor. 8. 10. Romans 14. 21. Luke 17. 1. 2. Mar. 9. 42.
And forasmuch (O gracious Father) as thou have promised to strengthen us upon
our bed of sorrows: yea to pillow us up, and to make all our bed in our
sickness, Psalm. 41. 3
and that thou will send thy good Angel to deliver us, when no hand can help
us Ps. 34. 7.
: O therefore perform this thy sweet and gracious promise: Let now thy power
appear in my weakness: 2. Cor. 12. 9.
to the praise of thy rich Ephesians. 2. 4.
mercy: in Christ our Savior: even so be it, even so, Amen.

REVEL. 5. 13. Praise, and honor, and glory, and power, be unto him that
sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for evermore. Amen.


FINIS.

