SAINT PAVLS TRIVMPH, OR Cygnea illa and dulcissima Cantio, THAT Swan-like and
most sweet Song, of that Learned and faithful Servant of GOD, Mr. JOHN
RANDALL, Bachelor of Divinity: Uttered by him (in an Eleauen SERMONS, upon the
Eight Chapter of St. PAVL his Epistle to the Romans, verse. 38.39.) lately
before his death, in the time of his great and heavy Affliction, and upon the
Communion-dayes, either altogether, or for the most part.

AND Now published for the glory of God, the edification of his Church and
people, and the honorable memorial of the Author, by WILLIAM HOLBROOKE,
Preacher of the word of God.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Richard Redmer, and Nathanael Newbery, and are to
be sold at the sign of the Star under St. Peter's Church in Cornehill, and
in Pope's Head Alley, 1623.

TO Mr. DOCTOR CHAMBERS, DOCTOR OF Divinity, and Pastor of S. Andrews Hubbart
in little Eastcheape London, and to M. Matthew de Quester, M. Richard Stretton,
M. Thomas Olive, M. Robert Wood, M. Edward Maddeston, M. Giles de Butt, and to
the rest of the Parishioners of the said Parish; All grace and happiness in
this life, and that which is to come.
MAster Doctor, and you the rest, my loving friends. It is no insolete nor
unwarrantable course, for men to be publishers of the Labors of others, and to
have a hand in bringing them forth into the view of the world, and that after
the death of the Authors of them, if we either consider the examples of the
servants of God in holy writ; as first of the men of Hezekiah, concerning
diverse of Solomon's Proverbs Inscript. cap. 25. Proverb.
; secondly of Solomon, or some other, concerning the words of Ager Inscript.
cap. 30. Proverb.
; and thirdly, of Solomon himself, concerning the words and counsel of his
Mother to him Inscript. cap. 31 Proverb.
: Or, if we consider the practice of holy men in all ages, both ancient and
modern, as, to instance in the writings of that late and worthy servant of God
Mr. Perkins, Vide Aben. Ezra. Mercer. Iun. Cartw. Iansen. Muff. in hos locos.
how many of them are extant, to his never dying fame? and yet most of them
published by others after his death, as is plainly to be seen, if we look
but in the Title-pages of most of them: Wherein those worthies did (as it were)
the office of spiritual Midwiues in helping such children to birth: And, had
it not been great detriment to the Church of God, present, and to come, and
great pity that such goodly children should have bin brought to the birth, and
there have perished for want of some to help to bring them forth? Upon
consideration of this that has been said. I have afforded my help to the
bringing forth of this ensuing Treatise, a worthy and excellent work, of a
learned and faithful servant of God (not long since deceased) well known to
you and me. The excellency of it will appear, first if the particulars therein
entreated of, be but generally considered; as first, the spiritual Communion
or conjunction that is betwixt God and the faithful. Secondly, the bond of
this conjunction, the love of God. Thirdly, the ground of this conjunction,
Christ Jesus. Fourthly, the special interest the faithful have in him, and he
in them. Fifthly, the certainty of the spiritual safety of Gods children amidst
all dangers, and against al comers. Sixthly, the assurance the faithful have,
and may have, in this life, of Gods love, and so of salvation. Seauenthly, the
Christian man's bearing of himself up in, and against all danger, upon this
assurance, with a declaration and discovery of diverse of our enemies, and what
they can do against us: If these be not excellent theames, I know not what
are. Secondly, the excellency of this work will appear if the strict and yet
plain and easy method which is used therein, be considered, which will make
it delightful to every one that reads it, method being to the matter spoken
and uttered, as fashion to apparel, form to building, and as Pictures of
Silver to Apples of Gold, Proverb. 25.11.
which make much to the luster and beauty of the Apples, and cause them to be
delightful to, and to be much desired, of the beholders. Thirdly, the
excellency of this Treatise will appear, if we consider the seasonablenesse of
its birth: It is borne, and comes forth in due time; For it entreats at
large of the afflictions and dangers to which the faithful are, and may be,
subject in this world, and furnishes them with matter of support, in, and
against them all. And when, or in what time could this Argument be more
seasonable then now, and at this time, wherein the Church and people of God are
in such distress, hazard, and danger, and the destroying Angel of God is so
abroad in many places of the world, and all places almost filled with wars,
and rumors of wars, and who knows when these things shall end? Fourthly,
the excellency of this Treatise will appear, if we consider the fitness of,
and the enablements wherewith this man was enabled to write and speak of this
Subject, which were very great and many, whether we consider the endowments of
Learning, nature, grace, or experience; for besides the three former, he was a
man experienced in afflictions, being then, when he studied, writ, and preached
these following Sermons, and for the space of many years before, a man of many
troubles, and of greiuous, and of heavy afflictions, by which (through the
gracious blessing and work of Gods spirit) he was made (as holyer and better,
so) fitter to write and speak of the nature, kinds* degrees, and effects of
troubles and afflictions, and of what they can do, and of the supports in
them, and against them. For, as every man is best able to speak, and discourse
of that profession, and the Mysteries thereof, of which he is Nauita de ventis,
de tauris narrat arator, enumerat miles vulnera, pastor oues. Propert.
, so is that man that is, and has been long a man of troubles, fittest to
write and speak of them, and of all things belonging to them. That this man
was, (both then when he writ, and spoke these Sermons, and had been for long
time before) a man of troubles, and heavy afflictions, besides the testimony of
all that knew him, his own words (which I find written with his own hand in
his book, by way of Preface to these following Sermons) do plainly show, his
words are these: After a heavy burden, of many heavy infirmities, and sore
afflictions, and hideous temptations, long endured, and still continuing upon
me, I am come forth once again to speak in this place, not in any sense of
strength recovered, nor yet in any lively hope of any ability to go through
with this great work, but only in obedience to Gods commandment, who has
now brought me, I know not how, unto this service, and in faith alone. This
Treatise (excellent as aforesaid in so many respects) I have been moved to
Dedicate to you Mr. Doctor, and to you the rest of my loving friends, for three
reasons. First, because I conceive that it does more properly belong unto you,
then to any other, for, to whom should it belong, if not to you, Mr. Doctor,
who succeed the Author of it in his pastoral charge? whereby you may see how
and with what kind of nourishment, he fed his, now your people: And to what
people does it more properly belong, then to you my loving friends, for whom it
was first conceived, studied, penned, and preached? Secondly, that I might
manifest my entire love and hearty wel-wishing to you all, amongst whom I have
exercised my Ministry for the space of nine years last past, and still do by
the mercy of God. Thirdly, that I might be a means of further knitting, and
continuing you in unfeigned love one toward another, by joining you together in
this Dedication of this work, whom God has, by his special providence,
joined together in that near band of relation, of Pastor and people. That this
may be, and that you, and all others to whom this Treatise shall come, may
gain, as much spiritual good, as the Author, in studying, penning, and
preaching, and I in publishing desire, I do, and will pray to him that is the
God of love, and the giver of all good things, and that through him who is the
Son of his love, and the means and way of all good things to us, even the
Lord Jesus,

In whom I am yours in the

To the Christian Reader.
Understand (Christian Reader) that these following Sermons, were given by the
Author (as they were written by his own hand) to his loving friend Mr. Edward
Misselden, Merchant, who most Christianly, and willingly, upon the first motion
delivered them unto me, and condiscended to the publishing of them, knowing
that bonum, quo communius, eo melius, a good thing the more common it is, the
better it is, for which thou art much beholding to him, for by this means thou
have these Sermons as they were penned and preached by the Author, without
addition or detraction. Read and meditate thoroughly upon them, thou shall not
(I assure thee) repent thee of thy labor, for thou shall find therein much
deep, and necessary heavenly doctrine, and (through Gods blessing) be
furnished with armor of proof against all dangers and troubles whatsoever,
that are upon thee, or may befall thee in this life. Be thankful to God, for
this, and all means of thy spiritual good, which he affords thee, and
forget not to pray for him, who forgets not to pray for thee and the whole
Church of God, and who will ever be thine in the service of the Lord,

William Holbrooke.

SAINT PAVLS TRIVMPHES, OR The SAINTS Conjunction with GOD, and support in
TROUBLES.
In the 116. Psalm, verse 10. the Prophet David speaks thus of himself, I
believed, and therefore did I speak. In imitation of the practice of the
Prophet, the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 4.13. takes up the very same speech: We also
believe (says he) and therefore we speak. And in imitation of that
practice, both of the Prophet and of the Apostle, I am now come here to speak
as God shall enable me; that which God has enabled me to believe, I believe
that which I speak, and I speak that which I believe, and because I believe
it, therefore I speak it: And what is that which I believe and speak? Even
the very same matter and words, which the Apostle Paul believed and spoke in
the depth of his Afflictions.

THE FIRST SERMON.
ROMANS Chap. 8. Verse. 38.39. For I am persuaded, (or I am sure,) that neither
Death nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present,
nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be
able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.


FOr I am persuaded, (or I am sure, etc.) It being the ordinary portion of all
Gods children to suffer many afflictions in this life; It was therefore the
ordinary practice of the Apostles, to minister comfort and consolation to all
Gods children, against all their sufferings. Thus the Apostle here in this
place to comfort himself, and the faithful against all afflictions, propounds
two considerations: First, what the afflictions are that may befall Gods
children; Secondly what harm they can do them. And this he does from the 35.
verse. First, what the afflictions are that Gods children are subject to in
this life; and they are of all sorts, sore and heavy, Tribulation, Distress,
Persecution, Famine, Nakedness, Peril, Sword, etc. Secondly, what harm can
they do to Gods children? He does not exempt us from any bodily dangers, (for
therein we are as other men) but they cannot endanger our spiritual estate,
to deprive us of that, they cannot separate us from the love of God, which is
in Christ Jesus our Lord, for so the question intends, verse 35. Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? shall Tribulation, or Distress? As who
should say, nothing can: No, they are so far from doing us harm in our
spiritual estate, as that contrariwise, we are much the better for them, in
that kind: In all these things we are conquerors, and more then conquerors,
through him that loved us, verse 37. And hereupon the Apostle grows to a
peremptory resolution, and determines the matter clearly, both on his own
part, and on the part of all the faithful, That neither life, nor death, nor
Angels, nor Principalities, etc. shall ever separate us from the love of God,
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, verse 38.39.

The parts of this Scripture are two: First the Apostles resolution, that
neither life nor death, etc. shall ever separate him from the love of God:
Secondly, his protestation of this his resolution, I am persuaded (or I am sure
of it. First, the Apostles resolution, that nothing shall separate him, etc.
The substance and effect whereof is this; that true believers can never fall
away utterly from grace; which he expresses in these terms, that nothing can
separate us, etc. So long as God loves us, we can never utterly fall away from
grace: But God loves us always; nothing can separate us from his love:
Therefore we can never utterly fall away from grace. And that he might not
seem to speak unadvisedly, or rashly, he knows not what, therefore he casts
up his reckoning beforehand, as the wise King does before he undertakes War,
Luke 14.31. So does the Apostle, foresee and set before his eyes, all the
causes and dangers of falling away that may be thought of, and then heartens
himself against them all, against death, against life, against Angels, etc.
and against all comers; never shall any thing separate us from the love of
God, neither death, nor life, says the Apostle: What danger soever befalls us,
it befalls us either in our life, or in our death, but neither in death, nor in
life, shall any thing separate us, (says the Apostle,) therefore nothing can:
Yea, but yet we may be ouermatched with mighty enemies, which are too strong
for us, as Angels, Principalities, Powers; the Apostle continues his
resolution, that God is infinitely more strong and mighty to save us, then all
our enemies are to destroy us, and therefore says, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, shall ever prevail against us: Yea, but though our
present state be good enough, yet things to come are uncertain; We know not
yet how hardly we may be bestead hereafter upon our deathbeds, etc. But says
the Apostle, all shall be well then too, our God is not a God a far off, but
at hand too; our loving God is not only for the time present, but for the time
to come, even for all eternity, his love never changes: And therefore as our
state is good for the present, so it is for the time to come, God has secured
us for that too, neither things present, nor things to come: Yea, but there is
a great height above us, we may be snatched up of that, and a great depth
below us, we may be swallowed up of that: No, says the Apostle, our God that
loves us, rules in all things, both in the highest heights, and in the lowest
depths that are, and therefore it is neither the height of Heaven, nor the
depth of Hell that can separate us: Yea, but there are infinite Creatures in
the world, and we know not what mischief they may do us: but says the
Apostle, they are but Creatures, and therefore in the hands and disposing of
God their Creator, who is our loving Father in Christ Jesus, and therefore not
any one of them can, nor all of them together shall, be able to separate us,
etc.

Now secondly of his protestation, I am persuaded, or I am sure of it. It is
not a bare conceit, but a full persuasion in me: I do not go by thinkings and
guessings, but upon a sure ground, I am sure of it, and here I make it known
to all the world, be it known to the faithful, for their comfort and
rejoicing; be it known to the wicked, for their terror and astonishment; be
it known to the Angels in heaven; and be it known to the Devils in hell, that
I am persuaded, that I am confident in it, that neither death nor life, etc. Oh
Paul, great was thy faith! Oh thou believing Man or Woman whatsoever thou art,
labor and strive thou to get this persuasion into thy heart, and if thou can
not get this full persuasion which was in the Apostle, yet labor to be a true
Believer, make sure work for that, and then Paul does here assure thee, as
himself, that neither death, nor life, etc shall ever be able to separate thee
from the love of God in Christ Jesus; for Paul does not speak this only in
particular of himself, but of us, putting it the case of every believing Man
and Woman: He says not nothing can separate me, but us: that is, all the
faithful: and surely he had the Spirit, and could not be deceived, and
therefore what was his case, is ours. I am sure, not any thing can separate me;
and I am sure not any thing shall separate them, whosoever they be, that have
saving faith: For I am persuaded, says the Apostle, that neither death nor
life, nor Angels, etc. shall be able to separate us from the love of God which
is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Now for my more orderly proceeding, and your better understanding, I will cast
this Scripture into this mould; The whole substance of the Text does spend and
empty it self into these seven particulars: First, is a matter of
Implication, and that is, that there is a Communion or Conjunction betwixt God
and the faithful; Separation presupposes Conjunction: when the Apostle says,
nothing can separate us from God, it is necessarily employed, that there is a
Conjunction betwixt God and us: for things that were never joined together,
cannot be said to be separated one from the other. Then secondly, he expresses
the Bond of this Conjunction, and that is the love of God. Thirdly, he shows
the ground and foundation of this Bond and Conjunction, and that is, Christ
Jesus our Lord. Fourthly, he declares a special Interest that the faithful
have in Christ Jesus, by a note of near and special reference betwixt Christ
and the faithful, our Lord. Fifthly, the Apostle avouches the certainty of the
safety of Gods Children amidst all dangers, nothing can separate us: and this
he enlarges in many particular dangers, even the greatest that can be
imagined, Death, life etc. Sixthly, he protests his Confidence which he has
concerning this their safety, as being the undoubted truth of God, I am
persuaded, (or I am sure, etc.) Seauenthly, he bears up himself boldly upon
this assurance, against all afflictions and dangers that ever did, or ever
could, befall him, for this is the maine drift of this whole discourse, being
propounded by way of a Reason, for I am sure: Why does he insult over all
these? Because he is sure, and bold against them all.

Now to the particulars, Doct.
and first for the matter of Implication: The Doctrine is this. All true
believers are joined to God in Christ, and have a gracious and an holy and
spiritual Communion and fellowship with him. The point is but employed here,
and therefore I must not be very large in it; but yet because it is so employed
as being one special means of our standing fast in the state of Grace, it
must not be left untouched, nor yet too sparingly handled. It is a Doctrine hard
to be understood, and I dare say, it passes the capacity of man to understand
it in the perfection of it: I say it is hard to be understood, but it is harder
to be believed, but hardest of all to be practiced; we will speak somewhat of
it therefore; first, by way of Explication, that so we may the better
understand it: secondly, somewhat by way of Confirmation, that we may the
better believe it: thirdly, somewhat by way of Application, that we may the
better practice it.

First, for Explication, Explication.
there is a twofold Communion with God, one general, the other special: the
general is common to all the Creatures; all have communion with God, they in
him, and he in them; they in him as their Creator, he in them, as his
Creatures: And this communion they have with God in Christ too, who is the
first begotten of every Creature, and in him all things consist, Colos.
1.15.17. as if he should say, Christ has Communion with God, for he is the
Image of the invisible God: the Creatures have communion with Christ, for he
is the first begotten of every Creature, and in him all consist; and so
consequently, all the Creatures have some kind of Communion with God. The
special Communion is twofold, either that Communion which the Angels have with
God* or that men have with God; the first we will let pass as not so incident
to the point in hand: For the second, the Communion which men have with God, it
is of two sorts also, general or special: General, which all men have with
God by nature, as men, for Christ having taken upon him the whole nature of
mankind, all men do Communicate with him; as he is man they partake with him,
and he with them, as man with man, as the Apostle-shewes, Heb. 2.14. For as
much as the Children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself
likewise took part with them, etc. The special Communion is that which we
have with God through Christ by grace, and this likewise is of two sorts,
either in the outward means, or in the inward truth of grace: In the outward
means of grace, and this is the case of all Professors of the Gospel, that
are outwardly called to the Communion of the word and of the Sacraments, they
have Communion with God in Christ, in respect of the outward means of grace,
and are reputed members of Christ's Body, and this they have, as Christ is head
of the Church visible. In the inward truth of grace; and this is proper and
peculiar to the faithful only, that are effectually called, and by faith
truly ingrafted into Christ; and this Communion they have with God in Christ,
as Christ is the head of the Church invisible, that is, of the whole company of
Gods chosen, and this is the true Communion here intended: Understand it thus;
God loves his chosen freely in Christ Jesus; and in his love, gives his Spirit
to his chosen; by his Spirit, he works faith into their hearts; by faith
Christ dwells within them, and is made one with them, and they with him, and so
in him they are made one with God: so then, if ye ask me what this Communion
is, I say it is our uniting or joining to God; If ye ask me who are the
persons that are joined? they are true Believers, all they, and none else; If
ye ask me, in whom they are joined? I say in Christ Jesus. Lastly, if ye ask
me what manner of Communion this is? I say, it is by grace, and by the Spirit,
and therefore it is a spiritual and holy Communion: and so you have the whole
Doctrine, and every branch of it plainly cleared and opened. So much for
Explication.

Now secondly for Confirmation, Confirmation. 1. By Scriptures.
and that shall be both by Scriptures and Reasons: First by Scripture, 2 Pet.
1.4. We are made partakers of the godly (or divine) nature, etc. True Believers
are not only made partakers of Gods blessings, or of his gifts, but of Gods
nature and being: And how? not by way of partition, as if some part of the
godly Nature were taken from God, and given to us, for that is impossible, the
divine nature can never be divided; but by way of Communion, as communicating
in the nature of God by a blessed union, 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joined to the
Lord, is one Spirit. The Apostle here affirms two things of every true
believer; First, that every true Believer is joined or glewed to the Lord, as
the word signifies; Secondly, the proceed of it, and that is this, that they
are one Spirit: Every true Believer is joined or glewed to the Lord; there is
our Conjunction: Every Believer that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit;
there is the proceed of this Conjunction, even to an holy and sound Communion.
The Scripture speaks yet more particularly, affirming, that we are not only
joined to Gods being and nature, but to every person in the Godhead: This
blessed Communion is made betwixt us and the whole blessed Trinity, the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, as in the 1 of John 1.3. Our fellowship is with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, there is our Communion with the
Father, and with the Son. 1 Cor. 1.9. Ye were called unto the fellowship of
his Son Jesus Christ: there is our Communion with the Son: and in the 2
Cor. 13.13. The Communion of the holy Ghost be with you all, etc. there is our
Communion with the holy Ghost: We have this Communion therefore with God the
Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost. In precise terms take it thus;
we have a Communion with God in Christ, through the Spirit: God the Father is
the subject to whom we are united; Christ is the Mediator in whom we are
united; the Holy Spirit is the worker by whom we are thus joined and united.
God loves us freely, and in his love, gives us his Spirit, and thereby works
faith in our hearts, and by Faith, and by the Spirit, Christ is made one with
us, and we with him, and in him we are made one with God. So much for proofs
by Scripture.

The Reasons why there is such a Communion of the faithful with God, are
these. The first reason is, Confirmation by Reasons.
Love of God to them. Ezekiel. 16.8. When I passed by thee, and looked upon thee,
behold thy time was the time of love, and I spread my skirt over thee, and
covered thy nakedness, yea I swear unto thee, and entered into a covenant with
thee, says the Lord God, and thou becamest mine. What is the reason that the
Lord did all this for his people? It was his love, it was the time of love, and
therefore he did join them to himself, and made them his. Yet further, our
Communion with God in Christ, is compared to a Marriage, in Scripture, Hosea
2.19.23. Ephesians. 5.31.32. Now why does a Man marry a Woman? Is it not because he
loves her? else he dissembles; but God cannot dissemble: And therefore the
maine reason why God marries us, and makes us one with himself, is this,
because he loves us.

Secondly, the mediation of Christ makes this Communion, God is in Christ, and
the Believer is in Christ, and there is the Communion, the Believer is one with
God in Christ: Christ by his Incarnation makes this Communion, by his
intercession he procures it, and by his death he does purchase it, and by our
sanctification, he applies it, and makes it ours. By his Incarnation he makes
it: For Christ being God, and coming down, and taking our nature upon him,
and becomes man, then there is Emanuel, God with us, Matthew. 1.23. not only God
with Christ, as he being made one with God, but God with us, as we through
Christ being made one with God, and he with us. Secondly, in his Intercession,
he procures it, as Ioh. 17.20.21.22. Neither pray I for these alone, but for
them also that shall believe in me through their word, that they may all be
one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us:
Here Christ prays for all true Believers, and what is his request? that they
all may be one, etc. that is, there may be an holy Communion, not only betwixt
themselves, but betwixt them and God also, and surely Christ's prayer was never
denied, but God hears him always, John 11.42. therefore if he has prayed for
it, he has procured it. Thirdly, by his death he purchased it, Reu. 5.9. Thou
have redeemed us to God by thy blood, etc. Christ has bought us, and paid
dearly for us, even his own precious blood, and whom has he bought us to? to
God, that we might be his, that is, that he may own us as his people, and that
we may own him as our God. Fourthly, he applies it to us, and makes it ours in
our Sanctification, Heb. 2.11. For both he that sanctifies, and they which
are sanctified, are all one: Til we are sanctified we are never truly joined to
God, but when once we are sanctified, that is, when we begin to be truly holy
in our hearts, and in our lives, then are we already admitted into this blessed
Communion with Christ, and so with God; then he that does sanctify, and they
that are sanctified, are all one.

manage this whole business betwixt God and us, Gal. 4.6. God has sent forth
the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying Abba Father: God sends his
Spirit into our hearts, thereby God Communicates with us, as with his Sons:
By this Spirit we cry Abba Father, and thereby we Communicate with God as with
our heavenly Father, there is Gods Communion with us, and ours with him: All
the exercises of Gods Communion with us, are carried by his Spirit: If he teach
us, he does it by his Spirit, if he comforts us, he comforts us by his Spirit,
if he adopt us, he adopts us by his Spirit, if he seals us, if he sanctifies
us, he does it by his Spirit; whatsoever God does to us in this Communion, he
does it all by his Spirit: And on the other side, all the exercises of our
Communion with God, are carried by his Spirit; If we pray, we pray by the
Spirit; if we believe, we do it by the Spirit; if we love God, if we obey
God, we do it by the Spirit; that we pray to God, that we believe in God,
that we hope in God, love, and obey God, it is all by the Spirit of God, there
is one and the same Spirit in God, and in us: therefore the Bond of the Spirit
is one special cause of this Communion which we have with God.

The last Reason is from the nature of faith, which By faith we are ingrafted
into Christ, Romans 11.19.20. As a Syence is ingrafted into a Stock, and as that
grows to be one with the stock, so is the soul that is ingrafted into
Christ, it grows one with Christ; Christ dwells in our hearts by faith, Ephesians.
3.17. And that is a blessed Communion and conjunction betwixt Christ and the
true believer. If we believe, presently we have possession of Christ in our
hearts, an holy and an heavenly gift: By faith we eatethe flesh of Christ, and
drink his blood, John 6.47.54. And whosoever eats Christ's flesh, and drinks
his blood, he lives in Christ, and Christ in him, verse. 57. Here is an holy and
an heavenly Communion. See the lively experience of this uniting power of faith
in the case of Thomas, Ioh. 20.27.28. he would not believe, our Savior
persuades him to be ruled by him, and not to be obstinate, not to be
faithless, but faithful; so soon as ever he believed, he cries out, My Lord,
and my God; so that by believing in God, God becomes our God, and by believing
in the Lord, the Lord becomes our Lord; he is ours, and we are his; this makes
the union: And so much be spoken for matter of Confirmation.

Now lastly we come to speak somewhat, by way of Application, for the practice
of Christians, and the uses for Application are of two sorts: the first sort of
uses are for all men in general; the second sort, are for those that have
found this favor at Gods hand, Uses in general to all men.
and that is for reproof; It serves to Jesus Christ, as he is without us; for
thus we imagine, that Christ came down from heaven, and took our nature upon
him, dyed for Sinners, and is ascended into Heaven to make intercession for the
Church, and whosoever believes thus of him, shall surely be saved by him: A
graceless conceit, such as hardens many thousands in their ignorance,
unbelief, and disobedience, and carries them smooth to hell: Oh my Brethren!
let us not be deceived, Christ Jesus indeed is a Savior and a perfect Savior,
but he never saved any but such as had Communion with him, that were in him and
he in them; they in him by faith, he in them by his Spirit, else they can
never be saved. 2 Cor. 5.17. Except we be in Christ, we have no part in his
Resurrection, and Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus: Till we be in Christ, we are most damnable wretches; if ever we will
escape damnation, we must be in Christ, and Christ must be in us, else we are
Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13.15. Hearken thou carnal Professor, that think to be
saved by Christ, as he is without thee, but the Holy Ghost tells thee plainly,
that except Christ be in thee, thou art but in the state of a Reprobate: If any
man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his, Romans 8.9.10. To
have Christ within us, is to have his Spirit within us, so that Christ must be
in us by his Spirit, if we will have any part in him: It were a merry world for
carnal Professors, if they might be saved by Christ, as he is without us; Then
the unclean man, the proud man, the malicious, the covetous man, and the
drunkard, and such like, might take their fill in sin, and yet sit down and
bless themselves, and say, Oh there is a Savior in Heaven, Christ Jesus, who
sits at the right hand of God, he will be merciful unto us, and forgive us and
save us: No, no, thou godless and graceless person, there is no such way to
Heaven; Christ Jesus must be in thee by his Spirit, else he will never save
thee; thou must have Christ thy Savior in thy heart, else thou have no Christ
thy Savior in heaven; Christ Jesus must be in thee to mortify thy
uncleanness, covetousness, pride, etc. and to make thee repent of thy sins,
and forsake them, and to cause thee to lead a new life, or else he will never
take away thy sins: Deceive not thy self; thou think that thou art in a
good case, and shall be saved; I tell thee thou art in a damnable state, except
Christ be in thee; It is very true that Jesus Christ in his own person, as he
is without us, has done and suffered all things that may cause and procure our
salvation; and it is as true that Christ Jesus must come and dwell within our
hearts by his Spirit, to apply these his doings and sufferings to our hearts,
else we can never have any saving benefit by him; as for example, Christ Jesus
has in his own person, by sacrificing himself on the Cross, offered a sweet
smelling sacrifice to God his Father for my sins; but yet except Christ come
down into my Soul, by his Spirit, and persuade me to believe it, and apply
it to my self, I can have no saving part in that his Sacrifice.

To all men.
whether Christ be in us, 2 Cor. 13.5. Prove your selves whether you are in the
faith; Examine your selves, says the Apostle. Enter into a serious
consideration with your own Souls, and see whether you have any part in this
blessed Communion with God or not: This be sure of, that whosoever has not in
some true measure, this blessed Communion with God, he has an accursed
Communion with the Devil, there is no middle betwixt them: Therefore lay thy
hand upon thy heart, and examine thy self what Communion thou have with God in
Christ, what knowledge and what faith thou have: Do thou know God in Christ?
do thou believe in God through Christ? do thou worship God in Christ? and
all this in truth of thy heart? then thou may be well assured that thou art
joined to God in Christ, else thou art without Christ, and so without God. To
give you a sure and true Rule for this Trial, which if you do duly consider,
will never deceive you; there are two infallible Evidences of this Communion,
the Spirit, and the fruits of the Spirit: First, the Spirit, 1 John 4.13.
Hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of
his Spirit: The Apostle makes this a certain Note of our Communion, and
therefore if we have the Spirit we are sure of it: Yea, but we may flatter our
selves, that we have the Spirit when we have it not? that is true, but that is
their own Error and presumption that do so: but yet if thou do make a
Trade of this Examination, thou shall find in time, that thou do know it of
a Truth: He that has the Spirit indeed, knows it as certainly, as he knows
he lives; only by practice, experience, and prayer, this is brought to pass.
Secondly, the fruits of the Spirit, (I will name but two,) Mortification, and
Quickening; Mortifying the old man, and quickening of the new man, these are two
infallible Evidences of our Communion with God: First, Mortification, Gal.
5.24. They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and
lusts; Secondly quickening, Romans 8.11. But if the spirit of him that raised up
Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall
also quicken your mortal bodies, by his spirit that dwells in you: And both
these in the 10. verse: If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin;
but the Spirit is life for Rightenesse sake: Now examine thy self by these
Rules: Thou say thou hopest to be saved by Christ, then show that thou have
the Spirit, and the fruits of the Spirit: Look well therefore into thy heart,
what portion of the Spirit have thou, Does the Spirit of God bear witness to
thy spirit that thou art Gods? Again, examine thy self what fruits of the
Spirit are in thee; what mortification have thou? do thou strive against thy
corruptions? do thou mortify thy earthly lusts? do thou find that sin
dies, and thy secret corruptions waste and consume daily in thee? If thou
do, then have thou a blessed Communion with Christ Jesus in his death; for
it is by the power of his death that this is wrought in thee. Secondly, what
quickening have thou? what newness of heart and life? what zeal for Gods
glory? what delight in Gods Commandments? what comfort have thou in prayer?
what care and conscience have thou to lead a godly life? etc. If thou find
these things in thee, then thou have a blessed Communion with Christ in his
resurrection; for this is our Communion with Christ, to communicate with him
both in his death and in his Resurrection, and both these have we by his
Spirit; but if thou do not find these things in thee, certainly as yet thou
art in a miserable case.

The second sort of Uses for those that have attained this favor at Gods
hands, 4. Uses to the faithful only.
to enjoy this John 1.6. If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in
darkness, we lie: The Spirit gives them the lie in their face that say they
have fellowship with God, and yet live in sin. Before we enter into this
league and Communion with God, we are at our own hands, happily we eat and
drink with the drunken, we smite our fellow servants, we walk in the lusts
of our own eyes, we profane the Sabbath, and such like: but when once we are
admitted into fellowship with God, then we are bound to our good-behauiour, our
Eyes, Hands, Senses, Limbs, all the parts of our Bodies, and powers of our
Souls, are wholly consecrated and devoted to Gods service; As the Apostle
speaks of Fornication, 1 Cor. 6.11.15. (A common Sin in the Church of
Corinth, and too common amongst us;) So we may say of every sin, for so the
force of this Reason extends it to all other sins, as well as to that: Shall
we take the members of Christ and make them the members of an Harlot, God
forbid. So we say of Pride, Drunkenness, and other sins; Shall I take the
members of Christ, and make them the members of a Drunkard, or of a proud
person? God forbid; No, if any be in Christ, let him be a new Creature: Old
things are passed, and behold all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5.17. If any
man have been a Drunkard, let him now learn to live soberly; If any man have
been a Sabboath breaker, or a swearer, or a lewd liver, now that he is in
Christ, he must be a new Creature: Away with all thy old sins, and see that
all be new within thee: Deck thy self with all spiritual graces, Faith, and
Repentance, and Love, etc. keep them always in exercise, that so thou may
be always gracious in Gods eyes, ever having your Lamps burning, and thus we
shall walk worthy of this blessed Communion.

Four things to be practiced for the increase of this Communion.
Secondly, this teaches us to maintain this Communion, and to increase it in
our selves, and grow up in it; First, by Prayer, Psalm. 86.11. Knit (or unite)
my heart unto thee, says the Prophet, or make my John 17.20. Our Savior
prays for his Disciples that they might have this Communion; Now David and the
Disciples had this Communion before, but yet they pray for the 1 Pet. 2.2.3.
Have thou tasted how bountiful the Lord has been to thee, in working this
blessed Communion betwixt him and thee by his Word? then labor to be further
confirmed in it by that Word. Thirdly, the Sacraments are forcible my Body
which was broken for thee, my blood which was shed for thee, etc. this is a
great help to us: And whosoever receives this Sacrament beleeuingly, as the
Minister gives him the Bread and Wine, so God conuaies Christ into his heart by
his Spirit. Lastly, every of us that comes to this Sacrament, must renew his
Covenant with God, and bind himself to be a truer servant to God then ever
before, else he can have no Communion with Christ in this Sacrament. Fourthly,
that we may maintain and grow up in this happy Communion, we must make much
of the smallest portion thereof; the least relish of Gods favor, the least
motions of this Spirit, the least degree of Sanctification, the least measure
of true grace: make much of that little thou have, and use it well, and be sure
thou shall have more, Math. 23.21.23. the Servant that does employ his little
well shall be made Ruler over much.

Eden, (for this is the Paradise of God.) Let us behold and admire the
particular passages betwixt God and us in this blessed Communion; God knows
us, and we know God; he walks and talks with us, and we with him; he
covenants with us, and we with him, Hosea 2.23. he loves and honors us, and we
love and honor him; he lives, and dwells, and delights in us, and we live, and
dwell, and delight in him. In admiration of this great mercy of God, let every
one of us break forth and say; Oh glorious God, how infinitely good art thou
to my poor Soul! Oh my poor Soul, how infinitely thankful ought thou
to be to thy glorious God!

The last Use is for Comfort, and for singular consolation Christ Jesus.

FINIS.
THE SECOND SERMON,
Upon ROMANS 8. two last Verses. For I am persuaded, (or I am sure,) that
neither Death nor life, etc.


I Have showed the Dependence and Connection of those words with the former,
from the 35. Verse. Also I have showed you that they contain two parts; First,
the Apostles Resolution, neither Death, nor life, nor Angels, etc. should
separate him, etc. Secondly, his Protestation, I am persuaded, or I am sure of
it. I also opened the meaning of the words, as you may remember, which I will
not now stand to repeat; only remember that I cast this Scripture into this
mould, and showed you that it spent it self into these particulars; First,
that which the Apostle implies, namely, that there is a Conjunction betwixt God
and true Believers, employed in the word separate. Secondly, the Bond of this
Communion, and that is the love of God. Thirdly, the Apostle shows the ground,
both of this Bond, and of this Communion, and that is, Jesus Christ. Fourthly,
he declares that there is a near Interest betwixt Christ and the Faithful,
our Lord. Fifthly, he avouches the safety of Gods children in the midst of
all dangers; nothing shall separate them, etc. and inlargeth it in many
particulars, neither death nor life. Sixthly, he protests the confidence he
has concerning this his safety, I am persuaded, or I am sure. Lastly, he
bears himself boldly upon this assurance, that neither any thing that has, or
shall befall him, shall separate him from the love of God. We have begun with
the first particular, the matter of Implication, and the point was this,
namely; That all true Believers are joined to God in Christ, and have a holy
and spiritual and gracious communion and fellowship with him; of this we
spoke the last time, as time did permit.

Now we are to come to the second point, 2 Doct.
the Bond of this holy Communion betwixt God and us, and that is, the love of
God. The Doctrine is this, that the Bond of that holy Communion which is
betwixt God and true Believers, is Gods love to them. The Bond of that holy
Communion which true Believers have with God in Christ, is the love of God. The
Doctrine arises thus, the Apostle speaking of the Impossibility of seperating
us from God, or from our Communion with God, expresses it thus; nothing can
separate us from the love of God, thereby giving us plainly to understand,
that the Bond whereby we are so fast joined to God in Christ so as nothing can
separate us, is this, the love of God toward us. Explication, consisting in
three questions and answers.
I will speak somewhat by way of Explication; and certain questions there are
to be propounded and answered therein. The first question is, whether this love
of God here spoken or, may not be meant of our love to God, as well as of his
love to us, for so some expound it? and it agrees well with the phrase, for so
sometimes in Scripture, the love of God is taken for Gods love to us, and
sometime for our love to God: And also it agrees well with the drift of this
place, which is to show the certainty of the faithful in the state of grace,
not only that nothing can remove God from us, that he should cease to love us;
but also that nothing shall remove us from God, that we should cease to love
him. And it agrees well with the Nature of our Communion with God; for this
being a mutual Communion, as well on our part with God, as on his part with us
(for, as he says to us, thou art my People, so, we say to him, thou art my
God, Hosea 2.23.) therefore there is necessary use as well of our love to him,
as of his to us, for the upholding of this Communion. I answer, the love of
God here spoken of is meant directly and properly of Gods love to us, and not
of our love to God; for it must be understood of such a love that never fails;
but alas our love to God does fail many times, but Gods love to us never
fails: therefore it must be meant of Gods love to us, and not of our love to
God: there is indeed a great use, and an absolute necessity of our love to God,
and so it is true that God will never suffer our love to fall utterly from him,
and so consequently it is true that nothing shall utterly separate us from our
love to him: Yea, but that is not the drift of the place, for the force and
power of our inseparable Conjunction with God, does not stand upon the weak
hold of our love to God, but upon the strong and immovable hold of Gods love
to us.

The second Question is, that seeing it is meant of Gods love to us, then what
kind of Gods love to the faithful is here spoken of? I answer, there is a
threefold love which God bears to all true Believers: First, God loves his
children with a general love, as they are his Creatures, the work of his own
hands, and so he hates nothing that he has made; and this is a providing love
for their maintenance and preservation, and this he shows in our daily Food
and Raiment, and necessaries for this life. Secondly, he loves them with a
special love, as men, or as they are of the Nature of mankind, for the Nature
of man is a lovely thing in the eyes of God; and this is a countenancing love,
for the advancement and honor of mankind; and this love God showed specially
in the Incarnation of Christ, when the nature of man was assumed into the
person of the Son of God. The third is a particular love which he bears to
them as they are his Children and true Believers, for a true believing Saul is
a most precious Jewel before the Lord; and this is a saving love, for their
grace and glory: and this he shows in making us one with himself
inseperably, and for ever; and this love it is, that is here spoken of, Nothing
shall separate us from the saving love of God for grace and glory.

The third Question is, why it is called a Bond: The answer is, because it
performs such Offices in this case, as a Bond does; for first, a Bond serves
to join and tie things together into one Bundle; and secondly, being so tied,
it keeps them fast together, so that till the Bond be broken, or taken off (as
we see in a faggot or a sheafe) they are never sundred; so is Gods love in
this blessed union, it ioynes together, and till it self fail, (which can
never be) it holds us fast to God for ever. These things rightly understood,
and well digested, the Doctrine stands clear in every man's understanding and
judgment against all difficulty and exception; namely, that the Bond of that
holy Communion which is betwixt God and true Believers, is Gods love to them in
Christ. The proofs of the Doctrine are these, Proofs, or confirmation, 1. by
Scripture
Ier. 31.3. the end of the Verse. I have loved thee with an everlasting love,
therefore with mercy have I drawn thee: It is Gods own speech to his own
people, wherein first he professes his love; I have loved thee, etc. And then
he shows the fruits of his love, therefore with mercy have I drawn thee, etc.
The Lord shows mercy unto us, and in mercy draws us unto himself, into a
blessed Communion with his own Majesty; but what is the Bond whereby he draws
us? It is his love to us, I have loved thee, therefore, etc. Hosea 11.1.4. When
Israel was a Child, then I loved him, and called my Son out of Egypt; God
calls us out of the Egyptian darkness of Sin and Death, and Hell, and takes
us to be his own Children, his Sons and Daughters; but whence comes it that
he enters into this league with us? It is from his love, I have loved him, etc.
then in the fourth Verse, I lead them with Cords of man, even with Bonds of
Love, where the Holy Ghost speaks expressly to the point in hand, that the
Bonds whereby God leads along in the ways of salvation, are the Bonds of
Love, Cant. 2 4. He brought me into the Wine-Cellar, and Love was his Banner
over me; He brought me into his Wine-Cellar, there the Spouse (every true
believing Soul) speaks of the sweet intercourse betwixt Christ and her;
brought me into his Wine-Cellar, that is, made me partaker, of his spiritual,
sweet, and heavenly comforts, for that is meant by wine; and love was his
Banner, what is the use of a Banner? It is to gather together the Soldiers to
the Company and Captain to whom they do belong: Gods Banner over his people,
is his lone, It is the love of God to his, that gathers all true believers
together unto Jesus Christ, he being their Captain, and they his Soldiers to
serve under his Colors; Oh this is a sweet service, to serve and to fight
under the Colors and Banner of the love of God in Jesus Christ! John 3.16. God
so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life: God has given us
his Son Jesus Christ, that by faith we might believe in him, and have
Communion with him, and he that does believe in him shall never perish, but
have eternal life: And whence is all this? from his love, there is no bond to
tie God to do this for us, but only his love to us, God so loved the world,
etc. John 17.23. I in them and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in
one, and that the world may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them as
thou have loved me: That Christ is in us, and God in Christ, and that all the
faithful have a perfect Communion with God in Christ. These are plain
Evidences to the eye of the world; that God has sent his Son to us, and that
he has loved us (in some measure) as he loves Christ himself, and that this
love was the cause, why he did all this for us: So much for proofs of
Scripture to confirm this point.

Secondly, by Reasons.
The Reasons of the Doctrine are these: First, all Psalm. 145.16. Thou openest
thy hand and fillest all things living of thy good pleasure; then much more
this Communion; I say much more, for the Reason arises upon many advantages:
First, if all the good he does to the other creatures comes from his love, much
more the good he does to man must come from his love, Man being the choice and
prime of the creatures: Secondly, if to men in general, of love, then much
more to true believers, being the prime and choice of men in Gods estimation:
Thirdly, if all the good God does to true believers comes from his love, then
much more this blessed Communion, which is the Prime and Choice, and indeed the
very Sum of all the good we receive from God; so that the reason stands very
strong.

2 Cor. 6.18. I will be your Father, and you shall be my Sons and Daughters,
says the Lord Almighty: Now betwixt the Father and the Child, the case stands
thus; so long as the Father loves his Child, so long he does well by him, and
delights to do him good; when his love fails, then the good he does him fails
too; that which binds the Father to do his Child good, is his love toward
him: Now, Isay 49.15.
can a Mother forget her child, and not have compassion on the Son of her
womb? though she should, yet will not the Lord forget his Children: The love
of a father to his child is changeable, but Gods love to his children is
unchangeable; that bond may be broken and so all flies in sunder; but this
cannot be broken, and therefore we cannot be sundred from God. Again, it is
such a Communion as is betwixt the head and the members, Ephe. 4.15.16. and we
know that it is from a loving respect that the head carries to the members of
the Body, whereby the members receive life, and sense, and motion from the
head; they are knit together in love, as in the 16. verse, as that being the
knitter of the members amongst themselves, and to their head; and therefore
consequently of the head to the members, as the Apostle makes the matter very
clear in that place. Again, it is such a Communion, as is betwixt the husband
and the wife, Hosea 2.19. and love is all in all in that Communion; First, it
brings them together, then it knits them together, and it holds them fast
together to the death; so it is betwixt God and us, look into the book of
Canticles with a spiritual eye, and there we shall see this Communion of the
believing soul with Christ, compared to the Communion that is betwixt man and
wife, and we shall find that there is never a stitch nor passage in it, but is
from love, Ephesians, chap. 5. verse 25. Husbands love your wives, as Christ
loved his Church: All that ever is done betwixt man and wife, must be in love;
and so it is betwixt CHRIST and his Church.

Moses, Deuteronomy. 7.7.8. The Lord did not set his love upon you, or choose you
because you were more in number then any people, for you were the fewest of all
people, but because the Lord loved you, etc. What is it then our Beauty that
should move God to draw us and bind us in Communion with himself? No, we were
in our blood, when God set his love upon us, and entered into Covenant with us,
Ezekiel. 16.7.8. What then, was it our Righteousness? No, neither, Titus 3.5. Not
by the works of Righteousness which we had done, but according to his mercy,
he has saved us; What, was it because we loved him first? No, says the
Apostle, 1 John 4.10. Herein is love, not that we loved him, but that he loved
us, and sent his Son, etc. No, I will add this further, for the
strengthening of this Reason, that we are so far from having any thing in us
of our selves, to induce God to this, to make us one with his blessed Majesty;
as that all that is in us, of our selves, is utterly against this Communion,
all of us are sinners, so far are we off from having Righteousness: we were
sometimes enemies to God, so far are we from loving God: we have deserved to be
joined in Communion with the Devils in hell; so far off are we in our selves
from deserving to be joined with God: We are ugly and deformed in our selves,
by our wickedness, so far off are we from having any beauty, whereby God
should set his love upon us: We are running away from God (as the lost child)
so far off are we from drawing near unto God. All these are seperaters from
God, and no ioyners to God, therefore it must needs be love, and nothing but
love, yea, the infinite love of God to us in Christ Jesus, that gathers us, and
binds us up within this Communion: It is his love to cover such a multitude of
sins; his love to care for us, when we were careless of our selves* his
love to affect us that hated him; his love to overcome our monstrous euilnesse,
with his merciful goodness; his love to rescue us, and raise us up from the
gates of Hell, and to set us in heavenly places; his love to assume us that
were cast-awayes in our selves, to be associated with his blessed Majesty;
this is such a love indeed as is admirable, infinite, worthy of God, who if he
were not love it self, he could not, nor would not, have showed forth such
favor unto us.

The first Use of this Doctrine, is matter of Confutation which as it brings us
to God, so it ties us fast to him, sanctifies us, and glorifies us.

Five Duties to be learned from the love of God to us
First, therefore we must know and believe this, that God loves us, 1 John
4.16. We have known (says the Apostle) the love that God has in us: Let us
labor therefore to get some comfortable knowledge and persuasion in our
hearts, that God loves us. Wicked men are usually too forward and too
presumptuous in this case; they run on in sin, and in their own vilde
courses, not regarding Gods love, and yet they presume and and persuade
themselves that God loves them; and if any tell them the contrary, they defy
him: On the other side, Gods children they are too backward; They repent, and
pray against their sins, and fight against them, and strive after grace, and
yet they are hardly persuaded of Gods love to them: Therefore how shall we
know certainly that God loves us? Certain signs and marks that God loves us.
I answer, we may know it; First, in general, by this very point in hand; if
we have this Secondly, thou may know it in particular by this; Psalm. 73.1.
Surely God is good to such as are of a pure heart. As it is the greatest sign
that ever can be of Gods wrath upon us, when he suffers us to live and to dye
in our sins; so there is no greater sign of his love, then this, that our
sins are cast out of us, and we not suffered to live in them. Thirdly, thou
may John 14.21. where Christ expresses, both how we may know, we love God;
secondly, how we may know that he loves us: If we would know whether we
love God, look into our obedience, He that has my Commandments and keeps
them, is he that loves me: And if we would know whether God loves us, let us
look into our love to him, And he that loves me shall be loved of my Father,
and I will love him, says our Savior. Fourthly, we may know Hebr. 12.6. Whom
the Lord loves, he chasteneth; but afflictions and chastisements are common to
all good and bad, to the wicked as well as to the godly. I answer, Afflictions
are so indeed, but chastisements are peculiar to Gods people only: But how
shall I know whether mine be chastisements? I answer, out of the 10. verse.
When God chastises us, it is for our profit. And what profit? that we might
be partakers of his holiness; therefore if we would know it to be a
chastisement, look whether we profit by it to holiness; If we grow in grace,
it is a certain and most sensible, yea, and infallible sign of Gods love; I
say both these together, chastisements and profit by them, is an infallible
sign of Gods love to thee; If Gods hand be upon thee in mind, or body, or
goods, any way, or every way, if thou do profit by it to holiness, and get
grace thereby into thy heart, then certainly God loves thee. This is a
sensible Argument and an infallible sign of it, it must needs be much love
that turns sower into sweet, the sowernesse of thy chastisements, into the
sweetness of his grace.

David, Psalm. 103.1. Oh my Soul praise thou the Lord, and all that is within
me praise his holy Name: And that which David would have all Nations to do,
that we must do, Psalm. 117.1. Praise the Lord: Thy soul fares the better for
this love, and all that is within thee, fares the better for it, and therefore
stir up thy self, and say, Praise the Lord Oh my Soul! for his love toward
thee, and let all that is within me praise him for his love; say it with thy
mouth, and do it with thy heart, and let thy life say Amen to it; and then
this love of God is well bestowed upon thee; Gods love is lively and quick to
us; and therefore let our thankfulness be so to him.

Thirdly, hence we learn this Duty, to take comfort Lord remember me in thy
love, can the Lord choose but hear us? If we can come to God with a sound
persuasion in our hearts that God loves us, then our prayers shall ascend as a
sweet perfume to God, and God will surely hear them, and that quickly.

The fourth Duty we learn hence, is to keep our Jude 21. It is the richest
Jewel that ever we can have, and he that changes this state of Gods love,
for any other, he changes heaven for hell: Therefore do not provoke God to
break off his love from thee, displease him not, break not his Laws, resist
not his Spirit of grace, grieve not his Children, neglect not Prayer, the Word,
nor the Sacraments, nor other means of grace, but observe him duly, and be
ruled by him, and so thou shall keep in his love, above all things, turn not
back to thy old Sins; and if thou do sin, (as who does not?) presently
humble thy self, make thy peace with him by unfeigned Repentance, and prayer,
and faith in the Mediator Jesus Christ, renew thy Covenant in him; and thus
doing, thou shall be sure to keep in his love; for this is the mercy and
goodness of God to us, he remembers whereof we be made, and that we cannot
but fall, yet such is his mercy, that if we return unto him, he will love us
still.



this great love of God, Ephesians. 2.4. which passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3.19. How?
Why thus; As the original and procuring Cause of all the good that ever we
receive at the hands of God, 1 Ioh. 3.1. We are the Sons of God, (says the
Apostle;) What does he rest there? No, Behold, (says he) What love the Father
has given to us, that we should be called the Sons of God? Gods love is the
cause of our adoption. If you ask why God chooses us, iustifies us,
sanctifies and glorifies us? the answer is, because he loves us: But if you
ask why he loves us? There can be no reason given of it, but because he loves
us. This is the Bond of all, it comprehends all the rest of the good that God
does for us, but is not comprehended of any of them: This Love is God, and God
is Love.

Lastly, this shows unto us the Excellency of that The excellency of a true
Believers communion with God, manifested in four things.
1 Neerenesse.
because it is bound up and tied fast within the unbounded limits of Gods love,
Psalm. 144.15. Blessed are the people that be so, yea, blessed be the people
whose God is the Lord: Consider the Excellency of it in these particulars:
First, the neerenesse of this Communion, it is of love, and therefore it is
most near. Love does transanimate us as it were, and makes of two, one; as it
is betwixt man and wife; or as the Heathen man said of two friends, that they
had one soul, and two bodies: and so Gods love makes us one with God; not as
if God hereby were become man, or man God, in proper and precise terms, but
as in a Communion betwixt a man and his wife, they are not one man, or one
wife, but one flesh: so the love of God to us, in this Communion makes us not
one God, or one man, but one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17.

2. Freeness.
Secondly, consider the Freeness of this Communion, Hosea 14.5. I will love
them freely (says God;) Luke 1.28. freely beloved: God loves us freely; as
when a father adopts a Child, for his own; freely; As if one of you should
see a Child go up and down the streets, and you should take him into your
House, and freely adopt him, and make him your Child: so does God, he loves us
freely, and out of his free love, takes us into his House, and adopts us to be
his Children.

3. Surenesse.
Thirdly, consider the Surenesse of this Communion, the Bond of it is Gods love,
and his love is everlasting, Ier. 31.3. no time can wear it out, and Can.
8.6.7. Love is strong as Death, much water cannot quench Love: It is so betwixt
man and woman, much more betwixt God and us: It is not our sins can quench
his love, no, love couers a multitude of sins.

4. Sweetness.
Lastly, consider the Sweetness of this Communion betwixt God and us, if it be
from the love of God, then it is most sweet, Cant. 1.1. Thy love is better then
Wine: If a man have but a sparkle of this love in him, it cannot but quicken
him, yea, it will ravish him, Psalm. 63.3. thy love is better then life. All the
blessings that we enjoy, whether they be spiritual or temporal, are no
blessings to us, except they be sweetened with this love of God; our meat, our
drink, our life, yea, Heaven it self is no blessing, unless it be sweetened
to us by this Love of God: what good did heaven to the Angels that fell,
wanting this love of God? Oh, the love of God to a Sinner! What is it? It is
the heart of our hearts, the life of our lives, and happiness of our Souls:
Worldly men, let them have what the world can afford them, wealth and honors,
and the like, they can be content without the love of God: but this is but as
gravel in their mouths wanting the other; they stand in slippery places, and
suddenly they go down to Hell. Therefore let us relish all things we enjoy,
as being sweetened with this love of God; our Wives, Children, Friends, Goods,
yea, our own lives; and then when these are gone, yet the love of God, whereby
they were made sweet unto us, will still remain: Let us labor therefore for
some relish of Gods love in Jesus Christ; it is hard to get it, Faith only
works it.

FINIS.
THE THIRD SERMON,
Upon ROMANS 8. the two last Verses. For I am persuaded, (or I am sure,) that
neither Death, etc.


THe dependence of these words with the former, and the meaning of them in
themselves I have already showed. Also I cast this Scripture into this moulde,
showing, that the substance thereof emptied it self into these seven
particulars: First, the things employed, and that was, that there is a Communion
betwixt God and the faithful, in the word separate, which necessarily implies
a Conjunction with God; things cannot be separate, that are not first joined
together. Secondly, there is showed the Bond of this Communion, the love of
God. Thirdly, the Apostle shows the ground of this love and Communion, Jesus
Christ. Fourthly, he declares the Interest which the Faithful have in Christ
Jesus, by a term of near reference, our Lord. Fifthly, he does here avouch
the safety of all Gods Children in the midst of all dangers, and inlargeth
himself in many particulars, neither death, nor life, nor Angels, etc. Sixthly,
he professes his own confident persuasion that he has of this, I am sure.
Seauenthly, he bears himself boldly upon this confidence against all
Comers, Death, life, Angels, etc. Of the first and second points we have
spoken; Now in the strength of God we are to procceede to speak of the third
point, and that is the ground and foundation of this love which God bears to
his Children, and that is Jesus Christ, Nothing is able to separate me from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus.

The Doctrine, for our Instruction, is this; Doctrine.
The ground or foundation of all Gods love which he bears or shows to true
Believers, is Christ Jesus. The Doctrine is contained within the Text fully,
and delivered almost in so many words, for mark the words, the love of God
which is in Christ Jesus; As if he should say, the love that God bears to true
Believers in Christ Jesus, is settled in him, erected in him, and made good unto
us in him, as he being the ground and foundation of it. The Doctrine may seem
plain enough at the first sight, and so it is; yet that we may rightly and
soundly comprehend it, or rather be comprehended by it, Explication.
it needs some Explication: First of the names, Christ Jesus; Christ signifies
the anointed; Jesus signifies a Savior, and whereas he is called in Scripture,
sometimes by the name of Christ only, and sometime by the name of Jesus only,
the Apostle here ioynes them both together, Christ Jesus; thereby to set forth
the perfection and fullness of Gods love to us in his Son. Jesus is the name
of his Person; Christ the name of his Office, he is called Christ respectively
to God, by whom he is anointed, he is the Lords anointed: and he is called
Jesus in respect of us, whom he comes to save, he is our Jesus, our Savior:
Behold, how complete and perfect Gods love to us in Christ is? He loves us in
his person, he loves us in his office, he loves us in his Christ, and in our
Jesus, in his anointed, and in our Savior, How could he devise to love us
more, then is meant and contained in these words, that God loves us in Christ
Jesus? Secondly, we are to speak somewhat of the phrase in Christ Jesus, which
is to be received under a distinction, for there is a difference in the actions
of Gods love to us in his Son: I say a difference in respect of our Sense,
and in respect of Gods love it self: Some actions of Gods love to us, are so
in Christ, that they are wholly suspended on Christ, and his merits are the
only procuring cause of them: As for example, forgiveness of sins, is an
action of Gods love to us, and yet this wholly depends on Christ and his
merits; that his precious blood must procure this mercy for us from God, else
they will never be forgiven; and this and the like love of God, is both in
Christ and for Christ. There are some other actions of Gods love which arise
merely and only out of the absolute will of God, without any concurrance of
Christ's merits; As the eternal purpose of God, whereby he has determined to
choose some men to salvation; this is an action of Gods love merely, rising out
of his absolute will, without Christ's merits, for Christ is a Mediator, and all
his merits are the effects of his love, not the cause of it; and yet this love
though it be not for Christ, yet is it in Christ too, Ephesians. 3.11. according to
the eternal purpose which he wrought in Christ Jesus, that is, in regard of
the execution of it, for even this eternal purpose, and all the actions of
Gods love which arise from his absolute will, are effected and brought to
pass, in, and through Christ. This distinction we must here undergo, that so
God may have his right, and Christ may have his right; that we may honor the
Father so, as that we may also honor the Son; and the Son so, as that the
Father may not loose his honor, that so the absoluteness of the love of God,
and the Mediation of Christ, may not impeach one another. Thirdly, we must
observe, that Gods love in this verse, is called the love of Christ, in the 35.
verse, showing, that God not only loves us in Christ, but that Christ loves us
too: We must conceive it thus; God loves his Son Christ Jesus, and in him all
true believers; Christ Jesus loves God the Father, and in him he loves all true
believers; and this is the right strain of Gods love to us in Christ Jesus. So
much for explication.

For proof of this point, Proofs.
look into these places of Scripture, Mat. 3.17. This is my beloved Son,
etc. Here is a Proclamation from heaven, published by Gods own mouth: God the
Father speaks it of his own Son, This is my beloved Son, etc. The words
intend two things: First, the love of God to Christ Jesus, This is my beloved
Son, that is, my most dearly beloved Son, for so it is in the original:
Secondly, the love of God in his Son, to all those that he is well pleased
withal, in whom I am well pleased; He does not say, with whom I am well
pleased, as my love staying upon him only; but in whom, as my love extending it
self to all that are in him. This love that God bears to Christ extends it
self to all men and Angels. All the love they find of God, it is in his
beloved Son, Christ Jesus, John 17.23. and 26. verses. In the 23. our Savior
says, Thou have loved them, as thou have loved me; speaking of the faithful:
Here we see that the love of God to Christ, is the sample or pattern of that
love which he bears to us* Now is not the sampler, or pattern, the ground of
that draught which is drawn by it? then the love of God to Christ, must needs
be the ground of his love to us: In the 26. verse, That the love where with
thou have loved me, may be in them: With the same love wherewith God has loved
Christ, he loves us; Here he speaks more directly to the point then before, in
the 23. verse, there was but a likeness, thou love them, as thou love me:
Here is a samenesse or oneness of each: The same love wherewith thou have
loved me, may be in them. It is not two sorts of love, or two several loves
that God bears to Christ, and to us, but as God is most simple, and but one,
so is his love, the same he bears to Christ, the same he bears to us, rooted
and grounded in Christ, and in, and through him, extended and communicated to
us, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself: Here the
Apostle speaks of the wonderful love of God to the true believing world in
Christ; and he comprehends all this love of God in these words, God reconciled
us to himself in Christ; and withal shows the manner how he has reconciled
us to himself, by not imputing our sins unto us. Here must needs be
infinite love and mercy in God, to forgive so many thousand sinners, as there
are believers, and so many thousand sins as every believer is guilty of, from
the beginning, to the end of the world: Here is infinite love; And what is the
ground of all this, that the Lord does vouchsafe all this love and mercy to
believers? why, it is altogether in Christ; and this the Apostle sets out most
significantly in the first words, God was in Christ personally, there was the
seat of his love; and in Christ he loved us, and in him he reconciled us to
himself, not imputing our sins unto us; so that all Gods love which he
bears to us, is in Christ Jesus, Ephesians 1. verse 6. To the praise of the
glory of his grace, wherewith he has made us freely accepted in his beloved;
The Lord is very gracious unto his children, he takes us into his favor, and
sets his love upon us, vouchsafes many kindnesses unto us, and this is a
glorious grace, that he vouchsafes us the glory of his grace: God magnifies
and glorifies his grace exceedingly on us: In what? In that he does accept us,
says the Apostle; It is a glorious and an admirable grace, that the Lord God
being so great, so holy, and so glorious as he is, should yet freely accept us,
such poor, sinful, and base creatures as we are; But what is the rule or
ground of this, of all this glorious grace? It is Christ Jesus, it is in his
beloved, says the Apostle, for so it follows in his Beloved, that is in
Christ Jesus: He is the beloved Son of God; So that we see from proofs out
of the Scripture, that the point is clear, that all the love, grace and
acceptance, that ever God shows to true Bele^uers, it is in Christ Jesus, it
is rooted and grounded, and founded in the beloved Son of God, Christ Jesus.

The Reasons are drawn from the Scripture too, Reasons.
Romans 3.23. All have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God: And God
cannot love, but hate sin and corruption, Psalm. 5.4.5. Thou hate all them
that work iniquity, thou shall destroy them that speak lies: God hates not
only the work, but the workers of iniquity: We are so far from being
beloved of God, that we are hateful to him of our selves; and therefore God
cannot love our Nature, except he find it in such a person as is free from
sin, and that is Christ alone: He took our nature upon him, John 1.14. The
word was made flesh: and he alone was free and pure from sin, Isa. 53.9. He had
done no wickedness, neither was there any deceit in his mouth: And therefore
in him alone GOD loves us.

the only begotten Son of God, John 1.14. Therefore he is the seat of Gods
love: It is so betwixt the Earthly Father and his only Son; but if it should
fail in man, yet it cannot fail in God; for Christ is called the Son of
Gods love, Col. 1.13. Therefore he is the very love of his Father: Therefore
all they that are beloved of God, are beloved in him, or else they are not
beloved. Secondly, consider him in relation to us; He is our head, we his body,
Col. 1.18, and is not the sense and motion of natural life originally seated
in the head, and derived from the head to all the parts of the Body? and so it
is betwixt Christ and us in the sense and motion of Gods love, in our
spiritual life; He is our head, and all our spiritual life is in him, and
comes from him. He is the Vine, and we are the branches, John 15.5. and what
juice or nourishment soever is in the branches for natural growth, it is first
in the stock or root; so it is betwixt Christ and us, what juice soever we
have to grow in Grace, it is from this stock, even from Christ himself. He
is the foundation, we the building, 1 Cor. 3.9.11. And does not the whole
frame, weight, and cost of the building rest on the foundation? so the whole
frame of Gods Church, and that grace and worth of every believing member, it
rests wholly on Christ the foundation. Thirdly, consider Christ in the Common
relation he bears to God and us, and so he is our mediator, and that not only
to God for us, but from God to us, 1 Timothy 2.4. A mediator generally receives of
the one party, and conueyes it to the other; and so Christ receives the love of
God, and conueyes it to us: But this may be where the parties are equal; but
here God and man must be mediated between: the parties are very unequal; and
therefore here is a further matter to be pressed: If the King be displeased
with the subject, he that must mediate betwixt them and makes the peace, must
be such an one as the King loves, and that so dearly, as that for his sake he
can be content to forgive and love the party that has offended him; and in
this case, the love showed to the offender, is granted in his love to the
Mediator: So it is betwixt God and us; we have displeased him, and therefore
Christ our Mediator, he must be so dearly beloved of God, that for his sake
God will be reconciled to us; so that the ground of all Gods love to us is in
Christ Jesus. Yea; here is yet a further matter, much more enforcing this
Reason; Here is such a mediation, as the like is not found in the world again;
The Mediator is in both the parties betwixt whom he mediates, and both they are
in him, that is, God in Christ, and Christ in God, Christ in the faithful, and
the faithful in him; and therefore there can be no love of God to us but it
must be grounded on Christ.

Lastly, in respect of his absolute State in himself; for what says the
Apostle, All the treasures of the wisdom and knowledge of God are hid in
Christ, Col. 2.2.3. If all Gods Treasure be in him, then the riches and
treasure of Gods love is in him too: In him dwells the fullness of the Godhead
bodily, verse 9. If the fullness of the Godhead, then the fullness of Gods love
dwells in him, there is the ground, seat, and Residence of it; And therefore
the ground of all the love that God bears to us, is in Christ Jesus.

man. Understand this one point well, that Christ Jesus is the ground of all
Gods love to us, and the multitude of mediators, and man's merits, will fall to
the ground, even as Dagon did before the Arc. Christ is the ground of Gods
love to us; What need we any other mediators? he only brings us into Gods
love and favor, and none else can do it: so for man's merits, they cannot
procure Gods love; Christ merits all at Gods hand: If we can merit any thing,
it is either grace or glory, and this we cannot merit unless we can merit
Gods love, and that we cannot do, unless we can merit Christ Jesus, who is
the infinite treasure of God, for he is the seat of it; and if we will say
that we can merit Christ, then we may say that we can merit Gods love, else we
can never do it; and if we cannot merit Gods love, then we can neither merit
grace nor glory. I do not hereby dis-hearten men from good works, but from the
pride of them: Do not think to merit any thing at the hands of God by them;
all our merit is in Christ, for God loves us only in him.

The second use serves to show us the woeful and First, showing the woeful
estate of those that are out of Christ.
and the blessed and happy estate of those that are in Christ. First, the
woeful and miserable estate of those that are out of Christ; all that are
without Christ, that is, that are not regarded of God in Christ, they are in a
fearful taking: God loves them not; they may love themselves, and the world
may love and applaud them, but God does not love them: When these profane
wretches shall come to fawn on God in their private houses, by reading,
praying, singing of Psalms, etc. What will God say unto them? Away, get you
from me, you are not in Christ, I love you not: If they come to Gods House to
hear the word, to receive the Sacraments, to call upon God with the Assembly,
or the like, what will God say to them? Get you hence, you are not in Christ, I
love you not: But when they shall come before Gods judgment seat, and there
make profession of their alms, devotion, profession, formality in Religion,
and the like; what will God say to them? Depart from me ye accursed, ye are
not in Christ, I love you not. In that day they shall feel and find what it
is to be destitute of Gods love, and to be out of Christ, for the everlasting
wrath, and hatred, and curse of God shall be showed upon them to the uttermost,
Ioh. 3.36. He that believes in the Son has everlasting life; and on the
contrary, he that obeys not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of
God abides on him: They that do not believe and obey Christ, they are exposed
to the wrath and hatred of God; it shall be their portion for ever: The
Apostle, Ephesians. 2.12. speaks of the Ephesians before their calling, and says,
that they were without hope, and without God in the world. He that has not
his part in Christ, has no part nor portion in God, but only as the Beasts or
the Devils have, the maintaining hand of God, for life and maintenance: yea,
but there is no saving love of God to them that are without Christ, but they
are exposed to the curse and wrath of God: And let us take hold upon one
particular, in that place for the present occasion; It is said there, That they
were strangers from the Covenant, etc. You come heereto receive the Sacrament,
the Seal of Gods Covenant, see therefore that ye have faith in Christ, and be
in Christ, and that you be reconciled to God in him, else you are strangers
from this Covenant, you have nothing to do with this Seal, it concerns you
not; therefore if you be without Christ, get you hence, you are but Dogs and
Swine in Gods estimation, these precious p^arl^s, these holy things of God, are
not to be communicated unto you, ye have no part in these things.

Secondly, Secondly, showing the blessed estate of those that be in Christ
truly.
this shows the happy and blessed estate of all true Believers, that are
truly in Christ, and that desire to be ^^ke unto him: They have a happy state,
they have true right and title to that love which God bears to his dearly
beloved Son, and to all the pledges and fruits of it: If we be in Christ, we
are entitled to the beginning of Gods love, his Election, for in Christ we have
our Election, Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us in him before the foundation of the
world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love: Secondly,
in Christ we are entitled to the renewing of Gods love to us in our Redemption,
for in him we have our Redemption, Col. 1.14. In whom you have redemption, by
his blood, etc. Thirdly, in Christ we are entitled to the application of his
love in our Adoption Ephesians. 1.5. Who has predestined us to be adopted
through Jesus Christ, in himself, according to the good pleasure of his will:
Fourthly, if we be in Christ, we are entitled unto the continuance of his love
to us for ever, in our Sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.2. Sanctified in Christ Jesus,
and Ephesians. 5 14. Christ is our sanctification; he is full of grace and truth,
Ioh. 1.14. Be thou in him, and thou shall receive fullness of grace: Eternal
life is in him, 1 John 5.11. Be thou in him, and thou shall have this life, All
the promises of God are yea, and Amen in him, 2 Cor. 1.20. they are his, and in
him they are ours; they are made unto us in him, and they are performed and
made good unto us in him: Again, if we be in Christ, all Gods blessings are
ours, Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be God, who has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in Christ: Therefore if we be in Christ, we are happy; whatsoever
our state be in the world; if we be in afflictions, being in Christ, he will
help us to bear them; if in temptations, he will strengthen us against them;
if we be fallen from God by our sins, if we be in Christ, he will raise us
up again, and renew our peace with God; If we be in Christ, he will be all
in all unto us; he will pacify Gods wrath for us, he will procure his favor,
abolish sin, bring righteousness, deliver us from hell, and bring us to
heaven: Blessed men are we if we can rest on Christ Jesus, as our
all-sufficient Redeemer and Savior.

he would never command thee so often to believe in Christ: Not that all men,
generally, shall or can believe, for this is against the revealed will of God,
for all men have not faith; but that every particular man and woman may
comfortably and particularly conclude for him and her self, that certainly God
will give grace and power to believe, upon the use of the means, for this
agrees with Gods revealed will, the Commandments and promises of God being
tendered generally to all, and no exception can be found in the word against any
one in particular. This the Devil puts into the hearts of men, that when the
Minister exhorts them to believe, and to get Christ; they reply, They know not
whether they can believe or no; or whether they were ever ordained to believe
or no: and thus the Devil keeps them at a bay all their life, that they never
believe, nor endeavor to believe: But make thou no question whether thou can
believe or no, but use the means and endeavor to believe; for if thou do
not believe, thou shall surely be damned, put it to the trial, it may be thine
endeauours may take effect, and then thou shall surely be saved. What madness
were it in thee, not to put thy self to the trial, by using the means? Many
men have believed upon the use of them, and why not thou? But thou will say, I
cannot use the means at all: thou may at least in outward conformity: But I
cannot use them as I should: I answer, do it as thou can, do thy best; and
so put thy self and thine endeavors upon Gods mercy, and humble thy self
before the Lord for thy weakness, untowardness, and hardness to believe.

Aron, that runs down to the skirts of his clothing: so Gods love in Christ
descends and runs down on all the faithful that now are, or ever shall be, to
the worlds end. And therefore, first let us consider of it, and bless God for
it, that has poured out such infinite love for the use and benefit of the
Church: Thus the Apostle does, Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be God, who has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings in Christ: secondly, let us consider it, and
magnify, and honor the Lord Jesus Christ, that is capable, worthy, and that
is the storehouse of such an infinite treasure; so does the Church in the Can.
1.2. Thy name is as an ointment poured out etc.

Thirdly, consider it and rejoice in it for thy self, that thou art a true
Believer, and that thou have thy part and portion in this ouer-flowing love of
God, for thy acceptance and salvation, Ephesians. 2.3.4.5. God that is rich in
mercy, through his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead
by sins, has quickened us together in Christ, by whose grace ye are saved:
The Apostle would have us to rejoice in this, that God so loved Christ, that in
him he has raised us up from the state of sin, to the state of grace and
salvation.

Fifthly, is Christ the ground of Gods love to us? Zach. 2.8. He that touches
you, touches the apple of mine eye: Why are we so tender to God? Why? because
he tenders us in the tender bowels of Jesus Christ. Secondly, it is a most
holy love, our most holy God loves us in his most holy Son Jesus Christ, that
holy one of God. God does not love us as many a wicked Father loves his Child,
in his evil and wanton courses; no, that is profane and carnal love; but he
loves us with a holy love in Christ, so far as we are washed from our sins
in the blood of Christ, and as we be made conformable unto Christ, so far as
we deny our selves, and dye to sin, and rise again to newness of life.
Thou that go on in thy sin, never dream that God loves thee in Christ,
except thou have crucified the flesh with the lusts, they that have their part
of Gods love in Christ, they crucify the flesh.

Thirdly, then this love of God to us in Christ, is a most perfect love, Ioh.
17.23. God loves us with the same love wherewith he loves Christ, and therefore
it cannot but be a most perfect love; If God should love us in our selves, it
would be a very imperfect love, not worthy God; because all the lovely graces
in the best of us are stained with many imperfections; and therefore God takes
us, and sets us into Christ, forgiues all our sins in his death, and couers
all our unrighteousness with his righteousness, and so beholds us, and loves
us in him with a perfect love; and if we have not this persuasion, we shall
never come to have any true peace in our consciences. Fourthly, if God love us
in Christ, then his love to us is most unchangeable and immovable; it is
grounded and built on a Rock, and the Rock is Christ Jesus, and therefore can
never be moved, but stands fast for ever: If any thing can alienate Gods love
from Christ Jesus, then it may alienate his love from us; If nothing can remove
his love from Christ, then nothing can remove it from us; and let sin and
Satan, and all our enemies, bodily and spiritual, stand up and say what they
can do against us: Can you draw us from the love of God? we will put you hard
to it: well, do your worst: Can you draw the love of God from Christ? if you
cannot, (as we are sure you cannot) then you cannot draw it from us, for it is
grounded in Christ Jesus. Lastly, if God love us in Christ, then this love of
God to us is a most sweet and comfortable love, and that in all the former
respects, because it is a tender love, a holy love, a perfect love, and an
unchangeable love; yea, but especially in this respect, because it is in Christ
Jesus: the very name of Gods love is very sweet and comfortable unto us, but
when the nature of it is tendered unto us in the name and person of Jesus
Christ, it is much more sweet and comfortable unto us: To be sorted with Christ
in any state whatsoever, is very comfortable to the believing soul, to be in
afflictions and reproaches with him, yea, to dye with him, this is a
comfortable thing to Gods Children; Who would not think themselves happy to be
joined with Christ in any of these? Yea, but to be sorted with Christ in the
bosom of God, in the love of God; that God should love us in Christ Jesus,
yea, and with the same love wherewith he loved Christ Jesus: Here is the
comfort of all comforts, and the fullness of our Consolation.

The last Use teaches us, that as God loves in Whatsoever we do in word or
deed, let all be done in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, Colos. 3.17. else
it is abominable to God, our spiritual sacrifices are acceptable to God only
in Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. Again, is Jesus Christ the ground of all Gods
love to us, then let the ground of all our love to God, to the faithful, and
to the Creatures, be settled in Christ; Does God love thee only in Christ, and
can thou not love where thou see Christ? Or dare thou love where thou
do not see him? Seeing God loves where he sees Christ, and loves not where he
sees not Christ, learn his example, and frame love to his love; Let us love
the Creatures of God in Christ, the Children of God in Christ; let us love the
ordinances of God in Christ; let us love God himself in Christ, and whatsoever
we do in the service of God, let it be done in Christ; whatsouer we do in
word or deed, let all be done in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Ye come
now to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, then walk by this Rule in
receiving; Let us do all that we do herein, in the name, faith, love, power,
and mediation of Christ; Let us receive it in Christ, as God gives it to us for
the love he bears to us in Christ, so let us receive it for the love of
Christ, with a true purpose to serve God all our life; and let us bewail our
sins, and know that all our worthiness is in Christ; and therefore let us
receive it in the worthiness of Christ, believing that God will make it
effectual to our souls in him: And so receiving it, and doing all we do in
it, in the name of Christ, we shall receive it with glory to God, and comfort
to our own Souls.

FINIS.
THE FOVRTH SERMON,
Upon ROMANS ^ the two last Verses. For I am persuaded, (or I am sure,) that
neither Death, nor life, nor Angels, etc.


AS the Lord has been pleased to enable us, we have entered into the handling
of these verses: and showed the dependence of them with the former, and the
meaning of the several terms of words that the Apostle declares himself
upon: then I laid you down seven heads, whereunto the whole force of the
Apostles speech might be reduced; the first was employed, and that was, that
there is a Communion betwixt God, and all true believers. Secondly, the Apostle
shows the Bond of this Communion, and that is the love of God. Thirdly, he
shows the ground of this Communion, and of the bond of it, and that is Jesus
Christ. Fourthly, the Apostle declares the near interest that the faithful
have to Christ, by a note of special reference, our Lord. And this is the
point we are now come unto, and if God show us strength in weakness, it shall
be our meditation at this time.

Christ Jesus our Lord: The Doctrine hence is this: Doctrine.


That there is a very near and special reference betwixt Christ Jesus and all
the faithful; whereby he is interressed in them, and they in him; He is our
Lord, says the Apostle, and consequently, we are his subjects and servants,
for this is a term of mutual relation, intending his right in us, and ours in
him; his superiority over us, and our subjection unto him; he is our Lord, and
we are his subjects and servants. According to our manner, we will speak
somewhat of this by way of Explication: Explication.
And therein we are to consider of two things: First, of the Title, Lord.
Secondly, how it does suit with the present purpose of the Apostle. First of
the Title, Our Lord, or the Lord of the faithful, or the Lord over his Church:
Christ is our Lord: A Lord, is a name both of honor, and also of authority,
and power; therefore when the Apostle says, Christ Jesus our Lord, we must
understand that he is the owner, and also the guider and ruler of the
faithful, he gouernes us by his laws, and guides us by his Spirit, and
keeps us in his protection, and imployes us in his service: The Lordship of
Jesus Christ over the Church, or over the faithful, is to be conceived under
these terms; First, that he is our special Lord; secondly, that he is our
spiritual Lord: thirdly, that he is our saving Lord; and fourthly, that he is
our absolute and only Lord. First, Christ is our special Lord; God the
Father, and God the holy Ghost, as well as God the Son is our Lord; and yet
there is but one Lord, as there is but one God, but this is in a general
sense: But Christ is our Lord, not only in respect of the Godhead, as the
other persons are, but in a special manner, as he is our Mediator, Acts 2.36.
God has made him both Lord and Christ: that is, God has put this office and
honor upon him, God has appointed him to be our Lord in a special manner, as
he is our Mediator. Secondly, he is our spiritual Lord; he is not the Lord of
our bodies only, but of our souls and our consciences, and this Lordship
which he has over us, he exercises not in any worldly state or outward pomp,
but in a spiritual state, as a heavenly Lord, John 18.36. My Kingdom is not
of this world; as who should say, I am a King, but not an earthly King; a Lord,
but not a worldly Lord; but I am a spiritual King, and a heavenly Lord.
Thirdly he is our saving Lord, he is the Lord of the whole world; of the
wicked, as well as of the faithful in a general sense: but to them he is a
destroying Lord, to us he is a saving Lord, 2 Pet. 2.18. Last, and grow in
grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; Christ is so
our Lord, as he is also our Savior; and that not only with a temporal
salvation, to save us temporally, for so, as the Prophet speaks, he saues
both man and beast; but as our eternal Savior, to give us everlasting
salvation both in grace and glory. Fourthly, he is our absolute and only Lord,
ruling us merely by his own will, freeing us from all foreign powers and
authority whatsoever: If any creature have any Lordship or authority over us,
as Kings, Princes, Magistrates, Parents, and Ministers have, it is as
subordinate to our Lord Jesus Christ; And whatsoever they do to us, they must
do it as under him; and whatsoever we do to them, we must do it as unto
Christ, Col. 3.23.24. Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as unto the Lord, and
not men, knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward, for ye serve
the Lord Christ: It is in him, and by him that they rule over us, and it is in
him, and for him, that we do service to them, for so is the rule in that place.

The second point for Explication is, how this Title suits here with the
present purpose of the Apostle: Surely it suits very fitly with it, for it is a
point very material to the cause in hand, that is, to prove the stability of
the faithful in the state of grace: For some happily might object and say;
What if the love of God be set upon us in Christ, how come we to fare the
better for it? Yes, says the Apostle, the same Christ in whom God loves us, is
himself our Lord, and we are his servants, and therefore his care and respect
for us is such, that look whatsoever love God does intend and bear to us in
him, himself being our Lord, will faithfully manage the same at all times,
for our best safety and greatest good: The Apostle had named mighty
adversaries, as Death, Life, Angels, etc. and for our better encouragement
against them all he sets out our Captain and deliverer in a high and glorious
title: He is a Lord, and therefore far above all our enemies; he is our Lord,
and therefore can and will deliver us from them all.

Proofs.
We come to the proofs: There is nothing more frequent in the new Testament
then this, that Jesus Christ is called our Lord; and no marvel, for this is
the very sum of the Gospel, the Apostle makes it to be so, Romans 1.1.3. Paul
an Apostle of Jesus Christ, called to be an Apostle, put a part to preach the
Gospel of God: Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. I will only serve
my self upon such places of Scripture where Christ is called our Lord in some
special significancy, that is, with some special reference to some notable
work, whereby he has showed himself to be our Lord. 1 Cor. 8.6. Unto us
there is but one God, even that Father, of whom are all things, and we in him,
and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him: He had
showed before, that there are many Gods, and many Lords, to others; but to us,
that is to the faithful, there is but one God and Father, and one Lord Jesus
Christ. Mark how significantly the Apostle applies this Title, Lord, to Jesus
Christ, in respect of the Sovereign Lordly power he has over all things,
especially over the faithful. Christ Jesus has supreme authority over all
things; all things are by him, and we by him; and therefore he is our Lord, and
our only Lord, we have but one Lord. Romans 7.25. I thank God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. The Apostle had complained before of the bitter combat which
he felt within himself, betwixt the flesh and the spirit; and finding himself
ouer-matched with the lusts of the flesh, in the 24. verse, he cries out for
help, Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me! and presently he
thinks upon Jesus Christ our Lord, and upon him he sets down his rest, I
thank God through, Jesus Christ our Lord: as if he should say, it is Jesus
Christ our Lord, that has appointed me to this combat; It is Jesus Christ our
Lord, that gives me strength in the combat; and it is Jesus Christ our Lord,
that in due time will deliver me, and give me victory in this combat; though I
be ouermatched with these enemies, yet he will ouermatch them. Who should a man
fly to in his distress, but to his Lord? So the Apostle here, flies to Christ
Jesus, as to his Lord, 1 Cor. 15.57. Thanks be unto God, who has give us
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ; The Apostle speaks there of Christ and
of his Resurrection from the dead, whereby he has overcome death, not for
himself only, but for the faithful, and in that respect he calls him our
Lord: For wherein did ever Christ Jesus show himself more plainly to be the
Lord, then by his Resurrection? And wherein may he Lord it more, then in giving
his subjects and servants victory over Death and Hell, and all their enemies?
To proceed yet a little further in the proof of this point, according to this
general proportion of Christ being our Lord, that is, the Lord of all the
faithful; we shall find that particular believers have laid particular
claim to Christ, every one of them as to his Lord, Luke 1.43. And whence
comes it that the mother of my Lord should come unto me? A strong faith in a
weak woman, to confess Christ Jesus to be her Lord, even whilst he was in
his mothers womb; My Lord, that came down from heaven for me; My Lord, that
took flesh of the blessed Virgin, my near and dear Kinswoman, even for my
sake, to redeem me. John 20.13. They have taken away my Lord, etc. She
speaks it as a woman weeping and mourning, but not out of a womanish passion,
but out of a spiritual and heavenly affection: My Lord, that has forgiven me
so many sins; My Lord, that has cast out seven Devils out of me: My Lord,
that has stood it out manfully on the Cross, against all the powers of
darkness, for the redemption of my poor sinful soul: Oh, they have taken
him away, and I know not where they have laid him? If I could tell where they
have laid him, I would surely go to him; I would go through thick and
thin, that I might enjoy my Lord, but alas, they have taken away my Lord.
John 20.28. My Lord and my God; It is the speech of Thomas, he saw in our
Saviors hands the print of the nails, whereby he was fastened on the Cross,
and in his side he saw the wound of the Soldiers Spear, and upon sight
thereof, he cries out, my Lord and my God, as who should say, Oh my Lord, these
wounds thou have received for my sins and trangressions; Oh my Lord, etc.

The Reasons: First, Christ is our Lord, because Col. 1.16. By him all things
were made; Yea, but so he is the Lord of the wicked, he made them too; yea,
but he is our special Lord, he made us not only to be Creatures, which is
common to the wicked; but to be new Creatures, which is peculiar to the
faithful only. 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ, let him be a new
Creature. He transformes and new moulds us, and makes us new Creatures if we
believe in him: Our Lord Christ, as he makes us Creatures, so he makes us new
Creatures; Christ Jesus has made us both Creatures and new Creatures too, and
therefore he must needs be our absolute and special Lord.

Secondly, he is our Lord, because we were given John 17.6. Thine they were,
and thou have given them me. God has given us to his Son Christ, and
therefore we are his in the best and surest right that may be. What better
right can we have, then to that which is given to us freely? And mark in what
terms God has given us to Christ, and by what right we are Christ's; Thine
they were, and thou have given them me: In the same propinquity that we were
Gods, in the same propinquity we were given unto Christ; but we were Gods as he
is our Lord, and therefore we are Christ's so too: And mark further here, how
he shows himself to be their Lord, and they to be his servants, I have
declared thy word to them: that is, I as their Lord have set them their task,
what they must do, that they may be saved; And they have kept thy Word, says
our Savior, that is, as good and faithful servants to their Lord they have
followed my direction.

Sin, Satan, etc. Luke 1.71. A temporal deliverer from a temporal bondage,
deserves justly to be Lord over those whom he does deliver; and this the Law
and light of Nature taught among the Heathen; for look who it was delivered
another from any bondage; his Lord he was: Our Lord Jesus Christ delivered us
from the spiritual and eternal bondage and slavery of Sin, Satan, Curse,
Death, Hell, and Eternal damnation; And therefore he must needs be our Lord
much more. And this Reason may be yet further confirmed, if we consider the
intendment of Christ in our deliverance, and that was, that we his servants,
might serve him all the days of our life, Luke 1.74.

Fourthly, he is our Lord, because he has bought 2 Pet. 2.1. Denying the Lord
that he has bought them. Natural reason teaches us this: Shall not a man be
Lord of that he has bought, and truly and dearly paid for? But Christ has
bought us and paid dearly for us, not silver and gold, but his own precious
blood; therefore he has most sovereign right over us, as our Lord, and we are
most strictly bound to him as his servants: It is the Apostles reason in the 1
Cor. 6.2^. Ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your bodies,
and in you spirits, for they are Gods.

This Doctrine is full of Use, the first Use is, concerning Christ himself*
the second is, concerning unbelievers; and the third is, concerning the
faithful.

The first Use is concerning Christ himself, He is This is an evident proof
of his Godhead, he is our Lord, and therefore our God: Christ is sometime
called the Lord, and that intends his Sovereign power and authority over all
things; sometime our Lord, and this intends his Sovereign power and supreme
authority over the Church, every way the name Lord proves him to be God: For
to have Sovereign power, and supreme authority over all things, or over the
Church, cannot be given to any but to God: Remember the terms before
mentioned, under which we are to conceive Christ to be our Lord, and every one
of them will necessarily conclude that Christ our Lord is Christ our God:
First, he is our special Lord, as he is our Mediator, and he must be God as
well as man, that he may be Mediator betwixt God and man. Again, he is our
spiritual Lord, he is Lord over our souls and consciences, and a conscience
well rectified acknowledges none over it but God. Again, he is our saving
Lord, and none can challenge this but God himself: Salvation belongs to God
alone. Lastly, he is our absolute Lord, to be obeyed without questioning,
without control, and without resisting, in all things whatsoever he commands:
and this none can challenge but God only. I hope there is none here present,
that will either deny or doubt of Christ's Godhead: but there are many of us
that in prayer and conference name Christ our Lord, but yet never think of his
Godhead, which is the life of his Lordship, both in himself, and unto us:
Christ Lord, without Christ God, is no Lord at all.

What Lord shall control us? If they do serve, or be ruled by any Lord at
all, it is the Devil, his word is their Law, they are ruled by his will, and
are at his beck: Let him bid a wicked man swear, or lie, or profane the
Sabbath, be drunk, steal, etc. straight way he will do it, he is led by the
Devil, at his will, as the Apostle says: Oh, that the faithful would and
could perform such true service to their Lord Jesus Christ, as these do to
their Lord the Devil! It is a foul shame to us that we yield not such true
service to Christ, as they do to their Lord the Devil; and it is a foul
shame in them, that they yield such true service to the Devil. So at their
death, when they are on their deathbeds, do they pray? no, says Job, the
wicked pray not at all times; No, they curse, and rage, and despair, or at the
best they are like to Naball, their hearts are dead as a stone within them,
there is no spiritual life nor comfort in them; they have never a Lord in
heaven to commit their souls unto, but the Lord whom they served in their
life, the Devil stands by them ready at their death to carry away their souls
to hell, when they part from their bodies, as he did the rich man's, and then
this cursed Lord and Master that set them on work, and to whom they have done
such true service here, shall truly pay them their full wages in everlasting
torments: They have sinned with the Devil and his Angels here, and therefore
it is just with God to give them their part and portion, and to damn them with
the Devil and his Angels for ever: And then this our Lord Jesus Christ, whom
they neglected and opposed in their life, and would not acknowledge to be their
Lord, he shall show himself to be a mighty Lord against them, and then he
shall exercise his Lordly power and authority over them in wrath and vengeance,
to their eternal condemnation. And then the very thought of the Lord Jesus
shall be as terrible to them, as the torment they endure, to think that Christ
should come down from heaven to save them, and that they should be such
wretches, to serve the Devil rather then him.

Paul and other of the Apostles boasted of, and so much comforted themselves
in, as we may see in their Epistles, that they were Servants to this Lord: Paul
a Servant of Jesus Christ: James the Servant of Jesus Christ, and so others. A
man when he sends an Epistle, graceth himself with the greatest title he can;
the Apostles grace themselves in their Epistles with this Title, the Servants
of our Lord Jesus Christ, as the greatest title they can have; Nay, the very
Angels in heaven take delight and comfort in it, Revel. 22.9. I am thy fellow
servant, (says the Angel to John) the servant of the Lord Christ as well as
thou. Some think it a shame to be counted Christ's Servants; What? shall we be
ashamed of that which is our greatest glory and honor with God? God forbid: In
trouble, and in persecution, let us acknowledge him to be our Lord, that will
give us full content both in grace and glory. Let carnal and profane
worldlings reproach us (as in these days it is too common) that we are too
precise, and that we are zealous for the Lord of hosts, that we make conscience
of our ways, and that we keep our selves from the corruptions of the times,
and that we will not run with them into excess of riot, this is the scandal
of the Cross in these times, that the faithful will not company and symbolize
with the wicked in their sins: no, we will not serve your sins, we serve
the Lord Jesus Christ, and if you reproach us for it, we will wear that
reproach as our Crown: The glory of the wicked is their shame; but the shame
that the wicked lay upon us, is our greatest glory; though this be a shame with
men, yet it is honor with Christ, he will take knowledge of us as his
Servants.

Secondly, this is matter of comfort to Gods Children; and they stand in great
need of comfort in these uncomfortable times; why this, that Christ is our
Lord, if we be sure of that, it will support and cheer up our hearts in all
our distresses, against desertions of men, when men, when friends, yea, when
our Parents forsake us, our Lord Christ will never forsake us, Psalm. 27.10.
Though my Father and Mother should forsake me, yet the Lord would gather me up.
It comforts us against all oppositions of men; they are many, great, and
strong, they rage, and plot, and they band themselves together against the
Lord, and against his Christ, but yet here is our comfort, he that dwells in
heaven shall laugh, our Lord shall have them in derision. Psalm. 2.2.4. So it
may comfort us against all our wants, Christ is our Lord, and therefore we
shall want nothing, Psalm. 28.1. The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want.
Again, it may comfort us against weakness and infirmities, Christ is our
Lord, and his grace is all-sufficient for us, as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 1.9.
Again, it may comfort us against all dangers present, imminent, and future.
Christ is our Lord, therefore we will not fear, The Lord of hosts is with us,
the God of Jacob is our refuge, Psalm. 46.1.2.3. So it may comfort us against
all Satan's temptations, the fiercest, greatest, and fearefullest that Satan
can assault us withal. Christ is our Lord and Master, and can a Lord or Master
see a faithful Servant of his wronged and oppressed by his enemy, and not
stretch forth his hand to help and rescue him? If men will, yet our Lord
Christ will not, nor cannot, but the more fiercely we are assaulted by our
enemies, the more ready will he be to help us. Therefore in the depth of
temptation retire thy self to this sure Hold, to Christ, as to thy Lord, and
say unto him, Oh my Lord, see thou how I am oppressed with thy enemy and my
enemy? Will thou see me trodden under feet? Up Lord I pray thee, fight for me,
suffer not my soul to be a prey to such a cursed enemy. And surely if thou
do thus, the Lord will be very ready to hear thee; and the God of peace
will tread Satan under thy feet shortly. Lastly, it may comfort us against
death it self: whosoever thou art that have served the Lord Christ in truth in
thy life, thou may boldly put thy self upon him, as thy Lord at thy death;
he whom thou have served all thy life, will surely comfort thee at thy death,
and in death, and after death: therefore be not discouraged at death, it is
terrible and fearful to Nature, but let us arm our selves for it before
hand: let us before hand go to Christ, and let him be our Lord, and then we
may say to our souls at our death; Oh my soul, thou have served the Lord
Jesus Christ thus many years, be not now afraid to go to thy Lord and master
home to his own house: and we may turn to the Lord and say, Oh my Lord, thou
have been my protector many years, now Lord help me, for now I stand in more
need of thy help then ever I did before: Lord receive my soul now into thy
merciful hands; and if thou do thus, assure thy self thou shall not be
more ready to commend thy soul to him, then he will be ready to receive it
into his hands.

The third Use is for matter of duty, teaching us Lord, we must carry our
selves to him, as to our Lord, in all duty, as good and faithful servants; he
that does so, is the right servant of Jesus Christ, the true and sound
Christian. The duties we are to perform to him are many, we will reduce them
to these two heads: Doing, and Suffering. In both these we must conform our
selves to Christ as to our Lord. In doing; First, if Christ be our Lord, we
must believe in him, trust in him, and rest upon him. Isa. 26.4. Trust in the
Lord for ever, for in the Lord God is strength for evermore: and therefore let
us be confident in him, and roll our selves upon him, and know whom it is that
we have trusted and hazzarded our soul* upon him. Let us trust in the Lord,
when we see nothing in the world but desolation; he is a Lord, and therefore
can do for us what he will; and he is our Lord, and therefore he will do for
us what he can: And if he can do for us what he will, by his absolute power,
and will do for us what he can of his mere grace and goodness, why should
we not believe in him, and rest upon him both in life and death?

Secondly, if he be our Lord, then we must reverence him as our Lord. Mal.
1.6. If I be a Lord, where is my fear. Psalm. 2.11.12. Serve the Lord in fear,
and rejoice in him with trembling. Kiss the Son, etc. Let us therefore
reverence him in his Nature, Person, Word, Ordinances, in our hearts, lives,
and all our courses: Let this fear be always before our eyes, that we may
never sin against him. It is a fault to be taxed in many Christians, that
they come to the Word, and to the Sacraments, with little reverence to God,
none at all to man: God will be honored with an orderly zeal.

Thirdly, if Christ be our Lord, then we must love him as our Lord. Deuteronomy. 6.5.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul.
Our love must be such to him, as his love was to us, that is, not cold or
little, but marvelous great; so that he shed his blood for us. Has our Lord
loved us thus dearly, to lay down his life for us, then let us love him as
dearly, let us lay down our lives, if we be called to it, for him.

Fourthly, if Christ be our Lord, we must imitate him, John 13.13.14. Ye call
me Lord and Master, and ye say well, for so I am; if I then your Lord and
master have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash one another feet: and
verse 15. For I have given you an ensample, etc. Thus we should imitate Christ
in love and humility, and other graces: we are much wanting in these Duties
now in these days, but if Christ be our Lord, we must show our love and
humility as Christ did, think scorn of nothing that is to be done for the
Children of God: Every servant will follow his Lord, if it be but in an ill
fashion; then let us imitate Christ in his graces, and conform our selves to
his fashions.

Fifthly, if Christ be our Lord, we must serve and obey him as our Lord, we
must do what he commands, and nothing else, and we must do it, as he
commands it to be done, and we must leave undone that he forbids: We must not
be servants to men, (we must serve other Lords as under our Lord Christ, and
in his name) much less must we serve our own lusts, or the world. Christ is
our Lord, and we will serve him, and not the world, nor our own sinful lusts.

Secondly, in our sufferings we must conform our selves to Christ: Let us know
for certain that we must look for affliction. The servant is not above his
master, Matthew. 10.24. It is the niceness of many Christians, that their finger
must not ache, they must not endure one temptation, they would fain fly from
afflictions, but we must look for them: Did Christ go from the Cross to
heaven, and shall not we go the same way? we must take up our Cross and
follow him. Secondly, as we must look for them, so we must carry our selves
with patience as he did in them, who when he was reviled, reviled not again,
when he suffered, he threatened not, etc. 1 Pet. 2.23. Leaving us an example
(says the Apostle) that we should follow his steps, verse 21. And therefore
let us labor to be patient in the least affliction, for he is thy Lord that
puts thee to it. And let them be our own afflictions, and then we shall the
better bear greater afflictions, and Christ's afflictions. Christ ware a Crown
of thorns, and was stroke upon that Crown, to add affliction to his
afflictions; so we must look for many thorns, many afflictions, and for
affliction to be added to affliction: But yet be of good cheer, Christ will
recompense all with a Crown of Glory. Let us apply this to the Sacrament: We
come here to the Lords Table, this is a great honor to us, therefore let us
be thankful for it: Secondly, let it comfort us, that if we come in
repentance, we shall have our comfort sealed up unto us, to our hands, to our
mouths, and to our hearts. Again, we profess Christ to be our Lord, then let
us examine whether we fear him, love him, and obey him as our Lord. Alas,
we must all confess we come short in these duties; let us acknowledge this
unto him, and let us say, Lord though we deserve not to be thy servants, yet
thou art our Lord, and let us come with more faith and fear, and love, and
with more resolution, to obey him better then ever we have done. If this
Sacrament Seal unto us that Christ is our Lord; it must also seal unto us
that we are his servants, and then we must not honor him for an hour, while we
are here, but all our life time. If thou be the servant of Christ, he is thy
Lord, but if thou serve the world, or thy belly, or thy pleasure, or any thing
else, and not the Lord Jesus in the truth of thine heart, then he is none of
thy Lord, nor thou art none of his servant. And therefore when thou shall come
and knock, and say, Lord, Lord, open unto me, he will answer thee, away from
me, thou art none of my servant: therefore let us subject our selves unto him,
in all obedience, both in doing, and suffering, as unto our Lord, and so he
will recompense us with grace here, and with glory hereafter.

FINIS.
THE FIFTH SERMON,
Upon ROMANS 8. the two last Verses. For I am persuaded, (or I am sure,) that
neither Death, nor life, nor Angels, etc.


IN handling this Scripture as GOD in mercy has given strength we have
proceeded thus far: First, we have showed the dependence of the verses with
the former; then we showed the meaning of the words in themselves: After that
we cast this Scripture, for our better instruction and memory, into this mould,
and showed that it did empty it self into these seven particulars. First,
that which is employed, namely, that there is a Communion betwixt God and the
faithful: Secondly, that which is expressed, namely, the bond of this Communion,
and that is the love of God: Thirdly, the Apostle shows the ground of this
Communion, and of this bond too, and that is Jesus Christ: Fourthly, he shows
that the faithful have a near interest in Christ Jesus, and this he sets
forth by a term of near Relation, our Lord: Thus far we have proceeded
already. The fifth point is, that the Apostle avouches the safety of all the
faithful in the midst of all dangers that they are subject to; nothing shall
separate us from the love of God. And this he inlargeth in many particulars, as
by and by we shall see.

This is the fifth thing then that we are to consider of, namely the safty of
the State of Gods children in the midst of all dangers; we will propound the
the Doctrine thus:

The hold that the faithful have in the love of God through Jesus Christ, it
is a sure hold: Doctrine.
the estate of grace that they are in, is an vndefeasable estate, nothing can
void them, nothing can deprive them of it. Consider well the words of the
obseruauation; the very words whereof are in effect the very words of this
Scripture; and the whole matter of the observation, is the whole matter of this
Scripture; For that which we have spoken heretofore touching our Communion with
God, the bond of it Gods love, the ground of both Jesus Christ, etc. have been
but preparations to this Truth; and these points which follow touching the
Apostle his certainty he has, and the use he makes of it, are but inferences
from this truth. This is the truth it self, that is here peremptorily and
precisely affirmed: that nothing shall separate the faithful from the love of
God to them in Jesus Christ, nor from the estate of grace that they are in: And
this the Apostle contents not himself only to affirm in the general, but
withal confirms it in particular, by a sufficient reckoning up of all the
parts of the Adversary power, that is or can be against us: Death shall not,
nor life shall not, nor Angels, etc. nor any other creature, nothing shall
separate us; not any one of these dangers asunder; no, nor all of them joined
together, no nor any other added to them, nor any other Creature, put what you
will to them, nothing shall separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus, and to put the matter out of all show of doubt, he says, not
only they shall not separate us, but he puts it upon an impossib^lity, they
shall not be able to separate us; let them join all their powers together, and
do what they can, they shall never be able to do it: Thus we see the Doctrine
is naturally raised, and the Apostle presses it as the maine matter of the
Scripture.

Explication.
I will speak somewhat, as our order is, for Explication of the Doctrine, and
therein I will handle but this one point: Because the Doctrine speaks of the
love of God, and of the state of grace; we must know what it is to be in that
state of the love of God, and the estate of grace; for either it has been our
state, or now is, or hereafter shall be our estate, else we can never be saved:
therefore before we show that we cannot fall away from this state, it is
needful to show what it is to be in it. The estate of the love of God, and the
state of grace, is to be thoroughly reconciled to God, through the precious
blood of Jesus Christ; whereby we are justified from all our sins, and entered
into a course of true sanctification: It is called the estate of Gods love, in
opposition to the estate of Gods wrath, wherein we are all by nature, Ephesians.
2.3. In this state of wrath God looks down from heaven upon us in mercy, and
receives us freely into his love through Jesus Christ, and so we are
translated out of the estate of Gods wrath, into the estate of his love; It is
called the estate of grace, in opposition to the state of sin, that we are
all in, Romans 3.28. All have sinned, etc. In this sinful state the Lord looks
down from Heaven in mercy upon us, and in Jesus Christ bestows upon us the
saving grace of Justification, forgiving us all our sins; and the grace of
Sanctification making us new creatures, and so translates us out of the state
of sin into the state of grace: These things we must feel in our selves in
some measure; else we were never in the state of grace. To open the point more
fully and familiarly; the estate of the love of God, and the estate of grace,
consists in certain mutual passages betwixt God and man: On Gods part to man,
there are two chief passages, Gods love, and the persuasion of Gods love: and
on man's part, there are also two chief passages; Faith, and Love: All those
that God will save, he loves them from all eternity in Jesus Christ; there is
Gods love, and in due time he acquaints them with it, and persuades them by his
Spirit to believe it, and to accept of it, and to return love and obedience
for it: there is his persuasion. On man's part, man being overcome with the
sense of this love, and the force of his persuasion, he yields to God, and
imbraceth this love, and believes the promise of grace, and applies it to
himself; here is our faith: and withal is carried after that good God, with
the whole bent of his Nature, and stream of his affections, that so dearly
loved us; here is our love. Take it thus, those whom God in mercy does purpose
to save, he will come unto; commonly upon the hearing of the Word, or else in
some special affliction, at the least in some good employment, and takes us
aside, and draws us into some serious meditation of our estate, and he breaks
with us to this effect: as if he should say, Ah poor sinful soul, thou art
in a miserable, a fearful, and a damnable case, led away every day into sin
in a fearful manner, and every hour of the day thou have deserved my wrath
and fearful curse to fall upon thee, if thou go on in these sinful courses,
hell and damnation is thy portion for ever; but I have pity upon thee, and
would have thee to have pity upon thy self; I do not desire thy death, but
that thou do repent and live; and out of my infinite love to mankind, I have
given my own dear Son Christ Jesus to die for such poor wretched sinners
as thou art: and now I come to tell thee, and do tell thee by my Spirit, that
thou poor sinful soul, art one of these sinners that CHRIST has purchased
by his most precious blood: therefore my Son hearken unto my voice; Oh my
Son give me thy heart, turn thy love and thy affections wholly upon me,
believe thou in me, and believe in my Son Christ Jesus, believe his Spirit,
his truth, his promises; cast away all thy sins, never let them enter into
thy heart again, and give thy self to promise and perform a holy life, be
persuaded by my advise, hold fast by me, and I will hold fast by thee; do thus
and I will be thy Father, and thou shall be my child for ever: Thus God wooes,
and thus he winnes every sinful soul: And this persuasion of his is not only
a bare tender of grace, as if God should say, thou shall be saved if thou will:
but it is Gods operative work of grace; which he persuades us and makes us able
and willing to do; he bids us believe and withal he gives us his Spirit, and
causes us to believe in Christ; he persuades us to set our love upon him, and
withal he sheds forth his love into our hearts by his holy Spirit, and makes
us able and willing to love him. This is the right state of saving grace, or of
the love of God, and when this knot of grace is knit betwixt God and the
believing Soul, it can never be dissolved by all the powers of hell. So we see
the Doctrine explained, that the hold which the faithful have in the love of
God through Jesus Christ it is a sure hold; the estate of grace that they are
in, is an vndefeasible estate, nothing can void them, nothing can deprive them
of it.

The proofs of this Doctrine are these, Proofs.
Psalm. 125.1. They that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Sion, that cannot
be removed, but remains for ever: The persons there spoken of are the same
that we spoke of in the Doctrine; they that trust in the Lord, the faithful
say we, that by faith and confidence have gotten sure hold of God in Christ;
secondly, the estate there spoken of, is the same we speak of; a sure and
firm estate, by way of comparison, is set down to be as mount Sion, the
surety whereof is set down by negation, it cannot be moved, and by
affirmation, but remains for ever: The substance of the speech is this, mount
Sion is so firmly settled as it can never be removed; But all they that trust
in the Lord are in such a state, therefore all they can never be removed, but
stand fast for ever. Some object and say, it is true that the faithful, so
long as they trust in the Lord, are immovable; but they may cease to trust in
the Lord, and so may be removed. I answer, this is a mere illusion of the
place, and this Scripture cannot be so deluded; for if they that trust in the
Lord may cease quite from trusting in him, then they may loose their hold in
him, but the place says, they can never loose their hold in God, for then
Mount Sion may be removed; but says the Text, Mount Sion can never be removed,
therefore they can never quite cease to trust in God: the Prophet concludes as
well the surenesse of their trust, that it shall never fail, as the surenesse
of Mount Sion, that it should never fail: he affirms as well the surenesse of
their faith, as the firmness of the hold they have in God. Matthew. 7.24.25.
whosoever hears of me these words, and does the same, I will liken him to a
wise man that builded his house upon a Rock: This wise builder is every true
believer, and the house there built, is the Rest that he sets himself upon,
how he looks to be saved, the grounding of this house upon a Rock, is the
relying of the Believer, truly and wholly upon Christ Jesus by a true and
lively faith in his blood; the rain fell, and the floods came, and the winds
blew, etc. These are his trials by afflictions, temptations, persecutions, etc.
The best believer is sure to have trials enough, even to the uttermost, as much
as he can stand under, and not more; but here is his comfort, his house shall
never fall, because it is built upon a Rock: the true believer has gotten
sure hold on God by faith in Christ, and therefore he can never fall, Ioh. 3.36.
He that believes in the Son, has everlasting life, etc. These are the words
of John Baptist, and are confirmed by our Savior, and that by terms of
asseueration, Ioh, 6.47. Verily, verily, I say to you, he that believes in
me has everlasting life: Here is a true Believer, and what is his portion?
everlasting life, and he says not, he shall have, but he has it, he is sure
of it, he is possessed of it: but a man may loose that which he has: yea,
but this is eternal life, and therefore cannot be lost, for if it could be
lost it were not everlasting. This appears further by the nature of the
phrase, to have life; which is not to have riches, or goods, or possessions,
but to have life is to live that life which a man has, as he that has
natural life, lives that life, and he that has spiritual life, lives a
spiritual life; and so he that has eternal life, lives eternally; so that
his meaning is, that true believers begin now to live that life, that they
shall live for ever, begun here in grace, and continued for ever hereafter in
glory; if they that thus believe could fall away quite from God, then they must
dye for ever, and it is not possible both to live and to dye for ever;
therefore it is impossible that ever any such should fall quite away from God.
John 10.27.28.29. My sheep here my voice, and I know them, and they follow
me; and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither
shall any pluck them out of my hand: Here our Savior speaks of his Sheep,
not only of Professors but of true Believers: Sheep that have true hearted
souls to Christ their Shepherd, for so they are described, they hear his
voice and follow him; they deal thus with him; But how deals he with them?
He gives them eternal life, and if Christ give it, who shall take it away
from them? And he says not I will, but I do give it them: every true Believer
at the first Act of his conversion has eternal life; he begins then to
live eternally, and he shall never perish; He may be hunted by Dogs, and
Wolves, and Bears, and Devils, but they shall never perish, neither shall any
pull them out of my hands; He that seperates us from God must tugge with Christ
Jesus himself, and be too hard for him too, else they can never pluck us out
of his hand: And is not this enough? If it be not, then look what he says in
the 29. Verse, My Father, which gave them me, is greater then all, and none is
able to take them out of my fathers hands: If any should question my power, yet
none will question my Fathers power; if any were able to pluck them out of my
hands, yet none, neither men nor Devils are able to pluck them out of my
Fathers hands, he is greater then all, and therefore the state of the faithful
is a sure state: And mark how our Savior in that place changes his words; in
the 28. Verse he says, none shall pluck them out of his hands; and in the 29.
Verse, none can take them out of his Fathers hands, they neither shall nor can:
So that the Doctrine is clear, that the hold that the faithful have in the
love of God through Jesus Christ is a sure hold, and the estate of grace that
they are in, is an vndefeasible estate, nothing can void them, nothing can
deprive them of it.

The reasons are many; there is no reason from man for this, for there is
nothing in, nor of our selves, but it is contrary and against this truth: all
the reasons must be fetched from God. 2 Cor. 1.21. It is God which establishes
us with you in Christ; Now look up to God, and all is for this truth, that we
cannot fall; First, his Love is for us, and that is everlasting: Secondly, his
Power is for us, and that is almighty: Thirdly, his Grace is for us, and that
is all sufficient: Fourthly, his Will is for us, and that is irresistable:
Fifthly, his Promise is for us, and that is unchangeable: and lastly, Christ
his prayer is for us, and that is infallible. A threefold cord is not easily
broken, but here is a sixe-fold cord, platted with Gods own hand, and every
one as strong as God himself, binding us fast to the love of God in Christ,
and therefore this can never be broken.

First, Gods Love is for us, and that is everlasting: We Ier. 31.3. and
therefore it cannot be removed. John 13.1. Whom he loves once, he loves for
ever, even unto the end he loves them. God cannot love us to day, and hate us
to morrow, as we do, that love a while and leave at last; far be it from
any of us, ever to imagine that God can love any man as his dear Child for a
fit, and a spurt, and yet afterward hate him, as the Child of the Devil, for
ever; but this God must do if ever any true Believer should be cast off, or
fall away; but this God cannot do, because his love is everlasting, and
therefore no Child of God can become a castaway.

Secondly, his Power is for us, and that is almighty, John 10.29. My Father is
greater then all, and none is able to take them out of my Fathers hands. Gods
greatness and his almightinesse lies at pawn for it, 1 Pet. 1.5. We are kept
by the power of God through faith unto salvation; the original signifies, that
we are kept by the Guard of Gods power, by the strongest and surest, and
chiefest power that God has; as the Kings Guard is his strongest power he
has about him: And what? is this for a time? no, for ever to salvation, says
the Apostle, to the full accomplishment of our salvation.

2 Cor. 12.9. My grace is sufficient for thee, etc. which is an effectual
sufficiency, else it could have been no comfort to Paul; for Paul was then in
great distress, the messengers of Satan, these Principalities here spoken of,
were about his ears buffetting him, he finds no power in himself to
withstand, and therefore he besought the Lord for this; and God gives him this
answer to satisfy and to pacify him withal, my grace is sufficient for
thee: though thou have no power nor grace to stand against this fiery
temptation, yet be of good comfort, my grace is, and shall be, sufficient for
thee. But you will say, this was Paul's particular case, but what is that to me,
or to another? I answer, it is true, it was his particular case, but yet so as
it is exemplary, and applicable to all true believers for ever after, so says
the Apostle himself, 1 Timothy 1.14.16. For this cause was I received to mercy,
that Jesus Christ should first show on me all long-suffering, unto the example
of them which shall in time to come believe in him unto eternal life; He
received mercy, that all the Children of God might lay hold upon it as he did,
in truth, though not in the same measure.

His will is for us, Luke 12.32. Fear not little flock, it is my Fathers will
to give you a Kingdom; And if it be his will, who shall gainesay it? Ioh.
6.39. And this is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all that he has
given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up at the last day; now
the will of God is irresistable, Rom, 9.19. Who has resisted his will? And
therefore the faithful cannot fall away.

Fifthly, Gods promise is for us, and that is unchangeable: Ier. 32.39.40. And I
will give them one heart, I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, I will
put my fear into their hearts, and they shall not depart from me: Here is a
promise, not of grace only, but of perseverance in grace; and Gods promise is
unchangeable, 2 Cor. 1.20. they are yea, and Amen: It is impossible that God
should lie, Heb. 6.18. and therefore seeing God has promised that we shall
stand fast; it is impossible that ever we should fall away.

Lastly, Christ's intercession is for us, and that is Luke 22.32. I have praide
that thy faith may not fail; that is, that thou may never fall from faith.
But this is particular for Peter; no, it is general for all as well as he,
Ioh. 17.9.20. I pray for them, I pray not for the world, I pray not for these
alone, but for them also that shall believe in me through their word; he prays
for all believers: now Christ's prayer is always heard, John 11.4. Father, I
know that thou hear me always: therefore the faithful cannot fall away.

The first Use of this point is matter of confutation, against those that hold
that the Saints may utterly fall from grace; It is held both by the Papists,
and the Lutherans, as also by the Arminians both at home and abroad; they hold
that Saints may utterly fall away from grace: I will ask these men, that are
so peremptory in this point, this question, whether they can show me any one
place in the Book of God, that does directly and expressly affirm that a true
Believer may utterly fall away from grace? They cannot, some of themselves
confess they cannot; then I answer them, that we can show many express
places to the contrary, directly affirming the impossibility of falling away,
and they have not one for the possibility of it, therefore we may quickly
judge where the truth is. Yea, but say they, there is many exhortations to the
faithful for that end, that they should not fall away, as 1 Cor. 10.12. Heb.
12.15. etc. and these should be in vain, except there were some possibility
that they might fall. I answer, such exhortations there are, and they are
directed to mixed congregations that consisted as well of Hypocrites that might
fall away, as well as of true Believers that might not fall away; and so they
are not in vain in respect of these Hypocrites, neither were they in vain in
respect of Gods Children, but of singular use in respect of them too, for
thereby they were stirred up to shake off security, and to be more di^igent in
the ways of God, for if we fall into sin, and negligence, and security, it
is the highway of falling from God. Yea, but say they, there are many examples,
as of Hymeneus, Phile^us, and Demas, etc. that were true believers, and yet
fell away. I answer, they can show me never one example of any that fell away
finally, but such as were hypocrites; I will say confidently, that he that falls
utterly away from grace, was never but an hypocrite; no true believer can fall
away; I dare say it because Christ has said it before me, Math. 7.26.27. The
foolish man built his house upon the sands, and when the storms came, it fell.
Do thou see a man build him an house, and it fall? certainly that man built
upon the sands, that is, only upon the profession of saving faith; he had
never true saving faith in CHRIST, but his own foolish persuasion; the true
believer builds upon the Rock CHRIST, and therefore his house can never fall.
To establish our Judgments herein, let us hold fast these two positions:
First, that hypocrites and counterfeits, may and do fall away finally, Matthew.
13.21. But true believers can never fall finally from GOD: Both these are
affirmed, 1 John 2.19. They went out from us, but they were not of us, for if
they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us. Secondly,
that true believers may fall from the sense of GODS love, and from the exercise
of Faith and Love, and obedience, and other graces; from some degree of Faith,
and from some degree of GODS love, and from the exercise of grace, as in the
case of spiritual desertion, temptation, specially by sin, but they can
never fall from faith, nor from the love of GOD it self, nor from the life of
grace, or at the least where they do fall, they neither fall wholly nor
finally: the whole power that is in them is not carried after sin, but there
is some resistance: A child of God in the case of sin, hates that he does, he
cannot fall wholly, the seed of God is still within him, 1 John 3.19. and that
will revive again; nor he cannot fall finally, because that seed is
immortal, 1 Pet. 1.23. and therefore can never die. They that are in the state
of grace, hear a voice behind them saying, This is the way, walk in it, Isa.
30.21. they have the guidance of Gods Spirit, whereby they are preserved from
evil, and fitted for every good duty, so that they cannot fall wholly nor
finally. And yet they may have such falls as are fearful, and which they may
rue for ever, as we may see in David's fall, Psalm 51. These two positions
well considered are a sufficient preservative to keep us from this error.

Jude 4? And mark what censure the Apostle passes on them in that place,
ungodly men they are, ordained to condemnation. A child that has a good
father, whom he knows will not see him want nor perish; shall this child
therefore waste and riot, and bezzell away all his state, and run himself
into debt and danger he cares not how? It were a wicked child that would do
thus: a good and true-hearted child to his father would never do it. It was
the devils temptation to our Savior, Luke 4.9.10. that he should cast himself
down headlong: An impudent persuasion to the Son of God: What is his reason
whereupon he persuades him thus to cast away himself? forsooth because he had
the promise of Gods protection, for, they shall bear thee in their hands, so
that thou shall not dash thy foot against a stone; as if he should say, thou
may do what thou list, thou art sure to be safe. Shall we give our selves
over to sin, to desperate and wicked courses, because we have Gods promise
not utterly to fall from grace? God forbid. This was the Devils Divinity, and
it is a devilish practice whosoever imitates it, and so let us esteem of it
and abhor it in our selves and others: Oh beloved we must consider that the
same grace of God whereby we are saved, the same grace does preserve us from
sin, and quickens us up to good duties. It is the Apostles words, Titus
2.11.12. The same grace of God that brings Salvation to us, makes us also deny
all ungodliness, and wordly lusts, and to live soberly, etc. Therefore
whosoever thou art that professest thy self to be a believer, and yet have no
care nor conscience to abstain from sin, and to lead a godly life, it is a
strong presumption against thee, that thou never yet had any true touch of
saving grace. Others abuse it to Pride: They have a high conceit of
themselves, and are lifted up in their hearts, as if they did stand by their
own strength and power: A fearful sin; for hereby they rob God of the
honor of their salvation, to ascribe it to themselves. And it is an usual and
just thing with God to recompense such abominable pride with a shameful fall:
John 18. It was the secret pride of Peter's heart, and confidence of his own
strength that made him say, that though all the world should forsake Christ,
yet he would not, yea, though he dyed with him, he would not forsake him;
which was justly recompensed with that shameful and fearful fall, that he
was the only man that not only forsook him, but denied him, and forswore him
too: that Peter might after be warned, and we by his example, never to think
of standing by our own strength, but wholly and only on the power of God, who
is all in all in it. Let us wait upon God in the humbleness of our souls,
and by faith and confidence put him in trust with our state; and let us do the
best we can to keep in the state of grace, but yet let us give the whole glory
of our preservation to God alone.

Hold fast till I come, says our Savior: It is not a vain exhortation, for
what God bids us do, he makes us willing and able to do in some measure;
therefore we are to hold fast by God, and to go on cheerfully in the state
of grace, and never be daunted with a servile fear for any enemy; we must
hold fast by God: notwithstanding his promise that we shall persevere, which
is the cause of our standing, yet we must hold fast by faith, as the
instrument and means under God whereby we stand, for this does not acquit us
from, but bind us more firmly to do our best endeavor to maintain our
state; Where Gods promise and man's endeavor are joined together, that being
the cause, and this the foundation and means, how sweetly do they concur
and work together? And therefore we must use all means for the establishing
of our selves in grace, when we are once entered into that estate; which state
we must labor to be sure that we are in, and not flatter our selves; and then
we must labor to use all good means to be established in it: First, Means to
be used that we may persevere in grace.
we must lay a sure foundation or ground, if ever we will hold out in the
estate of grace, else we shall quickly decay: See that thy says in Christ be
true and sound, grounded on Abba, Father, within thee; And let thy repentance
be unfeigned, not a few tears, but even the breaking of thy heart; And let thy
conversion be through, be not half a Christian, and see all thou do be done
in truth, and then thou have laid a good and sure foundation, Luke 6.48. He
that will lay a good foundation must dig deep, and so his building will
stand firm: And so if we will have our building stand firm with GOD, we
must dig deep, we must be men of deep meditations on our own miseries, and
on Gods mercies and promises, and in Christ's sufferings and merits; We must
have a deep forrow for our own sins, and not a slight and shallow
remembrance of them; and then we will not willingly be drawn to sin again
while we live; therefore we must have a deep sorrow for sin, and a deep
sighing for grace; and a deep Impression of the Word in our hearts; we must
not be hearers and speakers of it, and rememberers of it only, but it must
dwell plentifully in us, it must transform our hearts into the obedience of
it; If ever we look to lay a good foundation in God, we must dig deep,
Matthew. 13.5.6. The Corn that was sown in the stony ground, came up quickly
and perished quickly, because it had no depth of earth: Our ordinary hearers
are quick and apt to speak of that they hear, but the Word has no depth of
rooting in their hearts, and therefore they quickly fall away: be sure
therefore that thou dig deep, and that that which thou buildest upon be deep
in thy Act. 11.23. Barnabas exhorted all, that with purpose of heart they would
continue in the Lord; we must be resolute to deny our selves, to leave our
sins, to fight against our corruptions, and to endure temptations, and to
loose all, yea, our lives and all, rather then to loose our hold in God, many
there are that make resolutions, to lead a holy life, but either they are
passionate or cold, no marvel though such resolutions never hold out: many
make resolutions in a passion, and they will never hold, Deuteronomy. 5.27.29. The
people said unto Moses, Go thou near and hear all that the Lord our God
says, and declare thou unto us, and we will hear it and do it: But what
says God? Oh that there were such an heart in my people, to fear me, and to
keep all my Commandments always: We make many good resolutions; But* oh that
there were such an heart in us to do as we say. Five rules to be observed in
our resolutions, that they may be firm.
Now that our resolutions may stand; First, to do them in the fear of God, as
in Gods presence, and hearing; Secondly, do it heartily from thy heart.
Thirdly, do it from a mature deliberation, and not in a fit or passion, thou
have felt the smart of sin, therefore resolve deliberately* rather to be
drawn in pieces, then to be drawn to sin again; Fourthly, we must make
our resolutions in confidence of Gods promises, and empty our selves of all
power to do any thing, as of our selves; Lastly, we must go to God by prayer
for his Spirit, that he may frame thy resolutions within thee; Say, Lord thou
have given me these good resolutions, let thy Spirit work and confirm them
in my heart, and then they shall stand sure, and if we can prevail with God by
prayer, to frame these resolutions in our hearts, they shall be sure to stand.
Thirdly, that we may be established Psalm. 16.8. I have set the Lord ever before
me, because he is at my right hand I shall never be moved; The way to keep us
from falling, is to walk openly and nakedly before the Lord, without
dissembling, reseruations, circumloquutions; never be either afraid or ashamed
to tell GOD what thou want, for so much as thou failest in making thy self
thoroughly known to GOD, so much thou ever give thy self to fall away from
grace.

Matthew. 26.41. Our Savior prescribes it of purpose, as a preservation from
falling: Thy heart is deceitful above all things; watch thy heart therefore at
every turn, lest it fall away: But alas, what will our watchfulness do?
Yes, it is very effectual when it is joined with prayer; Watch to keep thy
self, and pray to God to keep thee, and thou shall be well kept; Bring God
unto thy watch by thy prayer, and then though thou be heavy and sleepy, yet he
never slumbers nor sleeps, he will surely keep thee.

Reu. 2.5. Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent: Have thou sinned?
oh what have thou done? Get thee to God, humble thy self before him, confess
and bewail thy sins with a broken heart, take hold on the promise of grace
in Christ; renew thy vow, and promise to God, and see thou perform it, to be
more careful for ever after, and this do speedily; It is a great advantage that
sin gets of us, by resting in us, like a sore that is let alone, it festers,
and is harder to be cured.

if the duty be done, all is well, no matter how; but this makes a foul bracke
in the estate of grace: but let us not do these things for custom or formality
sake, but let us see that the life and power of godliness be in us in the
performance of them.

Lastly, let us be sure we be always going forward, for surely our not going
forward, is some degree or beginning of going backward, Phil. 3.13. We must
forget those things which are behind, and reach forward to those things which
are before. Labor to weaken thy sins, and to strengthen thy graces, and to
be more frequent in good duties, and so shall we go forwards, and not fall
away. And now we come to the Lords Supper, let us not be content to receive it
in the Elements, but let us see that the life and power of it be in our hearts;
and then they shall be a powerful means to keep and help forward the
believing Soul in the state of grace: Here the promise of God is sealed unto
us, for the forgiveness of our sins; and here we bind our selves to God for
new obedience, and here we eat Christ's flesh* and drink his blood after a
spiritual manner; and so shall never dye, (says our Savior) but live for
ever. And so this Sacrament is a powerful means to confirm us in this
Doctrine, that the hold that the faithful have in the love of God through
Jesus Christ, is a sure hold, etc.

FINIS.
THE SIXTH SERMON,
Upon ROMANS 8. the two last Verses. For I am persuaded, that neither Death,
nor life, etc.


AS God has been pleased to give strength and opportunity, we have proceeded
in the handling of this Scripture to these five points; the first is contained
in the Text by way of Intimation; namely, that there is a near Communion
betwixt God and all the faithful in Jesus Christ, intended in the word
separation: Secondly, we have spoken of the Bond of this Communion, which is
the love of God: Thirdly, we have showed both the ground of this Communion, and
of the Bond of it, and that is Jesus Christ: Fourthly, we have showed the near
reference that is betwixt Christ and the faithful, he is our Lord, and we are
his Subjects and Servants: Fifthly, we have showed the safety of all the
faithful in the midst of all dangers which the Apostle avouches here, That
neither death, nor life, etc. shall separate us from the love of God; the
Children of God are and shall be in the love of God, let their enemies do what
they can.

Now we come to speak of the sixth point, and that is, the confident persuasion
which the Apostle has concerning this heavenly truth, I am sure he is sure of
it: First, I will propound the Doctrine; in that the Apostle says, I am
persuaded, or I am sure, that all the faithful shall continue in the love of
God without separation; the observation is this: Doctrine.
Gods Children, all true Believers, may and ought to have a confident
persuasion in themselves of their own certainty and continuance in the state
of grace and salvation: for howsoever the persuasion here spoken of, is a
personal and a particular persuasion of Paul, (I am persuaded) yet the matter
which he is peswaded of, is general to all believers, I am persuaded (says
he) that nothing shall separate us: and therefore the estate of all true
believers being in it self as firm and sure as Paul's was; then their
assurance must be in some measure answerable to his. To set the Doctrine right,
that we may receive it in the truth of the Apostles intendment, and apply it to
our selves rightly against despair, and yet without presumption; Doctrine
cleared for such exceptions as seem to lie in the Text.
we are first to clear it of some exceptions, and then to bound it within
certain bounds or limmits: First, of the exceptions, I do not mean such
exceptions as are made against the Doctrine it self, (for of them we shall
speak in the uses,) but of such as are made against this Scripture, from
whence the Doctrine is raised. The first exception is this; the word here
translated, I am persuaded or sure, does not always in Scripture signify such
a confident persuasion, as we hear speak of; it signifies indeed a probable
or hopeful opinion, not a confident persuasion, as for instance, Romans 15.14. I
my self am also persuaded of you my Brethren, that ye are full of goodness,
and filled with all knowledge, etc. Is this a confident persuasion? The Apostle
knew not their hearts, and therefore could not be confidently persuaded of
this, it was only a probable and hopeful opinion (say they:) and so that in 2 Timothy 1.5. I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt
first in thy Grandmother Lois, and in thy Mother Eunice, and I am persuaded
that it dwells in thee also. To this exception I answer, that it is true,
that these places are to be understood of a hopeful, or charitable, or
probable persuasion, and so the word may sometime signify (and yet in these
places Paul might speak by special revelation, but we will not stand upon
that:) But yet it is as true, sometime this word signifies a certain
knowledge, and a confident persuasion, as Romans 14.14. I know, and am persuaded
through the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of it self, etc. Here
is a confident persuasion; and so in the 2 Timothy 1.12. For I know whom I have
believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
committed unto him, against that day: Here is a confident persuasion, because
it is joined with certain knowledge, and therefore the persuasion must be
certain too; so that all this while the matter lies in suspense, for in some
places it signifies a confident persuasion, and in others a probable
persuasion; Which then is here meant? Go to the Rule: Where one and the same
word is used in diverse senses, in diverse places of Scripture, the circumstances
of the Text must judge and declare in what sense it is to be taken in that
place: Now look into the circumstances of this Text, and we shall find, that
it is here to be taken, and must be meant of a confident persuasion, for in the
35. Verse the Apostle had confidently insulted over all dangers, what shall
separate us from the love of God in Christ? etc. And he gives the reason of it
in this Verse, for I am persuaded, etc. Why does he slight his enemies so?
Because he is sure nothing shall separate him from the love of God, For I am
sure. Does he so confidently insult over all dangers, because he supposes, or
has some probable opinion or slender persuasion? That were too weak a ground
to cause him to insult over such strong enemies as these are; but because he is
sure and certainly persuaded that they shall not hurt him, therefore he may and
does safely and confidently insult over them; therefore this a confident
persuasion. Again, in the 30. Verse, he had pronounced himself a Conqueror,
yea, more then a Conqueror, as if the victory were already gotten: In all
these things we are more then Conquerours; and he gives the reason of it in the
38.39. Verses, for I am persuaded, etc. And does the Apostle pronounce himself
a Conqueror before he be sure of the Conquest? that were a proud and a vain
boasting, which Paul was free from: but he does pronounce himself a Conqueror
upon this persuasion here spoken of, because he is sure, that neither death,
nor life, etc. can hurt him: therefore the word in this place signifies a
certain and a confident persuasion, such as the Apostle dares build his soul
upon against all comers. Secondly, it is excepted, that Paul might have this
certain persuasion, that he, nor any of the faithful, should ever be cut off
from the love of God by special revelation; Had he so? They that make this
exception, will deny this when it comes to the proof; For, if Paul had it by
special Revelation, that he nor none of the faithful shall ever fall away
from the love of God, then it is certain that the state of the faithful is
infallible, and that they shall never fall from it; for special Reue^ation is
never of false things: But secondly, I say Paul had it not by special
Revelation, but by the lively power of a justifying faith: For first, special
Revelations are of matters not revealed in the word, but this is; secondly,
they are extraordinary, this is ordinary, (as we shall show in the proofs) in
others of Gods Children in their measure; our persuasion is built upon a sure
and ordinary ground, the promises of God rightly built upon, and his love
truly felt in Christ, true faith and repentance, etc. and therefore Paul had
not this certain persuasion by special Revelation.

The Doctrine limited and bounded within certain limits.
Secondly, we will bound this Doctrine within certain limits and bounds, and
they are two: The first is concerning all true believers in general; the
second concerning one and the same Believer in particular. First, concerning
all in general, we must not think that it is the portion of every Believer to
attain to this high strain of confident persuasion, as Paul had; no, we must
come short: God gives his graces to his Children in several portions, to some
more, to some less, as he will himse^fe; but yet every true Believer has some
measure of this confident persuasion, especially at sometimes, and every one
must strive to have it in the highest measure: We must strive after the most
excellent gifts, says the Apostle, and when they have it not, it is their own
fault: Every Believer must labor for it, and when they come short of this
height of persuasion, they must know that they come short of that high strain
that God would have them come to, and they must say with the man in the
Gospel, Mark 9.24. I believe, Lord help my unbelief: And so far as we
come short of this full and confident persuasion, so far our belief is
tainted with unbelief, and yet this does not utterly overthrow our faith, but
it does much disparage it, for all this our faith is a true faith, and we shall
be saved by it. So that the Doctrine stands firm, that we may, and ought to
have this certain and confident persuasion, etc.

The second limit is concerning one and the same particular Believer, he must
not always think to have this confident persuasion alike; the strongest faith
is sometimes abated to much weakness: There was a time when Job said, that
though God did kill him, yet would he trust in him, Job 13.15. And there was a
time again when the same Job said, Oh that I might have my desire, that is,
that God would destroy me, etc. Job 6.8.9. Here is a great difference betwixt
Job and Job, betwixt Job in the strength of his faith, and Job in the
weakness of his faith, yet still he had true faith: There was a time when
David said, Psalm. 23.4. Though I should walk through the valley of the shadow
of death, I would fear none evil; and there was a time when the same David
said, Psalm. 31.22. that he was cast out of Gods sight, here is a great
difference betwixt David in the strength of his faith, and Dav^d in the
weakness of his faith: And so it is with Gods Children, there is a great
difference of persuasion in one and the same Believer at sundry times;
sometimes they sin, and that weakens their faith; sometimes they are
grievously tempted, and that weakens their faith; somet^mes God withdrawes his
spirit, and that weakens their faith; and sometimes they are negligent in the
means, and that weakens their faith, yet still in the true believer there is
faith, and true faith, though a weak faith: and when he is in such weakness,
he grieves, and mournes, and goes to God by prayer, and by all means strives
against it. So we see that Gods Children may and ought to have this confident
persuasion.

Proofs.
Now we come to the Proofs of the Doctrine. Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near with
a true heart in assurance of faith: The Apostle stirs up himself, and all
true Believers to draw near to God in prayer, and other holy exercises, and
when they do draw near, he inioynes them to bring these two special graces
with them to manage these duties withal: First, a true heart; take heed we
come not as Hypocrites with their lips only, but with a true heart: Secondly,
with full assurance, with full confidence and repose, and resting on the mercy
and promises of God. The manner of the phrase is effectual, the word signifies
in the original, full sail, and it is a speech borrowed from a Ship at Sea,
that is under Sail, and has Wind and Tide, and all her Sails spread, that
goes a long snugge in her course toward her Port with full sail; so should
all true Believers, when they come to God, and draw near to him in prayer,
hearing the word, or receiving the Sacraments, we must hoist up all the Sails
of our Faith, that we may be carried along in the performance thereof, in the
strength and power of Gods Spirit, as with wind and tide, and with full
assurance, as with full Sail, evermore resting upon the promises and mercies
of God in Jesus Christ, and being confidently persuaded of the love of God to
us in him; and this the Apostle exhorts to in this place; and therefore all
Gods Children may and ought to attain to it. 1 John 3.2. We are now the Sons
of God, but yet it is not manifest what we shall he, and we know that when
he shall be made manifest, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he
is. The persons there spoken of, are true believers, their present state is a
blessed estate, for they are the Sons of God. Yea, but what is their future
estate? who knows what shall become of them hereafter? The world knows it not,
it does not appear to them what we shall be; happily they think that we may
fall away from grace, and loose our adoption, and be separate from God: yea,
but says the Apostle, We know better then so, we know that when he shall
appear, we shall be made like unto him: we know not only our present estate,
but our future too: we know we are now in a happy estate, in the state of
salvation, for we are the Sons of God; and though it appear not to the world
what we shall be, yet we know, and are confidently persuaded, that as we are in
the state of salvation now, so we shall continue firm in it, we shall so live,
and so dye, and so rise again at the last day; this we know, it is as sure as
if it were done already; When he appears, we shall be like unto him. 1 John
5.10.11. He that believes in that Son of God, has the witness in
himself, etc. What is this saving truth which God does witness, and which
every believer must be persuaded of? It is this, That God has given unto us
eternal life in his Son Jesus Christ, which is the same in substance with
that in the Doctrine, that we shall stand fast in the state of Gods love to
eternal life. And what persuasion have the children of God concerning this
truth? A true and sound persuasion, such as he has good warrant for in
himself, and in his own heart; He has the witness of it in himself: But
what witness is this? It may fail: No, it is not the witness of man, but of
God himself, as verse 9.10. so that it is the witness of God in our hearts,
and therefore cannot deceive us: See then if it be not a confident persuasion;
If we have it not, says the Apostle, we make God a liar. Romans 4.21. being
fully assured, that he that had promised, was able to do it: Here Abraham's
faith is set before us, as a pattern for all true believers, and the strength
of his faith is commended unto us, by these two particulars, each directly
touching the point in hand, one in the 20. verse, that he was strong in faith
and doubted not: if he was so persuaded as he doubted not, it was a confident
persuasion: the other in the 21. verse, that he was fully assured, that God
which had promised, was able to do it; there was the height of a confident
persuasion; this was Abraham's faith, and that faith which he was justified by,
verse 22. And lest any man should, It was Abraham's faith indeed, but that is
too high a strain for us to aim at; No, says the Apostle, in the 23. and 24.
verses, It is not written for him only, but for us also; where the Apostle
imposes the same duty on us, that we also ought to be strong in faith, and
not doubt of the promises of God, but be fully assured, that they shall be
performed and made good unto us; and this is to walk in the steps of the faith
of our Father Abraham, verse 12. And those are good children that follow so
good a Father.

The Reasons of the point are these: First, the giving and the receiving of the
Spirit begets this persuasion: Secondly, the voice of the Spirit in us
confirms it: Thirdly, the nature of faith requires it: Fourthly, the fruits of
the Spirit, and of faith approve it: Lastly, the truth of Gods promises ratify
it, and establish it.

First, the giving and receiving of the Spirit begets John 4.13. Hereby, we
know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his
Spirit: Hence it is that this Spirit thus given is called an earnest, Ephesians.
1.13.14. It is a significant comparison and most pregnant to our purpose; An
earnest we know is something given in hand at the making up of a bargain, the
buyer gives it, the seller receives it, and thereby both parties are bound to
the full performance of the bargain: so it is betwixt God and our poor Souls
in our conversion, God bargains and covenants with us to be our God, and to
make us his children, and heirs of salvation; he gives us an earnest, and we
receive it; what is that? His Spirit to assure us that as he has begun, so he
will go on with us, and that his Covenant shall never be broken; and we
receive it upon the same condition. If but a man give us an earnest, if he be
an honest man, we are persuaded he will go on with his bargain; much more
will God, if he give us an earnest, we may be confidently persuaded that he
will not break with us: If God should give but a small earnest, but a penny,
we would believe that he would perform with us; but he gives us his own
Spirit, as great an earnest as himself (in reverence be it spoken to his great
Majesty) and therefore he will surely go on with us: he gives us his Spirit to
assure us, that he will not fail us, and therefore we may confidently be
persuaded of it, that he will perform his word to us; and he gives us this
earnest nor in our hands, for happily we might loose it then: but in our hearts,
and there it rests as a Seal, to seal us up to God for ever and ever, 2 Cor.
1.22. Who has also sealed us, and given the earnest of his Spirit into our
hearts. We use to call this earnest given and received, a Gods penny; Here is a
Gods penny indeed, the best Gods penny that ever we took, and given us upon
the greatest and best match that ever we made, to assure us and certainly
persuade us that God will perform his covenant to us.

Secondly, the voice of the Spirit in us, confirms it, for upon our true
conversion, as we receive this Spirit, so our Spirit grows into a blessed
familiarity with Gods Spirit, and in this familiarity, Gods Spirit acquaints
our spirits with many heavenly truths, and amongst other, the Spirit tells us
in plain terms, that we are in the number of those that shall be saved:
thou poor sinful soul art in truth the child of God. Romans 8.16. The same
spirit bears witness to our spirits, that we are the children of God; there is
a lively voice in the hearts of all Gods true children, whereby the Spirit tells
them plainly so. The Apostle in the 1 Cor. 2.10. to the 16. reasons the case
plainly. This is a secret might some say* Yea, but says the Apostle, God has
revealed them to us by his Spirit, etc. But it is hid in Gods mind: We know
the mind of God, says the Apostle, verse 16. But how do we know Gods mind?
why, God has revealed it to us by his Spirit, verse 10. And in the 12. verse,
the Apostle says, that he has given us the Spirit that is of God, that we
might know the things that are of God; he has given us his Spirit to this end,
to confirm and seal unto us that we are appointed unto life.

Thirdly, the nature of faith requires it: Faith requires I believe in God? and
doubting is opposite to faith; James 1.16. Ask in faith, and waver not:
Doubting is opposite to faith, as darkness is to light, they cannot stand
together but with strife and contradiction one against another-

Fourthly, the fruits of the Spirit, and of faith approve it; what are the
fruits of the Spirit? why, the Commandments of God, 2 Pet. 1.10. If ye do
these things ye shall never fall; God gives his word for it; hereby we are sure
(says the Apostle 1 John 2.3.) that we know him, if we keep his
Commandments, and 1 John 3.14. we know that we are translated from death to
life, because we love the Brethren; If I love my Brother truly for Christ's
sake, I am sure that I am translated from death to life, as sure as I know it
to be day by the light.

Heb. 10.23. He is faithful that has promised, and therefore let us draw
near unto him with full assurance, and hold fast the profession of our hope
without wavering, this will carry us out through thick and thin.

pretend that they have the Law and the Gospel for them too: The Law says,
Do this and live; and they pretend to perform perfect obedience to the Law,
and yet they doubt whether they shall live. The Gospel says, Believe this and
thou shall be saved; and they say they are only the true believers; Have they
both the Law and the Gospel to assure them, and yet do they doubt whether
they shall be saved? If the Law assure them not of salvation, yet the Gospel
might, at least both together should not fail them: But all things well
considered, it is no marvel; seeing they join their merits with Christ's, it
is just with God to deny them the greatest comfort in the world, namely, this
full assurance by the merits of Christ: And seeing they will be justified by
their own works, no marvel though their justification fail them, seeing
their works fail them. The evils of Popish doubting.
But let us see the evil of this their Doctrine; hereby they impeach Gods
truth, and call all his promises into question, and deny one of the chiefest
privileges in the world to Gods children, and bereave them of their best
comfort, and hereby they dishearten Gods children, and dampe them in the course
of grace, and many other evils follow hereupon. I will insist only upon
these: First, If I must doubt of my 1 John 4.10. Hereby is love, not that we
loved God, but that he loved us. Secondly, our prayers will be but faint
prayers, I shall pray but faintly, if I doubt whether God will hear me or no.
James 1.6.7. Ask in faith and waver not, neither let that man think that he
shall receive any thing of the Lord. Mark 11.24. Whatsoever you desire when
you pray, believe that you shall have it, and it shall be done unto you. If we
believe that God will hear us, this makes us to pray earnestly; but if we come
wavering and doubting, we shall have little heart to pray; nay, we shall not
receive, (says the Apostle James.) Judges, Gideon was fearful at the first
to fight against the Midianites; but when God had promised him the victory,
then verse 15. he says to the people; Up, for the Lord has delivered into
your hands, the host of Midian; and so it is with us in our spiritual fight;
If we believe that we shall overcome, we will up and fight These. 5.8.9. Put on
the Breast Plate of faith and love, and the hope of salvation for an Helmet; for
God has not appointed us unto wrath, but to obtain salvation by the means of
our Lord Jesus Christ. If we doubted whether God had appointed us unto wrath,
and not to salvation, we should have little comfort to put on hope of salvation
for an helmet: but if we be persuaded of our salvation, then we would put it
on with good comfort. Again, our patience James 1.12. Blessed is the man that
endures temptation, for when he is tried he shall receive the Crown of life;
If once we believe that we shall receive the Crown of life, we will endure all
trials patiently. Again, our repentance will be but an hourly Mar. 1.13. Repent,
and believe the Gospel. We must believe the Gospel else we cannot repent.

Lastly, faith mixed with fears and doubtings, is but Math. 8.26. Why are ye
fearful O ye of little faith? And so in the whole course of grace, all the
duties of Gods service will be much dampt in us, if we go not along with this
full Sail, this full persuasion: Yea, but say the Papists, where do you find
in any place in all the Scripture, that it is written that every particular man
by name shall be saved? Is there any among you named in the Scripture? If it be
not written there, how can it be believed? I answer, we have as good cause to
believe, as if our names were set down in Scripture: God has made his
promises upon such and such quallifications; if I then find these in my self,
I may build upon Gods promises, that they are made to me: As if the King should
proclaim, that a^l his true-hearted Subjects should have such and such
favors; why, if I find I have a true heart to the King, I may conclude, that
I am there meant, as well as if I were there named; and so it is betwixt God
and us; God says in his word, that whosoever believes and repents, shall be
surely saved; then say I, I believe and repent, in my poor measure, therefore
I conclude that I shall be saved. For the first Proposition, the adversaries
agree with us, that whosoever believes and repents shall be saved: but to the
second they say, how do you know that you believe and repent? I answer, faith
is an act, and therefore may be known of the believer, as he that sees, does
know he sees, and he that hears, does know he hears, etc. and is not our
belief a matter of our understanding, as well as of our will? Therefore every
one that believes, knows that he does believe; it is a very untoward faith
that is without knowledge of it, and he a goodly believer, that knows not
whether he believes or no. Math. 9.28. Jesus asks the blind men, believe ye
that I am able to do this? and they said unto him, yea Lord: and so Ioh.
9.35.38. he asked the blind man whom he had cured, Do thou believe in the
Son of God? Verse 38. He said, Lord I believe: Every true believer knows,
and can truly say he does believe. Again, we may know we have faith, by the
proper effects of faith, which is a godly life. Lastly, we may know it by the
Spirit bearing witness to our Spirits, Romans 8.16. And there cannot but be
certainty of faith, where there is the sense of faith by the Spirit.

saved without ground, or upon some good ground? If without ground, then it is
a vain and foolish hope that will deceive thee; if upon good ground, then know
that there is no true ground for hope but faith; Faith is the ground of things
hoped for, Heb. 11.1. and therefore if we hope to be saved, we believe we shall
be saved, for true hope is as certain as faith, Heb. 6.9. If we believe
certainly, we hope certainly; so much faith as we have, so much hope we
have; and so much hope as we have, so much faith we have; and therefore labor
to know the ground of thy hope: Why do thou hope thou shall be saved? why,
because thou beleeuest thou shall be saved.

The last Use is to teach every one of us to labor wholly loose it; It may be
quelled and lost in sense, in thy extremity, but it shall never dye in us, but
it shall comfort our hearts when we have not the sense of it.

Means how this assurance may be gotten^
But how shall we get it, may some say? I answer, first by prayer, if we ask
we shall have; so did the Apostles, Luke 17.5. they prayed, Lord increase our
and so did David, Psalm. 35.3. Say unto my soul, thou art my salvation:
Secondly, we must get it by hearing and obeying the word of God, 1 Ioh. 5.13.
These things have I written unto you that believe in the name of the Son of
God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe in
the name of that Son of God; Labor to hear the word, and to know it, and to
obey it, and then we shall know that we have eternal life; it was written for
Ioh. 14.21. Thirdly, by the use of the Sacraments; they are Seals to confirm
this unto us: We have heard of the inward Seal, Gods Spirit, these are outward
Seals, Romans 4.11. After he received the sign of Circumcision, as the Seal of
the Righteousness of faith, etc. By the use of the Sacraments we come to have
this confident persuasion: In Baptism the Minister says, I baptize thee in
the name of the Father, etc. Some say, where is it said in particular, that I
or thou shall be saved? Yes, in Baptism, the Minister says to me and to thee
in particular, I Baptize thee; and God says, I reeciue thee: So the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, that is a Seal to us, and how? why, God has annexed it
to his word, as a Seal to our souls, of the forgiveness of our sins; and
if we come with believing hearts unto it, then we eat Christ's body, and drink
his blood, and so shall not dye eternally; and there is also the particular
app^ication of the Minister, eat thou, and drink thou, in remembrance that
his body was broken for thee, and his blood shed for thee; and so by this means
this confident persuasion is increased in us. Fourthly, another means is this,
make grieve not the holy Spirit, whereby ye are sealed, Ephesians. 4.30. The Spirit
works this confident persuasion in us, if we grieve this Spirit he will go
away, and withdraw the sense of this persuasion; If we have but a little fruits
of the Spirit, a little faith, etc. let us make much of it, and God will give
us more, as Christ said to Nathaniel, John 1.50. Because I said unto thee, I
saw thee under the fig tree, beleeuest thou? Thou shall see greater things
then these: So God says to every poor believing soul; I give thee but a
glimpse of assurance now, but thou shall see greater things then these. Fifthly,
another means is to walk uprightly Genesis 17.1.2. If we walk uprightly before
God, he will be our God all-sufficient. Sixthly, another means to get this
assurance is Heb. 10.22.23. they shall stand though our faith be weak; if we
have our eyes surely fixed on them, it will comfort us in all troubles. Psalm.
119.50. David professes that Gods promise was his comfort in trouble, and that
it did quicken him. Seauenthly, will help us greatly herein, Judges 13.23.22.
Manoah said to his wife, We shall surely dye, because we have seen God, but
his wife said, If the Lord will kill us, he would not have received a meat
offering, and a burnt offering at our hands, neither would he have showed us
all these things, etc. She observed and builded upon Gods former mercies, and
that works a confident persuasion in her for the time to come. So if we have
got some persuasion of the love of God, though afterward we loose the sense of
it, yet let us say to our souls, surely God would never have done all this for
me, he would never have showed me the way of Religion, and wrought some good
persuasion in me of his love toward me, if ever he had 2 Cor. 13.5. Prove
your selves whether you are in the faith, etc. The Apostle would have us to
attain to this certainty of persuasion, and how? why, says he, prove your
selves, try your selves: of what? whether Christ be in you: Whether he live in
you by his grace, and by his Spirit; whether by his death he mortify your
sins, and by his resurrection quicken you up to newness of life; if he do,
then we may be fully assured that we shall never be cast off.

This point we must bring our selves to, for this will bring comfort to us in
our sins, in our sickness, in our temptations, in all these if we look to
our union which we have with Christ, we may have comfort: God has knit me to
himself in Jesus Christ, and therefore I know that all these storms shall
end, and turn to my good. And so in the want of any grace, this is our
comfort, that we are knit unto Christ, and al-sufficiency is in him, and of his
fullness we shall receive grace for grace; therefore let us labor to be well
acquainted with this grace, our union with Christ. And let us make good use of
this word now delivered unto us, we know not what trials God has in store for
us; and therefore let us labor by all these means for this confident
persuasion of Gods love to us: God gives us his Sacrament to assure us of it,
and would have us be persuaded that he loves us, and though we cannot attain
to this persuasion in that strength that we should, why yet God is not
captious, he will take all things at the best, walk before him and be upright,
and he will be our GOD all-sufficient.

FINIS.
THE SEVENTH SERMON,
Upon ROMANS 8. the two last Verses. For I am persuaded, that neither Death,
nor life, etc.


IN handling of these words, as you may remember, we proceeded as God enabled
us in this present service, to reduce the whole Sum of these two Verses, to
these seven heads: First, that there is a Communion betwixt God and the
faithful, so the word separation does presuppose: secondly, we showed the
Bond of this Communion, the love of God: thirdly, we showed the ground both of
this Communion, and of the Bond of it, and that is Jesus Christ: Fourthly, we
showed the near relation that there is betwixt Christ and those that believe
in him, He is our Lord, says the Apostle. Fifthly, we showed the certainty of
the State of the faithful in it self: that never any thing should separate
them from the love of God: The sixth point (which we handled the last time) was
the certainty of it in our own hearts. The seventh and last point which now
we are come to, is; That the Apostle bears up himself boldly upon this
assurance against all dangers and troubles, that ever did or could befall him.
And this is the maine reach of the Apostles whole discourse; propounded here by
way of reason, for I am sure; As if he should say, I may boldly and safely
insult over all those dangers mentioned in the 35. Verse: But why Paul art thou
so bold? for I am sure (says he) that not only those dangers there spoken
of, shall ever separate me from the love of God; no, nor greater then they, nor
the instruments of them, nor Abettors, nor Authors of them shall ever do it;
Be it life, be it death, be it Angels or Principalities or Powers, etc. Not any
of all these shall be ever able to separate me from the love of God: so far
off is it, that Tribulations, or Persecutions, etc. shall separate me, that
none of these that are greater shall ever do it; This is the just connection of
these verses with the former, and in this consist the full weight and power of
the Apostles Reason.

Now concerning this seventh and last point, here are two things to be
considered: First, we are here to consider of the dangers that the children of
God are subject unto: Secondly, of the support and comfort they have against
these dangers; And both these we are to consider of (God willing) first in
general, then in particular.

First, we will speak of the dangers and that in general that Gods children
are subject to; and then we will come to the support they have in them. For
first we must know what the dangers are, before we can know the support and
help we have in them; we must first know the disease before we can know the
remedy: and concerning the dangers in general, take notice of these four
things; First, the variety of them, they are not one but many, of diverse kinds,
some dangers of life, some of death, dangers wrought by diverse means and
instruments, some by Angels, some by Principalities, and Powers: dangers at
diverse times, some present, some to come, dangers from diverse places, some from
the height above, some from the deph beneath; here is the variety of them, for
the Apostle speaks not idly in any of these words.

Secondly, we must take notice of the compleatnesse and fullness of these
dangers; they are not only many and diverse, but even all the dangers that may
be, for here is a sufficient and perfect reckoning up of all sorts of dangers
to the full; there is not one danger that can ever be named or imagined, but it
may fitly be reduced to one of these heads that the Apostle here names, either
to life, or to death, or to Angels, etc. And that the Apostle may be sure to
comprehend all dangers, he does not only name actual dangers, such as do
ordinarily befall us both of life and death, but possible dangers, to come as
well as present, nay such dangers as in our ordinary apprehension, are
impossible; from good Angels, which is hard to be conceived how that may be.

Thirdly, we are to consider the crossenes and thwartnes of these dangers,
propounded here in opposition one to another, and also in opposition each of
them to our own state and mind; the Apostle makes our case herein to be like
unto Iudahs, Isa. 9.21. Manasses against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasses,
and both of them against Judah: So it is with Gods children in their trials,
here is Death opposed to life, and life opposed to death, and both opposite to
Gods children; so here is good Angels opposed to bad, and bad Angels opposed to
good: things present opposed to things to come; and things to come opposed to
things present; height opposed to depth, and depth to height; and Gods children
subject to all these: And this is the sting of our Crosses, that we are thus
crossed, and thwarted in our affliction, as when we be pinched with pain on the
right hand, we turn to the left to find ease; and presently on the left hand
we are pinched as much as before on the right, yet such is the present portion
of Gods children. The 4 and last point is, that the Apostle propounds these
dangers to himself, and to the faithful, not as fears or shadows, or
imaginations, ( I fight not as one that beats the air, says the Apostle)
but as true and real dangers, such as he does acknowledge himself and all the
faithful exposed unto, and looks to be encountered first or last with such
things indeed.

The Doctrine that flows naturally from this Scripture thus opened is this:
Doctrine.
That Gods children must make their account, and set down their rest upon it,
that they shall be assaulted here in this world, with all trials, and dangers,
and distresses, that ever possibly can befall them. This Doctrine is easy
enough to be understood, (for Gods children see the truth of it daily in
others, and feel it in their own selves) but it is hardly digested: It is a
hard saying, who can bear it? Therefore that we may the better brook it,
Four preparations for the brooking of afflictions.
let us receive it upon these preparations. First, we must not think that all
these dangers shall be heaped Matthew. 20.23. Ye shall drink indeed of my
Cup; It is Christ's Cup, and all the faithful must drink of it; Ye shall
drink, says our Savior; Every one must have his share, and so amongst them
they must drink it all up. Now because none of us knows whether he shall
drink of the top of this Cup, or of the middle, or of the bottom, till his
turn come, therefore every one of us must Arm himself to drink of any part
of it, every one is to make account that he is liable to every affliction.

Job in his time, and such were David and Jeremy, and Paul in their times; God
raises up many of these Worthies in every time, and makes them undergo and
overcome a world of afflictions, to shame them that are fearful and
faint-hearted, and will not undergo any affliction; And to beard all the
enemies of God, be they men or Devils, and to magnify the Almighty power of a
strong God, in a weak man: Our heavenly Father is most wise and merciful in
measuring out his afflictions to us; the strongest shall be sure to have as
many as ever he can bear, (God gives him not his strength in vain.) And the
weakest shall be sure to have no more then he can bear; God cannot, nor will
not, cast away any of his children by their afflictions, how weak soever they
be.

The third preparation is, that these afflictions that

Lastly, we are to receive this Doctrine upon this Psalm 94.19. In the
multitude of my thoughts or sorrows in my heart, thy comforts have rejoiced my
soul. We have sorrows indeed; yea, but we have comforts as well as sorrows;
we have a multitude of sorrows, yea, but we have a multitude of comforts too:
Yea, and these sorrows and comforts are so graciously tempered by the
merciful hand of God, that even in the multitude of our sorrows, thy mercies,
oh Lord, have rejoiced our souls. And in the 1 Cor. 10.13. The Apostle says
that God is faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted above our power,
but will give an issue with the temptation. There are two things which God
promises to all his children in all their afflictions: First, a fair trial,
and then a good issue; What can we desire any more? Yes; we shall have more,
we shall have increase of righteousness and grace by them, Hebr. 12.11. It
brings forth the quiet fruit of righteousness; Would we have any more? ye
shall have more, says God; As they bring you increase of grace, so they do of
glory hereafter, they shall be recompensed with everlasting glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.
Our light afflictions, which are but for a moment, causes unto us a far more
excellent and eternal weight of glory. By these preparations I hope, ye are
well prepared* not only to hear and to understand, but also to brook and
digest this Doctrine.

Now we come to the proofs; Mat. 16.24. If any man will follow me, let him
forsake himself, and take up his cross, and follow me: If we will follow
Christ, we must bid farewell to our own wills, and to our own ease, and to the
sweet times that are past for the outward man; we must deny ourselves and we
must take up Christ's Cross: what Cross? It is a daily Cross, Luke 9.23. a
continual succession of trials and afflictions, that we are daily exercised
withal: And in the 14. Chapter of Luke 26. Verse, our Savior enlarges it
with many particulars, If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and
mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own
life also, he cannot be my disciple; Here are crosses of all sorts; And this
we must make account of beforehand; for so our Savior in Luke 14.28. does set
it out, by an excellent example of him that builds a Tower, which of you
minding to build a Tower, sits not down first, and counts the cost? As if
he should say, your saving faith and Religion will cost you dear, it will
cost you many afflictions and crosses of all sorts, and therefore you must make
your account so beforehand, for it will surely come upon you: And mark how
our Savior hampers us by the diverse manner of his speech, and puts us by all
our shifts: In Matthew our Savior speaks it by way of exhortation, If any man
will follow me, let him resolutely take up his Cross, etc. In Luke he
speaks it by way of Commination, If any man come to me and hate not father and
mother, he cannot be my disciple: And he puts us precisely upon this choice,
either you must resolve to forsake your Religion, and stand out in opposition
against Christ; or else you must resolve to forsake your selves, and all that
you have, and suffer, and live in expectation of opposition from all the world,
to forsake all the world, and live in opposition to that, Act. 14.22. Paul and
Barnabas confirmed the hearts of the disciples, exhorting them to continue in
the faith, affirming that we must through many afflictions enter into the
kingdom of God: The people had received the faith before, and they come to
confirm them in it; And how do they confirm them in it? By affirming that
through many afflictions we must enter into the kingdom of God There are two
things in the speech that directly answer to two points in this our Doctrine:
First, that the faithful shall be assaulted with afflictions; yea, with many
afflictions: they must, a necessity is laid upon them, it is their inevitable
portion; Afflictions are as the gate to the kingdom of God, for so the speech
intends; through many afflictions we must enter into the kingdom of God:
Secondly, that this persuasion is a special means to confirm their hearts,
and to make them to continue in the faith, and therefore, they must make
account of it before hand, that so it must be. We have an example of this in
all Gods children that are registered in Gods book, and as they were more
excellent in grace, so they were more eminent in afflictions; see it in the
former, and in the latter Testament; In the former Testament, Psalm. 44 22.
Surely* for thy sake are we slain continually, and are accounted as sheep for
the slaughter: that is the estate of the Church in the former Testament: And so
in the latter Testament, Romans 8, 36. For thy sake are we killed all the day
long, we are counted as sheep for the slaughter; there is the state of the
latter Testament. See how eligantly the holy Ghost in the mouth of the Prophet
in the former Testament, and in the mouth of the Apostle in the latter, does
chain both Churches in the same bond and condition of afflictions: The Prophet
says in the person of the former Church* for thy sake are we slain all the
day long, etc. and the Apostle in the person of the latter Church, retains it
as a truth, for thy sake, etc. No difference in their words, nor no difference
in their portion of afflictions: And therefore when we read it in the former
Testament, know that this was the portion of Gods Church and children from the
worlds beginning; and when you read it in the latter Testament, know that this
shall be the portion of all Gods children to the worlds end: We may see this in
the cloud of witnesses, Hebr. 11.35. to 38. The Church in the former Testament,
what was their portion? They were rackt, and would not be delivered, they knew
it was their portion; Others were tried by mockings and scourgings* by bonds
and imprisonment, they were stoned, hewn asunder, slain with the sword, etc.
What can be imagined that is not here to be understood? Look to answer this in
the words of the Apostle in the new Testament, and see how the estate of the
Church is under that, 1 Cor. 4.9. For I think (says he) the Lord has set
forth us, the last Apostles, as men appointed to death, for we are made a
gazing to the world, to Angels, and to men. The Apostle makes it his own case,
2 Cor. 11.23. to 27. He was in labors abundant, in stripes above measure, in
prison plenteously, in death often: And so in 2 Cor. 4.8. and 2 Cor. 6.4. to
the 10. And so we see the point proved by Scripture.

The Reasons to prove it are these; First, our former sins deserve it should
be so; Lam. 3.39. Reasons.
Why is the living man sorrowful? Man suffers for his sins. The Lord
himself makes the question there, and the Lord himself answers it; Will you
know a true cause, why the living man is sorrowful: his sins are the cause
of it, our sins have plucked all the world about our ears, by our sins we
incense God against us, by our sins we have incensed all the creatures against
us, how can we choose but have many afflictions on every side? Many men in the
world cry out of the multitude and greatness of their afflictions, but let us
learn a better lesson: when we are in distress, let us cry out of the
greatness and multitude of our sins, that deserve and have brought these
heavy and manifold afflictions upon us; and yet we must not think that every
particular affliction is answerable to every particular sin, but there is a
general reference in all; and this use we are to make of them, pray that they
may not be laid upon us in way of punishment for revenge, but for chastisement,
in judgment, not in wrath.

Job 7.12. Thou keep me in ward. Job had an unruly heart, and therefore God
kept him in ward, or prison, that he should not break out into sin with the
world. Paul was a dear child of God, yet he had an vnru^y heart, ready to be
lifted up through the abundance of Revelations, and therefore a messenger of
Satan was sent to buffet him, that so he might not be lift up above measure, 2
Cor. 12.7.

John 16.33. In the world you shall have afflictions; What is our present state
in this world? Is it not a pilgrimage? and do not pilgrims and strangers
find all hard measure in their travails? Is it not a warfare? and do not
Soldiers endure all dangers, and all manner of hardness in the field? A great
many of our Brethren at this day can witness it by woeful experience: Is not
our present state our seede-time? and do not Seedes-men or Husbandmen endure
many storms, winds and tempests, and many a hard brunt before the harvest
come? So must we sow here in tears, that we may reap in joy, Psalm 126 5.

Fourthly, Satan our enemy he labors it, and Revel. 2.10. The Devil shall
cast some of you into prison, men do it; yea, but the Devil he procures it.
Luke 22.31. Our Savior says to Peter, Simon, Simon, Satan has desired to
winnow you, etc. His fingers itch at Gods children, to be molesting them: and
he is malicious, and his malice is never at an end: When he had got a
commission against Job, to afflict him in his Cattle, Servants, and Children,
this would not serve his turn, but he sues to have a new Commission to
afflict his Body too, Job 2.4.5. His malice is insatiable and without end, he
will surely bring upon us all the evils he can, and he can do much where God
gives way to him (else he can do nothing) and hence it is that we meet with
so many trials.

Lastly, God gives way to Satan's malice, and that, Luke 22.31. and fiery
trial, 1 Pet. 4 12. Secondly, to humble us, nothing annoyes a Child of God
more then a proud heart, and nothing pulls it down and humbles it more then
affl^ction. Job 33.14 16.17. God speaks once or twice and one sees it not,
then he opens the ears of men by their corrections which he has sealed,
that he might abate the pride of man. Thirdly, to draw us near and close to
himself. It is with us as it is with little children, that when they are in
the field with their father, they run abroad from him in the grass
carelessly, but when they see a dog or a Snake coming toward them, presently
they run to their father and cry for help; So we run on in the world,
straggling from our Father, and when some affliction or other takes hold on us,
we run to our Father, and cry to him for help, as the prodigal child did,
when he was hunger-bitten, Luke 15. Fourthly, God gives way to it, that so we
may magnify his mercy, truth, power and wisdom, in preserving and delivering
us. When we have been in affliction many years, yet are not consumed: this
will make us praise and glorify God. 2 Cor. 1.8.9. We were pressed (says the
Apostle) out of measure, passing strength, yea, we received the sentence of
death in our selves, because we should not trust in our selves, but in God that
raises the dead; and therefore God suffers us to be thus afflicted, that so
his goodness might be magnified in raising us from these afflictions.

rest upon the Sabbath, and to go to Church, and to sit still and hear the
Word, and receive the Sacraments, and to say over now and then a few prayers;
this is an easy life, say they, and an idle profession. First, I answer to
the person; Thou profane worldling that say thus, let me tell thee; If the
Christian life be so easy as thou say, it is the more shame for thee, that
wilt not lead this life; it is the only way to heaven, and if it be so easy
as thou would make it to be, what a horrible shame, yea, what a foolishness
is it for thee, that thou will take a great deal more pains to go to hell,
then thou might take and go to heaven? I speak this to thee in thine own
language, that wilt make it to be so easy. But secondly, I answer to the
matter, and I say, that a Christian life rightly managed, is a most hard and
laborious life, subject to all reproaches, crosses, trials, losses,
persecutions, wounds of conscience, and breakings of the heart, fightings,
spoylings, subject to the malice of men, and to the rage of the Devil, subject
to killings of all sorts, and that which is most tedious and irksome of all
other, subject to a continual combat betwixt the flesh and the Spirit in our
own bosoms; these and all other dangers and trials, a Christian life and state
is subject unto; I say, a Christian life is subject to all these, but not so as
to be overcome by them, but as always exercised with them, so as we must
wrestle and struggle with them, all the days of our lives, and that upon the
very hazard of our souls if this be an easy life, there is none hard under
the Sun: It is true, it is an easy and comfortable life in a spiritual
sense, but a carnal man cannot reach unto this: Custom in afflictions makes
it easy, the promises of God makes it easy, the fellowship of Christ in our
afflictions makes it easy, the consolations of the Spirit, and the hope of the
reward of glory; these things make a Christian life easy and comfortable to us
in regard of the inward man: the regenerate part delights in nothing more, then
in mortifying and crucifying this body or sin, which is notably effected by
these afflictions. Hence it is that it is easy and comfortable to the
spiritual man, because he finds his Adversary, the flesh, weaker then it
was, that begins to die. For our corruptions are killed by afflictions, being
sanctified to the hearts of Gods children; yet still I maintain it against
this scandal, that a Christian life rightly managed in it self, in regard of
the outward state of it in this world, is most hard and laborious.

Secondly, it is for reproof of others that are without, that judge hardly of
Gods children, because of their afflictions: If they see a Professor much
afflicted and troubled, either outwardly or inwardly, or both, they are ready
to pass hard censures on them; Surely say they, whatsoever these men pretend
to be, yet they are but gross hypocrites, and notorious sinners; thus they
add affliction to the afflicted: God afflicts us with his heavy chastisements,
and the world afflicts us more with their bitter and heavy censures: but if
this Doctrine be true, as it is, that all Gods children are subject to all
afflictions, then surely we have more reason to judge more favorably of them
that are afflicted most, then of them that are afflicted least: Job was thus
censured by his friends, but it was their error, as God himself shows Job,
Job 42.7. And so was David by his enemies, but it was their malice, Psalm. 41.8.
A mischief is light upon him (say they) and he that lies shall no more rise:
Thus did the Barbarians censure of Paul because of the Viper that hung on his
hand, that he was a murderer, Act, 28.4. but this was their savageness: David
himself confesses that he was near unto this point, to condemn the
generation of the Righteous because of their afflictions, but he confesses it
was his folly and his ignorance, Psalm. 73.12. to the 22. and that he was as a
beast herein: And surely to condemn the generation of the Righteous for their
afflictions, is a foolish and an ignorant, and beastly censure, I say beastly,
as he says; because as a beast is lead only by present sense, and not by
understanding: so these uncharitable censurers are carried away only with the
present sense of our afflictions, not understanding nor considering, that all
kinds of affl^ctions and trials are the portion of Gods children here in this
life, 1 Thessalonians. 3.3.4. The Apostle is very careful to prevent the slander of
the Cross. It is not to be denied but that Gods children are sinners, but yet
they are not notorious sinners, or if they be in some particular kind, if thou
know it, then certainly thou may be bold to suspect that such Judgments
were for such sins; but if thou know not their sin, pronounce not of their
estate, this supposing, though it be in thought, is sin, Luke 13.2.3. etc.

Secondly, this serves for reproof of those that are within; of nice and
dainty professors: they will hear the Word, and pray, and believe, and do many
good things, and delight in the service of God: but when they must come to
endure, as Christians, many and heavy temptations and trials, they are at a
stand, this is harsh and hard to them, they cannot endure it, some of them are
ready to fall away, others grudge and murmr at their hard portion. But, shall
we think to receive good at Gods hand, and not evil? It was the words of a
wise man in his sore affliction, to a wicked woman that never knew what
affliction meant; and shall any of us think to receive the comforts and sweet
of Christianity, and not endure the crosses and sower of it? The hard-harted
Jews would have believed in Christ, if they could have separated him from the
cross, Come down from the Cross (say they) and we will believe in thee: But
thou that art a professed Christian must learn to embrace Christ with the
Cross; thou must as willingly embrace all afflictions that accompany a
Christian life, as Christ himself, the Author of thy salvation: But here some
will plead their privileges that they are exempted from this hard portion,
for they are loath to come under affliction, as the child is to come under the
rod: First, say they, God loves us, therefore he will not afflict us; I say he
loves thee, and therefore he will afflict thee, Reu. 3.19. As many as I love
(says God) I rebuke and chasten. Again, they say, God is our Father, and we
are his children, therefore he will not correct us; Nay, therefore he will correct
us, Heb. 12.6. Whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every Son
that he receives. Again say they, Christ has suffered all for us, and
therefore we must not suffer any such things: Nay, therefore we must suffer,
Mat. 16.24. If any man will follow Christ, he must take up his Cross and
follow him; and unless we do thus we cannot be Christ's disciples, John 15.20.
It is true that these are sweet and heavenly privileges and such as exempt us
from the evil of all afflictions, but not from any one kind of them.

The second Use is for Exhortation, and first to teach If it be possible, let
this cup pass from me, Luke 22. yet we must make account of them beforehand.
These times we live in are such as call upon us to look for afflictions, they
are the last days of the world, and they are the worst and most dangerous
times; present troubles and miseries, and imminent dangers and fears, there
were never more; The Lord is abroad in Judgment, and carries his cup in his
hand; the Germans drink of it first; the French soon after; the Polonians
soon after them; and have not the English just cause to fear, that we shall
pledge them, and that ere long, we know not how soon? Secondly, again this
teaches us not only to account of afflictions beforehand, but also to
prepare for them, and to furnish our selves accordingly; there is much good to
be had by them, and therefore we are to prepare for them; and therefore does
God warn us of dangers beforehand, that we might be armed to bear them, when
they do come. Things to be labored for that we may bear afflictions.
And that we may prepare for them, we must labor for these things; First, we
must labor to get a resolution in us to bear them, and to stand it Act.
21.13. not only to suffer, but to die with Christ; Secondly, we must season
our hearts with the comforts of Gods promises beforehand, to counteruaile our
afflictions when they come, as that he will never fail us nor forsake us, that
he loves us, Matthew. 16.24. If we be choice and leaning to our selves, we will
never Matthew. 16.20. with Phil. 2.7. And fourthly, we must labor to be well
acquainted with the death of Christ; this is Armor of proof against all
afflictions, to know Jesus Christ and him crucified, by sensible experience in
our selves: If I find the life of Gods Spirit in me, applying the death of
Christ to me, and thereby subduing and crucifying my sins, if we can find
this, we shall be well armed against all afflictions. We come here to receive
the Lords Supper, in remembrance of Christ's death, then let us desire to be
made conformable to his death, and then afflictions will be sweet unto us.
Again, let us labor for the assurance of

The last Use teaches us Pacification; even in our Lam. 1.12. but this is the
frowardness of our corrupt hearts; Whatsoever it is, it is thy portion, and
therefore be pacified and contented; It is no otherwise with thee, then it is
with all Gods children, every one has his portion of them, 1 Pet. 4.12. It is
no strange thing, 1 Pet. 5.9. It is the same afflictions that are accomplished
in our Brethren, 1 Cor. 10.13. No temptation does befall us, but such as
appertain to man; and therefore let us be content and pacify our selves; look
not so much on thy afflictions, but look up to God; It is his Ordinance that
every one of us should bear his portion of affliction; whatsoever thou do
endure, it is but thy portion, thy draught: Shall I not drink of the Cup which
my Father gives me to drink of? says our Savior, Ioh. 18.11. This is it our
Savior comforts himself and his Disciples withal; and let this comfort thee:
It is thy Fathers Cup, and therefore thou must drink of it. And secondly, let
us look upon others of Gods children, some of them are equal with thee in
afflictions, others come short, but many go beyond thee, and thy afflictions
are but little to some of theirs, and those that are at more ease now, may be
in great distresses hereafter, and wilt not thou be content to bear that which
all Gods children bear, and must bear more or less, first or last; All of us
have sinned, Christ only excepted; but none are exempted from the rod, not
Christ himself; And is it not a sweet thing for thee to be ranged with Christ,
and with thy brethren the children of God? Is it not a comfort to thee to dye
with thy Captain Christ, and with thy Fellow Soldiers the children of God,
David, Job, Paul, and others? therefore when thou say thy case is worse then
any others, thou speak thou know not what; thou know what thy self
feel, but not what another man feels, thine are greater happily then thy
brothers to day, happily to morrow his will be greater then thine; a little
affliction may be greater to him, then a greater to thee, he that has least
has as much, for his strength, as thou have for thine. Thou must suffer
afflictions, therefore take up thine own Cross, suffer thine own
afflictions, bear thine own burden, that is thy thou art appointed and called
unto; The Lord has appointed them to us, 1 Timothy 3. and therefore we must
willingly bear them, in obedience to Gods ordinance, in our fellowship with
Christ, and all the rest of Gods Children, and then God that has brought us
into the trials, will surely bring us through them all with comfort, safety,
and deliverance, even unto a Crown of life, Iam. 1.12. Blessed is the man that
indureth temptations, for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of
life: But see thou be the Child of God, for afflictions are common to all, but
the comfort and benefit of them is proper to Believers only: Do thou suffer
as a Christian? then rejoice in it, for then blessed and happy are we, 1 Pet.
4.13. to the 16. Verse; if we suffer for Christ's sake, for righteteousnesse
sake, for a godly life, for obedience to God in crucifying the flesh, then
blessed are we, if we thus endure temptations, for after we are thus tried, we
shall receive this Crown of life.

FINIS.
THE EIGHT SERMON,
Upon ROMANS 8. the two last Verses. For I am sure, that neither Death, nor
life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, etc.


THe seventh and last head that we reduced this Scripture unto, was the
comfort and support that the Apostle has in the love of God through Jesus
Christ, against all fears and terrors whatsoever: Wherein I observed two
things. First, the dangers of Gods children: Secondly, the comfort whereby they
are sustained in them: Of both these I propounded to speak first in general,
and then in particular: I began with the dangers in general, and showed; That
the dangers which Gods children are subject unto, are not only such as they
are subject to with the rest of the world, but also such as they alone are
subject unto, as persecution for Christ's sake, etc. Now in the next place; we
are to speak in general of the comfort which Gods children are supported
withal against all dangers; and that is the true and holy assurance which they
have of the love of God to them in Christ Jesus. Now this comfort the Apostle
does extend and stretch out here, upon a double strain; first by way of
supposition; secondly, by way of insultation and triumph: First, by way of
supposition, for so his speech is to be taken, as if he should say, suppose, or
put the case, that death, or life or Angels, etc. should set themselves against
us to overthrow us, yet in the strength of my assurance which I have of the
love of God in Christ Jesus, I am comforted and supported against them all:
Secondly, the Apostle speaks by way of insultation or triumph, for, that the
Apostle so intends it, appears partly by his manner of speech in the 35.
Verse, Who shall separate us? as if he spoke these things sleighting them, and
insulting over them; and more plainly in the 37. Verse. in all these things we
are more then Conquerours, etc. and thence be infers his protestation, for I am
sure that neither death nor life, etc. so that he speaks these words as a
Conqueror, by way of Triumph: so that this comfort which he has in this
assurance, is not a weak comfort, but a marvelous strong comfort, such a
comfort that in the strength thereof, he may and does insult and triumph over
all dangers whatsoever. These circumstances considered, the Doctrine arises
naturally thus, namely;

Let us propound to our selves what dangers soever may befall us, Doctrine.
yet notwithstanding the true and holy assurance that we have of the love of
God toward us in Christ Jesus, shall be able to comfort and support our hearts
against them all: even to a holy insultation and triumph over them. There are
two Questions to be considered of in the practice of the Apostle, and so in
this Doctrine: The first question is; Whether it be lawful, or fit, for Gods
Children to propound fears and dangers to themselves in their own
meditations? Secondly, how it can stand with distressed Believers, that they
should triumph and insult over their afflictions? For the first question, some
will say, have we not sensible fears and dangers enough upon us daily, even as
much as we can stand under, and shall we increase our burden, and propound more
and greater fears and dangers to our selves. I answer, yes, they may do it,
and they ought to do it, and it is no increasing, but a lightning of our
burden. If a man have a grim and stern adversary to fight withal, is it not
wisdom for that man, first to take a view of that adversary, and to look him
in the face, to see how he can brook him before he undertake to fight with
him: Oh beloved, Gods children have many grim and stern enemies to fight
withal. Persecution is a grim and stern adversary, and all that will live
godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution. Temptation is a grim and stern
enemy, and Gods children must be tried with many hideous and fearful
temptations, Death is a grim and stern enemy, and we must pass through the
terrors, and sorrows, and bars of death, to the joys of life. Hell is a grim
and stern enemy, and we must make account to touch at the gates of hell, when
we sail to heaven: The Devil is a grim and stern adversary, and Gods children
must fight with Devils: If we will be the good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, we
must wrestle and fight, not with flesh and blood only, but against
principalities and powers, even against the Devil himself: And therefore having
so many, and so grim, and stern enemies, that we must fight against, have we
not just cause then to propound such things to our selves, in our meditations,
to see how we can brook them; and to hearten our selves against the fear and
evil of them? Yet herein we must observe two cautions; we must not propound
to our selves vain and frivolous matters, without reason or ground, (that were
to fight with our own shadow) but serious thoughts and grounded meditations of
true dangers, such as may or will befall us, more or less, first or last.
Secondly, we must not propound to our selves any thoughts of sin, for sin is
a defiler, and the least thought or apprehension of sin will infect us;
Satan is so strong and subtle, we are so weak and simple, that if ever he get
us into any contemplation of sin, as it is sin, though it be not with any
intent to commit it; nay, though it be with a contrary intent, even to hate it,
and prevent it, yet usually he will infect us with it before we be aware, so
that it will leave a stain behind: therefore take heed of any speculations
or propositions of future sins, for that is not the way to escape them, but
rather to be entangled with them, specially meditate not on the materials of
sin, for that is exceeding dangerous; we may consider how hateful it is to
God, and how hurtful to our own souls, but we must not meddle with the
materials of sin. The second question is, how it can stand with the
disposition of distressed Believers, that they should insult and triumph over
their afflictions? Alas (may some say) Gods children are humbled, and mourn,
and sigh, and groan under the burden, and yet do they insult and rejoice
over them? Yes they do, their mourning and insultation may stand well together;
they mourn for their present pain and grief, but they insult over them in
the assurance of victory, and of the good they shall have by them. They mourn
for their sins that brought their afflictions on them; But they rejoice because
they know that by Gods hand these afflictions shall be made a means to cure
those very sins that have procured them; they mourn for the perishing of the
outward man by them, but they insult that thereby the inward man is renewed
daily: In a word, they mourn in themselves, but they rejoice in God: Carnal
insultation does not befit Gods children, this is an holy insultation, and it
becomes them well. They insult not, first in respect of their own strength
(such rejoicing is not good) but merely and only in the strength of God; and
secondly, not so much for their own good and safety, but much more for the
honor and glory that God shall have by their afflictions, and by their
deliverance; and this is a holy and good insultation: And this is the godly and
Christian insultation of strong Believers against all dangers, for that is the
reach of the Text; strong Believers may do it, weak Believers may do so too,
but not with that sense as the other may: Christ Jesus was so weak that he
was not able to bear his Cross, yet when he was nailed on that Cross, he did
then openly triumph over all his enemies.

Now come we to the proof of the observation thus cleared. And first we will
prove it in the state of the faithful: Secondly, you shall see it in the
practice of the faithful: And thirdly, you shall see it in the warrant that
Gods children have for it. First, see it proved from the state of the
faithful, Psalm. 112.7.8. He will not be afraid of evil tidings: and why? for
his heart is fixed and believes in the Lord; And for the more certainty he
doubles upon it in the 8. verse, His heart is stablished, therefore he will
not fear, etc. Who is it that the Prophet speaks of here? Of a true Believer,
that is, of him that believes in the Lord, and rests himself securely upon the
Lord for protection: And what is the effect that his Faith shall work in him?
strong assurance and comfort, it confirms and fixes his heart; And what
then? He shall not be afraid of evil tidings: Again in the 8. verse, His
heart is established; How far? Even to the seeing of his desire upon his
enemies, to the subduing and triumphing over, and the setting of his feet on
the necks of them. See it also in the practice of the faithful, how they
propound and hearten themselves against all dangers that may befall them. It is
the practice of all the faithful as well as of Paul, and some other. It was
the practice of the whole Church, Psalm. 46.1.2.3. God is our hope and strength,
and help in troubles, ready to be found. First, the Church there lays down
this holy assurance for the ground of their comfort, and this is a sure ground,
that God is our hope and help in troubles, etc. and then secondly, they
propound to themselves dangers that may befall them, and strange and fearful
ones too; The mooning of the Earth, the falling of the Mountains into the
midst of the Sea, the raging of the Waters, in the 2. and 3. verses, such
dangers as did not come to pass in their times; But if they did, what then?
Why then lastly, they gather to themselves out of this assurance matter of
consolation against al these dangers, verse 2, as who should say, Let them
roar when they will, we will not fear them, because the Lord is our hope, and
strength, and help in troubles, ready to be found. So Psalm. 27.1.2.3. it was
David's practice in his particular, the matter of the speech is this; The Lord
is David's light, and his salvation, and the strength of his life: This he
believes and is well assured of, and therefore he fears nothing; and this he
inlargeth, propounding to himself in the 3. verse, a matter of great fear:
What if a whole host were pitched against him? what though war be raised
against him? yet he would not be afraid, he would never be put to such a fear
as to unsettle his assurance in God: Alas, what is David alone to a whole host
of men? Nothing in himself, but in his confidence and assurance that he has
in God, they are nothing to him, they shall never be able to destroy him: And
if you mark the manner of his speech, he delivers it by way of insultation
too, The Lord is my light, whom should I fear? as setting his adversaries at
naught, and his heart triumphing in God against them all: And that no man
should think this was a matter peculiar to David by prerogative, he makes it
the case of every true believer, and calls upon them for the same practice in
the 14. verse, Hope in the Lord, and be strong, and he shall comfort thine
heart, etc. As if he should say, It is not my case alone, but yours too; get
you a sure faith in God, and sound assurance as I have, and thereby you shall
be comforted against all dangers, as I am. Thirdly, behold this in the warrant
that Gods children have for it; they have good warrant for it, even from God
himself, Isa. 41.10. Fear not thou, for I am with thee, be not afraid, for I
am thy God, I will strengthen thee, and help thee, etc. And in the 12. verse,
All their enemies shall be as nothing, and the men that war against them as
a thing of naught. The drift of the Prophets speech, is this; The Lord would
have his children to take heart to themselves, and to be fearelesse of dangers;
What must they do then? Why, let them get sound assurance in God, and in his
power, help, and love, and then all their opposites shall be as a thing of
naught, they may scorn them. And so Isa. 43.1.2. Thus says the Lord, that
created thee (oh Jacob) and he that formed thee (oh Israel,) I have redeemed
thee, and have called thee by thy name, thou art mine. When thou passest
through the waters I will be with thee, and through the floods, that they do
not ouerflow thee; when thou walk through the fire thou shall not be burnt,
etc. It may be they shall never fall into these dangers, but it is spoken by
way of supposition, as if God should say; If thou should fall into these or
any other dangers, yet in the assurance that God says unto us, thou art mine,
we shall safely and triumphantly pass through the fire, and through the water,
and through all dangers that ever can be imagined, and so, that we shall
receive no damage by them in regard of our spiritual estate, and we shall
have comfort in them in regard of our outward estate. And so Psalm. 91. from the
first to the last verse; Who so dwells in the secret of the most high, shall
abide in the shadow of the Almighty, etc. One would think at the first sight
that this were a repetition of one and the same thing; for, what is it to dwell
in the secret of the most high, but to abide in the shadow of the Almighty? It
seems to be the same, but it is not so: The former part of the verse shows
the assurance that Gods children have in the love of God, they dwell or repose
themselves in God; the latter part shows their safety and security that by his
assurance they attain unto, they abide in the shadow of the Almighty, that is,
they are safe sheltered under the shadow of the Almighty. And these two the
Prophet enlarges in the rest of the Psalm: their assurance in the 2. verse, I
will say unto the Lord (oh my hope and my fortress) he is my God, in him will
I trust; Here is the repose of the children of God; but what is their safety?
it follows in the rest of the Psalm, safety against ordinary dangers, The
noisome pestilence, the flying arrows, etc. in the 3.5. and 6. verses. Against
supposed dangers, verse 7. A thousand shall fall as thy side, and ten thousand
at thy right hand, but it shall not come near thee; And against likely dangers
in the verses following. And in the 13. verse, he stretches out the safety of
Gods children even to insultation, Thou shall walk upon the Lion and the Aspe,
the young Lion and the Dragon shall thou tread under foot. Seeing then that
this Doctrine agrees so fitly with the state, practice, and warrant of the
faithful, then it must needs be an undoubted truth, that let us propound to
our selves whatsoever dangers may befall us, yet our holy and true assurance of
Gods love to us in Christ Jesus, is able to comfort and support our hearts
against them all, even to an holy insultation and triumphing over them.

against all dangers; I say the reasons thereof are many. First this holy
assurance tells us that God is on our side, and then what, or who, can be
against us? It is our Apostles own reason, Romans 8.31. If God be on our side,
who can be against us, that is, to do us harm? God does not turn out his
children single to the battle to shift for themselves, but he goes forth with
us himself, and helps us, and comforts us, and strengthens us, and
incourageth us, and teaches us, and makes us to fight, and fights himself
for us, and gets the victory for us, and this our faith assures us of, and this
comforts the hearts of Gods children, and makes them confident against all
dangers. In the 2. Kings 6.15, 16, 17. when the Prophet Elisha his servant saw
the great host that compassed the City, he was much terrified, and cries out*
Alas Master, how shall we do? The Prophet answers him, Fear not, they that
be with us are more then they that be with them. This is like our case, when
Gods children look about them, and see a whole host of afflictions, dangers,
persecutions, and temptations compass* them about on every side, they cry out
in their weakness, Alas! what shall we do? Our Faith that answers; Fear
not, there be more with us then there is against us. Is not God more then all
the world? God is with us, and this assures and comforts our hearts. How
sweetly does David cast himself upon God in his greatest dangers? Psalm. 23.4.
Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none
evil: why? for thou art with me, thy Rod and thy Staff they comfort me. God
is not only with him, but he is with him to comfort him, and therefore he will
not fear.

the Apple of his eye, Zach. 2.8. now we know that the Apple of a man's eye is
most tender to him, he will see that that take no harm; and so are they to
God: and therefore whatsoever goes to wrack, they shall have no harm, the
bare persuasion of Gods love to us is comfort enough to establish us in any
trouble; but faith does not only persuade us that God loves us, but persuades
us further, that because he loves us, therefore he will keep us, and save us.
And this fills our hearts with comfort and confidence in all dangers, for can
God love us, and yet give us over as a prey unto his and our enemies? No, it is
not possible.

Nothing can separate us from the love of God in Christ; yea, but our sins
separate betwixt us and our God, Isaiah. 59.2. but the believing heart has
assurance, that all his sins are freely and fully forgiven him by the mercies
of GOD in JESUS CHRIST, and so our faith concludes, that therefore they cannot
separate us, and so that nothing can separate us from God. I say not, but that
though our sins be forgiven us, yet still we are liable to dangers and
troubles of all sorts, to grieve us, torment us, and to take us away; but this
I say, that no affliction can hurt us, as sin can hurt us, that is, to
condemnation, they cannot put us out of the favor of God, they shall never be
able to separate us from the state of grace here, nor glory hereafter: and this
is fullness of comfort to the spiritual man, that can well relish it; we have
no further privilege (from the warrant of the word) by the charter of our
freedom in Christ, but this, that our afflictions shall never hurt us, in
regard of our spiritual estate, they shall never impeach our spiritual
safety, so long as our sins are forgiven; for our sins are the poison and
venom of all our afflictions; when God shootes the Arrows of his judgments
against us, dipped in the venom of our sins, they are deadly Arrows, they
will poison us, to our everlasting destruction: But when they are dipped in the
death and blood of Jesus Christ, whereby our sins are forgiven and taken
away, then though his Arrows do wound us, it is a good wound, a comfortable
wound, and such as he will heal himself with his own hand; so that they
cannot hurt us but comfort us: And if we be taken away by such an Arrow, God
takes us to himself, and that is best of all.

Fourthly, our faith tells us, That all things shall 8.28. How shall I know this
but by faith? A true Believer sees his enemies, profane, wicked, and carnal
men, busy to do him hurt, devising and plotting how to work some mischief
against him; he sits down and smiles at the folly of the wicked, and says,
Alas poor men, little do they think that they take all this pains to effect
my greatest good, to do me good by this affliction: sometimes our dangers are
so great, and our afflictions are so bitter, that we think it impossible that
ever any good should come out of so great evils; but our faith stands up and
lays the power of God, and the promise of God together, and says, God is able
to help me, for he has power enough, and he is willing to help me, for so
he has promised; and therefore he will in the end turn all my afflictions to
my good; and so we rest secure whatsoever comes.

we put on the spiritual armor by faith, Ephesians. 6.10. to the 17. we have all
the parts of this spiritual armor, and that makes him that is spiritually
minded to be consecrated wholly to the service of God, and having on this
armor, nothing can hurt us.

Solomon speaks, Pro. 28.1 The righteous are bold as a Lion: The reason is in
the Doctrine, his faith assures his heart that he belongs to God, and persuades
him of Gods love, favor, protection, and salvation: And that is the reason
that the Prophet Isa. 28.16. says, He that believes makes not haste; he that
has found assurance of Gods love in Christ, makes not haste, is not disquieted
or distempered, nor carried out of his Spirit, by any evil or danger
whatsoever* but rests upon the might and power of God, and never flies out for
the matter, but abides it with much boldness, and keeps himself within his
Spirits, and rests soundly and sweetly on God for his deliuerence. It is
admirable to consider what wonderful courage, constancy and comfort Gods
children stand out withal in great afflictions and distresses, and merely
upon this assurance, how boldly have they bearded those Tyrants that have
insulted over them? how have they run to the fire? embraced the Cross?
despised the shame? scorned all pain that has been inflicted on them, lost
all? and merely upon the strength of this assurance, Hebr. 11.35. The Apostle
says, that they would not accept deliverance, because they were sure to
obtain a better resurrection: In Dan. 3.16.17. the three children were
questioned before the King, he tells them if they would not fall down and
worship the Image that he had set up, they should be cast into the hot fiery
furnace: What do they answer? They were poor captives, yet see how they
bearded the Tyrant: Oh King, we are not careful to answer thee in this
matter; see how they slight him; our God is able to deliver us, and he will
deliver us, do thou what thou can: If not (mark how bold they are) yet be
it known to thee oh King, that we will not worship thy God, etc. What is the
ground of their resolution and courage? It is this, That God whom they serve,
is able to deliver them, and he will deliver them. And so Luther, when he was
sent for by his enemies, was dissuaded not to go; yes says he, if there were
so many Devils there, as there are Tyles upon their houses, yet I would not
fear them, grounding himself upon the assurance of Gods protection. There is
no true courage to be found, but in true believers; there may be counterfeit
and carnal courage in hypocrites; neither is there any true courage in
believers, but as they are made partakers in some measure of this holy
assurance of the love of God to them in Christ: this will appear when it comes
to the trial, for then the boisterous hypocrite will fail, when the feeble
true believer will stand fast.

they fly when none pursues them, Pro. 28.1. and that they call for the
mountains to fall upon them, to hide them from the presence of God, Reu.
6.16.17. Why? the Reason is because their hearts are destitute of this holy
assurance, and therefore they wanting this comfortable persuasion and assurance
of the love of God to warm their hearts, therefore they are so cold at the
heart, and therefore they are ready to run into Rocks and holes to hide
themselves: Some wicked men before trouble comes, set a good face on it, and
think highly of themselves, and say they have as good a faith in God as any of
them all; but when it comes, and that they see they cannot put it off by sports
and starting holes, as they did before, then their hearts fail them, and then
they grow to fearful and desperate outrages. Oh Beloved, a man that truly
fear God, needs fear nothing else; Every true believer has this true fear
of God, and that makes him fearelesse of any thing else: an unbeliever has
none of this fear of God; and therefore he has just cause to fear all
things else: And it is the just judgment of God to give them over to these
base and slavish fears of all things else, because they regard not the true
fear of God. It is true that the strongest believer has his fears, but they
are natural, and are subdued by the Spirit of God, and the power of faith in
him; But the wicked are never endued with the Spirit of God to work faith in
their hearts, and therefore they are slaves to the most slavish fears.

The third Use teaches us what wrong men do to themselves, in that they do
not labor for this holy assurance: They deprive themselves of the greatest
comfort that they can possibly have in life or in death. This therefore is for
reproof of many Professors, that will pretend to have faith, but they care not
for this assurance of faith; if God give it, well and good, if not, they will
not labor for it, they think they have faith enough to save their own
souls. There are diverse causes of this sin, Seven causes why men labor not
for assurance.
that men will not labor for this assurance of faith; First, some account it
altogether needless, and therefore they look not after it: Will not ordinary
assurance,

Secondly, others pretend modesty, they say they and to his familiars. God will
say to his soul, I am thy salvation, and therefore this is a simple, and a
sinful modesty, not to be so bold as to seek and accept that that God offers
us and bids us seek and take, and which if we seek, we are sure to find; and
therefore this is a cursed modesty, to say, what shall I be so bold as to
search into this? This is somewhat like the unprofitable servant, that hid his
talent and said he was afraid to use it, Matthew, 25.24.25. But see what
follows; This wicked and sloathfull servant must be cast into utter
darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, verse 26. to 30.

Hell: We see (as before) what became of that sloathfull servant that would not
employ his Talent, Matthew 25.26 30. Cast ye that unprofitable servant into utter
darkness, etc.

time to labor for it. I would ask them that thus pretend want of time: why
God did give them all their time; Did he not do it of purpose, that thou
might learn to know him, and to believe in him, and to obey him, and to get
assurance of his love and favor in Christ? And have thou time for all things
else, and not for this? Have thou time to eat and to drink, and to do other
worldly businesses, yea to learn Religion too, so far as thou do affect
it; and yet have thou no time to acquaint thy self with the promises of God,
that thou may get this assurance? This thou do not affect nor desire, and
therefore thou have no time to get it; If thou had a desire to get it, and if
thou did know the comfort of it, thou would serve thy self upon all times
and seasons, both Sabbath day and week days, and upon all exercises, not
only spiritual, but even every business thou take in hand, to help thee
forward to get this assurance of salvation.

Fifthly, others say, it is impossible, or at least very Job: and David, and
Paul, and others had it: If it be impossible with men, yet it is not impossible
with God, and it is the work of God, and not of man; I grant it is hard and
difficult to be got, but so are all spiritual and heavenly things; never
think to come to heaven but through many difficulties; Oh poor soul! if thou
did know the admirable comfort and sweetness that this assurance will bring
unto thy soul both here and for ever, thou would endure and pass, by all
difficulties to attain it.

Gadarens, had rather leave Christ, then loose their swine; so these had rather
desperately loose the Assurance of their salvation, then leave their filthy
sins; and so they prefer their swynish sin before the sweetest comfort of
the soul: A fearful practice.

Abraham, Job, David, Paul, etc. follow these, for these has God of purpose
propounded, and set down in Scripture as patterns for us to imitate, even in
this grace of assurance: And know, that seeing all the ancient Fathers had it,
and it was their greatest grace, therefore it is a shame for us that we have it
not in some measure. All these and such like, are but gulls and delusions of
Satan to deprive men of their greatest comfort in life and death, and of the
strongest proppe of the kingdom of grace. Let us therefore examine our selves,
and see whether every one of us be not guilty of all or some of these; and if
we be, no marvel then if we have so little assurance.

Lastly, Motives to move us to look that our assurance be true and sound.
seeing this assurance is of such excellent

Secondly, consider Satan's policy, when he cannot shall I know that my
assurance is sound and true, or no? 4. Ways how a man may know whether his
assurance be true and sound.
I answer, thou shall descerne it clearly by these four observations: First,
by the cause of our assurance: Secondly, by the Rise of it: Thirdly, by the
nature of it: And fourthly, by the fruit of it.

Psalm. 119.49. Remember thy promise made to thy servant, wherein thou have
caused me to trust. When the Lord acquaints us with his word and promises, and
causes us by his spirit to put our trust in them, this is a sound and true
assurance that shall stand in remembrance before God for ever: The contrary,
counterfeit assurance and vain presumption, is fetched and does arise from
other causes, as maintenance, welfare in outward things, self-love, Satan's
flattery, soothings up of men, and such like; but this is presumption, and
never comes from the word and spirit. An hypocrite may say he does apply the
promises of God to himself, and that his assurance arises from thence, and
may have some places of Scripture running in his head sometimes tending to that
effect; yet indeed he mis-vnderstands the word, and mis-applyes the promises,
and they are not seconded by Gods spirit in their hearts, causing them to put
their trust in the promises.

Secondly, look into the Rise of our assurance, Psalm. 51.1.2.3.8.12. David
pleads hard for the forgiveness of his sins, for justification, and
sanctification; and he adds this petition more, Restore to me the joy of thy
salvation, stablish me with thy free spirit; and upon this petition God gave
it him: Counterfeit assurance, and vain presumption has no such rise; but it
arises from a benumbed conscience, and from a dead spirit. I never doubted
(say some) but have good assurance of Gods love in Christ, and all shall go
well with me: True, because thou have a dead conscience, and art past feeling,
and art not sensible of thy danger, as a dead man feels no hurt, because he is
dead, and so it is with thy dead and benumbed conscience.

They came about me like Bees (says the Prophet) Psalm. 118.11.12. but in the
name of the Lord I shall destroy them: David never makes mention of his own
strength, but of Gods. Goliath was confident in himself, but he had a
shameful fall; David was confident in God, and had a glorious victory. Let us
therefore humble our selves in the consideration of our own weakness, and
let us rest upon the strength of God in Christ, and that is true assurance.

John 3.3. He that has this hope in him purges himself. If therefore thou
say thou have this assurance, and art not purged from thy sins, thou art a
liar: When we sin, especially against conscience, our assurance much decays,
as fire when water is cast upon it: But if thou be purged from thy sin, it
will make thee more sure, 2 Pet. 1.9, 10. He that has not these things, etc.
has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins; but he that does these
things, he that endeauours to lead a godly life, and to stand it out to death,
he shall never fall.

FINIS.
THE NINTH SERMON,
Upon ROMANS 8. the two last Verses. For I am sure, that neither Death, nor
life, nor Angels, etc.


WE have proceeded in handling this Scripture, as the Lord has been pleased
to give strength, so far as that now we are come to speak of those particular
dangers which the Apostle propounds to himself, and to all the faithful; and
the particular comforts which they have to sustain themselves in them, we have
spoken before in the general of both. Now we are to proceed to the
particulars; for so the Apostle makes mention of some principal and particular
dangers here, as Death, life, Angels, etc. wherein we must not think that our
Apostle speaks rashly, or at adventure; but upon mature deliberation, and of
set purpose he makes special choice of these particulars here mentioned, as
being the most material things whereby any danger may acrue to Gods children,
and secures himself and them of safety and preservation against all these
dangers: Our Apostle understood himself well, for he spoke as he was moved by
the spirit, and the spirit never speaks idly, he spoke it in the height of
his faith, and therefore in the height of his spirit, and therefore he spoke
most seriously, and advisedly, and not rashly; and he spoke it in the depth of
his afflictions, verse 36. and the words of the afflicted are not wind, as Job
speaks, that is a bare and empty sound, but usually they are full of matter
and substance; and surely that which the Apostle here mentions is so full of
matter and substance, that I could never find by my poor reading, meditation,
and prayers, any full content touching the full sense and reach of the Apostle.
But a man may pass in a shallow boat over a deep river, and so far as our
line and plummet will reach, we will endeavor (God willing) to sound the
depth of these mysteries.

Neither death, nor life, nor Angels, etc. shall separate us. First, of the
first two particulars, death, and life. By life, and by death we are to
understand not only the things themselves, life, and death; but all
occurrences and passages. Our whole estate in life, and death, we are then to
take it thus, as if the Apostle had said, I am sure, that never any thing that
does befall Gods Children either in life or in death, shall be able to separate
them from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. The Doctrine is
this.

All true Believers are in good safety under Gods assured protection against
all dangers in life and death. Doctrine.
That the Doctrine may be the better understood, and believed, take these two
points for explication. First, Explication.
consider the dangers that are offered unto us in life and death: Secondly, let
us consider how far all true believers are in safety against them. And first
we will begin with the dangers of life: Two dangers of life.
Life indangers us two ways, either on the right hand, when we are too much in
love with it: Or on the left hand, when we are too much out of love Peter
himself, though he loved his Master dearly, and professed that he would never
forsake him, but resolved to dye with him; yet when it came to the trial, for
the brunt of the proof, that either he must forsake his Master, or his life;
Peter had rather forsake his best Master, then his sweet life. When such tall
Cedars shrink in such a storm, alas poor souls, what shall become of us the
low shrubs? danger: Now, whether are we content patiently to endure this dying
life, or desperately to desire an untimely death? This was a danger of Jonas
4.3. It is better for me (says he) to dye then to live: A fearful speech
of a Prophet of the Lord: And so it was a danger of Job, chap. 7.15. My soul
chooses rather to be strangled, and to dye: Yea, many of Gods dear children
have been so hardly put to it in this kind, that they have been tempted to
make away themselves, and to put an end to a wearisome life by a desperate
death; I say they have been tempted to it, but through Gods merciful
protection they have been kept from it: Here are the dangers of life.

Secondly, Death endangers us another way: How death indangers man.
The very name of death is terrible to us; and sometime the time of our death
does dismay us; and sometime the manner of our death troubles us; but the
matter of death that scarres us most of all, when we think with our selves,
that now we must die, and give up the Ghost, and leave all the world, and
forsake this present light that shines about us; when the body and soul must
part, that have been all this while loving friends together; the body to
return to the dust, as it was, and the soul to God that gave it; when we
think with our selves of the bitterness, and sowrenesse, and pangs of death,
and of our particular Judgment in death; and the general judgment that shall
come after death, and begin to feel these things come upon us, here is our
danger: Many of the children of God have been ready upon their consideration
hereof, to let go their hold in God, and to say that God does not love them,
because he deals so rigorouslly and extremely with them herein: Add hereunto
that we may save our lives, and escape all these fears for the time, if we
will our selves, as in the case of persecution, if we will forsake our Religion
and deny our faith, we may save our lives; then the sweetness of life
alluring us on the one side, and the fear and terror of death affrighting us
on the other side, makes this a great danger: oh what danger is upon us now in
this case, of our utter separation from the love of God in Christ Jesus? This
was one of Satan's chief bolts, that he shot at Job, Job 2.4. Skin for skin,
and all that ever a man has will he give for his life: These are the dangers
of life and death, great dangers, horrible dangers; well, yet whosoever is the
child of God, is in safety under Gods protection against all these.

Therefore the second point is to know, how far the children of God are in
safety against all these dangers? They are not exempted from any of these
dangers in respect of the matter of them, for so all things fall out alike to
all, to the just and to the wicked, Preach. 9.2. There are some dangers of
life, and some of death, and they fall alike to good and bad: yea but the
faithful are in safety from the evil of all these dangers, Job 5.19. He will
deliver thee in six troubles, and the evil of the seventh shall not touch
thee; Troubles shall be upon them, but the evil of the troubles shall not
touch them. Psalm. 23.4 Though I should walk in the valley of the shadow of
death, I will fear no evil: David might walk in the valley of the shadow of
death, as well as others, but God is with him, therefore he shall not fear the
evil of the shadow of death; And this is as much as our Savior prayed for,
and obtained for us, John 17.15. I pray not that thou should take them out
of the world, but that thou should keep them from evil; and therefore this
is as much as we must, or can look for. But what are these evils that we are
subject to in these dangers of life and death? I answer; Four evils Gods
people are freed from in affliction.
there are four special evils in the dangers of life and death which all Gods
children are freed from, and which all the wicked fall into: The first is loss
of graces; the second is the hardening of the heart by sin; the third, is the
furtherance of eternal damnation; Luke 8.13. In time of temptation they fall
away, their faith is lost; but Gods children can never loose their graces by
their afflictions, they may decay in some graces, and the brightness of them
may be dimbd, and their edge blunted by the extremity of their afflictions, but
they can never be utterly deprived of them: Nay, so far off are Gods children
from loosing their graces by their afflictions, that they are gayners in grace
by them; by their afflictions their sins and corruptions are purged, and they
come forth like the pure gold as Job speaks, Job 23.10. He tries me, but I
shall come forth like the gold.

The second evil is the hardening of the heart in sin: let Pharaoh be in
danger of Gods judgments, and he will harden his heart in his sins: but let
Josiah be in danger of Gods judgments and his heart will melt at them, and he
will humble himself before the Lord: and so Job 23.16. For God has softened
mine heart, and the Almighty has troubled me: Jobs troubles softened Jobs
heart, and made him to fear the Lord.

Kaine in his life, and Judas in his death, were the beginnings of their
passage into hell and condemnation: but it is contrary with Gods children in
their afflictions, for all their afflictions are preuentions of condemnation, 1
Cor. 11.32. When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, because we
should not be condemned with the world: Yea, they are furtherances unto heaven,
2 Cor. 4.17. Our light afflictions which are but for a moment, cause unto us a
far more excellent and eternal weight of glory. Look how it was with the
Israelites, and the Egyptians in the red Sea; so it is with the wicked and the
godly in their dangers of life and death; they were both in the Sea together,
but the Israelites they pass safe through it, and the Sea was as a wall to
them on the right hand, and on the left, and a high way to help them forward
in their passage from Egypt toward Canaan; but the Egyptians were overwhelmed
of it, and it became their grave, and they sunk to hell in it: So the sea of
all the troubles both of life and death, are matters of utter desolation to the
wicked, to further their damnation; But all that befall Gods children in this
passage of life and death are helps and furtherances to the heavenly Canaan,
matters that further their salvation.

The fourth and last evil in these dangers is the revenging Heb. 12.6. Whom
the Lord loves, he chasteneth, etc. Iere. 10.24. Oh Lord correct me, but in
judgment, not in thine anger: God corrects his children, but he does it not in
anger and fury; no, that is for the wicked. Lay all these together; First, the
children of God in all their troubles loose no grace; no, they are gayners by
them; secondly, they do not harden their hearts in sin; no, their hearts are
mollified by them: thirdly, their afflictions are not furtherances to hell, but
they further them to heaven: Lastly, they come not as the revenging hand of God
in fury upon them, but in love, as a father corrects his child; and then see
and say, Oh how safe are all Gods children in all their dangers both of life
and death? So that we see the Doctrine is clear, that all true believers are
in good safety under Gods assured protection against all dangers of life and
death.

For proof of this point; Proofs.
first consider life and death together, and then consider them asunder, and we
shall find this to be true: consider them together as Romans 14.8. Whether we
live, we live unto the Lord, or whether we die, we die unto the Lord, whether
we live therefore or die, we are the Lords: The persons there spoken of are
true believers, we, and there are two things affirmed of them: First, their
duty to God; secondly, Gods protection over them: their duty to God in the
former part of the verse, in life and death; whether we live, that is for the
time of our life, we live unto God; that is, we consecrate our bodies and
souls, our lives and all our endeauours to Gods service, and to his glory: or
whether we die, that is for our state in death, we die unto the Lord: that is,
we consecrate and offer up our souls and bodies a holy Sacrifice to God: Then
secondly, Gods protection over them, in the end of the verse, Whether we live
or dye, we are the Lords: whether we live, that is for our estate in life, we
are the Lords; that is, the Lord protects us. keeps us, and preserues us in
all dangers; or whether we die, that is for our state in death, the Lord
comforts us, saues us, and delivers us out of all dangers and evils that by
death are threatened unto us: so thou be a true believer, and labor to live and
die in obedience to God, and then surely whether thou live or dyest thou art
the Lords, he will protect, preserve and save thee in all dangers of life and
death, which is as much to say, that all true believers are in good safety,
etc. As in the Doctrine. In Psalm. 73.23.24. The Prophet makes it his own
particular, speaking to the Lord in the sweet meditation of his soul; I was
always with thee, thou have holden me by my right hand, thou will guide me by
thy Council, and afterward receive me to glory: I was always with thee, says
the Prophet, then he was ever in true safety, Thou have holden me by my right
hand; therefore always protected by God in all dangers; here is entire safety:
yea, but that is for the time past; but what shall be for the time to come? All
safety too, for his whole life; thou will guide me with thy Council, thy
counsel shall free me from all dangers, and preserve me in dangers, and carry
me safely through all my dangers, that is for the state of my life: but what
shall become of us at death? All safety too; even to death, and in death, and
after death; yea, more then safety, even safety in glory, and afterward receive
me to glory. Phil. 1.20. I am confident (says the Apostle) that the Lord Jesus
Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life or by death: Paul
applies it to his particular, he is confident of his safety, whatsoever comes
that Christ shall be magnified in his body, etc. And how shall Christ be
magnified in his body in life and death? why, in life by his manifold
deliverances from the manifold dangers of life; and in death, by his full
deliverance from all evils and dangers of life and death.

Consider life and death asunder; first in life, Gods children are in full
safety under Gods protection all their life, Psalm. 66.9. Our feet are subject
to many slippings and slidings, whilst we walk here in this world, even all
our lifetime: yea, but says the Prophet, God holds our souls in life, and
suffers not our feet to slip: that is, God holds us so, as that we shall
not fall away from his love in Christ. Secondly, in death, they are in safety
too, under Gods protection, Psalm. 116.15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is
the death of his Saints. A poor child of God lies upon his deathbed, and
bemoanes himself, his friends also grieve for him; in the sight of the world,
he is in a grievous and miserable state; yea, but in the sight and estimation
of God, his death is very precious and dear, the Lord loves him, the Lord
comforts him, and at his death the Lord receives his soul as a precious Jewel
into his own bosom, his death is precious to the Lord, it seperates the vile
from the holy; death seperates him from his foul sins, and from his filthy
corruptions, and from his unclean flesh, and from the wicked world, a precious
separation, but it never seperates him from the love of God in Christ Jesus our
Lord; no, it is so far from that, as God esteems his children more precious
in their death, then in their life.

Deu. 32.39. I kill and give life; and God is not only the Lord of life and
death it self, but of the state of life and death, he gives life, and he
disposes of us, and of our whole estate in life, and he inflicts death, and
disposes our state in death; we live of the Lord, and in the Lord, and to the
Lord; and we die of the Lord, and in the Lord, and to the Lord. I say, he is
the Lord of life and death, and they are his servants, and they can do nothing
but what God will have them to do; and therefore except God himself will hurt
us; these can never hurt us, nor put us out of his safty; yea, further seeing
the Lord himself loves us, and protects us, life and death, being his
servants, shall be applied and disposed of for the service of our safety and
protection. God is not governed by our state and condition either in life or
death, but our state both in life and death is altogether ouer-ruled by God,
and framed according to his own will, so that his will being to do us good,
life and death therefore and our whole state in them must be answerable thereunto.

Secondly, the Ministry of Gods Angels, that is his Angels charge over us to
keep us in safety both in life and death, and that is the true reason of our
safety, Psalm. 91.10, 11. The Angels keep us, and that universally in all our
ways; they keep us, and that very charily and tenderly; they bear us in
their hands, and they keep us very safely and surely, so that we dash not our
foot against a stone. Now the protection of the Angels is Gods own protection,
because it is by his appointment, and therefore ascribe it not to the Creature,
it is due to the Creator, bless God for it. The Angels do many good offices
for us, they wait on us, they destroy our enemies, they comfort us in our
distresses and troubles; but above al they guard our persons in the time of our
life, Psa. 34.7. The Angel of the Lord pitcheth his Tents round about them that
fear him and delivers them: And they guard our souls at the time of our
death, and carry them into Abraham's bosom, as they did the soul of Lazarus,
Luke 16.22. Here is the safety of Gods children under Gods protection both in
life and death.

Thirdly, Life and death are ours, our friends, and on our side, and at our
service, 1 Cor. 3.21. All things are yours; Life is ours, and therefore all the
passages of life are for us, and not against us; Death is ours, and therefore
all the passages of death are for us, not against us: Gods children have a
special title to life and death to claim them for their own, they have
warrant from God to take all the benefit they can afford them, and a privilege
too, to free and secure them from all their hurts, God has imposed an
inevitable law upon life and death, that they shall be attendant upon his
children to do them all the good they can, but no evil; and God has given
power and an heart to his children, to serve themselves upon life and death for
their own safety.

Philip. 1.20.21. Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life,
or by death: Why? for Christ is to me both in life and death advantage. And so
likewise it is the Apostles reason for all the faithful in general, Romans
14.9. why, we are the Lords, whether we live or die; for Christ (says he)
therefore dyed, and rose again, and revived, that he might be Lord both of
the dead and quick; that is, that he might be a protecting and a saving Lord
to us both in the state of life and death. A Snake or a Serpent is in danger to
poison us, and sting us, if we handle them as they are, but if we get out
their poison and sting from them, then we may handle them safely, and they can
do us no harm. In this corrupt state life is as a Snake, and death is as a
Serpent, full of poison in themselves, and we are in danger to be stung and
poisoned by them: but Christ Jesus by his life and by his death has taken away
the poison of our life, and the sting of our death, that is sin, and so we
are now in safety against all the dangers both of life and death, there is no
hurt in them. The uses are these:

The first use is for matter of comfort to Gods Blessed are the people whose
God is the Lord. Moses was ravished with the meditation of the happy estate of
Gods children in their life, and in their death, Deuteronomy. 33.27.29. The eternal
God is thy refuge, and under his arms thou art for ever. Blessed art thou, oh
Israel, who is like unto thee, oh people saved by the Lord? etc. Here is a
happy state indeed, fears assault us, God comforts us; afflictions trouble us,
God preserues us; our enemies thrust sore at us that we should fall, but God
is our helper; our sins endanger us, God delivers us; the Devil tempts us,
God vpholds us; death strikes at us, but God he shields and saues us; our
hearts, and our strength, and our life they fail us, yea, but God is our
portion for ever, he will never fail us, neither in life, nor in death: Shall
the Creatures hurt us? No, they shall nor, for God has made a covenant with
them for us, Hosea 2.18. Would the wicked swallow and devout us? They shall
not: God will not give us as a prey to their teeth, etc. Psalm. 124.6, 7. Is the
whole world in an vproare round about us? Yet we are in safety, Psalm. 91.7, 8.
Is the whole frame of Nature out of order? (as it lackes but little of it at
this day) yea, but he that calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved,
Joel 2.31, 32. A necessary consideration and meditation, as at all times, so in
these troublesome, cruel, desperate, and bloody times, when wars, and rumors
of wars are sounding in every man's ear, and Gods enemies make hauoke of Gods
Church, and the Angel of the Lord is abroad in the world executing Gods just
judgments in many places, and when there is a general combustion in most
parts of Christendom; yet here is all our stay, The Lord will surely help his
people, and save his inheritance; upon all his glory shall be a defense; Yea,
but are not many of Gods dear children at this day greatly persecuted in many
places; are they not murdered, consumed, and devoured? It is true, let the
wicked take away their lives, yet they shall never take away their souls; no,
God is ready when their lives are taken away by their enemies to receive their
souls, and to place them in eternal glory.

but while he lives, at his death he gives him over, and can do him no good;
but our good God, our heavenly Master, keeps and protects us his sinful
servants, and does us good both in life, and in death, and after death. This is
a blessed Master, and blessed are those servants that serve such a Master,
Psalm. 48. the last verse, This God is our God for ever and ever, he shall be
our guide unto the death.

Thirdly, This should strengthen our faith against the Lord is the strength of
our life, of whom then shall we be afraid? Psalm. 27.1. and Psalm. 42.8. God is
said to be the God of our life, this is a sweet comfort, and should much
strengthen our faith against all terrors in our life, because God is the God
of our life, and what can spoil that which God preserues? So it should
strengthen our faith against all terrors of death, Though he kill me, yet
will I trust in him, says Job 13.14.15. And the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.1. We know,
that if the earthly house of this our Tabernacle be destroyed, we have a
building given us of God, that is, an house not made with hands, but eternal
in the heavens. If God take away our life, we have an eternal state in heaven.

Fourthly, This teaches us patience in all our sufferings, Luke 21.18.19.
There shall not one hair of your heads perish: by your patience possess your
souls. We have great reason to be patient all the while we are in safety, but
we are in safety in all our sufferings, not only in life, but in death too,
and therefore we must be patient in all our sufferings, both in life and death.

How we may apply our selves unto God understandingly both in life and death.
that so we may be partakers of the comforts of them both: And herein consists
the right art of a true Christian, and till we are well-skild in the knowledge
and practice of this art, we are but pidlers in our profession. But you will
say, how may we attain this skill to apply unto our selves God understandingly
in Though heaven and earth fail, yet not one jot or tittle of Gods word and
promises shall fail, they shall stand fast for ever, and ever. We have a
conditional promise for freedom from temporal dangers (so far as shall be
good for us) we shall enjoy temporal safety; but we have an absolute promise
for our eternal safety; and this let us absolutely build and rest upon without
exception.

Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he will nourish thee, etc.
Psalm. 37.4.5. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee thine hearts
desire. Commit thy way unto the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall bring it
to pass. 1 Pet. 4.19. Commit your souls to God in well-doing, as unto a
faithful Creator. God has made and given us souls, let us commit them to him
in well-doing, and he will never cast them away; he is a faithful Creator, and
will not suffer that to perish which is so committed to him. If dangers offer
themselves, say thou, Here I am Lord, do with thy servant what thou will for
life or death: And then thou shall have God at hand, to say to thy soul; Here
I am, oh my servant, to uphold, and to preserve, and to comfort, and to save
thee.

Thirdly, We must grow to some familiar acquaintance Elisha did spread himself
on the Child, 2 Kings 4.34. and laid his mouth to the childs mouth, etc. so
does Christ spread himself upon every true believer that rightly apprehends
him, he stretches himself upon us in every particular, he lays his mouth
upon our mouth, his eyes upon our eyes, and his hands upon our hands, etc. to
sanctify us, and to preserve us in them; he lays his particular temptations
and sufferings on ours, to sanctify and preserve us in ours; his life on our
life, to sanctify and preserve us in the state of life; and his death on our
death to sanctify and preserve us in our state of death. This is a singular
comfort to a poor soul, to apply Christ's life and death to himself: I say,
it is a sound comfort to them both in life and death; but this is a mystery,
every one is not acquainted with it.

Jonas gourd, that came up in a night, and perished in a night; and will thou
set thy heart upon that which is nothing? Riches have wings and fly away,
they are quickly gone, and so are honors, and the like, and will thou set thy
heart upon such transitory things? Thirdly, consider that all outward comforts
are mingled with many sorrows, every sweet pleasure and worldly comfort has
his sower pain and discomfort; though they be pleasant for the time, yet they
are sour and bitter in the end. Lastly, let us consider that the comforts of
grace are incomparably greater and better and more excellent then all outward
comforts, there is no sorrow in them, they will make thee truly happy and
blessed; and will thou prefer the shadow before the substance? Yea, but will
some say, My crosses and afflictions they perplexe and trouble me, and make me
unfit to serve God. I answer, That is thy fault; why should crosses hinder
thee, or disable thee for the service of God? Still apply Gods comforts to thy
crosses; first the crosses are but short, though they be sharp; and will thou
not endure a while, for a time? secondly, they are light and momentary, 2 Cor.
4.17. Thirdly, they are nothing in comparison either of the pains of hell,
which we must endure hereafter, if we will not endure the cross here; or of
the glory of heaven which we shall be sure to have, if we endure afflictions
patiently, Romans 8.18. I account that the afflictions of this present time, are
not worthy of the glory that shall be showed to us. And again, we have many
times of comforts mixed with the days of affliction, and this may keep us to
the service of God in our lives. Yea, but what shall we do in death? that is
the end of all: shall I desire it to rid me out of all my troubles? I answer;
no, thy times are in Gods hands, Psalm. 31.15. and not in thine own; but if
thou desire death, that thou may be with Christ, it is well; but if it be
for worldly discontentments, it is desperate and damnable. What then, shall I
fear it? we know that the very name of death is fearful unto us. I answer,
that it is only thy own fear, there is no more fear in death, then in any
other thing, we make it fearful to our selves. It is but the withdrawing hand
of God; if we fear it, it is because we are wicked, for, the righteous have
hope in their death, Prou. 14.32. But what hope has the wicked, if God take
away his soul, Job 27.8. Yea, but the time of my death, that fears me; I
would be richer, and I would be better before I die, it is yet too soon to
die: I answer, this is thy perverse judgment; but whatsoever thou think,
certainly God never takes away any of his children but in due time, howsoever
it seem untimely to us, Job 5.26. Thou shall go to thy grave in a full age,
as a Ricke of Corn comes in due season into the Barn.

And so the kind of death that fears me; happily it may be cruel or
reproachful by war or the like. I answer, it is all one howsoever it be, it
cannot be worse then thy Saviors, and why should it dismay thee? It is the
same hand of God, and he is there present with thee to receive thy soul. Yea,
but death is bitter: But Christ Jesus has loosed the sorrows of death, Act.
2.24. and that not for himself only, but for us also, yea he has sweetened
them by his victory, 1 Cor. 15.54. Lastly, the consequents of death they are
the worst and most fearful, judgment, and the grave, and corruption, etc. I
answer, against judgment, thou must get faith and repentance, and against
corruption and the grave, thou must believe that God will raise thy body up
again, Psalm. 16.10. And so for thy soul thou must commit it into the hand of
God, it is dear and precious unto him: Have thou served the Lord with thy
soul all thy life, and art thou afraid to trust him with it at thy death? We
are apt to suspect what shall become of our souls at our death: Let us look
upon Christ Jesus, consider what became of his soul at his death, it went into
Paradise into Heaven: And what for himself alone? no, but for us, yea merely
for us; so that the children of God are as sure of it, as Christ himself. Thus
let us comfort our selves with the application of Gods particular promises
against our particular troubles: and both in life and death let us apply our
selves understandingly, and feelingly unto God, and so shall we be safe under
his protection against all dangers both in life and death.

FINIS.
THE TENTH SERMON,
Upon ROMANS 8. the two last Verses. For I am sure, that neither life, nor
Death, nor Angels, etc.


THe Apostle speaking here of the safety of all true believers in the estate of
grace, against all dangers that can possibly befall them, he does not content
himself (as you have seen) to speak of their dangers and comforts only in
general, but for our better satisfaction, he enlarges his speech to their
dangers and comforts in particular. And these particulars, he sets down before
us, in five several branches or ranks: The first rank of dangers and comforts
are of life and death, For I am sure that neither death nor life: The second
rank are Angels, Rulers, and Powers: The third rank are things present and
things to come: The fourth rank is height and depth: The fifth and last rank
is as it were an extent of his speech to all things that can be imagined, nor
any other creature; as if he should say, if I have omitted any other creature
in the world in these particulars, yet they shall not separate us. We have
spoken already of the first rank, death and life.

Now we are to speak of the second rank of dangers, and of our comforts
against them, nor Angels, Rulers and Powers; wherein we see there are three
sorts of dangers, Angels, Rulers, Powers. In this second rank the Apostle
climbes up a higher strain then before, for here he specifies the most mighty
and principal active workers that are in the world under God, that either have
or may have any hand in the indangering of our estate; Life and death, are but
certain states and conditions, wherein we are subject to certain dangers;
but Angels, Rulers and Powers, these are certain chief living agents, which
do or may endanger us, either by life or death. For the meaning of these three
words, I confess that there is great hardness in them, and great difficulty
amongst interpreters about them; I will not trouble you with many expositions,
generally the words are expounded altogether of Angels and nothing else, but
herein some speak more boldly, some more modestly: They that speak more
boldly take it thus; by Angels, they understand the whole Army of Gods Angels
in general, and by Rulers and Powers, they understand certain distinct orders
of Angels one above another: But this though it be the judgment of many of the
learned, yet it is a mere conjecture; for there is no certainety set down in
Gods word, what be the distinct order of Angels; and for a man to take upon him
to speak of such high mysteries as these are without warrant from Gods Word,
is great presumption: They that speak more modestly, do understand by all
these three words, Angels, Rulers and Powers, one and the same thing, that is,
all the Angels indifferently: But why does the Apostle here give them several
names? they answer that he does it in three several respects: They are
called Angels in respect of their office: they are messengers: secondly, they
are called Rulers, in respect of the excellency of their natures; and Powers in
respect of their mightiness and strength. This exposition comes nearest the
Apostles meaning, and it contains nothing in it against the rule of faith, nor
against the use of the words, nor against the drift and scope of the place,
etc. Yet it comes short of the Apostles strain, and does not reach the full
meaning of the place; for the Apostle here, in the height of his spirit, makes
a general challenge against all living mighty workers in the world under God,
that they shall never impeach the safety of Gods children in the state of
grace; therefore the words must be expounded, that they may comprehend all such
agents whatsoever: Now there are other mighty living workers besides the
Angels; therefore saving the judgment of the better learned, we expound it
thus: By Angels we understand all the Angels that are, as well those that
stand, as those that are fallen, as well good as bad; for so the word naturally
signifies: For, when the Scripture speaks of good Angels only, it calls them
holy Angels, Elect Angels, mighty Angels, the Angels of God, etc. but here it
speaks of Angels in general, and therefore we are to understand it both of
good and bad. By Rulers or Principalities, we understand earthly Governors,
the great and mighty Monarchs and Magistrates of the earth, Kings, Emperors,
and the like; for so this word, in the original, is expressly confined to this
sense in two places of the Scripture, Luke 12.11. And when they bring you unto
the Sinagogues, and unto Rulers, etc. And Titus 3.1. Put them in mind that
they be subject to Principalities or Rulers. It is true that the same word is
sometimes in the Scripture meant of the Angels both good and bad, but the
Apostle having mentioned them already in the former words, there is no need
that it should be meant of them in this word too. Thirdly, by powers understand
all the gifts and enablements that either these or any other mighty workers in
the world are furnished withal, as authority, place, strength, wit, policy,
etc. for so the word in the original usually signifies, not so much the agents
themselves, as the powers and enablements whereby they do work; so that lay
all these briefly together, and then the meaning of the words are thus much,
as if the Apostle should say, I am sure that neither all the Angels, good nor
bad, nor all the Rulers and Potentates, Monarchs and Magistrates of the world;
nor all the powers or enablements that these or any other are furnished
withal, shall ever be able to separate me from the love of God which is in
Jesus Christ our Lord. Here is a high strain of assurance; and we must have a
great measure of faith to attain unto it.

The Doctrine that arises naturally out of the whole state of the words thus
unfolded is this: Doctrine.
namely, That howsoever it be that Angels both good and bad, and Rulers, great
Kings and Emperors, Potentates and Monarchs of the world, are mighty workers,
endued with great powers, gifts, and enablements; yet neither Angels good nor
bad, nor all the Rulers and Potentates in the world, endued with all their
powers, gifts, and enablements, shall never be able to separate true beleuers
from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

To avoid confusion we will handle the three several branches of the
Doctrine, The first branch of the Doctrine.
every one apart; we will first begin with good Angels, and then we must apply
the Doctrine thus: That howsoever the good Angels are mighty workers, great in
power and enablements, yet neither they, nor all the power they have, shall be
ever able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord. For Explication of this point, Explication in the opening of three
particular.
we are here to touch these three particulars, as necessary for the
understanding of this Doctrine: First, what these good Angels are: Secondly,
what is that Relation and Communion that is betwixt them and true believers:
Thirdly, what dangers they are that may befall true believers by good Angels.

Heb. 1.7. He makes his Angels Spirits: that they kept their first estate the
Apostle Jude implies, verse 6. when he says of the evil angels, That they
kept not their first estate, thereby necessarily implying by opposition, that
the good Angels have kept their first estate, that is, the blessed estate of
excellency that God created them in. Lastly, that they are immediate and
continual attendants before God; Daniel saw it in a vision, Dan 7.10. The
ancient of days sat upon a throne; and who were his attendants? the Angels,
Thousands thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
stood before him. So we see what the good Angels be: Many other things might be
said of them, but I touch these only, which of necessity we must know for the
understanding of the Doctrine in hand.

The second particular is, what this relation and Reu. 19.10. I am thy
fellow-seruant: They and we are brethren in the testimony of Jesus, as the
same Angel affirms in the words following: They and we are fellow-Citizens
of the heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 12.22. We are their charge, they are our guard
and keepers; They pitch their Tents round about us for our safeguard and
protection, Psalm. 34.7. They are our pattern, we are their resemblance, both
for obedience whilst we live here, Math. 6.10. Thy will be done in earth as it
is in heaven. and likewise for glory hereafter, Luke 20.36. Other bonds there
are whereby they are associated to us, and we to them, but these are the
nearest and chiefest, and most remarkable.

The third and last point is, what those dangers To this I answer, two things;
First, that the Apostle does not say here directly, that the good Angels of
themselves may endanger Gods Children, but he speaks it here by way of
supposition, as if he should say, suppose that they should endanger Gods
children, yet they could never separate them from the love of God. And this is
very obseruable in the whole tenor of the Apostles speech, that all the
dangers which he mentions are put down by way of supposition, but safety and
the comforts against them, are set down positiuely and directly; As if he
should say, suppose that the good Angels should endanger us, yet certainly
they should never separate us from the love of God: But especially it is to be
marked in this particular concerning the good Angels, for this is merely a
supposall, that the good Angels of themselves should hurt us. But, why then
does the Apostle mention any such matter here? I answer, for the further
confirmation of true believers in the assurance of Gods love. I will clear
this place by another place of the Apostle in the very like kind, Gal. 1.6. If
an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel, etc. Will any man conclude from
hence, that therefore an Angel from heaven may, or can preach any other
Gospel then Paul had preached? No, but the Apostle speaks it by way of
supposall only, and supposalls do not affirm any thing in being: Yea, but
why does the Apostle then here use the name of an holy Angel in this case? I
answer, he had good reason for it, that he might confirm them the better in
the truth which he had taught, namely, that we must be so steadfastly settled in
the faith of the Gospel of Christ, that if an Angel from heaven should teach
any other Doctrine (which is a thing impossible) yet if he should we must defy
him, and hold him accursed. And so the Apostle in this place makes the estate
of Gods children so sure and firm, that if the good Angels should set
themselves against them, to separate them from the love of God in Christ Jesus,
(which is impossible) but if they should, yet they could not do it. Secondly,
I answer, that howsoever they do not of themselves endanger us, yet
occasionally in regard of our weakness and corruption they may endanger us: We
may in our weakness abuse them, or mistake their service, or put our trust in
them, and so endanger our selves greatly by them. I will give you a plain
instance in the holy Apostle S. John, Revel. 19.10. and Revel. 22.8. he was a
true believer, yet in his weakness, by occasion of a good Angel, he was in
danger to commit a vile and most fearful sin, the very sin of Idolatry,
and that not once, but twice, and that though he were reproved for it: A
grievous sin; but the Angel he hinders him, See thou do it not, (says he)
worship not me, worship God: In which we may observe two things that do
effectually concern the point in hand; first, that true believers may, through
their corruption and weakness, be endangered in the estate of grace by the
good Angels; yet secondly, that God will never suffer them to be overcome and
swallowed up of this, it shall never prevail utterly to separate them from the
love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

And so now the Doctrine being thus cleared, we come to the proofs, Proofs.
which are these, Mat. 18.10. See that ye despise not one of these little ones,
for I say unto you, that in heaven their Angels always behold the face of my
Father which is in heaven. These words are the words of our Savior, and he
ownes them by a special challenge, I say unto you; I that know well what
belongs to God, and to Gods Angels, and to Gods little ones, I say unto you,
despise not one of these little ones, for in heaven their Angels always behold
the face of my Father which is in heaven. The matter affirmed there is the
continual attendance of the Angels in the presence of God; but the drift of
the speech is, to note the continual care that the Angels of God have over
Gods weak children, as appears, first by their title, their Angels; they are
Gods Angels, as he being their Lord and Master to whom they do belong, and
they be our Angels, as we being the children of that their Lord and Master, and
in respect of the care and charge that they are employed in about us. Secondly,
it appears by the form of the reason, See (says our Savior) you despise not
one of Gods weak children, see that you hurt them not; for I say unto you; as
who should say, do not despise them, nor hurt them, for if you do, surely
their Angels will revenge the wrong and hurt done to them. Thirdly, by the
time, always, this is not for a day, nor a year, but always, without
ceasing: put all these together, and the Doctrine is here clearly proved, that
the Angels of God are ours, they are for us, and not against us, they will be
avenged on those that hurt us, and therefore will never hurt us themselves; and
this is their care and practice always, they are ever imploide about our good,
and therefore they shall never separate us from our greatest good of all, from
the love of God in Christ Jesus, Heb. 1.14. Are they not all ministering
spirits, sent forth to minister for their sakes that shall be heirs of
salvation? The Apostle speaks here generally of all good Angels, Are they not
all? and does not divide them in office or nature, but ioynes them in both,
they are all spirits by nature: And what are they by office? They are all
ministering spirits, and what ministry is it that they are employed in? sent
forth, etc. God sends them forth from time to time to perform certain offices
about his children, and his heirs, as a father makes his servants to attend
him that shall be his heir: and they are sent forth to minister for their
sakes that shall be heirs of salvation. They are most dutiful attendants on
us that are heirs, and they minister for our sakes, that is, for our good,
comfort, and protection only, never for our hurt; they know from God that we
are appointed to salvation, and shall they at any time hinder us of it? They
take notice of it that we are heirs to their Lord and Master, and shall they
being servants, go about to hinder us of the inheritance which their Lord and
Master, and our Father has appointed to us? No surely, they will not do it;
but on the contrary, they will help and further us all they can thereunto,
Psalm. 91.11, 12. He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in
all thy ways, etc. God has committed his children to the charge and custody
of his Angels; What to do? to keep them, not to destroy them, and to keep
them in all their ways; they shall not fail them in any one passage of their
life, to bear us up in their hands, never to suffer us to fall utterly from
God, much less to cause us so to fall, that thou dash not thy foot against a
stone: They shall preserve us from the harms that our selves or others might
do unto us, therefore themselves shall never hurt us in the least kind, much
less in the matter of grace and salvation: A place so pregnant to prove the
infallible protection of Gods children by the Angels, that the Devil himself
acknowledges it for a certain truth, and alleges it for that purpose, Math.
4.6. Lastly, their practice makes this good by experience, what good offices
have they done from time to time for Gods children? preserved them from their
enemies, as Lot, Genesis 19.10. delivered them out of prison, as Peter, Acts 12.
comforted them in their distresses, Acts 27.23, 24. freed them in their
troubles, as the Israelites, Isay 65.9. showed them, and directed them what
they must do to be saved, as Cornelius, Acts 10.5. In a word, infinite are the
good offices that the good Angels have done for Gods children, but there is not
one place extant in all Gods word, to prove that any good Angel has done any
harm to any one of Gods children: No, that is for the evil Angels to hurt us,
they hurt us altogether, and never do us the least good; but the good Angels
they help us always, they are altogether and only to help us, and never to
do us the least harm, and therefore they with all the power they have can
never separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

our salvation, if they could: Secondly, they cannot do it, if they would.
First, they will not do it if they could; for there are four engagements
whereby the will of the Angels is so stirred and inclined toward us, as that
they will never hurt us, if they could; first, the zeal of Gods glory:
Secondly, obedience to Gods will: Thirdly, their dependence on Jesus Christ:
And fourthly, their communion they have with us. First, the zeal of Gods
glory, Isa. 6.2. they are Seraphims, that is, hot and fiery spirits, burning
not in fury, but in zeal for the glory of the Lord of hoasts. Now they know
that God is wonderfully glorified in the salvation of his children, and
therefore they will not hinder that at any hand, but zealously advance it to the
uttermost of their power. Secondly, their obedience to Gods will, they know it
is Gods will to give his children a kingdom, and will they cross his will?
No, they obey and do his will, Psalm. 103.20. they will never cross it. They
know their fellow-Angels frustrated their estate by disobedience, and will they
frustrate theirs too? Noe, they will not. Thirdly, their dependence on Christ,
and their love to him, Ioh. 1.51. Hereafter you shall see heaven open, and the
Angels of God ascending and descending upon that Son of man: All their
ministry is from God to us, as in Christ, and they are vpheld by Christ, or
else they are as changeable as the evil Angels were by nature, and they know
that Christ has redeemed us with his precious blood, and will they seek to
cast away the price of his blood? They know that Christ has committed us to
God his Father, and will they incense us against God, or God against us?
Lastly, their faithfulness to us, and their communion with us, they take
notice of us as their fellow-seruants, and therefore they will not hurt us, he
is an evil servant that will smite his fellow-seruants; this is odious on
earth, how much more in heaven; if ever the holy Angels should entertain any
faithless or treacherous thought against us, their fellows and brethren,
heaven they know would never endure them.

they shall not be able to separate us. There are two immovable bars whereby
they are utterly disabled from hurting us in estate of grace: The first is the
soueraign power and ouer-ruling hand of God; the second, is the neernesse of
our communion with Christ. First, the sovereign power of God and his
ouer-ruling hand both over them and us, that hinders them; they are Gods elect
Angels, and we are Gods elect children, and therefore God by bis sovereign
power, will never suffer them to seduce us, nor suffer us to be seduced by
them, Gods election must stand good for ever. Secondly, the neerenesse of our
union with Christ, that is another bar to hinder them: Christ took our nature
upon him, not the Angels, Heb. 2.16. and herein we are a degree above the
Angels. Now this assumption of our nature into the person of Christ, and his
participation with us therein is so sanctified, and effectually ratified by
faith, and by the spirit, to every true believer, that they are truly one with
Christ himself; and can the Angels hurt Christ? or betray Christ? or separate
Christ from Gods love? then neither can they hurt us, nor betray us, nor
separate us from the love of God in Christ.

The Uses are these: First, since it is so, that the Coloss. 2.18. That under a
color of Religion and humbleness of mind did worship Angels, such as the
Monks and Friars be at this day; but what says the Apostle in the 19. verse?
They that teach such things hold not the head; that is, they hold not Christ as
their head, they are utterly void of Christ, and so living and dying in that
sin, they are utterly void of the state of grace, and salvation. This sets
such a brand of reprobation on the Popish Church and Religion, that they are
never able to claw it off: They hold many other gross points, which at least
by consequence overthrow the foundation Christ Jesus: But of this point the
Apostle says directly, That they that hold it, hold not the head Christ. A man
cannot be a worshipper of Angels and belong to Christ. And does not the Church
of Rome greatly adore and worship Angels? do they not reverence them, and call
upon them? It is their professed Doctrine and ordinary practice: I would feign
see how they would answer this; they are cut off hereby from the head Christ:
I doubt not but many of them are the Elect of God, but then either the Lord
keeps them that they fall into this sin; or if they do fall into it, yet
God gives them repentance for it before they die, that lo they shall not fall
by it for ever. But let us beware and take heed of this sin, in our selves,
and evermore let us take heed of Popery, that does maintain and teach this
gross error.

lift us up as high as heaven, yea above heaven, yea above the Angels in
heaven, in the matter of our assurance: Our faith should say, as the Apostle
does here; I am sure that the Angels in heaven, can never be able to separate
me from the love of God: and therefore much less can any other Creature or
casualty whatsoever; can any creature do more then the Angels in heaven can?
But if we consider further that these Angels, these mighty and powerful
Angels, are not only, not against us, but for us, affectionately for us:
wholly for us, always for us, and that they bend all their power to keep us
in the love of God; and to make good the work of our salvation, what a shame
should it be for us, still to lie slugging in the dumpes of our doubtings and
uncertainties? why should we not now take heart to our selves, and lay fast
hold on this assurance?

The third Use teaches us, the infinite and admirable Psalm. 103.20. Yet all
the strength and power they have, shall never be able to cross or hinder the
power of grace for the salvation of the faithful: this is the sinews of our
assurance: Some think it is an easy matter to be saved: No, it is the
infinite and Almighty power of God that must show forth it self in saving us,
else it is impossible for us to be saved, 1 Pet 1.5. Without this power of God
it is impossible that we should be kept, there is not the least sin
forgiven, nor the least corruption subdued, nor the least sparkle of grace
wrought in our hearts, nor the least temptation overcome, but by the almighty
power of saving grace. On the other side some dismay themselves at their own
corruptions, Satan's temptations, and the defections of a godly life, that they
think it impossible to be saved; here we must fly to the consideration of the
infinite and almighty power of saving grace, and then we shall be satisfied:
And take heed though thou debase thy self, debase not God: It is impossible
with thee, but it is not impossible with God, for then who can be saved? All
things are possible with God, Matthew. 19.25.26. It is our Saviors Resolution in
this very case, teaching us to rest wholly and only upon the power of God for
salvation; It is impossible with men that any should be saved: Yea, but it is
possible with God by the power of saving grace, 2 Cor. 12.9. My grace (says
God to the Apostle) is sufficient for thee: Paul had no rest in himself
before; but the almighty and all-sufficient grace of God gave him full content:
This is that which gives us satisfaction, and makes us go on cheerfully
against all difficulties, the all sufficiency of saving grace. And therefore
let us labor to lift up our hearts to a high and transcendent estimation of
the almighty power of saving grace, which is the almighty power of God; try and
prove whether this be not a notable means of subduing and ouertopping all
other powers in the world, and so of bringing full assurance to our souls: try
it I say, and see if it do not prove so; look unto the almighty power of God,
and to the all sufficiency of saving grace, and this will carry us comfortably
through all dangers, the want of this high estimation of the almighty power of
saving grace soundly taken to heart, makes most of us come so short of this
assurance.

The last Use teaches us how to carry our selves toward the good Angels, that
so they may not hurt How we are to carry our selves toward the good Angels
that they may not hurt us, but do us good.
keep God thy friend; the best way to keep the servants to be thy friend, is
to keep their master to be thy friend, so keep God to be thy friend, and that
is the best way to keep his servants the Angels to be thy friend: All the
promises of protection by the Angels are referred to such as are Gods, Psalm.
34.7. The Angel of the Lord campeth about them that fear him: And Psalm 91.11.
He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways;
Fear God and pray unto him as Cornelius did, Acts 10.2.4. and walk diligently
in the duties of thy calling, as the Shepherds did, Luke 2.8.9.10. and then
the Angels will comfort us, protect and keep us. The Angels love us for our
heavenly Fathers sake; if we be stubborn to him, they will turn their love
from us.

Matthew. 24.31. and 16.27. All the good they do us, and all the service which
they owe us, is for Christ his sake, because we are in him; if he favor us,
they will favor us; if he frown on us, they will frown on us too: If ever we
will enjoy the comfortable ministry of the Angels, let us lay fast hold on
Jesus Christ by faith; so far as we go from him, they go from us: Let us
therefore lay fast hold on Jesus Christ by faith in his blood, by love to his
Majesty, by obeying the motions of his Spirit, and by conforming our selves to
his example; and then the Angels are ready pressed to do us their best service;
hold thou fast to Christ, and they will be sure to hold thee fast.

Revel. 12.8. Michael and his Angels fought, and the Dragon fought and his
Angels: Christ and his Angels, and the Devil and his Angels, they fight for
our poor souls; But the Devil and his Angels do not prevail; but Christ
and his Angels they do prevail, and they are on our side to fight for us. And
therefore as the Prophet, 2 Kings 6.16.17. prayed to the Lord to open his
servants eyes, that he might see that there was more with them, then against
them: So let us pray to God to open our eyes, that we may see and take notice
of the Ministry of the good Angels, and of their protection and care over us.

Fourthly, let us imitate the good Angels in obedience, Matthew. 6.10. Let us do
Gods will on earth, as the 103.20.21. They are never out of Gods way, they ever
do Gods will willingly and cheerfully; the Devil does Gods will too, but it
is grudgingly and against his will. The good Angels they worship God, Hebr.
1.6. They take the cause of Gods children to heart, they rejoice at the good of
Gods Church and children, especially at the good of their souls; so let us
worship God alone, and let the good of Gods children, especially the good of
their souls, be the joy of our hearts. Let us imitate them thus, but yet let
us beware of (...), in the Papists, Vid. original.
in single life and angelical perfection.

Fifthly, speak not evil of those that are in place give not railing speeches,
2 Pet. 2.10.11. The Angels do it not, let us take heed we do it not.

Sixthly, offend not these Angels, 1 Cor. 11.10. The The Angels are about us,
and observe our doings, and mark our carriage, if it be reverent and agreeable
to our profession, they rejoice at it; if we mis-behaue our selves and carry
our selves irreverently in our words, gestures, or apparel, mis-beseeming our
persons, places, or profession, this offends and greeues them, they distaste
it, and are displeased at it, let us take heed therefore that we offend them
not.

Revel. 19.10. and 22.8. when John would have worshipped the Angel, He was
angry, see thou do it not (says he) worship God. It is an horrible dishonor
to God, and much displeasing to the good Angels themselves, they tremble at it,
and abhor it: Away with it says the Angel, worship not me, worship God:
Which is worse the Thief or the Receiver? If I worship the Angels, I am the
thief, if they receive and accept of it, they are the receivers, but they
abhor it.

Lu. 2.20. having heard many good things from the ministry of the Angels, they
returned glorifying, and praising not the Angels, but God for their Ministry:
Take the benefit of it, and give the Angels due reverence and respect for their
Ministry, but give the honor and glory of it to God alone; thus did Daniel,
Chap. 6.22. and Peter, Act. 12.11. they do not ascribe their deliverance to
the Angel, but to God that sent his Angel, and yet they do reverently
mention the Angel, that was the means of it: And we have great cause to
glorify God for their Ministry; for first it is a great comfort to us: what
greater comfort can we have by any of the creatures, then to have thousand
thousands of Angels, the best and greatest of Gods creatures evermore to attend
on us? Secondly, it is a great honor to us, the greatest honor God that can
bestow upon us by any of the Creatures, that the Angels that are far more
excellent Creatures by creation then our selves, should be attendants on us:
Oh, let us honor God greatly, that has so greatly honored us. Thirdly, all the
good they do unto us, they do it but as instruments, it is God alone that is
the author of it; therefore let God alone have all the glory and honor of it.
Observe these rules carefully and conscionably, and I will assure thee from
God, that thou shall be made partaker of the comfort and protection of the good
Angels, they shall attend upon thee all thy life, to preserve thee from evil,
and to encourage thee to goodness, and to comfort thee in troubles, and to
help thee out of them; and at thy death they shall stand by thee to cheer
thee up against the bitterness and terror of thy dissolution, and to carry
thy soul into heaven. And yet this is not all, for behold yet further, at the
day of judgment, they shall summon thy body out of the grave, and place thee
amongst the sheep at Gods right hand, that there thou may receive that
joyful and blessed sentence, Come ye blessed, inherit the kingdom prepared
for you from the beginning of the world, such honor have all Gods Saints.

FINIS.
THE ELEAVENTH SERMON,
Upon ROMANS 8. the two last Verses. For I am persuaded, (or I am sure) that
neither Death, nor life, nor Angels, etc.


THe Apostle here, when he propounds the dangers that belong to the faithful,
and the comforts against them; he sets them before us in certain ranks and
orders. And the first rank is the dangers that come to us by death, and by
life, and the comforts against them, and of that we have spoken.

The second rank is, of the dangers that come to us by Angels, Rulers, and
powers, and that we have entered into, and showed that by Angels are meant all
sorts of Angels, both good and bad, both those that stand, and those that are
fallen. Of the good Angels we have spoken as it pleased God to give ability.
Now we are to speak of the evil Angels, that the evil Angels shall never be
able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
That the evil Angels must needs be here meant appears, because they are
generally comprehended under the name of Angels: which is common to all Angels
both good and bad: But especially the evil Angels are here meant, because the
drift of the Apostles speech necessarily requires that they should be here more
specially intended, for the evil Angels are the special instruments and
chief procurers of all the dangers that tend to the separation of us from the
love of God in Christ Jesus. This is their maine reach and chief endeavor in
all their practices against us, to make this separation, and therefore they
must needs be here specially intended in this challenge of the Apostle. It
were a small comfort to the faithful for the Apostle to say, that they were in
safety, because the good Angels should not hurt them, for that were as much as
if he should say he were in safety, because his friends should not hurt him,
for the good Angels are our friends, and therefore will not hurt us. But the
Apostles reach is, to avouch the safety of Gods children against all dangers
that are or can be against them, even against the greatest and fiercest enemies
that we have; and therefore he must needs mean it especially of the evil
Angels, because they are the greatest and fiercest enemies that the faithful
have. And thus the Apostle has brought us into the meditation of the ground of
all our dangers and woes, and miseries, namely, the evil Angels or Devils. A
fearful and dismal argument in it self, yet as it is here applied by the
Apostle, it is a cheerful and a comfortable argument. It is a fearful and
dismal thing to hear of our enemies, but it is a comfortable thing to hear
of the overthrow of them. Let not any of us therefore be afraid to hear of
them; we must not be afraid to fight with them, and therefore much less to
hear of them. One thing the Apostle tells us here, as before we have heard
for our sound comfort, that all these wicked fiends shall never be able to
separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus; and therefore there is no
cause why the weakest believing soul here present should be daunted at the
hearing of this argument. Let us therefore proceed in the strength of God, and
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in the grace, and comfort, and
direction of his holy spirit, and in the light and direction of Gods word, and
we shall find an heavenly light arise unto us out of this hellish darkness.

The general Doctrine concerning all Angels, good and bad, was the last time
propounded, which being applied to this particular, arises naturally thus:
Doctrine.
That howsoever it be that evil Angels are mighty workers and great in
power, and do maliciously bend all the power they have against true believers,
to make this separation of them from the love of God in Christ; yet
notwithstanding not all the evil Angels, with all their power and malice, or
all that they can do, shall ever be able to separate all, nor any one true
believer, from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

For the opening of this Doctrine I will propound these four particulars,
wherein I shall lay open the whole nature of the point. The first particular
is, what these evil Angels are: The second, how these evil Angels are fitted
against us: Thirdly, how they seek to annoy us: And lastly, how far they may
endanger us. For first, we must know our enemies what they are; and secondly,
we must know their provision, how they are fitted against us; and then thirdly,
we must know their courses, how they may annoy us; and lastly, we must know the
event and issue, how far they may endanger us: These being known, the
Doctrine shall be well and plainly understood.

First, We must know what these evil Angels are. Explication in four things
concerning the evil Angels.
The evil Angels are those that left their first estate, and are become utter
enemies to God, and to man, and to all the creatures, especially to Jesus
Christ, and to Gods children, and to all matter of grace and goodness. First,
that they are such as left their first Jude 6. Secondly, they are enemies, for
hence they have their name Satan, and there is no name more commonly given
them both in the Old and New Testament then this name Satan, which signifies
an enemy. And howsoever this name in the Scripture seems sometime to point out
the chief of Devils, yet it does appear that it is applied in Scripture to
all Devils, Math. 12.26. If Satan cast out Satan, which is not meant of the
Prince of Devils, as if the Prince should cast out the Prince; but it is meant
of all the Devils, if they should be one against another, then how should their
Kingdom stand? They are enemies, and they are utter enemies, deadly enemies,
and that first to God, dishonouring him, accusing him, blaspheming him,
opposing against him to the uttermost of their power. Secondly, they are
enemies to man, they murdered us all with one blow, in the loins of Adam, and
not content with that they still follow the blow, and pursue mankind with
deadly hatred. Thirdly, they are enemies to all the Creatures, seeking and
working daily, as much as in them lies, the utter ruin and confusion of the
whole frame and order of nature in the Sea, in the wind, and in the air, and
in all places. Fourthly, they are special enemies to Jesus Christ; this is
that that galls these evil spirits, that JESUS CHRIST the mediator betwixt
God and man, comes to reconcile God to man, and to deliver man out of the power
of these hellish spirits; yea, and that he does utterly destroy and vanquish
these evil spirits, and all that take part with them, even all the powers or
darkness; here is their edge and stomach; this heavenly person Jesus Christ
in this heavenly office of the Mediator, is the principal object of all their
hellish spite: They fought against him by themselves, and by their instruments
all his life, and at his death they laid on load, and did bend and muster-vp
all their forces, and spit out all their venom against him. Fifthly, they are
enemies to Gods children, they are also a great eyesore to Satan, they cannot
endure them, and it is hard to say whether Satan hate our heavenly Father more
for our sakes; or whether he hate us the more for our heavenly Fathers sake;
howsoever the Devil is our adversary in a specially manner, 1 Pet. 5.8. Your
adversary the Devil, says the Apostle, he is a general accuser, accusing man
to God, and God to man, but he is the special accuser of the brethren. Lastly,
he is an enemy to all grace and goodness, he hinders it, he slanders it, he
hates it, he suppresseth it with all his power, he knows that if grace and
goodness stand, he must fall, and therefore he labors to overthrow all grace
and goodness, that he may stand. See this in one of his Impes, Acts 13.10.
Elymas the Sorcerer, Oh child of the Devil (says the Apostle to him) enemy
to all righteousness, etc. If it be so with the Children, that they are
enemies to all goodness, much more is it so with their father the Devil: So
we see what these evil Angels are.

Secondly, Let us see how they are fitted against us, 2. In nine things
concerning them.
for this is needful to be known, that so we may provide against them. They
have many advantages whereby they are fitted against us; first, they are very
many; secondly, they are very strong; thirdly, they are very malicious;
fourthly, they are very subtle; fifthly, they are very active and nimble;
sixthly, they are very busy; seauenthly, they are very well appointed; eighthly,
they are very well experienced; and lastly, they are very dangerous.

First, They are very many, Mark 5.9. One man; now a legion contains six
thousand; what? so many Devils in one poor man; how many think you are then
in all the world? Any one Devil is too hard for any one man, oh how hard then
is that poor soul bested that is assaulted with many Devils? This is the case
not of some of us only, but of all of us, if we understand our case aright.

Secondly, As they are very many, so they are very Luke 11.21. When a strong
man armed keeps the palace, etc. and so of a strong beast, yea, the
strongest of all Beasts, a Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8. Your adversary the devil as a
roaring Lion, etc. and the hold which they have in the heart of an
unregenerate man is said to be a strong hold, 2 Cor. 10.4. they are very
strong in getting the prey, it shall escape them hard but they will seize upon
us, and they are very strong in keeping the prey when once they have seized,
they will tug hard before they will let go.

great red Dragon, Revel. 12.3. The Dragon of all Creatures is the most fierce,
spightfull, and malicious: Satan's malice is greater then the Dragons, for he
is a great Dragon, and more fierce then the malice of the Dragon, for he is a
great red Dragon, says the Apostle, as who should say, that he burns fiery
red in malice always against Gods Church.

Revel. 12.9. That old Serpent called the Devil and Satan was cast out,
which deceives all the world; and the Serpent is very subtle, Genesis 3.1. Now
the Serpent was more subtle, etc. The Devil is an old subtle Serpent, so
subtle that (says the Apostle) he deceiues all the world; this he has done,
and this he does daily.

Job was to be tried, see how nimbly Satan bestirred himself, first to his
Oxen in one place, then to his Sheep in another place, then to his Cammels in
another place, and then to his children in another place, and all this in a
trice, in the turning of a hand as it were, Job 1. And when our Savior Christ
was to be tempted, how quickly did Satan get him up to the top of the pinnacle
of the temple, and to the top of a high mountain, in the twinkling of an eye,
says the Text, Luke 4.5.6.

Sixthly, he is very busy, he compasses the world Job 1.7. And walks about
seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. When we sit still, he walks about us,
when we are most at leisure, he is most busy to do us mischief, when we
sleep, he wakes, when our senses are bound up (as they are in our sleep) and
the inmost powers of our souls are in some sort locked up from him, yet then he
leaves us not, but even in our sleep he deludes our senses with many idle and
vain imaginations, and polutes our thoughts with much filthiness and
uncleanness.

Seauenthly, they are very well appointed, and therefore armed, Lu. 11.21. and
if one be too weak of himself, he can go presently and take seven spirits
more to him worse then himself, Luke 11.26. and then he will be hard enough
for us. The Devil has all the world to his friend as he carries the matter,
like a Spider that has his Cop-web in every corner of the house to catch the
poor silly Flies; so the Devil has his snares and Cop-webs in every corner
of the world to catch our poor sinful souls withal.

Eighthly, they are very well experienced, and therefore the old Serpent, Revel.
12 9. A man's experience is a great advantage to him, though it be but of some
few years; what wonderful advantage then is the Devils experience against us,
which he has had since the beginning of the world.



Five particulars how the devil annoyes us.
surely they seek to annoy us every way, at all times, and in all places, and
in all states and conditions, and upon all occasions, and by all means and
instruments; what is it that he will not make an instrument to fight against
us withal?





own dearest friends, our own wives and children.

Fourthly, not content with all this, he sets our

Lastly, as he seeks to set the whole world against Job, that he may have us
in his own power, to do his own will upon us, and to hurt us.

Fourthly, we must know how far they may endanger separate us from the love
of God in Christ Jesus; which being the chief end of all their endeauours (for
whatsoever means they use, this is the principal end they aim at to separate
us from the love of God in Christ Jesus, being not able to attain unto it,
here they are foiled, and this is their torment, and a special portion of
their hell in this world.

Proofs.
Now let us come to the proofs: Genesis 3.15. I will put enmity betwixt thee and
the woman, and betwixt thy seed and her seed, he shall break thine head, and
thou shall bruise his heel. God himself speaks this to Satan's face, for his
greater dis-couragement: And the speech contains two things; first, the enmity
that should be betwixt the woman and the Serpent, and betwixt their seeds, that
is, betwixt Satan and mankind; secondly, the issue and event of it; the enmity
in the former part of the verse, I will put enmity, etc. where we see; first,
that this is a mutual enmity, that is, of Satan against us, and of us against
him, he should exercise continual enmity against us, and we must exercise a
continual enmity against him: secondly, it is a deadly enmity, a deadly feude,
as we say, not only against the persons themselves, but against their seed
too, it is a deadly enmity never like to be reconciled, he and his seed,
against us and our seed, and we and our seed, against him and his seed.
Thirdly, this emnity is of Gods own ordinance, I will put it, says God,
therefore never think it strange that Satan is such a deadly enemy against
us, God has so ordained it, neither must we think it much that we are
continually put to this fight against Satan, for it is God that has imposed
this condition upon us. Then the issue follows in the latter part of the
verse, It shall break thine head, and thou shall bruise his heel: Satan
shall but bruise her heel; he may tempt and trouble, and disquiet Gods
children, and persecute them, and take away their goods, and happily their
lives too, but this is nothing, it is but a little nibling at the heel, it is
nothing in respect of our soul: It is but the heel that he can hurt, some
outward part, but he can never touch us in our head, that is, in the hold that
we have in the love of God through Jesus Christ. But on the other side, the
seed of the woman shall break thine head, says God; Satan shall part with
the greatest loss; his head shall be broke, and his power destroyed, his
purposes disappointed, and at last himself utterly vanquished and confounded;
Here is strong comfort for Gods children: Yea, but this is spoken of Christ
himself, he is the seed meant there: I answer, It is spoken of Christ indeed,
but withal understand that in the case of Christ is set forth the case of
every believing soul, as Christ being the head, and we the members, and
therefore that which is done by Christ against Satan, is done for us, on our
behalf, and to our benefit, Matthew. 16.18. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock
will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. In
the 16. verse Peter had made a glorious confession of saving faith, Thou art
that Christ the Son of the living God: In this 18. verse, our Savior quits
him, and says, Thou art Peter, etc. as if he should say, Is it so Peter, that
thou have this faith in thine heart to make this confession of me? Then I say
unto thee, Thou art Peter, and up on this Rock, that is, not upon Peter's
person, nor upon Peter's confession, but upon the matter of his confession,
Christ Jesus the Son of the living GOD, upon this Rock will I build my
Church, that is, all true believers, and that so firmly and surely, that all
the gates (that is, all the powers of hell) shall never prevail against it to
overthrow it. Hell has many gates, the gates of sin, and death, and the
Devil; yet all these gates of hell, and all these powers of darkness shall
never be able to shake off this building from this foundation, this Church from
this Rock, to separate any one true believing soul from the love of God which
is in Christ Jesus our Lord; many other promises there are in the Scripture of
this nature: yea, but these are but promises: If these promises do not
sufficiently confirm our distrustful hearts in the persuasion of this
heavenly truth see it by experience, and let that confirm us.

In Revel. 12.7 to 11. verse, where the holy Ghost sets it down as a thing
already done, there is set down a battle and the success, the battle in
the 7. verse, Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon, and the Dragon
and his Angels fought. Here must needs be a great Battle; when all the world
is divided into two parts, to fight one against another: What is the success?
first, on the Dragons part, he prevailed not, verse 8. he was disappointed of
his purpose, all his labor against Gods children was lost, and spent in vain,
and in the 9. verse, he was cast out of Heaven, and his Angels with him; he
had a shameful overthrow. The success in respect of the believers what was
that? first great joy and triumph in heaven, verse 10. and secondly, a glorious
conquest, verse 11. they overcame him: how? by that blood of that Lamb, etc.
This is the common estate of Gods Church and children, and this every true
believing soul shall surely find in particular in his greatest fight against
sin and Satan, from time to time, to the end of the world.

The Reasons of this point. Reasons.
There are no reasons on our part, why Satan does not prevail against us, for
we are ready to lie down as beasts, and to betray our own souls, and to be
taken of him at his pleasure: no, all our stay and safety is merely through
God in Christ.

The first Reason is this, God by his power restrains Job 1. and 2. Chapters;
when he lets him loose upon Job, it is with restraint still, all that he has
is in thy power, only upon himself put not forth thy hand, Job 1.12. And in
the 2. Chapter and 6. Verse, Behold he is in thine hand, but save his life. Now
the power of God is more mighty to help us, then the power of Satan is to
hurt us, 1 John 4.4. He is greater that is in us, then he that is in the
world: and except the Lord should thus limit and bind the power of Satan, no
man living could ever stand against him: God restraines him and keeps him as a
Lion within bars and grates.

Secondly, he restraines their rage and malice, as Luke 8.33. where he turned
the rage of the Devils, from the man that was possessed with them, unto the
swine: Gods goodness is more able and ready to preserve us, then Satan's
malice is to destroy us.

Zach. 3.1.2. his wisdom ouerreaches all their subtilties, and watches over
us more effectually to save, then they with all their subtilties can do to
cast us away.

Cor. 12.9. His grace and his power is all-sufficient to preserve us.

Genesis 3.15. He shall break Satan's head, Romans 16.20. He shall tread Satan
under our feet shortly, 1 John 3.8. He it is that does loose and undo the
works of the Devil: he foiled the Devil hand to hand in all his temptations,
Math. 4.11. And he it was that rebuked the Devil, and cast out those foul
spirits in his life, as appears in many stories of the Gospel: And at his
death, he it was that destroyed them, Heb. 2.14. He destroyed through death,
him that had the power of death, that is the Devil, says the Apostle; at his
death he spoiled them, and triumphed over all the powers of darkness openly
upon the Cross, Colos. 2.16. therefore Satan must needs be overcome, and can
never prevail. Secondly, Christ is our Captain and Protector, and therefore
we cannot be overcome, but must needs prevail, Luke 22.42. Satan desires to
winnow every one of us, that is, to destroy us; but I have prayed for you
(says our Savior) that your faith fail not. Satan he is a daily Suitor to
God against us, Christ Jesus he supports us, and is a continual Suitor to his
heavenly Father for us; Now, if the Devil shall be heard before Christ Jesus,
then we may perish: But if Christ Jesus shall be heard in heaven before the
Devil; then it is utterly impossible that ever the evil Angels should
prevail against us.

The uses of this point are these. The first is for reproof: before the
Kingdom of light: Oh blasphemous, impious, and odious conceit!

separate thee from the love of God in Christ Jesus, but thou art still
preserved; why then do thou distrust that he shall prevail hereafter? God
is as strong to uphold thee as ever he was; thy self, if thou be a true
believer, do daily grow in grace and so art more able to stand fast every
day then other, though happily thou feel it not; and the devil is weaker
and more hartlesse every day then other against thee, as having labored in
vain all this while, why therefore art thou thus discouraged? believe not
Satan, check thy self for this unbelieving heart, and gather better spirits,
and put on more comfortable resolutions, cast thy soul and state confidently
on the Lord in faith in Christ, and in obedience to his will, assure thy self,
that thou being a believing soul, God has set his mark upon thee, and
therefore rest thou upon him, and all these evil Angels shall never be able
to pluck thee out of the protection of his love in Christ.

The second use is for comfort, here is matter of Did not Christ even with one
word cast out a Legion of Devils at once out of one man? Mark 5.8. then never
fear them for their multitude; that one only God is infinitely more than
innumerable Diuils; Yea, but secondly, they are very strong: It is true, Satan
is the strong man indeed, but Christ is a stronger man, Luke 11.22. and
overcomes him; The Devil is a roaring Lion; it is true, yea, but Christ is a
Lion too, and a ruling and reigning Lion, he is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah,
the royal Tribe, he rules all, and he makes that other Lion the Devil when he
comes in presence to cry out and roar for fear and anger, Luke 4.33.34. an
unclean Devil cried out with a loud voice, saying, Oh! what have we to do
with thee? etc. therefore never fear them for their strength; Yea, but
thirdly, they are very malicious against us, what then? God is very loving and
gracious to us: If the King favor any man, and carry a special love toward
him, what though the subject hate and malign him, the Kings favor will keep
him far enough out of the reach of their malice; and is not the love and
favor of God to his children a far greater shelter from the Devils malice?
Fourthly, yea, but they are very subtle; what though they be? There is no
subtilty can stand against God: Christ is our wisdom 1 Cor. 1.30. and
therefore what need we fear their subtilty? Yea, but they are very active and
nimble, they can speedily pass from one place to another; what then? God is
always present in all places alike; whersoeuer thou art, God is there present
and ready to keep thee, before ever the Devil can come at thee to annoy thee:
Yea, but sixthly, they are very busy and watchful they sleep not: It is true,
behold also, He that keeps Israel never slumbreth nor sleeps. The Devil
always watches over us for evil, and not for good; but our heavenly Father
always watches over us for good, and not for evil, therefore fear them not:
Yea, but seauenthly, they are very well provided and appointed against us; It
is true, but I hope heaven is better appointed and furnished then hell: What is
all their provision, to the provision of the Lord of hosts, that has all
Creatures of heaven and earth at his full command? Yea, but eighthly, they have
very much experience: Yea, but what is their experience which they have gotten
in some five or six thousand years, to match with the knowledge and wisdom
of God, which has been from all eternity? The Devil knows us, and our
fashions and dispositions, but as a spy, and as a captious censurer: but God
knows us as our maker and Ruler, and gracious disposer of all our ways; Why
therefore should we fear Satan for his long experience? Yea, but lastly, they
are very dangerous: It is true, where Satan rules he is so, but God will
pluck his children out of their paws and clutches, as a prey to himself, and
make them dwell safely under the shadow of his wings; why then should we be
discomforted at the dangerousnesse of these enemies? Therefore fear none of
these advantages, which the evil spirits have against us, for we see we have
particular comforts in Scripture against them all. Wherefore, all you that are
true believers, comfort your selves in God, your estate is good, and your
salvation sure through Gods mercy, even against all the devils in hell; And
therefore let us be persuaded resolutely of it, and comforted thoroughly by it,
and bless God for ever for it, through Jesus Christ.

Secondly. This serves also to comfort us against the temptations of Satan,
which are his engines and instruments, surely we are in safety against these
also; for if the evil spirits themselves cannot pluck us from God, but that
we are in safety against them, then comfort your selves, ye are in safety also
against all their engines too; all their temptations shall not do it; I do
not say, that Gods children shall not be tempted at all; for they must never
look to be free from temptation while they are on the earth, if they be Gods
children; but I say, here is a warrant for us that we shall never be utterly
overcome by Satan's temptations. Tell me, thou true-beleeuing soul, that have
true faith, though it be but little, art thou persuaded that God loves thee in
Christ? Thou will say yes, I am; why, then tell me further, if God do love
thee, can thou ever think that God will ever suffer thee to be cast away by
a scuruy temptation of a cursed devil? I ask it thee again; if God do love
thee, can thou ever think that he will suffer thee to be cast away by any
scuruy temptation of a cursed devil? No, he cannot, nor he will not; it is as
impossible, as for heaven to be swallowed up of hell; God knows how to deliver
his (says the Apostle,) either God will prevent the temptation, that we shall
not be tempted at all; or if we be, God will quallifie the temptation, that it
shall not be too strong against us; or else he will give us strength against
the strongest temptation, that it shall not be too hard for us; or if we be
ouer-matched with the temptation for a while, yet God will recover us by his
spirit, and make us to take better hold of him for the time to come, and so the
issue shall be good: All this God has past his word for, 1 Cor. 10.13. God is
faithful, which will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able, but
will even give an issue with the temptation, etc. God he pawnes his
faithfulness for the confirmation of it, therefore let us embrace this
heavenly truth, and build surely upon it, and take sound comfort in it, and
then we shall most surely be safe against all Satan's temptations.

Thirdly, it is comfort to us against our sins, they are the Devils works,
and these shall not separate us from GOD wholly: For some man might say, Paul
thou tellest us all this while that the evil Angels shall not separate us from
God; But what comfort is this? Our sins they do separate us from God, Isay
59.2. What say thou to them? But the Apostle knew what he said, for if we be
safe from the evil Angels themselves, then surely we are safe from their
works; if any thing can separate us from God, then sin can; and if sin
can, then the evil Angels can: But the evil Angels cannot, and therefore sin
which is their work cannot: So far as sin preuailes, so far it may
separate us; if it prevail for a time, then it separates us for a time from
God, that is, in our sense and feeling, but such breaches are made up by daily
repentance, faith, and Christ's intercession; but if it prevail for ever, then
it will separate us for ever from God, but they cannot prevail over the
faithful for ever: But when the Apostle tells us the evil Angels shall never
separate us from God; it is as much, as if he had said, that God will not
suffer us to be wholly overcome of sin, 1 John 3.9. nor to fall into those
sins that may separate us wholly from him, for then the evil Angels may
separate, if sin may, which is their work, Here is the love of God in
Christ; first, Gods love, and love couers a multitude of sins, it is so with
men, much more with God; and secondly, Christ Jesus he takes away our sins,
and has pulled down the partition wall of our sins, that they cannot
separate us from God: So we see that neither the evil Angels themselves, nor
their temptations, nor sin can ever separate us from God. These comforts God
affoords us in his word for his children, and therefore let us take hold of
them: And now that we are to come to the Sacrament, what use are we to make of
it? The Sacrament is a seal of Gods word; then make this use of it, to seal
up that word to our souls that we have now heard: the Sacrament seals and
swears to us that all is true that God says in his Word; the Sacrament is a
pledge and token that God gives us of the truth of his Word: Have thou heard
then that all the evil Angels with all their power and malice, shall never be
able to separate thee from the love of GOD in JESUS CHRIST? then now receive
the Sacrament as a seal thereof, that as verily as thou receiuest the Bread
and Wine, so truly do thou receive the Body and Blood of Christ, that is the
benefit and the merits thereof, the love and mercy of God in Christ, and
therefore take Christ here, and take all things with him; He that gives thee
Christ in the Sacrament, gives thee all things with him, grace, mercy, peace,
comfort, forgiveness of sins, and what not? Therefore let us now make use of
the Sacrament to seal up the truth of Gods word to us, that we have now heard,
and let us entreat God to stir up our hearts to a holy use of it, that so it
may assure us of the certainety of our salvation, and let us not lissen to
Satan, but let us hearken to God in his word and Sacrament, that so we may
stand fast, and having fought a good fight, and finished our course, we may
enjoy the Crown of life, which God will give us at that day.

The last Use is for Instruction, teaching us to use separate us from the love
of God in Christ Jesus; yet such means must of necessity be used whereby this
end may be attained unto: and take this for a warning, that they that are not
careful to use the means in some true measure, may justly suspect that as yet
they have not any known interest in this privilege: And therefore here we
must learn, first, what we are to avoid; secondly, what we are to do, that
so we may enjoy this safety: and thirdly, the means to help us in both these.
First, what we are to avoid; and first, do not thou dare-them nor provoke
them; It is not good to provoke Waspes and Hornets, but it is much worse to
provoke Devils. Some rude people will dare the Devil, and challenge, and bid
the wicked fiend to come if he dare, aqd to do his worst, etc. Silly wretches,
the Devil laughes at them, to see how foole-hardy they are against him, that
has them in his clutches already: Nay beloved these enemies are eager enough
against us of themselves, they need no provocation; as long as he is the
challenger of us, and gives the onset on us, we have our warrant to fight
against him, and a promise of protection and deliverance: But when we are the
challengers, and give the onset upon him, if ever we be foiled, as usually it
so falls out, it was our own seeking, and we have our mends in our own hands.
Secondly, rail not at him, nor revile him; though he come against thee as
Goliath, railing against the living God, cursing and blaspheming, yet do thou
go against him as David, peaceably, and holily, in the name of the Lord of
hosts, and then be sure of victory; Learn of the Archangel, Jude 9. Not to
rail against the Devil, but say as he said, the Lord rebuke thee; and if it
be spoken in faith, it is the soarest sneape, that thou can give him: not I
defy thee, avaunt cursed fiend, and such like; these are but bug-beares: but
this, the Lord rebuke thee, being uttered by faith on earth, and answered by
audience in heaven, quails him soundly. Thirdly, reason not with him, if once
he can bring thee to parlee with him, as he did Eve, then he has half caught
thee already; he is a cunning Sophister, he will put many tricks and fallasies
upon thee: And he is a strong reasoner; no man is able to answer him in
reason, though he should use no deceit. Fourthly, believe him not, whatsoever
he says, will thou believe a common liar? he is the common father of lies, and
of liars too; though he speak truth, believe him not in the speaking of it,
for he has some sinister intent in it, and so he lies even in speaking truth.
This is the first Inlet of Satan into the heart, to believe his suggestions,
and therefore believe nothing that comes from him, hold him not parlee, and he
shall never hurt thee. Lastly, give no way to him, no, not in the least
passage; he is a subtle serpent, if he get in but the head, but the fastening
of an evil motion upon thee, he will soon wind in the whole body.

Secondly, here we must learn what is to be done that we may be in safety
against these evil spirits:

First, we must stand fast.

Secondly, we must resist; but you will say, what cares he for any resistance?
yes, he does, James 4.7. Resist the Devil, and he will fly from you. 1 Pet.
5.8.9. Your adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion walks about seeking whom
he may devour.

Thirdly, here we must learn the means, both how to avoid, and how to do
these things: The first is Resolution. The second is Strength. The third is
weapons; specially Sword and Buckler, the Word and Faith. The fourth is Skill.
The fifth courage. The sixth Watchfulness. The seventh Prayer. The eight
Patience. The ninth Perseverance.


FINIS.

