Prerogative of Parlaments in ENGLAND: Proved in a Dialogue ( pro and contra)
between a Counselor of State and a Justice of Peace.

Written by the worthy (much lacked and lamented) Sir W.R.Knight. deceased.

Dedicated to the Kings Majesty, and to the House of Parliament now assembled.

Preserved to be now happily (in these distracted Times) Published, and Printed
at Hamburgh. 1628.

To the KING.
Most gracious Sovereign:
THose that are suppressed and helpelesse are commonly silent, wishing that the
common ill in all sort might be with their particular misfortunes: which
disposition, as it is uncharitable in all men, so would it be in me more
dogge-like then man-like, to bite the stone that struck me: (to wit) the
borrowed authority of my Soueragne misinformed, seeing their arms and hands
that flang it, are most of them already rotten. For I must confess it ever,
that they are debts, and not discontentments, that your Majesty has laid upon
me; the debts and obligation of a friendlesse adversity, far more payable in
all Kinds, then those of the prosperous: All which, nor the least of them,
though I cannot discharge, I may yet endeavor it.

And notwithstanding my restraint has retrenched all ways, as well the ways
of labor and will, as of all other employments, yet has is left with me my
cogitations, then which I have nothing else to offer on the Altar of my Love.

Of those (most gracious Sovereign) I have used some part in the following
dispute, between a Counselor of Estate, and a Justice of Peace, the one
dissuading, the other persuading the calling of a Parliament. In all which,
since the Norman Conquest (at the least so many as Histories have gathered) I
have in some things in the following Dialogue presented your Majesty with the
contentions and successes.

Some things there are, and those of the greatest, which because they ought
first to be resolved on, I thought fit to range them in the front of the rest,
to the end your Majesty may be pleased to examine your own great and Princely
heart of their acceptance, or refusal.

The first is, that supposition, that your Majesty's Subjects give nothing but
with adiunction of their own interests, interlacing in one and the same act
your Majesty's relief, and their own liberties; not that your Majesty's
piety was ever suspected, but because the best Princes are ever the least
jealous, your Majesty judging others by your self, who have abused your
Majesty's trust. The feared continuance of the like abuse may persuade the
provision. But this caution, how ever it seems at first sight, your Majesty
shall perceive by many examples following but frivolous. The bonds of Subjects
to their Kings should always be wrought out of Iron, the bonds of Kings unto
Subjects but with Cobwebs.

This it is (most renowned Sovereign) that this traffic of assurances has
been often urged, of which, if the Conditions had been easy, our Kings have
as easily kept them; if hard and prejudicial, either to their honors or
estates, the Creditours have been paid their debts with their own presumption.

For all binding of a King by Law upon the advantage of his necessity, makes
the breach it self lawful in a King. His Charters and all other instruments
being no other then the suruiuing witnesses of unconstrained will: Princeps non
subijcitur nisi sua voluntate libera, mero moto and certa Scientia: Necessary
words in all the grants of a King witnessing that the same grants were given
freely and knowingly.

The second resolution will rest in your Majesty leaving the new impositions,
all Monopolies, and other grieuances of the people to the consideration of the
House; Provided, that your Majesty's revenue be not abated, which if your
Majesty shall refuse, it is thought that the disputes will last long, and the
issues will be doubtful: And on the contrary, if your Majesty vouchsafe it, it
may perchance be styled a yielding, which seems by the sound to brave the
Regalty.

But (most excellent Prince) what other is it to the ears of the wise, but as
the sound of a trumpet, having blasted forth a false Alarm, becomes but common
air? Shall the head yield to the feet? certainly it ought, when they are
grieved; for wisdom will rather regard the commodity, then object the
disgrace, seeing if the feet lie in fetters, the head cannot be freed, and
where the feet feel but their own pains, the head does not only suffer by
participation, but withal by consideration of the evil.

Certainly, the point of honor well weighed has nothing in it to even the
balance, for by your Majesty's favor, your Majesty does not yield either to
any person, or to any power, but to a dispute only, in which the Proposition
and Minor prove nothing without a conclusion, which no other person or power
can make, but a Majesty: yea, this in Henry the third his time was called a
wisdom incomparable. For, the King raised again, recouers his authority:
For, being in that extremity as he was driven with the Queen and his
Children, Cum Abbatibus and Prioribus saris homilibus hospitia quaerere and
prandia: For the rest, may it please your Majesty to consider that there can
nothing befall your Majesty in matters of affairs more unfortunately then the
summons of a Parliament, with ill success: A dishonor so perswasiue and
aduenturous as it will not only find arguments; but it will take the leading
of all enemies that shall offer themselves against your Majesty's estate.

Le labourin de la paurete ne saict poinct de breuct: of which dangerous
disease in Princes, the remedy does chiefly consist in the love of the people,
which how it may be had and held, no man knows better then your Majesty; how
to loose it, all men know, and know that it is lost by nothing more then by the
defense of others in wrong doing. The only motives of mischances that ever
came to Kings of this Land since the Conquest.

It is only love (most renowned Sovereign) must prepare the way for your
Majesty's following desires. It is love which obeyes, which suffers, which
gives, which sticks at nothing: which Love, as well of your Majesty's people,
as the love of God to your Majesty, that it may always hold shall be the
continual prayers of your Majesty's most humble vassal,

Walter Ralegh.

A DIALOGVE BETWEEN A COVNSELLOVR OF STATE, AND A JUSTICE OF PEACE.
COVNSELLOVR. NOW Sir, what think you of M S* John's trial in Star Chamber? I
know that the brute ran that he was hardly dealt withal, because he was
imprisoned in the Tower, seeing his disswasion from granting a Benevolence to
the King was warranted by the Law.


JUSTICE. Surely Sir it was made manifest at the hearing, that M.S. John was
rather in love with his own letter; he confessed he had seen your Lordships
letter before he wrote his to the Mayor of Marleborough, and in your Lordships
letter there was not a word whereto the Statutes by Mt St John alleged, had
reference; for those Statutes did condemn the gathering of money from the
Subject, under title of a free gift* whereas a fifth, a sixth, a tenth, etc. was
set down and required. But my good Lord, though diverse Shires have given to
his Majesty, some more, some less, what is this to the Kings debt?


COVNS. We know it well enough, but we have many other projects.


JUST. It is true my good Lord: but your Lordship will find, that when by these
you have drawn many petty sums from the subjects, and those sometimes spent as
fast as they are gathered, his Majesty being nothing enabled thereby, when you
shall be forced to demand your great aid, the country will excuse it self in
regard of their former payments.


COVNS. What mean you by the great aid?


JUST. I mean the aid of Parliament.


COVNS. By Parliament, I would feign know the man that durst persuade the King
unto it, for if it should succeed ill, in what case were he?


JUST. You say well for your self my Lord: and perchance you that are lovers
of your selves (under pardon) do follow the advice of the late Duke of Alva,
who was ever opposite to all resolutions in business of importance; for if the
things enterprized succeeded well, the advice never came in question: If ill,
(whereto great undertakings are commonly subject) he then made his advantage by
remembering his country council: But my good Lord, these reserved Politicians
are not the best servants, for he that is bound to adventure his life for his
Master, is also bound to adventure his advice, Keep not back council (says
Ecclesiasticus) when it may do good.


COVNS. But Sir, I speak it not in other respect then I think it dangerous for
the King to assemble the three estates, for thereby have our former kings
always lost somewhat of their prerogatives. And because that you shall not
think that I speak it at random, I will begin with elder times, wherein the
first contention began betwixt the Kings of this land, and their subjects in
Parliament.


JUST. Your Lordship shall do me a singular favor.


COVNS. You know that the Kings of England had no formal Parliament till about
the 18th year of Henry the first, for in his 17 year, for the marriage of his
daughter, the King raised a tax upon every hide of land by the advice of his
privy council alone. But you may remember how the subjects soon after the
establishment of this Parliament, began to stand upon terms with the King,
and drew from him by strong hand and the sword the great Charter.


JUST. Your Lordship says well, they drew from the King the great Charter by
the sword, and hereof the Parliament cannot be accused, but the Lords.


COVNS. You say well, but it was after the establishment of the Parliament, and
by color of it, that they had so great daring, for before that time they could
not endure to hear of S Edwards laws, but resisted the confirmation in all
they could, although by those laws the Subjects of this Island were no less
free then any of all Europe.


JUST. My good Lord, the reason is manifest; for while the Normans and other of
the French that followed the Conqueror, made spoil of the English, they would
not endure that any thing but the will of the Conqueror should stand for Law:
but after a descent or two when themselves were become English, and found
themselves beaten with their own rods, they then began to savor the difference
between subjection and slavery, and insist upon the law, Meum and Tuum: and to
be able to say unto themselves, hoc fac and vives: yea that the conquering
English in Ireland did the like, your Lordship knows it better than I.


COVNS. I think you guess aright: And to the end the subject may know that
being a faithful servant to his Prince he might enjoy his own life, and paying
to his Prince what belongs to a Sovereign, the remainder was his own to
dispose. Henry the first to content his Vassals, gave them the great Charter,
and the Charter of Forests.


JUST. What reason then had K. John to deny the co^firmatio^?


COVNS. He did not, but he on the contrary confirmed both the Charters with
additions, and required the Pope whom he had the^ made his superior to
strengthen him with a golden bull.


JUST. But your honor knows, that it was not long after, that he repented
himself.


COVNS. It is true, and he had reason so to do, for the Barons refused to
follow him into France, as they ought to have done, and to say true, this great
Charter upon which you insist so much, was not originally granted Regally and
freely: for Henry the first did usurp the kingdom, and therefore the better
to assure himself against Robert his eldest brother, he flattered his
Nobility and people with those Charters. Yea King John that confirmed them had
the like respect: for Arthur Duke of Britain, was the undoubted heir of the
crown, upon whom John usurped. And so to conclude, these Charters had their
original from Kings de facto but not de iure.


JUST. But King John confirmed the Charter after the death of his Nephew
Arthur, when he was then Rex de iure also.


COVNS. It is true, for he durst do no other, standing accursed, whereby few
or none obeyed him, for his Nobility refused to follow him into Scotland: and
he had so grieved the people by pulling down all the Park pales before
harvest, to the end his dear might spoil the Corn; And by seizing the
temporalities of so many Bishoprics into his hands, and chiefly for
practizing the death of the Duke of Britain his Nephew, as also having lost
Normandy to the French, so as the hearts of all men were turned from him.


JUST. Nay by your favor my Lord. King John restored K. Edwards Laws after
his absolution, and wrote his letters in the 15^ of his reign to all Sheriffs
countermaunding all former oppressions, yea this he did notwithstanding the
Lords refused to follow him into France.


COVNS. Pardon me, he did not restore King Edwards Laws then, nor yet
confirmed the Charters, but he promised upon his absolution to do both: but
after his return out of France, in his 16th year he denied it, because
without such a promise he had not obtained restitution, his promise being
constrained, and not voluntary.


JUST. But what think you? was he not bound in honor to perform it?


COVNS. Certainly no, for it was determined the case of King Francis the first
of France, that all promises by him made, whilst he was in the hands of Charles
the fifth his enemy, were void, by reason the Judge of honor, which tells us
he durst do no other.


JUST. But King John was not in prison.


COVNS. Yet for all that, restraint is imprisonment, yea, fear it self is
imprisonment, and the King was subject to both: I know there is nothing more
kingly in a King than the performance of his word; but yet of a word freely and
voluntarily given. Neither was the Charter of Henry the first so published,
that all men might plead it for their advantage: but a Charter was left ( in
deposito) in the hands of the Archbishop of Canterbury for the time, and so to
his successors. Stephen Langthon, who was ever a Traitor to the King, produced
this Charter, and showed it to the Barons, thereby encouraging them to make
war against the King. Neither was it the old Charter simply the Barons
sought to have confirmed, but they presented unto the King other articles and
orders, tending to the alteration of the whole commonwealth, which when the
King refused to sign, the Barons presently put themselves into the field, and
in rebellious and outrageous fashion sent the King word except he confirmed
them, they would not desist from making war against him till he had satisfied
them therein. And in conclusion, the king being betrayed of all his Nobility,
in effect was forced to grant the Charter of Magna Charta, and Charta de
Forestis, at such time as he was environed with an Army in the meadows of
Staynes, which Charters being procured by force, Pope Innocent afterward
disavowed, and threatened to curse the Barons if they submitted not themselves
as they ought to their Sovereign Lord, which when the Lords refused to obey,
the King entertained an army of strangers for his own defense, wherewith having
mastered and beaten the Barons, they called in Jews of France (a most
unnatural resolution) to be their King. Neither was Magna charta a law in the
19th of Henry the 2^, but simply a Charter which he confirmed in the 21^ of
his reign, and made it a law in the 25th, according to Littletons opinion.
Thus much for the beginning of the great Charter, which had first an obscure
birth from usurpation, and was secondly fostered and showed to the world by
rebellion.


JUST. I cannot deny but that all your Lordship has said is true; but seeing
the Charters were afterward so many times confirmed by Parliament and made
laws, and that there is nothing in them unequal or prejudicial to the King:
does not your Honor think it reason they should be observed?


COVNS. Yes, and observed they are in all that the state of a King can permit,
for no man is destroyed but by the laws of the land, no man disseized of his
inheritance but by the laws of the land, imprisoned they are by the
prerogative where^ the King has cause to suspect their loyalty: for were it
otherwise, the King should never come to the knowledge of any conspiracy or
treason against his Person or state, and being imprisoned, yet does not any man
suffer death but by the law of the land.


JUST. But may it please your Lordship, were not Cornewallis, Sharp, and
Hoskins, imprisoned, being no suspicion of treason there?


COVNS. They were, but it cost them nothing.


JUST. And what got the King by it? for in the conclusion (besides the murmr
of the people) Cornewallis, Sharp, and Hoskins having greatly ouershot
themselves, and repented them, a fine of 5 or 600l was laid on his Majesty for
their offenses, for so much their diet cost his Majesty.


COVNS. I know who gave the advice, sure I am that it was none of mine: But
thus I say, if you consult your memory, you shall find that those kings which
did in their own times confirm the Magna Charta, did not only imprison, but
they caused of their Nobility and others to be slain without hearing or
trial.


JUST. My good Lord, if you will give me leave to speak freely, I say, that
they are not well advised that persuade the King not to admit the Magna Charta
with the former reseruations. For as the King can never loose a farthing by it,
as I shall prove anon: So except England were as Naples is, and kept by
Garrisons of another Nation, it is impossible for a King of England to greaten
and enrich himself by any way so assuredly, as by the love of his people: For
by one rebellion the King has more loss then by a hundred years observance
of Magna Charta. For therein have our Kings been forced to compound with
Roagues and Rebels, and to pardon them, yea the state of the King, the
Monarchy, the Nobility have been endangered by them.


COVNS. Well Sir, let that pass, why should not our kings raise money as the
kings of France do by their letters and Edicts only? for since the time of
Jews the 11th, of whom it is said, that he freed the French Kings of their
wardship, the French Kings have seldom assembled the States for any
contribution.


JUST. I will tell you why; the strength of England does consist of the people
and Yeomanry, the Pesants of France have no courage nor arms: In France every
Village and Borough has a castle, which the French call Chastean Villain,
every good city has a good Cittadell, the king has the Regiments of his
guards and his men at arms always in pay; yea the Nobility of France in whom
the strength of France consists, do always assist their King in those
leavies, because them selves being free, they make the same leavies upon their
tennants. But my Lord, if you mark it, France was never free in effect from
civil wars, and lately it was endangered either to be conquered by the
Spaniard, or to be cantonized by the rebellious French themselves, since that
freedom of Wardship. But my good Lord, to leave this digression, that wherein
I would willingly satisfy your Lordship, is, that the kings of England have
never received loss by Parliament, or prejudice.


COVNS. No Sir, you shall find that the subjects in Parliament have decreed
great things to the disadvantage and dishonor of our kings in former times.


JUST. My good Lord, to avoid confusion, I will make a short repetition of
them all, and then your Lordship may object where you see cause; And I doubt
not but to give your Lordship satisfaction. In the sixth year of Henry the 3rd
there was no dispute, the house gave the King two shillings of every plough
land within England, and in the end of the same year he had escuage paid him
(to wit) for every knights fee two marks in silver. In the fifth year of that
King, the Lords demanded the confirmation of the Great Charter which the kings
Council for that time present excused, alleging that those privileges, were
extorted by force during the Kings Minority, and yet the King was pleased to
send forth his writ to the Sheriffs of every county, requiring them to
certify what those liberties were, and how used, and in exchange of the
Lords demand, because they pressed him so violently, the king required all the
castles and places which the Lords held of his, and had held in the time of his
Father, with those Manors and Lordships which they had heretofore wrested
from the Crown, which at that time (the King being provided of forces) they
durst not deny. In the 14th year he had the 15th penny of all goods given him
upon condition to confirm the great Charter: For by reason of the wars in
France, and the loss of Rochell, he was then enforced to consent to the
Lords in all they demanded. In the 10^^ of his reign he fined the city of
London at 50000 marks, because they had received Jews of France. In the 11th
year in the Parliament at Oxford, he revoked the great charter being granted
when he was under age, and governed by the Earl of Pembroke, and the Bishop
of Winchester. In this 11th year the Earls of Cornevvall and Chester,
Marshall, Edward Earl of Pembroke, Gilbert Earl of Gloucester, Warren,
Hereford, Ferrars, and Warwick, and others rebelled against the King, and
constrained him to yield unto them in what they demanded for their particular
interest, which rebellion being appeased, he sailed into France, and in his
15th year he had a 15th of the temporality, and a disme and a half of the
Spirituality, and vvithall escuage of every Knights fee.


COVNS. But what say you to the Parliament of Westminster in the 16th of the
king, where notwithstanding the wars of France and his great charge in
repulsing the Welsh rebels, he was flatly denied the Subsedie demanded.


JUST. I confess, my Lord, that the house excused themselves by reason of
their poverty, and the Lords taking of Arms; in the next year it was manifest
that the house was practiced against the king: And was it not so, my good Lord
think you in our two last Parliaments, for in the first even those whom his
Majesty trusted most, betrayed him in the union, and in the second there were
other of the great ones ran counter. But your Lordship spoke of dangers of
Parliaments, in this, my Lord, there was a denial, but there was no danger at
all: But to return where I left, what got the Lords by practizing the house at
that time? I say that those that brake this staff upon the K. were ouerturned
with the counterbuffe, for he resumed all those lands which he had given in
his minority, he called all his exacting officers to account, he found them
all faulty, he examined the corruption of other magistrates, and from all
these he drew sufficient money to satisfy his present necessity, whereby he
not only spared his people, but highly contented them with an act of so great
Justice: Yea Hubert Earl of Kent, the chief justice whom he had most
trusted, and most advanced, was found as false to the King, as any one of the
rest. And for conclusion in the end of that year at the assembly of the
States at Lambeth, the King had the fortith part of every man's goods given him
freely toward his debts, for the people, who the same year had refused to
give the King any thing, when they saw he had squeased those spunges of the
common wealth, they willingly yielded to give him satisfaction.


COVNS. But I pray you, what became of this Hubert, who^ the King had favored
above all men, betraying his Majesty as he did.


JUST. There were many that persuaded the King to put him to death, but he
could not be drawn to consent, but the King seized upon his estate which was
great; yet in the end he left him a sufficient portion, and gave him his life
because he had done great service in former times: For his Majesty, though
he took advantage of his vice, yet he forgot not to have consideration of
his virtue. And upon this occasion it was that the King, betrayed by those whom
he most trusted, entertained strangers, and gave them their offices and the
charge of his castles and strong places in England.


COVNS. But the drawing in of those strangers was the cause that Marshall Earl
of Pembroke moved war against the King.


JUST. It is true, my good Lord, but he was soon after slain in Ireland, and
his whole masculine race, ten years extinguished, though there were five sons
of them, and Marshall being dead, who was the mouer and ringleader of that
war, the King pardoned the rest of the Lords that had assisted Marshall.


COVNS. What reason had the King so to do?


JUST. Because he was persuaded, that they loved his person, and only hated
those corrupt Counselours, that then bare the greatest sway under him, as also
because they were the best men of war he had, whom if he destroyed, having
war with the French, he had wanted Commanders to have served him.


COVNS. But what reason had the Lords to take arms?


JUST. Because the King entertained the Poictoui^s, were not they the Kings
vassals also? Should the Spaniards rebel, because the Spanish King trusts to
the Neopolitans, Portagues, Millanoies, and other nations his vassals, seeing
those that are governed by the Vice-royes and deputies, are in policy to be
well entertained and to be employed, who would otherwise devise how to free
themselves; whereas, being trusted and employed by their Prince, they
entertain themselves with the hopes that other the Kings vassals do. if the
King had called in the Spaniards, or other Nations, not his Subjects, the
Nobility of England had had reason of grief. But what people did ever serve
the King of England more faithfully then the Gascoynes did even to the last of
the conquest of that Duchy.


JUST. Your Lordship says well, and I am of that opinion that if it had pleased
the Queen of Eng. to have drawn some of the chief of the Irish Nobility into
Eng. and by exchange to have made them good freeholders in Eng., she had saved
above 2. millions of pounds which were consumed in times of those rebellions.
For what held the great Gascoigne firm to the Crown of England (of whom the
Duke of Espernon married the inheritrix) but his Earldome of Kendall in
England, whereof the Duke of Espernon (in right of his wife) bears the title
to this day. And to the same end I take it, has James our Sovereign Lord
given lands to diverse of the Nobility of Scotland. And if I were worthy to
advise your Lordship, I should think that your Lordship should do the King
great service to put him in mind to prohibit all the Scottish nation to
alienate and sell away their inheritance here; for they selling, they not only
give cause to the English to complain that the treasure of England is
transported into Scotland, but his Majesty is thereby also frustrated of making
both Nations one, and of assuring the service and obedience of the Scots in
future.


COVNS. You say well, for though those of Scotland that are advanced and
enriched by the Kings Majesty's will, no doubt serve him faithfully, yet how
their heirs and successors, having no inheritance to loose in England may be
seduced is uncertain. But let us go on with our Parliament. And what say you
to the denial in the 26^ year of his reign, even when the King was invited
to come into France by the Earl of March, who had married his mother, and who
promised to assist the King in the conquest of many places lost.


JUST. It is true, my good Lord, that a subsidy was then denied, and the
reasons are delivered in Enlish histories, and indeed the King not long before
had spent much treasure in ayding the Duke of Britain to no purpose, for he
drew over the King but to draw on good conditions for himself, as the Earl
of March his father in law now did: As the English Barons did invite Jews of
France not long before, as in elder times all the kings and states had done,
and in late years the Leaguers of France entertained the Spaniards, and the
French Protestants and Netherlands, Queen Elizabeth, not with any purpose to
greaten those that aid them, but to purchase to themselves an advantageous
peace. But what say the histories to this denial? they say with a world of
payments there mentioned, that the King had drawn the Nobility dry. And
besides, that whereas not long before great sums of money were given, and the
same appointed to be kept in four castles, and not to be expended but by the
advice of the Peers; it was believed that the same treasure was yet unspent.


COVNS. Good Sir you have said enough, judge you whether it were not a
dishonor to the King to be so tied, as not to expend his treasure, but by
other men's advice as it were by their license.


JUST. Surely my Lord, the King was well advised to take the money upon any
condition, and they were fools that propounded the restraint, for it does not
appear that the King took any great heed to those overseers. Kings are bound
by their piety and by no other obligation. In Queen Mary's time, when it was
thought that she was with child, it was propounded in Parliament, that the
rule of the Realm should be given to king Philip during the minority of the
hoped Prince or Princess, and the king offered his assurance in great sums
of money to relinquish the government at such time as the Prince or Princess
should be of age: At which motion when all else were silent in the house, Lord
Dueres (who was none of the wisest) asked who shall sue the kings bonds,
which ended the dispute, for what bond is between a king and his vassals,
then the bond of the kings faith) But my good Lord the king notwithstanding
the denial at that time was with gifts from particular parsons, and otherwise
supplied for proceeding of his journey for that time into France, he took with
him 30 caskes filled with silver and coin which was a great treasure in those
days. And lastly notwithstanding the first denial in the Kings absence he
had Escuage granted him (to wit) 20s of every Knights Fee.


COVNS: What say you then to the 28^ year of that King in which when the King
demanded relief, the states would not consent except the same former order
had bin taken for the appointing of 4 overseers for the treasure. As also that
the Lord chief Justice and the Lord Chancellor should be chose^ by the states
with some Barons of the exchequor and other officers.


IVS: My good Lord admit the King had yielded their demands, then whatsoever
had been ordained by those magistrates to the dislike of the Common wealth,
the people had been without remedy, whereas while the King made them they,
had their appeal and other remedies. But those demands vanished and in the
end the King had escuage given him without any of their conditions. It is an
excellent virtue in a King to have patience and to give way to the fury of men's
passions. The whale when he is stricken by the fisherman, grows into that fury,
that he cannot be resisted, but will overthrowe all the ships and barks that
come in to his way, but when he has tumbled a while, he is drawn to the
shore with a twind thread.


COVNS: What say you then to the Parliament in the 29th of that King.


JUST: I say that the commons being unable to pay, the king relieues himself
upon the richer sort, and so it likewise happened in the 33 of that king, in
which he was relieved chiefly by the City of London. But my good Lord in the
Parliament in London in the 38 year, he had given him the tenth of all the
revenues of the Church for three years, and 3 marks of every knights Fee
throughout the kingdom upon his promise and oath upon the obscruing of magna
Charta but in the end of the same year, the king being the^ in France, he was
denied the aids which he required. What is this to the danger of a Parliament?
especially at this time they had reason to refuse, they had given so great a
some in the beginning of the same year. And again because it was known that
the King had but pretended war with the king of Castile with whom he had
secretly contracted an alliance and concluded a marriage betwixt his son
Edward and the Lady Elenor. These false fires do but freight Children and it
commonly falls out that when the cause given is known to be false, the
necessity pretended is thought to be fained, Royal dealing has evermore
Royal success: and as the King was denied in the eight and thirtyeth year,
so was he denied in the nine and thirtieth year, because the Nobility and the
people saw, that the King was abused by the Pope it plainly who as well in
despite to Manfred bastard son to the Emperor Frederick the second, as to
cozen the King and to wast him, would needs bestow on the King the kingdom
of Sicilie, to recover which, the King sent all the treasure he could borrow or
scrape to the Pope, and withal gave him letters of credence, for to take up
what he could in Italy, the King binding himself for the payment. Now my good
Lord the wisdom of Princes is seen in nothing more then in their enterprises.
So how unpleasing it was to the State of England to consume the treasure of the
land, and in the conquest of Sicily so far of, and otherwise for that the
English had lost Normandy under their noses and so many goodly parts of France
of their own proper inheritances: the reason of the denial is as well to be
considered as the denial.


CONS. Was not the King also denied a subsidy in the forty first of his
reign?


JUST. No my Lord, for although the King required money as before for the
impossible conquest of Sicily, yet the house offered to give 52000 marks,
which whether he refused or accepted is uncertain, and whilst the King
dreamed of Sicily, the Welsh invaded and spoiled the borders of England, for in
the Parliament of London, when the King urged the house for the prosecuting the
conquest of Sicily, the Lords utterly disliking the attempt, urged the
prosecuting of the Welshmen: which Parliament being proroged did again assemble
at Oxford, and was called the mad Parlame^t, which was no other the^ an
assembly of rebels, for the Royal assent of the K. which gives life to all
laws, formed by the three estates, was not a Royal assent, when both the K.
and the Prince were constrained to yield to the Lords. A constrained consent is
the consent of a Captive and not of a K., and therefore there was nothing done
there either legally or royally. For if it be not properly a Parliament where
the subject is not free, certainly it can be none where the King is bound, for
all Kingly rule was taken from the King, and twelve Peers appointed, and as
some writers have it 24 Peers, to govern the Realm, and therefore the
assembly made by Jack Straw and other rebels may as well be called a
Parliament as that of Oxford. Principis nomen habere, non est esse Princeps,
for thereby was the King driven not only to co^pou^d all quarrels with the
French, but to have means to be revenged on the rebel Lords: but he quitted
his right to Normandy Aniou and Main.


COVNS. But sir what needed this extremity, seeing the Lords required but the
confirmation of the former Charter, which was not prejudicial to the King to
grant?


JUST. Yes my good Lord, but they insulted upon the King and would not suffer
him to enter into his own castles, they put down the Purvey or of the meat
for the maintenance of his house as if the King had been a bankrupt, and gave
order that without ready money he should not take up a Chicken. And though
there is nothing against the royalty of a King in these Charters (the Kings of
England being Kings of freemen and not of slaves) yet it is so contrary to
the nature of a King to be forced even to those things which may be to his
advantage, as the King had some reason to seek the dispensation of his oath
from the Pope, and to draw in strangers for his own defense: yea Iure saluo
Coronae nostrae is intended inclusiuely in all oaths and promises exacted from
a Sovereign.


COVNS: But you cannot be ignorant how dangerous athing it is to call in other
nations both for the spoil they make, as also so, because they have often held
the possession of the best places with which they have been trusted.


JUST: It is true my good Lord, that there is nothing so dangerous for a King
as to be constrained and held as prisoner to his vassals, for by that, Edward
the second, and Richard the second lost their Kingdoms and their lives. And
for calling in of strangers, was not King Edward the sixth driven to call
instrangers against the rebels in Norfolk, Cornwall, Oxfordshire and
elsewhere? Have not the Ks. of Scotland been oftentimes constrained to
entertain strangers against the Kings of England, And the King of England at
this time had he not bin diverse times assisted by the Kings of Scotland, had
bin enda^gered to have bin expelled for ever.


COVNS. But yet you know those Kings were deposed by Parliament.


JUST: Yea my good Lord being Prisoners, being out of possession and being in
their hands that were Princes of the blood and pretenders. It is an old
country proverb: (that might overcomes right) a weak title that wears a
strong sword, commonly prevails against a strong title that wears but a weak
one, otherwise Philip the second had never bin Duke of Portugal, nor Duke of
Millayne, nor K. of Naples and Scicilie. But good Lord Errores not sunt trah*
udi in exemplum: I speak of regal, peaceable, and lawful Parliaments. The
King at this time was but a King in name, for Gloucester, Leycester and
Chichester made choice of other Nine, to whom the rule of the Realm was
committed, and the Prince was forced to purchase his liberty from the Earl of
Leycester, by giving for his ransom the County Pallatine of Chester. But my
Lord let us judge of those occasions by their events, what became of this proud
Earl? was he not soon after slain in Euesham? was he not left naked in the
field, and left a shameful spectacle, his head being cut off from his
shoulders, his privy parts from his body and laid on each side of his nose? And
did not God extinguish his race, after which in a lawful parliament at
Westminster (confirmed in a following parliament of Westminster, were not all
the Lords that followed Leycester disinherited? And when that fool Gloucester,
after the death of Leycester (whom he had formerly forsaken) made himself the
head of a second rebellion, and called in strangers, for which not long before
he had cried out against the K. was not he in the end, after that he had
seen the slaughter of so many of the Barons* the spoil of their castles, and
Lordships constrained to submit himself, as all the suruiuers did, of which
they that sped best* paid their sines and ransomes, the King reserving to his
younger son, the Earledomes of Leycester and Derby.


COVN: Well sir, we have disputed this King to his grave, though it be true,
that he outliued all his enemies, and brought them to confusion, yet those
examples did not terrify their successors, but the Earl Marshall, and
Hereford, threatened King Edward the first, with a new war.


JUST: They did so, but after the death of Hereford, the Earl Marshall
repented himself, and to gain the Kings favor, he made him heir of all his
lands. But what is this to the Parliament? for there was never K. of this land
had more given him for the time of his reign, then Edward the son of Henry
the third had.


COVNS: How does that appear?


JUST: In this sort my good Lord, in this kings third year he had given him
the fifteenth part of all goods. In his sixth year a twentieth. In his twelfth
year a twentyeth, In his fourteenth year he had escuage (to wit) forty
shillings of every knights Fee: in his eighteenth year he had the eleventh
part of all moveable goods within the kingdom, in his nineteenth year the
tenth part of all Church livings in England, Scotland and Ireland, for six
years, by agreement from the Pope, in his three and twentieth year he raised a
tax upon wool and fels, and on a day caused all the religious houses to be
searched, and all the treasure in the^ to be seized and brought to his coffers,
excusing himself by laying the fault upon his treasurer, he had also in the
end of the same year, of algoods, of all Burgesses, and of the Commons the 10^
part, in the 25^ year of the Parliament of St Edmu^dsbury, he had an 18th part
of the goods of the Burgesses, and of the people in general, the tenth part.
He had also the same year by putting the Clergy out of his protection a fifth
part of their goods, and in the same year he set a great tax upon wools, to
wit, from half a mark to 40^ upon every sack, whereupon the Earl Marshall,
and the Earl of Hereford refusing to attend the King into Flanders pretended
the greeuances of the people But in the end the king having pardoned the^, and
confirmed the great Charter, he had the ninth penny of all goods from the Lords
and Commons of the Clergy, in the South he had the tenth penny, and in the
North the fifth penny. In the two and thirtyeth year he had a subsedy freely
granted. In the three and thirtyeth year he confirmed the great Charter of
his own Royal disposition, and the states to show their thankfulness, gave
the king for one year, the fifth part of all the revenues of the land and of
the Citizens the sixth part of their goods. And in the same year the king used
the inquisition called Traile Baston. By which all Justices and other
Magistrates were grievously fined that had used extortion or bribery, or had
otherwise misdemeaned themselves to the great contentation of the people. This
commission likewise did enquire of intruders, barrators and all other the like
vermin, whereby the king gathered a great mass of treasure with a great deal
of love. Now for the whole reign of this king, who governed England 35 years,
there was not any Parliament to his prejudice.


COVNS: But there was taking of arms by Marshall and Hereford.


JUST: That Is true, but why was that? because the king, notwithstanding all
that was given him by Parliament, did lay the greatest taxes that ever king did
without their consent. But what lost the king by those Lords? one of them gave
the king all his lands, the other dyed in disgrace.


COVNS: But what say you to the Parliament in Edward the Seconds time his
successor: did not the house of Parliament banish Pierce Gaueston whom the king
favored?


JUST: But what was this Gaueston but an Esquier of Gascoine, formerly banished
the Realm by king Edward the first, for corrupting the Prince Edward, now
reigning. And the whole kingdom fearing and detesting his venomous
disposition, they besought his Majesty to cast him off, which the king
performed by an act of his own, and not by act of Parliament, yea Gauestons
own fatherinlawe, the Earl of Glocesterw, as one of the Chiefest of the Lords
that procured it. And yet finding the kings affection to follow him so
strongly, they all consented to have him recalled. After which when his credit
so increased, that he despised and set at naught all the ancient Nobility,
and not only persuaded the king to all manner of outrages and riots, but
withal transported what he listed of the kings treasure, and jewels, the Lords
urged his banishment the second time, but neither was the first nor second
banishment forced by act of parliament, but by the forceable Lords his
enemies. Lastly he being recalled by the king, the Earl of Lancaster caused
his head to be stricken off, when those of his party had taken him prisoner.
By which presumptuous acts, the Earl and the rest of his company committed
treason and murder, treason by raising an army without warrant, murder by
taking away the life of the kings subject. After which Gaveston being dead, the
Spencers got possession of the kings favor, though the younger of them was
placed about the K. by the Lords themselves.


COVNS. What say you then to the Parliament held at London about the sixth year
of that king?


JUST. I say that king was not bound to perform the acts of this parliament,
because the Lords being too strong for the king, enforced his consent, for
these be the words of our own history. They wrested too much beyond the bounds
of reason.


CONS. What say you to the Parliaments of the white wands in the 13th of the
king.


JUST. I say the Lords that were so moved, came with an army, and by strong
hand surprised the King, they constrained, (says the story) the rest of the
Lords and compelled many of the Bishops to consent unto them, yea it says
further, that the king durst not but grant to all that they required, (to wit)
for the banishment of the Spencers. Yea they were so insolent that they refused
to lodge the Queen coming through Kent in the Castle of Leedes, and sent her
to provide her lodging where she could get it so late in the night, for which
notwithstanding some that kept her out were soon after taken and hanged, and
the refore your Lordship cannot call this a Parliament for the reasons before
alleged. But my Lord what became of these Lawgiuers to the king, even when
they were greatest, a knight of the North called Andrew Herkeley assembled the
Forces of the Country, overthrew them and their army, slew the Earl of
Hereford and other Barons, took their general Thomas Earl of Lancaster, the
Kings cozen-germane at that time possessed of five Earledomes, the Lords
Clifford, Talbort, Mowbray, Maudiut, Willington, Warren, Lord Darcy, Withers,
Kneuill, Leybourne, Bekes, Louell, Fitzwilliams, Watervild, and diverse other
Barons, Knights and Esquires, and soon after the Lord Percy, and the Lord
Warren took the Lords Baldsemere, and the Lord Audley, the Lord Teis, Gifford,
Tuchet, and many others that fled from the battle, the most of which past
under the hands of the hangman, for constraining the King under the color and
name of a Parliament. But this your good Lordship may judge, to whom, those
tumultuous assemblies (which our histories falsely call Parliaments have been
dangerous, the Kings in the end ever prevailed, and the Lords lost their
lives, and estates. After which the Spencers in their banishment at York, in
the 15th of the King, were restored to the honors and estates, and therein the
King had a subsedy given him the sixth penny of goods throughout England,
Ireland, and Wales.


COVNS: Yet you see the Spencers were soon after dissolved.


JUST: It is true my Lord, but that is nothing to our subject of Parliament,
they may thank their own insolency, for they branded and despised the
Queen, whom they ought to have honored as the Kings wife; they were also
exceeding greedy, and built themselves upon other men's ruins, they were
ambitious and exceeding malicious, whereupon that came, that when Chamberlain
Spencer was hanged in Hereford, a part of the 24th Psalm was written over his
head: Quid gloriaris in malitia potens?


COVNS. Well Sir, you have all this while excused your self upon the strength
and rebellions of the Lords, but what say you now to King Edward the third, in
whose time (and during the time of this victorious king, no man durst take
Arms or rebel) the three estates did him the greatest affront that ever king
received or endured, therefore I conclude where I began, that these Parliaments
are dangerous for a king.


JUST. To answer your Lordship in order, may it please you first to call
mind, what was given this great king by his Subjects before the dispute
betwixt him and the house happened, which was in his latter days, from his
first year to his fifth year there was nothing given the king by his subjects:
In his eight year at the Parliament at London a tenth and a fifteenth was
granted: in his tenth year he ceased upon the Italians goods here in
England to his own use, with all the goods of the Monks Cluniacqs and others,
of the order of the Cistertians. In the eleventh year, he had given him by
parliament a notable relief, the one half of the woolls throughout England,
and of the Clergy all their wools, after which, in the end of the year he
had granted in his parliament at Westminster, forty shillings upon every sack
of wool, and for every thirty wool fels forty shillings, for every last of
leatherne, as much, and for all other merchandises after the same rate. The
king promising that this years gathering ended, he would thenceforth content
himself with the old custom, he had over and above this great aid the eight
part of all goods of all citizens and Burgesses, and of others as of foreign
Merchants, and such as lived not of the gain of breeding of sheep and cattle
the fifteenth of their goods: Nay my Lord: this was not all: though more then
ever was granted to any king, for the same parliament bestowed on the king the
ninth sheafe of all the corn within the land, the ninth fleece, and the ninth
lamb for two years next following: now what think your Lordship of this
parliament.


COVNS. I say they were honest men.


JUST: And I say, the people are as loving to their king now, as ever they
were, if they be honestly and wisely dealt withal, and so his Majesty has
found them in his last two parliaments, if his Majesty had not been betrayed
by those whom he most trusted.


COVNS. But I pray you Sir, who shall a king trust, if he may not trust those
whom he has so greatly advanced?


JUST. I will tell your Lordship whom the king may trust.


COVNS. Who are they?


JUST. His own reason, and his own excellent judgment which have not
deceived him in any thing, wherein his Majesty has been pleased to exercise
them, Take council of thine heart (says the book of Wisdom) for there is
none more faithful unto thee then it.


COVNS. It is true, but his Majesty found that those wanted no judgment whom
he trusted, and how could his Majesty divine of their honesties?


JUST. Will you pardon me if I speak freely, for if I speak out of love,
which (as Solomon says) covers all trespasses, The truth is, that his
Majesty would never believe any man that spoke against them, and they knew it
well enough, which gave them boldness to do what they did.


COVNS. What was that?


JUST. Even, my good Lord, to ruin the kings estate so far as the state of
so great a king may be ruined by men ambitious and greedy without proportion.
It had been a brave increase of revenue, my Lord, to have raised 50000 land of
the kings to 20000 revenue, and to raise the revenue of wards to 20000 more,
40000 added to the rest of his Majesty's estate, had so enabled his Majesty,
as he could never have wanted. And my good Lord, it had been an honest
service to the king, to have added 7000 lands of the Lord Cobhams, woods and
goods being worth 30000 more.


COVNS. I know not the reason why it was not done.


JUST. Neither does your Lordship, perchance know the reason why the 10000
offered by Swinnerton for a fine of the French wines, was by the then Lord
Treasurer conferred on Devonshire and his Mistress.


COVNS. What moved the Treasurer to reject and cross that raising of the kings
lands?


JUST. The reason, my good Lord, is manifest, for had the land been raised,
then had the king known when he had given or exchanged land, what he had
given or exchanged.


COVNS. What hurt had that been to the Treasurer whose office is truly to
inform the King of the value of all that he gives?


JUST. So he did when it did not concern himself nor his particular, for he
could never admit any one piece of a good Manor to pass in my Lord Aubignes
book of 1000 land, till he himself had bought, and then all the remaining
flowers of the Crown were culled out. Now had the Treasurer suffered the Kings
lands to have been raised, how could his Lordshippe have made choice of the old
rents, as well in that book of my Lord Aubigne, as in exchange of Theobalds,
for which he took Hatfield in it, which the greatest subject or favorite
Queen Elizabeth had never durst have named unto her by way of gift or
exchange. Nay my Lord, so many other goodly Manors have passed from his
Majesty, as the very heart of the kingdom mourns to remember it, and the
eyes of the kingdom shed tears continually at the beholding it* yea the
soul of the kingdom is heavy unto death with the consideration thereof, that
so magnanimous a Prince, should suffer himself to be so abused.


COVNS. But Sir you know that Cobhams lands were entayled upon his Cosens.


JUST. Yea, my Lord, but during the lives and races of George Brook his
children, it had been the kings, that is to say, for ever in effect, but to
wrest the king, and to draw the inheritance upon himself, he persuaded his
Majesty to relinquish his interest for a petty sum of money; and that there
might be no counterworking, he sent Brook 6000l to make friends, whereof
himself had 2000l back again, Buckhurst and Barwicke had the other 4000l,
and the Treasurer and his heirs the mass of land for ever.


COVNS. What then I pray you came to the king by this great confiscation.


JUST. My Lord, the kings Majesty by all those goodly possessions, vvoods and
goods loses 500l by the year which he gives in pension to Cobham, to
maintain him in prison.


COV. Certainly, even in conscience they should have reserved so much of the
land in the Crown, as to have given Cobham meat and apparel, and not made
themselves so great gainers, and the King 500l ( per annum) looser by the
bargain, but it is past: Consilium non est eorum quae fieri nequeunt.


JUST. Take the rest of the sentence, my Lord: Sed consilium versatur in iis
quae sunt in nostra potestate. It is yet, my good Lord, in potestate Regis, to
right himself. But this is not all my Lord: And I fear me, knowing your
Lordships love to the King, it would put you in a fever to hear all: I will
therefore go on with my parliaments.


COVNS. I pray do so, and amongst the rest, I pray you what say you to the
Parliament holden at London in the fifteenth year of King Edward the third?


JUST. I say there was nothing concluded therein to the prejudice of the King.
It is true, that a little before the sitting of the house, the King displaced
his Chancellor and his Treasurer, and most of all his judges and officers of
the exchequer, and committed many of them to prison, because they did not
supply him with money being beyond the seas, for the rest, the states
assembled, besought the King that the laws of the two Charters might be
observed, and that the great officers of the Crown might be chosen by
parliament.


COVNS. But what success had these petitions.


JUST. The Charters were observed, as before, and so they will be ever, and the
other petition was rejected, the King being pleased notwithstanding, that the
great Officers should take an oath in Parliament to do Justice. Now for the
Parliament of Westminster, in the 17th year of the King, the King had three
marks and a half for every sack of wool transported; and in his 18th he had
a 10th of the Clergy, and a 15^ of the Laity for one year. His Majesty forbear
after this to charge his subjects with any more payments, until the 29th of
his reign, when there was given the King by Parliament 50 for every sack of
wool transported for six years, by which grant, the King received a thousand
marks a day, a greater matter then a thousand pounds in these days, and a
1000l a day amounts to 365000 a year, which was one of the greatest presents
that ever was given to a King of this land. For besides the cheapnes of all
things in that age, the Kings soldiers had but 3d a day wages, a man at arms
6l, a Knight but 2^. In the Parliament at Westminster, in the 33^ year he had
26^ 8d for every sack of wool transported, and in the 42t^ year 3 dismes and
3 fifteens. In his 45l year he had 50000 of the Layty, and because the
Spiritualty disputed it, and did not pay so much, the King changed his
Chancellor, Treasurer, and Privy Seal, being Bishops, and placed Lay men in
their room.


COVNS. It seems that in those days the kings were no longer in love with
their great Chancellors, then when they deserved well of them.


JUST. No my Lord, they were not, and that was the reason they were well
served, and it was the custom then, and in many ages after, to change the
Treasurer and the Chancellor every 3 years, and withal to hear all men's
complaints against the^.


COVNS. But by this often change, the saying is verified, that there is no
inheritance in the favor of Kings. He that keeps the fig tree (says
Solomon) shall eat the fruit thereof; for reason it is that the servant live
by the Master.


JUST. My Lord, you say well in both, but had the subject an inheritance in the
Princes favor, where the Prince has no inheritance in the subjects fidelity,
then were kings in more unhappy estate then common persons. For the rest,
Solomon means not, that he that keeps the fig tree should surfeit, though
he meant he should eat, he meant not he should break the branches in
gathering the figs, or eat the ripe, and leave the rotten for the owner of the
tree; for what says he in the following chapter, he says that he that makes
haste to be rich, cannot be innocent. And before that, he says, that the end
of an inheritance hastily gotten, cannot be blessed. Your Lordship has heard
of few or none great with Kings, that have not used their power to oppress,
that have not grown insolent and hateful to the people; yea, insolent toward
those Princes that advanced them.


COVNS. Yet you see that Princes can change their fancies.


JUST. Yea my Lord, when favorites change their faith, when they forget that
how familiar socuer Kings make themselves with their Vassals, yet they are
kings: He that provokes a King to anger (says Solomon) sins against his
own soul. And he further says, that pride goes before destruction, and a
high mind before a fall. I say therefore, that in discharging those Lucifers,
how dear soever they have been, kings make the world know that they have more
of Judgment then of passion, yea they thereby offer a satisfactory sacrifice
to all their people, too great benefits of subjects to their King, where the
mind is blown up with their own deseruings, and too great benefits of Kings
conferred upon their subjects, where (...) mind is not qualified with a great
deal of modesty, are equally dangerous. Of this later and insolenter, had King
Richard the second delivered up to Justice but three or four, he had still
held the love of the people, and thereby his life and estate.


COVNS. Well, I pray you go on with your Parliaments.


JUST. The life of this great King Edward draws to an end, so do the
Parliaments of this time, where in 50 years reign, he never received any
affront, for in his 49th year he had a disme and a fifteen granted him freely.


COVNS. But Sir it is an old saying, that all is well that ends well: Judge
you whether that in his 50th year in Parliament at Westminster he received
not an affront, when the house urged the King to remove and discharge from his
presence the Duke of Lancaster, the Lord Latimer his Chamberlain, Sir Richard
Sturry, and others whom the King favored and trusted. Nay, they pressed the
King to thrust a certain Lady out of the Court, which at that time bare the
greatest sway therein.


JUST. I will with patience answer your Lordship to the full, and first your
Lordship may remember by that which I even now said, that never King had so
many gifts as this King had from his subjects, and it has never grieved the
subjects of England to give to their King, but when they knew there was a
devouring Lady, that had her share in all things that passed, and the Duke of
Lancaster was as scraping as she, that the Chancellor did eat up the people
as fast as either of them both. It grieved the subjects to feed these
Cormorants. But my Lord there are two things by which the Kings of England have
been pressed, (to wit) by their subjects, and by their own necessities. The
Lords in former times were far stronger, more warlike, better followed,
living in their countries, then now they are. Your Lordship may remember in
your reading, that there were many Earls could bring into the field a thousand
Barbed horses, many a Baron 5 or 600 Barbed horses, whereas now very few of
them can furnish twenty fit to serve the King. But to say the truth my Lord,
the Justices of Peace in England, have opposed the iniusticers of war in
England, the kings writ runs over all, and the great Scale of England, with
that of the next Constables will serve the turn to affront the greatest Lords
in England that shall move against the King. The force therefore by which our
Kings in former times were troubled, is vanished away. But the necessities
remain. The people therefore in these later ages, are no less to be pleased
then the Peers; for as the later are become less, so by reason of the
trayning through England, the Commons have all the weapons in their hands.


COVNS. And was it not so ever?


JUST. No my good Lord, for the Noblemen had in their Armories to furnish some
of the^ a thousand, some two thousand, some three thousand men, whereas now
there are not many that can arm fifty.


COVNS. Can you blame them? But I will only answer for my self, between you
and me be it spoken, I hold it not safe to maintain so great an Armory or
Stable, it might cause me, or any other Nobleman to be suspected, as the
preparing of some Innovation.


JUST. Why so my Lord, rather to be commended as preparing against all danger
of Innovation.


COVNS. It should be so, but call your observation to account, and you shall
find it as I say, for (indeed) such a jelousie has been held ever since the
time of the Civil wars, over the Military greatness of our Nobles, as made them
have little will to bend their studies that ways: wherefore let every man
provide according as he is rated in the Muster book, you understand me.


JUST. Very well my Lord, as what might be replied in the preceiuing so much; I
have ever (to deal plainly and freely with your Lordship) more feared at home
popular violence, then all the foreign that can be made, for it can never be
in the power of any foreign Prince, without a Papisticall party, either to
disorder or endanger his Majesty's Estate.


COVNS. By this it seems, it is no less dangerous for a king to leave the
power in the people, then in the Nobility.


JUST. My good Lord, the wisdom of our own age, is the foolishnes of another,
the time present ought not to be preferred to the Policy that was, but the
policy that was, to the time present. So that the power of the Nobility being
now withered, and the power of the people in the flower, the care to content
them would not be neglected, the way to win them often practiced, or at least
to defend them from oppression. The motive of all dangers that ever this
Monarchy has undergone, should be carefully heeded, for this Maxim has no
posterne, Potestas humana radicatur in voluntatibus hominum. And now my Lord,
for King Edward it is true, though he were not subject to force, yet was he
subject to necessity, which because it was violent, he gave way unto it,
Potestas (says Pythagoras) iuxia necessitatem habitat. And it is true, that at
the request of the house he discharged and put from him those before named,
which done, he had the greatest gift (but one) that ever he received in all his
days (to wit) from every person, man and woman above the age of fourteen
years. 4^ of old money, which made many Millions of Groats, worth 6^ of our
money. This he had in general, besides he had of every beneficed Priest, 12d.
And of the Nobility and Gentry, I know not how much, for it is not set down.
Now my good Lord, what lost the King by satisfying the desires of the
Parliament house; for as soon as he had the money in purse, he recalled the
Lords, and restored them, and who durst call the King to account, when the
Assembly were dissolved. Where the word of a King is, there is power (says
Ecclesiasticus) who shall say unto him, what do thou? says the same Author,
for every purpose there is a time and judgment, the King gave way to the time,
and his judgment persweded him to yield to necessity, Consularius nemo melior
est quam tempus.


COVNS. But yet you see the king was forced to yield to their demands.


JUST. Does your Lordship remember the saying of Monsieur de Lange, that he
that has the profit of the war, has also the honor of the war, whether
it be by battle or retreat, the King you see had the profit of the
Parliament, and therefore the honor also, what other end had the king then to
supply his wants. A wise man has evermore respect unto his ends: And the king
also knew that it was the love that the people bare him, that they urged the
removing of those Lords, there was no man among them that sought himself in
that desire, but they all sought the King, as by the success it appeared. My
good Lord, has it not been ordinary in England and in France to yield to the
demands of rebels, did not King Richard the second grant pardon to the
outrageous roagues and murderers that follovved Jack Straw, and Wat Tyler,
after they had murdered his Chancellor, his Treasurer, Chief Justice, and
others, brake open his Exchequer, and committed all manner of outrages and
villainies, and why did he do it, but to avoid a greater danger: I say the
Kings have then yielded to those that hated them and their estates, (to wit) to
pernicious rebels. And yet without dishonor shall it be called dishonor for
the King to yield to honest desires of his subjects. No my Lord, those that
tell the King those tales, fear their own dishonor, and not the Kings, for
the honor of the King is supreme, and being guarded by Justice and piety, it
cannot receive neither wound nor stayne.


COVNS. But Sir, what cause have any about our King to fear a Parliament?


JUST. The same cause that the Earl of Suffolk had in Richard the seconds
time, and the Treasurer Fartham, with others; for these great Officers being
generally hated for abusing both the King and the subject, at the request of
the States were discharged, and others put in their rooms.


COVNS. And was not this a dishonor to the king?


JUST. Certainly no, for King Richard knew that his Grandfather had done the
like, and though the king was in his heart utterly against it, yet had he the
profit of this exchange; for Suffolk was fined at 20000 marks, and 1000^
lands.


COVNS. Well Sir, we will speak of those that fear the Parliament some other
time, but I pray you go on with that, that happened in the troublesome reign
of Richard the second who succeeded, the Grandfather being dead.


JUST. That king, my good Lord, was one of the most unfortunate Princes that
ever England had, he was cruel, extreme prodigal, and wholly carried away
with his two Minions, Suffolk* and the duke of Ireland, by whose ill advice and
others, he was in danger to have lost his estate; which in the end (being led
by men of the like temper) he miserably lost. But for his subsedies he had
given him in his first year being under age two tenths, and two fifteenes: In
which Parliament, Alice Pierce, who was removed in king Edwards time, with
Lancaster, Latimer, and Sturry. were confiscate and banished. In his second
year at the Parliament at Gloucester, the King had a mark upon every sack of
wool, and 6d the pound upon wards. In his third year at the Parliament at
Winchester, the Commons were spared, and a subsedy given by the better sort,
the Dukes gave 20 marks, and Earls 6 marks, Bishops and Abbots with myters
fix marks, every mark 3^ 4d, and every Knight, Justice, Esquier, Shrieue,
Parson, Vicar, and Chaplain, paid proportionably according to their estates.


COVNS. This me thinks was no great matter.


JUST. It is true my Lord, but a little money went far in those days: I my
self once moved it in Parliament in the time of Queen Elizabeth, who desired
much to spare the Common people, and I did it by her Commandment; but when we
cast up the subsedy Books, we found the sum but small, when the 30^ men were
left out. In the beginning of his fourth year, a tenth with a fifteen were
granted upon condition, that for one whole year no subsedies should be
demanded; but this promise was as suddenly forgotten as made, for in the end
of that year, the great subsedy of Poll money was granted in the Parliament at
Northampton.


COVNS. Yea, but there follovved the terrible Rebellion of Baker, Straw, and
others, Leister, Wrais, and others.


JUST. That was not the fault of the Parliament my Lord, it is manifest that
the subsedy given was not the cause; for it is plain that the bondmen of
England began it, because they were grievously pressed by their Lords in their
tenure of Villenage, as also for the hatred they bare to the Lawyers and
Attorneyes: for the story of those times say, that they destroyed the houses
and Manors of men of law, and such Lawyers as they caught, slew them, and
beheaded the Lord chief Justice, which commotion being once begun, the head
money was by other Rebels pretended: A fire is often kindled with a little straw,
which oftentimes takes hold of greater timber, and consumes the whole building:
And that this Rebellion was begun by the discontented slaves (whereof there
have been many in Elder times the like) is manifest by the Charter of
Manumission, which the King granted in haec verba* Rich. Dei gratia etc.
Sciatis quod de gratia nostra spirituals manumissimus etc. to which seeing the
King was constrained by force of arms, he revoked the letters Pattents. and
made them void, the same revocation being strengthened by the Parliament
ensuing. In which the King had given him a subsedy upon wools, called a
Maletot. In the same fourth year was the Lord Treasurer discharged of his
Office and Hales Lord of S John's chosen in his place. In his fifth year was the
Treasurer again changed, and the Staff given to Segraue, and the Lord
Chancellor was also changed, and the staff given to the Lord Scroope: Which
Lord Scroope was again in the beginning of his sixth year turned out, and the
King after that he had for a while kept the Seal in his own hand, gave it to
the Bishop of London, from whom it was soon after taken and bestovved on the
Earl of Suffolk, who they say, had abused the king, and converted the kings
Treasure to his own use. To this the King condiscended, and though (says
Walsingham) he deserved to loose his life and goods, yet he had the favor to
go at liberty upon good sureties: and because the K. was but young, and that
the relief granted was committed to the trust of the Earl of Arundell for
the furnishing of the Kings Navy against the French.


COVNS. Yet you see it was a dishonor to the K. to have his beloved
Chancellor removed.


IVS. Truly no, for the K. had both his fine 1000 lands, and a subsedy to boot.
And though for the present it pleased the K. to fancy a man all the world
hated (the Ks passion ouerco^ming his Judgment) yet it cannot be called a
dishonor, for the K. is to believe the general counsel of the kingdom, and to
prefer it before his affection, especially when Suffolk was proved to be
false even to the K: for were it otherwise love and affection might be called
a frenzy and a madness, for it is the nature of humane passions, that the
love bredde by fidelity, does change it self into hatred, when the fidelity is
first changed into falsehood.


COVNS: But you see there were thirteen Lords chosen in the Parliament, to
have the oversight of the government under the King.


IVS: No my Lord, it was to have the oversight of those Officers, which (says
the Story) had imbezeled, lewdly wasted, and prodigally spent the Kings
treasure, for to the Commission to those Lords, or to any six of them, joined
with the Kings Counsel, was one of the most royal and most profitable that
ever he did, if he had bin constant to himself. But my good Lord, man is the
cause of his own misery, for I will repeat the substance of the commission
granted by the K* and confirmed by Parliament, which, whether it had bin
profitable for the K. to have prosecuted, your Lordship may judge. The preamble
has these words: Whereas our Sovereigne Lord the King perceives by the
grievous complaints of the Lords and Commons of this Realm, that the rents,
profits, and revenues of this Realm, by the singular and insufficient Council
and evil government, as well of some his late great Officers, and others, etc.
are so much withdrawn, wasted, eloyued, given, granted, alienated, destroyed,
and evil dispended, that he is so much impoverished and void of treasure and
goods, and the substance of the Crown so much diminished and destroyed, that
his estate may not honorably be sustained as appertains. The K. of his free
will at the request of the Lords and Commons, has ordained William Archbishop
of Canterbury and others with his Chancellor, Treasurer, keeper of his privy
seal, to survey and examine as well the estate and governance of his house,
etc. as of all the rents, and profits, and revenues that to him appertains,
and to be due, or ought to appertain and be due, etc. And all manner of gifts,
graunts, alienations and confirmations made by him of lands, tenements, rents,
etc. bargained and sold to the prejudice of him and his Crown, etc. And of his
jewels and goods which were his Grandfathers at the time of his death, etc. and
where they be become.

This is in effect the substance of the commission, which your Lordship may
read at large in the book of Statutes, this commission being enacted in the
tenth year of the Kings reign. Now if such a commission were in these days
granted to the faithful men, that have no interest in the sales, gifts nor
purchases, nor in the keeping of the jewels at the Queens death, nor in the
obtaining, graunts of the Kings best lands, I cannot say what may be recovered,
and justly recovered; and what say your Lordship, was not this a noble act for
the King, if it had been followed to effect?


COVNS. I cannot tell whether it were or no, for it gave power to the
Commissioners to examine all the graunts.


JUST. Why my Lord, does the King grant any thing, that shames at the
examination? are not the Kings graunts on record?


COVNS. But by your leave, it is some dishonor to a King, to have his
judgment called in question.


JUST. That is true my Lord, but in this, or whensoever the like shall be
granted in the future, the Kings judgment is not examined, but their knavery
that abused the K. Nay by your favor, the contrary is true, that when a King
will suffer himself to be eaten up by a company of petty fellows, by
himself raised, there in both the judgment and courage is disputed. And if
your Lordship will disdain it at your own servants hands, much more ought the
great heart of a King, to disdain it. And surely my Lord, it is a greater
treason (though it vndercreepe the law) to tear from the Crown the ornaments
thereof: And it is an infallible maxim, that he that loves not his Majesty's
estate, loves not his person.


COVNS. How came it then, that the act was not executed?


IVS. Because these, against whom it was granted, persuaded the King to the
contrary: As the Duke of Ireland, Suffolk, the chief Justice Trisilian, and
others, yea, that which was lawfully done by the King, and the great Council
of the kingdom, was (by the mastery which Ireland, Suffolk, and Tresilian had
over the Kings affections) broken and disavowed. Those that devised to relieve
the King, not by any private invention, but by general Council, were by a
private and partial assembly, adjudged traitors, and the most honest Judges
of the land, enforced to subscribe to that judgment. In so much, that Judge
Belknap plainly told the Duke of Ireland, and the Earl of Suffolk, when he
was constrained to set to his hand, plainly told these Lords, that he wanted
but a rope, that he might therewith receive a reward for his subscription. And
in this Council of Nottingham was hatched the ruin of those which governed
the King, of the Judges by them constrained, of the Lords that loved the King,
and sought a reformation, and of the King himself; for though the King found
by all the Shreeues of the shires, that the people would not fight against the
Lords, whom they thought to be most faithful unto the King, when the Citizens
of London made the same answer, being at that time able to arm 50000^ men,
and told the Major, that they would never fight against the Kings friends, and
defenders of the Realm, when the Lord Ralph Basset, who was near the K. told
the King boldly, that he would not adventure to have his head broken for the
Duke of Irelands pleasure, when the Lord of London told the Earl of Suffolk
in the Kings presence, that he was not worthy to live, etc. yet would the King
in the defense of the destroyers of his estate, lay ambushes to entrap the
Lords, when they came upon his faith, yea when all was pacified, and that the
King by his Proclamation had cleared the Lords, and promised to produce
Ireland, Suffolk, and the Archbishop of York, Tresilian and Bramber, to
answer at the next Parliament, these men confessed, that they durst not appear;
and when Suffolk fled to Callice, and the Duke of Ireland to Chester, the King
caused an army to be leavied in Lancashire, for the safe conduct of the Duke of
Ireland to his presence, when as the Duke being encountered by the Lords, ran
like a coward from his company, and fled into Holland. After this was holden a
Parliament, which was called that wrought wonders. In the eleventh year of
this King, wherein the forenamed Lords, the Duke of Ireland and the rest, were
condemned and confiscate, the Chief Justice hanged with many others, the rest
of the Judges condemned and banished, and a 10th and a 15th given to the King.


COVNS: But good Sir: the King was first besieged in the Tower of London, and
the Lords came to the Parliament, and no man durst contradict them.


JUST: Certainly in raising an army, they committed treason, and though it did
appear, that they all loved the King, (for they did him no harm, having him
in their power) yet our law does construe all leavying of war without the kings
commission, and all force raised to be intended for the death and destruction
of the K. not attending the sequel. And it is so judged upon good reason, for
every unlawful and ill action is supposed to be accompanied with an ill
intent. And besides, those Lords used too great cruelty, in procuring the
sentence of death against diverse of the Kings servaunts, who were bound to
follow and obey their Master and Sovereign Lord, in that he commanded.


COVNS. It is true, and they were also greatly to blame, to cause then so many
seconds to be put to death, seeing the principalls, Ireland, Suffolk* and
York had escaped them. And what reason had they to seek to inform the State
by strong hand, was not the Kings estate as dear to himself, as to them? He
that makes a King know his error manerly and private, and gives him the best
advice, he is discharged before God, and his own conscience. The Lords might
have retired themselves, when they saw they could not prevail, and have left
the King to his own ways, who had more to loose then they had.


JUST. My Lord, the taking of Arms cannot be excused in respect of the law,
but this might be said for the Lords that the K. being under years, and being
wholly governed by their enemies, and the enemies of the kingdom, and because
by those evil men's perswasio^s, it was advised, how the Lords should have bin
murdered at a feast in London, they were excusable during the kings minority
to stand upon their guards against their particular enemies. But we will pass
it over and go on with our parliaments that followed, whereof that of Cambridge
in the Ks 12th year was the next, therein the K. had given him a 10th and a
15th, after which, being 20. years of age recha^ged (says H. Kinghton) his
Treasurer, his Chancellor, the Justices of either bench, the Clerk of the privy
seal and others, and took the government into his own hands. He also took
the Admirals place from the Earl of Arundell, and in his room he placed the
Earl of Huntingdon in the year following, which was the 13th year of the K.
in the Parliament at Westminster, there was given to the King upon every sack
of wool 14s and 6d in the pound upon other merchandise.


COVNS: But by your leave, the King was restrained this parliament, that he
might not dispose of, but a third part of the money gathered.


JUST: No my Lord, by your favor. But true it is that part of this money was by
the Kings consent assigned toward the wars, but yet left in the Lord
Treasurers hands, And my Lo: it would be a great ease, and a great saving to
his Majesty our Lord and Master, if it pleased him to make his assignations
upon some part of his revenewes, by which he might have 1000^ upon every
10000^, and save himself a great deal of clamor. For seeing of necessity the
Navy must be maintained, and that those poor men as well Carpenters as ship
keepers must be paid, it were better for his Majesty to give an assignation to
the treasurer of his navy for the receiving of so much as is called ordinary,
then to discontent those poor men, who being made desperate beggars, may
perchance be corrupted by them that lie in wait to destroy the Ks estate. And
if his Majesty did the like in all other payments, especially where the
necessity of such as are to receive, cannot possible gives days, his Majesty
might then in a little roll behold his receipts and expenses, he might quiet
his heart when all necessaries were provided for, and then dispose the rest at
his pleasure. And my good Lord, how excellently and easily might this have bin
done, if the 400000^ had been raised as aforesaid upon the Kings lands, and
wards, I say that his Majesty's house, his navy, his guards, his pensioners,
his munition, his Ambassadors and all else of ordinary charge might have been
defrayed, and a great sum left for his Majesty's casual expenses and
rewards, I will not say they were not in love with the Kings estate, but I say
they were unfortunately borne for the King that crossed it.


COVNS. Well Sir, I would it had been otherwise, But for the assignments,
there are among us that will not willingly endure it. Charity begins with
itself, shall we hinder our selves of 50000^ per annum to save the King 20?
No Sir, what will become of our New-yeares gifts, our presents and gratuities?
We can now say to those that have warrants for money, that there is not a penny
in the Exchequer, but the king gives it away unto the Scots faster then it
comes in.


JUST. My Lord you say well, at least you say the truth, that such are some of
our answers, and hence comes that general murmr to all men that have money
to receive, I say that there is not a penny given to that nation, be it for
service or otherwise but it is spread over all the kingdom: yea they gather
notes, and take copies of all the privy seals and warrants that his Majesty
has given for the money for the Scots, that they may show them in Parliament.
But of his Majesty's gifts to the English, there is no brute though they may
be ten times as much as the Scots. And yet my good Lord, howsoever they be
thus answered that to them sue for money out of the Exchequer, it is due to
them for 10 or 12* or 20 in the hundred, abated according to their qualities
that sue, they are always furnished. For conclusion, if it would please God to
put into the Kings heart to make their assignations, it would save him many a
pound, and gain him many a prayer, and a great deal of love, for it grieueth
every honest man's heart to see the abundance which even the petty officers in
the Exchequer, and others gather both from the king and subject, and to see a
world of poor men run after the King for their ordinary wages.


COVNS. Well, well, did you never hear this old tale, that when there was a
great contention about the weather, the Seamen complaining of contrary winds,
when those of the high Countries desired rain, and those of the valleys
sunshining days, Jupiter sent them word by Mercury, then, when they had all
done, the weather should be as it had bin, And it shall ever fall out so with
them that complain, the course of payments shall be as they have been, what
care we what petty fellows say? or what care we for your papers? have not we
the Kings ears, who dares contest with us? though we cannot be revenged on
such as you are for telling the truth, yet upon some other pretense, we will
clap you up, and you shall sue to us ere you get out. Nay we will make you
confess that you were deceived in your proiects, and eat your own words:
learn this of me Sir, that as a little good fortune is better then a great
deal of virtue: so the least authority has advantage over the greatest wit,
was he not the wisest man that said, the battle was not to the strongest, nor
yet bread for the wise, nor riches to men of understanding, nor favor to men
of knowledge: but what time and chance came to them all.


JUST. It is well for your Lordship that it is so. But Qu: Elizabeth would set
the reason of a mean man, before the authority of the greatest Councellor she
had, and by her patience therein she raised upon the usual and ordinary
customs of London without any new imposition above 50000^ a year, for though
the Treasurer Burleigh, and the Earl of Leicester, and Secretary Walshingham
all three pensioners to Customer Smith did set themselves against a poor
waiter of the Custom House called Carwarden, and commanded the grooms of the
privy Chamber not to give him access, yet the Queen sent for him, and gave
him countenance against them all. It would not serve the turn, my Lord, with
her; when your Lordships would tell her, that the disgracing her great officers
by hearing the complaints of busy heads, was a dishonor to herself, but she
had always this answer, That if any man complain unjustly against a
Magistrate, it were reason he should be severely punished, if justly, she was
Queen of the small, as well as of the great, and would hear their complaints.
For my good Lord, a Prince that suffers himself to be besieged, forsakes
one of the greatest regalities belonging to a Monarchy, to wit, the last
appeal, or as the French call it, le dernier resort.


COVNS: Well Sir, this from the matter, I pray you go on.


JUST: Then my Lord, in the kings 15th year he had a tenth and at fifteen
granted in Parliament of London. And that same year there was a great
Council called at Stamford to which diverse men were sent for, of diverse
counties besides the Nolility, of whom the K. took advice whether he should
continue the war, or make a final end with the French.


COVNS. What needed the king to take the advice of any but of his own Council
in matter of peace or war.


JUST. Yea my Lord, for it is said in the Proverbs* where are many
counselors, there is health. And if the king had made the war by a general
consent, the kingdom in general were bound to maintain the war, and they
could not then say when the King required aid, that he undertook a needless
war.


COVNS. You say well, but I pray you go on.


JUST. After the subsedy in the 15 year, the King desired to borrow 10000l of
the Londoners, which they refused to lend.


COVNS. And was not the King greatly troubled therewith.


JUST: Yea but the King troubled the Londoners soon after, for the king took
the advantage of a riot made upon the Bishop of Salisbury his men, sent for the
Mayor, and other the ablest citizens, committed the Mayor to prison in the
Castle of Windsor, and others to other castles, and made a Lord Warden of this
city, till in the end what with 10000l ready money, and other rich presents,
instead of lending 10000l it cost them 20000l. Between the fifteenth year and
twentieth year, he had two aids given him in the Parliaments of Winchester
and Westminster: and this later was given to furnish the Kings journey into
Ireland to establish that estate which was greatly shaken since the death of
the Kings Grandfather, who received thence yearly 30000l and during the Kings
stay in Ireland he had a 10th and a 15th granted.


COVNS. And good reason, for the King had in his army 4000 horse and 30000
foot.


JUST. That by your favor, was the Kings sanity: for great armies do rather
devour themselves then destroy enemies. Such an army, (whereof the fourth part
would have conquered all Ireland) was in respect of Ireland such an army as
Xerxes led into Greece in this twentieth year, wherein he had a tenth of the
Clergy, was the great conspiracy of the Kings uncle, the Duke of Gloucester,
and of Moubrey, Arundell, Nottingham, and Warwick, the Archbishop of Canterbury
and the Abbotte of Westminster, and others who in the 21^ year of the King
were all redeemed by parliament. and what thinks your Lordship, was not this
assembly of the 3 states for the kings estate, wherein he so prevailed, that
he not only overthrew those popular Lords, but besides (the English Chronicle
says, the king so wrought and brought things about, that he obtained the
power of both houses to be granted to certain persons* to 15 Noblemen and
Gentlmen, or to seven of them.


COVNS: Sir, whether the king wrought well or ill I cannot judge, but our
Chronicles say, that many things were done in this parliament, to the
displeasure of no small number of people, to wit, for that diverse rightful
heirs were disinherited of their lands and livings, with which wrongful
doings the people were much offended, so that the King with those that were
about him, and chief in counsel, came into great infamy and slander.


JUST. My good Lord, if your Lordship will pardon me, I am of opinion that
those Parliaments wherein the kings of this land have satisfied the people, as
they have been ever prosperous, so where the king has restrained the house,
the contrary has happened, for the K^ atchiuements in this parliament, were
the ready preparations to his ruin.


COV: You mean by the general discontetmet that followed, and because the King
did not proceed legally with Gloucester and others. Why Sir, this was not the
first time that the Kings of England have done things without the Counsel of
the land: yea, contrary to the law.


JUST: It is true my Lord in some particulars, as even at this time the Duke of
Gloucester was made away at Callice by strong hand, without any lawful trial:
for he was a man so beloved of the people and so allied, having the Dukes of
Lancaster, and York his brethren, the Duke of Aumarle, and the Duke of
Hereford his Nephews, the great Earls of Arundell and Warwick, with diverse
other of his part in the conspiracy, as the King durst not try him according
to the law: for at the trial of Arundell and Warwick, the king was forced to
entertain a petty army about him. And though the Duke was greatly lamented,
yet it cannot be denied but that he was then a traitor to the King. And was it
not so my Lord with the Duke of Guise: your Lordship does remember the spurgald
proverb, that necessity has no law: and my good Lord, it is the practice of
doing wrong, and of general wrongs done, that brings danger, and not where
kings are pressed in this or that particular, for there is great difference
between natural cruelty and accidental. And therefore it was Machiauels
advice, that all that a king did in that kind, he shall do at once, and by his
mercies afterward make the world know that his cruelty was not affected. And
my Lord take this for a general rule, that the immortal policy of a state
cannot admit any law or privilege whatsoever, but in some particular or other,
the same is necessarily broken, yea in an Aristocratia or popular estate, which
vaunts so much of equality and common right, more outrage has been committed
then in any Christian Monarchy.


COVNS: But whence came this hatred between the Duke and the King his Nephew.


JUST: My Lord, the Dukes constraining the King, when he was young, stuck in
the kings heart, and now the Dukes proud speech to the King when he had
rendered Breast formerly engaged to the Duke of Britain, kindled again these
coals that were not altogether extinguished, for he used these words: Your
grace ought to put your body in great pain to win a strong hold or town by
fears of arms, ere you take upon you to sell or deliver any town gotten by
the manhood and strong hand and policy of your noble progenitors. VVhereat,
says the story, the King changed his countenance etc: and to say truth* it
was a proud and maisterly speech of the Duke; besides that inclusiuely he
taxed him of sloth and cowardice, as if he had never put himself to the
adventure of winning such a place, undutiful words of a subject do often take
deeper root then the memory of ill deeds do: The Duke of Biron found it when
the King had him at advantage. Humanum est erra^e^
Yea the late Earl of Essex told Queen Elizabeth that her conditions was as
crooked as her carcass: but it cost him his head, which his insurrection had
not cost him, but for that speech, who will say unto a King (says Job) thou
art wicked. Certainly it is the same thing to say unto a Lady, thou art crooked
(and perchance more) as to say unto a King that he is wicked, and to say that
he is a coward, or to use any other words of disgrace, it is one and the same
error.


COVN: But what say you for Arundell, a brave and valiant man, who had the
Kings pardon of his contempt during his minority.


JUST: My good Lord, the Parliament which you say disputes the Kings
prerogative, did quite contrary, and destroyed the kings charter and pardon
formerly given to Arundell. And my good Lord, do you remember, that at the
Parliament that wrought wonders, when these Lords compounded that parliament,
as the King did this, they were so merciless toward all, that they thought
their enemies, as the Earl of Arundell most insolently suffered the Qu: to
kneel unto him three hours for the saving of one of her servants, and that
scorn of his manebat alto mente repostum. And to say the truth, it is more
barbarous and unpardonable then any act that ever he did to permit the wife of
his Sovereign to kneel to him being the Kings vassaile. For if he had saved
the Lords servant freely at her first request, as it is like enough that the
Qu: would also have saved him, Miseris succurrens paria obtinebis aliquando.
For your Lordship sees that the Earl of Warwick who was as far in the
treason as any of the rest, was pardoned. It was also at this parliament that
the Duke of Hereford accused Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, and that the Duke of
Hereford, son to the Duke of Lancaster, was banished to the Kings confusion,
as your Lordship well knows.


COVNS. I know it well, and God knows that the K. had then a silly and weak
Counsel about him, that persuaded him to banish a Prince of the blood, a most
valiant man, and the best beloved of the people in general of any man living,
especially considering that the K. gave every day more then other offense to
his subjects. For besides that he fined the inhabitants that assisted the Lords
in his Minority of the 17 shires) which offense he had long before pardoned,
his blank Charters, and letting the Realm to farm to mean persons, by whom
he was wholly advised, increased the peoples hatred toward the present
government.


JUST: You say well my L. Princes of an ill destiny do always follow the worst
counsel, or at least embrace the best after opportunity is lost, Qui confilia
non ex suo cord sed alienis viribus colligunt, non animo sed auribus cogitant,
And this was not the least grief of the subject in general, that those men
had the greatest part of the spoil of the commonwealth, which neither by
virtue, valor or counsel could add any thing unto it: Nihil est sordidius,
nihil crudelius (says Anto: Pius) qua^si Remp. ij arrode, qui nihil in eam suo
labor co^ferent.


COVNS: Indeed the letting to farm the Realm was very grievous to the
subject.


JUST. Will your Lordship pardon me if I tell you that the letting to Farm of
his Majesty's Customs (the greatest revenue of the Realm) is not very
pleasing.


COVNS. And why I pray you, does not the K. thereby raise his profits every
third year, and one farmer out bids another to the kings advantage.


JUST. It is true my Lord, but it grieves the subject to pay custom to the
subject, for what mighty men are those Farmers become, and if those Farmers get
many thousands every year, as the world knows they do, why should they not
now (being men of infinite wealth) declare unto the K. upon oath, what they
have gained, and henceforth become the Kings collectors of his custom, did not
Queen Elizabeth, who was reputed both a wise and just Princess, after she
had brought Customer Smith from 14000l a year to 42000l a year, made him lay
down a recompense for that which he had gotten? And if these Farmers do give
no recompense, let them yet present the King with the truth of their
receivings and profits. But my Lord for conclusion, after Bollingbrooke
arriving in England with a small troop: Notwithstanding the King at his
landing out of Ireland, had a sufficient and willing army: yet he wanting
courage to defend his right, gave leave to all his soldiers to depart, and put
himself into his hands that cast him into his grave.


COVNS. Yet you see, he was deposed by Parliament.


JUST. As Well may your Lordship say he was knocked in the head by Parliament,
for your Lordship knows, that if King Richard had ever escaped out of their
fingers, that deposed him, the next Parliament would have made all the deposers
traitors and rebels, and that justly. In which Parliament, or rather unlawful
assembly, there appeared but one honest man, to wit, the B. of Carliel, who
scorned his life and estate, in respect of right and his allegia^ce, and
defended the right of his Sovereign Lo: against the K. elect and his partakers.


COVNS. Well I pray go on with the Parliaments held in the time of his
successor Henry the fourth.


JUST. This King had in his third year a subsedy, and in his fifth a tenth of
the Clergy without a Parliament; In his sixth year he had so great a
subsedie, as the House required there might be no record thereof left to
posterity, for the House gave him 20 of every knights Fee, and of every 20^
land, 20^ and 12^ the pound of goods.


COVNS. Yea in the end of this year, the Parliament pressed the king to annex
unto the Crown all temporal possessions belonging to Churchmen within the
land, which at that time, was the third foot of all England. But the Bishops
made friends, and in the end saved their estates.


JUST. By this you see, my Lord, that Cromwell was not the first that thought
on such a business. And if king Henry the 8^ had reserved the Abbeyes, and
other Church lands, which he had given at that time, the revenue of the Crown
of England, had exceeded the revenue of the Crown of Spain, with both the
Indies, whereas used as it was, (a little enriched the Crown) served but to
make a number of petty-foggers, and other gentlemen.


COVNS. But what had the king in steed of this great revenue.


JUST. He had a 15th of the Commons, and a tenth, and a half of the Clergy,
and withal, all pensions granted by king Edward, and king Richard were made
void. It was also moved, that all Crown lands formerly given (at least given
by K. Ed: and K. Rich:) should be taken back.


COVNS. What think you of that, Sir? would it not have been a dishonor to
the king? and would not his Successors have done the like to those that the
king had advanced?


JUST. I cannot answer your Lordship, but by distinguishing* for where the
kings had given land for services, and had not been overreached in his gifts,
there it had bin a dishonor to the king, to have made void the graunts of his
predecessors, or his graunts, but all those graunts of the kings, wherein they
were deceived, the very custom and policy of England makes them void at this
day.


COVNS. How mean you that, for his Majesty has given a great deal of land
among us since he came into England, and would it stand with the kings honor
to take it from us again?


JUST. Yea my Lord, very well with the kings honor, if your Lordship, or any
Lord else, have under the name of 100 land a year, gotten 500^ land, and so
after that rate.


COVNS. I will never believe that his Majesty will ever do any such thing.


JUST. And I believe as your Lordship does, but we spoke e're-while of those
that dissuaded the King from calling it a Parliament: And your Lordship asked
me the reason, why any man should dissuade it, or fear it, to which, this
place gives me an opportunity to make your Lordship an answer, for though his
Majestle will of himself never question those graunts, yet when the Commons
shall make humble petition to the King in Parliament, that it will please his
Majesty to assist them in his relief, with that which ought to be his own,
which, if it will please his Majesty to yield unto, the house will most
willingly furnish and supply the rest, with what grace can his Majesty deny
that honest suite of theirs, the like having been done in many Kings times
before? This proceeding, my good Lord, may perchance prove all your phrases of
the Kings honor, false English.


COVNS. But this cannot concern many, and for my self, I am sure it concerns
me little.


JUST. It is true my Lord, and there are not many that dissuade his Majesty
from a Parliament.


COVNS. But they are great ones, a few of which will serve the turn well
enough.


JUST. But my Lord, be they never so great (as great as Giants) yet if they
dissuade the King from his ready and assured way of his subsistence, they must
devise how the K. may be elsewhere supplied, for they otherwise run into a
dangerous fortune.


COVNS. Hold you contented Sir, the King needs no great disswasion.


JUST. My Lord, learn of me, that there is none of you all, that can pierce
the King. It is an essential property of a man truly wise, not to open all
the boxes of his bosom, even to those that are nearest and dearest unto him,
for when a man is discovered to the very bottom, he is after the less
esteemed. I dare undertake, that when your Lordship has served the King twice
twelve years more, you will find, that his Majesty has reserved somewhat
beyond all your capacities, his Majesty has great reason to put off the
Parliament, as his last refuge, and in the mean time, to make trial of all
your loves to serve him, for his Majesty has had good experience, how well
you can serve your selves: But when the King finds, that the building of your
own fortunes and factions, has been the diligent studies, and the service of
his Majesty, but the exercises of your leisures: He may then perchance cast
himself upon the general love of his people, of which (I trust) he shall never
be deceived, and leave as many of your Lordships as have pilfered from the
Crown, to their examination.


COVNS. Well Sir, I take no great pleasure in this dispute, go on I pray.


JUST. In that Kings 5th year, he had also a subsedy, which he got by
holding the house together from Easter to Christmas, and would not suffer them
to depart. He had also a subsedie in his ninth year. In his eleventh year the
Commons did again press the king to take all the temporalities of the
Churchmen into his hands, which they proved sufficient to maintain 150
Earls, 1500 knights, and 6400 Esquiers, with a hundred hospitals, but they not
prevayling, gave the King a subsedy.

Hen. 5.
As for the notorious Prince, Henry the fifth, I find, that he had given him in
his second year 300000 marks, and after that two other subsedies, one in his
fifth year, another in his ninth, without any disputes.

Hen. 6.
In the time of his successor Henry the sixth, there where not many subsedies.
In his third year, he had a subsedy of a Tunnage and Poundage. And here (says
John Stom) began those payments, which we call customs, because the payment
was continued, whereas before that time it was granted but for a year, two, or
three, according to the Kings occasions. He had also an aid and gathering of
money in his fourth year, and the like in his tenth year, and in his
thirteenth year a 15th. He had also a fifteenth for the conveying of the Queen
out of France into England. In the twenty eight year of that King was the act
of Resumption of all honors, towns, castles, Signieuries, villages, Manors,
lands, tenements, rents, reversions, fees, etc. But because the wages of the
Kings servants, were by the strictnes of the act also restrained, this act of
Resumption was expounded in the Parliament at Reading the 31th year of the
Kings reign.


COVNS. I perceive that those acts of Resumption were ordinary in former times;
for King Stephen resumed the lands, which in former times he had given to make
friends during the Civil wars. And Henry the second resumed all (without
exception) which King Stephen had not resumed; for although King Stephen took
back a great deal, yet he suffered his trustiest servants to enjoye his gift.


JUST. Yes my Lord, and in after times also; for this was not the last, nor
shall be the last, I hope. And judge you my Lord, whether the Parliaments do
not only serve the King, whatsoever is said to the contrary; for as all King
Henry the 6, gifts and graunts were made void by the Duke of York, when he
was in possession of the kingdom by Parliament. So in the time of K. H. when
K. Edw: was beaten out again, the Parliament of Westminster made all his acts
void, made him and all his followers traitors, and gave the King many of their
heads and lands. The Parliaments of England do always serve the King in
possession. It served Rich. the second to condemn the popular Lords. It served
Bollingbrooke to depose Rich. When Edw. the 4. had the Scepter, it made them
all beggars that had followed H. the 6. And it did the like for H. when Edw.
was driven out. The Parliaments are as the friendship of this world is, which
always follows prosperity. For K. Edw. the 4: after that he was possessed
of the Crown, he had in his 13 year a subsedy freely given him: and in the
year following he took a benevolence through England, which arbitrary taking
from the people, served that ambitious traitor the Duke of Bucks. After the
Kings death was a plausible argument to persuade the multitude, that they
should not permit (says Sir Thomas Moore) his line to reign any longer upon
them.


COVNS Well Sir, what say you to the Parliament of Richard the third his time?


JUST. I find but one, and therein he made diverse good Laws. For K. Henry
the seventh in the beginning of his third year he had by Parliament an aid
granted unto him, toward the relief of the Duke of Britain, then assailed
by the French King. And although the King did not enter into the war, but by
the advice of the three estates, who did willingly contribute: Yet those
Northern men which loved Richard the third, raised rebellion under color of
the money imposed, and murdered the Earl of Northumberland whom the King
employed in that Collection. By which your Lordship sees, that it has not
been for taxes and impositions alone, that the ill disposed have taken Arms*
but even for those payments which have been appointed by Parliament.


COVNS. And what became of those Rebels?


JUST. They were fairly hanged, and the money levied notwithstanding, in the
Kings first year he gathered a marvailous great mass of money, by a
benevolence, taking pattern by this kind of levy from Edw. 4th. But the King
caused it first to be moved in Parliament where it was allowed, because the
poorer sort were therein spared. Yet it is true that the king used some art,
for in his Letters he declared that he would measure every man's affections by
his gifts. In the thirteenth year he had also a subsedy, whereupon the
Cornish men took Arms, as the Northern men of the Bishoppricke had done in
the third year of the King.


COVNS. It is without example, that ever the people have rebelled for any thing
granted by Parliament, save in this kings days.


JUST. Your Lordship must consider, that he was not over much beloved, for he
took many advantages upon the people and the Nobility both.


COVNS. And I pray you what say they now of the new impositions lately laid by
the Kings Majesty? do they say that they are justly or injustly laid?


JUST. To impose upon all things brought into the Kingdom is very ancient:
which imposing when it has been continued a certain time, is then called
Customs, because the subjects are accustomed to pay it, and yet the great tax
upon wine is still called Impost, because it was imposed after the ordinary
rate of payment, had lasted many years. But we do now a days understand
those things to be impositions, which are raised by the command of Princes,
without the advice of the commonwealth, though (as I take it) much of that
which is now called custom, was at the first imposed by Prerogative royal:
Now whether it be time or consent that makes them just, I cannot define, were
they just because new, and not justified yet by time, or unjust because they
want a general consent: yet is this rule of Aristotle verified in respect of
his Majesty: Minus timent homines iniustum pati a principe quem cultorem dei
putant. Yea my Lord, they are also the more willingly borne, because all the
world knows they are no new Invention of the Kings. And if those that advised
his Majesty to impose them, had raised his lands (as it was offered them) to
20000l more then it was, and his wards to as much as aforesaid, they had done
him far more acceptable service. But they had their own ends in refusing the
one, and accepting the other. If the land had been raised, they could not have
selected the best of it for themselves: If the impositions had not been laid,
some of them could not have their silks, others pieces in farm, which indeed
grieved the subject ten times more then that which his Majesty enjoys. But
certainly they made a great advantage that were the advisers, for if any tumult
had followed his Majesty, ready way had been to have delivered them over to
the people.


COVNS. But think you that the King would have delivered them if any troubles
had followed?


JUST. I know not my Lord, it was Machiavels counsel to Caesar Borgia to do
it, and K. H. the 8 delivered up Empson and Dudley, yea the same King, when the
great Cardinal Woolsey, who governed the King and all his estate, had (by
requiring the sixth part of every man's goods for the King) raised a rebellion,
the King I say disavowed him absolutely, that had not the Dukes of Norfolk and
Suffolk appeased the people, the Cardinal had sung no more Mass: for these
are the words of our Story: The King then came to Westminster to the Cardinals
palace, and assembled there a great Council, in which he protested, that his
mind was never to ask any thing of his Commons which might sound to the
breach of his Laws. Wherefore he then willed them to know by whose means
they were so strictly given forth. Now my Lord, how the Cardinal would have
shifted himself, by saying, I had the opinion of the Judges, had not the
rebellion been appealed, I greatly doubt.


COVNS. But good Sir, you blanch my question, and answer me by examples. I
ask you whether or no in any such tumult, the people pretending against any
one or two great Officers, the King should deliver them, or defend them?


JUST. My good Lord, the people have not stayde for the kings delivery, neither
in England, nor in France: Your Lordship knows how the Chancellor,
Treasurer, and Chief Justice, with many others at several times have bin used
by the Rebels: And the Marshals, Constables, and Treasurers in France, have
been cut in pieces in Charles the sixth his time. Now to your Lordships
question, I say that where any man shall give a King perilous advice, as may
either cause a rebellion, or draw the peoples love from the King. I say, that a
King shall be advised to banish him: But if the King do absolutely command his
servant to do any thing displeasing to the Commonwealth, and to his own
peril, there is the King bound in honor to defend him. But my good Lord for
conclusion, there is no man in England that will lay any invention either
grievous or against law upon the Kings Majesty: And therefore your Lordships
must share it amongst you.


COVNS. For my part, I had no hand in it, (I think) Ingram was he that
propounded it to the Treasurer.


JUST. Alas my good Lord, every poor wayter in the Custom House, or every
promoter might have done it, there is no invention in these things. To lay
impositions, and sell the Kings lands, are poor and common devices. It is true
that Ingram and his fellows are odious men, and therefore his Majesty pleased
the people greatly to put him from the Coffership. It is better for a Prince to
use such a kind of men, then to countenance them, hang-men are necessary in a
Commonwealth: yet in the Nether-lands, none but a hangmans son will marry a
hang-mans daughter. Now my Lord, the last gathering which Henry the seventh
made, was in his twentieth year, wherein he had another benevolence both of
the Clergy and Laity, a part of which taken of the poorer sort, he ordained
by his Testament that it should be restored. And for King Henry the eight,
although he was left in a most plentiful estate, yet he wonderfully pressed his
people with great payments; for in the beginning of his time it was infinite
that he spent in Masking and Tilting, Banqueting, and other vanities, before
he was entered into the most consuming expense of the most fond and fruitless
war that ever King undertook. In his fourth year he had one of the
greatest subsedies that ever was granted; for besides two fifteenes and two
dismes, he used David's Law of Capitation or head-money, and had of every Duke
ten marks, of every Earl five pounds, of every Lord four pounds, of every
Knight four marks, and every man rated at 8^ in goods, 4 marks, and so after
the rate: yea every man that was valued but at 40 paid 12^, and every man and
woman above 15 years 4^. He had also in his sixth year diverse subsedies
granted him. In his fourteenth there was a tenth demanded of every man's goods,
but it was moderated. In the Parliament following, the Clergy gave the King
the half of their spiritual livings for one year, and of the Laity there was
demanded 800000', which could not be levied in England, but it was a marveilous
great gift that the king had given him at that time. In the Kings seventeenth
year was the Rebellion before spoken of, wherein King disavowed the Cardinal.
In his seventeenth year he had the tenth and fifteenth given by Parliament,
which were before that time paid to the Pope. And before that also, the monyes
that the King borrowed in his fifteenth year were forgiven him by Parliament
in his seventeenth year. In his 35 year a subsedy was granted of 4^ the pound
of every man worth in goods from 20^ to 5^, from 5^ to 10l and upwards of every
pound 2. And all strangers, denisens and others doubled this sum, strangers
not being inhabitants above 16 years, 4^ a head. All that had Lands, Fees, and
Annuities, from 20 to 5^, and so double as they did for goods: And the Clergy
gave 6 the pound. In the thirty seventh year, a Benevolence was taken, not
voluntary, but rated by Commissioners, which because one of the Aldermen
refused to pay, he was sent for a soldier into Scotland. He had also another
great subsedy of six shillings the pound of the Clergy, and two shillings
eight pence of the goods of the Laity, and four shillings the pound upon Lands.

Edw. 6.
In the second year of Edward the sixth, the Parliament gave the King an aid of
twelve pence the pound of goods of his Natural subjects, and two shillings the
pound of strangers, and this to continue for three years, and by the statute
of the second and third of Edward the sixth, it may appear, the same Parliament
did also give a second aid, as follows, (to wit) of every Ewe kept in
several pastures, 3: of every weather kept as aforesaid 2^: of every sheep
kept in the Common, 1^ ob. The House gave the King also 8 the pound of every
woollen cloth made for the sale throughout England for three years. In the
third and fourth of the King, by reason of the troublesome gathering of the
polymony upon sheep, and the tax upon cloth, this act of subsedy was
repealed, and other relief given the King, and in the kings seventh year he
had a subsedy and two fifteenes.

In the first year of Queen Mary, M. R.
tunnage and poundage were granted. In the second year a subsedy was given to
King Philip, and to the Queen, she had also a third subsedy in Annis 4. and 5.

Now my Lord, Eliz. R.
for the Parliaments of the late Queens time, in which there was nothing new,
neither head money, nor sheep money, nor escuage, nor any of these kinds of
payments was required, but only the ordinary subsedies, and those as easily
granted as demanded, I shall not need to trouble your Lordship with any of
them, neither can I inform your Lordship of all the passages and acts which
have passed, for they are not extant, nor printed.


COVNS. No, it were but time lost to speak of the latter, and by those that
are already remembered, we may judge of the rest, for those of the greatest
importance are public. But I pray you deal freely with me, what you think
would be done for his Majesty, if he should call a Parliament at this time,
or what would be required at his Majesty's hands?


JUST. The first thing that would be required, would be the same that was
required by the Commons in the thirtenth year of H. the 8: (to wit) that if
any man of the commons house should speak more largely, then of duty he
ought to do, all such offenses to be pardoned, and that to be of record.


COVNS. So might every Companion speak of the King what they list.


JUST. No my Lord, the reverence which a Vassal ovyeth to his Sovereign, is
alvvaies intended for every speech, howsoever it must import the good of the
King, and his estate, and so long it may be easily pardoned, otherwise not;
for in Queen Elizabeth's time, who gave freedom of speech in all Parliaments,
when Wentworth made those motions, that were but supposed dangerous to the
Queens estate, he was imprisoned in the Tower, notwithstanding the privilege
of the house, and there died.


COVNS. What say you to the Scicilian vespers remembered in the last Parliament?


JUST. I say, he repented him heartily that used that speech, and indeed
besides that, it was seditious, this example held not: The French in Scicily
usurped that Kingdom, they kept neither law nor faith, they took away the
inheritance of the Inhabitants, they took from them their wives, and ravished
their daughters, committing all other insolences that could be imagined. The
Kings Majesty is the Natural Lord of England, his Vassals of Scotland obey the
English Laws, if they break them, they are punished without respect. Yea his
Majesty put one of his Barons to a shameful death, for being consenting only
to the death of a Common Fencer: And which of these ever did or durst commit
any outrage in England, but to say the truth, the opinion of packing the last,
was the cause of the contention and disorder that happened.


COVNS. Why sir? do you not think it best to compound a Parliament of the
Kings servant and others, that shall in all obey the kings desires?


JUST. Certainly no, for it has never succeeded well, neither on the kings
part, nor on the subjects, as by the Parliament before-remembred your
Lordshippe may gather, for from such a composition do arise all jealousies,
and all contentions. It was practiced in elder times, to the great trouble of
the kingdom, and to the loss and ruin of many. It was of latter time used by
King Henry the eight, but every way to his disadvantage. When the King leaves
himself to his people, they assure themselves that they are trusted and
beloved of their king, and there was never any assembly so barbarous, as not to
answer the love and trust of their King. Henry the sixth when his estate was
in effect utterly overthrown, and utterly impouerished at the humble request
of his Treasurer made the same known to the House, or otherwise, using the
Treasurers own words, He humbly desired the King to take his staff, that he
might save his wardship.


COVNS. But you know, they will presently be in hand with those impositions,
which the King has laid by his own royal prerogative.


JUST. Perchance not my Lord; but rather with those impositions that have been
by some of your Lordships laid upon the King, which did not some of your
Lordships fear more than you do the impositions laid upon the Subjects, you
would never dissuade his Majesty from a Parliament: For no man doubted, but
that his Majesty was advised to lay those impositions by his Council; and for
particular things on which they were laid, the advice came from petty fellows
(though now great ones) belonging to the Custom House. Now my Lord, what
prejudice has his Majesty (his revenue being kept up) if the impositions
that were laid by the advice of a few, be in Parliament laid by the general
Council of the kingdom, which takes off all grudging and complaint.


COVNS. Yea Sir, but that which is done by the King, with the advice of his
private or privy Council, is done by the Kings absolute power.


IVS. And by whose power is it done in Parliament, but by the Kings absolute
power? mistake it not my Lord: The 3 estates do but advise, as the privy
Council does, which advice if the king embrace, it becomes the kings own act
in the one, and the kings law in the other, for without the kings acceptance,
both the public and private aduices be but as empty egge-shels; and what
does his Majesty loose if some of those things, which concerns the poorer sort
be made free again, and the revenue kept up upon that which is superfluous? Is
it a loss to the K. to be beloved of the Commons? if it be revenue which the
K. seeks, is it not better to take it of those that laugh, than of those that
cry? Yea if all be content to pay upon a moderation and change of the
Species: Is it more honorable and more safe for the King, that the Subject pay
by persuasion, then to have them constrained? If they be contented to whip
themselves for the King, were it not better to give them their rod into their
own hands, than to commit them to the executioner? Certainly it is far more
happy for a Sovereign Prince, that a Subject open his purse willingly, than
that the same be opened by violence. Besides that when impositions are laid by
Parliament, they are gathered by the authority of the law, which (as
aforesaid) rejects all complaints, and stops every mutinous mouth: It
shall ever be my prayer, that the King embrace the Council of honor and
safety, and let other Princes embrace that of force.


COVNS. But good Sir, it is his Prerogative which the K. stands upon, and it is
the Prerogative of the kings, that the Parliaments do all diminish.


JUST. If your Lordship would pardon me, I would say then, that your Lordships
objection against Parliaments is ridiculous. In former Parliaments three
things have been supposed dishonor of the King. The first, that the Subjects
have conditioned with the King, when the King has needed them, to have the
great Charter confirmed: the second, that the Estates have made Treasurers for
the necessary and profitable disbursing of those sums by them given, to the
end, that the kings, to whom they were given, should expend them for their
own defense, and for the defense of the commonwealth: The third, that these
have pressed the King to discharge some great Officers of the Crown, and to
elect others. As touching the first my Lord, I would feign learn what
disadvantage the Kings of this Land have had by confirming the great Charter,
the breach of which have served only men of your Lordships rank, to assist
their own passions, and to punish and imprison at their own discretion the
Kings poor Subjects. Concerning their private hatred, with the color of the
Kings service, for the Kings Majesty takes no man's inheritance (as I have said
before) nor any man's life, but by the Law of the land, according to the
Charter. Neither does his Majesty imprison any man, (matter of practice, which
concerns the preservation of his estate excepted) but by the law of the land.
And yet he uses his prerogative as all the Kings of England have ever used
it: for the supreme reason cause to practice many things without the advice
of the law. As in insurrections and rebellions, it uses the marshall, and not
the common law, without any breach of the Charter, the intent of the Charter
considered truly. Neither has any Subject made complaint, or been grieved,
in that the Kings of this land, for their own safties, and preservation of
their estates, have used their Prerogatives, the great Ensign, on which there
is written soli Deo. And my good Lord, was not Buckingham in England, and Byron
in France condemned, their Peers vncall'd? And withal, was not Byron utterly
(contrary to the customs and privileges of the French) denied an advocate to
assist his defense? for where laws forecast cannot provide remedies for future
dangers, Princes are forced to assist themselves by their prerogatives. But
that which has been ever grievous, and the cause of many troubles, very
dangerous is, that your Lordships abusing the reasons of state, do punish and
imprison the Kings Subjects at your pleasure. It is you my Lords, that when
Subjects have sometimes need of the Kings prerogative, do then use the
strength of the law, and when they require the law, you afflict them with the
prerogative, and tread the great Charter (which has been confirmed by 16.
acts of Parliament) under your feet, as a torn parchment or wast paper.


COVNS. Good Sir, which of us do in this sort break the great Charter?
perchance you mean, that we have advised the King to lay the new impositions.


JUST. No my Lord: there is nothing in the great Charter against impositions:
and besides that, necessity does persuade them. And if necessity do in
somewhat excuse a private man a fortiori, it may then excuse a Prince. Again,
the Kings Majesty has profit and increase of revenue by the impositions. But
there are of your Lordships (contrary to the direct letter of the Charter) that
imprison the Kings Subjects, and deny them the benefit of the law, to the
Kings disprofit. And what do you otherwise thereby (if the impositions be in
any sort grievous) but Renovare dolores? and withal dig out of the dust the
long-buried memory of the Subjects former intentions with their Kings.


COVNS. What mean you by that?


JUST. I will tell your Lordshippe when I dare, in the mean time it is enough
for me, to put your Lordship in mind, that all the estates in the world, in
the offense of the people, have either had profit or necessity to persuade them
to adventure it, of which, if neither be urgent, and yet the Subject
exceedingly grieved, your Lordship may conjecture, that the House will be
humble suitors for a redress. And if it be a Maxim in policy to please the
people in all things indifferent, and never suffer them to be beaten, but for
the Kings benefit, (for there are no blows forgotten with the smart but
those) then I say to make them vassals to vassals, is but to batter down those
mastering buildings, erected by King Henry the seventh, and fortified by his
Son, by which the people and Gentlemen of England were brought to depend upon
the King alone. Yea my good Lord, Q. E.
our late dear Sovereign kept them up, and to their advantage, as well
repaired as ever Prince did, Defend me, and spend me, says the Irish churl.


COVNS. Then you think that this violent breach of the Charter will be the
cause of seeking the confirmation of it in the next Parliament, which otherwise
could never have bin moved.


JUST. I know not my good Lord, perchance not, for if the House press the
King to grant unto them all that is theirs by the law, they cannot (in
justice) refuse the King all that is his by the law. And where will be the
issue of such a contention? I dare not divine, but sure I am that it will tend
to the prejudice both of the K: and subject.


COVN: If they dispute not their own liberties; why should they then dispute
the Kings liberties, which we call his prerogative.


JUST: Among so many and so diverse spirits, no man can foretell what may be
propounded, but howsoever if, the matter be not slightly handled on the Kings
behalf, these disputes will soon dissolve, for the King has so little need
of his prerogative, and so great advantage by the laws, as the fear of
imparing the one, to wit, the prerogative, is so impossible, and the burden of
the other (to wit) the law so weighty, as but by a branch of the Kings
prerogative, namely of his remission and pardon, the subject is no way able to
undergo it. This my Lord is no matter of flourish that I have said, but it is
the truth, and unanswerable.


COVNS. But to execute the laws very severely, would be very grievous.


JUST. Why my Lord, are the Laws grievous which our selves have required of
our Kings? and are the prerogatives also which our Kings have reserved to
themselves also grievous? how ca^ such a people then be well pleased? And if
your Lordship confess that the laws give too much, why does your Lordship
urge the prerogative that gives more? Nay I will be bold to say it, that except
the Laws were better observed, the prerogative of a religious Prince has
manifold less perils then the letter of the Law has. Now my Lord, for the
second and third, to wit, for the appointing of Treasurers, and removing of
Counselors, our Kings have evermore laughed them to scorn that have pressed
either of these, and after the Parliament dissolved, took the money of the
Treasurers of the Parliament, and recalled and restored the officers
discharged, or else they have bin contented, that so me such persons should be
removed at the request of the whole kingdom, which they themselves out of
their noble natures, would not seem willing to remove.


COVNS. Well Sir, would you notwithstanding all these arguments advise his
Majesty to call a Parliament?


JUST: It belongs to your Lordships who enjoy the Kings favor, and are chosen
for your able wisdom to advise the K. It were a strange boldness in a poor
and private person, to advise Kings, attended with so understanding a Council.
But belike your Lordships have conceived some other way, how money may be
gotten otherwise. If any trouble should happen, your Lordship knows, that then
there were nothing so dangerous for a King, as to be without money: a
Parliament cannot assemble in haste, but present dangers require hasty
remedies. It will be no time then to discontent the subjects by using any
vnordinary ways.


COVNS. Well Sir, all this notwithstanding we dare not advise the king to call
a parliament, for if it should succeed ill, we that advise, should fall into
the kings disgrace. And if the king be driven into any extremity, we can say
to the K. that because we found it extremely unpleasing to his Majesty to
hear of a Parliament, we thought it no good manners to make such a motion.


JUST. My Lord, to the first let me tell you, that there was never any just
Prince that has taken any advantage of the success of Councels, which have
been founded on reason. To fear that, were to fear the loss of the bell,
more then the loss of the steeple, and were also the way to beat all men from
the studies of the Kings service. But for the second, where you say you can
excuse your selves upon the Kings own protesting against a parliament, the
king upon better consideration may encounter that finenesse of yours.


COVNS: How I pray you?


JUST: Even by declaring himself to be indifferent, by calling your Lordships
together, and by delivering unto you, that he hears how his loving subjects in
general are willing to supply him, if it please him to call a Parliament, for
that was the common answer to all the Sheriffs in England, when the late
benevolence was commanded. In which respect, and because you come short in all
your proiects, and because it is a thing most dangerous for a King to be
without treasure, he requires such of you, as either mislike, or rather fear a
parliament, to set down your reasons in writing, which you either misliked, or
feared it. And such as wish and desire it, to set down answers to your
objections: And so shall the King prevent the calling or not calling on his
Majesty, as some of your great Councellers have done in many other things
shrinking up their shoulders, and saying, the K. will have it so.


COVNS. Well Sir, it grows late, and I will bid you farewell, only you shall
take well with you this advice of mine, thst in all that you have said against
our greatest, those men in the end shall be your Judges in their own cause, you
that trouble your self with reformation, are like to be well rewarded: for
hereof you may assure your self, that we will never allow of any invention
how profitable soever, unless it proceed, or seem to proceed from
our*selues.


JUST: If then my Lord, we may presume to say that Princes may be unhappy in
any thing, certainly they are unhappy in nothing more then in suffering
themselves to be so enclosed. Again, if we may beleeu Pliny, who tells us, that
it is an ill sign of prosperity in any kingdom or state, where such as deserve
well, find no other recompense then the contentment of their own consciences,
a far worse sign is it, where the justly accused shall take revenge of the
just accuser. But my good Lord, there is this hope remaining, that seeing he
has been abused by them he trusted most, he will not for the future
dishonor of his judgment (so well informed by his own experience) as to
expose such of his vassals (as have had no other motives to serve him, then
simply the love of his person and his estate) to their revenge, who have only
been moved by the love of their own fortunes, and their glory.


COVNS: But good Sir, the King has not been deceived by all.


JUST. No my Lord, neither have all been trusted, neither does the world
accuse all, but believe, that there be among your Lordships very just and
worthy men, as well of the Nobility as others, but those though most honored in
the Commonwealth, yet have they not been most employed: your Lordship knows
it well enough, that 3 or 4 of your Lordships have thought your hands strong
enough to bear up alone the weightiest affairs in the Commonwealth, and
strong enough, all the land have found them to beat down whom they pleased.


COVNS: I understand you, but how shall it appear that they have only sought
themselves.


JUST: There needs no perspectiue glass to discern it, for neither in the
treaties of peace and war, in matters of revenue, and matters of trade, any
thing has happened either of love or of judgment. No my Lord, there is not any
one action of theirs eminent, great or small, the greatness of themselves only
excepted.


COVNS: It is all one, your papers can neither answer nor reply, we can.
Besides you tell the King no news in delivering these complaints, for he
knows as much as can be told him.


JUST: For the first my Lord, whereas he has once the reasons of things
delivered him, your Lordships shall need to be well advised, in their answers
there is no sophistry will serve the turn, where the Judge, and the
understanding are both supreme. For the 2d, to say that his Majesty knows,
and cares not, that my Lord were but to despair all his faithful subjects.
But by your favor my Lord, we see it is contrary, we find now that there is
no such singular power as there has been, justice is described with a
balance in her hand, holding it even and it hangs as even now as ever it did
in any kings days, for singular authority begets but general oppression.


COVNS. Howsoever it be, that is nothing to you, that have no interest in the
kings favor, nor perchance in his opinion, and concerning such a one, the
misliking, or but misconceiuing of any one hard word, phrase, or sentence, will
give argument to the K. either to co^demn or reject the whole discourse. And
howsoever his M^ may neglect your informations, you may be sure that others (at
whom you point) will not neglect their revenges, you will therefore confess it
(when it is too late) that you are exceeding sorry that you have not followed my
advice. Remember Cardinal Woolsey, who lost all men for the Kings service, and
when their malice (whom he grieved) had out-liued the Kings affection, you
know what became of him as well as I.


JUST. Yea my Lord, I know it well, that malice has a longer life, than either
love or thankfulness has, for as we always take more care to put off pain,
than to enjoy pleasure, because the one has no intermission, and with the
other we are often satisfied, so it is in the smart of injury and the memory of
good turns: Wrongs are written in marble: Benefits are (sometimes)
acknowledged, rarely requited. But my Lord, we shall do the K. great wrong,
to judge him by common rules, or ordinary examples, for seeing his Majesty has
greatly enriched and advanced those that have but pretended his service, no man
needs to doubt of his goodness toward those that shall perform any thing
worthy reward. Nay, the not taking knowledge of those of his own vassals that
have done him wrong, is more to be lamented, than the relinquishing of those
that do him right, is to be suspected. I am therefore, my good Lo: held to my
resolution by these a, besides the former. The 1, that God would never have
blessed him with so many years, and in so many actions, yea in all his actions,
had he paid his honest servants with evil for good. The 2d, where your
Lordship tells me, that I will be (...) for not following your advice. I pray
your Lordship to believe, that I am no way subject to the common sorrowing
(...) worldly men, this Maxim of Plato being true. Dolores aex amore animi
orga corpus noscuntur. But for my body, my mind values it at nothing.


COVNS. What is it then you hope for or seek?


JUST. Neither riches, nor honor, nor thanks, but I only seek to satisfy
his Majesty (which I would have bin glad to have done in matters of more
importance) that I have lived, and will die an honest man.


EINIS.
The Authors Epitaph, made by himself.
EVen such is Time, which takes in trust
Our Youth, and Ioy's, and all we have,
And pays us but with age and dust,
Which in the dark and silent grave,
When we have wandered all our ways,
Shuts up the story of our days:
And from which Earth, and Grave, and Dust
The Lord shall raise me up I trust.

