THE SVMME OF THE CONFERENCE BETWEEN JOHN RAINOLDES AND JOHN HEART: TOUCHING THE
HEAD AND THE FAITH OF THE CHVRCH.

Wherein by the way are handled sundry points, of the sufficiency and right
expounding of the Scriptures, the ministry of the Church, the function of
Priesthood, the sacrifice of the Mass, with other controversies of religion:
but chiefly and purposely the point of Church-gouerment, opened in the branches
of Christ's supreme soueraintie, of Peter's pretended, the Popes usurped, the
Princes lawful Supremacy.

Penned by John Rainoldes, according to the notes set down in writing by them
both: perused by John Heart, and (after things supplied, and altered, as he
thought good) allowed for the faithful report of that which past in conference
between them.

Whereto is annexed a Treatise entitled, SIX CONCLVSIONS TOUCHING THE HOLY
SCRIPTVRE AND THE CHVRCH, written by John Rainoldes.

With a defense of such things as Thomas Stapleton and Gregory Martin have
carped at therein.

1. Ioh. 4.1. Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits
whether they be of God: for many false Prophets are gone out into the world.

Londini, impensis Geor. Bishop. 1584

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, the Lord Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, one of her
Majesty's privy Council, and Chancellor of the University of Oxford, grace
and peace be multiplied.
THe beginning of Schools and Universities (right Honorable) in the Church of
God, does show that they were planted to be 1. Sam. 19.2^* 2. King. 2.5. and
4.8.
nurseries of Prophets: who, being instructed in the truth of his word, might
deliver it to men; and lighten, as stars, the darkness of the world with
the beams of it. But it has come to pass by devises of the dragon, Reave.
1^.^.
whose tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and cast them to the
earth, that they have been turned into seminaries of false Prophets: to
maintain errors and the power of darkness, against the light and truth of
Christ. The primitive Church had experience hereof in them Act. 6. ver. 9.
of the Synagogue of Libertines, and Cyrenians, who disputed with Steven. A
lesson for the faithful in the ages to follow, that they should not think it
strange, or be dismayed, if Schools and Universities of men professing
wisdom were possessed of folly, and sought to pervert the straight ways of
the Lord. The consideration whereof, as it was needful for our predecessors,
when Rabbines of the Jews, Philosophers of the Heathe^s, Sorbonists among
Christians, being seduced themselves, seduced others: so have the Seminaries of
our English students (erected by the Pope of late at Rome and Rhemes) made it
needeful also for us at this day. The more: how much the nerer their dealings
do come to those of the Synagogue of Libertines and Cyrenians. For as they
defended ver. 14.
the Jewish opinions received by tradition from their Fathers: so do the
Seminaries the Popish superstitions. As they did pretend the care of religion,
ver. 11.
of Moses, and God, the law, and the Temple: so do the Seminaries, of the
Catholic faith, the Scriptures, and the Church. As the means they used were
sclanders of Steven, ver. 13.
that he spoke blasphemous words against the holy place, and the law: so do
the Seminaries charge us with reuolting from the holy Church, and corrupting
the Scriptures. I am not worthy to be compared with the least ofthe servants
of God, who lived at that time, in which he powered the gifts of his holy
spirit from heaven so abundantly. Howbeit, as it pleased him to raise Steven
to dispute with some of the Jewish Synagogue: so has he vouchsafed me of this
favor, that I should be called to confer with certain ofthe Popish
Seminaries. Of whom, one, contented to proceed farther therein then the rest;
by writing, not by word only: has given occasion ofthis, which here I
publish. Wherein how indifferently he has been dealt with: himself has
declared. My conscience, for mine own part, bears me witness that I have
endeavored to defend the cause of the same truth, with the same purpose, by the
same principles, and grounds, that Act. 7.2.
Steue^ did. Wishing from my heart, (if so it please God,) that it may prevail
more with English Papists, then Steuens speech did with the Jewish Priests. But
ready (by his grace) to endure their spite, ifthey hate me for telling them the
truth, as the Jews did him. Now, since Luke, who penned the story of Steven,
sent it to Act. 1.1.
Theophilus, Luke 1.3.
most noble Theophilus: I have been the bolder to present my conference unto
you, right Honorable; advanced, in state, to be of the most noble; in mind, a
Theophilus, and lover ofthe truth. Your benefits both publicly to our
University, in maintenance of our privileges; and privately to me ward, a
member thereof: have bound me to offer this testificat^on of a thankful
mind. And since it has been (I know) a grief unto you, that the Popish
Synagogue has drawn (...). 23.1^.
proselytes thence: I thought it most meet that the labors spent with one so
withdrawn, and printed to reclaim them who are gone, if may be, or at least
to stay them who are not gone, should bring him the salve whom the sore had
touched nearest. Which moves me withal to beseech your Honor, that, as you
have begoon, so you will go forward in being careful for our nurserie: that
they, who have the charge of husbanding it, may fense it and dress it
faithfully and wisely; that neither the wild boar of the forest, nor other
vermin may anoy it; that Ezekiel. 47.12.
the fruits of the trees thereof may serve for meat, and the leaves for
medicine, through waters running out of the sanctuary; and Genesis 3.9.
the tree of life may grow in the midst of it, as in the garden of Eden
planted by the Lord. So shall you leave a most worthy monument of a noble
Theophilus: the reward whereof shall follow from God, Psalm. 6^* ^^.
who will render to every man according to his works; the remembrance shall
rest in the Christian Church and common wealth ofEngland, to your eternal
praise throughout all posterity. The Lord of his mercy bless you with
continual increase of the graces of his holy spirit: specially of that, 1.
Ti^. ^^*
which has the promise of this life, and of the life to come, to your endless
comfort, through Jesus Christ the Lord of life. At London, the eighteenth of
July. 1584.

Your Honors in Christ at commandment, John Rainoldes.

John Heart to the indifferent Reader.
BEhold (gentle Reader) the conference, which thou have so long looked for,
between M. Rainoldes and me, at length ended: as also it had been more then
twelve months since, had not my self hindered the coming of it forth, when
it was nigh ready to be delivered to the Printer. For it is now above two
years ago, that the right honorable, Sir Francis Walsingham, as he had showed
me great favor from the time that I was apprehended, in granting me liberty
of conference at home, first in mine own country, and afterward in prison:
so, when the sentence of death was past upon me, he ceased not still to offer
me the same favor if I would admit it. Which I, grounding my self upon the
most certain foundation of the Church so strengthened by God that it shall
stand for ever, did gladly yield to, and (as became me) accepted of it with all
duty. Whereupon his Honor sent for M. Rainoldes to confer with me: taking
order also that I should be furnished with whatsoever books I did need
thereto. But after we had spent certain weeks together in conference by word
of mouth, and I continued still in my former mind: he desired to have the sum
thereof in writing, that he might see the grounds on which I stood. And to
this intent we set down together brief notes of the points that we dealt in:
I showing my reasons with the places of the autours whose judgment and
learning I rather trusted too, then to my own skill; and M. Rainoldes
answering them in such sort as he thought good. Howbeit, those notes being so
short (as pointing to things rather then unfolding them) that they could not
well be understood by any, but our selves only, unless they were drawn more
largely and at full: my self being troubled then with more necessary
cogitations of death, (as altogether uncertain when I might be called to yield
up mine account before God and man,) requested M. Rainoldes to take pains to
pen them according to our notes thereof. Promising him that I would peruse it
when he had done it, and allow of it, if it were to my mind; or otherwise
correct, if I misliked ought in it. This pains he undertook, and sending me
the parts thereof from time to time as he finished them, I noted such things
as I would have added, or altered therein, and he performed it accordingly. But
when I perceived that it was prepared to be set forth in print: I sought
means to stay it all that I could, for some considerations which seemed to me
very great and important. Marry since that again understanding it to be his
Honors pleasure that it should go forward, whereunto he granted me also by
special warrant the use of such books as I should call for to help my self
withal: I set afresh upon it, and by letters written unto M. Rainoldes and
received from him, I had mine own speeches and reasons perfitted, as I would.
Wherefore, I acknowledge that he has set down herein a true report of those
things which past in conference between us, according to the grounds and
places of the autours, which I had quoted and referred my self too. As for that
which he affirms In the seventh Chapter, and the seventh Division.
in one place, that I have told him, that my opinion is, the Pope may not
depose Princes: in deed I told him so much. And in truth I think that
although the spiritual power be more excellent and worthy the^ the temporal;
yet they are both of God, neither does the one depend of the other. Whereupon
I gather as a certain conclusion, that the opinion of them, who hold the Pope
to be a temporal Lord over Kings and Princes, is unreasonable and improbable
altogether. For he has not to meddle with the^ or theirs ciuilly, much less
to depose them or give away their kingdoms: that is no part of his commission.
He has in my judgment the Fatherhoode of the Church, not a Princehood of the
world: Christ himself taking no such title upon him, nor giving it to Peter, or
any other of his disciples. And that is it which I meant to defend in him, and
no other soueraintie. Humbly desiring pardon of her Majesty, my gracious
sovereign Lady, for my plain dealing in that, which (so Christ help me) I
take to be Gods cause, and the Churches only. As I do also most willingly
submit my self to the courteous correction of all men, who, through greater
skill, and perfitter judgment, see more then I do in the depth of these
matters whereof I have conferred. Farewell, gentle Reader: and now that I have
showed thee my dealing herein, let me obtain this little request at thy
hands, that thou be not too hasty in giving thy judgment, before thou have
weighed all things sincerely and uprightly.

From the Tower, the seventh of July.
John Rainoldes to the Students of the English Seminaries at Rome and Rhemes.
BRethren, my hearts desire and prayer unto God for Israel is, that they may be
saved. For that which S. Romans 10.^.
Paul wrote to the Romans, touching the Israelites, Romans 9.3.
his brethren and kinsmen according to the flesh, as being of one nation with
him* that must I protest to you (brethren) your selves, my kinsemen according
to the flesh in like sort, and countriemen of England. Of whom I have the
greater compassion and pity, because I am persuaded that you sin of
ignorance rather then of wilfulness; and have a devotion to serve God aright,
though not the right way wherein he will be served. That I may justly say the
same unto you, which S. Romans 10.2.
Paul of the^: For I bear you record that you have the zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge. The zeal, which the Israelites had, was of Act. 22.3.
the law. The knowledge, which they wa^ted, was the true meaning of it. For
they expounded it after Gal. ^.1*
the traditions and doctrines of their Fathers: and knowing not Romans 10.4.
Christ to be the end thereof, they sought their own righteousness against
the righteousness of God. The zeal, which you have, is of the Gospel. The
knowledge, which you want, is the true meaning of it too. For you are
instructed to understand it Allen in the Apology, of the English Seminari^s.
chapt. 6.
after the manner of your Fathers. Whereby your seducer bears you in hand,
that chapt. 2.
the Pope is supreme head of the Church; chapt. 3.
the trade of Popish Priesthood, the way to save souls; chapt. 1. and 6.
the sacrifice of Popish Mass, the souerain sacrifice; in a word, chapt. 5.
that Papistrie is the Catholic faith: and chapt. 1. and* 5.
the faith and service of the Church of England is cursed and damnable;
specially, chapt. 1. and 4.
the oath of the Queens supremacy. And your minds are taken so with these
opinions, that you are content to venture as far in the defense of them, as
the Donatists did, who loved their errors better then their lives. Great
zeal, but not according to knowledge, my brethren. For the Gospel teaches
not that which you imagine; your Fathers were abused by Phariseis and Rabbines:
your Pope has vs^rped over all Christian states; your Priesthood is impious;
your Mass, abominatio^; your Popish faith, heresy; our doctrine of the
Queens supremacy, and oath thereto, our ministry of the word, of sacraments,
of prayers, agrees with the Gospel, and therefore is holy. Which things since
this Conference, that one of your Seminarie-Priests, and I have had, does open
and prove: peruse it (^ beseech you) with equity and judgment; and study to
join knowledge to your zeal, that you may be saved. Perhaps your Superiors
(the Esai. 9.16.
guides who seduce you) will not give you leave to read it and peruse it. But
there are two reasons which should move them to co^descend thereto: the one, of
the work; the other, of the autours. The work, is a conference: which
themselves have called for. And Allen, in hi^ Apology, chapt. 5.
the chiefest of the^ has wished, that some of theirs might meet in
scholasticall combat with any of us before indifferent judges: trusting that
their doctrine, which we condemn of fancy and humane tradition, should then
be inuincibly proved to be most agreeable to Gods word. Wherefore since this
combat has been undertaken, and that in such sort as ^heologi^^ Mini^^ri
ecclesia^um ditioni^ Casimiri, in Admonitione de li^ro Concord^^, cap. 12.
learned men have thought to be most fit for trial of the truth; not by
extemporall speaking, but writing with advise; the question agreed of; the
arguments, the answers, the replies set down, and sifted of both sides, till
each had fully said; in fine, the whole published, that Churches and the
faithful all may judge of it: your guides cannot honestly deny you the sight
of their invincible proofs therein. The autours of the work: are M. Heart and
I. Of whom Concertat. ecclesi^e Catho^licae in Anglia aduersus Calvin. and
Puritan. In epistola Lucae Kyrby, and Apologia Martyrum.
they have given out in print to the world, sithence we began it, that I,
Quamuis doctissimus illius ordinis.
though the lernedst (as the reporter says) of that sort and order, yet Tanto
in doctiorem se esse ostendit.
did show my self so much the more unlearned, how much the more earnestly I was
dealt with: but M. Heart, Egregium Christi Athle^am.
a noble champion of Christ, and Sanctum sacerdotem.
a holy Priest, a Sacrae Theologiae Baccalau reum.
Bacheler of Divinity, Firmiores egisse radices in fide^ fundamentis.
had taken deeper root in the foundations of the faith, and Doctrina esse
solidiori.
was of sounder lerning, then that the reasons, which I ( Ministrum synagog^e
Anglicanae non vulgarem.
no common Minister of the English synagogue) brought to overthrow him, could
remove him from it. So that Re insecta, vnde venit, ^ecessit.
I was feign to go whence I came: and leave him, as I found him. Now, if they
themselves think this to be true, which they have given out: they may boldly
suffer you to read our Conference, that you may see the triumph, which a
noble champio^ of yours, a holy Priest, a Bacheler of Divinity, has had of a
Minister of the English synagogue, an unlearned Minister, and yet the lernedst
of that sort. But if they will not give you leave to read it: then may you
suspect that these glorious speeches of their own scholars, and base words of
us, are but sleights of policy; as many vauntes and lies be in the same
pamphlets wherein these are written. Nay, you may suspect, that there is
somewhat which they are afraid least you should epsy: and therefore debar
you from the means of knowing it. In deed, my dear brethren, you are
circumuented by Allen in hi^ ^pologie The n^^ration o^ the English (...) in
(...).
them who commend the love, and liberality, and piety of the Pope, in
erecting Seminaries to train up English youth under the Jesuits and other
famous men. For the love pretended toward you therein, is, to have you his
servants. The liberality employed in feeding and teaching you, is, to make you
pliable and fit thereunto. The Jesuits and others set to train you up, are set
to noosell you in heresy and treason, the pillars of his faith and State. The
Dan. 1. ver. ^.
King of Babylon, Nabuchodonosor, did command Asphenaz the Master of his
Eunuchs, that of the Israelites he should bring ver. 4*
children, who were without blemish, well favored, wise, and skillful, and had
ability in them; and that he should teach them the arts and tongue of the
Chaldeans. ver. ^.
And the King appointed them provision every day of a portion of his meat,
and of the wine which he drank: that they, being brought up so for three
years, might, at the end thereof, stand before the King Pope Gregory the
thirteenth loves you, brethren, as King Nabuchodonosor did the Israelites.
Allens Apolo^gi^. chapt. 3.
He has found the means that there should be brought to the Masters of his
Eunuchs, Jesuits, and others, a number of the best wits out of England,
that they may teach you the arts and tongue of the Romans. And chapt. 2.
he has appointed provision for you of moonthly exhibition, in bountiful
sort: but to what end? chapt. 6.
that after certain years of this education you may stand before the Pope. Dan.
1. ver. 7. and 8.
Daniel perceived that the Kings love and liberality was not single; but
sought his own profit: which ver. 12.
his fellows also, Ananias, Misael, and Azarias saw. If you have the spirit of
Daniel and his fellows: you will see as much in the Popes double love, and
liberality. Sure, he gives iuster cause to distrust it, then the King did.
For, the Kings drift in trayning up them, that they might stand before him, was
only that ver. 4. and 19.
they should attend and wait upon him, as courtiers, in his palace. Or if,
because he chose them ver. 3.
of the blood royal, and seed of the nobility, he had a farther drift: it was
but the assurance of their land of Judah. But you are trained up by the Pope to
serve him in provinces abroad, not in his palace at home; to subdue for him
that which he has lost, not to assure him of that he has subdued; nor to
make him sovereign of one land, but of two; and them not small of territory,
and state, as Judah was, but greater and mightier, England, and Ireland. For
which a poorer fisher, then the Pope is, would be content to angle with a hook
of gold, although it cost him more then your two Seminaries are lykely to do.
Pope Leo the tenth Guic^iardin* hist. Ital. lib. 11
did spend a hundred thousand ducats in one day, upon the pomp and bravery of
his coronation: lib. ^^.
and eight hundred thousand more in one war against the Duke of Vrbin, to
spoil him of his State, thereby to establish a nephew of his own in it. In
his days Luther rose: the Protestants had not touched the triple crown yet.
His successors have felt what danger it is in. If some of their offals be
spent, with greater show of alms, on scholars now, chiefly on such scholars as
may defend their crown: Allens Apologic. chapt. 6*
the Papacy (you know) is discreetely menaged; this menaging does prove not
less ambition, but more discretion. The policy of Gregory the thirteenth
appears therein, not the piety. His cost Genebrard. Chronogr. lib. 4. and in
a^pend.
upon captains, and soldiers, and ships sent into Ireland, discloseth the
fountain of his liberality and love to our nation. Whereof that is also a
cleerer proof, and plainer token, that the Masters of his Eunuchs are set to
teach you the arts and tongue of the Romans: as Asphenaz the Master of the
Kings Eunuchs was to teach the Israelites the arts and tongue of the
Chaldeans. I mean not the Italian tongue, though The narration of the English
Semin. in Romans
where they will you to learn that withal, it is a special point of the kings
policy: but I mean the Romish tongue (so to call it) and language of Popery.
The knowledge of the arts ye are not all taught; but ye are all taught the
knowledge of this tongue, be ye Philosophers, or Divines: Philosophers, in
sermons, in catechismes, in confessions; Divines, in the lectures of cases, of
controversies, of positive Divinity, and (they, who can) of Hebrew, and
Schoole-diuinitie too. Genesis 3.6.
The woman was deceued through desire of knowledge which the serpent promised
her. Great things are promised you by Seminarie-proctors of perfitter
knowledge to be obtained there, then with us in England. And truly, for the
arts and tongue of the Chaldeans, I think that the Master of the Kings
Eunuchs taught them more exactly, then any of the Jews did within Jerusalem.
But for the liberal arts and Esai. 19.18.
language of Chanaan, the skill of our readers, the course of our studies, the
orders of our Colleges and Universities are such, what through public lectures
thereof, what through private, with sundry kinds of exercises to ripen the
travails of students in them both: that, if I listed to deal, as S. Paul
does, with 2. Cor. 11. ver. 13.
the false Apostles, I might boldly say, ver. 22.
they are Hebrews, so am I. For if you excel us in one help of lerning, as
your harder state in a strange country may breed greater diligence then ours
at home more plentiful: we counteruaile you with vauntage in an other, as
that we spend six years in the study of Philosophy, for that you spend
three; seven in Divinity, for that you spend four. Wherein, I refer it to
your own judgments, whether our so long time, though with meaner helps, be
not as available to soundness and maturitie of judgment and knowledge,
(which years do greatly further:) as your helps, whatsoever they be, in so
short time. Or ween you of your selves, that, from your first entrance into
the study of logike, The ^arration of the English Semin. in Rome.
three years can make you perfect Masters of the arts, so perfect, passing,
eminent, as you are borne in hand? and four years as perfect graduates in
Divinity? Or is not this have used by the Masters of the Popes Eunuchs to
dispatche you quickly, that you may serve in his affairs? But it was not my
purpose to enter into comparison of our Colleges, with your Seminaries: much
less of our two most noble Universities, with your two Colleges. Let your
readers be as skillful as 2. Cor. 11.^^*
angels of light; as painful, as Job. 1.7. and 2.2.
the Prince of darkness. Let their orders and lectures, and exercises pass
ours, as far as 1. King. 11.10
the little finger of Roboam was bigger then his fathers loins. The knowledge,
which they teach you, is of good and evil: like that of the serpent which
deceived the woman. It is not the doctrine of Jerusalem, but of Babylon; the
tongue of the Chaldeans, not the language of Chanaan, which you shall learn of
them. Neither do they instruct you, as children of the Prophets, to stand
before the Lord: but as the Kings Eunuchs, as Babylonish vasals, to stand
before the Pope. When Dan. 1.^.
Daniel requested the Master of the Eunuchs that he and his fellows might not
be forced to eat the meat and drink the wine of the Kings provision, least
that (it being often Deuteronomy. 14.3.
such, or Dan 5.4. Romans 14.21. 1. Cor. 10.20
used so, as was not allowed by the law of God) they should be Leu. 1^.43.
defiled thereby, and offend: Dan. 1.10.
the Master said unto him, I fear my Lord the king, who has appointed your
meat and your drink: for why should he see your faces in worse liking, then
the other children that are of your sort, and so should you indaunger my head to
the King? A godly affection in Daniel, and his fellows: and savoring of the
instruction taught them in Jerusalem, Leu. 11.44.
that they should be holy, because the Lord is holy. But the Master of the
Eunuchs had learned an other lesson, that he must do in all things, as the King
commanded. Which although he would have taught his scholars also, according to
the arts and tongue of the Chaldeans: yet he showed (by mentioning his fear
of the King) that he misliked not their scruple of conscience, and could be
contented to grant their request, so that it were without his danger. Whereby
it came to pass, that an Dan. 1.^^.
other officer, whom he set over them, did grant it. I would to God (my
brethren) the Jesuits, and the rest, whom Nabuchodonosor of Rome has ordained
to be your Masters, used you no worse then Asphenaz did them. For then,
notwithstanding they would say unto you, We fear our Lord the Pope, who has
appointed your doctrine and your faith, if your conscience grudged at some
point therein as differing from the word of god: yet should not your souls be
forced to that, and other overseers might give you better food. But other
overseers and they are so linked all in one devotion to the will and pleasure
of their Lord the Pope: that if you bring forth but a bud of such fruit, they
nippe it off straight, and teach you to think and speak in all respects
according to the arts and tongue of the Romans. Whereof they have given
experience and proof in many learned men and writers of your side. But three
fresh examples may suffice to show it: even Ludouicus Viues, Johannes Molanus,
and Carolus Sigonius. For Viues had uttered (in Johan. Lud. ^^uis commen^ar. in
A^g^stinum de ciuitate De^.
his commentaries on S. Austin) some speeches that stood not with the Popes
liking: as namely, that Epist. ad Regem Henricum octa^um.
Princes are supreme governors in earth next under God; that lib. ^8. cap. 43.
humane affections do reign oftentimes in the holiest men, and l^b. 12. cap.
1^. (...). 16. cap. 3^. and lib. 18. c. 44.
Fathers have their ouersights; that lib. 8. cap. 27.
Saints are esteemed and worshipped by many, as were the Gods among the
Gentiles; that lib. 18. cap. 31.
the story of Susanna, of Bell* and the Dragon are not canonical scriptures;
that lib. 15. cap. 13.
they, who prefer the Latin translation before the Greek and Hebrew
fountains, are men of evil minds, and corrupt judgments; that lib. 16. cap.
37.
none must be blamed for the kind of meats, but for excess in eating, by
the doctrine of the Gospel; that lib. 17. cap. 5.
Priests are ambitious, covetous, unchaste, enriching their bastards with the
churches spoils, yea, lib. 8. cap. 27.
wicked and ungodly in causing things of Christ to be set forth in plays;
that lib. 18. cap. 2^.
all things almost are sold and bought at Rome, and that by rules and orders
of most holy law; to be short, that Schooleme^, through ignorance of toungs,
have not only marred and smoothered lib. 3. cap. 31^
all other arts, but lib. 2. cap. 13. and lib. 19. c. 12
Divinity too; and lib. 1^. cap. 11. and 24. lib. 13. ca^. 1. lib. 18. cap.
18. lib. ^0 cap. 16. and (...) 21. ^ap. 7.
have profaned it with their curiosity, their vanity, their folly, their
rashness in moving and defining questions, as Aristotelians rather then as
Christians, and heathen Philosophers, then scholars of the holy Ghost. Now
these, and sundry speeches mo to like effect, the Divines of Louan (in their
late Of Plantine^ print, at Anwerpe: in the year of Christ 1576.
edition of S. Austins works) have taken out of Viues: and shauing off his
locks, as Judge. 16.19.
Dalila did Samsons, have made him like an other man. Molanus, setting forth
the Church of Romes Legende, Printed at Louan by Wellaeus, in the year 1568.
the Martyrologe of Vsuarde, with notes of his own, and D. Hessels Censure on
certain stories of Saints, had therein discredited not only forged writings,
bearing false titles, as Annot. in 24. August. and 27. Decembr.
tales of the Apostles fathered on Abdias; of In 30. Iun.
Martialis, on Aurelian; of In 5. May.
Austin, on Ambrose: but also the reports of their right autours, though
speaking not aright, In Censura D. Hessels.
Pope Adrian, In praefat. ad Vsua^d. Martyrolog. cap. 20.
Palladius, Cassianus, Nicephorus, and In 25. Noue^b.
Simeon Metaphrastes. The chiefest defense of the Mass, of merits, of
moonkrie, of nunnerie, of the worship of Saints, of relikes, of images, and
other superstitions and errors of Popery, does stand on the credit of these
records and evidences, or as good as these. Wherefore Molanus being
reprehended, and told thereof In praefat. po^ster. edit. Vsuard. ad lectore^.
by many, was feign to be a Censour of Louan to himself: and In Vsuarde,
printed lately at Anwerpe by Nutius.
to raze out his notes of the^ all, saving of Abdias, (a forgerie Sixth.
Senensis biblioth. sanct. lib. 2. Claud. Espencaeus de continent. lib. 5. cap.
5.
condemned by the Pope, and Papists, the Roman Inquisitors In the year of
Christ. 1559.
many years ago,) with D. Hessels Censure wholly. Sigonius (in his story of
the Weststerne Empire) has written De occident. Imper. l. 3. and 4.
so of Constantine, that he has not only not proved the charter of
Constantines donation, (a fable, that he gave the Western Empire to the Pope,)
but has disproued it. Cardinal Sirletus sent him word from Rome, that
Balsamon, Caleca, Gennadius (hungry Greeks) have mentioned that charter. A
miserable evidence against all ancient writers. But such as it was, Sigonius
must enroll it, and use it gently, as lib. 3.
he does. Though overthrowing lib. 4.
afterward the foundation of it: yet fearfully, poor man, and making his
excuse, that he thought it his duty to show what Eusebius and many more had
written, albeit not agreeably to the Church of Rome. So the dealing of Cardinal
Sirletus with Sigonius, of many with Molanus, of the Divines of Louan with
Ludouicus Viues, may teach you, my brethren, to what sort of service, or
servitude rather, you are trained up by the Popes officers: who, if you utter a
word beside the arts and tongue of the Romans, will gag you by and by, and cut
your toungs if they be long. Yet this is a freedom in respect of that slavery
which your Masters fat you too. Nescis ab perdita: necdum Laomedouteae sentis
periuria genti^*
Alas ye know not seely souls, nor yet do understand
The thraldom of the Romish crew, and yoke of Popish band.
For it is a small thing that they should restrain you from reproving
falsehood, or force you to further it in points of lesser weight; (a hard thing
for ingenuous minds, but small for them:) unless they lead you also, with
heresy, and treason, to band your selves against the Lord and his anointed in
the Popes quarrel, that he may be exalted 2. These. 2.4.
as God Psalm. 82.1.
of Gods upon the earth. The anointed of the Lord, are Romans ^3.1.
the higher powers, ordained to execute justice and judgment over the good and
evil. The Lord has given charge of these his anointed, that all, eue^ every
soul, should be subject to them; yea, though they be infidels, as they were
when this charge was given. Your The Jesuit Robert Bellarmin in his Roman
lectures, Controuer. 4. part. 2. quaestion. 3. Wherein the rest follow him,
after their common doctrine of the Pope^ supremacy.
Masters do teach you, that if they endeavor to withdraw their subjects to
infidelity or heresy, then ought they not to reign: and the Pope, as judge
thereof, must depose them. It were a point of scandalous doctrine and
erroneous, to say, that As Pope Innocentius the third does, c. sol^tae. de
maiorita^e and obedientia.
the persons, over whom the power of the sword is given them, are lay men
only, not the clergy. Much more, to add thereto, that As the Rhe^mists do,
in their Annot. on Heb. 5.^.
the things and matters wherein they have to govern, are only temporal, not
spiritual. Bu^ ^o say, that As Sanders, Bristow, Surius, and all the Papists
do in maintenance of the Popes Bulls against Princes.
the Pope may deprive them of their kingdoms, nor only take from them some of
their subjects in all causes, and all their subjects in some causes, but all
their subjects and causes both, it is so ungodly: that Sigebertus Monachus
Gen^blacen^is.
Sigebert, a moonke, who lived five hundred years since, when Hildebrand the
Pope did first usurp that power against the Emperor Henry; Sigebert, an
historian, alleged by your champions for a special witness, Sander. de
visib. monarch. eccles. lib. 8. demonstrat. 3. quod Papa no^ sit Antichrist.
that the Church of Rome had never any heresy, Campian. Ration. 7.
nor changed ought in faith; In Chronico. ad annu^ Christi. 1088.
Sigebert condemns it in the Pope as Haec sola nouitas, non dicam haeresis.
novelty, and (though half afraid to call it so) heresy. This is the golden
image which your Nabuchodonosor has raised up to be worshipped. Beware of
him, my brethren, who has raised it up, and commands you to fall down
before it. Though he have ensnared you with his meat and drink: yet learn of
your fellow and friend M. Heart, to disobey him in this point. If you have not
the courage to do it where you are, Dan. 3.12.
as Ananias, Misael, and Azarias did: return out of Babylon into your native
country, and Psalm. 2.11.
serve the Lord with fear, not in 2. King. 23.13.
the hye places, but in Psalm. 5.7.
his holy temple. But if you will neither return unto us, and will persist
there to be the Popes slaves, heretics, and traitors: I call heaven and earth
to witness this day, that I have warned you to turne^ from your wickedness; I
have discharged my duty; your blood upon your own heads.

LVK. 23.34. Father, forgive them: for they know not what they do.


THE CONTENTS OF THE Chapters divided by numbers into sundry parts, for the
sundry points entreated of therein.
The first Chapter. THe occasion of the conference, the circumstances, and
points to be debated on. 2 The ground of the first point, touching the head of
the Church. Wherein, how that title belongs to Christ, how it is given to the
Pope: and so what is meant by the Popes supremacy. Page 33. The second
Chapter. The promise of the supremacy pretended to be made by Christ unto
Peter, 1 in the words, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my
Church: 2 and, To thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Of
expounding the scriptures: how the right sense of them may be known, and who
shall judge thereof. 3 What is meant by the keys, the power of binding and
loosing, promised by Christ to Peter, and (in Peter) to all the Apostles. Page
55. The third Chapter. The performance which Christ is supposed to have made
(of the supremacy promised,) 1 in saying to Peter, Feed my lambs, feed my
sheep: 2 and, Strengthen thy brethren. With the circumstances of the points
thereof, Do thou love me? and, I have prayed for thee Peter. What, and how,
they make for Peter: how for all. Page 121. The fourth Chapter. The practice of
the supremacy (which Peter is entitled to) imagined to be proved, 1 by the
election of Matthias to the Apostleship: 2 by the Presidentship of the Council
held at Jerusalem: 3 and by Paul's journey taken to see Peter, and his abode
with him. Wherein, as in other of the acts of the Apostles, the equality of
them all, not the supremacy of one is showed. Page 151. The fifth Chapter. The
Fathers 1 are no touchstone for trial of the truth in controversies
ofreligion, but the scripture only. 2 Their writings are corrupted: and
counterfeits do bear their names. 3 The sayings, alleged out of their right
writings, prove not the pretended supremacy of Peter. Page 184. The sixth
Chapter. The two maine grounds, on which the supremacy usurped by the Pope,
does lie. The former, that there should be one Bishop over all in earth: 1
because Christ said, There shall be one flock, and one Pastor; 2 And among the
Jews there was one judge, and hie Priest. The later, that the Pope is that one
Bishop: 3 because Peter was Bishop of Rome (as some say,) 4 and the Pope
succeeds Peter. Both examined, and showed to fail in the proof of the Popes
supremacy. Page 230. The seventh Chapter. The scriptures falsely said to be
alleged by the Fathers for the supremacy of the Pope, as successor to Peter.
1 Feed my sheep, strengthen thy brethren, and, that thy faith fail not,
belong no more to Popes then to other Bishops. 2 The Pope may err in doctrine,
3 not only as a private man, but as Pope: 4 yea, preach false doctrine also.
For 5 ^he may be a thief, a robber, a woolfe; 6 and err not in person only,
but in office too; as it is proved in every part of his office: 7 with answer
to the reply made against the proofs for the defense of him therein. 8 The
succession of Popes has been prevailed against by the gates of hell: 9 and,
when the gates of hell prevailed not against them, their rock did argue
foundnesse of faith, not the supremacy. Page 277. The eighth Chapter. The
authority 1 of traditions and Fathers pretended to prove the Popes supremacy:
in vain; beside the scripture, which is the only rule of faith. The Fathers,
2 being heard with lawful exceptions that may be justly taken against them, 3
do not prove it. As it is showed first, in Fathers of the Church of Rome. By
the way, 4 the name of Priest, the Priestly sacrifice of Christians, the Popish
sacrifice of Masse-priestes, the proofs brought for the Mass, the substance
and ceremonies of it, are laid open. And so it is declared that 5 nether the
ancient Bishops of Rome them selves, 6 nor any other Fathers do prove the
Popes supremacy. Page 452. The ninth Chapter. 1 The Church is the pillar and
ground of the truth. The common consent and practice of the Church before the
Nicen Council, 2 the Council of Nice, 3 of Antioche, of Sardica, of
Constantinople, Mileuis, Carthage, Afrike, 4 ofEphesus, of Chalcedon,
ofConstantinople eftsoons, and of Nice, of Constance and of Basil; with the
judgments of Universities, and several Churches throughout Christendom*
condemning all the Popes supremacy. Page 652. The tenth Chapter. 1 Princes are
supreme governors of their subjects in things spiritual and temporal: and
so is the oath of their supremacy lawful. 2 The breaking of the conference
off, M. Heart refusing to proceed farther in it. Page 669.
The first Chapter. 1 The occasion of the conference, the circumstances, and
points to be debated on. 2 The ground of the first point, touching the head of
the Church. Wherein, how that title belongs unto Christ, how it is given to
the Pope: and so what is meant by the Popes supremacy.
RAINOLDES. You have heard, master Heart, The first Division.
from the Right honorable M. Secretary Walsyngham, the cause why he has sent
for me to come unto you: to confer with you concerning matters of religion,
for the better informing of your conscience and judgment. In the which respect
you signified unto him your self to be willing to confer with any man: so
that you might be charitably and Christianly dealt withal.


Heart. In deed I did signify so much to M. Secretary: neither am I unwilling
to do that I have promised. Howbeit, I wish rather, that if a conference be
purposed, the learned men of our side, whom we have many beyond sea, might be
sent for hither, of riper years, and sounder judgment. As for me: the
condition of conference with you is somewhat uneven. For I lie in prison, and
am adjudged to dye: the closeness of the one, and terror of the other, does
dull a man's spirits, and make him very unfit for study. I neither am of great
years, nor ever was of great reading: and yet of that which I have read I have
forgotten much, by reason of my long restraint. I am destitute of books: we
are not permitted to have any at all, saving the Bible only. You of the other
side may have books at will: and you come fresh from the university: whereby
you are the readier to use them and allege them. These are great
disaduantages, for me to enter into conference with you. Nevertheless, I am
content, as I have said, to do it: so that my wantes may be supplied with
furniture of books, such as I shall desire.


Rainoldes. The learned men of your side, it lies not in me to procure hither.
I would to God none of them had ever come from Rome with traitorous intent,
nay more then intent: Morton into England, Sanders into Ireland. Sander. vi^ib.
Monarc. lib. 7. S^nders l^tters to D. Allen and ^l^ick Burke. Geneb ^^d.
Chronogr. lib. 4.
to move rebellion against our Sovereign, and arm the subjects against the
Prince. It had fared better both with you and others, who came from him that
sent them. Your imprisonment and danger, which has hereon ensued, I can more
easily pity then relieve. I wish you were at liberty: so that her highness
were satisfied, whom you have offended. The condition of conference, the which
is offered you: is not so uneven in deed as in show. For although I come fresh
from the university: yet I come from one of those universities, wherein Bristow
Demand. 41.
your selves report, that few of us do study: and those few that study, study
but a few questions of this time only: and that so lightly, that we be afeard
to reason with common Catholics: or, if we do reason, ^oti^^* 31.
the common sort of Catholics are able to answer all our arguments, and to
say also more for us, then we can say for our selves. You of the other side
have been brought up in one of those Seminaries, wherein Deman. 4^.
all truth is studied, the masters teach all truth, the scholars learn all
truth: and the course of divinity (which our students, nay our Doctors and
Readers can not tell almost what it means) The narration of the (...) ^oome.
is read over in four years, with so great exactnes, that if a man follow his
study diligently, he may become a learned Divine, and take degree. Yea, besides
the Lectures of positive Divinity, of Hebrew, of controversies, of Cases of
conscience: the Lecture of Scholasticall Divinity alone, (wherein the whole
body of perfect Theology does consist) does teach, within the same four
years, all the points of Catholic faith in such sort, that thereby the
hearers come to understand, not only what is in the scriptures about a matter
of faith, but also whatsoever is in all the Tomes of Councels, wrytings of
Fathers, volumes of Ecclesiastical histories, or in any other Author worthy
the reading. Wherefore, since you have heard this course of divinity, and have
been admitted to take degree therein upon the hearing of it: you may not
allege vnripenes of years, or reading, or judgment: especially against me,
before whom, in time so long, in place so incomparable, you took degree in
divinity: if yet our degrees may go for degrees, ^ulla Pi^. Quint. anno 156^.
as Bristow says Them. 41.
the Pope having deprived us of them. But you have no books, saving the Bible
only. You are, it is likely, the redier in that book: chiefly since Narrat. of
the English Semin. in Ro^^e
at Rhemes beside your private study of it, you were exercised in it daily, by
reading over certain Chapters, wherein the hard places were all expounded, the
doubts noted, the controversies which arise betwixt you and us resolved, the
arguments, which our side can bring unto the contrary, perspicuously and fully
answered. So that with this armor you are the more strongly prepared against
me: who can be content to deal with you in conference by that book alone, as
by the book of all truth. Notwithstanding, though you complain, I know you
may have more books, if you would have such as are best for you to read. But
you would have such as might nourish your humor: from reading of the which
they, who restrain you, are your friends. If a man do surfeit of variety of
dishes, the Physician does well to diet him with one wholesome kind of meat.
Perhaps it were better for some of us, who read all sorts, that we were tied
to that alone, and suffered part of your restraint. We are troubled about many
things: but one thing is needful. Many please the fancy better; but one does
profit more ye mind. He was a wise preacher, who said, Ecclesia^^. 1^. verse.
12.
The reading of many books is a weariness unto the flesh: and therefore
exhorted men to take instruction by ver. 10. and. 11.
the words of truth, the words of the wise, which are given by one pastor:
even by Jesus Christ, 1. Pet. 1.11, 12.
whose spirit did speak in the Prophets and Apostles, and taught his Church
the truth by them. Howbeit, for as much as Ephesians. 4.8, 11.
God has given gifts to men, pastors, and teachers, whose labor might help
us to understand the words of that one pastor: we do receive thankfully the
monuments of their labor, left in writing to the Church, which they were set
to build, either several, as the Doctors; or assembled, as the Councels: and
we do gladly read them as Pastors of the Church. Yet so, that we put a
difference between them, and that one Pastor. For Ioh. 3.^4.
God did give him the spirit not by measure: the rest Romans 12.3. Ephe^. 4 ^
had a measure of grace and knowledge through him. Wherefore, if to supply your
whatsoever wants, you would have the books of Doctors and Councels, to use
them as helps for the better understanding of the book of Christ: your wants
shall be supplied, you shall not need to fear disadvantage in this respect. For
M. Secretary has taken order that you shall have what books you will:
unless you will such as cannot be gotten.


Heart. The books that I would have, are principally in deed the Fathers and
the Councels: which all do make for us, as do the scriptures also. But for my
direction to find out their places in all points of controversy which I can
neither remember redily, nor dare to trust my self in them: I would have our
writers, which in the several points (whereof they treat) have cited them,
and buyld themselves upon them. In the question of the Church and the
supremacy, Principior. fidei doctrinaliu^ demonstrat. method.
Doctor Stapleton; of the Sacraments, and sacrifice of the Mass, De
Sacramentis in genesis de sacram. and sacrific. ^^charist.
Doctor Allen; of the worshipping of Saints and Images, Dialog. sex contr.
summi Pontificat. etc. oppugnatores ab Al^no Copo editi.
Doctor Harpsfield, whose books were set forth by Alan Cope, and bear his
name, as In the end of the book after the last dialogue, A. H. L. N. H. E. V.
E. A. C. that is to say, Author huius libri Nicolaus Harpsfield^eum vero edidit
Alanus Copus.
certain letters in them show. Likewise for the rest of the points that lie
in controversy, them who in particular have best written of them: and for them
al in general, S. Sum. Theolog. and in Magistr. Sent.
Thomas of Aquine, and ^^ctata Rob^r^. Politan. in Sum. Theolog. whom. Aqu.
Father Roberts Dictates, and chiefly Con^ess. Augu^tin. Hiero^^^. To^^en.
(...) Pa^is. 1^80
the confession that Torrensis, an other father of the society of Jesus, has
gathered out of S. Augustine, which book we set the more by, (...). Con^^ss.
Augusti. ad Lector.
because of all the Fathers S. Augustine is the cheifest, as well in our as your
judgment: and his doctrine is the common doctrine of the Fathers: whose
consent is the rule whereby controversies should be ended.


Rainoldes. These you shall have (God willing) and if you will Opus
catechisticum Pet. Canii. Jesuit.
Canisius too: because he is so full of textes of Scriptures, and Fathers, and
many do esteem him highly. But this I must request you, to look on the
originalles of Scriptures, Councels, Fathers, which they do allege. For they
do persuade you that all do make for you: but they abuse you in it. They
borrow some gold out of the Lords treasure house, and wine out of the Doctors
presses* but they are deceitful workmen, they do corrupt their gold with
dross, their wine with worse then water.


Heart. You shall find it harder to convince them of it, then to charge them
with it.


Rainoldes. And you shall find it harder to make proof of half, then to make
claim of all. Yet you shall see both your claim of all the Scriptures and
Fathers to be more confidente then just: and my reproof of your writers for
their corrupting and forging of them, as plainly proved as uttered, if you
have eyes to see. God lighten your eyes, that you may see: and open your ears,
that you may hear: and give you both a soft heart and understanding mind,
that you may be able wisely to discern, and gladly to embrace the truth when
you shall hear it.


Heart. I trust I shall be able always, both to see, and to follow the truth.
But I am persuaded you will be never able to show that that is the truth,
which your Church professes. As by our conference (I hope) it shall be manifest.


Rainoldes. UUill you then (to lay the ground of our conference) let me know
the causes why you separate your self, and refuse to communicate with the
Church of England in prayers and religion?


Heart. The causes are not many. They may be al comprysed in one. Your Church is
no Church: You are not members of the Church.


Rainoldes. How prove you that?


Heart. By this argument. The Church is a company of Christian men professing
one faith, under one head. You profess not one faith, under one head.
Therefore you are not of the Church.


Rainoldes. What is that one faith?


Heart. The catholic faith.


Rainoldes. Who is that one head?


Heart. The Bishop of Rome.


Rainoldes. Then both the propositions, of which you frame your argument, are
in part faulty. The first, in that you say, the church is a company of
Christian men under one head. The second, in that you charge us of the church
of England, that we profess not one faith. For we do profess that one faith,
the catholic faith. But we deny that the church is bound to be subject to that
one head, the bishop of Rome.


Heart. I will prove the points of both my propositions, the which you have
denied. First, that the church must be subject to the Bishop of Rome as to her
head. Next, that the faith, which you profess in England is not the catholic
faith.


Rainoldes. You will say somewhat for them: but you will never prove them.


Heart. Let the church judge. For the first, thus I prove it. The second
Division.
S. Peter was head of all the Apostles. The Bishop of Rome succeeds Peter, in
the same power over Bishops, that he had over the Apostles. Therefore the
Bishop of Rome is head of all Bishops. If of Bishops; then by consequent of the
dioceses subject to them. If of all their dioceses; then of the whole church.
The Bishop of Rome therefore is head of the whole church of Christ.


Rainoldes. S. Peter was head of all the Apostles? The Bishop of Rome is head
of all Bishops? I had thought that Christ our Savior both was, and is the
head, as of the whole church, so of Apostles, of Bishops, of all the members of
it. For the church is his body: and he alone performs the duty of an head
unto it, by giving it power of life, of feeling, of moving: and Ephesians 1.2^.
him has God appointed to be the head to the Church, and Colos. 2.19.
by him all the body furnished and knit together by iointes and bands,
increases with the increasing of God.


Heart. We grant that Christ is properly the head of the church, the principal
and quickening head. But this head is imperial, so to term him, and invisible.
The Pope is a visible, and ministerial head: yet in truth a head also.
Staplet. principior. doctr. lib. 6. cap. 16.
For of the head there are two duties: the one, to be the fountain out of
the which there flows life into the rest of the body; the other, to direct
Suo imperio.
by his rule and power the outward functions of the body. The former duty does
agree to God alone and Christ. The later, to the service and ministry of men
too.


Rainoldes. This your answer of two heads does stand with more reason, then
Pope Boniface the 8. c. vnam sanctam. extra. De maio^it. and obedient.
his, who said that Christ, and Christ's vicar Peter, and Peter's successor the
Pope, are all but one head of the church. Howbeit, so to make a twofold head,
as you do, by the variety of two duties: it is not to divide but to rent a
sunder the duties of the head, and to make the Pope a head imperial rather
then a ministerial. For, by rule and power to direct either the inward or
outward functions of the body, is the chief and proper function of the head,
agreeing to that head alone, that gives power of life and feeling and moving
to the body. Wherefore, since Christ, having bound him self by his promise Mat.
28.20.
to be with us until the end of the world, does give this power unto his
church by the effectual working of his holy spirit, which does quicken both
the whole and every member of his body: they who do divide the preeminence of
this duty between him and the Pope, allotting to him the inward, to the Pope
the outward functions to be directed, deserve to be attainted of treason
against the Lord. For seeing that to exercise this rule and dominion, is a
prerogative royal, and proper to the king of kings: to give it either in whole
or in part to any subject, can not be a lesser offense then hie treason.


Heart. If you account this to be treason against the Lord, and do attaint us of
it: You must attaint him self of it, who by his word has brought us to it.
For S. Paul comparing the church unto a body, to show the sundry gifts of
Christians, and in their sundry gifts their several duties by the similitude
of members, does mention a head amongst them: 1. Cor. 12.21.
The e^e cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee, nor the head to the
feet, I have no need of you. Here the name of head must by all likelihood be
meant of the Pastor in respect of the flock. But it cannot be meant of Christ.
For he may say to us, I have no need of you: and so he wills us also Luc.
17.10.
(when we shall have done all things that are commanded us) to say, we are
unprofitable servants. It must be meant therefore of Peter in respect of the
rest of the Apostles, and by consequent of the Pope in respect of all Bishops.


Rainoldes. If Paul had so meant it, either of Peter or of the Pope: he had a
tongue of the learned, he could easily have so expounded it. But, in the
applying of his similitude to his purpose, he shows that he meant, by the
name of head, them who had the greatest graces of Gods spirit: by feet,
hands, and eyes, them who not so great, though greater some then other.


Heart. Them who had the greatest? Nay: the name of head does show it must be
one, and that, one visible head (which we call a ministerial head under
Christ) proportionable to the body of Christ, I mean the Church. Of the which
visible and ministerial head those words of S. Paul may be truly verified,
The head cannot say to the feet, I have no need of you.


Rainoldes. Indeed, if the Pope be signified by the head, those words will
fit him well. For Reginald. Pol. Card. pro ecclesiast. vnitat. defens. ad
Henric. octau. lib. 1.
Cardinal Poole discoursing on the same reason of the Popes supremacy, does
make as him the head, so kings to be the feet. And it is true the Pope can not
say to kings, I have no need of you. It would be hard going for him if they
were not. But if, because Saint Paul does in that similitude mention a head,
therefore there must be one visible head proportionable to the body of Christ,
that is, ye Church: then because S. Paul does mention the feet, there must
be needs also two visible feet, by the like proportion. Now I would gladly
know of you Master Heart, which you will make the two feet of your church. The
Emperor I trow, must be the right foot. The left, who? The king of Spain?
What shall the French king do then? It is well that the king of Scots is no
member of it: nor the king of Denmark. Marry we had news of the king of
Swethland that Jesuits had converted him. Shall he be the left foot? Or shall
the king of Poleland set in a foot for it? Or is the king of Boheme nearer it?
There is a king of Bungo too, Jesuit. in epist. Iapon. lib. 2. and 4.
who is reported to protect your religion in his countries, and The epistle to
the Council see before the epistle of the persecution of Catholics in England.
likewise the Great Turk, and other princes of Mahomets sect: they may be
feet in time also. But how many feet may this body have? May it have six,
seven, eight, may it have twenty visible feet: and may it not have ten, not
four, not two, may it have but one visible head?


Heart. Cardinal Pole compares kings unto feet, not as though they were the
lowest parts of the church, (for he counts them as special members, though
not heads) but because the church in the course of her growth was last of all
increased with them, as with feet, and so did make an end of growing.


Rainoldes. Then in Saint Paul's time the church had no feet, but a head
without them. And what does he mean to say that the head could not speak to
the feet, when it had no feet to speak too?


Heart. Yes, it had feet then, but of an other sort. For they, who were of
lower degrees and meaner gifts in the church of Christ, are resembled to feet
in comparison of others who were in those respects as hands, and eyes, above
them.


Rainoldes. And do you think the church had but two such feet? Or had it many
hundreds? For christians were grown Ac^. 4.4
long before to thousands, and it is not likely the most of them were eyes and
hands.


Heart. It had (no doubt) many. But you must not rack the members of
similitudes beyond the principal points whereto they are applied and meant.
For else you might infer too, that the church must have but two eyes, and two
hands, because a man's body (to which S. Paul resembles the church) has no
more.


Rainoldes. As you say. Yet this is the mould of your own reason, wherein you
cast the church to have one visible head proportionable to the body. A fansy
more proportionable to the limbs of Popery, then to Saint Paul's doctrine
touching the body of Christ. For his drift and purpose therein is to show, that
1. Cor. 12. ve^s. 14. and 20.
as a man's body is made of sundry members, ver. 21. and 25.
which are not all as excellent one as an other, the hand as the head, the
foot, as the hand, yet they are joined together to care one for an other, all
to maintain the body: ver. 27. and 28.
so the body of Christ, that is to say, the church consists of sundry
Christians, as members, some of greater gifts and callings then some, the
Apostles then yt teachers, the teachers then the helpers, verse. 31, and the 13.
and 1^. chapters.
yet al joined together to love and serve one an other, and keep the church in
unity. whereby it is manifest, first, that in naming ver. 21.
the head he considers it not as a head properly, but only as a principal
member. For so he applies it, naming all Christians, ver. 27.
members: and calling them the body of Christ, he puts Christ to be the
head. Next, that by the name of head so considered, he means no one man, but
all ver. 28. first, Apostle^.
the Apostles, as them who were endued with the cheifest gifts, and placed in
the highest function. UUherefore if that word be strained to the uttermost, as
far as by the text it may: the proof that it yeldeth will argue a preeminence
of the Apostles in general over the inferior members of the church, but no
power of Peter over the rest of the Apostles, much less of the Pope over his
fellow-bishops.


Heart. Yet this it does prove, that the name of head is not so given unto
Christ, but that it may be given unto a mortal man also. Not as a head
properly (you say,) but as a principal member. And what said I else? For I
granted that Christ is properly the head of the church: the Pope improperly.
Yet you reproved me for it.


Rainoldes. I reproved you not because you gave the title of head unto the
Pope, for he should be a pastor of the church of Rome: and pastors (for
their gifts above the members of their churches) ought to be like heads,
though many of them be tails Esai. 9.1^.
as the prophet calls them: but because you named him head of the whole
church, and that in such sort as it is due to none but Christ. For though you
granted Christ to be the quickening head, that is to say, the fountain whence
there flows life into the rest of the body: yet you gave the Pope this
soueraintie of headship, that he should direct Suo (...)*
by his rule and power the outward functions of the body. Wherein, as of the
one side you debase the worthiness of his gifts, who gives us Pastors and
Teachers, in that you do appoint them to guide only the outward functions of
his body, whereas Ephesians. 4.12.
he has given them (...).
to the full perfiting of his Saints: so, of the other side you detract
somewhat from the soueraintie of Christ, when you give his servants dominion to
guide his church by rule and power, whereas they are ordained, (...).
to the work of the ministry. Wherefore, howsoever you alay the title which
you give the Pope, and say you call him head, not properly, but improperly, a
ministerial head: yet you do imply that in this [improperly] which can agree
to none but him that properly is a head, a head that does quicken, guide, and
move the body. Even as in c. Ita Domi^us. Distinct. 19.
your Canon law it is said of Peter: The Lord did commit the charge of
preaching the truth unto him principally, Cited out of Leo, in ye Rhemish
tra^slatio^ of the new Testament, to prove Peter's primacie, in ye annot. on
Mat. 16. ver. 18.
to the intent that from him, as it were from a certain head, he might power
abroad his gifts as it were into all the body.


Heart. These words that you reprove in the Canon law, are the words of a man
of singular wit and judgment, famous both for holiness and learning, Leo
Epist. 87.
Saint Leo, an ancient father, who did flourish About the year of Christ 440.
above a thousand years ago.


Rainoldes. They a^e the words I grant, of an ancient, a witty, a learned
holy man, but a man: and, that is more, a Bishop of Rome. Now men, even the
holiest, Romans 7 18.
while they live in the flesh, have some contagion of the flesh: and learning
may puff up, 1. Cor. 8.1.
as it did the Corinthians: and the best wits are soonest tainted with
ambition: yea Mat. 20.22.
James and John, Marc. 3.17.
the sons of thunder, desired superiority: and Rome a great City did
nourish great stateliness, and that Socrat. histor. eccle. lib. 7. cap. 11.
Ammian. Marcell. histor. lib. 27.
even in the Bishops of that City About the year of Christ 370.
before Leo. So they loving preeminence, as 3. John ver. 9.
Diotrephes did, took all occasions to get it, and sought some colors to
maintain it. Wherefore, as one (in Cic. in Hortens.
Tully) said to Hortensius, when he immoderately praised eloquence, that he
would have lift her up into heaven, that himself might have gone up with her,
as having greatest right unto her: so many Bishops of Rome, and Leo not the
least of them, did lift up Saint Peter with praises to the sky, that
themselves might rise up with him, as being forsooth his Leo sermon. 1. in
anniuers. die assumpt. suae
heirs. The Epistles and Sermons of Leo have manifest marks of this
affection: as, to give a taste of them, Epist. 87.
The Lord did take Peter into the feloship of the indivisible unity: and,
Epist. 61.
We acknowledge the most singular care of the most blessed Peter for us all,
in this that God has loosed the deceites of all slaunderers: and, Epist. 50.
My writings be strengthened by the merit and authority of my Lord most
blessed Peter the Apostle: and, Epist. 62.
Peter having confirmed the judgment of his See in decision of faith, has not
suffered any thing amiss to be seen about any of your persons, who have
labored with us for the Catholic faith: and, Epist. 87.
We beseech you, and advise you to keep the things decreed of us, through the
inspiration of God, and the Apostle most blessed Peter: and, Ser. 2. in
anniuer. die. assumpt. suae.
If any thing be well done or decreed of us, if any thing be obtained of Gods
mercy by daily prayers, it is to be ascribed to S. Peter's works and merits,
whose power does live, and authority excel in his own See: and, Sermon. 3. in
aniuer. die assumpt. suae.
He was so plentifully watered of the fountain of all graces, that whereas he
received many things alone, yet nothing passes over to any man but by him. To
be short, Leo, and by his example his successors after him, are so full of such
speeches, that in the common phrase of themselves and their Secretaries, all
things pertaining to the Popes, were grown to be S. Peter's: their
prerogative, Epist. 45.
S. Peter's right: their dignity, Ibid.
Saint Peter's honor; their stateliness, Epist 87. and Sermon. 1. in ann. die
assump. suae.
S. Peter's reverence; subjection to them, Epist. 87.
subjection to S. Peter; A message from them, Epist. 24.
an embassage from S. Peter; Things done in their presence, Epist. 4.
done in S. Peter's presence: Lands and possessions given them, Platina de vit.
Pont. in Johan. sept.
given to S. Peter: And when they would have kingdoms, Helmoid. in Chronic.
Slauer^ lib. 1. cap. 81.
Princes must get them for S. Peter: Their territories and Lordships, Pope
Innocent the third Extra. c. per venerabilem. qui filij sintlegitimi.
S. Peter's patrimony: Their Bernard. de consid. ad Eug. lib. 2.
usurpations tyrannical, Abb. Vrsperg. in Chron. Hen. quint. Onuphr. de septem
vrb. eccles. in Palate. Lateranensi.
S. Peter's royalties: Their good will, Greg. Regist. lib. 4. Epist. 34.
His favor: Their communion, lib. 7. Epist. 69.
His peace: Their indignation, Platina de vitis Pont. in Greg. Sept.
His curse: Their signet, Popes in their letters sub anulo piscatoris. As
Gregory the 13. in approbat. sodalit. B. Mari.
His ring: Their closet, Pope Innocent the fourth extra. cap. Maiores. de
baptism. and eius effect.
His See: Their City, Onuphr. de sept. vrbis ecclesi. cap. 1.
His borough: Their poll money Denarius Beati Petri. Eccles. Anglican. in
council. Lugdun. apud Mat. Paris in Henr. 3.
, even Peter pence too. Yea, it may be, that shortly they will take up Peter
for a surname, as the Roman Emperors did the name of Caesar. For Francisc.
Vargas de episcopor. iurisdict. and Pont. Max. autori. proposit. 4. confirmat.
4.
a famous Lawier and Patron of the Papacy, says, that the Popes may al be
called Peter's. And Campian. Rat. 4.
our countriman who was sent to display the Popes banner and Summum honorem
primae sedis episcopo, id (...) Petro, deferes.
challenge highest honor for him, does name him the Bishop of the first See,
that is to say, Peter. And De autoritate pontificis, ad Stanislaum O^^cho.
Cardinal Hosius one of ye Popes lieutenants in his Council of Trent, does
write, that there is only one universal patriarch, Who? Petrus Romanus.
Peter of Rome: and that Peter of Rome did send his messengers unto English,
French, Dutch, and other nations, to call them to the Council of Trent. Not
Peter Ioh. 1.44.
of Bethsaida, but Peter of Rome did it.


Heart. These things are small the most of them, and used to increase a
reverend estimation and opinion of that See, to the which our Savior committed
the principality and government of his church. As for the points that seem
greater in the words of Leo: they may be defended. For where he says, that
Christ took Peter into the fellowship of the indivisible unity: he might
mean unity in will not in substance, as Christ does pray for his disciples,
Ioh. 17.11.
Holy father, keep them in thy name, that they may be one, as we are. Where he
does honor Peter with the title of my Lord: it is a common title, and given
men of state both spiritual and temporal: yea Ioh. 20.15.
Mary Magdalen called him Lord (the word Domine: as Leo, Domini mei.
in Latin is the same) whom she supposed to be a gardener. The like might be
said for the defense of the rest: with as great probability and perhaps
greater, then you have to mislike them.


Rainoldes. The smaller things, which you call, are some of them small, I
grant, but like small holes in ships, at the which a great deal of water will
come in, enough to drown the ship, if they be left open as long as these
have been in the ship of the church. They had increased such an opinion of
the Pope of Rome, Saint Peter's See, as they termed it: that although he
practiced not a principality given him by Christ, but an outrageous tyranny
usurped by him self over Kings and Nations: yet neither kings nor Nations
almost, durst speak against him, at the least resist him. For if they did
offend the Pope, they thought they did offend S. Peter. Now of S. Peter they
were taught, that he is porter of heaven gates. They feared the porter would
let none in, saving the Pope his c. Ego Ludo^icus. distinct. 63. c. non qual^^.
^. q. 1.
vicars friends. So, to get eternal life, they served, and pleased, and feeed
the Pope, least that if he should frown upon them, Saint Peter's favor should
be lost. UUherfore how small soever those things of Peter seem in trifling
kinds of common speeches: they brought no small advantage to Peter of Romes
Court, and wealth into his Treasury. It is recorded Beda ecclesiast. histor.
genesis Anglor. lib. 3. cap. 25.
of King Oswy in our English Story, that when, upon a controversy about the
celebrating of Easter, there was a Synod assembled, and the one part
alleged, that they followed the East Churches, which had received their rite
of John the Evangelist, the Disciple whom Christ loved; the other part replied,
that they followed the Church of Rome, which had received theirs of Peter, to
whom Christ gave the keys of the kingdom of heaven: the King took up the
matter, and judged with the Church of Rome, For Ego vobis dico quia hic est
ostiarius ille, cui ego contradicere no lo.
I tell you, quoth he, that Peter is the porter, whom I will not gainesay, nay,
I will obey his orders in all respects, as far as I skill and can, least
when I come to the doors of the kingdom of heaven, there be none to open if
he be displeased who does keep the keys. This gross imagination of the
keys and porter, and corrupt opinion of power to shut and open committed unto
Peter only, (which the good king conceived of simplicity, his Clergy should
have taught him better, but they did all agree unto it, and Brist. motiu. 24.
Staplet. in his English Bid Note (says he) the conclusion of the king.
their successors praise King Oswy:) the Captains of the Church of Rome
perceiving it to be commodious for the advancement of their kingdom, and
conquering of all the earth, have nourished very cunningly, by Do for us, that
S. Peter may forgive your sins. Gregory. to the Empress, Regist. lib. 4. ep.
34.
their lessons, S. Peter's successor.
their titles, S. Peter's Keys.
their arms, S. Peter's banner. Genebrard. Chronograph. lib. 4. append.
their ensigns, Representing the keys as given only to Peter.
their pictures, and other legions of policies, all in S. Peter's name. And on
the credit of S. Peter they have pronounced that c. Sic omnes. Distinct. 19.
all ordinances of their See must be received, even as if Peter had confirmed
them. They have taught, that Pope Agatho in epist. Sext. Synod. Constant. act.
4.
their Church persisteth pure from all error, by the grace and help of Peter.
They have decreed that c. in memoriam. disti^ct. 19.
although it lay a yoke almost intolerable on us, yet we must bear it
patiently in the remembrance of S. Peter. They have set abroach in the donation
of Constantine, that c. Constantinu^ Distinct. 96.
he gave them his own crown, of gold most pure and precious stones, to wear
in honor of S. Peter, and that he held the bridle and stirrope of the Popes
horse in reverence of S. Peter. They have made the Emperor, as the Popes
vasall, to become Sacra^. ceremon. ecclesia Roman. libr. ^. sect. 5.
S. Peter's knight, and take his oath unto S. Peter, that he will restore S.
Peter's land unto the Pope, if he get any of it, and will help the Pope to
defend S. Peter's land. They have brought Archbishops to think c. Quoniam
quidam. Distin^^ 1^^.
their power is nothing, unless the Pope do send them from Sacrar. ceremonia.
eccle. Roman. lib. 1. sect. 10.
S. Peter's body, a pall, which has the fullness of the pontifical duty.
Bishops they have bound c. Ego N. Episcopus. extra. de iureiurando.
to promise by their oath allegiance and fealty, to Saint Peter, the Roman
Church, and their Lord the Pope. Yea, Felinus Comment. in c. Ego N. episcopus
de iureiurando.
from Bishops they have brought the oath unto them, who receive dignities. And
that which passes all the rest, whereas the form of the oath c. Ego N.
Episcopus. Papatum sanctae Romanae ecclesiae and regulas sanctoru^ patrum
adiutorero ad defendendu^ and retinendum.
in the Canon Law does bind them to defend regulas sanctorum patrum, the rules
of the holy fathers: the Pope has Pope Gregory the 7. Mat. Paris in Henrico
tert.
heretofore, and Pope Gregory the 13. in bulla ad Mauricium episcopum
Imelacensem.
now does put in steed thereof, regalia sancti Petri, the roialties of S.
Peter. Such prays your Eagles take, though you do count them flies. But let
them be flies or fowls, I will not strive. Only this I say, let the wise
consider it, and mark the degrees of increase in the Papacy, and they shall
perceive in this (what shall I call it) of Saint Peter's name, that although it
were not any of the greatest, it was one of the finest tricks of spiritual
coosinage, that has enriched the Pope, and set the Church of Rome so hie. Now,
to come from these lesser unto the greater points in Leo, I know, if a man
list to be contentious, it is an easy matter to say somewhat probably for the
defense of his words. Yea though he had named Peter, not only my Lord, but (as
John 20.28.
Thomas did our Savior) My Lord and my God. It is a desperate cause that will
admit no color. The Hardin. confutation of the Apology. The Author of the
discovery of Nichols.
Stews of Rome have found patrones, and Johan. Casa episcop. Bene^ent.
that which is worse then Stews. The Sueton. in vita Domitian.
heathens called Domitian, Our Lord God the Emperor. A c. Cum inter. in glossa.
extravagant. Ioh. 22.
Canoniste says of the Pope, Our Lord God the Pope. Blasphemous speeches both:
yet a quareller might allege in defense of them, Psalm. 82.6.
I have said, ye are Gods. But the very Sueton. and Sext. aur. Vict. in Domit.
heathens, by the light of nature mislyked the one, as insolent: neither have I
read any Papiste, no nor Jesuit, that durst defend the other. It was a common
practice amongst the young students of our Uniuersities in the time of the
Dunses, (and is yet amongst too many, whom spots of Dunsery have stained,)
that if in disputation they were brought to an inconvenience, were it never so
absurd: they would have a distinction, though void of brain and sense, yet a
distinction to mainteyne it. If a man will be perverse, it is no mastery to do
it. But as Vine^ lib. 1. de causis art. corrupt.
a wise and learned man does say of them, that they are base wits which are so
affected, whereas ingenuous minds and natures well given, will rather seek how
true that is which they hold, then how they may defend it, making greater
price of verity then victory: so I may say (yea much more in matters of
religion, of faith, of life eternal) a Christian wit, and godly mind will
search and weigh rather, what should be said truly, then what may be said
probably, or colourably at the lest. And I wish, if it had been the good will
of God, master Campian had had the grace in the Tower-conference to have aimed
at this mark: rather in sincerity to have sought the truth, then with shifts
and cauilles the mayntenance of his cause and credit. But though he were
froward, and did shut his eyes against the beams of the light: yet do you not
so for Gods sake, master Heart, in this conference of ours. Be content to open
your mind to his grace, who Re^. 3.2^.
stands at the door and knocks: and hearken to Hebr. 3.13.
his voice while it is to day. Beware of their example, who Ioh. 5.44.
could not believe, or if they did believe, Ioh. 12.^3.
durst not confess Christ: because they loved the praise of men more then the
praise of God, and hunted after honor one of another, not seking for that honor
which comes from the Lord alone, Deny your self. and your friends, and all
fleshly respects, and give the glory to the Highest.


Heart. I neither seek for shifts to darken the truth, nor love the praise of
men more then the praise of God. It were a madness for a man to adventure his
life (as we do, you see,) for the maintenance of error, or of his own credit.
As for M. Campian I think of him as of my self. I heard the disputations,
wherein he answered them who came to reason with him: and I perceived nothing
in any of his answers, but synceritie and truth.


Rainoldes. My self was not present at the disputations, but I have read them
In a book entitled: A true declaration and report of the conference had in the
Tower of London with Ca^pian, etc. wr^^ten by one (...) was present at the
whole action.
written: and that (least you suspect the writer as partial) by a favorer of
yours, who was present, as he says, at the whole action. And (I do affirm it
in singleness of heart, as before the Lord: neither do I doubt but al who
have the wisdom to discern spirits will see the same, if they peruse them:)
he sought in such sort to maintain the credit of his cause or person, as
though he had set nothing more before his eyes, then to persuade his Mat. ^3.1^
proselytes, that nothing could be brought against him, but he would show it
made for him. I would not say so much unless I knew it by his fruits. For, to
pass over his often glosing against the text, and facing out of places which
pressed him most forcibly: things alleged out of the As of the second Nicen
council action. quint.
Councels, of the As of Chrysostom in Mat. hom. 49. oper. imperf.
Fathers, of As of Gratian. did. 19. can. in canonicis.
others, which by the judgments of your For the Nicen council, Sixth. Senens.
biblioth. sanct. lib. 5. annot. 8. Barthol. Carra^z. in samm. council.

For Chrysostom Sixth. Senens. bib^ sanct. l. 6. ann. 104. Robert. Bellarmin.
controu. 1. quaest. 6. For Gratian, Alfons. a Castr. aduersus haer. lib. 1.
cap. 2. Andrad. defension. sidei. Trident. lib. 3. and Campian himself almost
too at last.


own doctors, have that sense wherein we cite them, he by shifts and cauilles
would turn their necks clean about, and wreste them unto his side: which
argued more wit then truth, and sophistry then sincerity. But to leave him
to the Lords judgment, and come unto your self: you neither seek for shifts
(you say) to darken the truth, nor love the praise of men more then the praise
of God. I pray God your deeds be not as plain to prove you do it, as the
reason which you add to prove you do it not, is weak. For what although it
were a madness to do it? Many things are done which mad men scarce would
do, and yet they that do them do think themselves well in their wits, as
Augustine. epist. ^0. ad Bonif. Com.
the Donatistes did, who adventured their lives in most desperate manner for the
defense of their error, and maintenance of their credit: yea they offered
themselves to the sword, the fire, the water, seeking for death as for a
treasure, that they might die (they thought) Martyrs. But whether you do set
the praise of men at that price, I leave it to your own conscience. That you
seek for shifts, the thing it self does cry. For your very answer in the
defense of Leo, touching unity of will, not unity of substance, on these
words of his, that Leo ep. 87.
Christ received Peter into the fellowship of the indivisible unity: is a shifte
to shield him from a just reproof. Let his own Discourse speak, and it will
grant it. For having said before that Christ did place Peter as it were a
certain head, to pour his gifts from him as it were into all the body: to
this point he knitteth Hunc enim in consortium indiuiduae vnitatis assumptum id
quod ipse erat, voluit nominari.
these words by way of proof. So that if the proof have any kin with the
thing proved, the words must needs import some preeminence in Peter above all
the rest of the Disciples of Christ. But unity of will, wherein Ioh. 17. verse.
11.
Christ does pray that his Disciples may be one as he is one with his Father,
is common unto all, not peculiar to Peter, ver. 20. and 21.
as Christ himself does show. That plaster then of yours has no virtue in
it to salve the sore of Leo. Neither can you cure it indeed with any other. For
the unity, which the Scriptures do note in God and us, is of three sorts:
the first of persons in one nature; the second of natures in one person; the
third of sundry natures and persons in one quality. In the first is Deuteronomy. 6.4.
One God: In the second is 1. Cor. 8.6.
One Christ: In the third is Cant. 6.8.
One church. The Lord received not Peter into the first unity: wherein the
father, the son, the holy Ghost, are one God. Not into the second: wherein he
himself consisting of two natures (God, and man) is one Christ. Into the
third, wherein the Church is one with Christ her head, and the Churches
members are one amongst them selves, he did receive Peter: but in society with
his brethren, not without them in singularity. Act. 4.3^.
The multitude of the belieuers were of one heart, and of one soul: They all
are Ephesians. 4.4.
one body, sanctified by one spirit, through the Sacrament of one baptism,
knit to Christ by one faith, to themselves in one love, to serve together one
Lord, in one hope and expectation of one eternal bliss and glory. So that, of
this unity, whereof Peter's state and nature is capable, apply which you list
unto the words of Leo, either unity of will, as you seem to do; or unity of
grace, as Harding in his Detect. lib. 3. cap. 33.
others answer for it; or unity of glory, which Ioh. 17. verse. 22. and 24.
Christ did pray for also, and some will like that better: none of these do
reach unto that majesty, which Leos words aspire to by giving him the
fellowship of the indivisible unity. Yet God forbid that any man should suspect
of him, that he meant unity, either of nature with God, or of person with
Christ. He has deserved better, In Ephesin. synod. secund. and council,
Chalced. Leo. ep. 10. ad. Flauianum.
then to be thought so evil off. But that which in truth may be said for him,
is, that his meaning was (as Sermon. 2. in anniuers. die. assumpt. suae. Sermon.
2. in Nata. Apost. Pet. and Paul.
other-where him self does open it,) that Christ did impart his name of rock
and foundation of the church to Peter. Now, some mist of fancy daisled his
eyes, or else he would never have said thereupon, that Christ received Peter
into the fellowship of the indivisible unity: and that, in such preeminence, as
he received none but him: chiefly, since he imparted his greater names and
titles of Hebr. 4, 8. Colos. 4.11. Aggae. 2.2. Zachar. 3.1.
Jesus, of Psalm. 105.15.
Christ, of Mat. 5.14.
the light of the world, one of them to some, the rest to all his servants:
neither did he give his name of rock to Peter, or of foundation to Peter
only, as shall appear Chap. 2. Diuis. 1.
after. But if yet you see not, that Leo did outreach, in making Peter as it
were a felow-head, a partie-rocke, and the halfe-foundation of the Church with
Christ: behold a farther fellowship, wherein he joins Peter as mate and
partner with God, a fellowship of power, Leo Sermon. 3. in anniuers. die
assumption. suae
God has given to Peter a great and a wonderful fellowship of his power: and
if he would have any thing to be common unto other princes with him, he never
gave, but by him, whatsoever he gave to others. Out of all controversy these
words do lift up Peter unto the fellowship of that glory of which God is so
jealous, that he has protested Esai. 42.8.
he will not give it to any other: he has given it to Christ, who is one with
himself, God of God, light of light: if any man presume to join a mortal
creature, whomsoever, as companion unto Christ in it, he robs Christ of his
honor of the only mediator between God and man. And what does he else, who
says ( In the places before alleged.
as Leo does) that S. Peter's care shines over Bishops in that their
slaunderers are defaced; that Peter's merit and authority does strengthen the
writings of his servant against heretics: that Peter does not suffer their
persons to be stained, who labor for the catholic faith: that the Popes
decrees are made by the inspiration of God and S. Peter: that it must be
imputed unto S. Peter's works and merits, if any thing be gotten of God by
daily prayers: that nothing passes over unto the chiefest of the Church, no
not unto any man, from God, but by S. Peter. Let every Christian heart, whom
the zeal of God has given any warmth unto, and his Spirit wisdom, be judge
between you and us: whether that to yeald such power, such authority, such
souerainetie and rule of the Church of Christ, to any Saint in heaven, be not
an empairing of the majesty, dominion, and sovereign authority of the king of
Saints, the holy one of Israel. It greeueth me to speak so much against Leo:
whose learning I do love, and reverence his ancient years. But Dan. 7.9.
the Ancient of days, is more ancient then he, and must be had in greater
reverence: who taught young Elihu Job. 32.6.
to reprove his ancients, 33.12.
even holy Job amongst them, and to say of them, 32.21.
I will not accept the person of any, neither will I give titles unto man: for
I may not give titles: If I should do it a little, he that made me would take
me away. UUherefore, I do freely without courtesy of titles and accepting of
persons, profess, that I mislike those hawtie speeches in Leo: and I think
that the mystery of iniquity so wrought through his ambitious advancing
Peter, that of the eggs, which he cherished, two of the most venomous
cokcatrices were bred, that ever poisoned the church of Christ: the one, the
Popes supremacy, usurping Princely power over the church and commonweal,
with breach of faith to God and man: the other, the worshipping of Saints,
wherein that honor is given to creatures which ought to be given to the Creator
only. One example may show them both, even Hildebrand (called Gregory the
seventh in his Popedom) who depriving Henry ye Emperor of his Empire, and
discharging his subjects of their oath of allegiance, pronounced sentence, with
such an invocation of Peter, as a true Christian would tremble to have heard
used to any, but to God. Platina de vlt. Pontif. in Gregorio Septimo.
Incline thine ears o blessed Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and hear me
S^ruum tuum:
thy servant, quem educasti abinfantia.
whom thou have brought up from mine infancy, and ab iniquoram manibus
vindicasti.
have preserved to this day from the hands of the unrighteous, who hate and
vex me, pro mea in te fide.
for my faith in thee. Tu mihi testis es optimus.
Thou can bear me witness best, and the holy mother of Christ, and thy
brother Paul partaker with thee of martyrdom, that I have undertaken the
government of the Papacy unwillingly. Not that I thought it robbery to clime
into thy See lawfully: but I had rather live in pilgrimage the^ occupy thy
room for fame and glory only. I do confess, (and good cause why) that the
charge of the Christian people was committed, and the power of binding and
loosing granted unto me, gratia tua no^ meritis meis.
not through my deserts, but by thy grace. Hac fiducia fretus.
Trusting therefore on this assurance, for the honor and sauegard of tuae
ecclesiae. Sigon. de regno Italiae lib. 9. which better agrees with the rest,
then (as Platina has it) suae.
thy holy church, in the name of God almighty, the father, the son, and the
holy Ghost, I throw down King Henry, the son of Henry sometime Emperor
(who has laid hands too boldly and rashly in ecclesiam tuam.
upon thy church) from his imperial and kingly government: and I absolve al
Christians subject to the Empire, from that oath by the which they are wont to
bear faith and alleagiance unto true Kings. Do you see to what iniquity
their pride, abusing Peter's name, and claiming al by him, has puffed them up?
To what usurping over Emperors? To what dishonouring of the Almighty? But of
this we shall have fitter occasion to confer, when we come to the question of
the worship of Saints. For the other, (to return to the point which we have
in hand:) the name of head, in that sense, as it is made a conduit of the
gifts of God, to power them abroad into all the body, is only due and proper
unto the Mediator between God and man, the Apostle of our profession, our
Savior Jesus Christ. When the right of this title is called into question:
every knee must bow in heaven, in earth, and under the earth, and yield it unto
him whom God has set at his right hand above all powers and principalities.
Wherefore, I say not, if a man, if Leo, (whom hope of profit might blind,
taking himself for Peter's heir,) but if an Angel from heaven do give it unto
Peter: shall I say (...). 1.8.
with the Apostle, Let him be accursed? I will not take on me that sentence:
but this I will say, the sin is very heinous* How much more heinous, that it
is pretended, in show, unto Peter: in deed, by Peter's name conveyed to the
Pope. For as boldly as Leo applies it to Peter: so boldly does Johan. de
Tur^ecremat. in Su^^m. de Ecclesi^ lib. 2. cap. 12.
a Cardinal apply it to the Pope. And Gul. Durand. in Rationali diuin^r.
officior. lib 2. cap. 1.
a Bishop, (venturing further then the Cardinal) not content to vouch that the
Pope is Melchisedec, excelling the rest inco^parably in priesthood; affirms
farther of him, that he is head of all Bishops, from whom they do grow as
members grow from the head, and of whose fullness they do all receive. Of
Christ it is written, that Ioh. 1.16.
of his fullness we do all receive: that he is Heb. 6.20.
a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec: that he is Ephe, 4.16.
the head of whom all the body being coupled and knit together by every joint
given to furnish it, through the effectual power, in the measure of every
part, receives increase of the body. But to give these privileges unto the
Pope, that he is Melchisedec, the head of al Bishops, and of his fullness they
do all receive: O Lord, in how miserable state was the Church, when this did
go for catholic doctrine? Was not the prophecy then fulfilled, of 2 Thessalonians.
2.4.
the man who should sit in the Temple of God, as God?


Heart. I marvel what you mean to take us up so sharply, as for a heinous
matter, that we call the Pope, head of the church: whereas you give that title
your selves to the Queen whom it may less agree to. So one that preached to
us h^re not long ago in the Tower-chappell, did make a long talk to prove
that Christ only is head of the church, and charged us with blasphemy, for
saying that the Pope is head: and yet him self praying for the Queens majesty
did name her supreme head of the church of England: wherein we smiled at his
folly. For if it be no blasphemy to call the Queen head: why should it be
blasphemy to call the Pope head?


Rainoldes. We give unto her Highness ye title, not of head, but of The oath of
the (...) li. 5. c. 5.
Supreme governor: and that upon how just ground of Gods word, and high
commission from the highest, it shall in Chap. 10. Diuis. 1.
due place be showed if you will. As for the Preacher, whom you mention: I had
rather you would deal with me by public monuments and writings of our church,
as I do with you, then by reports of private speeches: for perhaps you fansied
more then he said: perhaps he said so much that you were glad to smile it out
with that fancy. But if your report of his Sermon be true, it is likely that
he gave the name of head to the Queen in the same meaning that we do the
title of supreme governor, which I will prove to be godly: and he denied the
Pope to be head in an other meaning, in which that name belongs unto Christ
alone, condemning them of blasphemy who give it him so. And they, who did smile
hereat, as at folly, because they were Papists, might, if they were Painims,
smile at the scriptures too: which do give the title of Exodus 22.28. Ioh.
10.35.
Gods unto governors, and yet condemn them who have Exodus 20.3. Deuteronomy. 13 2.
other Gods beside the Lord. For if it be, no blasphemy to call the Magistrates
Gods: why should it be blasphemy to call Act. 14.11.
Mercurius and Jupiter Gods? Is not this your reason? But our doctrine as it is
holy and true, so it is plain: if men will rather learn it humbly, as
Christians, then laugh at it as Lucians, or, as Iulians, revolt from it. For
we teach Apologia ecclesiae Angl. Confess. Helu^^. cap. 17.
that Christ is the head of the church, as he does quicken it with his
spirit, as he is the light, the health, the life of it: and is present always
to fill it with his blessings, and with his grace to govern it. In the which
respects, because Ephesians. 1.22. and 4.15. and 5.23. Coloss. 1.18. and 2.19. and
so the Church, his body.
the Scripture gives the name of head to Christ alone, by an excellency:
thereof we so conclude, that he is the only head of the church. For otherwise,
we know, that (in an other kind and degree of resemblance) they may be called
heads, who have any preeminence of place or government over others. As in the
Hebrew text we read Nehem. 11.16.
the heads of the Levites, for the chief of them: and, 2. Chr. 31.10. (...)
the priest the head, that is to say, the chief Priest. After the which sort,
I will not contend, if you entitle Bishops heads of the churches, as In apolog.
2.
Athanasius does: and In Registr. li. 4. epist, 38.
Gregory, when he had named our Savior Christ the head of the universal
church, he calls Christ's ministers as it were heads: Paul, Andrew, John,
heads of particular flocks, yet members of the church, all under one head.


Heart. You grant in effect, as much as I require. For, if either Bishop or
Cardinal have given that unto the Pope, which is due to Christ, as he is head
properly: we maintain them not. UUe say that as pastors, all who have the
charge to govern the church, are heads after a sort, that is improperly, as I
termed it: so the Pope, who is the chiefest of them all is the supreme head.
And in this sense you must take us, when we do entitle Stapleton. in dedicat.
prin cipiorum fid. doctrine. Gregor. de^imo tertio, Pon. Opt. Max.
the Bishop of Rome the supreme head of the church.


Rainoldes. I will take you so. Howbeit, for as much as the name of head has
sundry significations in this kind of speeches as the scripture shows, 1.
Cor. 11.3.
God is the head of Christ, Christ is the head of man, man is the head of the
woman; Esaias 7.8.
the head of Syria, Damascus; the head of Damascus, Retzin; the king, 1. Sam.
15.17.
the head of the tribes of Israel; and Exodus 6.13.
the heads of housholdes, the eldest; and 1. Kin. 21.9.
the head of the people, the foremost; and Esaias 2.2.
the head of the mountains, the highest; and Exodus 30.23.
the head of the spices, the chiefest; and, in offenders Number. 25.4.
the heads, the principal; and amongst David's captains, 2. Sam. 23. ver. ^.
and 13. and 18.
the heads, the most excellent, some of the which import a preeminence of other
things, not of power, and they that do of power, some import a greater power,
some a lesser: I would understand particularly what power you give unto the
Pope by calling him supreme head, least afterward we vary about the meaning of
it.


Heart. The power, which we mean to him by this title, is Staple^ princip.
doct. lib. 6. in praefat. And herin the Rhe^ish annotations on the new
Testament ( Mat. 16.^9*) follow D. ^^^apleton: as also in the handling of
Scriptures and Fathers for this whole matter of the Popes supremacy commonly
they (...).
that the government of the whole church of Christ throughout the world does
depend of him: in him does lie the power of judging and determining all causes
of faith; of ruling councels, as President, and ratifying their decrees; of
ordering and confirming Bishops and pastors; of deciding causes brought him by
appeals from all the coasts of the earth; of reconciling any that are
excommunicate; of excommunicating, suspending, or inflicting other censures and
penalties on any that offend, yea on Princes and nations; finally, of all
things of the like sort for governing of the church, even what soever touches
either preaching of doctrine, or practicing of discipline in the church of
Christ.


Rainoldes. And all this you mean by the Popes supremacy. A power, very
great in weight, and large in compass, for one man to weeld: yea, for one
Apostle, much more for one Bishop. Bishop of Rome is he, or Bishop of the whole
world? You said that you call him a head improperlie. I ween you give this
power improperlie to him also. For out of all doubt you can never prove that it
belongs to him properly.


The second Chapter. The promise of the supremacy pretended to be made by
Christ unto Peter, 1 in the words, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I
build my church: 2 and, to thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven.
Of expounding the scriptures: how the right sense of them may be known, and who
shall judge thereof. 3 what is meant by the keys, the power of binding and
loosing, promised by Christ to Peter, and (in Peter) to all the Apostles.
HEART. How large and great soever this power and supremacy does seem in your
eyes: The first Division.
it belongs properly to the Bishop of Rome. And that is already proved by
the reason which before I made. S. Peter was head of all the Apostles. The
Bishop of Rome succeeds Peter in the same power over Bishops that he had over
the Apostles. The Bishop of Rome therefore is head of all Bishops, and by
consequent of their dioceses, that is of all the church of Christ.


Rainoldes. Remember in what sense you take the name of head: and I deny both
the propositions of this argument.


Heart. I will prove them both: and first the former. Christ did promise Peter
that he would make him head: therefore he did make him.


Rainoldes. He did not promise him.


Heart. Staplet. pri^cip. doctrine. lib* 6. cap. 2.
Christ did say unto him, Mat. 16.18.
Tu es Petrus, and super hanc petram aedificabo ecclesiam meam: Thou art Peter,
and upon this peter will I build my church. Therefore he did promise him.


Rainoldes. The reason does not follow. But why do you english it so, Thou art
Peter, and upon this peter? Sanders rock of the church. Bristow Me^tin. 47.
Your doctors were wont to cite it, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock: and to
that rock you tied all. Do you fear shipwreck there now?


Heart. No sir. But to make our anker-holde the surer, the which is fastened on
S. Peter, Doctor Allen thought good that in the translation of the new
testament into our tongue, which we were about at Rhemes, As in their
Annotations on Mat. 16.18. they say it should be by Christ's words speaking in
the Syriake tongue: yea, and by the meaning of the greek words too. Though
they keep the name of rock in their text, because of the latin.
it should be thus englished; Thou art Peter and upon this peter. The which I
rather follow, then the other of the rock, because it is agreeable unto the
original.


Rainoldes. It is not. For the original is the Greek text: and that has,
(...). whereto your latin old translation agrees, with Petrus and petra: as
your self alleged it. The words of both which though they differ not so much
as Peter and rock: yet they are not one, as your Peter and peter.


Heart. Although the Greek words (...) and (...) differ in termination: yet
they are one in meaning, and signify the same thing. For as (...) signifies a
rock, so does (...) in the Athenian language. And it must be noted that Christ
spoke in Hebrew, or rather in the Syriake tongue: wherein the name, that he
gave Peter, is Ioh. 1.42.
Cephas. Now, in the Syriake translation of the testament, that word is the
same without difference in both places. Staplet. princ. doctr. li. 6. ca. 3.
For thus are the words, (...): as if a man would say, Thou art Cephas, and
upon this Cephas; or, Thou art Rock, and upon this rock. For Cephas in the
Syriake does signify a rock: as In dictionar. Syro-chald. Regior. Biblior.
Tom. 6.
Guido Fabricius a learned linguist shows. wherefore the meaning of the word
(...) must be the same in greek. And so we may keep it well in both places,
Thou art Peter and upon this peter.


Rainoldes. The words which you allege are not of the Syriake translation:
they are Hebrew. But as the Hebrew (...) is one in both places: so the Syriake
I grant has (...) in the^ both. And I gladly take it (because our Savior
Christ spoke in that tongue) as an exposition of his words to Peter. Yet I
note by the way, that although your Session. 4.
council of Trent has allowed the latin old translation alone as
authentical, and has decreed thereof that no man shall dare or presume under
any pretense to reject it: notwithstanding, you your selves will depart from
it, and that not only to the original (which we should not be suffered) but
also to translations, if they may seem to make for you in any point more then
your old does.


Heart. We do not reject that authentical translation, but open the sense of
it, by comparing it with the greek, and the greek with the Syriake.


Rainoldes. But if we should do so in any point against you, this answer
would not serve us: it would be accounted a color or pretense, such as your
Council has condemned.


Heart. You do us great injury, in that you seem to make it all one to reject
the authentical Latin, and to take advantage for our selves out of the
original textes.


Rainoldes. For your selves? Nay, I make not that all one. I said, If we should
do so, not, If you should do so. For do you what you list: and all must be
soothed as agreeing with your Latin, and opening the sense of it. But if we
should take advantage for our selves by the original textes: our advantage
would be nipped on the head as a pretense. For example, Andreas Masius, a
learned man of yours, has written a Commentary on the book of Joshua: in the
which he launceth your authentical Latin, almost in every Chapter: yea, S.
Andr. Mas. co^mentar. in Iosu. cap. 14. ver. 15.
he says that S. Jerome, (if he be the Author of it) does seem to have
translated Sciens.
wittingly a place against the meaning of the Hebrew, that he might vouch a
fansy of his own thereby. Yet Ioh. Molanus Louaniensis.
the Popish Censour, who allowed it to the print, witnesses of that
Commentary that Multum elucidat veterem and vulgatam editionem.
it lighteneth and opens the common old translation greatly. Let us do much
less, let us but raze the credit of it: and will you give that Censure of us?
Nay, if we do note that Genesis 8.21.
where your old translation has of the frame or imagination of man's heart, that
it is Lat. in malum prona.
prone to evil, the Hebrew text has, not prone to evil, but Hebr. (...)
evil: Censura Colon. in Dialog. 2.
the Censure of Coolein will answer that it is far Long consultius.
better to say (as your old translation says) prone to evil: and will fetch
in also the Rabbis of the Jews, not to expound the Latin according to the
Hebrew, but to alaye the Hebrew according to the Latin. Wherefore in that I
said that if we should go from your authentical Latin to the original
textes, it would be misliked of: I do you no injury. Yet I mislike it not in
your plea for Peter, that you take advantage not of the original, but of a
translation: nay, I like it well. Though I like not that which you add to
prove it: that (...) in the Greek tongue does signify a rock, as Cephas in
the Syriake, and so the words (...), and (...), have one meaning. For they
have one meaning, not because (...) does signify a rock, as (...): but
because (...) does signify a stone, as (...). For, that (...) sometimes
signifies a stone: In Lexie. gra^. ad Sacri appar. instruct. Reg. B^^blior.
Tom. 6.
your own learned linguists (as you call them) note, and examples thereof are
rife. But that (...) any where signifies a rock: neither do they show, nor
have Thesaur. ling^ Graec^e cong^^t. ab Henr. Stephan.
other skilfu^l of that tongue observed. You say, that it is so in the Athenian
language: but you bring no Athenian nor any Grecian else to witness it. And
the French tongue (which follows the Greek, Hen. Stephan. de similit. ling.
Graecae and Gallicae lib. 3.
as in many other words, so in this,) has Pierre.
the same word (you know) for a stone, and for the name of Peter. Wherein there
is a print of the true original and meaning of that name in the Greek tongue.
But Christ did call him Cephas in the Syriake tongue: and Cephas (you say) does
signify a rock, as Fabricius shows. But In Dictionar. Syro-chaldaico.
Fabricius shows further that Cephas does signify a stone also. And though
he, or rather Elias Leuita in Thisbi.
the Jew (whom he cites) reports their saying who expound the name as
taken from that word in signification of a rock: yet, having mentioned the
other of a stone, he says thereupon that so his name is Peter in the Roman
tongue, and in the Italian a stone is called As Elias writes it. He means
pietra: which word in the Italian keeps that meaning of petra, from which the
name of Peter grew.
pereda. Whereunto I might add that Aber. Ezra in Daniel. cap. 11. verse. 37.
an other learned writer of the Jews, and auncienter then he, does likewise
say (as opening the sense of Peter's name) that he is called stone. But, that
Christ did mean a stone, not a rock, in naming him Cephas: your stoutest
champion, D. Sanders, may serve in steed of many witnesses. For he, wanting no
will to go as far as the boldest, and having many years advised of the matter,
durst say no more for Cephas, but 1. De visib. Monarchia eccles. l. 6. c. 7.
that it signifies a stone, at the most, a great stone: even petra it self
lib. 6. ca. 2.
he does expound in this manner, Super hanc petram aedificabo ecclesiam meam,
Thou shall be the first stone (next me) of that church, which I will build on
earth. In the which judgment he does deserve the greater credit at your
hands, because he was contented to hazard his life with the Pope against his
Prince in that As him self terms it in his letters written to Vllick Burck
an Irish Gentleman.
holy quarrel: and having spent his chiefest study in the point In his book
entitled, the rock of the church.
he had before times expounded it a rock; the which exposition so fit for the
Papacy he would have never left, had not the truth enforced him to retire from
it. A thing so much the likelier, because when he labored first to infect men
with the Popes supremacy by the name of rock, and therefore both in the title
and course of all his book did sound the rock of the church: even then In the
chap. 1.
he did expound Cephas and Peter doubtfully, a rock, or a stone; and yelding
the reason why Christ did name him so, he mentioned a stone only, because what
place a stone has in holding up the house which is built upon it, the same
should Peter have in upholding the frame of Christ's militant church. Wherefore
you must let go your hold of the rock, (whereon Princ. doctrine. lib. 6. cap.
5.
D. Stapleton does beast your house is built) and be content to lay a stone in
steed of it. Let our Savior Christ alone be the rock. If you dash your self
against him therein, he will break you in pieces.


Heart. It is a disputable point. You see that learned men are of sundry
judgments in expounding of it: some thinking, it betokens a stone, some a
rock. Wherefore you can not force me to take the one and leave the other.


Rainoldes. Not by men's words: but by the word of God I can. For Christ in the
Syriake tongue did name him Cephas, and Ioh. 1.4^.
Cephas in the Greek is expounded (...), and (...) in English signifies a
stone. And sure you had done better, if, as the Greek text has (...) and
(...), the Syriake translation Cephas and Cephas: so you had made it in
English, stone and stone. For Peter and peter does not express the force of
the Syriake word. Rock and rock is strong, but the text does not bear it.
Stone and stone is fit, had you not thought it too slender. Now, since you do
press the Syriake translation, to show thereby the meaning of the Latin, as
you say: you must give me leave to tell you that the words should be rather
Englished after the Syriake thus, Thou art stone, and upon this stone will I
build my church.


Heart. Rock or stone, if I should give you leave to choose whither of them you
list: what gain you thereby?


Rainoldes. The truth, which I deal for, shall gain thus much by it, that
although you construe those words (that Christ would build his church upon
Peter) for your most advantage, even as Sanders does: yet is it not proved
thereby that Christ did promise him a supreme-headship over the Apos^les. For
the church of Christ, which is the company of Gods elect and chosen,
isresembled in Scripture to a material temple, such as was the temple which
Solomon built. So, as that was called a house, Man* 22.1^.
the house of prayer: in like sort the church is called a house too, but 1.
Pet. 2.5.
a spiritual house, to distinguish it from that: which house because it must
be made of all ye godly, as it were of stones, grounded on Christ by faith,
though the doctrine of the Apostles: therefore Christ is called Esai. 2^.^^.
the chief corner stone in respect of the Jews and Gentiles (as of walls)
Ephesians. 2.14.
which are joined in him: 1. Cor. 3.11.
the foundation, in respect of the whole house, yea Esai. 28.16.
the foundation of foundation, as the Prophet terms him: the twelve Apostles
laid next upon Christ are called Reu. 21.14.
twelve foundations: the faithful laid on them, or rather after them on him,
are called 1. Pet. 2.5.
stones, not dead ones (such as the temple had) but living: the working and
framing of them to this purpose is called building and 1. Cor. 12.26.
edifying: which is done by preaching of Ephesians. 2. ver. 20.
the word of truth, ver. 21.
coupling them together between them selves and with Christ, that they may
grow to be a holy temple in the Lord, ver. 22.
for God to dwell in by his spirit. Wherefore if the words of Christ be so
taken, that he meant the laying of Peter as a principal stone next to him
self, and others upon him, when he said, Thou art stone, and upon this stone
will I build my church: this shows that Peter was in the first rank (as I
may say) of stones, I mean he was in order with the first who believed: and
amongst those first he had a mark of honor, in that he was named stone, above
his brethren. But it shows not, that he should be head of the rest of the
Apostles. For, as he, so they are called foundations: and Christ did build his
church as well on them as on him.


Heart. Then you grant, that Christ did promise to build his church upon Peter.


Rainoldes. I do so.


Heart. Not upon his doctrine only, but his person.


Rainoldes. After a sort. What then?


Heart. What then? What say you then to Doctors of your own side, namely to In
sophismatis Turrian. loc. 2.
Sadeel and The treatise of the church chap. 7.
Mornay: whom you praised so greatly, and brought them me to read? They write
that the church was builded, not upon the person of Peter, but upon his
doctrine preaching Christ unto us. You grant the contrary.


Rainoldes. What say you to the ancient Doctors whom they follow: chiefly to
S. Austin? He writes that the rock, (which our Savior promised to build his
church upon) is Christ, and not Peter. You hold the contrary. Augustine. de
verb. Dom. Se^m. 1^.
Thou art Peter, says he, and upon this rock which thou have confessed, upon
this rock which thou have known (saying, Thou art Christ the son of the
living God,) will I build my church. I will build thee upon me, not me upon
thee. For men entending to build on men, said, I hold of Paul, I of Apollos, I
of Cephas, (that is Peter:) and others who would not be builded upon Peter, but
upon the rock, said, I hold of Christ. For the rock was Christ: upon the
which foundation Peter him self was builded: since no man can lay an other
foundation beside that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. What say you to
the rest, namely, to In testimon. ^a vet. Testam de Trinitat contr. Iud.
Gregory Nys^en, to De Trinitat. lib 4.
Cyril, to In Matthew. hom^l. 55.
Chrysostom, to In epist. ad Ephe. cap. 2.
Ambrose, to De Trinitat. lib. 2. and 6.
Hilarie? They write that this rock is the consession of Peter. They say not,
it is Peter's person.


Heart. That exposition of S. Austin, denying Peter to be the rock, was That is
to say, an ^^ersight such as happens to men.
lapsus humanus (as D. Staplet. princip. doctr. lib. 6. cap. 3.
Stapleton calls it) caused by the diversity of the Greek and Latin tongue,
which either he was ignorant of, or marked not. Howbeit nevertheless it has a
true meaning: though not the full and proper sense of this place. Besides that,
him self does Retractation. lib. 1. cap. 21.
other-where expound it as understood of Peter: according to the famous verses
of S. Ambrose, in which he calls Peter the rock of the Church. The rest of
the Fathers, who apply the rock to Peter's confession, imply his person in it.
For, to say, that the Church is built on the confession and belief of Peter,
is all one in deed, and to say, it is built on Peter confessing and believing
in Christ. Wherefore in as much as they affirm the former, they prove withal
the later by it.


Rainoldes. S. Austin, and the Fathers, are beholding to you: whose words
(though not answering well to your fancies) are handled so gently. If you were
as favorable to Sadeel and Mornay: that, which they write of Peter, would have
a true meaning. Though, if they (with greater zeal unto his doctrine then unto
his person, that is, to Christ then to Peter) had given a little less to him
then is due: the fault were not so much to be ^aide on their restraint, as on
your excess, who say a great deal more of him then you ought. For example,
Father Reuerendi patris Roberti Bellarmini praelectiones Romae, ann. Dom. 1577.
In praefat. Controuers. de summo Pontisice.
Robert, the Prince of the Jesuits (in his Divinity lectures read publikelie
at Rome about seven years ago) handling this same point of the foundation of
the Church, did ground him self on a sentence of the Prophet Esaias to prove it
to be Peter, and Peter's see, the sea of Rome. Whereof to make his proof strong
by the words which God does speak of Christ, Esai. 28.^^*
Behold, I lay in Sion a tried precious corner stone, a sure foundation: he
affirmed that Esaias did therein prophecy not of Christ, but of Peter, a
stumbling stone to heretics, and a rock of offense, but to Catholics a tried,
a precious, a corner stone. S. 1. Pet. 2. ver. 6. and 8.
Peter the Apostle expounds those words not of himself, but of Christ.
Father Robert the Jesuit says that they agree not to Christ, but to him. So to
advance the Popes dignity by Peter: he makes Peter himself, nay, the holy
Ghost a lier. Such blasphemous outrages of your chief professors giving more
to Peter then stands with the truth and honor of the Son of God, might
provoke the godly spirits of his servants to bend to the contrary: as
husbandmen, when they would straighten a young plant that grows crooked one
way, do bow it to the other. But in the discourse of Sadeel and Mornay* that
the Church is built upon the confession of Peter not his person, there is no
straining of ought beyond the truth (for the meaning of it) by your own
judgment. For they approve and follow the exposition of S. Austin: and
Expositio Augustini habet ^ententiam veram. Staplet. ^. 6. c. 3.
that (you affirm) has a true meaning. As for the manner of S. Austins speech,
I grant it seems somewhat tough to expound those words of Christ as if he
said, Thou art Peter and upon me, not, Thou art Peter and upon thee will I
build my Church. But, if the circumstances of his speech be weighed: you shall
find, not only the meaning of it, true; but the manner, good. For, as Numb. 28.^.
it is written that God commanded the Iues to offer burnt offerings and
sacrifices unto him, yet God says in Iere. 7.22.
Jeremy that he spoke not to them, neither commanded them touching burnt
offerings and sacrifices, not as though he had not commanded the things, but
because he did not command them in that sort and respect as they used them:
so, though it be true that Christ's words to Peter do import this sense, Upon
thee will I build my Church, yet, because he spoke them in respect of Peter's
profession and faith (upon, Mat. 16.16.
Thou art Christ the Son of the living God) not in respect of Peter's person,
(which they built on, who said, 1. Cor. 1.12.
I hold of Paul, I of Apollos, I of Cephas;) S. Austin might expound them well,
as he does, that Christ said to Peter, I will build my church, not upon thee,
but upon me. In the which conclusion, the rest of the Fathers, who expound it
of Peter's confession, do join with S. Austin. Neither can your shuffling of
Peter's confession, with Peter confessing, inueigle their consent. For they do
expound and understand it plainly, As Gregory Nyssen does, and Hilarie.
some, of him whom Peter confessed, that is, Christ, the Son of the living
God: As Ambrose, Chrysostom, and Cyrill.
some, of Peter's faith wherewith he confessed him, as by which the faithful are
builded on Christ. And this is their meaning, in saying that (which Sander. de
^isib. monar. Eccles. lib. 7. Torren. confes^. August. lib. 1. cap. 9. tit. 2.
your men do vainelie triumph at) the church is built on Peter: as it
appears by S. Hilarie. Who giving him Hilar. in Ma^thaeum can. 16. Felix
ecclesiae fundamentum.
the title of the foundation of the church, expounds it some times of his De
Trinit. l^b. 6. Christum Dei ^i^ium non solum n^^ cupare, sed etiam credere:
haecsides ecclesiae fundamentum (...).
faith in Christ, some times of De Trinit. lib. 2. vn^ haec est ^aelix side^
p^tra, Petri ore confessa, Tu es filius Dei viui.
Christ himself in whom he believed. But admit that Christ had meant Peter's
person, when he promised him that he would build his church upon him. What
conclude you of it?


Heart. This I do conclude, that seeing the church was built upon Peter, and the
Apostles themselves were part of the Church: therefore the Apostles were built
upon him; and so was he their foundation. By consequent whereof, seeing the
foundation is the same to a house which a head is to a body: I do conclude
again that Peter was the head of all the Apostles. And so my purpose is proved.


Rainoldes. This conclusion has neither foundation, nor head. For by as good
reason you may conclude also, that, seeing the Church was built upon Peter, and
Peter him self is a part of the church: therefore was Peter built upon him
self, and so was he his own foundation. And because a foundation is the same
to a house, which a head is to a body: therefore S. Peter was S. Peter's head.
Or, if you see not either the necessity or folly of this consequence, as it is
made of Peter: you may frame the like of any other of the Apostles, and you
will espy it. For the church of Christ, is the great City, that holy
Jerusalem, whereof Reu. 2^.^^.
the wall had twelve foundations, and in them the names of the Lambs twelve
Apostles. Then seeing that the church was built upon every one of those
twelve, as upon James by name, and Peter was a part of the church: it follows
that Peter was built upon James; and so was James his foundation. And seeing a
foundation is the same to a house, which a head is to a body: it follows
again that James was Peter's head. which if your self deny: you must deny
that whereof it does follow by force of like reason. And so your purpose is not
proved.


Heart. But we do imagine, that in this building of the church and laying the
foundations of it, Christ did lay Peter next upon himself (as the foundation
of the rest) and other Apostles upon him.


Rainoldes. Indeed you do imagine it. And you consider not that your
imagination is crossed by it self, not only by the truth. For, if the twelve
Apostles of the Lamb (on whom he built his church) were laid as twelve
foundations, one upon an other, and Peter lowest of them: then, as Peter was
foundation of eleven, so the next to him must be of ten, the next to him of
nine, and likewise each of the next, until the last of none. A thing flat
repugnant to your imagination, wherein you make Peter (only) head of the rest,
the rest of them equal all amongst themselves. Neither does it stand with that
proportion of the building which the scripture makes, reserving the
prerogative of 1. Cor. 3.11.
the only singular foundation to Christ, and joining the Apostles all in
equal honor of Reu. 21.14.
the twelve foundations, as I have showed. For Christ (in this house) is as it
were Mat. 7.24.
a rock, a rockie sure and firm ground, on which both the Apostles, and all
his church is built: as 2. Sam. 5.9.
the city of David was on the mount Sion. The Apostles are as stones, as
twelve most precious stones, which being laid jointly one by an other, all on
Christ, are as twelve foundations: and walls (of chosen stones) are raised up
on them, 2. Pet. 3.9.
until the whole number of the elect be laid on, and the building finished.
One of these foundations might excel an other in pretiousnes of graces. For,
the first foundation, (says Reu. 21.19.
John) was a Jasper; the second, a Sapphire; the third, a Chalcedonie; the
fourth, an Emeraude; and so forth the rest. Or (because I know not the virtues
of these stones) Marc. 13.1.
the stones, which the Disciples of Christ did marvel at in the temple of
Jerusalem for the fairenes and greatness of them, were (as Antiquitat. Iudaic.
lib. 15. cap. 14.
Josephus writes) five and twenty cubits long, eight cubits hie, and twelve
cubits broad. Now as among such stones one might be fairer or better wrought
then other: so might one Apostle of Christ excel his fellows in zeal or other
gifts, as namely S. Peter. Unless perhaps S. Paul, whom Christ did add to
the twelve, excelled both him and them: which I do think rather; for 1. Cor.
15.10.
he labored more then they all, and (by Staplet. princ. doc^. l. 6. c. 12.
your own confession) converted more unto the faith. But neither Paul nor
Peter were foundations of the rest: they were altogether ioint-foundations of
the church, laid on Christ, the only and singular foundation, to speak of a
foundation properly. UUherefore though our Savior in saying to Peter, Thou art
stone, and upon this stone will I build my church, had meant that he would
build it upon Peter's person (which serves best your fansy:) yet does not that
saying infer a supreme-headship. But doubtless (if your fansy can yield unto
the truth) he meant not Peter's person, but his faith, and function in preaching
of the faith. For the only person that the church is built on, as on a
foundation (by the strength and virtue whereof it is vpholden) is the son of
God, our Savior Jesus Christ: beside whom 1. Cor. 3.11.
no other foundation may be laid: Ephesians. 2.21.
in whom all the building being coupled together grows unto an holy temple in
the Lord. Now because that faith in the son of God does make the living
stones whereof the building is compact and knitte up on Christ, a stone of
which sort Mat. 16.16.
Peter had showed himself to be Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God.
by believing and professing that faith: Christ told him that he was (according
to his name, stone) a stone indeed; and having chosen him to preach the same
faith, whereby there should be laid more stones on that building, he said,
upon this stone will I build my church. UUherin as he showed that whosoever
should be members of his church must be members of it by fellowship with Peter's
faith: so he showed withal that he would impart that faith to his church by
the ministry of Peter. As appears farther by that which he added, To thee
will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven.


Heart. Yet even this does argue still the same prerogative which we give to
Peter. For seeing Christ said that he would build his Church upon that stone,
or rock, (as I take it) and that, which a church is builded upon, must needs
be a foundation; it follows that Peter was a foundation of the church. Not a
principal foundation, for that is Christ only, of whom it is true that 1.
Cor. 3.^^
other foundation no man can lay beside that which is laid, which is Christ
Jesus: but (as we term it) a ministerial foundation. UUhich, by the
proportion of a foundation to a house and a head to a body, is enough to prove
that Christ would make Peter head of the Apostles, I mean a ministerial head.


Rainoldes. But here again you fall into your former fault: and that which was
common to all the Apostles by the meaning of Christ, you challenge as proper
unto Peter only. For, as the confession of Peter touching Christ showed their
common faith by the mouth of one: so the answer of Christ directed unto one
contained that blessing that should be common to them all. And this is declared
by the holy scripture: which to the Ephesians (members of the church) says,
that Ephe. 2.20.
they are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets. Not of Peter
only, but of the Apostles; who lay the same foundation (all) that Peter did,
and thereupon are called (all of them) Reu. 21.14.
foundations. And the church relying upon their doctrine, that is the Christian
faith, (the only and sure foundation of the church, as the truth has forced
In the Council of Trent, which (Session. ^) speaking of the articles of the
Christian faith, (commonly named the Creed) says, it is the sure and only
foundation, against which the gates of hell shall never prevail. Symbolum
fidei, fundamentum ^irmum and vnicum, contra quod portae in^e^i nunquam
praeualebunt.
your own mouths to witness) may be justly said to be built on them, even
as well on all of them as on Peter. Wherefore by the proportion (that you grate
upon) of a foundation to a house, and a head to a body: as Christ is head
only, so is he the only foundation of the Church; as the name of foundation
is given to the Apostles, so the twelve foundations does prove them twelve
heads. You must seek therefore some other foundation of Peter's headship over
them. For neither the name of stone that Christ gave him, nor the words of
building his church upon that stone, prove that he promised him to make him
head of all the Apostles.


Heart. The second Division.
Not in your judgment: but in mine they do. And so does the other part of the
promise also which Christ made unto him; Mat. 16.19.
To thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Staplet. princ. doctr.
l. 6. c. 1.
For by the name of keys is signified the fulness of ecclesiastical power. But
to give the fulness of ecclesiastical power, is to make him head. Therefore
Christ did promise to make him head of the church.


Rainoldes. These keys will not open more in the house, then did the
foundation lay in the building. For if you mean by fulness of ecclesiastical
power, the lawful power of the Apostleship, then the which no greater was ever
given to any ministers of the church: Christ gave it both to Peter and to
every Apostle. If you mean such power as the Pope claims by Bu^la Pii
Quinti contra Reginam Angliae.
fulness of power, a Pope Sixtus The fourth. Sacrar. ceremoniar. eccles. Romans
lib. 1. Sect. 7. tit. De ense. Potestas summa temporalis (a Christo) Pon^is^ci,
eius in terris Vicario collata est: iuxta illud, Data est mihi omnis potestas
in caelo and in terra.
sovereign power not only spiritual but also temporal: Christ gave it
neither to Peter, nor to any Apostle. So that in the former sense, al were
heads; in the latter, none: and thus your headship proved by neither. But what
soever you mean by fulness of power: this is clear and certain that our
Savior promised no more power to Peter, then he meant and performed to all the
Apostles. And therefore, what soever he promised to him, he promised in him to
them. For, as amongst them, when they were all asked, Mat. 16. ver. 15.
Whom say ye that I am, Peter answered alone, ver. 16.
Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God: so Christ said to him alone,
ver. 19.
I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, as though he had alone
received power to bind and loose: whereas he made that answer one in stead of
them all; and received this power, one together with them all. Wherefore since
no more was promised then given, and equal power was given to all the
Apostles: this promise proves not your headship. You must bring us forth some
better evidence: or else your title will be naught.


Heart. The evidence is good. For it says in plain and express terms, that
Christ would give the keys to Peter. Then the which what could be more
manifestly spoken?


Rainoldes. In show, to the simple. Chiefly when they see the matter set
forth, as that is at Rome: In a book of pictures, entitled, Non rocedat
volumen legis huius ab ore tuo. Printed at Rome 1577.
where Christ is painted out, not as promising Peter that he would give him
keys, but as giving them to him at that present; and giving them to him alone,
not to all the Apostles; with the words of Christ, paraphrased feately thereto
by some poet; Be thou the Prince of pastors:
to thee alone is given
The power to shut the door of heaven,
and eke to set it open,
Pastorum princeps esto:
tibi ius datur vni,
Claudere celestes
and reserare fores.



Heart. Nay: the very words (as they lie in scripture) are plainer in show for
us then for you. which also may be noted in other points of controversy
between you and us. As, about the real presence, Mat. 2^.26.
this is my body. For Christ did not say, this is a sign of my body. And
again, Ioh. 6.5^.
the bread that I will give, is my flesh. He said not, it is but the sign of
my flesh.


Rainoldes. Neither do we say, that Christ did so mean in this, of flesh and
bread. For we teach, that Ioh. 6. ver. 32.
the true bread, ver. 33.
the bread of God which came down from heaven and gives life unto the world,
ver. 35. and 48.
is Christ, even ver. 51.
the flesh, the very flesh of Christ, that is, Christ incarnate. The greater
wrong Alan. de sacrament. Eucharist cap. 22. The defender of the Censure, in
the answ. ^o M. Charlis pref. page 27.
they do us, who lay to our charge that we expound it not of the thing, but of
a sign: themselves indeed guilty thereof, expounding it of a sacrament of
Christ, where it is meant of Christ him self, Ioh. 1.14.
the word that was made flesh. But what if in the other place, and sundry mo,
the words of the scripture be plainer in show for you then for us? It is not
the show but the sense of the words, that does import the truth, and must
decide controversies. For words were ordained to open the meaning and mind of
him that speaks them. The meaning of the word of God is always true: because
God, who speaks it is Ioh. 3.33.
true, and Ti^. 1.2.
cannot lie. The show of it is false sometimes and deceitful: as Romans 3.4.
men are, whose judgment this show depends of; and that may seem to them to
be meant by it, which is not meant by God. Wherefore it is not the show, but the
sense; the substance, not the semblance of the words of scriptures; that you
must prove does make for you (in points of controversy) if you will prove
ought.


Heart. Why? do you grant then, that the words of scripture make more for us,
in show, though not in substance, then they do for you. It were not good for
you that this should be known.


Rainoldes. What? Not that the words of scripture, sometimes, make more for
you then us, in show, though not in substance? Yes truly M. Heart: and for the
Anabaptists too, that Act. 4.32.
Christians had all things common. And for As his words are set down in the
^anon law. c. dilectissimis. 12. ^. 1.
Pope Clemens too, that wives must be common: because in omnibus sunt sine
dubio and coniuges.
in all things wives are employed also. And I am so far from being afraid that
this should be known: that, even in the very example which you mention (as
making for you most,) I grant that the words of Christ, this is my body, are
plainer in show, though not for your monster of transubstantiation, yet for
your real presence, then for our sacramental. But so, that I grant the same
(in like manner) of other sacramental and mystical speeches: wherein the
scriptures give the name of the thing to that which it betokneth, as of Matt.
26.17. Exo. 12. verse. 11. and 27.
the passover, to the lamb, and of 1. Cor. 10.4. and the rock was Christ.
the rock to Christ. For (I hope) you will not conclude of this show, that
really Christ was a rock; or a lamb, the passover really.


Heart. These speeches are not like to that of Christ's body in the Sacrament
of the Eucharist. For, it is manifest, that when the lamb was called the
passover, and Christ the rock: it was meant, not really, but figuratively,
that the rock signified Christ; the lamb, the passover. But it is not
manifest in that of Christ's body.


Rainoldes. Whither it be manifest, or no; is not the question: but whither the
speeches be like in show of words, the rock was Christ, this is my body. Or,
to come nearer to your own example and proof of that point: Christ says of
himself that Ioh. 6. ver. 3^.
he is true bread: and, verse. 55.
my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. True and, indeed:
these terms are more pregnant for a real presence, then that of Christ's
body. Yet if you say that Christ is bread, really; and his flesh, meat; and
his blood, drink: you may as well say, that he is really Ioh. 15. ver. 1.
a vine; and his disciples verse. 5.
branches really, and other such real either blasphemies or follies.


Heart. Nay, we do confess that many things in scripture are spoken and meant
figuratively: but neither all, nor this concerning the Sacrament, nor any thing
else, whereof the literal and proper sense has not somewhat contrary to God,
to religion, and to Christian life. As Alan. de sacrament. Eucharist. cap. 22.
D. Allen says that S. De Genes. ad lit. lib. 8. cap. 2. De doctr. Christ.
lib. 3. cap. 15.
Austin teaches. Out of cap. 10.
whom he cites withal a worthy sentence, touching such, as you are: If the
mind be prevented with an opinion of some error, whatsoever the scripture
does affirm otherwise, men think it to be spoken figuratively.


Rainoldes. That sentence is good, as S. Austin utters it. But D. Allen uses
it ill, against us. The worse, because S. Austin shows straight upon it,
cap. 16.
in the same book, of the same point, that, to eat the flesh of Christ, and
drink his blood, was spoken not properly (for so it were a wicked deed,) but
figuratively: flat against that error of the real presence, which he is
pretended to prove by D. Allen. But howsoever D. Allen deal in that: the point
(which you grant with him) suffices me for proof of that I said. For if
many things in scripture are spoken and meant figuratively: it follows that
the sense of scripture is against the show of words in sundry places, and
therefore that the show of words sundry times is against the truth. Which since
you cannot see in this Sacrament, because of your prejudice of the real
presence: I will bring an example of the sacrament of baptism, wherein you
must needs see it. There were Seleacus et Herm^a, G^la^^ Philastr. (...).
haeres.
some of old, who, as we sprinckle children with water in baptizing of them, so
they used to print and stamp certain marks upon them with fire. For the which
usage they alleged the scripture, (I mean, the words thereof) that, touching
John Baptist: Luc. 3.16.
who saying of himself, I baptize you with water, adds of our Savior, He
will baptize you with the holy Ghost and fire. Now, I put the matter to your
own judgment, whether they did better, who baptized with fire: or we, who
without it.


Heart. Who doubts, but we? For they were deceived who took the name of fire
properly in that place: where it is used figuratively, to signify the graces
of the holy Ghost, who lighteneth and purges the hearts of the faithful.
They, who did baptize in that sort, were heretics: as Alphons. a Castro
aduers. haeres. lib. 3.
Alphonsus shows.


Rainoldes. Yet the show of words does make more for the^: John baptized with
water, Christ baptizeth with fire. Neither have you here so much as that
evasion, (which yet if you had, were nothing to the purpose) that it is
manifest to be meant, not properly, but figuratively. For there have been
Paul. Venet. de regionib. orientalib. li. 3. cap. 43. Matthew. Paris in Henrico
tert. Petr. Bizar. in histor. rer. Per sicar. lib. 10.
sundry churches and nations these many hundred years, that used it, and do
still: induced all thereto by the show of words, as manifest to be meant not
figuratively, but properly, in their judgment. And your real presence has
not gone so far in the one Sacrament with this is my body: as their fiery
marks have gone in the other with the holy Ghost and fire. Wherefore (to
return to the point in question) although it may seem by the show of words
that our Savior promised the keys of the kingdom of heaven to Peter only:
yet, since he meant them to all the Apostles (as I have declared) your claim
will be a bare show, if all your proof be show of words. And therefore, as I
said, so I say again, that you must bring us forth some better evidence: or
else your title will be naught.


Heart. And I tell you again, that the evidence is good: and has not only
show of words, but sense too, if it be rightly taken. But we retain not you to
be our lawier to expound it.


Rainoldes. I am not in have to be retained of you. But what mislike you in my
expounding of it?


Heart. That, which shall keep me from yelding thereunto. For your exposition
is a private exposition, which we allow not of. We allow only of the churches
exposition.


Rainoldes. Then I perceive the church shall be your lawier. And what is (I
pray you) the churches exposition.


Heart. Staplet. princ. doctr. l. 7. c. 13. and l. 11. ca. 5.
That which all the Fathers make with one consent.


Rainoldes. Which all the Fathers make? We had need to have bodies like the
bodies of Oaks, and memories as strong as steel, to endure to read, and be
sure to remember of every exposition, so much, as may ascertaine us, that all
the Fathers make it. Has any man living read them all? Nay, have all the men
living read them? Nay, can they show them? Can they get them? I had almost
said, can they name them?


Heart. Womeane of the Fathers which are extant commonly, and may be had and
read. If many of them make it, and the rest either gainsay it not, or say
naught of it: we count it to be made of all with one consent.


Rainoldes. That count is evil cast. For, as in the writings of Fathers which
we have, some one expounds places of Scripture oftentimes otherwise then all
the rest, Sixth. Senen. biblioth. sanct. li. 5. and 6. Aloys. Lipom. caten. in
Genes. and Exodus
(a thing notorious and confessed:) so, it is likely that in those which we
have not some places were otherwise expounded the^ they be in those which we
have. Yet I will not deny but you had reason so to count. For else your lawier
had been dumb, and could not have spoken a word for his client. But if this
be your rule of the churches exposition: then I could have made mine
exposition, the churches, with a wet finger, if I would have stuffed it with
the names of Fathers. For my words of Peter, that he alone made answer for all
the Apostles, and received the keys together with them all, are the words of
In Johan. tractat. 118.
S. Austin, though I did not name him. And In Psalm. 38.
S. Ambrose says of that promise of Christ ( I will give thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, and the rest which follows) that what is said to Peter,
is said to the Apostles. And Aduers. Iouinian. lib. 1.
Ierom says, that the foundation and firmness of the church lay on all the
Apostles equally, and they did all receive the keys. And In Matthew. tractat. 1.
Origin says, that Christ's promise of building his church, of giving the
keys, of binding and loosing, made as to Peter only, was common unto all. And
De Trinitat. lib. 6.
Hilarie says in like sort, that through the worthiness of their faith they
obtained the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and the power of binding and
loosing in heaven and earth. Neither do I doubt but other of the Fathers have
said as much as these in the expounding of these words. But have they or not:
this is no path for us to walk in, if we seek the right way. For neither
might we hope for an end of our travels because of sundry expositions, one
contrary to an other: and we should faint for thirst in time of heat and
drouth, looking for water in the wilderness, as Job. 6.19.
the travelers of Tema: and (that is woorst of all) sometimes we should leave
the pure water of truth, and swill up puddle in steed of it. For, although the
Fathers were men endued of God with excellent gifts, and brought no small light
to understanding of the scriptures: yet learned men in our days may give a
right sense of sundry places thereof which the Fathers saw not, yea against
the which perhaps they consent.


Heart. The (...). 4.
Council of Trent condemns them that say so.


Rainoldes. As learned men, as any were at that Council, say it. And they do
it too.


Heart. Who? Calvin and Beza?


Rainoldes. Truly, I do judge no less of their learning. And, if I be of any
judgment, I judge not parcially in it. But think of the^ as you list. S.
Retractation. lib. 2. cap. 18.
Austin, having followed S. Cyprian in expounding a certain place of Scripture,
afterward did find in Tyconius the Donatist an other exposition: which
thinking to be truer, he preferred it before Cyprians. Whereby you may see,
that, although you thought as ill of Calvin and Beza, as did S. Austin of the
Donatists, yet, if you had S. Austins mind, you would rather follow the sense
which they give sometimes of the scriptures, then that which is given by
ancient godly Fathers. Nevertheless, my mind was not of them, when I
mentioned learned men. For, to what purpose? Since I am not ignorant how small
account you make of them. My mind was of your own men, who say so, and do so.


Heart. What? Against the Council of Trent? UUho be they?


Rainoldes. First, the flower of your Cardinals, the In praefat. comment. in
libros Mosis.
Cardinal Caietan, beginning to expound the scriptures, does set it down for
a principle, that God has not tied the exposition of the scriptures unto the
senses of the Fathers. UUherefore if he fall upon a new sense agreeable to the
text, Quamuis a torrente Doctorum sacrorum sit alienus.
though it go against the stream of the Fathers: he does advise the reader not
to mislike of it.


Heart. But the flower of our Bishops, Bishop Locor. Theologico. li. 7. ca. 3.
Melchior Canus misliketh the Cardinal for that his rash sentence: and
reprooueth it as an error, yea as the common sentence of heretics and
schismatikes.


Rainoldes. But the flower of your Doctors, Andrad. defens. fid. Trid. lib. 2.
D. Payua Andradius, rebukes this your Bishops reproof, as more rash: yea
defends Caietan against it as a slander. He teaches first, that the Fathers
do in many places not expound the Scriptures according to the literal sense,
(the only which has weight to prove points of faith,) but allegorically and
morally. We may leave their allegories and expound them literally. He teaches
next, that when they seek the literal senses of the scriptures, they do not
always find them, but give diverse senses one unlike an other. We may forsake
their senses all, and bring a new unlike to theirs. Moreover, (to make the
thing evident by examples) him self expounds sundry places otherwise then
the Fathers have: declaring that he does it upon sufficient ground. Again, he
proves by the sayings of the chief of the Fathers, that they spoke not
oracles when they expounded the Scriptures, but might therein be deceived. He
shows furthermore, that the ouersightes of the translation which they
followed, must cause them needs to miss sometimes the right meaning of the
holy Ghost. Finally, he adds that experience forces us to confess (unless
we will be unthankful to most excellent wits) that very many things in
Moses and the Prophets are in this our age expounded more exactly (through the
diligence of learned men) then ever they were before. Whereupon he concludes
that the holy Ghost, the only and faithful interpreter of the Scriptures,
would have many things to be known to us, which our ancestors knew not: and
has wrought by means, (unknown to us, known to him) that the Fathers noted
good and godly mysteries out of very many places of the Scriptures, whereof
the right and natural sense has been found out by the posterity. This is,
in few words, the judgment of Andradius, which he prosecuteth more at large;
in the defense of Cardinal Caietan against quarellers; who did cavil at him
because he wrote that it is lawful to go against the stream of the ancient
Fathers in expounding of the Scriptures.


Heart. I care not for the judgment of Andradius, or Caietan, or any other
private man, though you could bring a hundred of them. I do not build my faith
on them.


Rainoldes. Although you care not for their judgment, yet you should care for
their reasons. Of which the light is so great: that, unless a man have
altogether lost his eyes, he can not choose but see the truth and brightness
of them. Neither may you set so little by their judgment: chiefly the judgment
of Andradius. If you do: it may be the price of his contempt will help to
purchase your confusion. For, the Council of Trent, Campian. rat. 4. Quae
medulla, Theologorum.
the fairest flower of your garland, and chiefest pillar of your faith, is but
the consent of a few such, as Andradius was, or rather none such perhaps. Let
Oso. epist. praefixa Andrad. Defens. fid. Trident.
the Italians witness it, who wondered at his gifts. Theyloue not them selves so
ill, as to wonder at common things in strangers. A great token of it, that
the faith of Trent most justly charged by Kemnicius, (who tried the Spirit of
the Council, and proved it the Spirit of error) found no man to defend it,
but Andradius, to speak of. For I^doc. Rauestey^ Tilet. defens. decret. co^c.
Trident.
Tiletan is a trifler, not worthy to be named the same day that he is. But let
the Authors, with their reasons, be proofs of no value: and grant, that if
the Fathers all consent in one, their exposition must be stood too. What, if
the Fathers dissent in expounding a place of the Scripture, as oftentimes they
do? Which of their expositions must we follow then?


Heart. If one expound a thing otherwise then all the rest, the rest must be
followed, and he must be refused. As by D. Stapletons example in S. Austin I
showed Chapt. 2. Diui^. 1.
ere-while.


Rainoldes. S. Austin was against you then. But if he make for you, though he
be alone, you will leave all and follow him: whereof you give notable proof in
the division of the ten commandments. For, the second commandment against the
worship of Images, Thou shall not bow down to them nor worship them, because
the words are sharp, and rip the heart strings of your church, whose spiritual
hooredomes do pass the hoordomes of Iezabel, and all your temples are stews
of them: therefore you omit it in Offic. B. Mar. virg. reform. a Pio Q^i^t.
praierbookes and The catechism of Vau^ in English, and Ledesima in Italian.
catechismes; and to salve the matter, least thereby we should have no more
the^ nine commandments, you cut the tenth into two. Now for this, Qua^st 71.
in Exodum.
S. Austin is all in all with you: the rest of the Fathers go for naught. Yet
the rest expound it literally as it were: S. Austin fansied a mystery, that
the number of three commandments touching God might betoken the Trinity. Thus
under the color of one Fathers judgment against all the rest, you conceal
the second commandment from the people, least your vile idolatry, or Sanders
treatise of Images. chap. 8.
imagedoulie as you smooth it, should grow (by the hearing thereof) into
mislike. Indeed, whatsoever you say of the Fathers, to bleare the peoples
eyes: you use them as marchaunts are wont to use their counters. Sometime they
stand with you for pence, sometime for powndes, even as they be next and
readiest at hand to make up your accountes.


Heart. UUhy? Think you that none, but S. Austin only, has so divided the
commandments?


Rainoldes. I find none alleged of your Magist. sentent. li. 3. Did. 37.
Thom. Aquin. in prima secundae q. 100. a^tic. 4.
Schoolmen, but him.


Heart. You may. For Clemens Alexandrinus is alleged also by Father Robert in
his In quaest. 100. conclus. 4.
Dictates upon S. Thomas.


Rainoldes. Clemens is smally bound to Father Robert for alleging of him.
Neither will he get credit: nor you advantage by it. For Strom. lib. 6.
Clemens, though he number no more then three commandments touching our duty
toward God: yet neither does he number any more then six touching our duty
toward man; and of the tenth he makes but one, which you make two. So that,
through omitting the second commandment, as part annexed to the first:
Clemens found no more commandments then nine, whereas Exodus 34.28.
the scriptures number ten. UUherefore, either Clemens makes nothing for you:
or at least no more for you then us.


Heart. Yes. For the later place of six commandments, wherein Clemens makes
for you, is corrupted. The former is sound, wherein he makes for us.


Rainoldes. Just. For Dictat. in s^m. Tho. Aquin. q. 100. concl. 4.
Father Robert says so. And he belike is (...). Diogen. Laert. in Pythag.
Pythagoras. All the proof, is, He said it. Else, what reason have you, why
the later place (if Clemens be corrupted) should be thought rather to be
corrupted then the former? This was wont to be, with young Logicians in Oxford
a schoolers trick at Paruis: to say that the place in Aristotle is corrupted,
when they could not unloose a knotte. In deed your latin, either translatour,
or printer, Putting doctrina for decima.
has corrupted Clemens in the chief place that he does make for us against
you. Which I say, not (as father Robert does) upon my word without proof: but
the very drift and course of Clemens treatise, and (...).
the greek copy agreeing fully with it, conuinceth it to be so. As for the
repugnancie that is between these points in the true copy of Clemens: it
seems not to have grown of either place corrupted, but of an oversight and
slip of memory in Clemens, by reason of a digression which he fell into upon
occasion of the precept to sanctify the Sabbath day. And this is the likelier,
because there is some body touched by In Exodus homil. 8.
Origin for so dividing the commandments: and we find not any that has
divided them so before Clemens; who was Origens master. Which also father
Robert himself has observed. Wherefore you may not look for any help at
the hands of Clemens: S. Austin you must stand alone with, and follow one
against all.


Heart. No doubt there be more of that mind then he: although I know not who
they be. For In confess. Augustine. lib. 2. ca. 6. tit. 5.
Torrensis, a learned Jesuit, says that this division of the ten
commandments, three of them to touch our duty toward God, and seven
toward man, is a point of doctrine very common and familiar both unto S.
Austin, and to Antiquitati omni.
all antiquity. UUhereby you may see that S. Austin is not alone of that
judgment.


Rainoldes. Nay: I see not that. But I see an other thing, which it were reason
that you should see also.


Heart. UUhat is that?


Rainoldes. I see that the Jesuit makes no conscience of lying, so that it be
for advantage: as Dori^ the bawd in Terence. Non pudet vanitatis^ Minime, dum
ob rem.
a lewd person professes in the poet. For whereas the commandments, which
touch our duty toward God, are noted to be four, (and that of Images, one
of them) by the chiefest autours and witnesses of antiquity; first by the
Hebrews, (as Libr. de Decalog. and duob. opuse. de legib. specialib.
Philo and Antiquit. I^d. lib. 3. cap. 4.
Josephus show) who have still continued of the same minds, Aben Ezra in Exodus
20.
(as it may seem) in their posterity; next, by the Grecians, In versib. de
Decalogo.
Gregory Nazianzen, In Exo. hom. 8.
Origin, In synopsi sacrae scripturae.
Athanasius, In Matthae. opere imperf. hom. 49.
Chrysostom, or whosoever was autour of the work imperfect upon Matthew;
thirdly, by the Latins, In epist. ad Ephesians. cap. 6.
S. Ambrose, In epist. ad Ephesians. cap. 6.
S. Ierom, and one more ancient then they both, August. quaestion. vet. and
nou. Test. c. 7.
the autour of the questions of the old and new Testament: nevertheless this
Jesuit, as though his face were hardened, like the face of an harlot, blu^heth
not to say, that antiquity, that all antiquity does affirm the contrary.


Heart. You are persuaded too hardly of Torrensis. I can not think that he would
pretend al antiquity, unless he had known, if not all, yet the most to be of
that mind.


Rainoldes. You have conceived too lightly of Torrensis, I can not think that
he would allege not one witness out of all antiquity, if he had known any
of that mind in deed. Chiefly seeing that he is so ambitious in citing
Fathers when he has them, that, to prove the church was builded upon Peter,
Confess. Augustine. lib. 1. cap. 9. tit. 2.
he quoteth no less then eight and forty places out of Doctors and Councels,
to let go other writers which (he says) he passes over. But, grant there is
perhaps some one, or two, or three, or four (whom your Jesuits have not found
yet) that are of S. Austins mind in that point. If fewer of the Fathers expound
a place of scripture contrary to more of them: which shall we follow the^? the
lesser or the greater number?


Heart. Hieron. Torren. con^ess. Augustine. lib. 1. cap. 11^ tit. 1.
The greater number. For a few may be deceived more easily then many.


Rainoldes. Then must you bid your Schoolmen now adieu, and agree with us
in the division of the commandments; though we give you Clemens (whom father
Robert cites) and three or four voices more. Howbeit I can not urge you to do
it, unless that you do it upon surer ground: because this ground is slabbie,
and the rule unsure for men to walk on. For, that the greater number of the
Fathers expounds Scriptures worse sometimes then the lesser: it appears by
the controversy between Epist. 19.
Austin and Epist. 11. i^ter epistolas August.
Ierom, concerning the reproof of Peter: whether Paul rebuked him in earnest,
as blameworthie; or dissembled with him, and made Mendacium officiosum. August.
a duetifull lie, which Ierom termed Hones^am. dispens^tionem. ^ie^on.
an honest policy. For, Con^ess. Augustine. lib. 1. cap. 1. t^t. 1.
your selves grant, that Austin (who thought that Paul reproved him in
earnest) did judge therein more soundly and truly then Ierom did, who thought
that he dissembled. Yet Ierom alleged more Fathers on his side* and made so
great account of them, that Epist. 11. inter epist. August.
he desired Austin to suffer him to err with such men if he thought him to
err. Whereupon Epist. 19.
S. Austin replied, that peradventure he might find as many Fathers on his
side, if he had read much. But I, says he, have Paul the Apostle himself in
stead of these all, and above these all. To him do I fly, to him I appeal
from all the Doctors (his interpreters) who are of other minds. Of him do I
ask, whereas he writes to the Galatians, that he saw Peter not going with a
right foot to the truth of the Gospel, and that he withstood him to his face
for it, because by that dissembling he constrained the Gentiles to do like
the Jews: whether he wrote true, or did lie perhaps Nescio qua dispensatiua
Falsitate.
with I know not what politic falsehood. And I do hear him (a little before)
making a very religious protestation, in the beginning of the same discourse,
The things which I write unto you, behold, I witness before God, I lie not.
Let them, who are of other minds, pardon me. I believe rather so great an
Apostle, swearing in his own and for his own words, then any man be he never
so learned, talking of the words of an other. A wise and free judgment,
worthy of S. Austin. Whereby you may perceive that your rule of following the
greater number of the Fathers in expounding the scriptures, is but a leaden
rule, not fit which should be used to square out stones by, for building of
the Lords temple.


Heart. This of Austin shows that we may vary sometimes from the greater
number of the Fathers, and refuse their judgment. But that (as Confess.
Augustine. lib. 1. cap. 11. tit. 1.
Torrensis has observed well) must be with two cautions. One, that the thing
wherein we vary from them be a known truth. The other, that we do it with
reverence and modesty.


Rainoldes. UUith reverence and modesty? God forbid else. As Job. 33.1.
Elihu reproved Job: as Gal. 2.14.
Paul reproved Peter. But for the other caution: how shall we know a thing to
be a known truth?


Heart. One^way to know it, and that a good way, Staplet. princip. doct lib. 7.
cap. 17.
is the common testimony of the faithful people, if they with one consent
believe it to be true.


Rainoldes. This brings us small help to the expounding of scriptures. For
things may be true: and yet a place of scripture not applied truly and rightly
to prove them. As it is plain in places, Deuteronomy. 6.4. Augustine S^euchus Chisam.
epis cop. apud Sixtu^ Senensem biblioth. sanct. lib. 5. annot. 130.
that have been applied by Christians against the Jews. But let it be a good
way. UUhat, if the faithful people do dissent? As, in the question which we
have in hand about the Popes supremacy, the people of the east church dissented
from the west, many hundred years together. UUhat shall we do then?


Heart. Then an other way (a better way to find it) Staplet. princip. doctr.
lib. 7. cap. 8.
is the common testimony of the faithful Pastors, if they do decree it in a
general council. As for the Popes supremacy they did in the Under Pope
Innocent the third, capit. 5.
Council of Lateran.


Rainoldes. The Bishops of the east church Tit. general. octauae Synod.
Florent. and epist. Ieremiae Constantinopolit. patriarchae.
say that the Council of Lateran was not general: which the Pope him self
does acknowledge also, In c. Item Adrianus. Did. 16. c. Sancta octo. Contius.
as it is noted on your law. But here the former difficulties meet us again,
and breed the same perplexity. For there are but few places of Scripture
which general Councels have expounded: neither is it likely the Pope will
assemble them to expound the rest. Again, although Staplet. princip. doctrine.
li. 8. cap. 14. and 15. lib. 11. cap. 6.
you say that general Councels can not err in their conclusions: yet you say
they may err in applying of Scriptures to prove their conclusions. Lastly,
general Councels may dissent too: Council. Ephesians. 2. and Council. Chalcedon.
as heretofore they have in a weighty point offaith touching Christ. The which
incommodities being all incident into this which presently we debate of, as our
conference will show: you see that you have not yet resolved me. One question I
must ask you more. In this case, when Councels say nothing of Scriptures; or
misapply them, in proofs; or dissent, in conclusions: what are we to do?


Heart. If Councels dissent, we must follow those which are confirmed by the
Head. And (to answer all your questions in a word) whether with the Councels
or without the Councels, that which the Head determines, is a known truth:
that which the Head condemns is a known error.


Rainoldes. Staplet. princip. doctrine. li. 7. cap. 10. and li. 10. cap. 11.
You mean by the Head, not our Savior Christ, but the Pope, I trow.


Heart. I: the visible head.


Rainoldes. Do you not see then by your own answers, that whatsoever show
you make of Fathers and Councels: the Pope is the man that must strike the
stroke? So that, (to bring it to the point in controversy) whereas our
question is, whether that the Pope be supreme head of the church: you say, He
is so. UUhen we sift the matter, and seek the reasons, why: this is the sum
of all, Because him self says so. I thought, that the church should have
been your lawier to expound your evidences: but now I perceive that you meant
the Pope. He is the churches husband (belike) and in matters of law deals
for her. I cannot blame you, though you be content to make him your judge too.
For if he give sentence, in this cause, against you: I will never trust him.


Heart. You do gather more of mine answers, then I meant. I pray make your own
collections, and not mine.


Rainoldes. I do gather nothing, but that which you have scattered. For, you
began to try this point touching the Pope by the words of Scripture. The
words (we agree) decide by ye sense: ye sense must be tried (you say) by ye
Fathers: the Fathers by ye truth: the truth by the people: the people by the
Councels: the Councels by the Pope. If one of us should make but a semblance of
such an answer: you would sport your selves with it, and call it a Campian.
Rat. 9.
Circulation, and Eccum, quas rotas, quos gyros fabricat*
cry against our impudency, and O Circulos. Campian. Rat. 4.
whoope at it like stage players. But you may daunse such roundes, and yet
persuade men that you go right forward with great sobriety and gravity.


Heart. Howsoever you dally with your circulations, and rounds, as you call
them: I say no more, but this, that if a truth cannot be known otherwise, then
the last mean to resolve us of it, is the Popes authority. But there needed
not so much adoo hereof, if I prove that Christ did give that supremacy
(whereof we talked) to S. Peter.


Rainoldes. You can never prove that Christ did give it him, but by Col. 3.16.
the word of Christ, which is the holy scripture. And the scripture stands
in substance of the sense, not in the show of words. UUherefore, it was
needful, since we seek herein to find out Christ's will, that first we agreed
what way the right sense of the scripture may be known. UUhich, seeing you
would have me to fetch from the Pope, and I have no lust to go unto Rome, nor
think it lodges in The Palace of the Pope.
the Vatican, so yt by this way no agreement can be made, or end of
controversy hoped for: I will take a shorter and a surer way, confessed by us
both to be a good way, whereby the right sense of the scripture may be found,
and so the will of Christ be known.


Heart. UUhat way may that be?


Rainoldes. To learn of Christ him self the meaning of his word, and let his
spirit teach it: that is, to expound the scripture by the scripture. A golden
rule, to know, and try the truth from error: prescribed by the Lord, and
practiced by his servants for the building of his church from age to age
through all posterity. For, 2. Pet. 1. ver. 19.
the holy Ghost, exhorting the Jews, to compare the darker light of the
Prophets with the cleerer of the Apostles, that the day-brigtnesse of the
Son of righteousness may shine in their hearts: says, that ver. 20.
no prophecy of Scripture is of a man's own interpretation: because, in the
prophecy (that is, the scripture of the Prophets) they spoke as they were
moved by the holy Ghost, not as the will of man did fancy. UUhich reason since
it implies, as the Prophets, so the Apostles: and it is true in them all, the
holy men of God, spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost: it follows
that all the scripture ought to be expounded by God, because 2. Tim. 3.16.
it is inspired of God: as L. Si. Cod. De legib. et constitutionib. Principum.
natures light has taught that he who made the law, should interpret the law.
This rule commended to us by the prescript of God, and as it were sanctified by
Nehem. 8.8. (...)
the Levites practice in the old Testament, and In the epistles to the Romans,
Galatians, Hebrews.
the Apostles in the new: the godly ancient Pastors and Doctors of the church
have followed, in their preaching, their writing, their deciding of
controversies in Councels. UUherefore, if you desire in deed the churches
exposition, and would so feign find it: you must go this way, this is the
churches way: that is the churches sense to which this way does bring you.
For, S. Austin, Confession. Augustinian. praefat. ad lecto.
whose doctrine your self do acknowledge to be grounded on the laws, the
manners, the judgments of all the catholic church: whom you call a witness
of the sincere truth and catholic religion, such a witness as no exception
can be made against: who assures you (as you say) not only of his own, but
also of the common, the constant faith and confession of the ancient Fathers
and the Apostolic church: this S. Austin has written four books of
Christian doctrine, wherein he purposely entreats, how men should understand
the Scripture and expound it. The sum of all his treatise does aim at this
mark, which I have pointed too: that the meaning of the Scripture must be
learned out of the Scripture, August. de doctrine. Christ. li. 1. cap. 2.
by the consideration of things and words in it: that cap. 35.
the end whereto, cap. 37.
the matter whereof, it is all written, be marked in general, cap. 36. and 40.
and all be understood according to that end and matter: that Lib. 2. cap. 8.
al be read over and over, and cap. 9.
those things chiefly noted which are set down plainly, both precepts of life,
and rules of belief, because that all things, which concern belief and life,
are plainly written in it: that obscure and dark speeches be lightened and
opened by the plain and manifest: that to remove the doubt of uncertain
sentences the clear and certain be followed: that cap 11.
recourse be had unto the Greek and Hebrew copies, to clear out of the
fountains, if the translation be muddie: that Lib 3. cap. 2. and 3.
doubtful places be expounded by the rule of faith, which we are taught out
of the plainer places of the scripture: that all the circumstances of the text
be weighed, what goes before, what comes after; cap. 5.
the manner how, cap. 10.
the cause why, cap. 17.
the men to whom, cap. 18.
the time when, every thing is said: to be short, that cap. 27.
still we seek to know the will and meaning of the Author by whom the holy
Ghost has spoken; if we find it not, yet give such a sense as agrees with
the right faith, approved by some other place of scripture: cap. 28.
if a sense be given, the uncertainty whereof cannot be discussed by certain
and sure testimonies of scripture, it might be proved by reason; but this
custom is dangerous; the safer way far, is, to walk by the scripture, the
which (being shadowed with dark and borrowed words) when we mind to search, let
either that come out of it which has no doubt and controversy, or, if it have
doubt, let it be determined by the same scripture, through witnesses to be
found and used thence wheresoever: yt so (to conclude) Lib. 4. cap. 3.
all places of the scriptures be expounded by the scriptures, the which are
called Canonical, as being the Canon, that is to say the rule of godliness and
faith. Thus you see the way, the way of wisdom and knowledge, which Christ
has prescribed, the church has received, S. Austin has declared both by his
precepts and his practice, both in this treatise and in De Genes. ad liter. l.
1. c. 21. Enchir. ad Laurent ca. 68. De ciuit. Dei li. 11. cap. 33. and lib.
15. cap. 7. De unit. eccles. ca. 16. Epist. 48. ad Vincent. De verb. Dom. sermon.
2. Retract. li. 2. cap. 54. etc. In comment. Sermon. ^^actat. and epist.
others, agreeably to the judgment of the ancient Fathers. Which way, since it
is lyked both by us and you, though not so much followed of you as of us: I
wish that the worthiness thereof might persuade you to practice it your
self, but it must enforce you at least to allow it.


Heart. I grant, it neither can, nor ought to be denied, that every one of
those things, and specially, if they be joined all together, do help very
much to understand the scriptures rightly. But Staplet. princ. doctr. l. 11.
ca. ^.
yet they are not so sure and certain means as some other are, which we
prefer before them. Neither do they help always; nay, sometimes they do
hurt rather, and deceive greatly such as expound the Scripture after them.
This is not only said, but also proved at large out of the Doctors and
Fathers, by that worthy man of great wit and judgment, our countriman M.
Stapleton Doctor of Divinity, the Kings Professor of controversies in the
university of Doway. Of whose most wholesome work, entitled, A methodicall
demonstration of doctrinall principles of the faith: one book is wholly spent
to show the means, way and order, how to make authentical interpretation of
the Scriptures. In the which he lays this for a ground, that Staplet. princ.
doctr. lib. 11. c. 1.
the Scripture cannot be rightly understood but by the rule of faith. Whereupon
cap. 2.
he condemns the Protestants opinion, that the sense of Scriptures must be
fetched out of the Scriptures. Which error of yours to overthrow the more
fully: he delivers four means of expounding the Scriptures; cap. 3.
the first, very certain and sure, the rule of faith; cap. 4.
the next, no less certain, the practice of the church; cap. 5.
the third, at least probable, the consent of the Fathers; cap. 6.
the last, most infallible, the councels interpretation. And cap. ^.
these means, he says, are the only certain sure infallible means, of
understanding and expounding the Scripture aright. As for other means, which
learned men do use, such as you observed out of S. Austin: he grants they
are profitable, but deceitful many ways, if each of them be severally taken by
it self. Which he proves in particular by the chiefest of them: first, the
weighing of circumstances, what goes before, what comes after; next, the
words and kind of speeches used in the Scriptures; thirdly, cap. 10.
the conference of places together, one to be lightened by an other; fourthly,
cap. 12.
recourse to the fountains of the Greek and the Hebrew text. Wherefore,
though I acknowledge your way to be a good way, and such as I am well content
to walk in, when these our ways shall lead me to it: notwithstanding, since it
is cap. 9.
common to us with all Heretics, yea with Jews and Painims; (who do all,
confer places, observe the kind of speeches, look on the Greek and Hebrew
fountains, mark what goes before, what comes after, and such like things;
and yet they are very far from the true understanding of the scriptures;) I
will my self practice it when I shall see good: but there is no reason of
yours that can enforce me to allow it simply.


Rainoldes. The treatise of your Doctor against the Protestants opinion, is
like the army of Antiochus prepared against the Romans: very great and huge of
men of many nations, but white liuered soldiers: neither so strong with
armor, as glistering with gold and silver. Antiochus him self was amazed at
it, and thought it invincible: so did the simple fools of his country too. But
Liui. lib. 37.
the Romans contemned it: and Plutarch. in compar. Scipio. and Annib.
Annibal iested at it. The name of Protestants, (which Staplet. princip. doctr.
lib. 7. cap. 15. and li. 11. cap. 10.
he uses tauntingly as all one with Heretics) we are no more ashamed of,
then were the 2. Chron. 24.19.
Prophets and Act. 2.40. and 8.25. and 10.42.
Apostles: whom the Spirit of God has honored with that title because they did
make a protestation of their faith, Sleidan. de statu relig. and reip. lib. 6.
upon the like occasion, as did the faithful in Germany when they were noted
by that name. The Protestants opinion, I have already showed to be the opinion
of the ancient Protestants, the Fathers, the Apostles, the holy Ghost who
spoke by them. If you call it an error: we are content to err with them. If
he think it an heresy: we are no better then Paul, Act. 24.14. and 26.22.
who in such heresy served God. The ground which Stapl. princip. doctr. li.
11. ca. 1. and 2.
he lays for the disproofe of it: is such, that it seems, his wits and he
had made a fray when he laid it. He says, that the scripture ought to be
expounded by the rule of faith, and therefore not by scripture only. Which is
(in effect) as if a man should say: the church must be taught by living
creatures endued with reason, and therefore not by men only. For as a living
creature endued with reason, and a man, is all one, which every child knows
by the principles of logic: so the rule of faith, and scripture is all one,
does not your Doctor know it? It is a principle of divinity, delivered by S.
Austin, whom cap. 3.
he pretends (chiefly, in this point) to follow.


Heart. And does he not follow him? Does he not allege S. Austins own words,
August. de doctr. Christ. li. 3. cap. 2.
In a doubtful place of scripture let a man seek the rule of faith, which
rule he has learned of plainer places of the scriptures, and of the
authority of the church: to prove that the rule of faith must be fetched out
of the authority of the church also, not out of scriptures only?


Rainoldes. Yes: he does allege S. Austins words in deed: but as Mat. 26.61.
the false witnesses alleged Christ's words of destroying the temple, and
building it in three days: the words, against the meaning. Which trick In
fraudem legis facit, qui^^^. uis verbis legisententiam en^^ circumuenit. L.
Contra. Dig. de legibus Senatusque consultis.
the law notes as an abusing of the law: yet is it common with your Doctor.
For as Christ, when he spoke of raising the temple, by the temple Ioh. 2.19.
meant his body, the witnesses did wrest it to the temple of Jerusalem: so,
the authority of the church is mentioned by S. Austin, as teaching scriptures
only, your Doctor alleges it, as teaching somewhat beside the scriptures.


Heart. This is strange, that S. Austin, by, the authority of the church, meant
no more then by the plainer places of the scriptures. For so much you seem to
say in effect.


Rainoldes. Be it strange: yet is it true. For him self declares that to be
his meaning, not only by the rest of his whole treatise, wherein he does
establish the scriptures alone for the rule of faith, to show the sense of
doubtfuller places by the plainer: but also by the end of this your own
sentence, which Stapleton (in alleging it) either negligently passed, or
craftily suppressed: unless the fault perhaps be in some other, with whose
eyes he read it. For Aug. de doctr. Christian. lib. 3. cap. 2.
after these words, let him seek the rule of faith, which rule he has
learned of plainer places of the scriptures, and of the authority of the
church: it follows in S. Austin, Of which rule we have sufficiently entreated
in the first book, when we spoke of things. Now, in that discourse (to which
he refers us) he spoke not of any thing as taught by the church, but what is
in the scripture. Wherefore, in these words, by the authority of the church,
he meant not any thing beside the scripture. If he did: show it. If he did not:
acknowledge it.


Heart. He did. For, in the first book where he spoke of things, he showed
that cap. ^^*
the doctrine of the Trinity is comprised in that rule of faith. Which yet is
not expressly set down in the scriptures.


Rainoldes. Expressly? What mean you by this word expressly?


Heart. I mean, that it is not expressed in the scriptures.


Rainoldes. What? Not the doctrine of the blessed Trinity: the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost?


Heart. Not all that our faith does hold of the Trinity.


Rainoldes. God forbid that we should hold of such a mystery more then he
teaches by his word.


Heart. Certainly, S. Austin Epist. 174. ad Pascentiu^ Com. haeres. Arian.
writing to an Arian (who denied that God the son is consubstantiall with the
Father) says, that as we read not in the holy scriptures the Father
Ingenitum.
unbegotten, and yet it is defended that it must be said: in like sort it may
be that neither Homousion.
consubstantiall is found written there, and yet being said in the assertion
of faith may be defended. And again Contr. Maxim. Arianot. episc. lib. 3. cap.
3.
disputing against Maximinus a Bishop of the Aria^s, Give me testimonies (say
thou) where the holy Ghost is worshipped: as though by those things which we do
read, we understood not some things also which we read not. But (that I be
not enforced to seek many) where have thou read God the Father unbegotten or
unborn? And yet it is true.


Rainoldes. And think you that S. Austin meant by these speeches that the
scriptures teach not that God the holy Ghost is to be worshipped, God the Son
is of one substance with the Father, God the Father is not begotten or borne?


Heart. He seems to have meant it. And Confess. Augustinian. lib. 1. cap. 8.
tit. 4.
Torrensis (who gathered S. Austins Confession out of all his works) alleges
these places to prove that Christians ought to believe many things which have
come to us from the Apostles themselves (delivered as it were by hand) although
they be not written expressly in scriptures.


Rainoldes. The Jesuit Torrensis does great wrong herein to the truth of God,
to S. Austins credit, and to you who read him. And yet with such a sophisme in
the word [expresly:] that, if it should be laid unto his charge, he would wash
his hands of it, as Mat. 27.24.
Pilate did of Christ's blood. For cap. 8. de sacris traditionibus.
he alleges those places of S. Austin, thereby to prove Traditions: as though
we had received that doctrine (touching God) by tradition unwritten, not by the
written word. S. Austin, no such matter. But Epist. 174. ad Pascentium.
dealing with an Arian, who required Ips^m verbum homousion.
the very word consubstantiall to be showed in scripture: does tell him that
the thing it self is there found though not that word perhaps. Whereupon, he
presses him in like sort with Hoc verbum, ^uod Pater es^o^ ingenitus.
the word unbegotten: which the Arian having given to God the Father, and
defending it: S. Austin replieth, that as he had termed the Father unbegotten,
and well, although the word not written: so might the Son also be termed
consubstantiall; since the scripture proves the thing meant thereby. And as with
this Arian: so with their bishop Maximinus. Contr. Maximin. A^ian. episcop. lib.
1.
Who having himself termed God the Father unbegotten or unborn, denied the
holy Ghost to be equal to the Son, because it is not written that he is
worshipped. To the which cavil of his S. lib. 3. cap. 3. and 10.
Austin answers, that although it be not written in flat terms, yet is it
gathered by necessary consequence of that which is written, Matt. 4.10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, 1. Cor. 3.16. and 6.19.
the holy Ghost is God, therefore to be worshipped. Thus, S. Austins meaning
was of these points, that the scripture teaches them. Whereby you may
perceive the fraud of Torrensis. Who saying that they are not expressly written
in the scriptures, left him self this refuge, that he might say they are not
in express words, though for sense and substance they are in the scriptures.
And yet, by referring Tit. 4. cap. 8. de tradit.
that title to traditions, induces his reader to think that they are taught
by tradition, not by scripture. A doctrine, which Arians will clappe their
hands at: that the Son of God is not (by scripture) of one substance with
the Father. But let it be far from you, M. Heart, to think so profanely of the
word of God. And, if you rest so much on Doctors of your own side, rest here
on Sum. Theologic. part. 1. quaest. 36. art. 2.
Thomas of Aquine rather: who says that concerning God we must say nothing
but that which is found in the holy scripture, Vel per ve^ba, vel per sensum.
either in words, or in sense. Which, as he confirfirmeth by Dionys. de divine.
nomin. ca. 1.
Denis, and Damascen. de orthod. sid. lib. 1. cap. 1. and 2.
Damascen: so was it the common judgment of Augu. de Trinitat. lib. 1. ca. 2.
and 4.
the Fathers, of S. Austin chiefly, as his books touching the Trinity do
show. And, in lib. 15. cap. 2^.
the conclusion thereof (for evident proof of that which you denied) he gives
the name of the rule of faith to that which is plainly set down in scripture
of the Trinity. Wherefore the scripture co^priseth the rule of faith for that
point. And as for that point, so for all the rest, which De doctrine. Christian.
lib. 1. cap. 35.36.37. and 40.
in that very book (whereof we spoke) S. Austin notes. It remains therefore
that S. Austin meant not by lib. 3. c. 2.
the authority of the church, more then he signified by plainer places of the
scriptures.


Heart. Yes: his own words in that very sentence do yield sufficient proof
(me thinks) that he did. For, if he signified by plainer places of the
scriptures, as much as he meant by the authority of the church then was it
idle, when he had named the one, to add the other to it: chiefly in such sort,
as that is added by S. Austin. For both the conjunction, the places of
scriptures, and the authority of the church, should import things different:
and I may say of words, as the Philosopher says of things, That is done in
vain by more that may be done by fewer.


Rainoldes. Nothing is done in vain, that is done to edify. The church might
well be mentioned, as an interpreter of the word: though it teach not any
thing beside the word of God. The people of Israel Exodus, 14.31.
did believe the Lord and his servant Moses: yet Moses did nothing but that
the Lord commanded him. The wise man does charge his son Prou. 1.8.
to hearken to the instruction of his father, and forsake not the doctrine of
his mother: yet they both (the father, and mother) teach one lesson, the
chiefest wisdom, the fear of God. The same is fulfilled in this Moses, and
the Lord; or rather in this mother, and our heavenly Father: of whom it has
been said well, Cyprian. libr. de vnitat. eccles.
He cannot have God to be his Father, who has not the church to be his mother.
For, God having purposed to make us his children and heirs of life eternal,
as he prepared his word, to be, first, the seed, 1. Pet. 1.23.
the immortal seed, of which we are begotten a new, afterward, the milk, 1.
Pet. 2.2.
the sincere milk, whereby we (being borne) grow: so he ordained the church
by her ministry to teach it, as it were a mother, first, to conceive and
bring forth ye children, afterward to nourish them, as babes newborn, with
her milk. Which appears, as by Namely, by Philip, Act. 8.^5. and by Peter,
Act. 10.34.
others, so chiefly by S. Gal. 4.19.
Paul, who traueiled of them in childbirth, whom he sought to convert: and when
they were newborn, he 1. Cor. 3.2.
nourished them with milk: to set before our eyes the duty of the church,
and all the churches Ministers in bearing children unto Christ. Now, the milk
which the church gives to her children, she gives it out of her breasts: and
her two breasts, are the two testaments of the holy scriptures (by S. In
epist. 1. Io^an. T^actat. 3.
Austins judgment) the old Testament, and the new. S. Austin therefore,
saying, the rule of faith is received of the authority of the church: meant
not that the church should deliver any thing, but only what she draws out
of the holy scriptures.


Heart. Not for milk perhaps, which babes are to suck: but for strong meat
wherewith men are nourished. For mothers feed not their children, being
grown, with milk out of their breasts.


Rainoldes. But S. Austin adds that the holy scriptures have both milk for
babes, and strong meat for men: milk, in plainer things and easier to be
understood; strong meat, in harder and greater mysteries. Yea, where Mat.
13.52*
Christ said, that every Scribe which is taught unto the kingdom of heaven is
like unto an householder, who brings forth out of his treasure things both
new and old: S. Contr. ^a^st. Manichae. l. 14. c. 2.
Austin judges that he meant by new things and old, the old and new
testament. Wherefore, since every pastor and teacher of the church is meant (
Staplet. prin. doctr. l. 11. c. 5,
you grant) by this Scribe: it follows by S. Austin that the meat which he
is to fetch out of his storehouse for the sustenance of his household, must be
the Scripture only. Which the light of reason will induce you too, if you
believe the former points. For the Aristot. libr. ^^ de or^u and interit.
Philosopher teaches that we are nourished by the same things of which we do
consist. Then, if we are begotten of Gods word, as seed: the word, as it is
milk to nourish us, when we are young; so must it nourish us, when we are
grown, as strong meat. But if it were so, that S. Austin had not had this
opinion touching strong meat: yet must he needs have it, in that whereof we
reason: for there he speaks of milk. And he says that the rule of faith is
received of plainer places of the scriptures and of the authority of the
church: to note the churches practice, August. de catechizand. rudibus, cap.
3.4.6.7 etc.
which, in catechizing of her young ones, taught them summarily the points of
belief and the precepts of life. So that the simplest Christians, who had not
read them selves the plainer places of the scriptures to learn the rule of
faith, yet knew it by the catechism: wherein, through the ministry of the
church, they learned it. Now, S. Austins catechism has nothing but the
doctrine which Christians may suck out of plainer places of the scriptures.
His rule of faith therefore delivered in the plainer places of the scriptures,
is the same that the authority of the church delivered. In deed your Canisius
in his latin, Ledesima in his Italian, Vaux in his English catechism.
new Doctors in their Popish catechismes have precepts of the church, beside
the precepts of the scriptures: and your church, Ecclesia Roman^ omnium
ecclesiarum matter and magistra. Council, Trident. Sess. 7. de ^aptism, can. 3.
and Sess. 14. cap. ^. and Sess* 22, (...) and Sess* 25. dec^et. de lib. delect*
which names her self (though untruly) the mother of al churches, has more
then two breasts, a third, out of the which she powers poison with her milk*
Whereby, through good usage, having killed her own children, she claims our
churches children to be hers: as did 1. King. 3.17.
the woman before Solomon. And the whore has got her Sander. in epist. ad Pium
Quint. dedicat. de visib. monar. Staplet. prin. doctrine. lib. 8. cap. 19.
atturneies of her minions, which do not only rail at us for not
acknowledging her to be our mother: but also belie us Vulgatam catholicorum
vocem de San^ta matr^ ecclesia irrident hodie and execran^ur haeretici. Staplet.
that we scoff at and curse the very title of Holy mother the church. But they
whom God has blessed with the spirit of wisdom, as he did Solomon, will
easily discern, that we are so far off from scoffing at and cursing, that we
give the name of mother to the church with reverence and joy. Marry, the church
of Rome to be called our holy mother, which neither is holy, nor our mother:
that our souls detest, and wish that her stepmotherhood may be far from us.
As for the rule offaith, to which she lays claim by her advocate, your
Doctor, pleading the title out of Austin, that we as acknowledging her child
to be our sister, may take her for our mother: if we follow Solomon and rippe up
the plea with such a sword as he did; we shall find that the child is neither
hers, nor That is to say, the Popes who (in his Canon law) calls the church
his spouse. Nos iustitiam nostram and ecclesiae sponsae nostrae nolentes ne
gligere. c. Quoniam. de immunitat. ecclesiar. in Sext.
her husbands, but the holy scriptures. For Austin, in saying, the rule of
faith is learned of plainer places of the Scriptures and of the authority of
the church: named the Scriptures, as the matter, the church as the minister,
whereof the rule of faith is learned. Your Doctor, supposing, as well the
carpenter, as the timber, to be the stuff, whereof the house must be builded;
does lay his axe to both together: and squaring them alike, does make him
beams, and posts, and iuises, some of the timber, some of the carpenter. Even
so, the holy scripture is not the whole matter of the rule of faith: whereof
the church ministers, as workmen, and builders, should frame the house of God:
but in part, the church; in part, the scripture is the matter. Both which being
molten, as were ye Exodus 32.3.
earerings of the Israelites, and wrought in fashion by your craftesman, not
yielding unto it of weakness, as did Aaron, but seeking after it with
greedines, as the people, who knew not what was become of Moses: they will
make a rule of faith, not of Christ's, but of the Popes faith. And this if it
be decked with With medals, agnus Deies, hallowed grains, ^eades, cru^^^ixes,
and other such jewels.
devises to the eye, as that was with gold, and set forth by D. Allen,
Campian, Howle^, the Censurer the Jesuits and Seminarie-priestes.
men whose tongues are their own, and voices sweet to sing the song, Exodus
32. ver. 4.
These be thy Gods, o Israel, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt: it
will move many to daunse for joy about it, in as holy sort, as the golden
calfe did move ver. 6.
the Israelites to do.


Heart. It does not become you, to scorn in this sort so grave and learned men,
as M.D. Stapleton, and others whom you touch: much less the church of Rome,
and least of all the Popes Holiness. Allens Apolog^e ofthe English Seminaries
chap 2. out of Bid hist. Angl lib. 1.
Whose predecessors gave us our cap. 4. Ele^the^ius.
first faith in the time of the Britannes, and restored it cap. 23. Gregory the
first, who sent Austin.
afterward in the days of the English. And do you thus reward them for it? You
will make some men perhaps, (if you use it) to give their judgment of you,
with what spirit you do it.


Rainoldes. If you will speak of him, who gave us our faith: you shall do well
to lift up your eyes from dust and rottenness, and cast them somewhat Iam.
1.17.
higher. Else, although I will not condemn your spirit therefore, yet I shall
fear you do not that honor to Gods 1. Cor. 12.4.
Spirit, which would beseem a child of God: for, 1. Sam. 10.12.
who is their father? But, to accept them as the giuers of it, whose ministry
God used in it: first, as it is doubted of the one side, whether the Britannes
had their first faith from Eleutherius, (it is Gildas a Bri^tan, auncienter
then Bid does affirm the contrary. And Polidor. Vi^g l. lib. hist. Ang. 2.
Gildas testis eft Britannos iam inde ab initio orti Euangelii Christianam
accepisse religio nem.
more likely, no:) so, of the other side Bid histor. Anglor. l. 3. c. 21. and.
^2.
it is confessed, that all the English had it not from Austin sent by Gregory.
Then, if it were so we had it first from them: yet we received it not from the
Popes predecessors. For, as you take the name of Pope for supreme head, and
supreme head for that power which you have defined: there was no Pope at all,
when we received the faith. The bratte was not yet borne, when Gregory the
first, much less, when Eleutherius was Bishop of Rome: as our co^nference will
show. Thirdly, if they who were the predecessors of the Pope (though not as
Pope) gave us our first faith: the successors can not complain they gave it
freely; they have been paid sweetly for it. Gratian. 2. q. 7. c. Nossi. cum
Balaam.
Your men (to set them up) compare them to Balaam, and Benedict. Parisiensis,
and Bullo c. Anglus in concordant* sacr. ^criptur. Asina, ecclesia.
the church to his ass. In deed (we must grant) our church has been the
ass: but The Chronicles of Thom. Walsingham and Mat. Paris. Chiefly Mat.
Paris in Henric. tert. anno Dom. 1245.1246. and 1247.
your Balaam has not refused to accept Number. 22.18.
a house full of silver and gold, nay, he has been glad to sue for it too.
Last of all, if they had given it us freely, and played a kind mothers part:
nevertheless, of mother transgressing, as she has done, Hos. 2.2.
our father says unto us, Vulgat. edit. lat. Iudicate matrem vestra^* iudicate.
Contend with your mother, contend, that she is not my wife, neither am I her
husband: to the intent she may remove her fornications out of her sight, and
her adulteries from between her breasts. S. Paul was Act. 22.3.
brought up at the feet of Gamaliel: 5.34.
Gamaliel, a great Pharise. Neither was he only the scholar, but the 23.6.
son of a Pharise too. Yet, the duty and love which Paul did owe and bear
to his father and master, should never have excused him before the
iudgement-seat of God, if he had cleaued still to the Pharisees sect, when God
did lighten him with greater knowledge of his truth. As for me, of whom some
will give their judgment with what spirit I do it, if I jest at your
Pharisees, or touch your holy mothers whooredomes, and villainies of your holy
Father: men's judgments I depend not of: I neither fear them nor despise them.
I have 1. Cor. 4.4.
a judge to whom I stand. And I content my self that he assures my spirit, I
do it with the same spirit, though not with like measure of the same spirit,
that 1. Kin. 18.27.
Elias did jest at Baalites, and Esai. 44.16.
Esaias did touch idolaters. Wherefore, to go forward with your discourse of D.
Stapleton against our error of expounding the scriptures by scriptures: you
have the ground of it, that they must be expounded by the rule of faith, and
therefore not by scriptures only. Now, as his ground is, so are his proofs:
both for your own means first, and afterward against ours. What
infallibility and certainty there is in yours, Staplet. princip. doctr. lib.
11. cap. 4.
the practice of the church, cap. 5.
the consent of the Fathers, cap. 6.
the Councels determination: it will appear (in place of trial) more
hereafter, it has in part already: when you were feign to fly from them all
to the Pope, whom here the Doctor had forgotten. Touching ours: he proves them
to be deceitful and unsure, how? cap. 9.
because each of them, if they be taken severally, may cause a man to err:
which he shows by examples in some of the particulars, as, the weighing of
the circumstances, the style and phrase of scripture, cap. 10.
the conference of places, cap. 12.
the loking on the Greek and Hebrew. First, if it were so: what shall I call
this dealing, treachery, or folly? We teach of our means, that they all,
together, do make a perfect way whereby we may find the right sense of the
scripture. He replieth against us, that each of them, alone, and taken by it
self, is not a perfect way to find it. In the which answer, if you see not
his weakness (to speak the best of it:) I will set before you a glass to view
it in. It is In the year of Christ, 1578.
not many years ago, since Captain Stukely ( Marchio Hyberniae.
the Marquis of Ireland, as your stories call him) Histor. de bello A^ricano
quo per^it Sebastianus Rex Portugalliae. cap 7. Ge^ebrard. Chro^ograph. lib. 4.
was sent with six hundred Italians by the Pope to take possession of
Irelande. Which he was coming to have done, but that (at the request of the
King of Portugal) He was slain there. Hist. de bello Afr. ca. 13.
he went and took possession of Barbary by the way. An English man might say,
to comfort good subjects, that (by Gods grace) these Italians and the Marquis,
if they had arrived, might have been discomfited by the Queens army: as the
Popes soldiers were, who came after them. D. Sanders might reply, to
encourage the rebels, that they need not fear it: because the Queens
soldiers, though they have some strength, yet each of them, alone, and
severed from the rest, cannot overcome six hundred Italians, with such a
Captain too. And for proof hereof that it is very likely, he might have
store of arguments, examples, and testimonies, to discourse at large: with as
great eloquence, and no less wisdom, then D. Stapleton has done to prove
the other. Yet this in D. Stapleton is Demonstratio methodica principiorum
fidei doctrinalium Thomae Stapletoni.
a demonstration. Had the other been a demonstration too? No marvel that you
send us so many books over, if they be fraught with wares of such
demonstration. Marvel, you send no mo: unless it be lawful for none but
public readers, so subtly to prove their things by demonstration. Now, if
your Doctors answer be absurd, though none of our means were certain and
sure, alone, without the rest, to find the right sense of Scripture: how much
more absurd, if any one of them, alone, be sure and certain, and that in his
own judgment too? The conference of places of the scripture is so: though he
would hide it with a mist. But the mist which Staplet. prine. doctr. li. 11. c.
10.
he casts, is no thicker then the former. A weak eye may see through it. For
we say, that Dextera collatio locorum scripturae.
a right conference of places, is a way most excellent: as himself rehearses
our words of that point. And he thereto replyeth, that Infeliciter adhibita.
a wrong conference, a left one, (so to term it) is no such excellent way.
Which is, as if we said, that wise men and virtuous are fit to bear offices in
the commonweal: and he, to prove the contrary, should say that mad men and
knaves are no good magistrates. If we can see through this mist, the conference
of places is a perfect way. For that which we mean by conference of places: S.
Austin does signify by the rule of faith. But cap. 1. and 3. and 9.
the rule of faith, is a way infallible, in your Doctors judgment. Therefore
(to judge him of his own mouth) the conference of places is a way infallible.
If this alone: much more this and all the rest being joined together. The
means then which we commend to understand and expound the scripture: are sure
and certain means whereby the right sense of scripture may be found. But
your Doctor says cap. 9.
that al heretics, and Jews, and Paynims use these means, they confer
places, they note the kind of speeches, they look upon the fountains, they
mark what goes before, what comes after, and such like things. If they do
not so: your Doctor ouer-lasheth. If they do so: they do more then himself
does in many controversies of faith, which yet he teaches publicly, and
printeth them too. What? And do all heretics, Jews and Paynims use these
means: and does none of them see the churches practice; mark the consent of
Fathers; read the decrees of councels? If any of them do; which it is evident
many do: then by as wise a reason, as your Doctor makes, these his own
means are not sure neither. Which were a sore consequence, and would raze the
church of Rome unto the ground. Let him bethink him self thereof, and heal
the breaches, which (if he look not to it) his own shot will make in the
walls of his Jerusalem. As for us and our means, if any seem to use them,
and yet miss the right sense of the scripture: I say with De doctrine.
Christian. lib. ^. a prolog^.
S. Austin (whom this quarrel makes as much against, as us;) If they who know
these precepts, cannot see the things which are obscure and dark in the
Scriptures of God, the fault is in them selves, not in the precepts: as if I
should point with my finger at a star, which they would gladly see, and their
eie-sight were so weak, that although they could see my finger, yet could they
not see the star at which I point. Wherefore as S. Austin concludes of them,
Let them cease to blame me, and let them pray to God, that he will give them
eyesight: so we do acknowledge that al means are vain, unless the Lord give
eyes to see: whom therefore the Psalm. 119.18.
Prophet made his prayer to, Open mine eyes, that I may see the wonders of thy
law.


Heart. You may say what you list. But experience shows, and it is most
certain, that many who allow those means, which you do, and expound the
scripture by them, are themselves deceived, and deceive others. For, Staplet.
prin. doctr. lib. 11. cap. 10.
the conference of places by which you set more then by all the rest, which you
call a great remedy, and the best exposition of scripture that may be had: let
this remedy be taken severally and by it self, it is marvelous deceitful,
yea pernicious and pestilent; so much the more, by how much (in show) it is
more probable, and still at least corrupts two places of scripture, if it be
used peruersly. In deed, we acknowledge gladly with S. Austin, that place
receives light of place, and those things which one-where are spoken somewhat
darkely, are other-where more clearly uttered. But in conference of scriptures
it is to be known and diligently marked, Quod obseruare haeretici nolunt, quia
catholici and boni ecclesiae ^ilii esse nolunt.
(which heretics will not mark, because they will not be catholics, and good
children of the church:) first, that one saying may seem to be like or unlike
an other, not so much for the likeness and unlikeness of things, as for the
prejudice and affection of them by whom they are conferred. Secondly, that the
same word, or kind of speech, has not every where the same signification, but
sometimes diverse, sometimes contrary. Thirdly, that there are many places in
the scripture, which being uttered only once, have not any like wherewith you
may confer them. Fourthly, and lastly, that all heretics both of this and of
all ages, Conferendo scripturas diligentissime, errauerunt tamen in
Scripturarum sensu turpissime.
in conferring the scriptures most diligently together, yet have erred in the
sense of the scriptures most shamefully. Which reasons why the conference of
places of scripture is a deceitful means of expounding the scripture, and
leads often into error: D. Stapleton, a man well learned out of question,
how weak soever you account him, has set down and proved them with such
examples, as might prevail with you perhaps, if you would weigh them.


Rainoldes. I have weighed them, and I find them to light. The merchant, whom
you praise, is rich, I deny not: but sure he uses false weights, and abuses
the simple, who take their wares upon his credit. Poor men, conceiving well of
them whom they fancy, think him to deal uprightly for that he raileth at
others, saying that they are deceauers, because they will not be honest
dealers, and good children of the weal public. But let his words go: and have
an eye to his weights. If you should tell a young beginner in shooting that
they who look at the mark and louse directly toward it do not always hit
it: your speech were a truth. But if you should say that all naughty archers
which are, or ever were, have fowlly missed the mark in aiming at it most
straightly: he might suspect either your skill, or your will, who train up
archers so. What may we think then of him who to persuade men that conference
of scriptures is a deceitful way to hit their right sense, does say that all
heretics both of this and of all ages, in conferring the scriptures most
diligently together yet have erred in the sense of the scriptures most
shamefully? For though they might err in conferring of them: yet the fault
thereof must be, not in conferring them most diligently, but in not conferring
them diligently enough. And this is the last of your Doctors reasons. The next
before it is no better. He says, that there are many places in the scripture,
which have not any like wherewith you may confer them. The proof he brings
of it, is, that there are sundry speeches in S. Paul, which are in no Prophet,
nor Apostle beside him: as (for example sake) to put of the old man, and put
on the new. Which proof is like the point whereof it makes proof. For, if
the same speeches be not in any other, yet there are speeches like them,
whereby they may be understood. Or, if not in others: yet in S. Paul himself,
who lightneth so his own speeches. Or, if not in him: yet confer them with
the drift and circumstances of the text; the course of things and words will
open what is meant by them. And so allege what place of scripture you list,
the darkest that you can: let a man expound it after our rules, and it will
never lead him into heresy. For either it has plain places to expound it,
and being expounded according unto them, it is far from heresy: or if it
have no such, it has no danger of heresy, because all things required to
belief and life are set down plainly in the Scriptures. The danger all
lies in your first and second point: ye one, touching sayings, that men's
corrupt affections may judge unlike or like, when in truth they are not so: the
other touching words, that may be mistaken through men's ouersightes, as
signifying the same thing, or sundry, which they do not. And by these means we
grant that the scriptures, may be (and are of many) expounded amiss: to the
verifying of that which S. Pet. 3.16.
Peter writes of S. Paul's epistles, that in them are some things hard to be
understood: which they that are unlearned and unstable do pervert, as they do
also other scriptures, to their own destruction. Hereof we have notable
examples in your selves: or (because of yours we shall speak hereafter) in
the Family of love, and that ympe of Satan, their master, Harry Nicolas. Whom
the spirit of error has (through an illusion of ignorance) so bewitched,
that, as though he took a glory in his shame, to be him self, and his,
unlearned, (such as S. Peter points at,) In the gospel of the kingdom, cap
23.6 and 33.11. and so forth in that, and the rest of his pamphlets.
he detesteth the learned and skillful in the scripture, the scripture-wise, as
he terms the^, and gives it in charge to his babes to shun them. Christ
was too skillful in scriptures for the Devil. Else might Mat. 4.6.
the Devil, by the show of scripture, which he did allege (or missealleage
rather) have perseuered with greater hope in tempting Christ. But shall we
suspect and mislike the scripture, because he missealleaged it? or the
conference of scripture, because his ympes use it peruersely? We have not
learned Christ so. Nay, so much the more should we labor and travail to
search it most diligently, and wisely to confer it: to wrest by that means
their sword out of their hands, and kill their own error with it. For, the
destruction of such spiritual foes, is the sword of the spirit: and Ephesians.
6.17.
the sword of the spirit, is the word of God. So the Family of love, which
make a mock of our faith, our salvation by Christ, our resurrection, the
judgment, and everlasting life; and (to save their frensies from danger of
the scripture) beat flat the literal sense, which is the edge of it, and
put it up into a scabberd of their fanaticall dreams and allegories: let Hebr.
4.12.
the two edged sword be drawn out and sharpened with this conference, and, as
the flame of fire deuoureth the stubble, so will the point of truth rippe up
the bowels of their errors. So the Arians, when they brought broken sentences
of scripture, in show resembling somewhat their blasphemous doctrine against
the son of God, but indeed unlike it: they were overthrown through the
conference of Theodor. hist. ecclesiast. l. 1. c. 7.
scriptures by the Nicen council and Athanas. con^tra A^ian. Gregor. Nazianz.
de Filio. ^asil. contra Eunomium. Hilari. and Augustine. de Trinitat. and contra
Arian.
godly pastors of the church. So the Pelagians, the enemies of grace under the
name of nature, when they trifled vainly to shift the scriptures off, which
make against the free will of man for Gods favor: they were put to flight with
plainer places of the scriptures, by the Councels of In epist. ad Innocent.
epist. 90. inter epist. August.
Carthage, of Epist. 92 (...) epistolas Augustine.
Mileuis, of Concilium A^a^sican. secundum.
Orange, and chiefly by S. In operibus contra. Pelagianos Tom. 7.
Austin. So has God con^ounded others of that rabble, and will (no doubt) their
accomplices: if with the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God, we
join the Ephesians. 6.16.
shield of faith to quench the fyry darts of Satan. The Family of love shall
feel it in time; the Father of the Family feared it: and therefore he warned
his children to beware of them who bear this weapon, and have skill to handle
it, of scripture-learned men. And you, Howle^ in his epistle to the Queens
Majesty.
who lay the Families sin to our charge, as though we did foster that
venomous vipers brood, do join your selves to them, and march into the field
with them, and strengthen their hands against us. Of you they have learned to
take up the name of ^crip^ura^ii. Albeit. Pighius ecclesiast. hiera^. l. 1. c.
2.
Scripturemen by way of scoff, and use it as a contumely. You teach them,
that Staplet. prin. doctr. l. 11. c. 10.
the diligent, yea the most diligent conference of scriptures, is the path of
heretics to most damnable errors. You persuade them that Lindan. de optim.
genesis inte^pr. Scriptur. Staplet. prin. doctr. l. 11. c. 12.
the fountains of the Greek and Hebrew text, are neither pure, nor greatly
needful. You tell them that Staplet. prin. doctr. l. 11. c. 9. and 10.
to expound the scripture by scripture is good, and it is fruitful to confer
places, to observe the words and circumstances of the text: but there are
many dangers and difficulties in it; the text is not always knitte and
coherent to it self; the very order of speaking is oftentimes abrupt,
sometimes preposterous altogether; there are sundry These are Giants, the
sons of Anak, of whom it is written N^m. 13.34.
hyperbata and These are Giants, the sons of Anak, of whom it is written N^m.
13.34.
anantapodota in S. Paul; one word, yea in one sentence has sundry
significations: places may seem like one to an other, that are unlike, and
contrariwise: and many mo such inconveniences, enough to break the heart of a
weak Christian. In the which dealing you do band your selves with the ten
spies: Number. 13.28.
who, when they should have encouraged the people of Israel to enter into the
land of promise, they told them that the land certainly is good, and flows
with milk and honey; but the people dwelling in it, is strong, and the cities
walled, exceeding great, and the sons of Anak (Giants) be there. The
Amalekites dwell in the south country; the Hitthites, and Iebusites, and
Amorites dwell in the mountains: the Cananites dwell by the sea, and by the
coast of Jorden. The Psalm. 95.11.
Lord swear in his wrath, both to these spies, and to the people who believed
them, that they should not enter into his rest. At you, and your men, I
marvel, (M. Heart) that whose fact you follow, you tremble not at their end. As
for us, although we were but two against your ten, and all the people would
rather believe you then us: yet we will follow them who were Number. 14.14.
of an other spirit, Caleb and Joshua, and with them will we say to the whole
assembly of the children of God; Number. 14.7.
The land, through the which we have gone to search it, is an excellent good
land. If the Lord take delight in us, he will bring us into this land, and give
it us: even a land that flows with milk and honey. Only rebel ye not
against the Lord, neither fear ye the people of the land: for they are bread
for us. In deed the holy scripture is bread for our souls: and the word of
God is the food of life. If the Lord take delight in us, he will bring us unto
it, and give it us. Let us not rebel against him, nor fear the hardness of it.
We must Ioh. 5 39.
search the scriptures, and Iam. 1.5.
pray to him for wisdom, and Mat. 7.7.
he will open them to us, (for he has promised) and make us learned in them.


Heart. We acknowledge with you Staple^. prin^. doctrine. lib. 10. cap. 10. and
li. 11. cap. 9.
that the means you mention, namely, to search the scriptures and to pray to
God for wisdom and knowledge, are good and godly means whereby we may the
sooner come to understand them, or rather be prepared thereto. But such, as
nevertheless are not still effectual.


Rainoldes. They are still effectual, if men pray, as they should; and search
them as they ought: 1. Ioh. 5.14.
in the spirit of faith Romans 12.3.
and modesty.


Heart. True, in that measure, which is fit for every man's vocation and duty:
some, to exhort and comfort privately, some publicly to teach the church. But
after you have said all that you can: we shall never grow to any end and
issue, if we follow this way. For, if you allege the scripture against me, and
I against you: if I expound it by conference of this place, and you of that: if
in your opinion one sentence be plain, and in mine an other: in mine, our
meaning right, and in yours the contrary: what end can our controversies have
without a judge? And if you yield to a judge, who fitter for it then the Pope?


Rainoldes. Who, but Christ our Savior? And they which under him have it
committed to them, even the Church of Christ?


Heart. The Church? Nay you mentioned the godly before, and spoke as if they
should try the truth from error, by conference of the scriptures. Which is
your right kind of trial and judgment. But you are ashamed of it now belike,
as in truth you may be. For you shall find many taylers and cobblers more godly
then sundry more learned then they. Yet I trust you will not repair for
shreddes and cloutes to any shop of theirs.


Rainoldes. Yet the shreddes and cloutes of tailors and cobblers may have
greater knowledge perhaps and better judgment of the sense of scriptures, then
ye scarlet gowns of learneder men then they. For the learned Pharisees, Ioh.
7. ver. 49.
who condemned the people as ignorant of the law, did not judge the doctrine of
Christ to be true: nay ver. 52.
they rejected it as false with search, and see. But Act 17. ver. 11.
the men of Beroea (some of whom by likelihood were taylers, or cobblers, or at
least common artificers as mean as they) ver. 1^.
received it with all readiness, and (upon the search of the scriptures)
believed it. Howbeit when I mentioned that judgment of the godly, I meant the
godly learned. Wherefore you needed not to speak of shreddes and cloutes, but
that you were loath perhaps to leese this jest. Chiefly, since I showed thereupon
withal, that, for the trial of controversies by scripture, ye toongs (in
which the scripture is written) must be known, namely, Greek and Hebrew. The
which shreddes and cloutes, neither many taylers and cobblers with us, neither
many Cardinals and Popes with you have. Nor yet am I ashamed of that kind of
trial and judgment by the godly who have not learned toonges, and arts, but
Christ only. And I comprised it in that which I said, that Christ is the
judge, and they which under him have it committed to them, even the church of
Christ. For himself has given by special commission two sorts of judgment
to his church, the one private, the other public: private, to all the
faithful, and ^. Cor. 2.15.
spiritual, as God calls them, who are willed 1. Cor. 10.15.
to judge of that which is taught, and to 1. Ioh. 4.1.
try spirits whither they be of God: public, Act. 15.6.
to the assembly of pastors and elders: for 1. Cor. 14.29.
of that which Prophets teach, let Prophets judge, and 1. Cor. 14.32.
the spirits of Prophets are subject to the Prophets. In both of the which,
the church must yet remember, that God has committed nothing but the
ministry of giving judgment unto her. The soueraintie of judgment does
rest on Gods word. For Christ is Matt. 23.10.
our only Doctor and Iam. 4.12.
Lawgiuer: according to whose written will the church must judge. And so, The
third Division.
to return unto the words of Christ, from which we digressed: the sense (I
gave of them) will I prove by scripture, according to the rule of faith: the
proof of the sense I submit to the private and public judgment of the
church. The words of Christ to Peter, contained a promise of the keys, I will
give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven. The occasion of the words, was
a question of Christ, asked of the Apostles, answered by Peter: whom say ye
that I am? Thou art Christ the Son of the living God. The sense which I
gathered by laying these together, was, that as Peter answered, one, for all:
so the keys were meant to him, one, with all. To prove the former point, that
Peter answered, one, for all: the scripture is most plain, in the sixth of
John, where (before this time) Peter had confessed in their common name, Ioh.
6.6^.
We believe, and know, that thou art Christ, the Son of the living God. To
prove the later, that the keys were meant to him, one, with all: the scripture
is as plain in the twentieth of John, where Christ performing that which he
had promised to Peter, does say to him with the rest, Ioh. 10. ver. 22. and 2^.
As my Father sent me, so do I send you. Whose sins soever ye remit, they
are remitted to them: and whose sins soever ye retain, they are retained.
Wherefore since the keys were promised by Christ on the profession of their
faith, which was common to them all: and the promise was performed, when he
sent them all with power to bind and loose, to remit and retain sins: it
follows that the keys belonged no more to Peter, then to all the Apostles.
And therefore the promise of the keys to him, imports no headship of his
over them.


Heart. That which was promised by Christ unto Peter, was not performed to the
Apostles. For, he gave not them the keys of his kingdom: but the power of
remitting and reteyning sins.


Rainoldes. These things differ in words, but they are one in sense: as Joseph
said to Pharao, Genesis 41.25.
Both Pharaos dreams are one. For as God, to teach Pharao what he would do in
Egypt by seven years of plenty, and seven years of famine, did use two
sundry dreams, of kine, and ears of corn, the surer to resolve him of his
purpose in it: so Christ, to teach us what he does for mankind in ordeining the
ministry of the word and Sacraments, Mat. 16.19.
uses two similituds, the one, of keys, the other, of binding and loosing,
that we may know the better the fruit and force of it. Touching ye keys: he
speaks of heaven, as of a house, wherinto there is no entrance for men,
unless the door be opened. Now we (all Adams offspring) are shut out of
heaven, as Adam our progenitour was out of Paradise, through our offenses and
sins. For Reu. 21.27.
no unclean thing shall enter into it. But Ioh. 3.16.
God, of his love and favor toward us, has given us his son, his only
begotten son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
eternal life: which is 1. Pet. 1.4.
the inheritance reserved in heaven, for us. Romans 10.14.
We cannot believe, unless we hear his word. We hear not his word, unless
it be preached. Wherefore when Luc. 4.18. and (...). 61.^.
God the Father sent his son Christ, and Mar. 16.15. and Luc. 24.47.
Christ sent his Apostles as his Father sent him, to preach his word to men,
that they who repented and believed in Christ should have their sins forgiven
them, the faithless and unrepentant should not be forgiven: then he gave
authority as it were to open heaven to the faithful, and to shut it against
the wicked. Which office (to shut, and open) because in men's houses it is
exercised by keys: and 2. King. 18.18.
the steward of the house is said Esai. 22.22.
to have the key of it, to open it and to shut it: therefore Christ, the
principal steward of Gods house is said Reu. 3.7.
to have the key of David: and he gave his Apostles the keys (as you would
say) of the kingdom of heaven, when he made them his (...). 1. Cor. 4.1.
stewardes to shut out, to let in. The other similitude of binding and loosing
is to like effect. For Romans 5.12.
we are all by nature the children of sin, Romans 6.23.
and therefore of death. Now sins are in a manner the same to the soul, that
Prou. 5.22.
cords to the body: and the endless pains of death, (that is, the wages of
sin) are like to 2. Pet. ^.4.
chains, wherewith the wicked are bound in hell, as 1. Pet. 3.19.
in a prison. From these cords of sin, and chains of death eternal, men
are loosed by Christ, when their sins be remitted: their sins are remitted,
if they believe in him. If they believe not, their sins are retained: whose
sins are retained, they do continue bound. For, Ioh. 3.18.
he that believes not, shall be condemned: he that believes, shall be saved.
None shall be condemned but they whose sins are retained, to bind them with
the chains of darkness: none saved, but they whose sins are remitted, and
the cords unloosed by which they were holden. UUherefore, since the Gospel is
preached to this end ^. Cor. 2.16*
a savor of life to life unto believers; unto the unbelievers, a savor of
death to death: as we read of Christ, that Esai. 61.1.
the Lord sent him to preach deliverance to the captives, and opening of prison
to them that are bound: in like sort his ministers whom he sent to preach it,
are said Matt. 16.19. and 18.18.
to bind and loose, Ioh. 20.23.
to retain and remit sins. So that both these kinds of speech import the
same that is signified by keys. For, to bind, and to retain sins, is to
shut: to loose, and to remit sins, is to open the kingdom of heaven. Your
own church does take the keys in this meaning: even Catechism. Council.
Triden^. in Sacram. P^^niten^.
the Council of Trent. For, whereas Christ gave to his Apostles and their
successors the power of binding and loosing, that is, of remitting and
reteining sins, as your selves expound it: this power you call the power of
the keys, as by which an entrance into heaven is opened: because the gates of
heaven are as it were unlocked to them, who have remission and forgiveness of
sins, and locked to the rest. Which things being so, this sum arises of
them, that, since the keys of the kingdom of heaven are all one with the power
of binding and loosing, of remitting and reteining sins: Christ therefore,
when he promised the keys, meant that power; and, when he gave that power,
gave the keys. But, he gave that power to all the Apostles. It follows then,
he gave the keys to them all.


Heart. You expound these places, I cannot tell how. For much of that which you
say, is said by us also: and yet you agree not with us in the principal.
Howsoever you cast the parcels of your count: there is a fault in the sum.
Wherefore you must pardon me if I allow it not. For, (to use Staplet. princ.
doctr. lib. 6. ca. 1.
his words, whose opinion, though you mislike him, I far esteem above
yours:) by the name of the keys of the kingdom of heaven which Christ
promised to Peter, he simply meant all power, whereby the kingdom of heaven
(in whatsoever sense you take it) may be shut and opened. As for that which
follows, Matt. 16.19.
and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven: Non est (vt
quiba^dam visum suit) explicatio, aut limitatio ipsatum clauium.
this is not (as some have thought) an explication or limitation of the keys.
For so, by those words, should Christ have restrained the power of Peter to the
only outward ecclesiastical court. For Omnium Doctorum scholasticoru^
sente^tia.
it is the common opinion of all the Schoolmen, that by those words, Mat.
18.18.
whatsoever ye shall bind, and so forth, (which are like to these words
spoken unto Peter, and have the same meaning) an ecclesiastical judge in the
outward court is made: as by those other words, Ioh. 20.23.
whose sins ye remit, and so forth, an ecclesiastical judge in the inward
court is made. Wherefore, if Mat^. 16.1^
in this place, that [whatsoeuer thou shall binde] were an explication or
limitation of the keys: then by the name of keys were promised to Peter a
power judicial only in the ^utward court: which is but a part (and that a
lesser part) of the power of the keys. For a great deal more excellent is the
power of remitting sins, then of excommunicating or suspending a man from his
office or honor: and therefore this may be exercised by him that is not a
Priest, whereas the other belongs unto Priests only. Again, because our
Savior Illud, et quodc^n queliga^e^^^, co^^unctiue ad ^it.
adds with a conjunction, and whatsoever thou shall bind: it must note
differently some distinct power, at the least in special: even as the other
things, all that go before, uttered coniunctiuely, are things distinct and
different: to wit, and I say to thee, and upon this peter, and hell gates shall
not prevail, and to thee will I give the keys, and lastly, and whatsoever
thou shall bind on earth, and so forth. Wherefore in these last words is
promised to Peter, not only power of binding and loosing in the court, either
outward or inward; which both are only Partiales actus ipsarum clauium: that
is, part of those things which are done by the keys.
partial actions of the keys. But because the keys themselves were promised
him, indefinitly, and were not restrained to any one kind of opening or
shutting: doubtless all the power which is contained in the keys was promised
to him, how great soever it be, and of what sort soever. Now Tota et adaequata
potestas ^psis clauibus.
the whole power, and correspondent fully and euenly to the keys, is to open
and shut: what means soever it be done by. For, to open and shut is the duty
of keys: in token whereof the keys of the city are brought unto the cheifest
magistrate, that by his commandment the city may be shut and opened. To
receive the keys therefore of the kingdom of heaven, is, to receive the power
of shutting and opening the kingdom of heaven: whither you take the name of
the kingdom of heaven for everlasting life, or for the communion of the
militant church. Now this is done by diverse and many other ways, beside those
of binding and loosing in either court. For Pastors do open and shut the
kingdom of heaven, (the one, by exercising that power; the other, by
withdrawing it) in their whole spiritual government: in preaching of the word,
in ministering of Sacraments, in making of laws, in expounding of the holy
scripture, in declaring articles of faith, in deciding points of controversy
and doubt. To be short, the keys of the church may be divided, into the keye
of knowledge, and the key of power. To open the scriptures, belongs to the
key of knowledge: which Christ himself exercised in the four and twentieth of
Luke, and whereof he said to the Lawiers, Luke 11.52.
ye have taken away the key of knowledge, and so forth. The key of power, is
either of order, or jurisdiction. And jurisdiction it self is either in the
outward court, by excommunicating, by suspending from office, by granting of
pardons, and making of laws: or in the inward court, by forgiving of sins.
All this Amplissima e^ adaequata potestas clauium.
most ample power, and correspondent wholly and euenly to the keys, is
promised in this place by Christ to Peter only. Which, as the force and
meaning of the word [keyes,] so the kind of speech of holy scripture shows.
For (in Esaias the Prophet) when it had been said Summo sacerdoti Eliachim.
to the hye Priest Eliakim in the figure of Christ, Esai. 22.22.
The key of the house of David will I lay on his shoulder: the scripture
declaring the use of this key does by and by add; and he shall open and none
shall shut, he shall shut and none shall open. Which likewise is spoken again
of the person of Christ in ye Apocalypse: for he is called Apocal. 3.7.
the holy one and true, which has the key of David, which opens and no man
shuts, shuts and no man opens. Wherefore, as Eliakim in figure, Christ
in truth, receiving the key of the house of David, that is, of the church, or
the kingdom of heaven, received withal the power of shutting and opening: in
like sort S. Peter being to receive (in the room and steed of Christ) the
keys of the kingdom of heaven, is (out of controversy) to receive withal
the power of shutting and opening; that is to say, not only of binding and
loosing in judgment of both the courts, which are only Partiales non
totales, et minores non praecipui actus clau^um.
partial not total, and lesser not chief actions of the keys, which also
were committed to all the Apostles in the eightienth of Matthew, and twentieth
of John, Quum soli P^tro claues datae fuerint.
whereas the keys were given to Peter alone: but also besides, of governing, of
teaching, of disposing, and doing all things which may any way belong to the
general duty of a Pastor: which actions are fully and euenly correspondent
to the keys themselves, and therefore in those words were promised Soli P^tro
principaliter, ante et supra alios omnes.
to Peter alone principally, before and over all the rest. This is D.
Stapletons judgment of the keys promised to Peter: wherein the ground of
Peter's supremacy and headship over the Apostles is set down very plainly, and
very strongly proved.


Rainoldes. This long and smooth tale, which you have told out of your Doctor,
is like to that nightingale to which Plutarch in a (...) Lacon.
a Lacedemonian, when he had plucked her feathers off, and saw a little caraine
left, said, Thou art a voice, naught else. Pluck off the feathers of your
tale: the body is a poor carkase, and has no substance in it. Howbeit, the
names of the two courts, the outward court, the inward court, with other tunes
of like music: are very sweet melody in the ears of them, whose hearts are
in the court of Rome. As for simple men, who have been only conversant in
Psalm. 34.2.
the courts of the Lord: they sound to them like strange languages, and seem
to contain more profound mysteries then we can reach the depth off. But, to
open your answer, that it may be seen what is unsound in it: this is the
point of the thing in controversy. I say that the power promised to Peter by
the name of the keys, in the sixteenth of Matthew: was performed and given to
all the Apostles by the commission of Christ, in the twentieth of John. You
with Stapleton deny it. Why? Because the keys promised to Peter do signify
all kind of power; whereof a part only was given to the Apostles, to bind and
loose in either court. And how prove you this? Forsooth, because by these
words, whatsoever thou shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven, Christ does Non
est (vt quibusdam visum fuit) explica^io, aut limitatio ipsarum clauium.
not expound what he meant by the keys, as some men (say you) have thoughtthat
he does. Then some men have thought that the power of the keys, and the power
of binding and loosing are all one: the later added by Christ to expound the
former. In deed I thought so: and I perceive by you that I thought not so
alone: some other men have thought it too. But, you say it is not, as some men
have thought. Yet you do not tell us the names of these [some men.] Might we
know (I pray) what these [some men] be?


Heart. What matter is it, who they be? since we are not of their mind.


Rainoldes. Yes: it is a matter. For if I knew them, it may be I would talk
with them.


Heart. To confirm you in your error. But learned men do vary in expounding of
Scriptures: some hitte the mark, some miss it. And D. Stapleton, reading many
of all ^ortes, might fall on some expounding it amiss (as you do,) whom he
for modesty would not name, where he reprooueth their opinion.


Rainoldes. This modesty I like not. The truth is, he durst not name them,
least we should know them, and be the more strengthened by them in the truth
to the confounding of your error. For, these [some men] whom he so lightly
trippeth over, are, but all the Fathers: who have with one consent expounded
Christ's promise of the keys, as we do. Now, the exposition which the Fathers
make, is (by his own judgment) the churches exposition, which has the right
sense of the scripture. And so while he is launching out into the deep, to
fetch in a prise for Peter of Romes supremacy: he makes shipwreck in the
haven.


Heart. How know you, that the Fathers all have so expounded it? You have not
read them all: have you?


Rainoldes. No truly. Neither ever am likely to do it. But I have read him,
that has read them all, I trow. And he being a man worthy (with you) of
credit, does witness, that I say true.


Heart. Who is that?


Rainoldes. Even Father Robert: the public reader and professor of divinity
in Rome. Who, Robert. Be^larmin. in praelect. Romans Controu. 4. Quaest. 3. De
Summo ^ ont.
when he discoursed of Christ's words to Peter, Whatsoever thou shall bind on
earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth,
shall be loosed in heaven: said, that all power of the keys is therein
promised, not restrained to part, but enlarged to what soever. Yea, that Christ
likewise promised the same power to all the Apostles, when Mat. 18.18.
he spoke in like words, Whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in
heaven, and what soever ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. For,
albeit Origin (more subtly, then literally) does put a difference between
the promises, because, in the one, the word, (...). Matthew. 18.18.
[heauen] is used; in the other, (...). Matthew. 16.19.
[heauens:] yet the common exposition of S. Ierom, S. Hilarie, S. Anselme, and
others upon this place, yea of S. Austin him self in his treatise upon John,
is, that Christ speaks of the power of the keys by which the Apostles and
their successors do bynd or loose sinners. And although it seems, that here
is chiefly meant the power of jurisdiction whereby sinners are excommunicate:
yet the said Fathers do understand it of both the powers, not only of
jurisdiction but of order too. And that may be gathered (it seems) by the
text. For it is said as generally to the Apostles, What things soever ye shall
bind: as it is to Peter, What thing soever thou shall bind.


Heart. Perhaps Father Robert does bring in these things by way of an
objection, and frames thereunto an answer, and so resolves to the contrary.


Rainoldes. No. But he brings your opinion in deed by way of an objection,
and frames thereunto an answer, and so resolves to the contrary. For thus he
goes forward. What? Is that given then to all the Apostles, which was promised
to Peter? Caietan (in his treatise of the Popes authority) says that the keys
of the kingdom of heaven, and the power of byndyng and loosing, are not all
one: for that to bynd and loose is less then to open and shut. But this
doctrine seems to be more subtle then true. For it is a thing unheard of,
that there are in the Church any other keys then the keys of order and of
jurisdiction. And the sense of those words, I will give thee the keys, and
whatsoever thou shall bind and loose, is plain: that first, a certain power
and authority is promised; afterward, the function of it is declared. Now the
function of these keys is declared by the words to bind and loose, not by the
words, to shut and open: that we may understand they be metaphorical and
borrowed kinds of speeches; neither heaven is opened properly, but it is said
that heaven is opened then with these keys when men are loosed and dispatched
of the difficulties and infirmities which shut them out of heaven, and so
forth. Thus says your chiefest reader, and Jesuit Robert Bellarmin: whose
judgment (by your leave) I far esteem, in this point, above D. Stapletons,
as more agreeable to the scriptures.


Heart. You may esteem it, as you li^t. But I am not bound to stand to
Bellarmines judgment.


Rainoldes. But you are bound to stand to the judgment of the Fathers, by the
Council of Trent: and that Allens Apolog. of the English seminar. chap. 5.
Cone. Trid. Sess. 4. The Bull of the oath (annexed to the Council of Trent:)
Sacram Scripturam nunquam nisi iuxta vnanimem consensum Patrum accipiam and
interpretabor.
upon your oath, as I take it. With the which oath I know not how D. Stapleton
dispenses. Unless the Pope expound it, that you must follow them, so far as
they do go with him: or else Pope Pius the fourth. Bulla Sanctissimi Domini
nostri Domini Pii diuina prouidentia Papae quarti, Super forma iuramenti
professionis fidei.
the oth-maker, meant not to bind you to it. Let us give a passeport then unto
the Fathers. It may be that the man was moved (in conscience) by light of truth
to vary from them. Let us hear what moved him. The same is not meant (says
he) by the keys, and by the words, to bynd and loose, as some men have
thought. And why? For all the Schoolmen are of opinion, that to bynd and loose
does note a power judicial in the outward court only: to remit and retain
sins, in the inward court. By the outward court, he means the consistory:
wherein the church discipline and censure is exercised. By the inward court,
the conscience: wherein a man's trespasses and sins are bound or loosed. So
(in effect) he says, that the power of remitting sins and censuring sinners,
were only meant (in the speeches of Christ) to the Apostles: and not the most
ample and large power of keys (promised to Peter) Omnium Doctorum
scholasticorum sententia.
by the judgment of all the Schoolmen. Which proof, though it cannot weigh
as much for him, as the Fathers against him: yet herein his dealing is orderly
and plain, that, leaving the Fathers, he cleaves to the Schoolmen. For (when
all is done) the Schoolmen are the men that must uphold Papistrie: with the
freendly help of the Canonists their breethren. The Scriptures and Fathers
would be pretended for a show, to countenance the matter. But they are like to
images in old buildings of antike work: which are framed so, that with their
shoulders they seem to bear the roof, whereas that in deed does rest on
walls or pillars. The Schoolmen and the Canonists, the fountains of the
corruption which has infected the Church of Christ; the Schoolmen, in
doctrine, by the opinions of Popery; the Canonistes, in discipline, by the
state of the Papacy: the Schoolmen and the Canonists are the two pillars that
uphold your Church, as Judge. 16.29.
the house of Dagon, in the which the Philistines triumph and insult over the
faith and God of Samson. What then, if the Schoolmen, whose 1. Tim. 6.2^.
oppositions of science falsely so called, are noted by S. Paul, that Timothee
may avoid them, who (the most ofthem) came with feet unwashed into the Lords
sanctuary, who being ignorant of the tongues wherein the holy Ghost wrote,
(great helps to understand his meaning,) searched not the sense of scripture
in the scripture, but in human sense, and so expounded it thereafter: what,
if they say, that to bynd and loose does make a judge only in the outward
court: to remit and retain sins, in the inward court: and both import less
then the keys, which open all in court and country? I have proved the
contrary by conference of the Scriptures. You can not deny but that the Fathers
teach the contrary. Where is your discretion? Who, though the Scriptures (as we
prove,) the Fathers (as you grant,) do say it is so: yet you say it is not so,
because the Schoolmen think not so. As if you should say in a matter of
state, which is allowed and ordained by the Queen and Council, that although
they will it, yet may it not be done: why? because the Yeomen ofthe kitchen
like it not.


Heart. If you believed so rightly as you ought, with Catholics: you would not
think so basely of Schoolmen, as you do. For, (as Locor. Theologicor. ^ib. 8.
cap. 1.
Melchior Canus writes well and truly) the contempt of Schoole-diuinitie is a
companion of heresy: and the heresies of Luther, of Wicklef, of Melanchthon,
and (in a word) of all the Lutherans, do seem to have flowed most from that
fountain, even from the despising of the Schoolemens judgment. But, howsoever
you esteem them, cap. 4.
their common opinion, when they all consent and agree in one, is of such
weight with us: that we account it a point of great rashness, and almost of
heresy to dissent from them. They have not such ornaments offiner learning and
the tongues, as some in our days have: but they have the substance, The
narration of the English Seminary in Rome.
the pith of all sciences: chiefly S. Thomas of Aquine, one of the grauest and
learned divines, that ever Christ's church had, whatsoever ignorant heretics
(which understand him not) esteem of him.


Rainoldes. My judgment of the Schoolmen, is such as they deserve. If Canus
have judged more favorably ofthem, he is to be borne with: since Locor.
Theolog. lib. 8. cap. 1.
him self desired to be thought a Schoolman. Though, if I should grant them
as much as he does, that, when they all agree in one they must be followed: they
would not trouble us greatly in many points of faith. For they are at such
contention (for themost part) and that, about such matters: that S. 1. Tim. 6.4.
Paul's reproof of questions and strife of words never fell on any more justly
then on them. But as Canus speaks of Schoole-diuines, and Schoole-diuinitie:
he and I dissent not, though I be against them, and he for them, in show.
Sophocles, the poet, (a writer of tragedies) being asked ofhis friend, why, when
he brought in the persons ofwomen, he made them always good, whereas Euripides
made them badde: because I (quoth he) do represent women such as they should
be: Euripides, such as they be. So the matter fares between me and Canus. For
he does paint out Schoolmen such as they should be: and I such as they be. I
speak against them who perverting the scriptures, have profaned divinity
with philosophy, or rather sophistry, and yet are called Schoole-diuines,
when they are neither Scholars in truth, nor Divines. He accou^teth none a
Schoole-diuine, but him, Locor. Theolog. lib. 8. cap. 1.
who reasons of God and things concerning God, fitly, wisely, learnedly out
of the holy scriptures and ordinances of God. Now, if none be a
Schoole-diuine, but such; nor any divinity, Schoole-diuinitie but that, Quae
sacrarum literarum fundamentis constituta sit.
which is set on the foundations of the holy scriptures, as Canus does define
it: then shall I gladly both yield to Schoole-diuinitie, and follow
Schoolediuines: but I deny them to be Schoole-diuines, whom you meant in citing
Schoolmen. Yea eue^ Thomas of Aquine, who^ your Popes set more by, then by all
the Doctors, placing him as Pope Viban. In confirmat. and approbat. doctrinae
S. Thomae.
chiefest, and Pope Innocent. In sermon. ecce plus quam Solomon hic. Augustine.
Hunae. praefat. Sum. Theolog. Thom. Aquin.
first after the scripture, and worthily, for he was the first thorough-papist
of name that ever wrote, and with his rare gifts of wit, learning, and
industry did set out Popery most, that he might well be Pope Pius the fifth. In
bulla super celebratione festiuitatis Angelici Doctoris S. Thomae Aquin. Eclog.
Bullar. and Motu-proprior.
praised as the standerd-bearer of the faith maintained by the Council of
Trent: even him will I follow, so long as he shows himself such a Schoolman,
as Canus prayseth to us. But he shows not himself such a Schoole-man, when he
does (as he does often; so much we understand in him) keep down the truth and set
up error: either by mistaking the scripture against scripture; or by holding
the corruptions of faithful men, as incorrupt; or by following the glimses of
Philosophers as perfect light. By mistaking the scripture: through faulty
translations or expositions of men. By the corruptions of the faithful: in the
practice of the church, or some opinions of Fathers. By the glimses of
Philosophers: in taking grounds of Aristotle as principles of truth, equal to
the word of God. I set not down examples of all Popish errors, grown by
these occasions, confirmed by Thomas and the Schoolmen. Because in our
conference, they shall (if God will) have each their due places. Now for the
present, I grant, that the contempt of the Schooleme^s doctrine, (on these
considerations) has moved us to depart from your Catholic errors: and a
Lutheran mislike, not of Schoole-diuinitie, but of this Schoole-diuinitie, is a
companion of our heresy: and in our Uniuersities, Oxford and Cambridge, we
study scriptures more then it; so that (in some part) you rail upon us
justly, The narrat. of the English se^^n. in Rome.
that heresy in England has abandoned the study of it. For we had not
believed Act. 24.5. and 28.22.
the heresy of Christ and that new fangled man, his Apostle, S. Paul: unless
we had contemned the Catholic fancies of the Schooleme^, who (as Act. 19.24.
Demetrius) strive against it. But you shall never drive me with bugges of
Whence the names of Lutherans, Wiclefists, Melanchthonists are taken up against
us, by Hofius, Staphylus, Sanders: as likewise of Caluinists, and
Anglo-caluinists by D Stapleto^.
the names of Luther, or Wicklef, or Melanchthon, or any else, from holding
that with them which they hold of God. For though we rejoice not in names
drawn from them, with the which you press us, but in the name of Act 11.26.
Christians, 1. C^or. 1.13.
into the which we are baptized: yet I know no harm by them, nor you, I think
(set slanders apart) why we should be ashamed of them, more then our fathers
were of Caecilian, August. breuic. collat. cum Donatist. collat. diei 3. cap. 4.
of whom the Donatists called them Caecilianists. But had they been as evil
as their enemies report them, their lives stained with lewdnes, their doctrine
mixed with leaven, no less then were the Pharisees: S. Act. 23.6.
Paul has taught me to acknowledge my self even a Pharisee (if need be, not
only a Lutheran) in that the Pharisees teach a truth of Christian faith, the
resurrection of the dead. Wherefore, if the Schoolmen (to return to my
purpose) if all the Schoolmen had distinguished the keys from the function of
binding and loosing, that function from the remitting and retaining of sins,
as you say they do: yet might not their credit ouerweigh the reasons which I
have laid against it. But what if all the Schoolmen have not done so? As in
deed they have not. What if they have done the contrary rather? What shall we
say of him who has taught his tongue so shamefully to lie, as though he neither
feared God nor reverenced men? First, Sententiar. li. 4. Distinct. 18. and 1^.
Peter Lombard, the father of the Schoolmen, does define the keys by the
knowledge and the power of binding and loosing: and so he divides and handles
them accordingly. The next after him, Sum. Theolo. part 4. quaest. 20. memb.
2. and 5.
Alexander of Ales, treads the same steps: and says, that to bind and loose
is as much as to open and shut: which is the whole power of the keys. Thomas
of Aquine after him, misliking In magistr. sent. lib. 4. distinct. 18^ quaest.
1. art. 1.
Peter Lombard for requiring knowledge (which some, who claim the keys, have
not,) agrees with him in the rest, and makes the power of binding and
loosing, to be the substance of the keys. John Scot after him, Script. Oxon.
in Magist. sent. lib. 4. did. 19. art. 5.
although he distinguishes between the two courts, secret, and open, as you
do: Art. 3.
yet he dreameth not of any other keys then of binding and loosing. Yea, (that
which cuts the throat of your supreme head) In magist sent. lib 4. did. 19.
art. 1.
Scot, In 4. Sent. did. 24. quaest. 3. art. 2.
Thomas, and Sum. Theologic. part. 4. quaest. 20. Membr. 5. and 6.
Alexander, affirm the same, that I: namely, that the keys promised to Peter
in the sixteenth of Matthew, were given to the Apostles in the twentieth of
John. And these are accounted the cheifest of your Schoolmen, and so esteemed
amongst you, that the Lombard^^.
first of them is called ye Master of the sentences; Alexander.
the next, the Doctor irrefragable; Thomas.
the third, the Doctor Angelical; Scotus.
the fourth and last, the Subtle Doctor. What the rest of the black guard
judge of the matter, I have not enquired. But it is likely they wear their
Masters liueries: chiefly, since Scot and Thomas do not square about it. Which
I think the rather, because D. Stapleton, though boasting that all the
Schoolmen are of his side, yet names not one: whereas he uses not to spare
his margent for quotations, when they (whom he alleges) do speak or seem
to speak for him. Belike the Queen must leese her right, where there is
nothing to be had.


Heart. You need not find fault that he quoteth not the names of the
Schoolmen to prove his exposition: when he proves it by that which you like
better, even by conference of scripture.


Rainoldes. By conference of other plainer places of scripture?


Heart. No. But by a word of the same text, Illud, Et quod. cunque ligaueris,
coniunctiue addit.
even [and] the conjunction: which, seeing that it coupleth things distinct and
different, in the former members, and I say to thee, and upon this peter, and
the gates of hell, and to thee will I give the keys; therefore to bind and
loose must differ from the keys, because the last clause is knit with [and]
unto the rest, and whatsoever thou shall bind.


Rainoldes. And did not he (think you) go about to show and prove by this
example, that conference of scripture is but a bad means to come unto the
right sense of the scripture? Doubtless such a conference, as this (at which
he fumbleth) is not the wisest way to find it. But, I know not how, when he
medleth with scripture, he seems half amazed, as it were a creature in a
strange element. For neither he remembers Staple^ (...) doctr. li. (...)
his own exception against us, that in the same sentence one word has
sundry senses often: nor marketh that a conjunction is used as properly to
couple together agreeing things as different, Ier. (...) 17. (...)
and both (as here) in one place: nor considers that things may differ, each
from other, and yet be expounded each of them by other, as the cause by the
effects, the whole by the parts: nor weighs (the point in question) that
although in Matthew the words of Christ to Peter did differ in meaning as much
as he would have them, yet Christ by his general commission in John might
perform jointly to all the Apostles that which he promised to him. And this
(to put the matter out of all controversy, because it is the issue between
you and us) the very words of the commission, delivered in the scriptures,
expounded by the Fathers, observed by the Schoolmen, do convince so forcibly:
that Rob. Bellarmin. prae lect. Romae, Contro^^r. 4. qu^st. ^. De summo Po^ti.
the Jesuit (whom I named) the Popes own professor, and most earnest proctour
of the Popes supremacy, was feign to seek other shifts whereby to help it,
but this he could not choose but grant. For having taught that the keys
promised to Peter were only two, of order, and of jurisdiction: he declared
that Christ did give them both to his Apostles: the key of jurisdiction over
all the world, in that he said to them, As my Father sent me, so do I send
you, which Cyrill and Chrysostom note upon it; the key of order in the words
that immediately follow, Receive the holy Ghost, whose sins soever ye remit,
they are remitted to them, whose sins soever ye retain, they are retained.
Or, if D. Stapleton love himself so well, that neither Scriptures, nor
Fathers, nor Schoolmen, nor Jesuits, can make him to acknowledge his own
oversight: let him hear a witness who can do more with him, against who^
there lies no exception for him, unless it be that of the law, L. in
testimon. Dig. De testibus.
They who waver against the credit of their own testimony, are not to be
heard. This witness, is himself: who, remembering not the proverb that a liar
must be mindful, Staplet. princip. doctrine. li. 6. (...) 7.
does afterward affirm, that all the Apostles were sent with full power to
begin the church, by those words of Christ, As my Father sent me, so do I
send you: and that they all were therein equal unto Peter.


Heart. So: he says that full power was given them by those words, As my Father
sent me: but, that the words which follow contain a part thereof only, Whose
sins soever ye remit: as again he mentions in that very place. Now, these
two sayings agree well together: that it is given, by the one; and by the other
it is not. Wherefore your self offend in that you touch him, when you do
touch him as a liar. A common fault with Protestants, in dealing against us:
which argues your church of what brood it is. Ioh. 8.44.
The Devil is a liar: and the father thereof.


Rainoldes. If any man of our profession be stained with this filth: we wish
him and exhort him to cleanse him self of it, least the name of God, be
(through his default) blasphemed among the Gentiles. But you do us injury to
condemn our church for the offense of some in it. For, Romans ^.6.
all they are not Israel, which are of Israel: and Jacobs sons, Genesis 35.^^
Ruben, did commit incest, Genesis 34.23.
Simeon and Leui, murder; yet the house of Jacob was the church of God. If my
self have done your Doctor any wrong, in touching him, as a liar: it was an
error, not a crime; not of wilfulnes, but oversight. And such an oversight,
for which he rather owes thanks to me, who touch him: then to you, who clear
him. For I, who do touch him, touch him with a rod: but you, who do clear
him, whippe him with scorpions.


Heart. What mean you by that?


Rainoldes. You charge him with a capital crime (as I may term it,) to clear
him of a lesser. He follows not the Devil in lying, you say. But you grant,
he follows him in that is worse: even in the suppressing of the holy scripture
to seduce the reader. For, as the Deui^^* ^empting Christ to cast him self
down from the pinnacle, alleged, Not. 4.6.
it is written, He will give his Angels charge over thee; omitted, Psalm ^1.11.
that they shall keep thee in all thy ways, because that made against him,
the ways, (to which he tempted) being none of Christ's ways: in like sort the
Doctor tempting us to fall down before the Pope, when he alleged Ioh. 20.2^.
whose sins soever ye remit, as giving less to the Apostles then was
promised to Peter; he omitted, Ioh. ^0.^1.
As my father sent me, so I send you, whereby they all have full power, the
same that Peter had. Neither yet contenting him self with this treachery: he
proceeds farther. And whereas 2. (...). 18.1^
the scripture says of Eliakim, that he was the steward of the kings house*
the Doctor affirms he was ^
the hie priest: that seeing the key of David's house was given him, and his key
therein was a figure of Christ's, and Christ did promise keys to Peter: the
simple reader might conceive (by this allusion) that, as Eliakim was the hie
priest in the old Testament, so Peter should be in the new: the one as a
figure, the other, as lieutenant of Christ, the true hie priest.


Heart. What moved D. Stapleton to say that Eliakim was hie priest, I know not.
I do not think he would have said it, unless he had had good reason to avouch
it. And I am persuaded, that if he knew that, and other things, which you
find fault with: what soever he has written, he would make it good.


Rainoldes. I wish with all my heart, he would. For then he should repent, and
amend his errors: the only way to make that good, which is evil. But thus you
may see (by his own confession) that Christ gave the keys to all the Apostles
which he promised to Peter. For seeing by the keys is signified the full power,
and the full power was given to them all: it follows that the keys were given
to them all. How much the more idle is that fansi-full tale which you told out
of him, that to bynd and loose, to remitte and retain sins, imply a part
only, or (as he terms it) are only Partiales non totales, and minores non
praecipui actus ipsarum clauium.
partial not total, and lesser not the chief actions of the keys: but to
open and shut, wherein is employed the power correspondent fully and euenly to
the keys, is the whole power, even a power most ample: Tota and ado quata
potestas ipsis clauibus: amplissima potestas.
and so the partial lesser actions of the keys were committed by Christ to
all the Apostles, Qu^m soli Petro claues datoe fuerint.
whereas the keys were given to Peter alone. Whereof the conclusion is so
clearly false, that himself (as though he had swalowed a hot morsel which he
must needs vngorge) was feign to cast it up straightwaie, and say the
contrary. For, in that he adds, that the full power of the keys was promised
Soli Petro principaliter ante and supra ^mnes alios.
to Peter alone principally, before and above all the rest: he grants (by
co^sequent) that it was promised to the rest of the Apostles, and therefore
given to them also.


Heart. Yet principally to him alone. But though all of them had received the
keys, even the full power, the same that he received, which nevertheless I
grant not, but suppose they had: yet this does confirm that he was their
supreme head, in some respect.


Rainoldes. How so? Because no greater power was given him, then was given them.


Heart. No: But because Staplet. princ. doctr. lib. 6. cap. 7. and 15.
the power which was given them, was given them by him. For, Sermon. 3. in
anniuers. die assumpt. suae. and Sermon. 2. in Natali Apostolor. Petri and Pauli.
so (as Leo the great writes wisely) Firmitas. quae per Christum Pet^o
tribu^^ur, per Petrum Apostolis conse^tur.
the strength which is given to Peter by Christ is bestowed on the Apostles by
Peter.


Rainoldes This Leo was too great a friend of Peter's state, as Chap. 1. Diuis.
2.
I have declared. Wherefore how great soever he were, and wrote wisely: yet
must his writing give place to the word of a greater Leo: I mean of Reu. 5.5.
the Lion of the tribe of Judah. For he teaches us, not, that the Apostles,
receued their power by Peter, but John 20.21* Mat. 28.18.
that Peter and they received it all together immediately of Christ. Yea Paul,
Act. 9.15.
though he were chosen after Christ's ascension to be an Apostle: yet was he
Gal. 1.1.
an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the
father which raised him from the dead.


Heart. That is true which you say: but you mistake my meaning. For you seem to
speak of the Apostolic power, which I grant they received immediately of
Christ. But Staple^. (...) doct. l. 6. c. 7.
they had an other power beside that, to wit, a Bishoply, or Pastoral power.
Wherein since they were inferior to Peter, though equal in the Apostolic: it
may be they received, though not the Apostolic, yet the Bishoply power of him.


Rainoldes. Some such thing it is, that your men would say. But (to confess
mine own ignorance) I do not understand what they mean by it. Which I should
perhaps be ashamed off, if you (who handle it) your selves did understand it,
or gave us sense and reason of it. For, if all the power, which Bishops have,
as Bishops, be the power of the keys; and the Apostles, as Apostles, had all
the power of the keys committed unto them by Christ; both the which things the
Scriptures prove, and you disprove not: then was there no power, which they
might receive of Peter, as Bishops; and therefore they did not receive any of
him, nor were inferior to him therein* Yet this is the very foundation of the
Papacy: but laid on such sand, that the master builders who travail most in
laying it, do reele (like dronken men) about it, too and fro; and strooken with
a blindness, as Genesis 19.11.
the Sodomites at Lots doo^e, they are wearied in seeking of it. Cardinal In
Summa de ecclesia lib. 2.
Turrecremata, the chiefest autour of the fancy, is of this opinion, that cap.
34.
Christ brought the rest of his Apostles to bishoply dignity by Peter: even as
he lead his people through the wilderness, by the hand of Moses and Aaron. cap.
3^*
For him self made Peter only, a Bishop, immediately; and Peter preferred the
rest, first John, next James, then others: as the Cardinal gesseth by
probabilities of dreams, some in theCanon law, some of his own brain. Pro
epist. decreralibus Pon^ificu^ lib. 2. cap. ^1.
Turrian the Jesuit, (a man, with whom such dreams commonly are oracles)
though he allow Peter to be the father of the Apostles, yet thinking this manner
of fathering him to be absurd, he says that the Apostles were all ordained
Bishops, cap. 2.
by the laying (as it were) of the fyry tongues upon them, when they received
the holy Ghost. And this he proves by S. Ierom, S. Denis, and other Fathers.
Of whose opinion it ensues, that, granting the Apostles were ordained
Bishops, as in a general sense, (in which their charge is called (...). Act.
1.20.
a bishoply charge) they were: yet they were ordained of God immediately, as
well as Peter was, and not of God by Peter. D. Stapleton, uncertain how to
bear him self between these two opinions, the later being truer, the former
safer for the Pope: he faltereth in his speech, as though (according to the
proverb) he had a woolfe by the ears, whom neither he durst let go out of
his hands, nor hold, for fear of danger. For of the one side he is loath to
grant the truth, lest it should prejudice the title of the Pope: yet loath of
the other side to deny it also, because Mat. 21.26.
he fears the people. Staplet. princ. doct. l. 6 c. 1.
First therefore he says, that the keys (which signify the full power of
government ecclesiastical) were given to Peter only. Then, he confesses,
cap. 7.
that all the Apostles were sent by Christ, with full power, yea with power
most full, and equal unto Peter's power. From hence he turns back, and
takes up his old song, cap. 8.
that Christ gave all power ecclesiastical to Peter only, and so by him to
others. Which string because it gives a very sweet sound: cap. 6. and 7. and
8. and 10. and 15.
he harpeth on it often. Afterward, either doubting the conscience of weak
Catholics, or the evil tongues of Caluinists, who favor the Apostles, and
cannot hear them so debased: he says cap. 15.
that the Apostles were sent immediately of God with full power unto al
nations. Yet by and by falling again unto his giddines, (through some pang
belike of The Pope.
his holiness displeasure, which might be stirred by such speeches:) he
pronounces, cap. 15.
that the spring of honor and power is derived from Peter alone to all the
rest. And thus he goes on, through the whole discourse, (both in this, and the
rest of his Doctrinall Principles,) enterfeiring as it were at every other
pace, and hewing hoof against hoof. But so will the Lord confound the toongs
of them who do build up Babylon. Yet here, for these cuttings wherewith he
gasheth himself, he thinks that they may be healed with a distinction taken
up in Cardinal Turrecrematas shop, of a twofold power, the one Apostolic, the
other Bishoply: the rest of the Apostles to have been inferior to Peter in the
Bishoply, though equal in the Apostolic; and all to have received the
Apostolic power immediately of Christ, the rest (as namely James) their
Bishoply power of Peter. But two learned Friars, Sixtus Senensis, and
Franciscus Victoria (men of better reading and judgment then either he, or
Turrecremata) have cast off this quirke as a rotten drugge, before Stapleton
took it up. Relection. ^. de potestat. ecclesiae.
Victoria, by showing out of the Scriptures, that the Apostles received all
their power immediately of Christ. Bibliothec. san. lib. 6. annot. 269. and 171.
Sixtus, by declaring out of the Fathers, that in the power of Apostleship and
order (so he calls those two powers) Paul was equal to Peter, and the rest
to them both. Which case he thought to be so clear, that despairing of help
for the Papacy, by Peter's either Bishoply power, or Apostolic: he added
thereunto a third kind of power, even the power of kingdom, therein to set
Peter over the Apostles, that so the Pope too might reign over Bishops. It
must be known, says he, that Peter had a threefold power, one of the
Apostolatus.
Apostleship, an other of Ordinis.
order, and the third of Regni.
kingdom. Touching the Apostleship, that is, the duty of teaching, and care
of preaching the Gospel: Paul (as it is rightly noted by In comment. ad Galat.
Ierom) was not inferior to Peter, because Paul was chosen to the preaching
of the Gospel, not by Peter but by God, even as Peter was. Touching the power
which is given in the Sacrament of order: Aduersus Iouinian. and ad Euagr.
Ierom has said well, that all the Apostles received the keys equally; yea that
they all, as Bishops, were equal in degree of priesthood and the spiritual
power of that degree. But touching the power of kingdom, and that principal
authority over all Bishops and teachers: thereof has Aduers. Iouinian. and
Luciferian.
Ierom said best, that Peter was chosen amongst the twelve Apostles, and made
the head of al, that by his supreme authority and eminent power above the
rest, the contentions of the church might be taken up, and all occasion of
schisms removed. Now, if you will use this aid of kingly power to fortify
the Pope with: we will try the strength thereof, Chapt. 5. Diuis. ^.
when you bring it. In the mean season, for the Bishoply power which Peter is
imagined to have bestowed on the Apostles, (as the Pope would on Bishops:) it
was but a Cardinals fetch to serve ye turn of his Lord the Pope: the learned
of your Jesuits and Friars dare not take it: your Doctor feign would have it,
but touches it so nicely, as though he were afraid of it. If you will stand
unto it, and hold it with the Cardinal: let us see your warrant; where did
the Apostles receive it of Peter? At what time? In what manner? Who is a
witness of it?


Heart. They did not receive it. But the order was that they should have done.


Rainoldes. Was that the order? Why did they break it?


Heart. Christ Singulari priuilegio. Staplet. l. 6. c. 7.
by singular privilege did exempt them from it.


Rainoldes. Then there was a law which did bind them to it.


Heart. What else? For they should have done it: though they did it not.


Rainoldes. Should, that they did not? How do you prove it?


Heart. Because an order must be set, which should be kept by the posterity.


Rainoldes. An order? For whom? For Apostles? you Immediate a Deo missi.
Staplet. l* 6. c. 13.
grant that man might not ordain them. For Bishops? Tit. 1.5.7.
other men did ordain them, as rightfully as Peter did. But you had rather
make this show of an answer, then say (that which you should say in truth) I
cannot tell. For you deal with us, as Cicer. pro Sex. Roscio*
Erucius did with Roscius* whom when he accused, that he had killed his
father, because his father purposed to disinherit him: Thou must prove, (says
Tully) that his father did purpose it. The father did purpose to disinherite
his son. For what cause? I know not. Did he disinherite him? No. Who did
hinder it? He did mind it. Did he mind it? Whom told he so? No body. Your
answers unto me, are very like to these, but somewhat more unorderly. For to
ground the Popes supremacy on Peter: you said that the Apostles did all
receive their power, at least, their bishoply power of him. You must make it
manifest that they did so. All the Apostles were to receive their power of
Peter. What scripture says so? I know not. Did they receive it? No. Who did
hinder it? They should have done it. Should they have done it? How prove ye it?
I can not tell. I may not say of you, as Tully of Erucius, What is it else to
abuse the laws and judgments and majesty of the judges to lucre and to lust,
then so to accuse, and to object that, which you not only can not prove, but
do not as much as endeavor to prove it. For I must bear you witness, you
endeavor to prove it. But you shall do better to surcease that endeavor,
unless your proofs be sounder, and have not only show, but also weight of
truth in them.


The third Chapter. The performance, which Christ is supposed to have made (of
the supremacy promised,) 1 in saying to Peter, Feed my lambs, feed my
sheep: 2 and, Strengthen thy brethren. With the circumstances of the points
thereof, Do thou love me? and, I have prayed for thee Peter. What, and how,
they make for Peter* how for all.
HEART. The promise made to Peter has not only show but also weight of truth
to prove his supremacy. But, to satisfy you, The first Division.
who think it not weighty enough of it self, I will add thereto the
performance of it, and so you shall have it weight with the advantage. Staplet.
prin. doctrine. l. 6. c. 9.
For, it was said to Peter in the presence of three Apostles, James, John, and
Thomas, by our Savior Christ, Eo etiam m^mento.
even at the very moment when he would now ascend up unto his father, and
therefore either then or never make his vicar: Ioh. 21.15, 17.
Pasce agnos meos, pasce oues meas; Feed my lambs, feed my sheep.


Rainoldes. Not, at the very moment. That, is the advantage (I ween) which you
will add to make up the weight: as some add eare-wax to light angels. But the
words were spoken: what do you gather of them?


Heart. Christ, in those words, did truly perform the promise of the keys
which he had made to Peter. But Christ gave him commission to feed his whole
flock, without exception of any. Therefore he made him supreme head of the
Apostles.


Rainoldes. This reason does seem to be sick of the palsy. The sinews of it
have no strength.


Heart. Why so?


Rainoldes. Because in the charge of feeding sheep and lambs, neither was the
commission given unto Peter: and if it were, yet no more was committed to him
then to the rest of the Apostles: and if more, yet not so much, as should make
him their supreme head.


Heart. If you prove the second of these three points: the other two are
superfluous.


Rainoldes. They are so. But you shall have weight with advantage, to ouerwaigh
your weight to us ward. And, for the first: I have already showed, that the
commission which Christ gave to Peter, he had given it him (...). 20.21.
before, when he said, As my father sent me: so do I send you. Receive the
holy Ghost. Whose sins soever ye remit, they are remitted to them: whose
sins soever ye retain, they are retained.


Heart. But Christ gave him not so much at that time, as he had promised him.
Wherefore, part of his promise being performed then, part was performed after:
then, as much as he had jointly with the Apostles; after, that he had over them.


Rainoldes. This is your bulwark of Peter's supremacy: but it is builded on a
lie. For all that Christ had promised him, was implied in that he had said,
Matt. 16.19.
To thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Was it not?


Heart. It was so: what then?


Rainoldes. But in this commission (sending him with full authority and power)
he gave him all the keys of the kingdom of heaven. In this commission
therefore he gave him all that he had promised.


Heart. I deny that he gave him all the keys in this commission.


Rainoldes. I prove it. All the keys, (as it has appeared by Chapt. 2. Diuis.
3.
your own confession) are only too, the key of knowledge and of power: or
rather both of power, by Thomas of Aquines judgment, whom you rather follow.
But Christ gave him both those in this commission: Ioh. 20.21.
As my Father sent me, so do I send you; Receive the holy Ghost. Wherefore in
this commission he gave him all the keys of the kingdom of heaven. And
whatsoever keys he gave him in this, he gave the same to all the rest of the
Apostles. He gave as much authority therefore to them all: as he gave to
Peter. But that is the next point.


Heart. Yet they received Act. 2.1.
afterward the holy Ghost from heaven in the day of Pentecost. And therefore
they received not their whole commission of Christ at this time: they waited
for a part of it.


Rainoldes. Yes: it was a part of their commission so to wait. For (as it is
further declared by S. Luke) when Luc. 24. v^r. 45.
their understanding was opened by Christ that they might understand the
scriptures: he commanded them to ver. 49.
stay in Jerusalem, until they were endued with power from an high. A King who
puts men in commission of peace, does give them authority to execute that
charge by the words of his commission. If they perhaps have not such wealth as
is requisite for Justices of peace to discharge their duty; and the King will
give them lands by such a day, thereby to furnish them unto it: they receive
by their lands, not authority, which they had; but ability which they
wanted: and the better they are landed, the more are they enabled, but not the
more authorized to execute their duty. Christ, the King of Kings, did put his
Apostles in Romans 10.15. 2. Cor. 5.20.
the commission of peace: of heavenly peace, not earthly; not bodily, but
spiritual; not temporal, but eternal. Their authority they received by the
words of his commission. But the discharge of the duty required great
treasures of the holy Ghost. Whereof he gave them some Ioh. 20.22.
then; more in the Act. 2.3.
fiery toonges from heaven; more Act. 10.11. and 11.18.
as the churches state required; and these, Luc. 19.16.
well occupied, gained more: with the increase whereof their ability still
increased; their authority not so, which all was given them at once.


Heart. But a King, for better trial of his Justices, may commit some lesser
authority first unto them, and afterward greater.


Rainoldes. Matt. 10.5.
So did Christ to his Apostles. But having made trial of them in the lesser,
he called them by this commission to the greater: nay, to the greatest, then
which he had no greater for them.


Heart. Not within the limits perhaps of their commission: yet he might enlarge
them, and give them greater limits.


Rainoldes. But Christ in this commission had given them authority through all
his dominion, not through a shire only. For he sent them Marc. 16.15. Luc.
24.47.
to all nations.


Heart. And what, if I grant, that Christ in this commission gave all that power
to Peter, which he had promised him, and was to give unto him?


Rainoldes. If he gave him all that power in this commission: no part thereof
remained to be given in any other. If no part to be given: then was there no
further power given to him by those words of Christ, Feed my lambs, feed my
sheep. If no further power were given him thereby, the bulwark of your Papacy
is builded on a fancy.


Heart. Then belike our Savior spoke to no purpose, when he said to Peter, Ioh.
21. ver. 15 1^. and 17.
Do thou love me? Feed my lambs. Do thou love me? Feed my sheep.


Rainoldes. God forbid. To great purpose: though not to yours. For he gives
him therein a commandment, though not a commission. As if the Queens
Majesty, having made already by letters of commission some Justices in the
North, and one perhaps amongst them, of whose faithful heart she were
persuaded well, yet, that had showed himself not of the trustiest in time of
the rebellion, she should say unto him (to stir in him a lively regard of
his duty,) Do you love us? Have care of our poor subjects: Do you love us?
Have care of our good people. Which charge and commandment Christ might give
a great deal better to Peter, then the Queen to any Justice in ye North:
because she knows not whither any new Bull be coming from Rome, or new
rebellion be toward. But he knew that Peter should be in greater danger, then
he was when he fled, and denied his Master. Whereof, he forewarneth him
(straight upon the giving him of this commandment) and that, with earnest
Verily, verily I say unto thee.
words of great asseueration, as in a matter of weight: telling him, Ioh. 21.18.
that he should dye a grievous death for his profession of the faith and
feeding of the flock of Christ. So yt, to arm him against that fear of the
flesh, which before had made him to betray his duty, when he had less cause
to fear: Christ having made the iron hot, as it were, by asking him, Do
thou love me? strikes it, to make it a fit instrument to build with, and so
commands, Feed my flock; yea though the work be painful, and will cost
thee dear: for it shall bring thee to thy death. So, he commits not a new
charge to Peter, but wills him to look to that, which he had committed, and
flee not from it for any danger. As if a wise shipmaster, seeing a dangerous
storm at hand, should command his mariners whom he had well deserved of, that,
if they love him, they look unto their tackelings.


Heart. Well. If it were (perhaps) not a commission, but a commandment: yet was
it a commandment to discharge that duty, wherewith he was put in trust by
commission.


Rainoldes. I grant. What infer you?


Heart. Then Peter had commission to feed the lambs and sheep of Christ.


Rainoldes. Who does deny it? For Ioh. 20.21.
he had the same commission from Christ, that Luc. 4.18.
Christ from God his Father, to preach the Gospel to the poor, to heal the
brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight
to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised and preach the
acceptable year of the Lord. Which is, in other words, to feed the lambs
and sheep of Christ. For Christ by a similitude, is named the 1. Pet. 5. ver.
4.
chief shepherd: his church, and chosen servants, ver. 2.
a flock of sheep and lambs; whereof he gave a principal charge to his
Apostles, that they should feed it. Wherefore the commandment given unto
Peter to feed his sheep and lambs: imports the commission which before was
given him, when Christ sent him, as God sent Christ. But in this commission the
Apostles all were equal unto Peter. They were equal therefore to him in
charge of feeding the sheep and lambs of Christ. And so the second point
which I had to prove (the very deaths-wound of your supremacy) is proved.


Heart. Proved? How proved?


Rainoldes. As clearly, as the Sun does shine at noone day. For, to send
the Apostles, as God the Father sent Christ, is to give them charge to feed
his sheep and lambs. But Christ sent the Apostles, as God the Father sent
him. Therefore he gave them charge to feed his sheep and lambs. Now, this is
the greatest power, that can be showed, was given Peter by Christ. Wherefore in
the greatest power, that Christ gave him, the rest of the Apostles all were his
equals. If you be loath herein to believe the Scripture: yet believe the Pope,
and Pope Anacletus* Did. (...). c. in no^^ ^estamento.
an ancient Pope (unless the Canon law lie,) The rest of the Apostles received
honor and power in equal fellowship with Peter.


Heart. It is true that the Apostles were equal to Peter: but in respect of
their Apostleship, not of their Pastoral charge.


Rainoldes. This answer of yours, has a distinction, but not a difference. It
is the same fellow, but in an other gown, whom ( Chapter 2. Division 3^.
a little rather) I showed to be a bankrupt: and now he comes forth again in
new apparaile, like an honest and welthy Citizen.


Heart Why say you so?


Rainoldes. Because you did distinguish the Bishoply power of the Apostles,
from their power Apostolic: as here (with other words) you do their
Apostleship from their Pastoral charge. Whereas in deed the pastoral charge
of the Apostles is nothing else but their Apostleship: and has no more
difference then the other had. For the name of Pastor is used in two senses, a
special, and a general. In the special, to note a kind of function distinct
from the Apostles, ( Staplet. princ. doctr. lib. 6. c. 7. and 15.
your Doctor grants it,) and so Apostles are not Pastors: as when it is
said, Ephesians. 4.11.
some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and teachers. In
the general, to signify the common charge of al such, as do teach the word and
feed the flock of God: in which respect Ioh. 10.11.
Christ him self is called a Pastor. Wherefore since Apostles are not Pastors
by the former sense; by the later, whosoever are equal in the Apostleship,
must needs consequently be equal in the Pastorship too: your distinction, that
they were equal in the one not in the other, has no more reason, then an other
of Princ doctrine. l. 6. c. 7. Petro d^ta est potestas p^aeceptiua, seu
regiminis: Apostolis autem tantum exequ^tiua, seu gubernationis.
D. Stapletons, who says, that they were equal in power of government, but
not of regiment.


Heart. You deprave his words. For he says that this is the greatest
difference between Peter and the rest of the Apostles, that Christ gave to
Peter the power of regiment, or to command: to the Apostles only the power of
government, or to execute: because in government of the church Peter must
prescribe, what should be done, and they must execute it.


Rainoldes. I deprave them not, unless he speak sottishly, he knows not him
self what. For his drift is, to prove, that the Apostles all had equal power
given them by Christ, but with a threefold difference: of which this is one,
that they had equal power (forsooth) to do and execute all things that
appertain to the building of the Church; but so, that Peter had the power of
regiment, to command, the rest of the Apostles the power of government, to
execute. Which is as ridiculous, as if a man would say, that the Queens
Majesty and the Sheriffs of London have equal power both: yet with a
difference, to wit, that her Majesty has the power of regiment, that is, to
command, when a traitor shall suffer, and the Sheriffs the power of
government, that is, to execute that which she commands. If you should
preach thus in London: our Londoners would smile at it. I think that this
heresy has made our wits dull. Your Catholic distinctions are so sharp and
subtle, that we cannot conceive them.


Heart. You may flout as well, if you list, at S. Gregory: who though he use not
the words of this distinction, yet he has the sense of it: saying, Grego.
Registr. lib. 4. epist. 38.
that Andrewe, James, and John were heads of several congregations, and all,
members of the Church, under one head Peter.


Rainoldes. If I should touch Gregory for this, I should do him wrong: as great
wrong almost, as your lib. 6. cap. 7.
Doctor does, who alleges it out of Gregory. For though he were himself a
Bishop of Rome, and a well-willer of S. Peter's: yet in that epistle (whence
those words are cited) he calls Christ Caput vniuersalis ecclesiae.
the head of the universal church: Peter, Primum me^brum sanctae and
vniuersalis ecclesiae.
the chiefest member; and others, members of it also. D. Stapleton thinking it
a small thing, that Peter should be counted as the chiefest member, unless he be
the head too, has (upon mention of the one head) cogged in the name of Peter,
S. Gregory says, sub v^o capite omnes membra sunt ecclesiae.

D. Stapleton cites it, sub vno capite Petro omnes me^bra ecclesiae.


like a cunning gamster to help a dye at a need. Alas a man must enterprise
somewhat in such cases. For, you were all undone, if this game should be lost.


Heart. I marvel, that you blush not to use such uncivil speeches, and
tauntes, against D. Stapleton, a man of great learning even in your own
judgment.


Rainoldes. A man not of so great learning, as reading, if you will take my
judgment in it. Yet I wish (for his own sake) that his learning were as good,
as it is great. But for the uncivil speeches, and tauntes, which I use against
him; weigh the occasions and circumstances of them. If he have not deserved as
Mat. 23.13. Luke. 11.4^.
the Scribes and Pharisees: let me be rebuked when I touch him, as Christ them.
But you deal herein as Cic. pro ^lacco.
Tully reports that Athenagoras did: of his fault he said nothing, he
complained of his punishment. It is lawful for D. Stapleton to take up me with
his tauntes of Princip. doctr. lib. 4. cap. 1^.
Caluinist, Anglocaluinist, lib. 13. cap. 9.
Puritan, and that undeservedly. But if I reprove on just cause, with plain
terms, his cogging, corrupting, belying, sclaundering, abusing both of God and
men: it is a heinous matter and to be blushed at. Let them blush, M. Heart,
Reu. 22.15.
who love or make lies, either by committing such shameful tricks of
falsehood, or by partaking with them. It is no shame for me to note them, and
reprove them.


Heart. Why? Are you sure that there is no copy of S. Gregory's works, which
has the name of Peter inserted in that place.


Rainoldes. I think that none has: I am sure that none should have. For, in
Gregor. Registr. l. 4. epist. 36.
an other epistle of the same argument, when he had said yt al Christians Soli
vni capiti cohaerent, videlicet Christo.
do cleave to only one head, he adds, Imeane, to Christ: and having (in this
same epistle) put that difference between Christ and Peter, that Peter is a
member, Christ the head of the church, he shows manifestly whom he meant by
head. A thing so apparent, that De concordant. catholic. lib. 2. cap. 34.
Cardinal Cusanus does cite those words of Gregory Sub vno capi^e Cristo
omnes membra.
with Christ's name inserted: either as having read them so in some copy, or
to open the meaning of them. How much the more shameful is Stapletons dealing,
who foysteth in [Peter:] to set (by that conueiance) the Pope in Christ's
room. But you were best to go forward with the scriptures: and then (when you
have found nothing in them,) come to the Fathers after.


Heart. You are very peremptory still in your speeches. I will find in them as
much for the substance as I have affirmed* For, howsoever the words of
Pastoral charge, and the Apostleship; the power of regiment, and government,
agree with my meaning: my meaning, (I am sure) agrees with the scriptures, and
stands with good reason.


Rainoldes. Then you shall do well hereafter to refrain from such foggy
distinctions, devised to choke the blind, (who eat many a fly:) and express
your meaning in clear and plain words: least we suspect, that you fancy
darkness more then light.


Heart. This is my meaning, that Peter had authority over the Apostles to feed
them, to rule them, to be a Pastor of them: which the rest of the Apostles had
neither over him nor one over an other.


Rainoldes. So. Now make proof of it.


Heart. Christ did say to Peter: Ioh. 21.17.
Do thou love me? Feed my sheep. Whereof thus I reason. Christ did charge
Peter to feed his sheep, all; even all his sheep, without exception. But the
Apostles were sheep of Christ. Therefore he had the charge of feeding them
also.


Rainoldes. Christ said to the Apostles, Marc. 16.15.
Go ye into all the world* and preach the Gospel to every creature. Whereof
thus I reason. Christ did charge his Apostles to preach the Gospel to every
creature, to every one without exception. But Peter was a creature. Therefore
they had the charge of preaching to him also. Now, if I would play with words
as your men do: I could show that this reason must ouermaster yours in the
plain field. For Christ said not to Peter, feed all my sheep: but he said to
the Apostles, preach to every creature.


Heart. But you should consider Staplet. princ. doctr. li. 6. ca. 10.
that Christ giving that commandment to Peter, gave it with a difference
between the sheep and the lambs, as Commentar. in Luc. lib. 10.
S. Ambrose has noted well, (set me down, I pray, his own words in Latin:)
tertio Dominus interrogauit: and noniam agnos, vt primo, quodam lacte
pascendos; nec ouiculas, vt secundo; sed oues pascere iubetur, perfectiores vt
perfectior gubernaret. That is to say, When the Lord had asked Peter the third
time, Do thou love me? he is commanded now to feed, not the lambs, as at
the first time, who must be fed with certain milk; not the little sheep as
the second time; but to feed the sheep, that he (a man more perfect) might
govern the more perfect. So that the whole flock of Christ was committed to
Peter to be fed, as well the small as the great; both the lay men, who, as
lambs, are fed themselves, and feed not others; and the Priests and
Clergy, who, as sheep, do feed the lambs, but are fed of the shepherd.


Rainoldes. The lambs and the sheep do signify two kinds of Christians:
the one younger and tenderer, which needs to be taught the first principles of
religion, as it were Hebr. 5.12.
to be fed with milk: the other riper and elder, fit to learn the deeper
mysteries of faith, to be fed with strong meat. This S. Ambrose noted well in
the commandment that Christ gave to Peter. Though the difference, which he
makes between the second and the third, Ouiculas, et oues.
the little sheep and the sheep; was either an oversight in the Reading
perhaps (...) for (...)
Greek copy, or a fancy of some interpreter. Which I would not mention, but
that you bid me set down his own words in Latin, as though there were some
mystery in them, which yet your selves are wont to make no account of: unless
your Robert. Bellarm. Romans Controuer. 4. quaest. 3. de summo ^ont.
Roman reader has spied more in it, who says that the text ought to be
corrected, and read as Ambrose cited it. But your gloss, of the laymen to be
signified by lambs, and by the sheep the Priests and Clergy: does vary
from ye text, not of Christ only, but of Ambrose too. For whereas they speak
of the lambs, and the sheep, both which the flock consists of: you
interpret their words of the sheep, and the shepherds. And whereas all
Pastors are bound to feed both sheep and lambs: you make as though ye rest
must feed none but lambs, and all the sheep were Peter's. From dreaming
whereof S. Ambrose was so far, that De dignit. sacerdot. cap. 2. Eas cum illo
nos suscepimus omnes.
he says of the sheep which Christ commanded to be fed: Peter did not only
receive the charge of them, but himself and all Bishops received it with
Peter. Wherefore, you should consider, that in Christ's commission unto the
Apostles they are not considered as sheep, but as shepherds: and therefore
not themselves to be fed of any, but all to feed others. So, when they abode
together in Jerusalem: they sed the church in common (with, Act. 2.^2.
the doctrine of the Apostles) not Peter them, and they the rest. And when they
went thence into other countries: they went not as sheep with Peter their
shepherd, but as several shepherds to sheep of all nations.


Heart. Be it so: that Christ spoke (in his commission) to them, as to
shepherds. Yet were they also sheep of the flock of Christ. And therefore he
might well appoint a shepherd over them.


Rainoldes. And was not Peter also a sheep of Christ's flock? And must* not our
Savior appoint by this reason, a shepherd over him also? For, if all sheep
need it: why not S. Peter? If some need it not: why the Apostles? But, it is
true, that, as they were sheep, so needed they sometimes to be fed, the
best of them: and this did Christ provide for, though not with your policy;
not by setting one as Pastor over all, but by giving charge of every one to
other. For as S. Paul said to the Elders of Ephesus, Act. 20.2^.
Take heed unto your selves and to all the flock, charging them with care not
of their flock only, but of themselves too, all of all, and each of other: in
like sort the Apostles who had charge of all in that they were shepheardes,
were to be looked too, in that they were sheep, to be admonished, taught,
fed, not every one of Peter, but every one of other, yea even Peter also him
self, if need required. Hereof their practice is a proof. For Gal. 2.14.
when Peter went not with a right foot to the truth of the Gospel: S. Paul
reproved him openly before all men for it. But to reprove him was to feed him.
Therefore S. Paul did feed S. Peter.


Heart. Staplet. princ. doctr. l. 6. c. 14.
S. Paul reproved him, not by authority, but of courtesy: and Peter yielded to
it, not of duty, but of modesty. As now any Bishop may reprove the Pope: and
he will harken to it patiently, and mildly; and yet impair not his supremacy.


Rainoldes. I acknowledge a distinction of the Romain style: Sacrar. ceremon.
eccles. Romanae, l. 3. sect. 1. c. quod Romanus Pontifex nemini reuerentia^
facit.
which (in the book of Ceremonies of the church of Rome, in the chapter, that
the Pope does do reverence to no man) says, that notwithstanding the majesty
and solemnity, which he uses to highest states in entertaining of them: yet
Popes are accustomed (when they are not in their po^tificals) to Aliquantulum
caput inclinare.
bow their head a little as it were rendering reverence to Cardinals Maximis
principibus.
and to mighty Princes, when they come privately and do reverence unto him.
and hoc non ex officio, sed ex laudabili humanitate.
Marry this, not of duty: but of laudable courtesy. The Pope showed not you
this courtesy, M. Heart, when he admitted you to kiss his holiness foot: it
was not for his state to do it. Yet has he so bewitched your senses
therewith, that you (to render him not duty, but courtesy) forget both
courtesy, and duty, to Paul the Apostle, the chosen instrument of God, and
penneman of his holy spirit. For S. Paul mentions his reproof purposely,
to prove, that he was Peter's equal in authority: against the false Apostles,
who sought to discredit the doctrine which he taught, by deba^ing him and
setting others far above him. You say that he reproved Peter, of courtesy,
and not by authority. Whereby (mark it well) you say in effect, that he made a
foolish reason to prove a false conclusion. And, if he were inferior to Peter
in authority, as he was by your answer: what meant he to say that 2. Cor.
11.5.
he accounted himself (...).
nothing inferior to the very chief Apostles. You add that any Bishop may
so reprove the Pope. Your Thom. Aquin. in 4. Sent. distinct. 19. quaest. 2.
art. 2.
Thomas says, no. For he writes that this fact (of Paul reproving Peter)
exceeds the measure of brotherly correction which subjects owe unto their
prelates, because he did it Gal. ^.14.
before the multitude. Though otherwise him self (to uphold the Papacy) uses
Paulus fuit par Petro in exequutione autoritatis, no^ autoritate regiminis. in
epi. ad Galat. cap. 2. le^t. 3.
such shifts, as you do: and In secunda secundae quaest. 33. art. 4.
makes his account of Paul as the subject, and Peter as the prelate,
according to the 2. q. 7. c. Testes.
Canon law. But his own sentence may serve for an axe to behead your common
error. For either S. Paul in so reproving Peter did transgress his duty;
or he was his equal in authority, not his subject. But, to say the former, is
a blasphemous speech of Hieron. pro^^m. commentar. in epist. ad Gala^. and in
cap. 2.
Porphyrie. The latter therefore is true. And so your answer falls of
authority and courtesy.


Heart. I grant that Staplet. princ. doctr. l. 6. c. 14.
S. Paul was equal in authority to Peter, in some sort. Yet this is a
notable difference between them, and well worth the marking, that S. Paul was
the Apostle and teacher of the Gentiles: but Peter the Apostle both of Gentiles
and of Jews. Which (because we love not to speak without Doctors) you may
read in S. Ambrose, in his Commentaries on this place, Ambros. in comment.
epist. ad Galat.
Gal. 2.8.
He that wrought by Peter in the Apostleship of circumcision, wrought by me
also toward the Gentiles. He names Peter alone (says he) and compares him
unto himself, because he had received the primacie to build the Church; that
himself likewise is chosen to have the primacie of building the Churches of
the Gentiles. Yet so, that Peter preached to the Gentiles also. These are S.
Ambrose his words.


Rainoldes. Have you read these words your self in S. Ambrose: or do you take
them up on credit?


Heart. What if my self have read them?


Rainoldes. Then shall I think worse of you, then I have done. For I have
thought you to err of simplicity. But I smell somewhat else here.


Heart. In deed, I read them not my self, in S. Ambrose, but in D. Princip.
doct. lib. 6. cap. 14.
Stapleton: who cites them as I do.


Rainoldes. Then you may learn the precept of (...). (...).
a witty Poet; Be sober and distrustful: these are the joints of wisdom.
For this which you have taken of D. Stapletons credit, is clipped: fowly
clipped. If he should deal so with ye Princes coin: I know what judgment he
should have. The words of Ambrose are, Ita tamen vt and Petrus gentibus
praedicaret, si causa fuisset, and Paulus Iudaeis: yet so that Peter preached
to the Gentiles also, if it were needful, and Paul to the Jews. D. Stapleton
cites them, Ita tamen, vt and Pe^rus gentibus praedicaret. Haec ille. Yet so
that Peter preached to the Gentiles also. Thus says Ambrose. See you not, how
hansomely he has clipped-of the last words of Ambrose, [and Paulus Iudaeis,
and Paul to the Jews:] to prove, that Paul might not preach unto the Jews,
as Peter might unto the Gentiles? Yet this is D. Stapleton, whose Principior.
(...) dei doctrina^^^ demonstratio methodica: pe^ controu^rs. 7. in libris 12.
tradita.
Treatise of the Church some of our English Students and young seduced
gentlemen think to be a treasure of great truth and wisdom. But God will make
the falsehood and folly thereof evident to all men at his good time. For this
present point, that Paul was an Apostle and teacher of the Jews and the
Gentiles both, as well as Peter was, and therefore not inferior to him in this
respect: the Scripture is so clear, that no mist of Stapletons, though it were
as thick as the darkness of Egypt, can take away the light of it. The words
of Christ prove it, spoken (touching Paul) unto Ananias: Act. 9.15.
He is a chosen vessel to me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and
kings, and the children of Israel. The commission by Ananias sent unto Paul:
Act. 22.14.
The God of our Fathers has appointed thee, that thou should know his will,
and see that Just one, and hear the voice of his mouth. For thou shall be his
witness, unto all men, of the things which thou have seen and heard. Paul's
obedience to his calling, and performance of his duty: Act. 9. ver. 20.
He preached Christ in the Synagogues, ver. 2^.
he confounded the Jews, ver. 29.
he spoke and disputed with the Not (...) but (...), that is, Gentiles borne,
converted to the Iuish faith and circumcised: which are called proselytes. Act.
2.10. and. 13.43.
Graecians, (Jews by religion, although not by parentage:) to be short, Act.
13. ver. 2.
when he was sent by special commission of the holy Ghost, for the work
whereunto God had called him and Barnabas: ver. 5. and 14.
they preached the word of God in the Synagogues of the Jews through diverse
cities and countries: until that ver. 45.
when the Jews did stubbernely resist the truth which they preached, they said
boldly to them, It was necessary that the word of God should have been first
spoken unto you: but seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves
unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles. Wherefore as Act.
8.25. and 10 28.
Peter preached the Gospel both to Jews and Gentiles: so did also Paul. As
Act. 15.7.
God did choose Peter, that the Gentiles by his mouth should hear the word of
the Gospel: so did he choose Paul.


Heart. Why does Paul then call himself Romans 11.13. 1. Tim. 2.7. 2. Tim. 1.11.
the Apostle and teacher of the Gentiles: and that in sundry places?


Rainoldes. Because that when he and Peter perceived, that God did bless the
labors of the one of them amongst the Jews chiefly, of the other amongst the
Gentiles: they agreed together and Gal. 2.9.
gave the right hands of fellowship each to other, that Paul should preach
unto the Gentiles, and Peter to the Jews: not so, but that either (if occasion
served) might and did preach to either, as Comment. in epist. ad Gal. cap. 2.
Ambrose noted well, and Act 28.17.30.
it is written of Paul namely: but that they should specially teach, the one,
ye Jews; the other, the Gentiles, as Romans 1.13. 1. Pet. 1.1. and so forth the
rest.
their epistles show they did. Thus, if you regard that, which they did
chiefly: Peter was an Apostle and teacher of the Jews, Paul of the Gentiles.
If that which they might do, and did by occasion: they were the Apostles and
teachers, both of both, and so no difference between them.


Heart. We grant Staplet. princ. doctr. li. 6. ca. 14.
that there was no difference between them, in the office of the Apostleship:
for therein was Paul equal unto Peter.


Rainoldes. He that grants this, would see, if he had eyes, that he must
grant the other, which he has denied. For, if equal in the office of the
Apostleship: then equal in the charge of preaching to all nations. And if in
the charge of preaching to all nations; then both to Jews and Gentiles.


Heart. It is true: to both. But so, that S. Peter was chief Apostle to them
both, and the supreme head to rule as well S. Paul, as the rest of the
Apostles.


Rainoldes. I have proved that Peter had no such headship over them. You barely
say the contrary, and repeat it still. This is a fault in reasoning, condemned
of the Aristot. in Reprehens. Sophist.
Logicians by ye name of begging that which is in controversy. I pray use it
not: but either prove that you say, or hold your peace and cease to say it.


Heart. I will prove it Staplet. princ. doctr. li. 6. ca. 1^.
by the circumstances of the words of Christ Ioh. 21. ver. 15.16. and 17.
saying unto Peter, Do thou love me more then these? Feed my lambs. Do
thou love me? Feed my sheep. Do thou love me? Feed my sheep. Wherein,
sundry principal points are to be noted. First, he requires of him an open
profession and testimony of his love, to this intent that he may put him in
trust with his flock. Secondly, he requires not only that he love him, but
also that he love him more then the rest: that to him as loving him more then
ye rest, he may give power above the rest. Thirdly, he asks him thrice, if he
love him; and the former times with the word (...), the last with (...), which
notes fervent love. With the which word also Peter had answered him still.
Fourthly, he says unto him thrice also, feed. And, to pass over the sheep
and the lambs, whereof I spoke before; fifthly, the first charge of feeding the
lambs, and the last of the sheep are uttered with the Greek word (...), that
is, feed, the second of the sheep, has (...)* yt is, rule: to show that the
lambs, even laymen (as I said) are only to be fed; but the sheep, I
mean, Bishops and Pastors, are both to be fed and to be ruled of Peter.
Sixthly the word, to feed, has a great force, and signifies a power most
full and absolute: as the which implies all other actions of ecclesiastical
regiment. For they are all directed to ye food of souls. There are observed
more such notes to like effect: but either not so pithie and sound as these
are, or treated of already. Wherefore I content my self with these six.
Which if you lay together, and mark what may be said in several for each of
them: you have enough to prove a great worthiness of Peter, in any man's
judgment; in ours, a supremacy.


Rainoldes. That which is written Pro. 30.33.
in the Proverbs of Solomon, He that wringeth his nose causes blood to come
out: may be truly said of the proofs which you press out of these
circumstances. The most pithie of them, if any of them have pith, are they
which touch the matter: the question, of love required; the charge enjoined, of
feeding; and each of them repeated thrice. Which all in very truth, as Christ
did use them to Peter, were rather a stay of his weakness, then a mark of
his worthiness, much less a proof of his supremacy. For Peter had pretended
greater love to Christ, then had the rest of the Apostles. In so much that when
Christ had told them of their frailty, the night before his passion, Mat.
26.31.
All ye will be offended at me this night, for it is written, I will smite the
shepherd and the sheep shall be scattered: Peter answering said unto him,
though al should be offended at thee, yet will I never be offended. Whereto
when Christ replied, verily I say unto thee, this night before the cock crow,
thou will deny me thrice: Peter answered him again, though I should dye with
thee, yet will I not deny thee. This promise, as it was made by all the
Apostles, but chiefly by Peter: so was it broken by them all, but chiefly by
him. For they did all forsake Christ: Peter did not only forsake him, but
forswear him too. Wherefore when our Savior after his resurrection would
gather them together, to confirm them from their fear, and give them power to
preach the Gospel to all Nations: he, that in comforting them all (before his
passion) remembered Peter chiefly as needing it most; Luc. 2^.32.
but I have prayed for thee: did then (in sending for them to meet him in
Galile) remember Peter namely, by the voice of his Angel, saying to the women,
Marc. 16.7.
tell his disciples and Peter that he will go before you into Galile. Peter, a
disciple: yet named beside ye disciples: Author commentarior. Hieron. in Marc.
cap. 16. Gregor. in Euangelia ^omil. ^1.
as who might think him self not worthy of the name of a disciple, that had
denied his Master thrice. Now when they were come to him into Galile, and had
received common both comfort and commission to execute the charge whereto they
were chosen: Christ admonished Peter particularly of his duty, and moved him
(beside the rest) to do it faithfully; as he particularly before had betrayed
it, and had behaved him self most fearfully above the rest. To encourage him
therefore with assuring his conscience Cyrill in euang. Johan. l. 12. c. 64.
quia Petrus Christi ^lementia maioris pe^^^tiremissionem (...) iure ab eo m^ior
repetitur dilectio. Cui enim pl^s remit^icur. plu^ ama^e debet: vt ipse dicit
^li^i, Luc. ^.
of the forgiveness of his sin, and strengthen him to constancy, that he
offend no more s^: Christ demands of him whether he love him; and thereupon
charge him, to feed his lambs and sheep. In demanding of him, do thou
love me more then these: first, he touches his fault, who had professed more
then these, but had performed less then these. Then he shows that it is
pardoned. For Luc. 7.47.
he who loves more, to him more is forgiven: his greater love is a token of
it. In charging him to feed his lambs and his sheep: he sharpneth his care,
that now he be faithful and firm in following Christ, though he shall come to
danger, yea to death thereby. Both which, August. in Iohann. tract. 123, and de
verb* Domin. secund. Iohann. Sermon. 49. Ambros. comment. in Luc. l. 10.
the demand and charge are thrice repeated: the demand, that Peter by his
threefold answer may counteruaile his threefold denial of Christ: the charge,
because that Eccles. 12.11.
nails the oftener they are strooken, the deeper they do pearce. Philip. 3.1.
To write the same to Christians, it greeueth not our Apostle: it is a safe
thing for us. And although the truth of this exposition be very apparent by
conference of Scriptures: yet, that you may take it with the better appetite,
who love not to eat meat without this sauce, you may know that I find it
(for the chiefest points which touch the matter nearest) in Cyril, Austin,
Ambrose, and other ancient Fathers. Wherefore, your pithiest notes out of the
circumstances of the text, have color of some proof for Peter's infirmity,
but naught for his Supremacy. As for the other three, which you pick out of
the words (...), and to feed: they have no pith at all, they are as bones
without marrow. If this be the fruit of The narration of the English Seminar.
in Rome.
the study of the toongs renewed in your Seminaries, that by show thereof you
may out face the Protestants, who by help thereof have rid your filth out of
the church: then your tongues will prove as good as the miracles, which 2. Tim.
3.8. Exodus 7.11, 13.22.
Iannes wrought, and Iambres, to harden Pharaos heart, by doing like as Moses
did. You cast us in the teeth with a Campians challenge in the sixth article.
Bristowes reply to Fulk. chap. 10. Them. 41.
kingdom of Grammarians: but you would raise a Popedom of the^. And De laud.
^tult^^
as Erasmus says, that Schoolmen, speaking barbarously, said, it was not
meet for the majesty of divinity that it should be bound to keep the laws
of Grammarians: so the Popedom of Grammarians dealing too too Pope-like in
expounding of words, (as Fuit hic nimis um Papaliter dispensatum. 2. q. 5. c.
Me^n^m. In glossa. Francis. victoria relect. 4. De potest. Papae and concilii.
Albert. Krantz. Saxon. lib. 5. cap. 8.
Popes do full often in dispensing with things) will not have them bound to the
Grammatical sense wherein their authors use them. But if we may obtain, that
justice be ministered according to the civil laws of our kingdom: then shall
the poor words (which your Popedom forces to speak for the Papacye that
which they never meant) be rescued from that injury. For, the Scripture
shows that, (...) signyfyeth as fervent love as (...) in deed the very
same, chyefe^y in S. John: who declaring the perfect and entire love, of (...)
Ioh. 5.20. (...). Ioh. 13.36 and 10.7.
God toward Christ, of (...). Ioh. 20.2. (...) Ioh. 19.26. and ^1, ^2.
Christ toward him; one where expresses it by (...) and other where by (...)
yea by (...) more often then by (...). So that (if the words had any difference
in sense,) it would be very likely, that (...) is rather ye more significant
of the two: since it is used also Ioh. 13. and 14. and 15. and through out all
the new Testament.
commonly to note the love which the Lord does bear toward us and we should
bear one to an other: and that in place of greatest force, as when he says,
Ioh. 15.12.
This is my commandment that ye (...).
love one an other, as I have (...).
loved you: (...).
greater love then this has no man, when a man bestows his life for his
friends. Whereas S. John therefore uttered Christ's demand by the one word,
and Peter's answer by the other: it seems that he used the words
indifferently, as having both ye same meaning. Which is proved also by the
consent and judgment of the Syriake translation, that has the (...)
same word for them both. Howbeit if the words have a difference of sense: it
agrees better with the modesty of Peter to have said less, then more, of
his love; chiefly, since he had fallen by saying too much of it, and had by
trial felt his frailty. But if he did answer, as you imagine him; Do thou
love me Peter? Lord, I love thee fervently: yet this fervent love infers no
supremacy over the rest of the Apostles. For, what he reports of his own
love, the same does Christ witness of theirs, or rather more, if we would
prick it up as you do; even Ioh. 16.27.
that his Father loves them, because that they loved him. In both the which
branches (...).
that same word is used, which (by your fancy) does signify fervent love,
when it may serve the Popes vantage.


Heart. We do not rely so much on that word, as on the other two, (...), and
(...), but chiefly on ye word (...). For although to feed (which is meant by
(...)) does import much: yet to feed and rule (which (...) signifies) has a
greater force: as those places show where that word is used, (...). Psalm. 2.9.
Reave. 2.27.
Thou shall rule them with a rod of iron, and, (...). Matt. 2.6. Mich. 5.2.
he shall rule my people Israel. Wherefore Christ committed a sovereign power
to Peter in that Ioh. 21. ver. 16.
he said (...): not only to feed but to rule and govern too.


Rainoldes. Then it was not Peter's duty to rule ye lambs but the sheep
only. For Christ does say (...), speaking of the sheep: and ver. 15.
of the lambs, (...).


Heart. So I said. Yet that word which he uses of the lambs he uses ver. 17.
^^b. 6. cap. 10.
of the sheep also. Whereby this is showed (as I touched briefly out of o D.
Stapleton) that lambs must be only meated and fed of Peter (through the
common food of doctrine to be looked for from Ab hoc supremo patre familias.
him, as supreme father of the household, and from his See,) and they must be
ruled of their next and proper Pastors whom immediately they are under: but
sheep, that is to say, the greater and perfiter, Bishops themselves and
Pastors, are committed to him not only to be fed with the common doctrine,
but also to be ruled Ab illo tanquam supreme pastorum pastore.
of him more immediately as of the supreme Pastor of Pastors.


Rainoldes. So your Doctor notes (I grant,) and you touched it. But you were
best recall it, or else this fine fancy of that Greek word, as it is far
fetched, so will be dear bought. For it must cost the Pope half of his
supremacy.


Heart. Why do you say so?


Rainoldes. Why? Are not Princes comprised in the name of lambs, by your
judgment: as Bishops, and Pastors, in the name of sheep?


Heart. They are: and what then?


Rainoldes. The Pope then has nothing to do with the ruling and governing of
Princes; much less with deposing them. For Peter had commission (you say) to
feed only (and not to rule) the lambs.


Heart. But they must be ruled of their next Pastors, and so, by consequent, of
the Pope: because their Pastors must be ruled of him, as Pastor of Pastors.


Rainoldes. Nay: but the Pastors are not to be ruled by the Pope neither, if
this fancy hold. For in your Latin authentical translation Ioh. 21.16. Pasce
agnos, for (...).
ye clawse which does answer to ye Greek word has not sheep but lambs.
Whereupon The Rhemish Testament on that place in the margent.
your Rhemists also note ye same as spoken of lambs, (...), feed and rule. So
that, howsoever he lay hold on others by yt Greek word compared with your
Latin text: yet his rule and government of Bishops and Pastors is shaken of
thereby. And this is as much as half of his supremacy: nay all, by a consequent.
For his claim lies, first, over Bishops: and then, by means of Bishops, over
the whole church. Thus while you devise by quirkes of your own to underprop ye
Pope, you lay him on the ground: and do him more harm by crasing of ye word
(...), then good by fortifying of (...). For although it signify to feed, in
such sort, as shepherds do their sheep, and so consequently to rule them, and
guide them, in all respects as shepherds do, for the preserving of them: yet
that charge of ruling belonged not to Peter alone peculiarly, but was and is
common unto all shepherds. Our English tongue answers not to the felicity of
the greek and latin in making evident proof hereof. For in the greek words
(...), and (...), and in the Latin pastor and pasco, the matter would be
plainer. But yet in our English, a shepherd, and, to feed in that sort with
ruling, are Coniugata.
yoked so together by lincke (as I may term it) of reason and sense, though it
appear not in lincke and likeness of words: that as many as are called to the
function of (...).
shepherds and Pastors of the church, they all are bound by duty (...)
to feed and rule so. The proof whereof we have in Peter and Paul: who
moving the Pastors (whom they call Elders) to attend their charge, 1. Pet. 5.1.
the one beseeches them to (...).
feed the flock of God which depends on them: Act. 20.28.
the other tells them, that the holy Ghost has made them overseers (...).
to feed the church of God; both using the same word (...) as betokening the
common charge of shepherds. Reu. 2.27.
Yea Christ him self, speaking to the Angel, yt is, ye shepherd of ye church
of Thyatira, does promise that he who overcomes and keeps his works unto
the end, shall have power given unto him over nations, and (...).
he shall rule them with a rod of iron. So that even there, where you note
that word imports greatest power of beating down the wicked: Christ applies
it to all his faithful servants and not to Peter only. Wherefore, if it were
so that he had meant more by saying (...) the^ by (...), in his charge to
Peter: yet he meant no more then that which belongs to every shepherds
charge for the sheep which God ordeineth him to feed. But, in truth, if your
itche of wresting holy scriptures to private fancies were healed; you would
rather think that S. John did utter one sense with sundry words, as in the
Lords demand of Peter, Do thou (...), and (...).
love me? so in his commandment to Peter (...) and (...).
Feed my sheep. For the Syriake translation, which your self alleged, to
prove, that the Greek words (...) and (...), though different in sound yet
are one in sense, because our Savior spoke in the Syriake tongue, and in the
Syriake both are (...) expresses here also ye two sundry Greek words by one
(...) as if that our Savior had used the same word, and meant the same thing
in both. Which interpretation should be of greater credit with you in this
point then it was in that, because your authentical Latin translation which
there dissented from it, agrees with it here, expressing likewise both by
pasce. Unless you will say that your authentical Latin does not express
fully the meaning of the Greek.


Heart. A translation cannot express the force always of words in the
original: as in Prolog. in Ecclesiastic. Jesus filij Sirach.
Ecclesiasticus it is observed of the Hebrew.


Rainoldes. You say true. How much the more were they to blame Council. Trident.
Session. 4.
who decreed that a translation should be accounted as authentical In publicis
lectionibus, disputationibus, praedicationibus, and expositionibus.
in all Diuinitie-exercises, and no man under any pretense to reject it. But if
there had been such force and importance in the Greek (...): your Latin
translator could have expressed it easily. For Act. 20 28.
otherwhere he does translate it Regere ecclesiam Dei*
to rule: and that, being spoken of meaner Pastors then Peter, even of the
Bishops of Ephesus. Which bewrays further the seely state of your proof
grounded on ye word. For, if Peter were ordained supreme head because he was
willed to rule the After the Greek text, (...).
sheep or After the latin translat. agnos.
lambs: what headship may the Bishops of Ephesus claim, who were made
overseers to rule the church of God, that is both lambs and sheep? But your
last proof upon the word Staplet. li. 6. c. 10. Obserua vim verbi pasce, quo
plenissima potestas designatur.
to feed which signifies (you say) a power most full and absolute, is most
out of square: and neither agrees with your selves, nor with truth and reason.
For you said that lambs are only fed of Peter: sheep, both fed and
ruled. Which is fond, if to rule be no more then to feed: fonder, if to feed
imply a power most full and absolute. Beside that, to feed, is to nourish
Christians with Hebr. 5.12. 1. Cor. 3.2.
milk or strong meat according to their state, as they are either lambs or
sheep. Wherefore if that import the fullness of power which no man has but
one, to weete, the supreme head: how great is your cruelty to the church of
Christ, who leave but one Pastor throughout all the earth to preach the word of
God unto it? Or if you leave more, and grant that several Churches shall have
their several Pastors after the ordinance of God: how great is your folly who
granting us so many Pastors and feeders, yet say, that one alone has the
charge to feed, and that imports a supremacy? For if every Pastor have
charge to feed his flock; and to feed implies a fullness of power peculiar
to the supreme head: then by your reason every Pastor in his church, every
feeder in his flock, is a supreme head, no less then Peter was amongst the
Apostles. Nay, Peter was not so, by your reason, neither. For, if to feed do
signify a power most absolute and full, as Staplet lib. 6. cap. 10.
you say it does, and that power was given to all the Apostles, Stap^et. lib.
6. cap. 7.
as you confess too: it follows by your own confession and saying that all
the Apostles had that charge, to feed. If all they had that charge: to feed,
makes nothing for Peter's Supremacy. Wherefore this, and other of the like
knottes, which Stapleton has sought and ^ound out in bulrushes: they did not
grow in them, by the workmanship of the Creator; man has made them, and God
will loose them.


Heart. This which you have said might seem to be some what toward the
loosing of them: The second Division.
if the scripture gave not very clear evidence for proof of his Supremacy as
well elsewhere as here. For Christ said to Peter, Luc. 22.31.
Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has desired you, to winow you, as wheat. But I
have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. And thou being converted,
strengthen thy brethren.


Rainoldes. Will you be drawing still of blood? for what does either Christ's
prayer for Peter, or the charge given him to strengthen his brethren, say more
for his supremacy: then the question, do thou love me? or, the charge, feed
my sheep? unless you press violently the words beyond their sense, as your
Schoole-diuines in their captious syllogismes (or rather sophismes) use to do.


Heart. Such dregs (as our Melchior Canus locor. Theologicor. lib. 8. cap. 1.
Canus terms them) of sophismes, brought into the School by men who were
unworthily named Schoole-diuines, are reproved by us as well as by you. But the
words of Christ do speak enough for Peter's prerogative without violence. For
Staplet. princ. doctr. lib. 6. cap. 8.
they command him to strengthen his brethren. And his brethen were the rest of
the Apostles. They command him therefore to strengthen the Apostles. If to
strengthen the Apostles: then must he be their supreme head. Wherefore the
words of Christ prove the supremacy of Peter.


Rainoldes. And think you that Christ meant the rest of the Apostles, when he
said, thy brethren?


Heart. Whom should he mean, if not them?


Rainoldes. All the faithful, as I think. For they have all one 1. Pet. 1.17.
Father, the same that Peter has; and they are 1. Pet. 3.7.
fellow heirs of the grace of life with Peter; and Peter himself strengthening
them, 2. Pet. 1.10.
calls them brethren. So that, in Peter's judgment, Christ seems to have
meant by his brethren, all the faithful. Pardon me, if I be rather of his
mind therein, then of yours.


Heart. As who say we denied that all the faithful are meant by his brethren:
Staplet. lib. 6. cap. 8.
we teach the same also. Yet that is true, that I said. For (I trust) the
Apostles are in ye number of the faithful.


Rainoldes. They are so. But then your reason of brethren has no more force,
then had the other of sheep. Nay it has less. For what is (...).
to strengthen?


Heart. To strengthen is to stay them up who do stand. For the function of
preaching, Romans 10.14.
which through the grace of God ingendreth faith in men, has two special
parts, to teach, and to strengthen: or, as S. Paul speaks, 1. Cor. 3.6.
to plant and to water. To teach and to plant, is to convert men unto the faith
of Christ, and to ingraffe them into him. To strengthen and to water is to
uphold them which are already faithful, that they may persevere in it.


Rainoldes. Then is the charge lesser, to strenghthen the brethren, then to
feed the sheep. For to feed, is as much, as to preach the word of God. And,
to preach, has two duties: to raise up them that are fallen, to strengthen
them that do stand. Wherefore if the supremacy were not given Peter by the
charge, to feed the sheep: much less can it be given by a part of that
charge, to strengthen the brethren. For as Peter ought that duty to his
brethren: so did his brethren to him, and Gal. 2.14.
Paul performed it; so did the Apostles to their brethren, and Act. 15.41.
Romans 1.11. 1. Pet. 5.12. Jude. 3. etc.
they paid it; so do 1 Thessalonians. 5.1^.
all the faithful, every one to his brethren (according to that measure of
grace, which God has given them) Romans 12.5. 1. Cor. 12.25.
as being all members of the same body, and therefore each to help other. Our
Polydor. Virgil hist. Angl. libr. 8.
English Chronicles have a story of king Edward the Confessor, and Godwin Earl
of Kent: that, when they were sitting at table together, Harald the kings
cup bearer, the Earls son, did stumble so with one foot, that he was down
almost, but recovering him self with ye other foot, he neither fell, nor shed
the drink. Whereat when the Earl smiled, and said, now one brother helped an
other: the king calling to mind his brother Alfreds death, whom the Earl had
slain, beheld him with a displeased countenance, and said, So might my brother
also have helped me, if thou had not been. In the which story, the
cup bearer who stumbled, does show that one foot may strengthen an other, and
stay them both that they fall not: the Earl, who observed therein a brothers
duty, does show, that the younger may strengthen the elder, or the elder the
yoongger: the king, who remembered his own estate by it, does show that the
inferior may strengthen the superior, yea the member the head. By the
proportion of which points a man of reason may see, that an equal in all
respects may strengthen an equal: that, amongst vnequalles, the left may
strengthen the right, and the right the left: yea, that an arm, that a foot
may strengthen the head, and save it perhaps from taking such a fall, as would
crush it in pieces. Wherefore the charge of Peter, to strengthen his brethren,
is no sufficient proof that he was made head of the meanest amongst the
faithful: much less of the Pastors whom 1. Pet. 5.1.
he calls his fellow-elders; and least of al of the Apostles, Mat. 28.19.
whose commission was the same with his to all nations.


Heart. It is true that others may strengthen their brethren, as members of the
same body: but Christ commands Peter to do it as their head. Which may be
gathered Staplet. lib. 6. cap. 8.
by the occasion, whereon the words were spoken. For, when there arose a
strife among the Apostles which of them should seem to be the greatest:
Christ said unto them, Luc. 22.25.
The kingesof the Gentiles do reign over them; but you not so, and so forth:
teaching them, that Omnem dominandi appetitum ac libidinem.
all desire and lust of reigning ought to be far from his ministers. Ne
tamen omnem dominandi potestate^ pa^iter prohibuisse aut abstulisse videretur.
Yet least he should seem thereby to have forbidden withal, or taken away all
power of reigning from them: he added those words spoken to Peter only;
plainly declaring that he should be the greatest, which was the matter where
about they striued.


Rainoldes. Cato said Cic. de divination. lib. 2.
that he marueiled, that a Sooth-sayer did not laugh when he saw a Sooth-sayer.
Me thinks, the professors of your divinity should laugh, when they see one an
other. For, they prove the points of their Popish doctrine by as strong
reasons: as the Sooth sayers used to prove their diuinations by the liver, and
the heart, and other entralles of beasts. But children are persuaded, when they
hear a ring of belles that the belles speak whatsoever they have fansied, at
least, like unto it. The Lord, when the Apostles did strive about dominion and
superiority, told them, that none of them should be amongst the rest, as
kings amongst the Gentiles: yet least he should seem withal to have
forbidden all dominion amongst them, he appointed Peter to be their supreme
head. Thus says the Soothsayer. But what says the Scripture? In effect the
clean contrary. For it shows, that Christ Luc. 22. ver. 2^.
having reproved them for striving who should be the greatest, and thirsting to
be Lords after the manner of earthly kings: ver. ^6.
taught them, that an humbling of them selves to their brethren, and a desire
to do good by serving each of other, must be the preeminence that they should
seek, as ver. 27.
he had done. And as ver. 28.
they had been partakers of his troubles, so ver. 29.
had he appointed to them a kingdom also: ver. 30.
to make them partakers of that bliss and glory, in which he should reign him
self, as king of kings, and they (as counselors about him) sitting on Mat.
19.28.
twelve thrones to judge the twelve tribes of Israel. Now the former part of
this speech of Christ debarreth the Apostles all from that supremacy (of
Sanctissimus Dominus noster Papa.
our most holy Lord the Pope) which you would put on Peter. The later has
greater color for his dream, who says, that Christ removed Omnem dominandi
appetitum ac libidinem.
all lust of reigning ftom his ministers, and Non tamen omnem dominandi
potestatem.
not all power of reigning; because it mentions a kingdom yt Christ
appointed for them. But this imports rather an equality of Peter with the
rest of the Apostles: since the state is common, and thrones are given to the^
al. Or if there might be even so notwithstanding a superiority, as at a
council table there must needs be, in sitting one before an other: yet is
that nothing unto that supremacy which you claim for Peter. For, to serve
your purpose, Christ should have said, that he would establish them all in
seats of honor: but Peter in a throne like 1. King. 10.18.
the throne of Solomon: and he should be their Pope, and they should be his
Cardinals As the Pope tells his Cardinals (newly created) aduertising them of
their duty. Sacrar. ceremo^. sanct. Romans eccles. lib. 1. sect. 8.
to Success ores Apostolorum circa thronum sedebitis.
sit about the throne, and be both Consiliarii nostri and con ^ucices orbis
^^^rarum.
Counselors to him, and judges with him of all the earth.


Heart. It is a folly (I see) for me to reason with you, if you be resolved to
cast of so weighty reasons, as trifles.


Rainoldes. A folly indeed: if you go about to make me esteem of mole-hils,
as mountains.


Heart. I go not about it: but this, that the reasons which are in truth as
mountains, you will esteem them so.


Rainoldes. Then you must prove them so. But if your mountains travel, and be
delivered of a mouse: you may not look that I should admire it as a Giant.


Heart. Well. Let us leave the occasion of Christ's words: and weigh the words
in themselves. Staplet. p^inc. doct^. li. 6. cap. 8.
For there are two things which Christ does therein. First, in the common
danger of all, he strengthens Peter only: Satan has desired you, to winow
you as wheat: but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. Then, least
that strengthening should seem to have been made for Peter's own sake alone, or
in respect of his personal faith, he adds, And thou being converted
strengthen thy brethen: showing that he is strengthened in the faith, to the end
he might strengthen the faith of all others, as who should be afterward the
Pastor of them all.


Rainoldes. It were a needless labor for me to spend words in these your two
points, if you had marked that which has been said already. For I showed
that the former argues his weakness; the later opens his duty; but
neither proves any preeminence at all, save a preeminence in frailty. The
truth is, that Christ in those words does three things: whereof one is a
byle, and therefore you touch it not. For in the danger of them all, but
greatest danger of Peter, he puts him in mind Satan has desired to winow
you, as wheat.
first of his fall, to humble him; I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail
not.
then of his rising, to comfort him; And thou being converted, strengthen thy
brethren.
last, of his duty to quicken him unto it. His fall; to cool the heat of
Theophylact. in Luc. 23.
pride and Chrysostom in Matthew. hom. 83.
vain glory, (may I so term it with the Fathers?) wherein he presumed,
Matthew. 26.33.
more then the rest did, of his faith and constancy. His rising; that he should
not despair when he had fallen. For though he dealt unfaithfully, denying
Christ thrice: yet his faith should not fail, because Ioh. 11.42.
he (whom God does always hear) had prayed for him. His duty; that being
raised up again he should strengthen his brethren: as having learned by
experience both to have compassion of the infirmity of men and to preach the
goodness and mercy of God. The last point, of his duty, was common to him (as
I have showed) with the Apostles: and therefore proves no preeminence of
supreme headship. The first, of his fall, proves a kind of preeminence; but
in the denying of Christ above others: which Popes have best right to, but they
do not claim it. The other, of his rising, insueth and depends on that of
his fall: wherein, since he specially would sin more then the rest, and so his
danger be more special, and therefore need more special succor; Christ said
to him in special, But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. For
Christ prayed the same for all his Apostles in sense, though not in word, by
that solemn Ioh. 17. ve^. 11.
prayer made unto his father, (...). 6.
I have declared thy name unto them, ver. 11.
holy father, keep them in thy name and (...).
sanctify them with thy truth. Neither did he pray this for them only, but
for (...).
all the faithful which should believe in him through their word. Wherefore, as
a good father has care of all his children, but if he see some one distressed
above ye rest, Luc. 15.22.31.
will cheer him up beside the rest; and a good Physician has care of all ye
body, but applies plasters to ye part affected: so Christ, to help Peter,
who was to be distressed and diseased most, encouraged him with this comfort,
yt his faith should not fail; and laid that salve of Gods assured favor on
the sore of distrust that might afflict his mind. Now, this care and wisdom
of a father and a Physician does show (for the child and part whereto they
tender it) not, that they be in greater honor then the rest, but that they
stand in greater need. The words of Christ therefore spoken unto Peter, I
have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: do prove that he stood in
greater danger then the rest, not that he was in greater dignity. And these
are ye words, of which D. Princip. doct^. lib. 6. cap. 8.
Stapleton does insole^tly vaunt, yt they are so singular for Peter's supremacy:
yt Calvin (when he had diligently weighed all other places and reasons that are
wont to be brought for it, and refuted them as he could) made no mention at all
of this place and these words Vt qui probe sciret nullo cauilationis suco tam
manifesta ve^ba (...) potuisse.
because he knew well that it was impossible to shift of words so manifest with
any color of a cavil. Whereas it is most likely, that Calvin, a wise and
faithful servant of the Lord, did therefore pass them over in handling your
supremacy, because he knew they made so little for your purpose, that if he
should have brought them in amongst your reasons, he might seem to have sought
a shadow wherewith to fight. For, you abuse them so notoriously, that if, I say
not Calvin, but any of the meanest children of the Prophets, whom God has
scarcely given one portion of his spirit to, would deal with you for it: we
have as just cause to charge you with this fact, as 2. Sam. 13. (...).
Tamar Sam. 13. ver. 14.
had to charge her brother Ammon with his vilany.


Heart. Good Lord, what mean you so to say?


Rainoldes. Nay, I may rather ask: good Lord, what mean you so to do? For,
as Amnon, enamoured of his sisters beauty, ensnaring her by fraud, did force
her to his lust, and after ver. 15.
cast her out; whereupon she said, ver. 16.
this evil was greater then the other, which he had done unto her: so the Pope
enflamed with love of the church, entrapping her with guile and using violence
unto her, does cast her out of doors by giving this as proper, first to Peter,
then to him self, that Christ prayed for him, that his faith should not fail.
Wherein I have this reason to say, that he does greater evil unto the church,
then was the other which he did: because in the other she had this comfort
left, that the transgression was rather his, who did, then hers, who suffered
force: in this he takes from her all comfort of her misery, and makes her
ashamed to cast her eyes on God or man. For what is the comfort of the Church
of Christ, the faithful, and elect, but that Ioh. 17.11.
he has prayed for us that we fail not, that the Matt. 16.18.
gates of hell shall not prevail against us; that our Hebr. 6.18.
hope might be an ancre of strong consolation, that Romans 8.16.
we do believe and are assured by Gods spirit we are the heirs of life
eternal? of the which comfort that incestuous Amnon seeks to bereave us and
cast us out of the doors, when he says that Christ prayed for Peter only,
and after Peter for the Pope. But of the Pope Chap 7. Division 2.
in due place. Now, we speak of Peter.


Heart. Why? Dare you deny that Christ spoke to Peter, and to Peter only, when
he said, Luc. 22, 31.
Simon, I have prayed for thee that thy faith should not fail? Does not the
very text of the Gospel show it?


Rainoldes. What? Dare you deny that Christ spoke to the man sick of the
palsy, and to him only, when he said, Matt. 9.2.
Son, be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee? Does not the very
text of the Gospel show it? But is this a proof that other Christians have
not their sins forgiven too? And do we all believe in vain when we believe
forgiveness of sins? Or may you not affirm it with as good reason, as you
affirm the other of Peter, not to fail in faith? Are you the masters of
Israel Allens Apology of the English Seminaries. Bristow in his Motives,
Demandes, and Reply.
who make so great boast of skill in all Divinity: and do you not know that
Pastors and Preachers (of whom Christ was (...). 1 Pet. 5.4.
the chiefest) apply the general doctrines of the law and Gospel to them, in
particular, who need to be relieved thereby? If I should say to some covetous
man, who grindeth the faces of the poor, and builds up his house with blood,
or joins benefice to benefice, and takes charge of a flock which he feeds
not; Hebr. 13.5.
Let thy conversation be without covetousness, for he has said, I will not
fail thee nor forsake thee: do I take this comfort of the providence of God
from every other Christian, because I assure it to one in particular? Or did
the Apostle ouershoote himself, in saying that to all the faithful which God
said to Joshua: Ios. 1.5.
I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee? You have your choice, take which you
list: either acquit us, or condemn him. For if Christ meant to assure the
faith of none but of Peter, because he said to him, I have prayed for thee that
thy faith should not fail: then did God promise his gracious assistance to
none but to Joshua, when he said to him, I will not leave thee nor forsake
thee: and Hebr. 13.5.
the Apostle erred in saying it to all Christians. If the Apostle said that to
all Christians by the spirit of truth: then is it true in like sort, that it
may be said to any child of God, whom Satan has desired to sift and shake (as
he did Peter,) and made him to deny Christ; Be of good comfort, for he has
said, I have prayed for thee that thy faith should not fail. And if it may be
said to any child of God: then was it verified in all the Apostles, Ioh. 17.12.
except the child of perdition. Wherefore Christ, by saying of those words to
P^ter, gave him no Supremacy over the Apostles.


Heart. I cannot deny, but that, in some respect, it may be truly said to all
the children of God, if they fall as Peter did. Yet (I know not how) me
thinks, I cannot be persuaded, but that it makes somewhat for Peter's
supremacy.


Rainoldes. No marvel. For the noise of it has been so great and loud about
your ears, in the Seminary at Rhemes and other Popish schools beyond seas:
that it has made you dull of hearing, and you cannot perceive 1. King. 19.12.
the still and soft voice of the truth. As Cic. in ^omnio Scipion.
we read of them who dwell about the fall of the river Nilus, where it tumbleth
down from the hye mountains, that they are made deaf by the greatness of the
sound and noise of the waters. But tell me I pray: do you think yt Christ
made Peter supreme head by saying unto him, I have prayed for thee, or,
strengthen thy brethren?


Heart. What a question is that? Why should I mention it, unless it proved his
supremacy?


Rainoldes. It is a question. For if Christ made him supreme head by those
words: then the supreme head denied Christ, and that often, and that with an
oath too. Whereof a very dangerous conclusion would follow, that the Pope may
err, yea (that is more) deny Christ.


Heart. I say not that Christ made him supreme head at that present time: but
prepared him (as it were) to make him supreme head after. As D. Princip.
doctrinal. l. 6. c. 8.
Stapleton writes that Christ by those words established Peter's faith,
Antequam hanc tantam potestatem illi de facto conferret.
before that he bestowed the power of supreme head-ship upon him in deed. For
he gave that power after his resurrection, when he said to him, Feed my
lambs: feed my sheep. But those words (of strengthening) he spoke before his
death, and did but Futuram insinuauerat. Stapl^t. l. 6. c. 9.
insinuate therein and give an inkling, that he would make him supreme head.


Rainoldes. You have said. And your Doctor has showed, herein, a point of
greater wit then many of his fellows. But as of greater wit, so of greater
spite, in adding thereunto (that, which now I touched) Lib. 6. cap. 8.
that Calvin made no mention at all of those words, because he knew well that
(they are so singular for Peter's supremacy) they could not possibly be
avoided. For Institut. religion. Christ. lib. 4. cap. 7. sect. 27. and 28.
Calvin does mention them in treating of the point whether the Pope may err.
And your Doctor witnesses him self that directly they concern that point:
the supremacy, but by an inkling. The strength thereof then, as touching the
supremacy, does rest upon that, whereof they give inkling it should be done
after: that is, upon the charge of feeding lambs and sheep. But it is proved
that Christ gave no more to Peter, in that, then to the rest of the Apostles.
It is proved therefore, that ye words of Christ [strengthen thy brethren] do
raise no higher throne for Peter then for them. Much less, if the prayer that
Christ made for Peter were common unto him with all faithful Christians, and
not with the Apostles only. Wherefore this reason, which is so strong in your
eyes, must be strengthened by his brethren, if he have any. For sure he is a
great deal too weak to strengthen them.


Heart. Yes: he has brethren. And more peradventure, then you would be glad to
see in the field: as lusty as you are, and think you can dispatch them all.


Rainoldes. Not I: save with the aides of Elisaeus only: 2. King. 6.16.
they that be with us, are mo, then they that be with them. But let us see,
what are they?


The fourth Chapter. The practice of the Supremacy (which Peter is entitled
to) imag^^^^ to be proved, 1 by the election of Matthias to the Apostleship: 2
(...) by the presidentship of the Council held at Jerusalem: 3 and by Paul's
journey taken to see Peter, and his abode with him. Wherein, as in other of the
acts of the Apostles, the equality of them all not the supremacy of one, is
showed.
HEART. Examples of the practice of Peter's supreme-headship in the government of
the Church. The first Division.
Whereof we have records in the holy scriptures: even in the Acts of the
Apostles, which are a pattern of Church-gouernment.


Rainoldes. The reasons in deed, which you gather thence, are brethren to the
former. But they are no stronger, then the former were. If you bring them forth
into the field: you shall perceive it.


Heart. There are many places, but specially, two: by which Peter's soueraintie
over the Apostles is manifestly showed. For in Act. 1.15.
the one, he proposes an election to be made of a new Apostle into the room
of Judas. In Act. 15.7.
the other, he is President of the Council of the Apostles, which was held at
Jerusalem: he speaks first, and concludes in it. Out of both the which I
gather this reason. S. Peter did practice the power and authority of a supreme
head over the Apostles. Therefore he was their supreme head.


Rainoldes. Now are you come to that, which I had an eye too, when I desired
you (in Chap. 1. Diuis. 2.
the beginning of our conference) to tell me what power you gave unto the Pope
by calling him supreme head. For, in this grass there lurketh a snake. Which
that you may see, and (if it be the gracious will of God) avoid, least that
you perish through his venoom: I will ask you a question. When you say,
Staplet. prin. doctr. lib. 6. in praefat.
the Pope is Primarium and supremum ecclesiastici iudicii caput.
chief and supreme head of ecclesiastical judgment, and President of
Councels: do you mean that the Pope in assemblies of Bishops, is, as the
Speaker (with us) in the Parliament, to propose matters to them, and ask their
judgments, and gather their voices, that things may be orderly handled and
enacted by common consent?


Heart. As the Speaker? No. But as the Prince rather.


Rainoldes. Yea, I say to you, and more then the Prince. For as things in
Parliament cannot be enacted without the Princes consent: so neither can the
Prince make acts without consent of the Lords and Commons. And when they are
made by consent of them all* they cannot be repealed by the Prince alone,
without the like consent by which they were made. But with the Pope it is not
so. For such is the power of his Princely prerogative, that not only Councels
may not make decrees for the Church-gouernment without his consent: but he may
also make decrees without them, as good as they with him. Yea, that he may add
too, and take from, and alter what he shall think good in the decrees of
Councels* and set them out for theirs, Johannes Andreas in principio Clementina
^um, de constitut. council. Vi^^^ens.
as Pope Clemens played with the Council of Vienna. Yea, that being made with
their consent and his both: As it is showed by the whole course ofthe Canon
law: specially the Decretals, as they are called.
he may break them when he will, and repeal them, if he list, for no law
does hold him. Now, since that the power which you give the Pope by the name of
supreme head, you give it Peter too, from whom you fetch the Popes conueiance;
and Peter in the assemblies of the Apostles, was but as the Speaker, and
therefore not as the Prince, and therefore not as more then the Prince in our
Parliament: hereof I conclude, that Peter was not the supreme head of the
Apostles. And so have you the third point, Chap. 3. Diuis. 1.
which I promised to prove, that if somewhat more were given to Peter the^ to
the rest of the Apostles, yet was it not so much as should make him their
supreme head. You may discharge now the Acts of the Apostles, out of your
Camp. For, draw what reasons thence you list, you shall find the^ (as I told
you) no stronger the^ ye former.


Heart. You are too hasty: your conclusion runs away before your proof.


Rainoldes. I have proved as much as may conclude your Pope to be an usurper.


Heart. You have not proved that Peter in the assemblies of the Apostles, was
but as the Speaker is in our Parliament.


Rainoldes. What need I? When your self gave no more unto him, then as the
Speakers office, in the former assembly: wherein yet he did most. For you said,
Petrus proponit faciendam furrogationem noui Apostoli. Staplet. lib. 6. cap. 13.
that he proposed an election to be made of a new Apostle into the room of
Judas. And this was all that you might say, and say truly, by the story of the
Acts. Which shows, that not he, but Act. 1.23.
they mad^ the election: so far as it was lawful for them to deal with that
which God was to order extraordinarily. As for the other assembly, when the
Council was held at Jerusalem: you cannot prove that he had so much as the
office of a Speaker therein. Your Staplet. lib. 6. cap. 13.
Doctor infeoffeth him (I grant) with more: namely, that Primus ex omnibus
loquitur, concludit, and praesidet.
he speaks first of all, concludes, yea, and is President too. But what
will not he dare to affirm? who, in so great light of the Scriptures,
affirms in writing that which is flat against them. For he says that Peter
not only speaks first, but concludes also. And they show that both Act. 15.
ver. 7. (...).
there had been much debating and reasoning of the matter, before Peter spoke:
and after he had spoken, ver. 12.
Barnabas, and Paul and ver. 13.
James spoke, and so ver. ^2.
the Council did conclude the matter. Yea they did conclude it according to
the very words that James spoke, and ver. 29.
a special point of his, which Peter touched not. So that, if we would strive
but lawfully against yt, for which you strive unlawfully: ver. 20.
the likelihood is rather that James sat as President in the Counsel, then
Peter, since both he spoke last and the whole Council did conclude with him.
But, to yield unto you (for your most advantage) as much or more then any
likelihood may afford you, yt Peter was not only the Speaker but ye President
in both ye assemblies: yet are you no nearer unto yt supremacy which you shoot
at. For, such a Presidentship as Peter had amongst ye Apostles, is so far
from the Prelatship which the Pope seeks to have amongst Bishops: that, if we
should offer him all that Peter had (at your request) upon condition that he
would accept it and ask no more then it: he would think we mocked him, and
give you little thanks who take upon you to be his advocate, and make so poor
a plea for him. This you may perceive by an other advocate, who made ye same
plea for him out of this story, a learned Lawier, Francis Duaren. He (in De
sacr. eccle minister. ac benefic. lib. 3. cap. 2.
his Abridgement of the Canon law) falling into the question of the Pope and
the Council, whither of them is sovereign, and has the chiefest power,
whereto the other should be subject in matters of the Church: does thus set
down his judgment of it. It seems most agreeable to the law of God, that
the Church (which the Council does represent) should have the chiefest power,
and the Pope should acknowledge himself subject to it. For the power of
binding and loosing was given by Christ not to Peter alone (whose successor
the Pope is said to be) but Matt. 18. c. Quodcunque. 24. q. 1.
to the whole Church. Howbeit, I deny not, but Peter was set over the rest of
the Apostles. Hereof it comes that in the time of the Apostles Act. 1. and 6.
and 15.
as often as any was to be ordained either Bishop or Deacon, or any thing to
be decreed which appertained to the Church: Peter never took that upon
himself, but permited it to the whole Church. This was in him above the rest,
that he was wont, Tanquam princeps Apostolorum.
as chief of the Apostles, to call them together, and propose to them the
things, which were to be done. Even as now He means, in France. Where the
courts of Parliament are assemblies of judges: of whom the Lord-chiefe-iustice
(as it were) is called President.
with us, he that is the President of a court of Parliament, does call together
the Senate: in the Senate he speaks first, when it is needful; and does many
other things, which argue a certain prerogative and preeminence of the person
that he bears. Yet is he not therefore greater or higher then is the whole
court: neither has he power over all the Senators; neither may he decree
any thing against their judgments: nay the judgment of all controversies
belongs to the court ( Cuius caput esse praeses dicitur.
whose head the President is said to be,) and not to the President. Yea, if
need be, the court does minister justice and execute judgment as well
against him, as against any other, and punishes him also. And this was the
state of these things Olim, olim.
in old time. But in process of time, (I know not how) it came to pass, that
the highest power over all Christians was given unto one man: and he was
Legibus omnibus canonibusque synodalibus (imperatorum exemplo) solutus.
set at liberty from being bound to any laws (after the manner of Princeps
legibus solu^us est. l. Princeps. D. de legib. senatusque consult.
Emperors) or to the Canons and decrees of any Councels. For cap.
Significasti. de election.
Pope Paschalis provided and ordered by a decretall Epistle; Nulla concilia
Romanae ecclesiae legem praefigere posse.
that no Councels may prescribe a law to be kept of the church of Rome: and
the authority of the Bishop of Rome is excepted expressly c ideo. 25. q. 1.
in the decrees of certain Councels. And thus he goes forward in showing the
prerogative of the Pope above the Council: whereof he makes him President.
But so, that (you see) he acknowledges it is not in Their government by their
Ca^^^ law.
the Acts of the Popes, as it was of old in the Acts of the Apostles: no not
in those very places of the Acts, whereon you ground the chiefest proof of
your supremacy. Which, and all the rest that you can bring with any show out of
the scriptures, give Peter such supremacy, if you will call it so: that I am
persuaded, Pope Gregory the thirteenth, as he has already spent Allens
Apology of the Seminaries* chapt. 2.
much upon Scholars, and Genebrard. Chronograph. lib. 4.
somewhat upon Soldiers for maintenance of his State: so he will rather spend
his triple crown, and all, upon them, then heretics shall force him to come
out of his throne of majesty, and submit his head to such a supremacy.


Heart. What tell you me of Francis Duaren, whose authority I regard not, nor
am to be pressed with it? Chiefly, since he was a Lawier, not a Divine: and
whither he were a Catholic or no, I know not. I will prove by the ancient and
holy learned fathers, that Peter had a full and perfect supremacy over the
Apostles, in those two places of the Acts.


Rainoldes. I did not take Duaren for the strength of mine answer, but the
holy scriptures, the same that you alleged. By the text and circumstances
whereof, I made it plain, that Peter had no higher power in the assemblies of
the Apostles: the^ has either the Speaker of our English Parliament, or, (to
make the most of it) the President of a court of Parliament in France, which is
Duarenes similitude. Howbeit, if I should have used his authority to confirm
it, as well as I alleged his words to open it: you might not reject such a
man so lightly. For (...).
a gardener (as the proverb is) has spoken often to very good purpose: and
Exodus 18.17.
Iethro saw more in somewhat then Moses. And Duaren, though a Lawier, yet was
not only skillful of the civil law (which is a great help notwithstanding of
wisdom in matters touching government:) but also of the Canon, whereof you
may vouchsafe to count as of Divinity; doubtless your Divinity will be cold
without it. Beside, he wrote that treatise to instruct students in the Canon
law, which is the fortress of the Papacy: and he so delivers the chiefest
points of it, that Lawiers amongst ye Protestants were offended and Responsio
Christianorum iurisconsultoru^ ad Duareni commentarios de ministerijs ecclesiae
atque beneficijs: Argentoruti.
wrote against him for it. But now (thus you reward men) it is called in
question, whether that he were a Catholic or no. I assure you, if you beware
not, you will make honest and well affected hearts afraid to be Catholics;
such, as you mean by that word. For if a man keep within any bounds of
modesty and truth, and will not run headlong with you through thick and
thin: you will account of him, either as an Heretic, or as one that sauoureth
of heresy at least. But who are the Fathers, whom you pretend against Duaren,
to prove your supremacy out of those places of the Acts?


Heart. Staplet. princip. doctr. li. 6. cap. 13.
S. Chrysostom, for the one: S. Jerome, for the other.


Rainoldes. And what do they say?


Heart. S. In act. Apostolor. hom. 3.
Chrysostom, entreating of the fact of Peter how he proposed the election of a
new Apostle into the room of Judas: Behold, says he, the zeal of Peter. How
he does acknowledge the flock committed to him by Christ? How he is the
chief in this assembly: and every where begins to speak first of all?
Afterward he prayseth Peter for doing all things by the common advise and
judgment of the Disciples, nothing by his own authority. Yet that Peter
might have chosen an Apostle, yea, alone, without them, he affirms plainly.
What, says he, was it not lawful for Peter himself to choose him? yes, it
was lawful, no doubt. But he does it not, least that he should seem to
gratify any man. Then he praises the modesty of the rest of the Disciples:
Consider, says he, how they grant the seat to him (that is, the primacy, as
In Matthaeum homil. 51.
otherwhere he calls it,) neither doubt they any longer, debating amongst
themselves, (to wit as they did once, when Christ conuersed with them) which of
them should be the greatest. This is S. Chrysostomes judgment of that place,
which I alleged out of the first chapter of the Acts of the Apostles for the
supremacy of Peter.


Rainoldes. This testimony of Chrysostom does stand on two branches: the
one, what Peter does, as the Scripture shows; the other, what he might have
done, as Chrysostom supposes. That which Peter does, is granted. But it
proves not the supremacy. He remembers his duty; he speaks first of all;
he does all things by the common advise and judgment of the Disciples, and
nothing by his own authority. Thus much I said of Peter, and did explane it
out of Duaren. In Duaren you thought that it made against you, and therefore
refused him. Does it make for you, when it is in Chrysostom, that you bring
him against Duaren? Or, is this the reason, why you accept the one and refuse
the other, because the words of Chrysostom yelding a certain primacy to
Peter, may deceive the simple, as though he meant that primacy which you call
the supremacy: but the words of Duaren put so plain a difference between the
two primacies, that, which Peter had; and the other which the Pope has, or
would have; that a blind man may see that Peter's primacy was not a Popes
supremacy. Which shall appear Chapt. 5. Division 3.
farther (if God will) by those things, that the Fathers speak touching
Peter's primacy. And thus your proof fails in that which the scripture
shows that Peter does. Now that, which Peter might have done, as Chrysostom
supposes, would infer a greater primacy then Peter had, if it were true.
But the scripture says it not. Wherefore as the Basil. de Gregor. Neocaes. ep.
64. Athanas. de Origene, libell. de decret. Nicaen. Synod.
Fathers report one of an other, (by Staplet. princ. doctr. li. 7. cap. 6.
your own confession) that they write some things (...), to confute the
adversaries with whom they had to deal, and in these they err sometimes and
gather amiss: likewise may I say that they write some things, (...), to
praise the Saints of God, and stir up others to their virtue, Hallacinantur
interdum and ma^le colligunt.
wherein if their words should be rigorously sifted, the truth is sometimes
ouerlashed. So In Act. cap. 15. homil. 33.
Chrysostom (in the other place which you allege out of the Acts) to commend
the mildness and wisdom of James, who left the sharper speeches to be used
of Peter, and used himself the gentler, does speak of him as being above
Peter in power: and here to commend the modesty of Peter, because that he did
all things by the common advise and judgment of his brethren, he says (by
the way of amplification) that Peter might himself have chosen an Apostle,
which yet he did not.


Heart. By way of amplification: (...), to praise the saints of God. Such
colors you cast upon it. But Chrysostom says expressly, that Peter himself
(that is to say, alone) might have chosen him, if he would. And you (with
smoother words, but in plain effect) reply, that he lies. Do Fathers
praise the Saints so?


Rainoldes. It is a rule Chapt. 2. Division. 2.
of your own and Hieron. Torrens. in confession. Augustine. li. 1. ca. 11. tit.
1.
given by your Jesuit, that a man may lawfully dissent from the Fathers, so
that he do it with modesty. If any keep not this, you say he raileth at the
Fathers. Of me, who would keep it, you say I cast colors. What shall I do to
please you?


Heart. You shall please me, if you dissent not from them, but only in such
things as be known truths. Which is another rule of ours, if you remember it.


Rainoldes. I remember it well: and herein I have kept it. For it is a truth
and a known truth, that the Fathers write, in favor of the Saints, some
things which ouerlash the truth, if a man examine and try them by the
touchstone. Peter himself shall be the Saint, in whose example I will show
it. In Matthaeum canon. 16.
Hilarie, upon the words of Christ unto Peter, Mat. 16.23
Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense to me; says, it is not meet
we should think, that Christ did call Peter Satan; but Christ said to him, get
thee behind me, and no more; the rest to the Devil, not to him, Satan thou art
an offense to me. The same In Matthaeum canon. 32.
Hilarie, paene, sine pia ^^lo.
almost but Commentar. in Luc. lib. 10.
Ambrose quite and clean excuses Peter from all fault in that he denied
Christ, nay Ambrose commends him. Peter answered, says he, Mat. 26.72.
I know not the man, Denegauit hominem, quem sciebat Deum.
He well denied him a man, whom he knew to be God. Clem. Alexan^r. hypotypos.
lib. 5.
Clemens and Eusebius. histor. ecc^es. lib. 1. cap. 13.
Eusebius, whom In epist. ad Galat. cap. 2.
Oecumenius follows, do write that that Peter whom Paul did withstand and
reprove at Antioch, was not Peter the Apostle, but an other, I know not who, of
the same name, one of the seventy disciples. Wherefore since it is known by the
word of truth, that Christ called Peter Satan, that Peter denied Christ, that
Paul withstood and reproved Peter; and it may be known by the writtnges of
the Fathers, how they vary from this truth in favor of S. Peter, that, by
washing out the spots which seem to stain him, his praise may be the more
glorious: I hope, I might take it for a known truth, that the Fathers write
some things (...), to praise the Saints of God: wherein, if their words be
sifted precisely, they ouerlash the truth sometimes. In saying whereof if you
think I cast colors, and use words too smooth: I can amend that fault with
speaking more roughly, as In Matthaeum cap. 26.
Ierom does, who says yt the sense which Hilarie and Ambrose give of Peter's
words, I know not the man; as though denying Christ he had denied him man,
because he knew him God: they gave it of a reverent affection to Peter; but
Hoc quam friuolum sit, prudens lector intellig^t.
wise readers see how frivolous it is, if they so defend Peter that they make
God a liar. For, if Peter denied not, then did the Lord lie, who said, Mat.
26.34.
Verily, I say to thee, this night before the cock crow, thou shall deny me
thrice. Behold what he says, thou shall deny me, not, the man. Or if S.
Ieroms words be too smooth also, I can speak more roughly yet with In Luc.
cap. 22*
Theophylact: who says that they who make that defense of Peter, do make
(...).
a foolish defense. Thus if you compare my words with Theophylacts, and Ieroms,
I used modesty: if with that which other of the Fathers write, I did it in a
known truth, when I dissented from Chrysostom. Do I please you now?


Heart. I wonder that you set your self against S. Chrysostom, a Father so
ancient, so learned, so godly, so skillful in the Scriptures.


Rainoldes. Let me ask you a question. What think you of Christ? Was he alone
free from all spotte of sin, both original, and actual? or was the blessed
virgin free from it also?


Heart. You know Conc. Tride^t. Sess. 5. Decreto de peccat. orig. and Sess. 6.
de ^ustif. can. 23.
our mind thereof. She was free from it also.


Rainoldes. S. In Matthew. hom. 45. and in Johan. hom. 20.
Chrysostom says the contrary: a Father so ancient, so learned, so godly, so
skillful, in the scriptures. Yea, and he groundeth therein upon Mat. 12.48. Ioh.
2.4.
the scriptures: which he does not, in yours of Peter.


Heart. But other of the Fathers say the same, that we say: with whom we do
dissent from Chrysostom.


Rainoldes. If I should ask what Fathers say it of actual sin: hard for you to
name them. As for original: your own Locor. Theolog. lib. 7. cap. 1. and 3.
Canus shows Ambros. August. Chrysostom. Eus. Emis. Remig. Maxim. Bed. Anselm.
Bernard. Erard. Anton. Pad. Bernardin. Bonauent. Thom. Vin^cent. Antonin.
Damas. Hug. de S. Vict.
they all say the contrary. But if many said it: yet you may see by this, which
I have showed of Chrysostom, what broken reeds you lean on, when you lean on
such reasons: Chrysostom does say so; therefore it is so. And, if [other
fathers] be of as good credit to win you from others, unto a point of truth, as
to a point of error: then will you be as ready to leave his opinion in this
point of Peter, as you have been to leave it in yt of the virgin. For a number
of Fathers, eue^ a whole Epist. Synod. African. ad ecclesias Legion. Astur.
Emerit. apud Cyp^ian. ep. 68.
Council of Bishops of Africa (together with S Cyprian) do write that Peter
did Secundum magisteria diuina.
according to the les^ons and precepts of God, in that he proposed unto the
disciples the ordeining of an Apostle in the room of Judas, to the end they
might deal Omnium ^^^fragio and (...).
by common advise and voice therein. Wherefore, if you have Fathers in such
regard, as you pretend, and do rather follow the consent of many, then the mind
of one (which is Chap. 2. Diuis. 2.
your own rule) in exposition of scriptures: you must yield that Peter might
not have done that which Chrysostom says, he might; unless, you will say,
that he might do that, whereof he was commanded and taught the contrary by God.
But, if this opinion be so rooted in you, that reason cannot weed it out:
wonder not at me who, beside the scripture, have Fathers more then you have,
and therefore (by your judgment) the exposition of the Fathers. Wonder at your
self: who having neither of them stand against them both. Wonder at your
Doctor: who having undertaken to prove the Supremacy by that, which Peter did
in the Acts of the Apostles, tells what he might have done by Chrysostomes
supposall. Wonder at your Pope: who building on the word, not of God, but of
man, and finding man's foundation ouer-weake too, does not practice that which
Chrysostom commends in the fact of Peter, but does challenge that which
Chrysostom imagines of the right of Peter.


Heart. If Peter would not use his own right, of modesty: his fact does not
bind the Pope (his successor) but that he may use it.


Rainoldes. That refuge will not serve, unless you prove two things, whereof
neither is true. One, that this soueraintie was the right of Peter: an other,
that the Pope succeeds him in all his right. By the way, what soever you
deem of his right: you grant that he does not succeed him in modesty.


Heart. It is not expedient for him to do in every thing as Peter did. The
second Division.
But, that he succeeds Peter in all his right: I will prove then, when I have
proved Peter's right. Now, that this soueraintie was the right of Peter, and
that he had as full power in the assemblies of the Apostles, as the Prince has
in a Parliament, or the Pope in a Council: S. Chrysostomes words were not all
so pregnant upon the first of the Acts Staplet. princ. doctr. l. 6. c. 14.
as S. Ieroms are upon the fifteenth, to prove it inuincibly. For Epist. 11.
inter epist. August.
he teaches plainly that Peter was the first man who gave the sentence: which
sentence being followed and approved by the rest, was concluded and published
in the name of the whole Council, both of the head and of the body. Audito
Petro tacuit omnis multitudo.
When they, says he, had heard Peter, all the multitude held their peace: and
James and all the Elders together did agree unto Peter's sentence.


Rainoldes. What is this to the purpose? Does [all the multitude held their
peace] prove the supremacy of Peter?


Heart. You are disposed to toy. My proof is in the rest of S. Ieroms words:
and you can see it, if you list. In sen^entiam Petr^ Iacobu. and om^es ^imul
Pres^yteri transierunt.
James, and all the Elders together did agree unto Peter's sentence: therefore
Peter was supreme head.


Rainoldes. In deed I saw not whence you could frame a proof. Bear with mine
oversight. The silence of the multitude was fitter stuff for it. For all
sorts of men do know by experience, Princes and Counsailours in matters of
State, Nobles and Commons in the houses of Parliament, Citizens and Townsmen in
their common assemblies, our Students of universities, both publicly in
conuocations, and privately in their colleges: that he is not always above the
rest in power, whose sentence all the rest agree unto in consultation. But if
your friends M. Heart, have done you such injury, that (by means they sent you
untimely beyond sea) you are become a stranger in things of common sense, and
humanity, at home: yet you have read (I trust) the story of the Acts, out of
the which you reason; and God has furnished you with gifts of wit and
memory to understand it, and remember it. Tell me, do you think, that Act. 3.
ver. 34.
Gamaliel the Pharise, the Doctor of the law, whom all the people honored, was
superior in power to the hie Priest, and Council of the Jews.


Heart. No.


Rainoldes. Yet when ver. 33.
the hie Priest, and Council did consult to kill the Apostles: ver. 35.
he advised them, yt they should not do it, and ver. 40.
having heard him, (...).
they agreed to him. If a Supremacy grow not hereof to Gamaliel: why should it
to Peter? If it do to Peter: why not to Gamaliel? Is this the invincible proof
that you did promise? When they had heard Peter, they all agreed to him:
therefore he was their supreme head?


Heart. But S. Epist. 11. inter epist. August.
Ierom adds farther of Peter, that he was princeps decreti, prince of the
decree which the Apostles made. And sure (as it is well noted by Waldensis)
Doctrinalis Fidei lib. 2. cap. 4.
if Peter had not been the chief and President there: he were procax es^^t.
a malapert fellow to prevent them al in taking up the controversy and giving
the definitive sentence. Thus says Waldensis.


Rainoldes. Before you promised Scripture, and performed Chrysostom. Now you
claim by Jerome, and prove by Waldensis. This is your fashion. Treasures we
look for: and we find coals.


Heart. I bring not Waldensis for his own credit: but, as interpreter of S.
Ieroms meaning. Howbeit, though he were not himself an ancient writer: he was
a great Clerk in the time he lived.


Rainoldes. It may be: such a one as gave occasion to the proverb, that the
greatest Clerks are not the wisest men. He did never enter into the Roman
Senate House: or else he might have learned, both, that Princeps Senatus. Varro
in epist. ad Oppia^. apud Gell. Noct. Atti^ar. l. 14. c. 7.
the prince of the Senate (as he was termed) gave his sentence first, yet was
not President of the Senate: neither was his sentence the definitive sentence,
but he spoke his mind of the matter, (as others after him,) and the whole
Senatus consultum.
Senate defined it. Though oftentimes the Senate agreed to the sentence of some
one Senator, and him they did call Princeps sententiae.
prince of the sentence, that is to say, the first author: as Ierom calls
Peter Princeps decreti.
prince of the decree; which himself expounds, Primus author ^^ius
sententiae. Hieron. epist. 11. inter epist. August.
the first author of the sentence. Wherefore it was not malapertnesse in Peter
to speak before others, although he were not the President of the Council:
but indeed Waldensis was a malapert fellow to vouch that of Peter, and use S.
Ieroms words thereto. For, that they prove not a Presidentship of Peter, by
entitling Peter prince of the decree, you may learn of Cic. pro Corn. ^albo,
Harum ego sententiaru^ princeps and author fui.
Tully: who shows that himself was prince of decrees, when he was neither
President nor prince of the Senate. Beside, (to let you see the poverty of
this princehood farther) Jerome does not mean the whole decree of the
Council; when he says that Peter was the prince of it; (for the^ he should
deny ye Act. 15. ver. 10.
scripture it self which makes James the prince of part:) but he means so
much thereof, as touched his purpose, which Peter is mentioned first to have
set down; namely, that ver. 10.
Gentiles being turned to the faith of Christ, should not be constrained to
keep the law of Moses. Whereon, they, who know what the Romans meant by [
Diuidere sententiam. Cic. pro Mil^n. Ascon. Paedian. in Cicor.
to divide a sentence,] may easily consider, how James though he agreed to
Peter's sentence in general, yet excepted (as it were) from it this particular,
that Act. 15.20.
the believing Gentiles should be admonished to keep certain points of the
law of Moses, perteining to To abstain from the filthiness of idole^, and
fornication:
holiness and and from that which is strangled, and from blood.
peace with their The Jews.
brethren, Hebr. 1^.14.
both duties necessary for the faithful. The words of whose sentence Act.
15.29.
the Council followed so precisely: that In Act. Apost. homil. 33.
Chrysostom (if I would stand on men, as you do) speaks of the sentence
given by James as the definitive sentence, and says that (...).
he pronounced his judgment with power, and that (...).
the principality was committed to him.


Heart. He speaks so of James, Staplet. princ. doctr. li. 6. ca. 14.
because he was Bishop of the City of Jerusalem, where the Council was holden.


Rainoldes. Beware of that answer.


Heart. Why? It is S. In Act. Apost. homil. 33.
Chrysostomes.


Rainoldes. Be it whose soever. See you not what follows thereof, that every
Bishop in his own diocese is above ye Pope? For, if above Peter, above an
Apostle, above a chief Apostle: much more above a Bishop of Rome, or any
other. You were better say that Chrysostom did err, then fall into this
peril. And in deed, (to help you in a point of truth) he that makes James
a Bishop of one City, whom Christ made an Apostle to all the Nations of the
earth: does bring him out of the hall (as they say) into the kitchen. It
seems that Chrysostom spoke it upon the word of Clemens: Hypotypos. lib. 7.
apud Eusebium, histor. ecclesiast. lib. 1. cap. 1.
who when he reported it, reported this withal, that Christ (...).
did give knowledge after his resurrection to James, John, and Peter: and they
(...).
did give it to the rest of the Apostles. Which tale is flat repugnant to the
word of truth: wherein we read that Luc. 24.45.
knowledge and Act. 2.4.
the holy Ghost was given by Christ to the Apostles all jointly.


Heart. You shall not help me with such shifts against the Fathers. For other
of them consent herein with Chrysostom, that James was Bishop of Jerusalem.


Rainoldes. Neither shifts, nor against the Fathers: but true defenses in
favor of them. For the Apostles, being sent to preach the Gospel to all
Nations, made their chief abode in greatest cities of most resort, as at Act.
^.1.
Jerusalem, at Act. 11.26
Antioche, at Act* 19.10.
Ephesus, at Act. 28.30.
Rome: that from the (...)
mother cities (as they were called) religion might be spread abroad unto the
daughters. Now, because this residence in the mother-cities was afterward
supplied by the Bishops of them: therefore the Fathers are wont oftentimes to
call the Apostles Bishops of those cities, wherein they did abide most. Which
they might ye rather, for that (...). ^^sebius, and Clemens, (...).
the word (in their speech) betokens (in a general meaning) any charge and
oversight of others: in so much yt the Act. 2. verse. 20. (...). verse. 25. (...).
scripture applies it to the ministry of the Apostles also. And in this sort
it seems to be said, as by Ep. 68. De ordinando in locum Iudae episcopo.
Cyprian, yt a Bishop was to be ordained in the room of Judas; so by Comment.
in epist. ad Calat. cap. 2.
Jerome, yt Peter was Bishop of Antioch; and by Chrysostom yt James was Bishop
of Jerusalem. Though whither it were or no: yet that which I spoke in defense of
Chrysosto^ is cleared by himself from your reproach of a shift. For he says yt
James (...).
was Bishop, as they say. Which words [as they say] import that he spoke it on
the words of others: most likely, of Cleme^s, from whom (...), Histor. eccles.
lib. 2. cap. 1.
Eusebius fetches it. But if notwithstanding you reply yt Chrysostom allowed
that [they say,] and supposed James to be a Bishop properly: then his words
have so much the greater importance against your supremacy; seeing that they
give the principality to James in his own dioces, and that above Peter.
Howbeit, I will not take this advantage: because I know that neither Peter, nor
James gave the definitive sentence; but when they had spoken their minds of
the matter, Act 15. verse. 23. and 23. and 28.
the Council did define it and decree it with common judgment.


Heart. They did it with common judgment, I deny not. But Theodoret shows,
that Peter as a Prince had a great prerogative therein above the rest: yea,
gave definitive sentence, to which the rest consented, and as it were,
subscribed. For he (in an epistle which he wrote to Leo) affirms that Paul
did run to great Peter, to bring a resolution from him unto them, who
contended at Antioche about the observation of the law of Moses.


Rainoldes. You may cite (if you list) S. De o^^icijs ecclesiast. li. 1. ca. 1.
Isidore too, for an other special prerogative of Peter, as good as this, and
grounded likewise on the Acts, (which he alleges to prove it:) to wit,
Antiochiae pri^^um nomen Chistianoru^ per Petri praedicationem est exortum,
sicut actus A^^stolorum te^tantur.
that the name of Christians arose at Antioche first, through the preaching of
Peter. For though he be more direct against ye scripture, which shows that
Act. 11.^6.
the name of Christians arose upon the preaching, not of Peter, but of Paul and
Barnabas: yet is Theodoret direct against it too, by giving as proper and
peculiar to Peter, yt, which was common to the Apostles and Elders, Act. 15.22.
and 26.4.
whose resolution Act. 15.2.
he was sent for. And as Isidore seems to have ouershot him self by flip of
memory, on too great a fancy (perhaps) toward Peter: in like sort
Theodoret, seeking to get the favor of Leo bishop of Rome (whose help he stood
in need of,) did serve his own cause, in saying, that Paul ran to great
Peter, that so he might run much more to great Leo. Which words to have issued
out from that humor: his commentaries on the Scriptures (where he sought the
truth, and followed the text) show. For therein he says of Barnabas and Paul,
In epist. ad ^alat. cap. 2.
that they ran [not to great Peter] but to the great Apostles, and In argumento
epist. ad Ephesians.
had a resolution from them of the question about the keeping of the law.
Howbeit if Theodorets words unto Leo suffered no exception: the most were, that
Peter pronounced the definitive sentence, as President; not gave it, as Prince.
But the Scripture it self (by the rule whereof his words must be tried)
makes no more for Peter's Presidentshippe then for James: and whosoever were
President, it shows that neither James, nor Peter, but the Council gave the
definitive sentence. So well it proves that, which you undertook to prove
concerning Peter: that he had as full power in the assemblies of the Apostles,
as the Prince has in a parliament, yea, or the pope in a Council.


Heart, It proves that wel-inough, (though not to you:) chiefly if other
places thereof be waied withal. The third Division.
For the singular power of Peter is declared also by S. Paul in that he says
to the Galatians, Gal. 1.18.
Then after three years I came to Jerusalem to see Peter, and tarried with him
fifteen days.


Rainoldes. The singular power of Peter? In which words? By what reason?
Because he went to Jerusalem to see him? Or because he went after three
years? Or because he stayed with him fifteen days?


Heart. The reason consists Stap. princ. doctr. li. 6. ca. 13.
in that which Paul did, and the cause for which he did it. For he went to
Jerusalem to see Peter. Why? but to do him honor, as In epist. ad Gal. cap. 1.
Ierom says in his Commentaries: and in an epistle to Austin, Peter was,
(says he) of so great authority, that Paul wrote, Then after three years,
and so forth. Epist. 11. int^^ epist. August.
And In Iohann. homil. 87.
Chrysostom; Because Peter (says he) was the mouth of the Apostles, the
chief, and top of the company: therefore Paul went up to see him above the
rest. Because it was meet, says Comment. in ep. a^ Gal. ^a. ^*
Ambrose, that he should desire to see Peter, unto whom our Savior had
committed the charge of Churches. Which also De praescript. contra haeret.
Tertullian affirms, that he did of duty and right. Nor otherwise Comment.
in epist ad Gal.
Theodoret: he gave, says he, that honor to the prince of the Apostles, which
it was fit he should. Hence it is, that, S. In Ezechiel. hom. 18.
Gregory doubts not to say, that, Paul the Apostle was the younger brother:
And S. De baptism. contr. Donatist. l. 2. c. 1.
Austin, an Apostle made after Peter: who says moreover, that the primacie of
the Apostles is conspicuous and preeminent, with excellent grace in Peter.


Rainoldes. You bring in witnesses not necessary, to prove a thing not denied.
For, that Paul was as Apostle, in time after Peter, and so his younger brother,
as Gregory, Austin, and Quia primus erat inter Apostolos, cui Saluator
delegauerat curam ecclesiarum. As Ierom, Honoris priori apostolo deferendi.
Ambrose say: that he went to see Peter for honor and reverence which he bare
to him, as it is in Ierom, Chrysostom and Theodoret; that he did this of
duty and right; what right and duty? Ex officio and iur^: scilicet eius them
fidei and praedicationis etc. Tert.
of the same faith and preaching of the gospel, to show his concord with him,
which is the meaning of Tertullian: all this will I grant you; Gal. 1.17. and
2.2.
the scriptures teach as much; what need the Fathers to prove it?


Heart. Will you grant all that, which I alleged out of the Fathers? then will
you grant that Protestants are in an error: and the truth is ours. For they
avouch plainly the primacie of Peter, and call him, the mouth, the prince, the
top of the Apostles.


Rainoldes. Alas, you were agreed (me thought) to go through with the scripture
first, and afterward come to the Fathers. I wisse they will give you small
cause of triumphing over the Protestants, when you shall bring their forces out
into the field, and see with whom they join, with you, or with us. But of the
rest then. Now I grant you so much, as does concern the point, for proof
whereof you cited them: namely, that Paul went to see Peter for a reverent
respect and honor of his person. But I deny the argument, which you infer
thereof, that Peter had therefore a singular power, whereby you mean the
supremacy. You should have laid the Fathers (if you would needs bestow them)
on this which is denied, not on that which is granted. But this is the world.
Men will rather give to the rich, who need not, then to the poor who need.


Heart. I thought you would rather have denied that, then this: for this is
clear of it self; and needs no proof. The common use of men shows it.
For they give honor and reverence to them, in whom they acknowledge a
superiority*


Rainoldes. Perhaps, a superiority: yet not a supremacy.


Heart. If Peter were Paul's superior in power: the supremacy is proved.


Rainoldes. If in power: you say somewhat. Though nevertheless he might be
full hie in power, and yet come short of your supremacy. But he was superior
to him in some things else, and not in power.


Heart. That he was superior to him in power: I prove. S. Peter had honor given
to him of Paul: therefore he was in power above him.


Rainoldes. Evil news for husbands, that have shrewes to their wives, if
this argument be good. For 1. Pet. 3.7.
they are commanded to give honor to the woman as to the weaker vessel:
whereof (by your Logic) the wives may claim authority and power above their
husbands. S. Peter saw not this consequence: he did not think on his
supremacy. For although he teach, that the husband should give honor to his
wife, yet he calls the wife the weaker vessel, not the stronger: and 1. Pet.
3.1,
he commands wives to be subject to their husbands, that is, to be inferior
(I trow) in power unto them. Which S. 1. Cor. 11.10.
Paul notes also more expressly, when he says, the woman ought to have
power upon her head.


Heart. This answer does not weaken the strength of mine argument. For the name
of honor, when husbands are commanded to give it to their wives, is taken
improperly. But honor, as I take it, as Paul gave it to Peter, is used in his
proper sense: to signify a reverence, the which an inferior does owe to a
superior, a subject to him that is in power above him.


Rainoldes. The honor which husbands are bound to give unto their wives, as to
the weaker vessels, does signify an honest care and regard of bearing with
their weakness, providing for their wantes, and showing all husbandly love and
duty to them. Such a reverence as you mention it does not signify, I grant:
yet does it signify a reverence which is implied in the love and duty that
their husbands owe them. Tim. 3.3.
S. Paul says to Timothee: honor the widows, which are widows in deed. He
means that they should be charitably relieved: but this relief is no reason,
why they should not reverently be regarded too. For you are deceived, if you
think, that none are bound to reverence others, but only the inferiors their
superiors in power. The Gentiles were taught by nature it self, that a
reverence is due to every state of men: Maxima debetur puero reuerentia.
Iuuenal. Satyr. 14.
to children, with an heed that no dishonest thing be done in their presence,
because their tenderness is prove to learn it; Magna fuit quondam capitis
reuerentia cani. Ovid. Fastor. lib. 4.
to old men, with an honor, in respect of their wisdom, their experience,
their gravity, wherewith the gray hears are wont to be accompanied; Adhibenda
est quaedam reuerentia aduersus homines, and optimi cuiusque and reliquorum.
Cic. offic. lib. 1.
to all, but chiefly to the best, with a modest account of their good opinion,
and an honest desire to be approved of them. Wherefore if your argument do
stand upon the proper signification of honor: you shall perceive your self,
that it can never prove a supremacy of power. For honor, is an outward
profession and testimony of a reverent opinion, which we have conceived of
some kind of excellency in him to whom we give it. So, the chiefest honor is
due unto Reu. 7.12.
God, the father of lights, the fountain of all excellency: and after him to
men, in several degrees, according to their several estates and gifts of
excellency wherewith the Lord has blessed them: to 1. Pet. 2.17.
the king, as verse. 13.
preeminent, and verse. 14. 1. Tim. 6.1.
all that govern under him; to Phil. 2.29. 1. Tim. 5.17.
the ministers of the gospel, the more, the better they do their duty; to
Exodus 20.12.
them whom nature most does bind us, our fathers and mothers; to Leuit. 19.32.
the aged, Genesis 41.39.
the wise, Ester. 6.3.
the virtuous, Act. 5.34.
the learned: in a word to 1. Pet. 2.17.
all men; but chiefly Cor. 12.24.
to the faithful, as members of the body of Christ, none so base but has an
excellency, the excellency of a Christian. And hereby appears the weakness
of your argument: that Paul was inferior to Peter in power, because he gave
him honor. Did not 1. King. 2.19.
Solomon in his majesty give honor to his mother? and was not he the king, and
she a subject to him? Are we not all taught Romans 12.10.
to go one before an other in giving honor, as well the rich as the poor, as
well the high as the low? What a proud and arrogant mind had Staplet. princi.
pior. doctrine. lib. 6. cap. 13.
that body (unless his mind and tongue dissented) who thought that he must
give honor to no man, but to them only that are in power above him. Belike this
divinity was learned out of that chapter of the book of Ceremonies (which I
touched before) Sacr. ce^emon. sanct. Romans eccles. lib. 3. sect. 1.
that the Pope does do reverence to no man, of duty and right: for then he is
afraid least it should be thought that some man is in power above him. Yet Lib.
1. sect. 13.
in the same book (to see a good nature) we read that In the year of Christ
1^68.
he did honor Fridericke the Emperor: in so much that he placed him next unto
him self above all the Cardinals; and Altitud^ sedis ita era^ instituta vt
non altior esset locus vbi sederet imperator, quam vbi Pontifex teneret pedes.
the place in which the Emperor did sit, was no lower then the place, where
the Pope did hold his feet. Now, the seat of the Emperor declares, that
the Pope was above him in power: and yet the Pope Honorauit, quantum potuit^
cum summa tamen grauitate and maiestate.
did honor him. Paul therefore might have been above Peter in power, though
he did honor Peter. If he might: the honor, which he gave to Peter, does
strike no stroke for the supremacy. Wherefore you may dimisse it as a coward
out of the field, not fit to fight the Popes battles. Does not this mine
answer touch [honour] taken properly? Or will you set the Emperor above the
Pope in power? Or is it a lie that the Pope did honor him?


Heart. You triumph over me at every small occasion, as though you had a
conquest. But you see not your own absurdities and follies. You spoke
ere-while of the Apostles, as equal in power: now you speak of Paul, as if
he were above Peter, like a Pope above an Emperor. And I did frame my reason
out of the Scriptures and Fathers: and you do bring the book of Ceremonies to
kill it. Will you subdue us with such warriors?


Rainoldes. I would feign triumph, not over you, but over your errors, if I
could. The strength of my cause and valor of my proofs makes me the
cheerefuller in dealing with the dastardes, which you set against them. My
former words, of the Apostles as being equal in power, agree well with these
of Peter and Paul. For I say not, that Paul was above Peter, but that he
might have been above him in power, for all the honor which he gave him. And
this is sufficient to overthrow your reason. But if my example of the Pope and
Emperor did cause you to mistake me: you may take an other and fitter for ye
purpose, the College Apostolic, as Pope Pius the second. Sacrar. cerem. lib.
1. sect. 8.
the Pope does call them, I mean the Cardinals of Rome. Who, though they be
in states, orders, and livings, one above an other: Lib. 3. sect. 1.
yet Cardinales intersese and gestis and verbis and nutu summam exhibent
reuerentiam: stando, sedendo, eundo, equitando, and in rebus omnibus alter
alteri deferendo.
in all things, and with all courtesies they all give hie reverence one unto an
other. And when any of them does come into the chapel of the Popes holiness
to say his devotions, he turns toward the Cardinals of his own order,
and goes not directly to his own place, unless he be the lowest: but
beginning at the lowest, Quasi ibi remanere velit.
as though he would abide there, he is desired and entreated of every one to go
higher, until he come directly to his own place, unless he be the lowest: and
himself Modeste: semel atque iterum.
(demurely, once, and again) desires him, who is next unto him, that he will
go before him; and Tandem in locum suum residet.
at length he sits down in his place. This is a foul trouble to make so
much adoo at the coming in of every Cardinal to prayers: chiefly, when
prayers are begun. Yet to show how modestly they think of themselves, and how
they honor one an other, Hoc idem facit quotiescunque aliquis venit postalios,
praesente vel absente Pontifice.
every one (that comes after others) does it, whither the Pope be there or
no. Out of doubt, Cardinals, men of such wisdom, would not commit this
folly, if every one whom they honor must be above them in power. But you deal
injuriously with me, to say, that you framed your reason out of the scriptures
and Fathers, and I bring the book of Ceremonies to kill it. For neither did
you ground upon the words of scripture, but only on a circumstance observed
by the Fathers, that Paul went to Peter of reverence to honor him: and I slew
the reason (which you made thereof) with the sword of scriptures; I used the
book of Ceremonies, but as an Irish Lackey, to cut off a dead man's head. I
would not have vouchsafed as much as to name him, but to cast the doong of your
solemnities in your faces: and to show the fondness of a Popish reason, by
practice of a Papal mockery. Though I see not, why you should prefer so the
scriptures and Fathers before the book of Ceremonies. For the book of
Ceremonies speaks more good of the Pope in one leaf, then both the other do
throughout all their volumes. And Sacrarum ceremoniarum, five rituum
ecclesiasticorum sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae libri tres. Romae. Typis Valerij
Dorici. 1560. Cum priuilegi^.
it is solemnly printed at Rome with Peter's picture in the front, and the
keys in his hands and [ Pa^ce oues meas.
Feed my sheepe] written about him, as a book of great account: where many of
the Fathers do lie in the dust of the Vatican Library, and cannot come into
the light. Notwithstanding, if you be willing to yield your self prisoner to
the Fathers, as Gentlemen, and think the book of Ceremonies to be a rascal
soldier whom you disdain to yield unto: behold your own witnesses who make
not Paul inferior to Peter, otherwise, then in the time of his Apostleship,
the one made first, the other last. S. Jerome: who puts Comment* in epist.
a^ Gala^. cap. 2.
an equality between them, though Paul did honor him, cap. 1.
as an Apostle before him. S. In epist ad Gal. cap. 1.
Chrysostom: who pronounces that Paul (to say no more of him) was Peter's
peer in dignity. S. In epist. ad Gala. cap. 1. and ^.
Ambrose: who gives a primacy to them both, and says that Paul was even such
an other as Peter. S. Exposit. epist. ad Galat. cap. 1.
Austin: who declares their authority to have been equal; and that, for
Paul's honor, what he wants in time, is supplied by Christ's glory, in that
he made him an Apostle, not (as the rest) upon the earth, but when he reigned
now in majesty. And these things are written by the same Fathers, whose
words, touching the honor that Paul gave to Peter, your Staplet. prin^*
doct. li. 6. ca. 1^.
Doctor sets in a beadrole, as though in their judgment Paul acknowledged
Peter his supreme head thereby. Wherein you may perceive both his deceitful
dealing, that alleges their words, as setting one above the other, who in
express words do make one equal to the other: and your expositions how iumpe
they meet with the Fathers, who gathered an equality of Peter and Paul by the
epistle to the Galatians, whence you conclude Peter's supremacy over Paul.


Heart. How the Fathers all agree with one consent of Peter's supremacy: it shall
be showed hereafter. As for the circumstance which I observed out of them
touching the fact of Paul, y^ when he went to see Peter, he went of reverence
to honor him: I do not account so greatly thereof, as ofthe fact it self;
nor urge I the Fathers so much observing that, as the report of this made by
the Scriptures. For they set it forth, with so lively words, as if it were of
purpose to paint out Peter's primacie. Gal. 1.18.
Then after three years I went to Jerusalem (says Paul) to see Peter and
tarried with him fifteen days. Mark his words, I pray, and see what weight
they carry with them. He went to Jerusalem, so far, so long a journey; and he
went notwithstanding his great affairs ecclesiastical; and he went to see
Peter, not in the vulgar manner, but (as S. In epist. ad Gal. cap. 1.
Chrysostom notes that the (...).
Greek word imports) to behold him, as men behold a thing or person of name
excellency and majesty. Neither did he go only to see him; but he abode with
him also, to fill him self with a perfect view of his behavior. And he abode
with him no common time, but fifteen days: fiftene days, a great matter, and
more then many would think, who do not search the depth of scriptures. In
such estimation was Peter with Paul: and will you yet deny his primacy?


Rainoldes. King Plutarch. in Apophthegm.
Agesilaus, when one praised an Orator, that he could amplify things, and
make them of small to seem great: I, says he, would never count him a good
shoemaker, who would put a great shoo upon a small foot. You play the Orator,
M. Heart, with your amplifications: and that in such sort, as you pass the
shoemaker of Agesilaus* For you do not only put a great shoo upon a small
foot: but you stretch the leather with your ^eeth too. And yet when you have
weeried your self with stretching it: you will have stretched it in vain. For
though your shoo be too great for the primacy of Peter, yet will it be too
small for the supremacy of the Pope.


Heart. We speak not of the Pope now, but of Peter. Why stray you from the
point?


Rainoldes. I thought they had been things both of one nature, and differing
in name only. But I will speak of Peter. And that you may see that the shoo
which you made is too great for his foot: I will show it by a plain
demonstration to the eye. The mother of our Savior, the blessed virgin Marie,
is called, in the scripture, Luc. 1. ver. 28.
blessed among women: that is (as I interpret it after the Hebrew phrase) the
most blessed of women. What think you of her? Was there any woman in her time
above her, in any thing of name, of excellency and majesty?


Heart. Above her? God forbid. Neither in her time, nor before her, nor after
her.


Rainoldes. Yet she, when ver. 35.
the holy Ghost was come upon her now, and the power of the highest had
ouershadowed her, ver. 39.
went into the hill country with have to a city of Judah, not only to see, but
also ver. 40.
to salute her coosin Elisabet. And ver. 41.
her salutation was such, that when Elisabet great with child did hear it: the
babe sprang in her belly, and she was filled with the holy Ghost. Neither did
she only go to salute her; but ver. 56.
tarried with her also: and that no common time, but about three months; three
months, a great time, chiefly for a woman, which was conceived with child. If
you tendered not the blessed virgins honor more then you do Paul's: your
Rhetorike, that depresseth Paul beneath Peter, would much more debase her
beneath Elisabet. For she was coosin to Elisabet according to the flesh: Paul
was Peter's brother according to the spirit, Matt. 12.42.
a nearer kin, and straiter bond of amity and duty. She went a harder
journey, into the hill country: Paul a pleasantor to Jerusalem; whither some
other causes might allure him also. She was a woman, weaker of body, and
might away with travel worse: Paul a man, strong, exercised with toils and
troubles. She went thither in have: Paul, after three years. Paul went to
see Peter: she to salute Elisabet. Her salutation was so heavenly, that the
babes body, and the mothers spirit felt it: nothing is written of Paul's
seeing Peter, but only that he saw him. She stayed with her coosin about three
months: Paul abode with Peter no more then fifteen days. Yet Paul, as an
Apostle, might be and stay any where: the virgin, as Luc. 1.27.
a maid betrothed to a man, had greater cause to keep home, chiefly being
with child. Wherefore if Peter were above Paul in excellency and majesty,
because he did go to Jerusalem to see him, and stayed with him fifteen days:
what might Elisabet be above the blessed virgin, which went into the hill
country to salute her, and abode with her about three months?


Heart. Nay. But there is more in the fifteen days of Paul's abode with Peter,
then in the three months of Mary's with Elisabet.


Rainoldes. More? What is that?


Heart. Marry there is a mystery (as S. Jerome shows) in the number of days
which Paul did spend with him.


Rainoldes. You commended the lively words of the text: and now from them you
flit to Jerome. They be mysteries, I see, that must set a helping hand to your
supremacy: the literal sense of scripture will do nothing for it. But what is
the mystery?


Heart. S. Epist. ad Paulin. presbyt. inter epist. Hier. epist. 103.
Jerome (in an epistle, which commonly is printed in the beginning of the
Bible, because it entreats of all the books of holy scriptures) falling into
mention of Paul how he stayed with Peter fifteen days, does give this
reason of it: hoc enim mysterio hebdomadis and ogdoadis futurus gentium
praedicator instruendus erat; for by this mystery of the number of seven and
eight, he who should become the preacher of the Gentiles, was to be instructed.


Rainoldes. And what did S. Jerome mean by this mystery of the number of
seven and eight, which he divides those fifteen days into? How was Paul (I
pray) to be instructed by it?


Heart. Look you to that. Those are his own words: wherein you have as much
expressed, as I said: that it is a mystery.


Rainoldes. But it is like to be a mystery still, if it be not expounded: and
we shall lose the kernel, unless the nut be broken.


Heart. Why? What do you think S. Ierom meant by it?


Rainoldes. I know not, I assure you: unless he meant, as one, (I know not the
man, but they name him Maximus Papa in ep is it. ad Orientales: apud
Turrecrematam in Summa de ecclesia lib. 2. cap. 107.
father Maximus) expounds it, that Paul went to learn of Peter, and
remained with him as it were in a School a certain number of days. I abode
with him, says Paul, fifteen days. Per mysticum hebdoadis and octoadis
numeram, veteris Testamenti simul et noui didicit sacramentum.
By the mystical number of seven and eight, he learned both the old and the
new Testament.


Heart. And what do you say of this exposition?


Rainoldes. I say that father Maximus did doat when he made it. For by this
reason Paul should have learned the gospel of Peter: which the Scripture
denies, protesting, Gal. 1.12.
that he neither received it of man, neither was taught it, but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ. And if you desire candlelight at noone day to
help the brightness of the Sun shining in his strength: you may know that the
Fathers, Exposit. epist. ad Gal. cap. 1. Not that he might learn the Gospel
by Peter, but that he might increase brotherly love with bodily acquain^ance,
says Austin on this place. And as Austin, so the ^est, to like effect, in
their commentaries on the epistle to the Galatians.
Austin, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Theodoret, Ierom, and Theophy lactus, and
Oecumenius.
others, affirm the same precisely, that Paul came to Peter, not to learn of
him, but of a reverence, and love, to be acquainted with him. As for Ierom, who
seems (in the epistle which you mention) to think otherwise, against the
scripture and him self: no marvel, if sometimes he went out of ye way
through a liking of allegories, as a great reader and follower of Origin, De
principiis lib. 4. cap. 2.
who handled the scriptures too licentiously, with wa^dring mystical senses.
Hieron. praefat. comment. in Abdiam prophet.
Himself, when he was grown to be of riper judgment, acknowledged an
oversight of his In adolescentia mea.
youth herein: confessing, that (by travailing after Mysticos intellectus.
mystical senses) he rashly followed Allegorice interpretatus Abdiam prophetam,
cuius historiam nesciebam.
allegories, in expounding a Prophet, whose litterall sense he understood not.


Heart. What soever it were that S. Ierom meant, he meant a prerogative of Peter
over Paul: which you may not avoid either by his youth, or by an allegory.
For, he gave the like prerogative to Peter, without an allegory, in his old
age, upon the manifest words of Paul: Gal. 2.1.
I went up says Paul, to Jerusalem by revelation and conferred with them the
Gospel, which I preach among the Gentiles: but particularly with them that
were the chief, least perhaps I should run, or had run in vain. Paul, says S.
Ad Aug^stin. epist. 11. inter ep. August.
Ierom, had not had security of preaching the Gospel, unless it had been
approved by the sentence of Peter, and of the rest, that were with him.


Rainoldes. You are wont to lay it unto our charge, that we discover the
nakedness of the Fathers. In deed, you are they, who entreat them so. Nay, you
do not only discover their nakedness, but you blase it out, and praise the
beauty of their blemishes, and think them best clad where they are naked
most. For what a speech is this, which you allege of Ierom, that Paul had not
had security of preaching the Gospel, unless Peter had approved it. What?
Was he called by Gal. 1. ver. 1.
God to preach the Gospel, and durst he not do it, except men did like it? And
when ver. 12.
Christ had taught it him by revelation was he not sure of it, but by
conference with Peter? And had he preached it ver. 18. and Gal. 2. ver. 1.
almost twenty years, and was he now afraid least he had preached falsely.


Heart. S. Ierom says not so: but that he had not had security of preaching
it, unless it had been approved by the rest, with whom he did confer of it.


Rainoldes. S. Ierom says not so: but that he had not had security. Then S.
Ierom says so, in that he says not so: and you unsay in one word, that which
you say in an other. For what is it else not to have security of preaching the
Gospel: then to be afraid either of his doctrine, that it is not true; or of
his fact, that it is not lawful?


Heart. Why does Gal. 2.2.
the scripture then report of S. Paul that he conferred with them, least he
should run, or had run in vain.


Rainoldes. Because many Christians, whom Paul had preached the Gospel too,
began to be seduced by false Apostles of the Jews: Gal. 1.7. and 5.2.
who taught them, that except they kept the law of Moses, they could not be
saved. And to win credit to their heretical doctrine, that the hearers might
receive it the sooner for the authority of the teachers: they said, it was the
doctrine of Peter, and the rest, the chief of the Apostles, the pillars of the
Church. As for Paul, who taught the contrary thereof: they disgraced him, as
one that was crept into the Apostleship after the^; and having learned the
gospel of them, which he preached, yet dissented from them in the preaching of
it. Which speeches of seducers, if they had believed, whom Paul either should
or had already preached the Gospel unto: 2. Cor. 11.3.
then should they have fallen away with minds corrupted from the simplicity,
that is in Christ, and Paul have lost his labor, and run in vain, as he
speaks, that is to say, without profit, without the Romans 1.13.
fruit of that he ran for. As Christ complains in Esaias 49.4.
the Prophet, I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength in vain and
for nothing: because he was not received of the Jews, to whom he preched the
word of life. Wherefore Paul, desirous, as a careful husbandman, to reap
where he had sown: did seek to root out the weeds of false Apostles, yt did
or might hinder the growth of the corn. In which consideration, having showed,
first, touching his authority, Gal. 1. ver. 1.
that he had it not of men, nor by man, but by God: next, touching his
doctrine, ver. 12.
that he learned it of Christ, not of the Apostles: touching his dissension
from them, he shows last, Gal. 2.2.
that he went and conferred with the chief of them, even James, Peter, and
John, who were accounted to be pillars, that they might witness their consent,
and make his preaching to be fruitful, and stop the mouths of false
Apostles. All this S. Ierom saw, and taught, In epist. ad Gal. cap. 1. and 2.
in his commentaries on Paul to the Galatians: where he advised better of
Paul's intent, and drift, and sifted all the points and circumstances of the
text. The words which you stand on, were uttered less advisedly by him, in De
Petro repre henso a Paulo. Epist. 11. inter epist. August.
an epistle written to S. Austin: against whom, to justify his opinion,
(though false,) that Peter's fault at Antioche was no fault in deed, nor Paul
reproved him in earnest, he says, for the credit of one above the other, Paul
had not had security of preaching the Gospel, unless that Peter had approved
it. Wherefore I may justly speak in his excuse (at the least, to soften the
hardness of his speech) the same which Epist. 64.
Basil said in excuse of Gregory, that his words were uttered (...)
not by way of doctrine, but of contention; rather to maintain his quarrel
against Austin, then to deliver his judgment of ye matter; as writing of
affection more what he fansied, then of discretion what he thought. Whereof
there appears as it were a print even in his own words. For he does mention
Peter by name, (of whom he did contend with Austin,) and none of the rest:
whereas the Scripture names no more him then others; but Gal. 2. ver. ^.
first says (in general) of Paul, that he conferred with them that were the
chief; and ver. 9.
after (in particular) of James, Peter and John, that they were counted to be
pillars. Thus, neither did Paul confer with Peter only, but with James and
John, and therefore it proves no suprem^cie of Peter, more then of James and
John; and, although he had, yet were it a token (by Ieromes own judgment) that
Paul was Peter's equal; not Peter his superior. For, Inter confer^tes
aequalitas est. Hieron. in epist. ad Galat* cap. 2.
there is equality between them (says Ierom) who confer together. I would
to God, M. Heart, if you will needs follow S. Ieroms authority, yet you would
follow him in the best things: and what you say with error in heat of
contention, you would amend by truth in judgment of doctrine. But that which
is written of gifts and rewards, Deuteronomy 16.19.
they blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the just: is no
truer in judges and arbiters of civil causes, then in you and The Remist^, who
press these places, of Ierom, touching the mystery of fifteen days, and
security of preaching the Gospel: as the former also of Tertullian, touching
duty* of Ambrose, and Chrysostom, touching honor, and the force of the
Greek word (to see:) with the circumstances of majesty, and so far, and
notwithstanding his great affairs Ecclesiastical: in their annot. on the
Epist. to the Galat. chap. 1. and 2.
yours who meddle with the decision of spiritual matters. The gifts, which
partly the policy of the Pope has enterteined you with, in his Seminaries,
and affairs; partly the state of the Papacy does yield to such as speak
things pleasing him: they do blind your eyes, and pervert your words, that you
think darkness to be light, and light, darkness; and call evil good, and good
evil. They make you not to see in Paul to the Galatians his direct purpose of
overthrowing that, which you would have him build. They move you to deprave the
circumstances of his words, as though he proved him self inferior to Peter in
that by which he proves him self not inferior. They stir you to transform
his summission into subjection: and to abuse the spirit of his apostolic
modesty to the raising up of the Papal pride and pomp of the supremacy.
Paul went to see Peter with a desire of knowing him, which the Greek word
imports: as they use (says In epist. ad Galat. cap. 1.
Chrysostom) to speak, who go to see great and famous cities. You can not see
that Chrysostom says (on the same place) that Paul (...).
was Peter's equal in dignity, to say no more: but you take this note of his,
and puff it up with the word of Majesty; thereby to make the simple reader to
conceive, that Peter was as stately as The Pope.
he to whom Maiestate tua. Paul. Manut. Epist. lib. 8. ad Pium quart.
Pontisicem maximum.
that term is used. Paul went to Jerusalem Act. 9.26
from the city of Damascus: not much above a hundred miles. You say he went,
so far, so long a journey: as though it had been no less then hence to go to
the court of Rome, which c. Ego N. Episcopus. extra. de iureiurando. Limina
Apostolorum singulis annis per me aut per certum nuntium visitabo, nisi eorum
absoluar licentia: sic me Deus adiuuet and haec sancta Euangelia.
Bishops do to the Pope, not of their own accord (as Paul,) but enforced
thereto by solemn oath; not twice in seventeen years (as Paul,) but every
year once, by them selves, or by their messengers, unless the Pope dispense
with them. But of all the rest, that passes, that you say he went to
Jerusalem, to see Peter, notwithstanding his great affairs ecclesiastical.
Here was art, by the way, to show, that Bishops may neglect their own charge to
go to see the Pope, under the color of Paul's example. And to hide this art, it
was an other point of art: if it be known, it is naught worth. For what were
these great affairs ecclesiastical, which Paul omitted to see Peter?
Forsooth, Act. 9.24.
at Damascus the Jews lay in wait, and watched the gates of the city day
and night that they might kill him: in so much that he was feign to be conveyed
away by the wall in the night time, the disciples letting him down in a
basket; and so he escaped to Jerusalem. These are the affairs, the great
affairs ecclesiastical, the which notwithstanding, Paul went from Damascus
to Jerusalem to see Peter. Wherein, he had a reverent regard to the supremacy
of Peter, as you say: as Greg. Martin in his treatise of Christian
peregrination.
a friend of yours says, he went in pilgrimage to Peter. Whether of you
applies the place to better purpose, and fitter for the text: it may be a
question. But in show it seems to make more for pilgrimage, then for the
supremacy.


Heart. See, what wrong you do to that learned man. He says, that when Paul
went to see Peter, he made a certain pilgrimage: and you report him to have
said, that he went in pilgrimage.


Rainoldes. He made a certain pilgrimage: I cry you mercy. I thought he
would have proved that kind of pilgrimage which our Church reproves: and so
he meant to do; at least, he pretended it. But, in proving it, he dalieth
(like a Sophister) with a certain pilgrimage, such as our Church allows. You
might as well say, that I came from Oxford in pilgrimage to you: in a certain
pilgrimage. And he was ouerseene, that amongst examples of pilgrimage in
scripture, he did not mention Genesis 47.9.
Jacob: who says that he spent his life time in pilgrimage; yea, and that his
fathers spent in their pilgrimages longer time then he. But whatsoever show the
fact of Paul has for a certain pilgrimage, in that he went to see Peter: it
has no show at all for Peter's supremacy. Nay, the whole discourse of Paul in
that point, does drive flat against it: as it has appeared (in Chap. 3.
Diuis. 1.
part thereof) already. Wherefore, you were abused by them who sent you thither.
You should have done better to have contained your self within the Acts of
the Apostles. And if your two places, in the first, and the fifteenth, had not
force enough to prove that which you would: you might in steed thereof have
taken two other, out of the eight, and the eleventh, which have force enough to
prove that which you should. For, in the one, Act. 8.14.
the Apostles which were at Jerusalem, sent Peter and John to the people of
Samaria, to strengthen them in the faith through the gift of the holy Ghost. In
the other, Act. 11.3.
the Apostles and brethren that were in Jury called Peter to an account (when
he had preached to Cornelius,) why he went in to men uncircumcised, and did
eat with them.


Heart. Alack, you imagine, that the Apostles had equal power with Peter,
because they sent him abroad in commission, and asked him a count of that which
he did. Poor reasons: God wot. For an inferior may entreat his superior to
do his business for him. And specially a body politic or a corporation may
choose their head and send him: as Citizens may send their Mayor to the Prince,
or Parliament, though he be head of the City because he may be more fit to do
their business. And as they may send him, so may they ask a reason of that
which he has done, and call him to account of it. Ween you, that the
Cardinals may not entreat the Pope to do this or that, which shall be
convenient for the commodity of the Church? Or, that the Pope will think his
state to be abased, if they enquire of him why he does this or that? Perhaps
you ween so, because you know neither the Pope, nor the Cardinals. But what
say you then to your own selves? Do not your Seniours in Corpus Christi
College send abroad your President about your College business? Does he not
give you an account of those things which he has done? Or, if he give it not,
may you not ask it of him? And is he therefore not your head?


Rainoldes. Yes, he is our head: but he is such a head, that your head of Rome
had rather you should loose your head, then you should so behead his power. I
told you so much In the first Division of this chapter.
before in effect: and made it plain unto you by Duarens similitude of the
President of a court of Parliament in France, named the head of the court. You
might have conceived the same of our President: and thought his headship as
unfit for the proof of your purpose, as you thought the other. For he is bound
to statutes: by them we send him out, and ask account of that he does. No
statutes bind your Pope: but his lust is his law; and what he will, that is
holy. We may deprive our President if he should commit any heinous crime, as
murder, or adultery. Your Pope, although he be as wilful a murderer, and as
notorious an adulterer as Pope Luit prand. Ticin histor. rer. per Europ.
gestar. lib. 6. cap. 6.7. and 8.
John the twelfth, yea, though he be taken in most horrible incests, and
vilanies of all sorts: yet a Council may not depose him, no not the Emperor
with a Council. It is true yt Otho ye Emp^ror did depose him in a Council
assembled of purpose thereunto. But your Cardinal Turrecremata: and Father
Robert the Jesuit.
Doctors tell us yt the Emperor did it Turrecremata. in sum. de eccles. lib.
2. cap. 103.
de facto, not de iure; Robert. Bellarmin. controuers. 4. part. 1. quaest 5.
of a good zeal, not according to knowledge. Wherefore I would not have you to
use these similitudes, of Presidents in Colleges, and Mayors in Cities, and
heads in Corporations. Or, if you will use them, yet use them to the simple,
whom such similitudes may deceive: but use them not to us, who see the
dissimilitude of them, and can (by Gods grace) discern a fish from a serpent.
Do you think your self, I pray, in good sooth, that Peter (in the Acts of
the Apostles) was as Pope, and the rest of the Apostles as the College of
Cardinals?


Heart. Why ask you me that? as though I spoke not what I thought.


Rainoldes. It would be strange news to hear that ye Cardinals should send ye
Pope in Embassage, (and make him as it were Legate a latere,) chiefly, to pray
for men converted to the faith of Christ, and to preach unto them. The College
of the Apostles sent Peter Act* 8. ver. 15.17. and 25.
to do these things. You seem to say, they did it by entreaty; be it: and,
as a corporation may send their head about their business, because he is more
fit to do it. But might the College of Cardinals send the Pope abroad by ye
like entreaty? Unless perhaps you make this difference between them: that in
other corporations the head sometimes is fitter; but the Pope is fitter for no
business of the Church, then any of his corporation. Howbeit, even of that too,
it follows in part, that Peter was not thoroughly as Pope in the former point.
As for the later, of calling him to account: although your good weening of the
Pope persuadeth you, that he would not think his state to be abased if the
Cardinals should ask him why he does this or that: yet they who knew him
better a great deal, then you, and loved him so well that they would not
belie him, do witness, not only by word but by writing, that he will not be
dealt withal by his inferiors, as Peter was by the Apostles. I mean not your
Canonists: in whose c. ad Apostolatus. Extrauagant. Ne sede vacant. In glossa.
gloss it goes for a famous rule, that none may say unto the Pope, Domine, cur
ita facis?
Sir, why do you so? But I mean the learned and best of your Divines: who
setting the Church above the Pope in authority, mislike that the Pope will not
be subject to the Council. Of whom (to name one for many) John Ferus, a Friar
of S. Francis order, but godlier then Such as Buchanan describes in his
Franciscanus.
the common sort, entreating (in his Commentaries written on the Acts) of the
example of Peter, how he was required to render a reason of that which he had
done, makes this note upon it. Ferus in Act. Apost. cap. 11.
Peter the Apostle, and chief of the Apostles, is constrained to give an
account to the Church, neither does he disdain it: because he knew him self
to be not a Lord, but a minister of the Church. The Church is the Spouse of
christ and lady of the house: Peter a servant and minister. Wherefore the
Church may, not only exact an account of her ministers, but also depose the^
and reject them altogether, if they be not fit. Sic
So did they olim
of old time, quamsaepissime actum est
very often, in Concilijs.
in Councels. But Im pij Pontifices
wicked Bishops, nunc
now, ne ab Ecclesia quidem argui and in ordinem cogi volunt.
will not be reproved, no not of the Church, nor be ordered by it: as though
they were Lords, not ministers. Therefore Iusto Dei iudicio ab omnibus et
singulis confunduotur.
they are confounded of all and each in several, by the just judgment of God.
Do you know what Bishops they be, who refuse to be subject to the Church? Who
say, they are above the Council? Who may judge all, and none may judge them?
This Preacher, a Preacher of your own, not ours, does call them wicked
Bishops. The Lord of his mercy make his words a prophecy: that those wicked
Bishops may be confounded of all and each in several, by the just judgment of
God.


Heart. You bring me words of Ferus, which were not his, perhaps, but thrust
into his commentaries before they came unto the print, by some malicious
heretic. For Biblioth. sanctae lib. 6. annotat. 72.
Sixtus Senensis says, that there are witnesses of very good credit, who
avouch that the commentaries of Ferus upon Matthew were corrupted by heretics,
after his death, before they were printed.


Rainoldes. Sixtus says in deed of his Commentaries upon Matthew, that they
were corrupted, chiefly in Commentar. in Matt. lib. 3.
that place, where Ferus speaks of the keys that Christ did promise Peter.
For there is set down, as a special note, that Christ says to Peter, Tibi
dabo cla^es regni coelorum: non dicit, regni terrarum.
I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: he says not, the keys
of the kingdom of earth. These words pertain nothing to an earthly power:
which yet some endeavor by them to establish, affirming that Peter received
fulness of power not only in spiritual things, but also temporal. And after
declaration, how this is plainly reproved by S. De considerat. ad Eugen. lib.
1.
Bernard, writing to Pope Eugenius: it is added farther. Peter received the
keys, that is to say, power: not an earthly power, that he might give and take
away dominions and kingdoms: neither such a power that it should be lawful
for him to do what he list, (as many men dream,) but he received the power
of binding and loosing, opening and shutting, remitting and retaining sins:
neither this at his pleasure, but as a minister and servant, doing the will of
his Lord. And these are the words, which savor so strongly of an heretical
spirit, that Sixtus says, it is avouched by credible witnesses, the
commentaries of Ferus on Matthew were corrupted, after his death, by heretics,
Praesertim hoc loco: says Sixtus Senensis*
chiefly in this place, before they were printed. Wherein both ye witnesses, and
Sixtus (in my judgment) have showed the^ selves wise. For it is better to
bear men in hand that heretics corrupted the commentaries of Ferus, chiefly
in this place: then it should be thought that the strongest hold of all your
religion [the Popes supreme power to give and take away kingdomes] is shaken by
a man so learned, so famous, so Catholic, as Ferus. But Sixtus says not of
his Commentaries on the Acts, that they were corrupted also by heretics. Yet
some heretics hand may seem to have been in them, chiefly in this place:
where he does reprove the arrogancy of the Popes, and names them wicked
Bishops. Wherefore it would do well, that the oversight of Sixtus, herein, were
mended by some other Sixtus: who might say as much of Ferus on the Acts, as
Sixtus says of him on Matthew. Perhaps you have not witnesses, that will avouch
this, as some avouched that. The least matter of a thousand. For two or three
such as Popish Chronicle writers.
Surius, Pontacus, and Genebrardus, men that have sold them selves to make lies
in the defense of Popery, will be ready (on the credit of a Two knights of
the post.
Lindan or Bolsecke,) not only to say it but to Chronicle it too. Here is all the difficulty, that Ferns in Acta Apost. Coloniae. 1567. apud haeredes
Arnoldi Birckman cum priuileg. Caes. May. In Matthaeum, Maguneiae, 1559.
apud Franciscum Behem cum priuilegio Caesar. May and Regis Gallorum.
these books are printed thus amongst your selves: who set them forth first,
and we receive them at your hands. A great fault, I know not whether of
printers, or censours and allowers of books to the print: who suffer such
scandalous places to be printed. Yea In Acta Apost. Parisiis, 1568. apud
Sonnium cum priuileg. Regis and Caesar. May. and Coloniae, 1577. apud
Geruin. Calen. and haeredes Quent. In Matthaeum, Lugduni 1562. apud haeredes*
Iuntae: and Antuerpiae, 1570. apud Philip. Nutium.
to be printed so still: specially when Sixtus Senensis has said and credible
witnesses have avouched that heretics did corrupt them. No, no, M. Heart, it is
too stale a jest to say that heretics have corrupted the commentaries of
Ferus. For the abomination of the Popes supremacy, oppressing both the
magistracy of the common wealth, and ministry of the Church, is grown to
such outrage: that if we (whom you call heretics) should hold our peace, the
stones would cry against it.


Heart. What needs all this of Ferus? Or Sixtus? Or Canonistes? Or I know not
who? You called me to the scriptures, when I brought the Fathers: and now from
the scriptures you bring me to writers of our own age.


Rainoldes. Not from the scriptures to them: but to the scriptures by them. As
Christ, when the Phariseis sclaundered his works, Mat. 12.27.
alleged the example of their own children thereby to make them see the truth.
And as he said to them, therefore your children shall be your judges: so I say
to you, therefore your brethren shall be your judges.


Heart. I grant that the Pope does not in all respects submit him self, as
Peter, to give account of his doings, both to the Apostles, and to inferior
Christians. But Ferus should have considered, and so must you, that the times
are not like. It were not convenient for him to do so now.


Rainoldes. So I thought: the case is altered. You mean by [the times,] the
me^, who live in the times, I trow. In deed they are not like. For Peter was
then a preacher of the Gospel, as Pastors are now: and the Pope now is a
Prince of the world, as Nero was then.


The fifth Chapter. The Fathers 1 are no touchstone for trial of the truth in
controversies of religion, but the Scripture only. 2 Their writings are
corrupted: and counterfeits do bear their names. 3 The sayings, alleged out
of their right writings, prove not the pretended supremacy of Peter.
HEART. The first Division.
What soever difference there is between the Pope and Peter in state, and power
of worldly government: yet Peter had the same authority and primacie over the
Apostles, which the Pope claims over all Bishops. And this (because you will
not yield unto the Scriptures) I will prove by the Fathers: whose testimonies
of it are most clear and evident.


Rainoldes. Whether I, or you, refuse to yield unto the scriptures: let the
godly judge. As for the Fathers: I like your dealing well, in part. For I
wished, that first you would go through with the Scriptures: and then (when you
had found nothing in them) come to the Fathers afterward. But I wish further,
if I might obtain it, that you had the Scriptures in such price and honor, as
the word of God: that no word of men should be matched with them to build your
faith upon. For God has given his word to be Ps. 119.105.
a lantern to our feet, and a light to our path: that we may see the way to
heaven, and walk in it. And 2. Tim 3.15.
the holy Ghost says, that the Scriptures are able to make us wise unto
salvation: wise, by instructing us in the faith of Christ; unto salvation, by
leading us to Ioh. 20.31.
life through that faith. Wherefore since we confer about a point of wisdom
perteining unto faith and life: you should do very well to rest on the
Scriptures as the only touchstone for trial of the truth therein.


Heart. Now at length I hear that, which I looked for. I thought, for all your
duetifull words of the Fathers, that you would come over to the Scriptures
only, before you made an end.


Rainoldes. Why? Is my behavior toward men undutiful: because I am duetifull
unto God above them?


Heart. There is a worthy treatise of an ancient writer, Vincentius Lirinensis,
Aduersus profanas ommium haerese^n nouationes.
against the profane innouations of all heresies, Bristow, Motiu. 14.
a passing fine book: The preface of the Motives.
which it is wished that al such should read, as will know the truth. You have
read it perhaps: and what think you of it? Is it not Staplet. princ. doctr.
lib. 10. cap 11.
a golden book?


Rainoldes. The book is good enough, if it have a wise reader.


Heart. Say you so? Yet some there be of your side, who are afraid of the name
of Vincentius Lirinensis.


Rainoldes. They are worse afraid then hurt, for any thing that I know. But
what of Vincentius?


Heart. He says Vincent. Lirin. cap. 35.
it is so common a practice of heretics to allege the scripture, that they
never bring almost ought of their own, but they seek to shadow it with words
of scripture too. And having showed this by sundry examples, he adds that
cap. 37.
therein they follow the practice of the Devil, their master. Who took our
Savior Christ, and set him on a pinnacle of the temple, and said unto him, If
thou be the son of God, cast thy self down: For it is written, that he will
give his Angels charge over thee, that they shall keep thee in all thy ways:
with their hands they shall lift thee up, least perhaps thou dash thy foot
against a stone. If thou, says he, be the son of God, cast thy self down.
Why? For it is written. We must with great heed observe and remember the
doctrine of this place: that when we see words of the Prophets or Apostles
brought forth by any men against the Catholic faith, we way be assured by
this great example of the authority of the Gospel, that the Devil does speak
by them. Thus says that ancient Father, Vince^tius Lirinensis. Whose words do
manifestly disprove your opinion, that the truth of points in faith should be
tried by the scripture only.


Rainoldes. The L. Inclu^^e. Dig. de legib. Senatusque consult.
civil law says, that it is uncivil, for a man, not having weighed the whole
law, to give advise or judgment, some one parcel of it being alone proposed.
Your dealing with the words of Vincentius Lirinensis is guilty of this
vnciuilitie. For he, to instruct us, how we may continue sound in the faith,
against the guiles of heretics and suttletie of Satan, who does transform him
self into an Angel of light: Vincent. Lirin. cap. 36.
teaches that our Savior has to this intent both forewarned us of the
danger, and foreshewed us a remedy. Forewarned us of the danger, in the
precept that he gave: Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep
clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves. For what, says he, is sheep
clothing, but the sincere and soft words of the Scripture, which are alleged
by false prophets, as well as by the true? What are the ravening wolves, but
the cruel meanings and senses of heretics, which, under sheep clothing, do
rent the flock of Christ? Foreshewed us a remedy, in the lesson that he
adioined: Ye shall know them by their fruits. That is to say, when they be gin
not only to allege those words but to expound them, and citing them as true
prophets, do not interpret them as true prophets: then are the wolves seen by
their teeth and ravening; then are their bloody natures known for all their
fleeces; cap. 37.
then are the faithful teachers discerned from seducers, the true Apostles
from the false, the Angel of light from the Angel of darkness, the ministers
of righteousness from the ministers of Satan. Which things, set down and
prosequuted more amply, and fully, he draws in fine unto this conclusion,
(the sum of all his treatise:) cap. 38. and 41.
that, although the scriptures alone be sufficient for all points of faith,
yet is it not sufficient to have a show of the words, but we must also have
the substance of the sense, that is, the true and natural meaning of the
scriptures. Now, if this discourse of his be weighed whole, and not a parcel
of it severed from the rest: what can you prove thereby, more then I will
grant? Nay more then I have granted and proved already, Chapt. 2. Division 2.
when I showed that the right sense of the scripture expounded by the
scripture, is the sword of Gods spirit, wherewith all heresies must be
vanquished. The Devil (you say) alleged the words of the scripture against
Christ. He did so. Yet, he alleged the^, not wholly and entirely, as Vince^tius
has them: but, as Matthew 4.6. and Luke 4.10 Both omitting and leaving the
words (In all thy ways) out of the text of scripture (Psalm. 91.11.) which the
Devil alleged.
the Evangelists rehearse them, maimedly. Wherein, if Vincentius, observing
the attempt that the Devil alleged the words of the scripture; had withal
observed the suttletie of the tempter, how he alleged them: he might have
better noted the deceites of heretics abusing scripture, then he did; and so
have better fensed the right-beleeuing Christians with power of scripture, then
he has. For he reports it so, as if the Devil had alleged that whole place
of the scripture: He will give his Angels charge over thee, that they shall
keep thee In omnibus vijs tuis: which words are added by Vincentius, as if
the Evangelists had not left them out.
in all thy ways: with their hands they shall lift thee up, and so forth.
Whereas the devil, alleging the rest, of charge given, to keep him and
uphold him, left out of the middle words of keeping him [in all his ways:]
because they made directly against that to which he did tempt Christ, as Chapt.
2. Division 3.
I have declared. Wherefore if Vincentius had thought, that the scripture is no
sufficient stay for us against heretics, because it is alleged as well by
false teachers, as it is by true, by the Devil as by Christ: he must have
rather craved pardon, for not espying the policy of Satan; then liking, for
impairing the credit of the word of God. But although he saw not all in
particular: nevertheless in general he joins with the truth. For Vincent.
Lirin. cap. 37.
he says that heretics follow the Devil, Quotiescunque diuinae legi^
sententias proferunt quibus male interpretatis errores suos astruere conentur.
as often as they bring forth sentences of scripture, by which being expounded
amiss, they go about to maintain their errors. So that, the scripture,
which heretics bring forth against the Catholic faith, is the scripture
taken in a wrong sense, and misse-expounded, by his judgment. But I mean the
scripture expounded aright, when I say that points of faith should be tried by
the scripture only. The words of Vincentius therefore, which you cited, do
rather prove that which I defend, then disprove it. Neither make they more
against us then you: unless you beg all that which is in controversy, that
Popery is the Catholic faith. For then you may conclude that we bring the
scripture against the Catholic faith, when we bring it against Popery. An
easy way to conquest, if begging can procure you that. But I mind not to give
it: and right to it you have not. You must win it, if you will wear it.


Heart. Whither that the faith of the Church of Rome, which you call Popery, be
the Catholic faith or no: because it is the later part of our conference,
concerning one faith; I will not confound it with this of one head. But what
do you mean to say that the words of Vincentius, which I cited, disprove not
your assertion, nor make against you more then us? when he says, that
heretics do allege the scripture, as also did the Devil: and you allege it
too, and think it a sufficient fense of your opinions.


Rainoldes. So do you allege it too: do you not? And what is there against
us, in those words, more then against you? would you not laugh at me, if I
should reason thus: Heretics allege scripture; so do the Papists too:
therefore they are heretics? Mat. 4.6.10 Vnam sanc^^m. Extra. De m^iorit. and
obedientia.
The Devil alleged scripture: so does the Pope too: therefore he is the
Devils scholar?


Heart. But we do not allege, only, the scripture: nor will be tried by it
alone. The heretics appeal to nothing but to scripture: and the Devil
alleged the scripture only against Christ.


Rainoldes. This is more, then you ^^nde in the words of Vincentius: it is
your own fancy. He says, that heretics do allege the scripture: that,
nothing else but it, he says not. Neither could he have said so without a lie.
For they allege many reasons beside the scripture, even whatsoever helps to
countenance their errors: sometime the Author operis imperfect. in Matt. hom. 48.
Church, sometime Iren. aduers. haeres. lib. 3. ca. 2.
Tradition, sometime Augustine. co^tr. Maximin. Aria^. episcop. lib. 1.
Councels, sometime De baptism. Contr. Donatist. lib. 3. cap. 2.
Fathers, sometime In Johan. Tractat. 13.
Miracles, sometime De vnitat. eccles. cap. 16.
Visions, sometime Epist. 165. ad Generosum.
Succession of Bishops, sometime Eusebius. histor. eccles. li. 5. ca. 14. Socrat.
li. 4. c. 23. Theodoret. li. 1. ca. 16. and caet. histor. ecclesiast.
such other Motives, as your Bristow calls them. Yea, they have greater
advantage for their errors against the catholic faith, by these, then by
scripture. For these may be truly alleged against it, as they have been
often: the scripture can never, but falsely, and wrongfully. As for that the
Devil alleged the scripture only, against Christ: you think his example
discrediteth the trial of truth in points of faith by the scripture only. And
so it may seem to a weak eye. But to such as mark it with a sharper sight,
it does confirm it rather. For Genesis 3.1.
that subtle serpent knowing what baits are fittest to take the^, whom 1. Pet.
5.8.
as a roaring lion he seeks to devour: is want to set upon men with those
persuasions, which he is most lykely to seduce them by. To one he promises
Genesis 3.5.
knowledge of good and evil, as to Eve; an other he hardneth with Exodus 7.22.
lying wonders, as Pharao; the prophet he tells of 1. King. 13.18.
an Angels speech; the king he deceives by 2. Chron. 18.11.
the consent of false prophets; to ye Jews he pretends Ier. 7.4.
the temple of the Lord; to the Heathens he shows Act. 19.27.
universality and Act. 17.19.
antiquity: in a word he leaves Deuteronomy. 13.2. 1. King. 18.28. Ier. 23.25. Ioh.
7. ver. 42. and 48. and 52. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. 1. Tim. 4.2. and so forth in the
rest of the Scriptures.
no means unattempted whereby he may entangle the souls of mankind, and
wrappe them in the snares of death. Wherefore, as in his instruments he uses
other Motives to prevail with others: so him self of likelihood would have
used them specially to Christ, and not the scripture only, had he not known,
that only scripture (if any thing) would prevail with him. Stapleton,
intending to persuade us, that Peter, and (by reason of Peter) the Pope is
supreme head of the Church: Princip. doctrine. lib. 6. in praefat.
says that he will prove it Sola ea, quae ex scripturis sacris peti potest
demonstratione.
by only demonstration out of the scriptures, in effect, and that Ex solis
scripturis.
by only scriptures it may be proved fully enough and abundantly. Is not this
a token, that we, whom he seeks to win by his persuasions, will not be won
thereto, but only by the scriptures? So the Devils practice in alleging
scripture only to Christ, is a great presumption, that Christ accounted
nothing a ground of faith and duty, but only the scripture. Whereof a surer
argument is the whole behavior of Christ against the Devil: whom Matt. 4.
ver. 4. and 7. and 10.
in every one of his three tentations he put to flight still with scripture, It
is written. And although the Devil (to drive him from that hold) alleged
scripture also: yet Christ replied not with Matt. 22.9.
Fathers or Doctors, or Rabbines of the Synagogue, but with the word of his
heavenly Father; and, against ye maimed and wrested words of scripture, he set
the scripture alleged rightly. Wherefore let As Bristow does, in his Motives
to the Catholic faith. Motiu. 48.
your Captains instruct their soldiers as they list, to get us into the
plain fields of their Motives, out of our weak and false castle of only
scripture, as Richard Bristow Priest, Licentiat in Divinity.
a Licentiat terms it: the action of Christ is the instruction of Christians;
the Prince of darkness, could not get him out of that, neither shall the Princes
band get out us. Nay, that this castle (how weak and false soever false-harted
weakelinges count it,) has ordinance enough to shake your Motives into
fitters, and can alone subdue all adversary powers: I need not the practice
of Christ, and word of God, against you, to prove it. Your own golden author,
Vincentius Lirinensis, says it. For himself affirms that Vincent. Lirin.
cap. 2. and 41.
scripture is sufficient alone, against heretics, so that it be taken in the
right sense. But scripture is not scripture, unless it be taken in the right
sense: in the which alone (...) 2. Tim. 3.16.
it came from God by inspiration, and is (...). Iam. 1.^8
the word of God. Wherefore, if you will take the gold of Vincentius, you must
grant, that scripture alone is sufficient to try the truth from error, and to
maintain the Catholic faith against heresy.


Heart. You do not deal well in misreporting so the words of Vincentius. For
Vincent. Lirin. cap. 1.
he sets down two means, by the which we must fense our faith against the
guiles of heretics, and eschew their snares: Primo, diuinae legis autoritate.
first, by the authority (says he) of the scripture; Deinde, ecclesi ae
catholicae traditione.
then, by the tradition of the catholic Church. You leave out altogether that
which he says of tradition* and handle him in such sort as though he had
spoken for the scripture only.


Rainoldes. It is not your purpose, (I hope) to beguile me by the color of
his words. It may be, that your self are beguiled in them. For Vincent.
Lirin. cap. 2.
he, by [the tradition of the catholic church] meant the true and right
exposition of the scripture, made by faithful pastors and teachers of the
church: as his own words immediately show. And this I made mention of, in that
I said, that Perfectus scripturarum canon.
scripture is sufficient alone against heretics Vt Propheticae and Apostolicae
interpretationis linea secu^dum ecclesiastici and catholici sensus normam
dirigatur.
if it be taken in the right sense; the catholic sense he calls it. You
seem to imagine, that he meant by the word, [tradition,] unwritten verities,
as they have bin termed, or as you term them now, Council. Trident. Sess. 4.
traditions: which the Trent-Councell does account as much of, as of
scriptures, and coupleth them together to make a sufficient and perfect rule of
truth: as though that only scriptures were insufficient for it. Which error
was so far from the mind of Vincentius, that Vincent. Lirin. cap. 2. and 41.
he says expressly, that he does not add the tradition of the Church, to the
authority of the scriptures, as though that Scripturarum canon
the scriptures were not themselves Solus
alone Sufficit
sufficient Ad omnia
for all things, yea Satis superque.
more then sufficient: but to show, that, because heretics do wrest and
misse-expound the scriptures, therefore we must learn their right sense and
meaning, delivered to the godly by the ministry of the Church. In which
consideration, as S. Paul writes, that he did 1. Cor. 15.3. (...).
deliver according to the scriptures the things which he taught, and thereupon
names his doctrine, (...) 2 Thessalonians. 2.15.
traditions, as you would say, things delivered: so Vincentius mentions both
the Churches Cap. 1. and 4^. Ecclesiae traditionem, and interpretationem.
tradition, to note the ministry of the Church delivering the sense of
scriptures; and the Churches Ecclesiae traditiones, and catholici dogmatis
regulas. Cap. 38.
traditions, to signify the rules of faith, according whereunto the scriptures
are expounded, (as Chapt. 2. Division 2.
I have showed) by scriptures. Wherefore, the words that your Vincentius
speaks touching the tradition, and traditions, of the Church: do join hands
with that which I did deliver of the truth (in points of faith) to be tried by
the scripture only.


Heart. You may not carry so the words of Vincentius away in a cloud. For,
though he may seem to have meant in general by [the tradition of the Church]
the expounding of scriptures according to the rule of their right and Catholic
sense, which the Pastors of the Church deliver: yet coming to particulars he
frames that rule, not out of the scriptures, but out of the opinions which the
Church holds in matters of religion. For, Vincent. Lirin* cap. 38.
he asks him self, when heretics pretend scriptures, what shall the
Catholics do? How shall they discern the truth from falsehood in the
scriptures? Whereto he makes answer, that they must take the scriptures in
the sense of the Church: and therein they must follow, universality,
antiquity, consent. By the which cap. 3* and 4.
threefold means to try the truth, he instructs us that we must hold that,
which the church of our time does hold through all the world universally. If a
part of Christendom divide and cut it self from the faith of the whole: then
are we bound to follow the whole, and not the part. If the whole in our time be
stained with any error: then must we have respect to the former time, and
cleave to antiquity. If all in antiquity agreed not about it: then look too
consent; as, what a generalll Council did decree thereof; or, if no such decree
be, what all the Fathers thought, or if not all, what the most, even they who
continued in the faith and fellowship of the Catholic Church. And whatsoever we
find that not one, or two, but all with one consent have held, written, taught,
plainly, commonly, continually: let us be assured that we must hold also that
without all doubt. Thus Vincentius shows how he would have the truth to be
tried by the church: if ye church be sound, by the universality of our own
time: if that be corrupt, by the antiquity of the former time; if that be at
variance, by the consent of all, or most of the Fathers. Wherefore if you will
stand unto his judgment, to which you give countenance as though you liked it:
you must not call the trial of truth in religion to the scriptures only, but
to the consent of the Fathers rather.


Rainoldes. I liked his judgment in the general point, touching the
sufficiency and perfitnes of scriptures: which (I know) you like not, though
you make greater semblaunce of liking him, then I. If in the particulars I
mislike somewhat, let the blame be laid upon the blameworthy: not me, who
stand to that which he has spoken well; but him, who falls from it. For,
laying his foundation as it were, on a rock: he builds up his house beside
it, on the sand. That scripture is sufficient, alone, against heretics, so
that it be taken in the right sense, expounded by the rules of the Catholic
faith: this has he well avouched, as on the rock of Gods word. But, that the
rules of faith, and sense of the scripture must be tried and judged by the
consent, antiquity, and universality of the Church: this has he added not so
well, as on the sand of men's opinions. The difference of the points may be
perceived by S. Austin: who ioining in the former of them with Vincentius, does
leave him in the later. For In his book entitled De doctrina Christiana: as it
is ^^ewed before, Chapt. 2. Diuis. 2.
Austin, as he sets the ground of religion in the right sense and Catholic
meaning of the scripture: so teaches he that this must be known and tried by
the scripture it self, ye infallible rule of truth; not by the fickle minds of
me^. And, to have taught hereof as Austin does, it had agreed best with the
foundation of Vincentius: which makes Scripturarum canon solus sibi sufficit
ad vniuersa. Vincent. cap. 41.
the rule of scriptures, alone, sufficient for all things. But because the
weaker and ruder sort of Christians, have not skill to know the right
exposition of scripture from the wrong: therefore he, tempering him self to
their infirmity, does give them outward sensible marks to know it by. Wherein
he deals with them, as if a Philosopher, having said that a man is
areasonable creature, should, because his scholars cannot discern of reason
(whereof the show is such in many brute beasts, that Lactant. de ira Dei cap.
7. Plutarch. in opusc. quod brat. anim. ration. vtantur.
some have thought them reasonable) describe him more plainly by outward
marks, and accidents, as namely, that he has two feet, and no feathers. They
report, that Diogen. Laert. de vit. philosopho^. lib. 6.
Plato defined a man so: a man, is a living creature, two-footed, vn-feathered.
For which definition when he was commended, Diogenes took a Capon: and having
plucked his feathers off, did bring him in to the school of Plato, saying, This
is Platoes man. The holy word of God is the same in the Church, that reason is
in a man. Whereupon we give it for an essential mark (as I may term it) of
the Church, by which the Church is surely known and discerned. But the show of
Gods word is such in many heretics, (as of reason in brute beasts,) that
some, who have no skill to discern that mark, do think it impossible to
know the Church by it. The authors of the Romane-Dictates. Controu. 1. quaest.
3. The discovery of Nicols* part. 3. Bristow, in his Motives and Demands.
Your fellows hereupon describe the Church by outward and accidental marks:
as namely, by antiquity, succession, consent. These are very plausible, and
many do commend them highly. But he that has half an eye of a Philosopher, I
mean a wise Christian: need not play Diogenes in plucking feathers off, to
show that these marks may agree to a capon. Now, as they deal with the marks
of the Church: so do you, M. Heart, with the marks of the truth. Not
Vincentius, but you, who cover your errors with the name of Vincentius: and
take things, as necessary, and sure proofs of truth, which he did note, as
probable, and likelye tokens of it only. For he delivered them, not as never
failing, but as holding often: and such, as albeit they do hit sometimes, yet
do they miss sometimes also. Whereof him self is witness, in that he
disproueth them: the first, universality, by the example of the Vincent. (...)
cap. 6.
Arians, and cap. 4.
flies from it to antiquity: the second, antiquity, by the example of the
cap. 5. and 11.
Donatistes, and cap. 4.
flies from it to consent.


Heart. But the third, consent, cap. 4*
he speaks of as never failing; as a necessary token, to know and try the
truth by; as an essential mark, and proper to the points of Catholic faith
and truth. And this is the mark which chiefly I regarded when I alleged
Vincentius: that our questions might be tried by the consent of the Fathers.


Rainoldes. In deed he prefers this mark before the rest, as having held
when they failed. Nevertheless he speaks not so of it neither, as that it
may serve for trial and decision of questions between us. For what does he
acknowledge to be a point approved, and such as we are bound to believe, by
this mark? Even Qui^quid omnes parite^ vno eo demque consensu.
that, which the Fathers all with one consent, have held, written, taught,
plainly, commonly, continually. And who can avouch of any point in question,
that not one or two, but all the Fathers held it; nor only held it, but also
wrote it; nor only wrote it, but also taught it; not darkely, but plainly;
not seldom, but commonly; not for a short season, but continually. Which so
great consent is partly so rare, and hard to be found; partly so unsure, though
it might be found: that cap. ^^
him self (to fashion it to some use and certainetie,) is feign to limit and
restrain it. First, for the matters: that we are to seek and follow their
consent Non in omnibus diuinae legis quaestiunculis.
not in all little questions of the scripture, but in the weighty points of
faith. Then, for the persons: that we must follow all, Vel omnes, vel plures.
or the greater part; because, in many points, all of them consent not.
Finally (which comes nearest to our purpose,) he grants that there may such
heresies arise, as must be dealt withal by the scripture only, and not by the
Fathers. for, purposing to show both in what manner, and what kind of heresies
may be found out and condemned by the consenting sentences of the Fathers: he
says, and confirms, that Neque semper neque omnes haereses hoc modo
impugnandae sunt.
neither all heresies must be assaulted in this sort, nor always, but only
such as are new and green: to weete, when first they spring up, before they
have falsisied the rules of ancient faith, the very straitenes of time not
suffering them to do it, and before (the poison spreading abroad farther,) they
endeavor to corrupt the writings of the Fathers. But Dilatatae and inueteratae
haereses nequaquam hac via aggredien dae sunt: eo quod, prolixo temporum
tractu, longa his ^urandae veritatis patuerit occasio.
heresies that are spread abroad, and waxed old, must not be set upon in this
sort; because they, by long continuance of time, have had long occasion to
steal away the truth. And therefore whatsoever profanities there be, either of
schisms, or heresies, that are waxed ancient: Nullo modo ^os oportet.
we must in no case deal otherwise with them, then either to convince them,
(if it be nedeful,) by the Sola Scripturarum autorita^^^*
authority of scriptures only; or at the least avoid them, being of old time
convicted and condemned already by the general councels of Catholic Bishops.
Lo, when heresies are grown to be in years ancient, and ample in places;
when they have got antiquity, and universality: then must we fight against
them, not by consent of Fathers, but by the authority of the scriptures only.
This is the sentence of Vincentius Lirinensis, in that passing fine book
against the profane innouations of all heresies. Is it not a golden sentence?


Heart. The cause why Vincentius affirms, that heresies when they are spread
far, The second Division.
and have long continued, are to be confuted by the scriptures only, not by
consent of Fathers: is that (which he does point too) of endeavoring to
corrupt the writings of the Fathers; a common practice of heresies, if occasion
and time serve them. But there is no color why therefore you should refuse to
deal with us by the consent of Fathers. For, neither are the doctrines which
we profess, heresies, much less old and ample heresies, such as he speaks
of: nor have we endeavored to corrupt the writings of the Fathers, nay, we
have kept them, and endeavor daily to set them forth most perfitly. But your
heresies in deed, although they sprang of late, and may be counted new and
green; yet have they endeavored to corrupt the Fathers since, and have done
it. Torrensis pr^^fat. confess. Augustine. ad Lectorem.
The practice of Erasmus is famous therein. Of whom to say nothing what
censures have been given by other worthy men, who^ Torrensis names: Marian
Victorius, in Commentaries that he set forth upon the former three tomes of S.
Jerome, reproves most learnedly more then six hundred errors thrust into
them by Erasmus, either in expounding, or ill correcting them. And Torrensis,
in his preface to the Confession of S. Austin, declares sundry books to be S.
Austins own, which Erasmus had noted as falsely fathered on him. Wherefore, if
by Vincentius you mind to touch them, who endeavor to corrupt the writings of
the Fathers: cast out the beam out of your own eye, before you seek a m^at^
in ours.


Rainoldes. Yet you see by the way (though you make have away from it) what
rotten posts they be, whereon, as principal pillars, your church and faith is
built, universality, antiquity, consent. Of which it is showed by Vincentius
himself, that heresies may justly claim the two former, universality and
antiquity: and make a fair challenge to the third, consent, in process of
time; so cunningly can they file the Fathers to their purposes. But you may not
be touched with any such suspicio^. Why? Because the doctrines which you
profess, are not old and ample heresies, you say, no not heresies; ours are
so, not yours. Whether in opinions of faith and religion, which are in
controversy between us, you or we do hold heresies: that is the point in
question. Your, or mine; yea, or nay; is no sufficient proof of either. But of
which soever it shall appear by conference that they are repugnant to the holy
scriptures: let them be judged heresies; and the men, heretics, who stubburnly
maintain them. Thus much you can not choose but grant, that your opinions are
old, and spread abroad: for Bristow Demand. 31 and 3^.
you claim antiquity, and universality; whereof you say that our opinions
have neither. It is more likely therefore, by Vincentius, that you, who Prolixo
temporum tractu, longa furandae veritatis occasio.
by long continuance of time, have had long occasion to steal away the truth,
should corrupt the Fathers, then we who have not had it. And in very truth, as
the worship of Images, (the greatest abomination that first prevailed in
Popery) was confirmed by Scriptis admodum incertis and fabulosis.
writings very uncertain and fabulous, yea by Muliebribus somnijs.
dreams of women, and Daemonum ^pectris.
visions of Devils in the Action. 4. and 5.
second Nicen Council; (as the thing it self, and Adrianus postea sextus Papa
quod libe^. 6. Claudius Espencaeus Parisiensis Theologus commentar. in poster.
epist. ad Timoth. cap. 4.
great Clerks of your own testify:) so the rest of your errors, which
ouerflowed Christendom in darkness of superstition, have been most authorized
by forged deeds, and bastard writings, begotten by some varlets, and fathered
on the Doctors. The Schoolmen and Canonists, whose hands were chief in this
iniquity, did bear the whole sway for many years together in Uniuersities
and Churches. The Doctors and Fathers were pretended much, but more pretended,
then regarded: and their books corrupted, what through ignorance of
scriueners, who copied them out before the use of printing, what through
impudence of forgers, who coined counterfeites in their names. Now, when they
lay thus distressed and diseased in the dust of Libraries: Erasmus, a man of
excellent judgment, and no less industrious, then learned, and witty, did
enterprise first to cure them, and brought them forth into the light. In the
works of S. Jerome, which were most of all depraved above others, chiefly, the
former tomes: he did what he could, both to cleanse them from blemishes, and to
lighten them with his notes. Erasm. praefat. ad Gulielm. Waram. archiep.
Cantuar.
He professed, that his conjectures in restoring of places had not satisfied
himself always. He promised, that if any man should restore them better: he
would both embrace his travail very gladly, and rejoice at the public profit.
What sparkle of thankfulness, but I let go thankfulness, what sparkle of
ingenuitie was there, and good nature, in Marian Victorius: Victor. praefat. ad
Pium quart. in tres priores tomos Hieronymi.
who requiteth such a work so carefully attempted, so painfully performed, so
modestly excused, with the tauntes and contumelies of erring, of lying, of
craftines of ignorance, of heresy, of impiety? In reprehens. Sophistarum.
Aristotle writes of them, who begin a thing in points of learning, that
although they seem to do less then others, who receive it of them, and after
add thereto, yet they do more in deed: because the beginning of every thing is
hardest, and it is easy to add. Whereupon, he craves of such as he has
sought to benefit by his labor, thanks, for that he found; pardon, for that
he missed. If Victorius have profited no better in the school of Christ, let
him go to Aristotle: and learn, first, to think more humbly of him self;
afterward, to deal more modestly with others. And you, who like of him,
because he finds fault with the doings of Erasmus; as a shoemaker did with
the picture of Apelles, for missing in a shoo-latchet: may know, that
Displicuit permultis pierate and doctrina claris.
good and learned men among your selves have found fault with him, for being
bold beyond the shoo. That does Johan. Molanus, Censor Apostolicus et Regius:
in Censura scholiorum Mar. Vict.
Molanus witness, one of your chiefest Doctors and Censors of books: who (in S.
Ieromes works, Ex officina Christophori Plantini. anno Dom. 1578.
set forth at Anwerpe,) has therefore circumcised the lips of Victorius.


Heart. Molanus has reproved and corrected him for uncivil speeches against
the person of Erasmus, as wherein Praeter Christianam modestiam.
he past the bounds of Christian modesty: not for oversight in that he laid
errors to Erasmus charge. Though the special point for which we blame
Erasmus, is not this so much of errors in S. Jerome. His censures on S. Austin
are misliked most: in that he rejects sundry books as counterfeit, which
Torrensis proves to be S. Austins own. Whereof the importance and danger is
the greater, because some will have nothing taken for S. Austins, but what
Erasmus has allowed.


Rainoldes. Molanus did cover the sins of Victorius, when he found no other
fault with his notes, but of uncivil speeches. If favor to the man, and
fancy to the cause had not made him partial: he might have said of him, that
as he past the bounds of Christian modesty in Not content to call him
somniatorem, and haereticum: but he must ca^ him also haereticorum omnium
pessimum.
railing at Erasmus person, so had he past the bounds of Christian truth in
noting errors of Erasmus. But Marian. Victorius praefat. ad Pium quart. in his
editions of S. Ierom, uncorrected by Molanus, as at Paris. 1579. and the former.
he that would affirm Erasmus to be ignorant of the Greek tongue, whereof his
works so many, both in divinity, and humanity, through all sorts of writers
do proclaim the contrary; needs no other Censor to advertise men, with
what eyes he looked into Erasmus doings. It was not Erasmus ignorance of
Greek, which bredde so many errors in his corrections of, or notes upon, S.
Jerome. It was his knowledge of the Latin, the Roman churches faults. It was
his skill of the Italian abuses of the Pope. It was Antidotus. Erasm. annotat.
in epist. ad Nepotianum, ad Rusticum, ad Demetriadem, etc. passim.
the triacle which he gives that Victor. praefat. ad Pium quart^* Erasmus
Roterodamus, Catholici hominis parts professus. antidoti nomine venenum sudit.
seems poison unto you. These things, because they moved many to suspect
that somewhat in Popery was not of the best: it was thought expedient that they
should be taken out of S. Jerome. Victorius (to do it with a fair show)
pretended other errors: but through too much choler he bewraied his humor.
He lacked that discretion which has been showed since by the Divines of Louan,
in setting forth the notes of Viues on S. Austin. For In Augustine. de ciuit.
Dei: both in the Prefaces of Viues, and in his Commentaries throughout.
they have omitted a great many things wherein Viues touched their Popes and
Churches sores: yet say they not so much. Only In titulo appendicis Tomi quinti
operum Augustini, A^t^erp. Plantin.
they say, that Nonnullis tamen omissis, ex Censura facultatis Theologicae
Louaniensis.
certain things are omitted: certain, as not many; and errors they name them
not; neither tell they what. Now, if the notes of Viues on S. Austin have found
such disfavor: the censures of Erasmus, on him, may better bear it. And, to
say the truth, they have deserved it at your hands. For in those censures has
Erasmus showed that many books do falsely bear S. Austins name, by which, as
by the warrant of S. Austins judgment, sundry of your Schoolemens and
Canonists dreams have been advanced and aided. But he rejects some as
counterfeit, you say, which Torrensis proves to be S. Austins own. And what
marvel is it, if amongst hundreds he were deceived in one or two? And having
had trial of many false titles, he thought somefalse which were not? A fish,
that has been touched once with the hook, is said to fear the hook under
every meat. They, who by experience have felt that some are coosiners, which
bear the face of honest men, must be borne with, if they suspect a man
sometimes whom they need not: chiefly, since it proves a greater point of
wisdom to mistrust an honest man, then to trust a knave. For, to trust a
knave, has undone many, and brought them past recovery. To mistrust an honest
man, though it be a fault, yet is it less dangerous, and may be sooner
mended. But what shall we think of your Torrensis policy? Who, under this
pretense that Erasmus judged some books not to be S. Austins, which are: In
confession. August* li. 1. c. 9. tit. 2. etc. passion.
he cites such, as S. Austins, As nam^ly the Sermon of S. Peter's chair and
other pretty pamphlets of the (...) litter.
which are known and granted to be none of his.


Heart. He does not so simply, but In praefat. confess. Augustine. ad Lectorem.
with an exception, that if all of them be not S. Austins own, as we grant
they be not: yet the most are theirs who lived the same time, and Doctorum
^uxta atque pioru^ hominum plane omn^.
all (no doubt) were written by learned and godly men.


Rainoldes. But out of this exception he does except again, that, although
they do not avail much to convince the opinions of sectaries, nevertheless
there will be godly men and learned, Qui libros illos Augustinianos e^se sinant
and iudicent.
who will permit and judge them to be S. Austins own, and will both take
delight and profit by reading them. Yet amongst these books, for which he
strives so to have them thought S. Austins, there be that teach contrary to S.
Austins doctrine. As namely, the book of visiting the sick: wherein De
visitat. in^irmor. lib. 2. cap. 3.
the bastard Austin allows the worship of Images, as good; which De morib.
eccles. catholicae cap. 34.
the true Austin does note, as an abuse, and says, the Church misliketh it.
But Torrensis could not epsy this sentence of the true Austin: the other of
the bastard (as it is judged by, not Censura Erasmi: Sermo loquutuleii nec
docti, nec diserti. Quid habuere vel frontis vel mentis, qui talia scripta
nobis obtruserunt nomin^ Augustini^
Erasmus only, but Censura Louanie^sium: Non est Augustini.
your Divines of Louan too,) Torrensis confess. Augustine. lib. 4. cap. 9. tit.
4.
he sets for a flower in his Austins confession. So that, if we compare the
dealing of the Jesuit Torrensis, with Erasmus, in taking or refusing the books
of S. Austin: Erasmus, as a plain and well meaning man that were to receive a
sum of of money in angels, finding many bad ones, some light, some cracked,
some sowdered, some counterfeited amongst the^, does upon suspicion distrust a
few good and is loath to take them, for fear of deceiving any whom he should
pay them too. The Jesuit, as a yoonker, who could gain by them, if he might
put them all away, does mingle them one with an other, and prays men to take
them: protesting, that if they be not all English angels, yet they be Flemish;
at least, they are stamped with the image of an angel. And although some
curious and precise men are loath to take them in part of lawful payment: yet
there be good fellows that will permit and judge them to be English angels, and
will (...). Ephesians. 4.14.
play them at dice for their delight and profit too. I, for my part, have a
better liking of Erasmus herein. Specially for that he shows (in his
censures) the reasons that moved him to think, as he does, of the books which
he refuses: so that the church may thereby judge of his judgment. If you
rather fancy the Jesuit Torrensis: use your own discretion. But I would advise
others to beware how they trust you, who do so lightly trust him.


Heart. You excuse Erasmus, as though the suspicion which his censures raise of
some things in S. Austins works, proceeded from a carefulnes, yt he might
neither be deceived, nor deceive. Which if it had been so: his fault were the
lesser. But Prae^at. confess. August. ad Lect.
Torrensis shows, that whereas there are two Tractatus de communi vita and
moribus clericorum.
treatises of his, touching the common life and manners of Clergy men, in which
the spring and orders of the life of monks are faithfully declared: Erasmus,
of malice (as it may seem) for hatred that he bare to monks, removed them both
out of their own place, and put them guilefully amongst Sermones ad ^ratres in
^re^o.
the sermons entitled to the Eremite Friars; giving a note of infamy as to
most of these, so to them withal; though him self deny not, but they were made
by S. Austin. This is more, then distrusting a good angel for the badde. This
is wilful refusing of an angel, as bad, the which he knows to be good.


Rainoldes. If Erasmus did this, not of error, but of malice, for hatred which
he bare to monks, as Torrensis suspecteth that he did: it were a great crime,
and worthy to be published in print unto the world. But if he did it not of
hatred, and malice, if he did it not at all, if he did the contrary, if he
reproved the party by whom it was done, and him self redressed it: how will
Torrensis make amends to Erasmus, whom he has defamed with so lewd a slander?
The sermons, entitled to the Eremit Friars, were impudently forged under S.
Austins name, by some who was him self of that order belike, and gladly would
have gotten credit to his order by the title of such a patron. Erasmus has
marked the most of these sermons with a note of infamy. Wherein, if he
committed any offense, it was, that he marked no more of them so, not that he
marked the most. For, In Censura Sermonum ad Fratres in Eremo, Tom. 10. in
append.
your Louan-Cen^ors do set them out all with as good a note; affirming, not
only, that they are Confictos.
forged, and Satis constat.
known certainly to be written under S. Austins name, A quodam semilatino.
by some pety-latinist, Exclamatorem Gallo flandrum autorem Lipsius fuisse
suspicatur.
a rhetorical moongrell, demy-French, demy-Flemish, as Lipsius does gather by
certain words and phrases: but also that they were reproved and condemned A
Co^seruatore Apostolico ^hegii, anno^ ^414. damnatos and reprobatos.
by an officer of the Popes above eight score years since, and written both
largely and learnedly against by In his book entitled, Venatorium canonicorum
regula^^um.
Malburne of Brussels. This Flemish-French-man then, as he endeavored to write
his sermons Austin-like, that men might think them to be S. Austins own: so
he interlarded them with two treatises, which were in deed Austins, but uttered
to the people of his own Church, and not to Eremite Friars. Erasmus, when he
set forth S. Austins works first, espied the fraud and opened it: neither did
he only remove them both thence, but also left this Hoc loco sequebantur ^cta
^pud populum de disquisitione (...) Augustini Quae habentur inter Epist^las:
and stult^ inserta sunt Eremitici^.
Censure there to keep them out; they are amongst the epistles, and were put
foolishly in amongst the sermons to the Eremite Friars. Now be judge your
self, what the Jesuit deserves, who charge Erasmus to have done that of
malice and hatred, which he not only did not, but also provided (as much as
lay in him) that no man else should do it.


Heart. Perhaps Erasmus did it, if not in his first edition of Austin, yet in
other afterward. For doubtless in some of Anno Domin^ 1556. and 156^.
the Basill-editions, which have the censures of Erasmus, those treatises are
printed as Torrensis notes them, even amongst the sermons to the Eremite
Friars. And if Erasmus caused them so to be printed, as he did of likelihood:
it is no mortal sin to think that he did it, not of error, but of malice and
hatred against monks. For it is well known, that he could not abide them: and
sundry of his censures are stained with that affection.


Rainoldes. The likelihood is rather that Erasmus would not commit that
himself, which he had condemned before in an other. At least, if he were so
greatly ouershot, Torrensis should do well to quote us the editio^, and take
him up more sharply, not only for malice but for folly too. But perhaps
Torrensis has done as (men say) Will Summer was wont: to let fly at Rowland,
when Oliver had strooken him. For, Anno Domin^ 1531. in officin^ Claudii
Cheuale lonij.
in a Paris-edition of Austin, one Iacobus Haemer praefat. ad Abb. D. Vict. in
opera August.
Haemer (who was the ouer-seer of the print) does note that Tomus deeimus
recepit se^ mo^es duos, quos Erasmus, quia scilicet inter Episto las essent, ex
To^^ trun cauerat. Hos solicit quaesitos and no^ inuentos suis ipsos Eremitis
restituimus.
himself has restored again to the Eremite Friars, two sermons which Erasmus
had taken away from them. The former Basil-printer, whom Erasmus used, had (as
it appears) omitted them in the epistles, amongst the which he should have
printed them. This fault the Paris-printer minding to amend, amended with a
greater fault: whom Anno Domi^^ 1556. and 1569.
the later Basil-editions did follow, ouerseene by Lipsius, and others, not
Erasmus. Howbeit, nether is there, in the^, a note of infamy set on both those
treatises, (as Torrensis says,) but only on the former. Which seems to have
been the printers escape rather then the overseers: since that they agreeing in
argument and style had the same judgment both, as it is likely. Now
concerning that, wherewith you charge farther the censures of Erasmus, that
they are stained with his affection against monks: his affection toward them
was so well ordered in the love of righteousness, and hatred of iniquity, that
it rather lead him to cleanse the stains of other, then stain his own
censures. For, how well he liked of godly monks and their societies, it
appears by that, which (when he was in England) he judged of The descript^ o^
Britai^e, the 2. book, the 6. chapt.
our Colleges in Oxford and Cambridge. The orders and rules whereof when he
perceived, the end and manner of their studies, their lectures, their
discipline, their provision in common: he compared the trade of our students
lives, with the rules and orders of the ancient moonkes: and counted it the
best of the monastical institutions that ever was devised. Which being spoken
by him to the praise of our Colleges, as raised to be nurseries for the
ministry of the church, wherein they may be well resembled to the best of
Possidius de vita Augustine. cap. 11. Sever. Sulpit. de vit. Martin. cap. 7.
Hieronym, epist. 4. ad Rusticum monachum.
the ancient monasteries: does argue that Erasmus had a good affection
toward the ancient monks. But the common sort of monks of our age are
creatures of an other kind, and changed to an other hew. In so much that
Historiae Anglicae lib. 6.
Polydore Virgil, an Italian, who knew their state well, and did not hate them
for religion, does affirm of them, that it is ^n credibile dictu est, quantu^
a Maioribus suis degeneraue^int.
a thing incredible to be spoken how greatly they are grown out of kind,
from their ancestors. Wherefore, it stained not the censures of Erasmus, that
he had a misliking of these unkindly monks, evil beasts, and idle bellies.
But the liking of them professed by Torre^sis has stained with a witness his
Austins confession. For, to bring men in love and admiration of their beggarly
ceremonies, Confession. Augustine. lib. 4. cap. 8. ti^. 6.
he writes of S. Austin that he was clad with a black cool, and girded with
a leather girdle; and that, by no meaner man then S. Ambrose; Ambros. part. 3.
Sermon. 94.
whose sermon he alleges for the proof thereof, and With these words ^n the
margent: Augustinus cuculla nigra in dutus, and cingulo co^iaceo praecinetus.
notes it as a worthy matter. Where, in truth, that sermon is so far from
being S. Ambrose his own: that the learned note it to be undoubtedly forged in
his name Censura Erasmi, Citra controuersiam impostoris est and blateronis.
Adeo nihil est illic Ambrosianum.
by a coosining and prattling merchant, as the which has nothing in it of S.
Ambrose.


Heart. That censure sauoureth of Erasmus: who (by your leave) in matters
touching monks, shall have no credit with me; say what you can, for him.


Rainoldes. If you like not him: you may like Costerius, and Molanus yet, two
Doctors of Louan. Molanus, the kings professor of divinity: Annot. in Vsuardi,
Martyrologium. May. 5. Sermo non est Ambrosii nec in eius operibus habetur.
who, casting off that fable of Austins black and monkish weed, says that the
sermon is not S. Ambroses. Costerius, the Prior of S. Martins Abbey: Censura
Costerij, Ipsa res clamat ab insulso and audaci impostore esse co^fictum.
who censureth him that forged it more sharply then Erasmus did. For he does
not only call him a coosiner, but a sottish and shameless coosiner. And
whereas Erasmus did yet notwithstanding Anno Domini 1527. and 1539.
set it forth amongst the rest of Ambroses works: it seemed so loathsome and
beastly to Costerius, that he has clean left it out. So that, in the later
editions of Ambrose, Anno Domini 1555. and 1567,
it is not extant now. Only this place of it, touching the cool and girdle of
the Austin-monkes, (or Austin-friers, as they are called,) is laid up in
Torrensis: a storehouse fit for such antiquities.


Heart. If the Church allow the censures of those learned men:


Rainoldes. I know no learned man of your church that disalloweth them.


Heart. Then is it to be thought, that when Torrensis quoted that sermon of S.
Ambrose: he meant, (as he had said Praefat. confess. Augustine. ad Lectorem.
before of S. Austin) that either it is his; or some others like him.


Rainoldes. This neither does he say, nor his scholars gather, nor the truth
agree too. For neither was it written by any like S. Ambrose, if a rash and
sottish coosiner did forge it, which your supposall grants: and he, with As
namely, the defendet of the Censure against M. Charke. page 38.
other after him, allege it as written by S. Ambrose him self; whose it is
manifest they would have it supposed, for the cooles sake. So favorable are
you in bearing with your selves, to take that, as certainly written by the
Fathers, which certainly is none of theirs. So sharp against us, if we
suspect any thing not to be theirs, which is: yea, though we suspect it not,
but be falsely thought to have suspected it through other men's default. And thus
have I cast out the beam out of our eye. Now, let us see the moate in yours.
Your practices in corrupting the writings of the Fathers, are of two sorts:
the one, before the art of printing was found; and the other, sithence.
Examples of them both I will give in our present question, touching the
supremacy. The former sort therefore is rife in the chiefest Doctor of your
Church, I mean, In opusculo contra errores Graecorum ad Vrbanum quart. Pont.
Max.
Thomas of Aquine. Who writing against the errors of the Grecians, does bring
in S. Cyrill, saying, that as Christ received power of his Father over every
power, Vt ei cuncta curuentur plenissimam potestatem.
a power most full and ample, that all things should bow to him; Sic and
Petro and eius successoribus plenissime (...).
so he did commit it most fully and amply both to Peter and his successors:
and Nulli alij quam Petro Christus quod suam est, plenum, sed ipsi solidedit.
Christ gave his own to none else, save to Peter, fully, but to him alone he
gave it: and, the Apostles in the Gospels and Epistles have affirmed (in every
doctrine) Peter and his Church to be in steed of God: and, Cui, scilicet
Petro, omnesiu re diuino caput inclinant, and primates mund^ tanquam ipsi
Domino Jesus obediunt.
to him, even to Peter, all do bow their head by the law of God, and the
Princes of the world are obedient to him, even as to the Lord Jesus: and we, as
being members, must cleave Capiti nostro, Pontifici Romano.
unto our head, the Pope and the Apostolic See; thence it is our duty to
seek and enquire what is to be believed, what to be thought, what to be held;
because Solius Pontificis est arguere, corrigere, increpare, ratum facere,
disponere, soluere et ligare.
it is the right of the Pope alone, to reprove, to correct, to rebuke, to
confirm, to dispose, to loose and bind. These sayings are alleged by Thomas of
Aquine out of S. Cyrils work entitled Or treasures, as Thomas, and other do
entitle it.
the treasure. But in S. Cyrils treasure there are no such base coins to be
found. Wherefore either Thomas coined them him self for want of current
money: or took them of some coiner, and thought to try, if they would go.


Heart. Do you know, what injury you do to that blessed man S. Thomas of
Aquine, to whose charge you lay so great a crime of forgerie?


Rainoldes. None I at all, to him, whose counterfeits I discrie. But he did
great injury to the poor Christians, whom he abused with such counterfeits.
Your Pope John the two and twentieth. An^onin. histor. part. 3. tit. 21. cap. 5.
Saint-maker of Rome did canonize him for the holiness of his life and
learning. The greatest trial of it was in his service to that See. And are you
loath to have it known?


Heart. But why should you think either him to be the counterfeiter, or the
sayings to be counterfeit, when, (as Alanus Copus Dialog. 1. ca. 13.
Cope shows) they are alleged not only by him, but by other too. Namely, by
that worthy and most learned Cardinal In summa de Eccles. and in apparatu
super decreto vnionis Graecorum in Concilio Florentino.
John of Turrecremata, who was at the Council of Basil; and before him by In
lib. de potest. Ecclesiast.
Austin of Ancona: yea by Graecians themselves, who were at the council of
Florence, Andreas Bishop of Colossae, and Gennadius Scholarius the Patriarch of
Constantinople. Of whom when the former said (in Vid. session. 5.7. and 8.
the Council) that Cyrill in his treasures had very much extolled the
authority of the Pope, none of all gainesaid him. The later, (in a treatise
that he wrote for the Latins against the Graecians, touching five points
whereof one is the Popes supremacy) cites the same testimonies, although
perhaps not all, which S. Thomas of Aquine does out of Cyrill. Yet you amongst
so many choose him whom you may carpe at: and think that words alleged by
them all, are counterfeites.


Rainoldes. Counterfeites are counterfeites, though they go thorough twenty
hands. Al these, whom you name out of Harpsfieldes Cope, did live long after
Thomas: and seem to have alleged S. Cyrill on his credit, as Cope himself
does also. Wherefore I could not think that they had been the coiners of yt
which was before they were. But Thomas is the first, with whom I find the
words: and therefore greatest reason to lay the fault on him, unless he show
from whom he had them. At least, seeing I know the words are not Cyrils, whose
Thomas says they be: I did him no injury (I trust) when I said, that either
he received them at some coyners hands, or coined them him self.


Heart. Although the words are not to be found now in those parts of Cyrils
treasure, which are extant: yet that is not sufficient to prove, that either
Thomas or some other forged them. For Locor. Theologicor. lib. 6. cap. 5.
Melchior Canus affirms that heretics have maimed that book, and have razed
out all those things which therein pertained to the Popes authority. Which same
thing to be done by them in the Commentaries of Theophylact upon John: the
Catholics have found, and showed.


Rainoldes. Me thinks, you and Canus deal against us, as Cicero pro L.
Flacco.
the men of Doryla did against Flaccus. Whom when they accused out of their
public records, and their records were called for: they said that they were
robbed of them upon the way, by, I know not what shepheardes. You accuse us,
that we deny the Pope his right of the supremacy. The records, by which you
prove it his right, are the words of Cyrill. Cyrils words are called for,
that they may be seen. You say, they are not extant: you are robbed of them,
by, I know not what heretics. Whereon to put a greater likelihood, you say
further, that heretics have done an other robbery in Theophylact, as they are
charged by Catholics. And this do you say: but you say it only: you bring no
proof, you name no witness, you show no token of it. If such accusations may
make a man guilty: who shall be innocent? He that should have dealt-among the
Cic. pro M. C^lio: Accusario crimen desiderat, rem vt desiniat, hominem vt
notet, argumento probet, te^te confirme^.
heathens so: would have been counted rather a slaunderer then an accuser.


Heart. Admit, that the words were not razed perhaps out of any book of
Cyrill, which we have. Yet might they be in some of them, which are Alan.
Copus, dialog. 1. cap. 13.
lost, or Melchior Canus lib. 6. cap. 5.
not set forth in Latin. For, we have no more then fourteen books of his
treasure: whereas the two and thirtieth is cited by the Fathers in the Synodo
6. action 10.
sixth general Council. And this is enough to remove suspicion of forgery from
Thomas, and other, who allege them.


Rainoldes. Nay, although the two and thirtieth be mentioned by the Fathers
there: yet meant they no more of Cyrill, then we have. For that, which in our
Latin edition is the twelfth, is the two and thirtieth, in the Grecians count.


Heart. This is an answer which I never heard. It has no likelihood of truth.


Rainoldes. Peruse you the place, which touches that of Cyrill: and the words
them selves will prove it more then likely.


Heart. The Council has it thus. Hoc and sanctus Cyrillus in trigesimo secundo
libro Thesaurorum docet, epistolam ad profanos explanans: nec enim vnam
naturalem operationem dabimus esse Dei and creaturae; vt neque id quod creatum
est ad diuinam deducamus essentiam, neque id quod est diuinae naturae
praecipuum, ad locum qui creatis conuenit deponamus.


Rainoldes. This sentence, alleged out of the two and thirtieth of Cyril in
Greek, is In Cyrilli Thesauro lib. 12. cap. 1.
in the twelfth book of our Latin Cyrill. Saving that, he being translated by
Georgius Trapezuntius.
an other has it in other words. But there is the sentence: the very same
sentence which the Council points too.


Heart. It might be there, first, and yet again afterward in the two and
thirtieth: as many use one sentence often.


Rainoldes. But the circumstance of the place does rather import it to be the
very same. For, the Council says, that Cyrill has these words, explanans
epistolans ad profanos, where he expounds the epistle to profane men. And
what meant they, by this epistle ad profanos, to profane men?


Heart. How can I tell what they meant, when that book of Cyrill (whereof they
speak) is lost?


Rainoldes. It should be, the epistle ad Romanos, to the Romans: [ The Roman^
Romanos] made [ profane men.
profanos] by the printers error: unless he did it of purpose, to show, what
now the Romans be: or some corrector changed it, least we by this
circumstance should find the place of Cyrill. For, this [where he expounds
the epistle to the Romanes] is a great argument, that the Council meant the
place in the twelfth book: where Cyril does handle such points of that
epistle as concerned the matter that he had in hand. Which that he should do
again, in the same work, with the same sentence, touching the same matter:
they who know Cyrill, will not think it likely. The less, because it is an
usual thing with the Grecians, to divide books otherwise then the Latins do.
As, in the Greek testament, the gospel of S. Mark has more then forty
chapters, which has not twenty in the Latin: and yet notwithstanding the
Latin has the whole, as well as the Greek. Which is the more likely to have
been the difference between the Greek Cyrill, alleged by the Council, and
our Latin Cyrill translated out of Greek, because that our Latin has also
other sentences in the tenth book, which are alleged Action. 10.
by the Council out of the four and twenteeth: and, in their division, As (in
the same place) Cyrillus de Thesauris, capitulo vigesimo quarto, is aleaged:
for which it is after, libro vigesimo quarto.
a chapter and a book did go for all one, whereas the books in Latin are
sub-diuided into chapters. The mentioning therefore of more books of Cyrils
treasure, then we have, remoueth not suspicion of forgery from the sayings,
which Thomas cites thence for the Popes supremacy. Chiefly, since
Trapezuntius who translated that work of Cyrill into Latin, was a man
affectionate greatly to the Pope. That, if he had left out somewhat of yt
Greek, as he has perhaps, (unless he used Cyril better then De praeparatione
euangelica^ which in Greek has much more, then it has in latin translated by
Trapezuntius.
Eusebius:) yet is it not credible that he would have left out so many places,
so notable proofs of a thing so weighty, so nearly touching him whom he so
dearly loved. In deed they are too notable, and perfect for the purpose: and
such, as, your Locor. Theolog. lib. 6. cap 5. Cyrillus apud D. Thomam multo
euidentius quam autores caeteri.
Canus says, have not their matches throughout all the Fathers. Wherein, yt is
also worthy of remembrance which a wise man said in a like case: to much
perfection breeds suspicio^. Neither was S. Cyril likely to write the^,
Epist. Cyrilli ad synodum Carthag. in council. Africa^ cap. 102.
who, when ye Council of Carthage sent unto him about the Popes usurping, was
so glad to send them evidence against it: neither was his treasure fit to
write them in, as handling al an other matter, namely, that the Son and the
Holy ghost are of one substance with God the Father. But the forging of Cyrill
might be better borne with he was but one man. That is no way tolerable, that
the like dealing is used with six hundred Bishops, and more, even with the
general Council of Chalcedon. Of whom In eodem op^sculo contra errores
Graecorum.
Thomas writes that they decreed ^hus: If any Bishop be accused, let him
appeal freely to ^eatissimum episcopum antiquae Romae.
the Pope of Rome, Quia habemus Petrum petram refugii.
because we have Peter for a rock of refuge; and he alone has right, with
freedom of power, in the steed of God, to judge and try the crime of a Bishop
accused, according to the keys which the Lord did give him. And again after:
Let all things be kept which are defined by him, as defined by the Vicar of
the Apostolic see. And, to prove Quod Pontifex in totam ecclesiam Christi
vniuersalem praelationem habet.
that the Pope has universal soueraintie over the whole church of Christ: It
is read, says Thomas, in the Council of Chalcedo^, that the whole Council did
cry to Pope Leo, God grant long life to Leo, the most holy, Apostolic, and It
is in Thomas, Icumeraycos, id est vniuersalis: but he means (...).
universal Patriarch of the whole world. Now in the general Council of
Calcedon there is not one of these things: no more, then the other were in
Cyrils treasure. Wherefore it must needs be, that either Thomas coined them,
or had them from some coiner. Belike he, who did it, was master of the Popes
mint: and who that should be, but Thomas, I know not.


Heart. Neither Thomas, nor any else. For these things were written in the
Council of Calcedon: but heretics have razed them out of our copies, as
Registr. lib. 5. epist. 14. ad Narsem Comitem.
Gregory complains to the Earl Narses.


Rainoldes. Or rather, as Locor. Theolog. lib. 6. cap. 6. Eaquae D. Thomas
refert, in ^uius temporis exemplaribus no^ habentur: sed ab haereticis erasa
Gregorius queritur.
Canus reports out of Gregory; but reports falsely. For Gregory does not
mention either heretics, or these things. Only Registr. lib. 5. ^p. 14.
Chalcedo nensis synodus in vno loco ab ecclesia Constantinopolitana falsata est.
he affirms that the church of Constantinople had falsified the Council of
Chalcedon in one place: which he seems to mean of the eight and twentieth
canon of that Council, (as the Grecians reckon it) wherein Constantinople is
allowed equal privileges with Rome. For the Church of Rome had still
withstood this canon: chiefly, Pope Epist. 51.52.53.59. and 60.
Leo. Yet Constantinople, and the Greek churches did set it down amongst the
rest. The difference between them appears to this day in the Canones council.
Chalced. ^an. 28.
Greek and Council. Chalced. act. 15. Which has but seven and twenty canons
Latin copies: the one of them having it, and the other wanting it. Which is a
great presumption, that Gregory, in saying, the Council of Chalcedo^ is
falsified by the church of Constantinople in one place: meant this place, by
which Constantinople claimed as great prerogatives as Rome, the church of Rome
crying against it. And hereof In summa council. Chalced ex noua edit. act. 16.
Carranza in the abridgement of the Councels, and Council. Chalced. in annot. ad
Lect. action. 15.
Surius in the whole, do give a mark both, rejecting that canon. But neither
Surius, nor Carranza do bring in any such stuff as that of Thomas; or say,
that it was written in the Counsel of Chalcedon, but heretics have razed it
out. Nay the very canons them selves of that Council, which are agreed upon
in both the Greek and Latin copies, do cut off al show from such false and
frivolous defenses of Thomas. For it cannot be thought, that so great a
Council, of so wise men, ordained things repugnant one unto an other: and
Council. Chalced. can. 1.9.17. and 19.
they have ordained repugnant unto that which Thomas cites of the Pope, as
shall appear Chapt. 9. Diuis. 4.
after. But Canus has greatly both abused you and ouershot himself: who, to
prove that now the copies have not those things which they had in Thomas time,
brings Gregory for witness, who lived Above sixth hundred years.
long before Thomas; and charge heretics with that, wherewith Gregory
charge Ab ecclesia Constantinop.
Catholics; and says, that they have razed out, where Gregory says they have
Falsata est synodus Chalced.
falsified, which they might do by adding too; and speaks it of sundry
places, which Gregory speaks but of In vno loco.
one, and that one (by the judgment of your own friends) an other one then
those of Thomas. Now much more ingenuously should Canus have done, and you (who
follow him in evil,) to confess a fault where a fault is, then to commit many
for the covering of one; and for clearing Thomas, to corrupt Gregory; and to
sclaunder us with unjust reproaches, that you may save your selves from a just
reproof.


Heart. I did not peruse the place my self in Gregory: but took it, as I found
it alleged by learned men. For Alan. Copus Dial. 1. cap. 13.
Cope has it as well as Canus. Neither do I think that they did wrest it
purposely: but trusting their memories for the matter in general, did miss in
setting down the words.


Rainoldes. Neither do I charge them as wilful wresters of it. It may be that
Canus read it in some other, Mat* 15.14
and Cope in Canus, and you in Cope: and thus by tradition you are deceived
from hand to hand. Remember Christ's sentence. If the blind lead the blind,
both shall fall into the ditch. But this may suffice for a taste of your
corrupting the writings of the Fathers, before they came to the print. Now, how
you have used them since they were printed: let your setting forth of Cyprian,
first at Rome, and then at Anwerp, be an example. In the time of Cyprian, the
church of Christ was troubled with the heresy of ye Nouatians, or (as they
called themselves) (...). Epiphan. haer. 59. Cathari. August. de haeres. ad
Quoduultd. haer. 3^.
Puritans: a faction of men, who thinking all impure and unclean, which had
fallen in the time of persecution, though they repented after, refused to
communicate with them; and thereupon did separate themselves from the society
of the Catholic church and assemblies of the faithful as unclean also, for
that they received into their fellowship and communion, upon repentance, such
as had fallen. Against these Nouatians, the firebrands of schisms and
dissensions in the Church. S. Cyprian has written a notable treatise Cyprian.
de vnitate ecclesiae.
touching the unity of the church: wherein he does instruct and exhort
Christians to keep the unity of spirit in the bond of peace, and be at
concord among them selves. And, to win this of them by reasons and
persuasions out of the holy scripture; as among the rest he brings sundry
figures wherein is represented the unity of the church, as the ark of Noah,
the coat of Christ, the house of Rahab, the lamb of the Passover: so among
the figures he places Peter first, in that our Savior said to him, Thou art
Peter, and on this stone will I build my church, and, To thee will I give the
keys of the kingdom of heaven, and again, Feed my sheep. For albeit
Christ, says he, gave Apostolis om^ibus parem potestatem.
equal power to all the Apostles, after his resurrection, and said, As my
father sent me, so I send you; receive ye the holy Ghost; whosoeuers sins ye
remitte, they are remitted to them, and whosoeuers sins y^ reteyne, they are
retained: yet to declare unity, he disposed by his authority the original of
that unity beginning of one. No doubt, the rest of the Apostles were the same
that Peter was, Pari consortio praediti and hono^^s and potestatis.
endued with like fellowship both of honor, and of power: but the beginning
does come from unity, that the church of Christ may be showed to be one. Now,
this place of Cyprian, which by the former printes was thought to make rather
for an equality of all the Apostles in power, then a supremacy of one, as it
does in deed: is farsed with such words, in the Roman Cyprian, that in show
it makes for Peter's supremacy, and so for a supremacy in power like the
Popes, Staple. princip. doctrine. l. 6. c. 7.
as you teach men to gather of it. For where it was in Cyprian, that the rest of
the Apostles were equal both in honor and power unto Peter but the beginning
does come from unity: the Roman Cyprian adds these words, Et primatus Petro
datur.
and the primacy is given unto Peter. Where it was in Cyprian, that Christ did
dispose the original of unity beginning from one: the Roman Cyprian adds,
Vnam cathed^^m con^^tuit.
he appointed one chair. And again where Cyprian said, that the church of
Christ may be showed to be one: the Roman Cyprian adds Et cathedra vna.
and the chair to be one. This was well, to begin with; that unto Peter the
primacy is given, that Christ appointed one chair, and, as the church must be
one so the chair must be one. Yet because one chair (in Cathedra v^^. Epist.
40. episcopatus vnus est, cuius a singulis in solidum pars. tenetur. De vnitat.
ecclesiae.
Cyprians language) does make no more for the chair of the bishop of Rome,
then of the bishop of Carthage: the Cyprian of Anwerpe (to help the matter
forward) does bring in Peter's chair. And where it was in Cyprian, even in the
Roman print too, He who withstandeth and resists the church, does he trust
him self to be in the church? the Anwerp Cyprian adds, Qui cathedr^ Petri
super qua^ fundata est ecclesia, deserit.
He who forsakes Peter's chair on which the church was founded, does he
trust himself to be in the church? So, whereas aforetime S. Cyprian showed the
unity of the church in an equality of Peter with the rest of the Apostles:
now, by good handling, he shows Peter's primacie; and that, by good
expounding, is the Popes supremacy. For, we must imagine, that by Peter's
chair is meant the Popes chair: which chair be forsakes, who is not
obedient and subject to the Pope, according to Did. 93. Obedientiam etc. summo
po^tifici: nec in ecclesia esse poterit, qui cathedram eius deserit. Vnde
Cyprianus. Qui cathedram Petri (supra quam f^^data est ecclesia) de^erit: in
ecclesia se e^^e non confid^^.
Gratian in the canon law. The only difficulty, and scruple, that is left to
breed a doubt thereof in suspicious heads, is that clause of Cyprian, that
Christ gave equal power to all the Apostles; and the rest were the same that
Peter was, endued with like fellowship both of honor and of power. Which words
if you could hansomly take away out of him in some new print, (and why not take
away so few, as well as add so many?) then would this be a passing fine place
for you, to persuade men, that the unity of the church does presuppose your one
chair, to which all must be subject, who will be of the church: and that they
(by conseque^t) are no right Christians, who stand against the Popes supremacy.


Heart. You are much to blame to lay unto our charge the corrupting of Cyprian:
chiefly in those editions, which are best and soundest, the Roman of Manutius,
and Anwerp of Pameliu^. For, Pius the fourth, a Pope of worthy memory, desirous
Manut. epist. lib. 8. ad Pium quart.
that the Fathers should be set forth corrected most perfitly and cleansed from
all spots, sent to Venice, for Manutius, an excellent famous printer, that he
should come to Rome, to do it. And to furnish him the better with all things
necessary thereto: he put four Cardinals, very wise and virtuous, in trust
with the work. Now, for the correcting and cleansing of Cyprian specially
above the rest, Praefat. in opera Cypriani ad C^rolum Bor^^m. Cardin.
singular care was taken by Cardinal Borromaeus; a copy was gotten of great
antiquity from Verona; the exquisite diligence of learned men was used in it.
Wherefore I am persuaded, that whatsoever they did add unto Ciprian they did
not add it rashly, or of their own head, but with good advise upon the
warrant of written copies. Which although they have not declared in particular,
yet may we gather it by Iacobus Pamelius, sacrae Theologiae Licentiatus,
ecclesiae Brugensis canonicus.
Pamelius, a Canon of the Church of Bruges, and Licentiat of divinity, by whom
the Anwerp-Cyprian was afterward set forth. For, Annot. in Cyprian. de unit.
eccles.
he does note yt all the words (which you spoke of) added by Manutius in the
Romane-print [he appointed one chaire] and [the chair to be one,] and [the
primacie is given unto Peter,] are in a written copy of the Cambron-abbey:
Codex manuscriptus Abbat. Cambronensis, omniu^ optimus. Pamel. in codi^um
indiculo.
which was the best of all the copies that he had. Yea, those of [Peters
primacie] not only in that copy, but in an other too, which Cardinal Hosius
occupied. As for the rest, which were added by himself in the print at Anwerp,
[he who forsakes Peter's chair on which the church was founded, does he trust
himself to be in the church?] he notes that they also are in the
Cambron-copie, and confirmed by Did. 93 c. Qui ^athedram.
Gratian, who has the same words, and cites them with Cyprians name. Whereby
you may perceive, that we have not corrupted those places of Cyprian, either
in the Roman-print, or the Anwerpe: we have corrected rather that which was
corrupt. But (I see) the Poet has said very truly: Nothing is done so well,
but with evil speeches a man may deprave it.


Rainoldes. And it is as truly said by the Orators: Nothing is done so evil,
but with fair colors a man may defend it. The Pope sent for Manutius to print
the Fathers corrected; he appointed four Cardinals to see the work done;
Cardinal Borromaus had singular care of Cyprian; copies very ancient, men
very learned, exquisite diligence used in it. This is it, which makes me the
more suspect it: the diligence was too exquisit. Cicer. de oratore lib. 2.
When a pety-captaine, whom Scipio did punish for that he was not in the field,
said, that he remained in the camp to keep it: I love not them (quoth Scipio)
that are too diligent. The camp was too well kept by the pety-captaine. The
Cardinals care of Cyprian might have the like fault. Manutius Epist. lib. 9. ad
^acobum Gorse^um.
him self writes, that his whole charge of printing books at Rome pertains
Ad Sedis Apostolicae dignitatem.
to the dignity of the Popes See. I fear me, this dignity did dasel much
their eyes, who perused copies to correct the Fathers. The purpose of the Pope
was (as Manut. praefat* ad Pium quart. in librum Card. Poli de concilio.
he declares) to have them so corrected, that there should remain no spot,
which might infect the minds of the simple False doctrinae specie.
with the show of false doctrine. Whereby, if it be weighed what [false
doctrine] signifies in the court of Rome, a man may guess easily how they did
correct them. Chiefly, since they have not showed where they found those words
of [one chaire] and [primacie given unto Peter:] as The Louan Diuine^, in
setting forth of Austin: Morelius, of Cyprian: Co^^erius, of Ambrose: Erasmus,
of the Fathers commonly.
others use to do in new corrections of autours. Which yet I will not condemn
as a token of a guilty conscience. It may be that they found the^ in one or
other bad copy. For such they followed some, as it appears by Pamelius: who,
in sundry places corrects the Roman print, and that justly. But Pamelius
found them in a written copy of the Cambron-abbey, the best (he says) of all
his copies: wherein he found also the words which Gratian has of cleaving to
the chair of Peter: and so Atque adeo non sumus veriti in textum in^erere.
Pamel. annot. in Cyprian. de unit. ^ccl s.
he was bold to put them into Cyprians text. More bold then wise, in that. For
(to see, how fancy does oue^rule discretion,) first, if the copy of the
Cambron-abbey had been very good: yet to follow one against so many, which him
self, which Morelius, which other (who printed Cyprian) had, your selves would
think it rashness, but that it made for the Popes advantage. Then, it is likely
that the man of Cambron, who wrote that Abbey-copie, was tampering about it to
square it unto somewhat. For As Pameli^^ shows, anno^* in Cyprian. de unit.
^c^les.
he has left out that clause of Cyprian touching the Apostles, [ Pari
co^sortio praediti and honoris and potes^^ti^.
endued with like fellowship both of honor and of power:] and in stead ofthese
words, V^lg. Sed^^. ordium ab ^^^tate proficiscitur. Cambio^. Sed primatus
Petro datu^.
but the beginning does come from unity; he has put in th^se, but the primacy
is given to Peter. Thirdly, ifhe altered not the words of purpose: yet might
he write that in the text by error, which some had noted in the margent; or if
he did not so himself, perhaps an other had, whom he followed. A thing that
falls often out in written copies. As Pr^fut. ad A^^^iep. Tolet in opera A^g.
Quod lector ineptien^ anno^a^at in margin ^ui codicis, s^rib^ retulerant in
contextum.
Erasmus witnesses he found S. Austins works depra^ed much by that folly: and
if you suspect the judgment of Erasmus, Praefat. ad lectorem de edit. operum
August. 1571. Paris. apud Merlinum and Niuellium.
the Paris-ouerseers consent with him in this point, though otherwise
dissenting from him.


Heart. You may reject what evidence soever you li^t, if you please your self
in such conjectures and gesses. For, if any Fathers sentence be alleged, and
you like it not: you may say, that perhaps it was noted in the margent, and
some unskillful scriueners wrote it in the text, as they have done elsewhere
in Austin.


Rainoldes. Not in Austin only, but in Cyprian too, as your An notat. in
epis^. 60. In trac^at. de unit. eccles.
Pamelius has observed: and that even in this treatise touching the unity of
the church. But whether I have reason to say, that the words (whereof we
speak) in Cyprian, might come into the text out of the margent-note: I leave
it to be judged by reasonable men upon the view of the circumstances. The
written copy (cited by Annot. in. Cyprian. de vnitat. eccles.
Pamelius him self) which Cardinal Hosius occupied, conuinceth it most
plainly, for the chiefest of the^. For there, after the speech of Christ unto
Peter, alleged out of Matthew, these words are interlaced, Hic Petro primatus
datur, Here the primacie is given unto Peter. Which to have been noted by some
in the margent, it is so manifest, that neither the Romane-print nor the Anwerp
could bring them into Cyprians text, but either by changing or leaving out the
word [Here:] Roman. Et primatus Petro datur.
the one has changed it into the word* [And,] Antuerp. Primatus Petro datur.
the other has left it out. That the rest of [one chaire] crept in by like
stealth: it is very probable, though harder to convince. But the last of
[sticking unto Peter's chaire] added by Pamelius, do seem to have lept into
the text suddenly, before the margent saw them. For, they are written not
only in the copy of the Cambron-abbey, but in Gratian too. And thereupon
Pamelius says that he was bold to put them into Cyprians text. Now shall the
Fathers be well amended shortly, if you amend them out of Gratian: a man, who
in favor of the Popes State has forged and falsified the writings of the
Fathers most lewdly and shamefully. Know you not his famous abusing of S.
Austin Distinct. 19. c. ^n canoni^is. Ex A^gust. de doctr. Christ (...). c. 8.
whom he has made to say, that Inter canon^^cas scriptur^^ decre^ales
epistol^ connume^antur.
the decretall epistles (as you term them) of the Popes are counted in the
number of the Canonical Scriptures? Howbeit, if he have not abused Cyprian so:
yet he rather hurts then helps the corrections of your new prints. For,
where 24. q. 1. cap. Loquitur.
he alleges that whole place of Cyprian, which they have made such change in,
he neither has [the primacie is given unto Peter,] nor [ Christ appointed one
chair,] nor [that the chair may be showed to be one.] Wherefore if his
authority may warrant the soundnes of things that are cited by him out of the
Fathers: he brings you greater discredit, then credit, for that which you
have changed in Cyprian.


Heart. The clause, which Pamelius added to Cyprian, he added on the warrant not
of Gratians credit, but of the Cambron-copie. Wherewith, as far as Gratian
agreed, he approved him: he approved him not, in that he disagreed from it.
Neither is it any discredit to Pamelius, to have rather followed that copy,
then Gratian: since Gratian has missed sometimes (as we grant) in citing of
the Fathers; perhaps by setting down not so much their words as that which he
conceived to be meant thereby. But these are small matters, whereto you pick
quarrels in the print of Cyprian, at Rome, or at Anwerpe; for this, or that
correction: that you may seem to have some pretense yet, why you refuse trial
by the consent of the Fathers in controversies of religion.


Rainoldes. When a young man, whom Diog. La^^^. de vit. philosophor. lib. 3.^
Plato reproved for plaing at dice, said, Do you reprove me for so small a
matter? The matter is small, quoth Plato, but the custom of it is no small
matter. So the matters may be small, which I reprove in your correcting of
Cyprian: but the custom of such correcting is no small matter. For Gratian (you
grant) sets down sometimes not the words of the Fathers, but that which
he conceiueth to be meant thereby: what if he misse-conceiue it? And howsoever
that be: what if here he aimed at the meaning of Cyprian? As it may seem he
did: for Gratian. In e^cl^sia se esse no^ confidat. Camb^. In ecclesia se esse
confidit?
he agrees not precisely word for word with the Cambron-copie. Now, the
Cambron-copie what is it, or whence came it, that Cyprian should be made the
father of such slippes upon the credit of it alone? What, if some did note them
in the margent, of fancy, as students use to do? What if some received them
into the text of error? What if some, of zeal unto the church of Rome, did
add them? And why did not Pamelius leave out the other words of the equality
of the Apostles in honor and power, because the Cambron copy wants them: as
well as add these of Peter's primacie and chair, because the Cambron-copie
has them? Did not his conscience tell him, that the copy was unsound: or at
the least insufficient, to force the change of a place of so great importance
against the credit of so many both written books and printed? If other
Licentiates as learned as Pamelius; shall upon one copy, as good as the
Cambron; presume, in all the Fathers, as he has in Cypria^; to add the like
gloses, for the rest of your opinions, as these are for the chair and primacie
of Peter: it will be hie time for us to take heed how we permit the trial
of controversies in religion to the consent of the Fathers. Wherefore, although
these matters seem never so small, yet there may lie as much on them, as
concerns the safety of our souls. Neither do I pick them, as quarrels, for
pretense; but I allege them as reasons for proof, that, by the position of
your own author, we must deal with you not by their consent, but by the
scripture only. For he, on whom you grounded, Vincentius Lirinensis, allows
only scripture, to convince those errors which have increased long, and wide:
because the length of time has given them occasion to steal away the truth;
and (the poison spreading farther) they endeavor to corrupt the writings of the
Fathers. Your error of the Papacy has spread far, and grown long: you have
endeavored to corrupt the writings of the Fathers: the forgeries are plain in
Cyprian, in Cyrill, and in the Council of Chalcedon: the presumptions are
great that you have been as bold with other, as with these. For if Thomas of
Aquine made no conscience of it, what may be thought of such as were more
ambitious? And if Manutius dealt so with Cyprian, in Praefat. in opera Cypriani
ad Carolum Bor^om. Card.
whom he sought most credit: what did his Manut. epist. lib. 10. ad Cardin.
Sirlet.
ten years labors in setting forth the rest? And if Papists durst this in
the light of printing: what may we fear they did in the darcknesse of writing,
books? And if the Roman print be followed at Anwerp, the Anwerp at Anno Domini
1574. apud Se^ Ni^ellium.
Paris, the Paris other-where perhaps, and the newer the worser, and the worst
accounted best by such as D. Princip. doctrine. (...). 6. cap. 7* and 15.
Stapleton, and testimonies alleged thence, as authentical: how much likelyer
is it, that when they wrote copies in Monasteries, and Abbeys, they followed one
another with lesser shame, and greater loosenes; and so did proceed, from good
to evil, from evil to worse; and authors of that age did most approve those
copies, which made for their advantage most, and brought authorities out of
them. To conclude therefore, even by his judgment to whom you appealed,
Vincentius Lirinensis, in that golden book against the profane innouations of
all heresies: the touchstone, by the which our controversy must be tried, is
the word of God, and not the word of men; not the consent of Fathers, but the
holy scripture, and the scripture only. And this (I may protest) I speak not
of fear, as though the Fathers all held with you against us: but of
conscience, that I may yield due glory to God, due reverence to his word. For,
let such forgeries, as I have spoken of, be set apart: The third division.
and what have all the Fathers, nay what has any of them, to prove the
pretended supremacy of Peter?


Heart. The very same Fathers, whose words I alleged, Chap. 4. Diuis. 3. out
of Stapleton prine, doctr. l. 6. c. 13.
before, and them acknowledged to be their own, not counterfeits, give Peter
ye supremacy, which you call pretended. For S. Epist. 11. ad August. inter
epist. Aug.
Ierom says of him, Peter was of so great authority, that Paul wrote, Then
after three years, and so forth: and S. De bapt. contr. Donat. l. 2. c. 1.
Austin affirms that the primacie of the Apostles is conspicuous and
preeminent with excellent grace in Peter: and Chrysostom calls him, the
mouth of the Apostles, the chief, and top of the company: and he is named by
In epistolama^. Gal. cap. 1.
Theodoret, In Iohannem homil. 87.
the prince of the Apostles; the prince, which title also is given him by all
antiquity. Whereto Staplet prin^. doct. lib. 6. c. 7. and Torrens. confess,
Augustine. l. 1. c. 9. tit. 1. and 2.
I may add that In Anchorat.
Epiphanius terms him (...), as you would say, the highest of the Apostles:
and Quaest. ex No^ Test. quaest. 75. Tractat 124. in Iohannem.
S. Austin yet farther, their head, and their President, and the first of them:
which preeminence he proves also out of S. Epist. ad Qui^tum. apud Aug. de
bapt. cont. Do^ l. ^. ^. 1.
Cyprian, who says that the Lord did choose Peter first: and S. Aduers^^
I^uiman. lib. ^.
Ierom teaches, that Peter was chosen, one, among the twelve, to the intent
that (a head being appointed) occasion of scisme might be taken away. The
books of the Fathers are full of such sayings: but they are all to this
effect. And therefore these few may serve to show their judgment.


Rainoldes. These sayings, and the like, which are alleged out of the Fathers,
do touch three prerogatives which they give to Peter: the first of authority,
the second of primacie, the third of principality. But none of them all does
prove the supremacy which you pretend to Peter, and mean to the Pope. For, by
tha^ supremacy, is signified the s^lnes of ecclesiastical or rather Papal
power, even a power sovereign of governing the Church throughout the whole
world, in all points and matters of doctrine and discipline, as Chap. (...) 2.
^.
you declared. Is it not?


Heart. It is so. What then?


Rainoldes. But none of the sayings alleged out of the Fathers, do give this
sovereign power to Peter. Therefore they prove not his pretended supremacy.


Heart. They give it him all.


Rainoldes. I will show the contrary. And to speak in order of the three
prerogatives, which by them are given him: the first, out of Ierom, that Peter
was of great authority, is nothing to your purpose. For, it is apparaunt,
that, since the supremacy does note a sovereign power, the question is of
power, and not of authority.


Heart. As who say, that power and authority did differ so much, one from the
other.


Rainoldes. Much. For, power imports a right of rule and government, which
the superiors have over their inferiors for the good ordering of mankind: as
Romans 13.1.
Princes over subjects, 2. Cor. 13.10.
Pastors over flocks, Mat. 8.9
Masters over servants, ^. Cor. 11.10.
Husbands over wives. By, authority, is meant estimation and credit: a good
opinion of men, for that which we account worthy to be esteemed. For they, of
whom we think so well in respect of their virtue, or wisdom, or state, or
other qualities, that we will follow them as authors in our doings, our
judgments, factes, or words: are said to be of credit, and authority, with
us. And this an inferior may have with his superior. As ^. Sam. 16.23.
Achithophel, a counselor, had such authority with his Prince, that his
counsel was regarded, as an oracle of God: and Act. 5.40.
Gamaliel, a Pharise, had such authority with the Jews, that the hie priest,
and the whole assembly, did yield to his advise, and, as it were, obeyed him.
Wherefore, the authority which Ierom says that Peter had, does not prove a
power, much less a supremacy.


Heart. Yet oftentimes [authoritie] is taken for the same that [power:] as, when
a thing is done by the appointment and order of the magistrate, we are w^nt to
say, that it is done by authority.


Rainoldes. True: because power is one of those qualities which procure
authority; the greater authority, the better that the power is used. And so I
joined power and authority together, Chap. 3. Diuis. 1.
when I spoke of the keys, that Christ did give to Peter. But, although the
words be taken for the same in a (...), as the Gramma^ians call it.
figurative kind of speech, by reason of the affinity which is between the
things: yet as the things differ, and the words are used for them (as
different) properly, it is clear, that authority may be without power, and
an inferior in power may be superior in authority. So Philip. 3. Autoritas
tribuenda est.
Tully, when he told the Senators of Rome, that they ought to give authority
to Caesar and the rest against Antonie: he meant by authority, lawful power and
right to deal against him as against an enemy. But otherwhere, Pro leg.
Manil. Scientia rei^ militaris, virtus* autoritas, felicitas.
entreating of four things, which should be in a General of an army, skill,
virtue, authority, felicity: he meant, not lawful power by authority, but
estimation, that a General must be honorably thought of by friends and foes.
The difference between them he showed, where In Pisonem.
he said, that Metellus, Priuatus fieri vetuit, atque id quod nondum potestate
poterat, obtinuit autoritate.
a private man, (though chosen Consul. for the year following) forbadde certain
plays, when an officer had allowed them, and that which he could not yet
obtain by power, he did obtain by authority.


Heart. The things do differ, I grant. But seeing that the name of authority
is used as well for power sometimes, as for estimation: why should it be taken
in S. Ieroms words, rather for estimation, as you will have it; then for power,
as I?


Rainoldes. Because the point, which Ierom does thereupon infer, cannot
agree to power, but to estimation: yea, this word it self is expressed by him,
and shows that he meant it. For he says, that Paul went up to Jerusalem to
confer of the gospel with them that were Qui videbantur aliquid esse. Ex Gal.
2.2. Gr. (...)
esteemed: by whom he means Petri, and cae^ero^^m apostolorum.
Peter and other Apostles, even them, whom Gaia. 2. (...)*
Paul names, and notes their estimation (as himself expounds it) James,
and Peter, and John, who were esteemed to be pillars. Wherefore, albeit Ierom
speak hardly of Paul, that he had not had security of preaching the gospel,
unless it had been approved by these: yet the authority which he gives
Peter, he gives other Apostles, James, and John, with him: and therefore a
preeminence in estimation, not in power; not in supremacy, but in credit. For,
if by [authoritie] he meant supreme power: James and John should have it over
the Apostles, as well as Peter had. But they (you say) were equal in power to
the rest, and inferior to Peter. Then Ierom, by [authoritie] which he gave to
Peter, meant not the supremacy.


Heart. The primacie of Peter does prove it more forcibly: which is the next
prerogative. And that is given to him, not only by S. Austin, but also by S.
Cyprian, as I have declared.


Rainoldes. What need you to allege me S. Austin, and S. Cyprian? Did I deny
his primacie?


Heart. Why? Do you not deny it?


Rainoldes. If I do: let me be smitten, not with the blunt weapon of the words
of men (for so I may justly term them in this comparison:) but with the sharp
two-edged sword of Gods word. For, Mat. 10.2.
it is written in S. Matthewes gospel: these are the names of the twelve
Apostles; the first is Simon, called Peter. Now, if he were the first: then he
had the primacie. For although the reason be not so plain in English, because
we have not a fit word derived from our English [first] as Primatus.
primacie is derived from the [ Primus.
first] in Latin: yet they who know reason will never deny, but that he that is
first, has the first^ship (if I might speak so) that is to say, the primacie.
But this is such a primacie, as a foreman of the Quest is wont to have in
Iuries: not a primacie of power, as over inferiors; but a primacie of order,
as amongst equals.


Heart. The primacie of order is a colorable show, whereby you may avoid S.
Matthew. But Austin and Cyprian cannot be so avoided. For their words are
witnesses, they meant a farther primacie: and what should that be, but a
primacie of power? Which because they learned (as it is likely) out of S.
Matthew: thereof do I gather, that S. Matthew meant a primacie of power, and not
of order only.


Rainoldes. And because S. Matthew, (as it is more likely) meant not a primacie
of power to one there, where Mat. 10.5.
he shows that Christ gave the same power to all the Apostles: thereof do I
gather that he meant a primacie of order only, not of power. But Austin and
Cyprian meant a farther primacie, you say. Perhaps they did. Therefore a
primacie in power? It does not follow. Nay, it is manifest, they meant it not of
power. De bap^ism. contra Don. l. 2. c. 1.
For Austin does build it upon the ground of Cyprian: and De unit. eccles.
Cyprian does teach, that Christ gave Parem potestatem Apostolis omnibus.
equal power to all the Apostles. The truth is, they meant a primacie in
calling: to weet, that Petrus, quem p^imum Dominus elegit.
the Lord did choose Peter first, as Epist. 71. ad Quintum.
Cyprian does speak expressly. And whether S. Matthew regarded this also, in
that he numbered Peter, first: I can not define. But whether he did, or no; it
is no farther primacie then I granted you by the foreman of the Quest: who is
called first, as he is reckened first; and so both in order and calling has a
primacie, which he has not in power.


Heart. A primacie in calling? Nay yet you had done better to have cleaued still
to the primacie of order. For Peter, in order was the first in deed: and so I
deny not but he might have been, though he had been equal in power to his
brethren. But he was not the first in calling. For S. Comment. in 2. epist. ad
Corinthios cap. 12.
Ambrose says: Andrew first followed our Savior before Peter, and yet Andrew
received not the primacie, but Peter. And S. De baptism. contr. Donat. l. 2. c.
1.
Austins words, [the primacie of the Apostles is conspicuous and preeminent
with excellent grace in Peter,] do plainly import, that he meant a primacie
not in calling, but preeminence.


Rainoldes. You say that Peter had not a primacie in calling: for S. Ambrose
says so. What, if I should answer, He had a primacie in calling: for S.
Cyprian says so. Or, to help S. Cyprian (if he have smaller credit with you,)
for S. In Ezechielem homil. 18.
Gregory says so: Primus in Apostolatum vocatus.
Peter was called to the Apostleship first. But there is no dissension between
them and Ambrose, if all their words be weighed. For Ambrose says, that
Andrew did first follow Christ: and they say, that Peter was called first of
Christ. The truth of both which is plain by the scriptures. For John 1. ver.
40.
Andrewe followed Christ, before Peter knew him: and he brought Peter unto
Christ. But ver. 42.
Christ said to Peter, Comment. in epist. ad Gal. cap. 1.
Thou shall be called Cephas, (wherein he meant him the Apostleship,) before
he spoke a word of the Apostleship to Andrewe. And so does Ambrose seem him
self to expound his meaning otherwhere: affirming of Peter, that Primus erat
inter Apostolos, cui Saluator delegauerat curam ecclesiarum.
he was the first among the Apostles to whom our Savior had committed the
charge of the churches. Whereby he gives Peter ye primacie in being called to
the Apostleship: though he gave a primacie in discipleship (as it were) I mean,
in following Christ, to Andrew. As for S. Austins words, which (you say) import
that he meant a primacie, notin calling, but preemine^ce: you should have
rather said yt he meant a primacie, in calling, and preeminence both. For out
of al doubt he meant a primacie in calling. But your friends, who dismember the
sayings of the Fathers, do stand in your light, that you can not see it. For
as Princip. doctr. lib. 6. cap. 13.
Stapleton did cut out Quia primus erat inter Apostolos. And so he leans
Ambrose to say, that it was meet Paul should desire to see Peter, to whom our
Savior had committed the charge of the churches. As if to him alone: not to
the rest of the Apostles.
the former words of Ambrose, that Peter might be thought the only man who
had the charge of the churches, not the first of them who had it: so has
Torrensis cut of the later words of Austin, that the primacie of Peter might be
thought a primacie in power, not in calling; or, if in calling, in power too.
The primacie of the Apostles is conspicuous and praeeminent with excellent
grace in the Apostle Peter: thus says Torrensis out of Austin. And these are
De baptism. contr. Donatist. lib. 2. cap. 1.
Austins words: but his words say farther, that Peter the Apostle, in whom
that grace and primacie are so preeminent, A posteriore apostolo Paulo esse
correctum.
was corrected by Paul a later Apostle. Wherein, naming Paul, [a later
Apostle,] as made Apostle, after Peter, in time: he shows, Confession.
Augustinian. lib. 1. cap. 9. tit. 1.
that of the other side he meant by [the primacie,] yt Peter was an Apostle, in
time, before Paul. As Ambrose says of the chiefest of the Apostles, that they
were before Paul, Non dignitate, sed tempore.
not in dignity, but in time. And Epist. 71. ad Quintum.
Cyprian (whom Austin alleges, and follows) does use the word [ Vt
diceretse primatum tenete: et obte^perari a nouellis and posteris sibi potius
oportere.
primacie] in the same sense of being first in time also. Wherefore, the
Fathers prove not your supremacy by giving the prerogative of primacie to
Peter. Comment. in 2. epist. ad Cor. cap. 12.



Heart. The bare name of primacie is not enough to prove it. But some by that
name have meant a supremacy. And surely, the preeminence with excellent grace,
which Austin gives Peter, does note a higher primacie, then either of order,
or calling, or time: though it with all too.


Rainoldes. It does so, I grant. And I noted that, in the third prerogative
which the Fathers give him: namely, principality. For De bapt. contr.
Donatist. lib. 2. cap. 1.
Austin, having joined his primacie and preeminence with excellent grace
together, does term them both, in one, Principatum apostolatus.
the principality of the Apostleship. Which if some have meant by the name of
primacie, as perhaps they have: they might, because the word is borrowed often
times from the proper signification of the first in order, to signify the
chief in quality. And so, when In Iohannem Tractat. 124.
Austin says, that Peter was Natura vnus homo, gratia vnus Christianus
abundantiori gratia v^us idemque primus: Apostolus.
a man by nature; a Christian by grace; by more abundant grace, an Apostle of
Christ, yea, the first Apostle: by, the first Apostle, he meant the chief
Apostle; the principality, by the primacie. But this principality of the
Apostleship, this preeminence of the primacie with grace so excellent and
abundant, comes no nearer unto your supremacy then did the primacie of
order. For, to be chief in grace, is one thing: and, to be chief in power, an
other.


Heart. And is it not a great grace, to be chief in power?


Rainoldes. As you say: the greatest grace, that your Popes of long time have
fought for. Yet there is a difference between grace and power. Which the Popes
Distinct. 20. c. Decretales.
Lawiers have observed well: as it behooved them to do. For many Doctors have
been endued with greater Gratia sancti spiritus.
grace of the holy Ghost, then sundry Popes, says Gratian: yet in the deciding
of controversies and causes the writings of the Doctors are of less authority
then the Popes decrees. Why? because the Popes are in Potestate.
power above them. But what speak I of Doctors? when the meanest Christians
may pass the Pope in grace, as it is confessed by Cardinal In summa de
Eccles. lib. 2. cap. ^2.
Turrecremata. Who, handling the question between the Pope and the Church,
whether of them is greater, when he had set down the reason of his
adversaries, that the Church is greater, because it is the body, the Pope a
member of it, and the whole must needs be greater then the part: he answers
thereto, that, the question is not whether the Church be greater then the Pope,
simply, to weete, Perfectione gratiae, and a^plitudine virtutum.
in perfection of grace, and amplenes of virtues; Quoniam etiam vna vetula
potest esse hoc modo perfection ac major ipso Papa.
for even an old woman may in this sort be perfiter and greater then the Pope
him self; but Potestate iurisdictionis*
in power of jurisdiction (he says) the Pope is greater. Wherefore if the Popes
supremacy do stand in power of jurisdiction, and a woman may be above him in
grace: then Peter might excel with the preeminence of grace, as Austin says he
did: and yet not excel in supremacy of power, which you conclude of it. Else,
you must take the supremacy from Peter, and give it to the blessed virgin.
Unless you you will deny that she excelled him in grace.


Heart. I will not deny it. Neither did I mean to prove the supremacy by the
preeminence of grace, alone, in Peter: but by the preeminence of so excellent
grace, concurring with the primacy. Whereto, because you think these privileges
(touched by Austin) do not prove it: the title of the Prince of the Apostles,
which As the Rhemistes say, In the argum. of the epist. of S. Peter: concluding
thereof, that Christ made him his vicar.
all antiquity gives him, may add weight and strength.


Rainoldes. Which all antiquity gives him? That speech is too lauishing.
Beside that, Prudentius (...). hymn.2. Duo Apostolorum principes. As the
Rhemists also note, in the tab. after ye acts of the Apostles: not
considering, that so Christ must have two vicars by their conclusion.
some of them who give it to him, give it to Paul also. But suppose that all:
and to him only. What is there employed more in this title, then I have
granted you already? For must he not be needs the Prince of the Apostles, to
whom the principality of the Apostleship is allowed? And if the principality
of the Apostleship infer not your supremacy: can you infer a supreme head
by the Prince of the Apostles? But the name of Prince perhaps does deceive you,
or you deceive others by it. For our English tongue does use it to note a
sovereign power in government: as Ier. 26.10.
the Princes of Judah, Ezekiel. 4^.9.
the Princes of Israel, Mat. 20.^5.
the Princes of the Gentiles are named in the scriptures. Whereas the Fathers
used it (after the Latin phrase) for chief, and most excellent: as Plato is
named the prince of the Philosophers. As Plato, says Aduersus Pelagianos, lib.
1. Vt Plato princeps philosophorum: ita Pe^^us Apostolorum fuit.
Ierom, was prince of the philosophers, so was Peter of the Apostles.
Wherefore, this is all you may conclude of it, that Peter did excel amongst
the Apostles, for grace and gifts of grace: as Plato did excel among the
Philosophers for wit, and gifts of wit. In the which conclusion (that you
may perceive what I give to Peter, and refuse it, if you mislike it:) by the
gifts of grace I mean all the blessings, wherewith the Lord did honor him;
by excelling in them, I mean that he did pass, not all the Apostles in them
all, but every one in some or other. For John, the disciple, whom the Lord
loved, who wrote the Gospel so divinely, In the beginning was the word, who
saw by revelation the things that were to come, and wrote them by the spirit
of prophecy: John excelled Peter in many gifts of grace, as Aduersus
Iouinian. lib. 1.
Ierom declares. And Paul excelled him farther even in the chiefest gifts:
in so much that De bapt co^t. Donatist. l. 2. c. 1.
Austin who gives Excellenti gratia.
excellent grace to Peter, In psalm. 130.
does give Excellentissi^ae ^^it gratiae.
most excellent grace to Paul; and says that he received more grace, and
labored more, then all the rest of the Apostles, and is therefore called
Apostolus. A^g. contra duas epist. Pelagianorum lib. 3. cap. 3.
the Apostle, by an excellency. But Peter of the other side excelled Paul in
primacie, that he was chosen first: and John in age, that he was elder: in
respect whereof he was preferred before him ( Hierom. aduers. Iouinian. lib.
1. Aetati delatum est, quia Petrus era^ senior.
by Ieroms opinion) to be the chief of the Apostles. And this is it, which
Ierom, and other Fathers meant by Peter's principality: if you will give them
leave to be their own interpreters. They did not mean to call him Prince of
the Apostles, as the Pope desires to be Prince of Bishops.


Heart They did mean to call him the mouth, and the top, the highest, the
President, and the head of the Apostles. For these, (as I have showed) are
their own words, by which, a preeminence in government is proved, and not in
grace only.


Rainoldes. These in deed come nearer to the point in question, because they
touch government: at the least some of the^. For some, as (...).
the highest (and so the top it may be too,) seem to have been meant rather
of preeminence in grace, then in government. But if you will refer them unto
both: it skilleth not. For they can betoken no more then the rest. And the rest
do signify, although a preeminence in government, such as it is: yet nothing
in comparison of your supremacy. (...) as Peter is called by Eusebius hist.
eccle. lib. 2. cap. 14.
This is plain by that, which was agreed betwixt us, Chapter. 4. Division 1.
when we spoke of the practice of Peter's authority in the Acts of the
Apostles. For when I granted him to be as the Speaker of ye Parliament in
England, or the President of a court of Parliament in France, and showed the
great difference (out of Franc. Duar. de sacris eccle. min. acbene. l. 3. c. 2.
a lawier of your own) between this preeminence, and that supremacy which
you claim: you rejected the lawier, as either ignorant, or unfaithful, and
refused this preeminence as not importing that supremacy; because it has not
sovereign power, nay, in power is under the body of the assembly, above which
it is in a prerogative of honor. Yet, this preeminence, is all, that is given
to Peter by the titles of the mouth, the head, the President of the Apostles.
Wherefore, it is evident that by those titles your Papal supremacy is not
given to him.


Heart. It may by your similitudes be probably thought, yt some of ye rest might
note such a preemine^ce in government (as you speak of) without a souerainty
of power. But, ye title of head has greater strength in it. For, the Speaker
is not called with us, in England, the head of the Parliament. That title is
reserved to the Princ e alone.


Rainoldes. But ^s it is showed before out of Duaren, who says of that court,
Cuius curiae caput es^^ Praeses dicitur.
the President of a Court of Parliament in France, is called head of the Court:
and Austin (or rather he, whom you alleged in the name of Austin) expounds
caput.
head, by praepositus.
President: and the name of head (as Chap. 1. Division 2.
I have proved out of the Scriptures) is used to note a preeminence of other
things, and not of power (much less of Princely power) only. Then what reason
is there, Author quaest ex Nou. Test. qu^est. 75.
but Ierom, in saying that Peter was appointed head, might signify the
preeminence not of a Prince but of a Speaker? We give not in England, the name
of head unto the Speaker. True. Neither give we the name of Speaker to the
Prince. But Peter has them both. For he is called the mouth, and head of the
Apostles. If the one debase him not to the meandness of a Speakers function:
why should the other advance him to the highness of a Princes soueraintie?


Heart. S. Ieroms This is the reason, and place of S. Ierom, whereon Sixtus
Senensis does gather Peter's kingly powers: mentioned before, Chap. 2. Diuis. 3.
reason shows, that he rather meant a soueraintie as of a Prince. For he
^aith, that Peter was chosen, one, amongst the twelve, to the intent, that (a
head being appointed) occasion of schism might be taken away. And how can
occasion of schism be taken away, unless that one have souerain power to
govern all?


Rainoldes. Why? Do you not think that France appointed Presidents in the
Courts of Parliament for the better ordering of them in their doings, that
occasion of strife might be taken away? What? In free States, which are ruled
in common, not (...).
by one Prince but (...).
by the best men, or (...).
by the whole people: do not their stories show, that one had a preeminence,
(as Each of the Consuls for his month. Sueton. in Iulio, cap. 20.
the Consul at Rome, Each of the (...), for their wecke: each (...). for his day.
Liban. argument. orat. Demost. in Androtion.
the Provost at Athens,) though the soueraintie were in many, who had like
authority and power amongst themselves? And did they not appoint this one, to
be the chief, and head of their company, that occasion of strife might be
taken away? So fared it with Peter amongst the Apostles in governing the
church, whose state if we compare with the states of common wealths, we shall
find that it was an aristocratie, not a monarchy, as the Philosophers term
it; not having Peter as a Prince, but the Apostles as the best men, to govern
it in common. Yet, as in all assemblies wherein many meet about affairs of
government, there must needs be one for orders sake and peace, to begin, to
end, to moderate the actions: so was that preeminence given to Peter amongst
the Apostles, that all things might be done peaceably and orderly. And this to
be the headship which S. Ierom meant, himself Hieron. aduer. sus Iouin. lib. 2.
in that very place, in which he touches it, does show manifestly. For,
having set down his adversaries objection: But, thou say, the church is
built upon Peter: he answers thereto, Although the same be done in another
place Super omnes Apostolos.
on all the Apostles, and Cuncti claues regni coelorum accipiant.
they all receive the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and the strength of the
church is grounded on them Ex aequo.
equally: yet therefore is one chosen amongst the twelve, that (a head being
appointed) occasion of schism may be taken away. Of the which sentence the
former branch shows yt by the name of head, used in the later, he could not
mean that Peter had a sovereign power over the Apostles. For all Peter's power
is comprised in the keys that Christ did promise him, and in the building of
the church upon him. But all the Apostles receive the keys, by Ieroms
judgment: and the church is builte upon them all equally. Wherefore by Ieroms
judgment, Peter was not over the Apostles in power. If not in power; and yet
in part of government: in what, but in that preeminence, which I spoke of? S.
Ierom therefore, saying, that Peter was appointed head of the Apostles, did
mean that preeminence among the Apostles, and not a soueraintie above them.


Heart. The words of S. Ierom do speak somewhat too liberally of the
Apostles, in that he says the church is built upon them all equally. And, as
D. Princi. doct. lib. 6. cap. 7.
Stapleton notes very well, Distinctio, d^ his quae a patribus dogmatice and
quae contentio s^ scribuntur, in verbis Hieron vmi locum habet.
the distinction touching things written by the Fathers, some by way of
doctrine, and some of contention, is verified in them. For here, by occasion
that he reasons against Iouinian, who alleged (against the honor of
virginity) that Christ preferred Peter, a married man, before the rest: he does
lessen and extenuate the authority of Peter, (as far as truth did give him
leave,) making the rest equal to him for the Apostleship; yet affirming
plainly, that he was head of the rest.


Rainoldes. Ierom wrote many things in deed against Iouinian by way of
contention rather, then of doctrine, to the disgrace of marriage. In so much
that Hieron. in a^polog. ad Pammachium pro libris aduersus Iouinian.
being therefore reproved by some, himself excuses it, that he did rather
strive the^ teach: and Hieron. in epistola ad Pamm.
Pammachius, a learned gentleman, his friend, did suppress the copies, and
wished them to be concealed till he had corrected them. But neither was this
place so reproved by them, or excused by him, for ought that may be gathered by
his apology: nor is it to be noted, as sauouring more of heat, then truth;
for the substance of it agrees with the scriptures. Yea Stapleton, who
covers it with this distinction, confesses in effect as much at unawares:
For, he says that Extenuat Hieronymus (quantum per ueritat^m licuit) Petri
autoritatem.
Ierom does lessen and extenuate the authority of Peter, as far as truth did
give him leave. Whereof it ensues, that it is no untruth to say (as Ierom
does) that all the Apostles had equal power with Peter. The name of head
therefore, which Ierom gives him with the same breath, can by no means import
a sovereign power over ye Apostles. Unless you will make him so absurd, and
brainesicke, as that he should say: Though none of the Apostles were sovereign
of the rest, but they had equal power all; yet was one of them above the rest
in power, and had the souerain-headship of them.


Heart. Well. Howsoever you handle Ieroms words: he says in flat terms that
which you denied. And therefore he makes against you with us.


Rainoldes. In what point? Or how?


Heart. You denied that Peter was head of the Apostles. Ierom says, he was.
Peter was not head: and Peter was head. Is there not a contradiction between
your words, and his?


Rainoldes. No more, then between the words of John and Christ Christ said of
John Baptist: Mat. 11.14,
this is Elias. John Baptist said of him self, John 1.21.
I am not Elias. John Baptist is Elias: and John Baptist is not Elias. Is there
not a contradiction between the words of Christ and John?


Heart. No. For Christ meant one way: and John Baptist, an other. Christ, that
he was Elias in spirit; as coming (...) 1.17.
in the spirit and power of Elias: John Baptist, that he was not Elias in
person; which the Pharisees meant.


Rainoldes. You have answered well. So Ierom meant one way: and I an other.
Ierom, that he was head in a preeminence of government; as moderating the
actions in assemblies of the Apostles: I, that he was not head in soueraintie
of power; which the Papists mean. And thus, to conclude, you may see that the
Fathers whom you allege for Peter: some give him a prerogative of authority,
some of primacie, some of principality, but none of your supremacy. For, your
supremacy does consist in power: and they give equal power to Peter with the
rest.


Heart. Equal power (I grant) in respect of the Apostleship, but not of
pastoral charge. For Peter was over the^ in that, even as the Pope is over
Bishops. And so Sraplet. prin^. dectrin. lib. 6. cap. 7. and 14. etc.
we do expound the words of S. Cyprian, S. Ierom, S. Chrysostom, and other of
the Fathers: who give equal power to the Apostles with Peter.


Rainoldes. Yet more of these Colewortes? I have proved Chapt. 3. Diuis. 1.
already that Peter's pastoral charge, and his Apostleship, is al one: and
therefore, if they were equal to him in the Apostleship, the were in pastoral
charge too. But if no other reason will put you to silence: the Popes own
authority may force you to it here. For, in the Cyprian set forth by him at
Rome, Annotat. in Cyprian. excusum Romae a Paulo Manutio.
he notes it to be considered, that, whereas Cyprian says, The rest of the
Apostles had equal power with Peter, this must be understood De aequalitate
Apostolatus, qui cum Apostolis morientibus cessauit, nec ad Episcopos trans^it.
of the equality of Apostleship, which ceased when the Apostles died, and
passed not over unto Bishops. The drift of which note implies a distinction of
Apostles, and Bishops: that it is not with Bishops in respect of the Pope, as
it was with the Apostles in respect of Peter. And that does carry with it a
check of your opinion: which makes the Apostles underlings to Peter, as
Bishops to the Pope.


Heart. You know not who made that note in the Roman Cyprian: for there is no
man's name to it. But if the Pope either made it him self, or allowed of it
being made by others to whom he did commit that charge: he set down (as a
private Doctor) his own opinion, which they who list may follow. But this is my
opinion, which I have set down: and to that I stand.


Rainoldes. I am glad you think not as the Pope does, at least, in one point.
God grant, that you may come forward in the rest: to dissent from him, not in
this one point alone, but in many. Howbeit whether he, or others made that
note: they set it forth with greater authority and privilege, then as a
private Doctors fancy. Neither is it likely that they would have granted so
much to the Apostles, unless the truth had wroong it from them. Let your
righteousness, M. Heart, if not exceed, yet match the righteousness of Scribes
and Pharisees: and yield to this conclusion (which rises of our conference,)
that Peter was not head of all the Apostles, as you do take the name of head.


Heart. You shall conclude your self alone so, for me. For I do protest, that I
believe it not, nor mind to yield unto it.


The sixth Chapter. The two maine grounds, on which the supremacy usurped by
the Pope, does lie. The former, that there should be one Bishop over all in
earth: 1 because Christ said, There shall be one flock, and one pastor; 2 and
among the Jews there was one judge, and hie Priest. The later, that the Pope
is that one Bishop: 3 because Peter was Bishop of Rome, (as some say,) 4 and
the Pope succeeds Peter. Both examined, and showed to fail in the proof of
the Popes supremacy.
RAINOLDES. The first Division.
Then Mat. 11.19.
wisdom must be content to be justified of her children. Howbeit God is able
to change your heart in such sort, that as in the Gospel, Mat. 21.29.
he, who said he would not go into the vineyarde, repented afterward, and
went: so you may yield to this on better advise, to which you say you will not
yield. Though, if your opinion of Peter's supremacy were granted to be true:
it proves not your title to the Popes supremacy (the principal point in
question) which you claim thereby. For let us feign, that Peter was head of
the Apostles. How follows it thereof, that the Bishop of Rome is head of all
the Church of Christ?


Heart. It follows by Chapt. 1. Di^is. 2. and Chap. ^ Diuis. 1.
the second part of my reason: The Bishop of Rome succeeds Peter in the same
power over Bishops, that he had over the Apostles. For, if Peter's power over
the Apostles did reach unto the whole flock, both of the sheep and the lambs:
then must the same power of his successor over Bishops reach by like reason
unto the same flock, and so to all the Church of Christ.


Rainoldes. But how do you prove that the Bishop of Rome succeeds Peter in
his power?


Heart. Because that the power committed to Peter was not to dye with Peter. For
this had not been agreeable to the goodness and wisdom of Christ: upon whom it
lay to provide for his church until the end of the world, as In Psalm. ^^.
Austin shows he did. Think not (says he to the Church) think not thy
self forsaken, because thou see not Peter, because thou see not Paul,
because thou see not them by whom thou art begotten. Of thine offspring there
is grown unto thee a fatherhood: in steed of thy fathers, children are borne
unto thee.


Rainoldes. The goodness and wisdom of our Savior Christ provided for his
Church, as S. Ephesians. 4.11.
Paul witnesses, by giving Pastors, and teachers: Pastors, and teachers; not
one, to the whole; but many to the several parts of his Church. For they,
whom Christ has chosen to serve him in the ordinary feeding of his flock, to
instruct his people, and guide them in the way of life, until the end of the
world: are named in the scripture sometime (...) Act. 20.17. and 1. Pet. 5.1.
Elders, of their age; sometime (...). Act. 20.28. (...). 1. Pet. 5.2.
Bishops of their duty. And he has taken order by his spirit and word that
Act. 14.2^. and 20.28. Philip. 1.^. Tit. 1.5.
such should be appointed in every Church, through every city. This was it
that Austin regarded, when he said; the church is not forsaken although she see
not the Apostles: considering that in steed of the Apostles, she has Bishops.
For Patres mis^i sunt apostoli: pro apostolis filii natisunt tibi, constituti
sunt episcopi. August. in Psalm. 44.
by the name of [Fathers] he meant the Apostles, and by the name of [children]
bishops: In steed of thy fathers, children are borne unto thee. Which, how it
may serve your purpose, I see not. Unless perhaps you mean, that (amongst
those children) the Bishop of Rome should be heir, as eldest: and Bishops of
other cities should be handled, al, like younger brethren. But Austin says not
so.


Heart. It is proved by Austin that our Savior Christ provided for his church.
And this (I grant) he did by giving several Pastors unto several flocks: but
so, that he committed the charge of them all to one supreme Pastor; which is
the Bishop of Rome.


Rainoldes. Thus I hear you say. But I had rather hear, Thus says the Lord.


Heart. You shall hear it. The Lord says that Ioh. 10.16.
there shall be one flock, and one shepherd, or (as we translate it) one fold
and one Pastor. Staplet* princip doct. lib. 6. cap. 15.
whereof I make this reason. By the name of Pastor is noted an ordinary
government and charge, which has relation to a flock: and therefore, as long
as the flock continues, the Pastors office must continue; the office of one
Pastor, as the flock is one. It continued in Peter, when Christ made him
supreme Pastor. Now, when Peter dyed, it should continue in his successor. And
the successor of Peter is the Bishop of Rome. The Bishop of Rome therefore is
the supreme Pastor of the Church of Christ.


Rainoldes. I perceive your Pope can make no show of title to supreme-headship
of the Church, unless he put Christ from the possession of it. For Christ by
[one Pastor] does signify himself: as it may appear by the drift of all his
speech, wherein he maintains his office and authority Ioh. 9. verse. 16. and
24. and ^29.
against the slanders of the Phariseis. Ioh. 10.14.
I am, says he, the good Pastor, and know mine own, and am known of mine. As
the Father knows me, so know I the Father: and I lay down my life for my
sheep. Other sheep I have also, which are not of this fold: and them must I
bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one flock, one Pastor.
One Pastor, who but he, of whom the words before, and after, are meant? He,
who is the good Pastor; who knows his sheep; who lays down his life for
them; who has other sheep beside the Jews, to weete, the Gentiles, whom he
will bring to his fold; and so of them both the Church shall be, as one flock;
obeying Christ, as one Pastor. This is the one Pastor, that our Savior meant.
Which if you will not believe on my word, or rather on his word who spoke it:
believe ^ibli^ castiga^a a Theologis ^ouaniensibus, excusa a Christophoro
Plantino Antuerpiae.
your own Bible, expou^ding it by conference of scripture with scripture, of
John with Ezekiel. In whom God does promise that Ezekiel. 37. verse. 22.
he will make (of Israel, and Judah) one people: and verse. 24.
set his servant David (that is, Christ, the son of David) to be one Pastor
unto them all, Ezekiel. 34.23.
and he shall feed them. Thus, in Gods law, the words are meant of Christ.
The Pope The canon ^aw. c. vnam sanctam. extra. de maioritat. and ^^edient.
in his law, will have him self meant by them. You are angry with us, when we
call him Antichrist. Is not the name of Antichrist too gentle for him, who
claims that to himself, which is proper to Christ?


Heart. The Pope will have himself to be meant by them, as the vicar of Christ:
and so they do belong to him. Though they belong also to Christ: which we deny
not. For thus says the Pope. Of the Church, which is one, there is one body,
and Vnum capu^ non duo capita* quasi monstru^, Christus videlicet and Christi
vicari^s, Petrus, Petrique successor.
one head, not two heads, as a monster, namely Christ and Christ's vicar
Peter, and Peter's successor: since the Lord says to Peter himself, Feed my
sheep: my sheep, says he, in general, not in particular these or these:
whereby he is understood to have committed all to him. Whether they be
therefore Grecians or others, who say that they are not committed to Peter and
to his successors: they must needs confess them selves not to be of the
sheep of Christ: Dicente Domino in Iohanne, Vnum ouil^ and vnicum e^se
pastorem.
Since the Lord says in John, that there is one fold and one Pastor. Which
words, though they conclude the Pope to be that one Pastor: yet you must not
take them as though the Pope meant them of himself alone, but that they are
verified first in Christ, then in Peter, lastly in himself. And so there
continues one Pastor by succession, even as the Church continues one.


Rainoldes. Do you know what you say, when you say, there continues one
Pastor by succession, Peter after Christ, the Pope after Peter? I hope you do
it ignorantly, 1. Tim. 1.^^.
and therefore may obtain mercy, though you blaspheme in it.


Heart. Blaspheme? why say you so?


Rainoldes. Because you deny Christ the Son of God to be the one Pastor, and
so the head of his Church. For he to whom an other succeeds in an office,
does cease him self to bear the office: as Act. 24.^^.
Felix did cease to be governor of Jury, when Festus was in place to be his
successor. Wherefore if the office of that one Pastor continue by succession:
then does it wholly rest in the successor, that is the Pope; and Christ, the
predecessor is discharged of it.


Heart. You speak as though we named the Pope, Christ's successor: which we are
far from. For we know that Priests after the order of Aaron had therefore
successors, Heb. 7.2^.
because they were not suffered to endure by reason of death. But Christ
endures ever, as being a Priest after the order of Melchisedech: and so has
no successors. We name S. Peter, Christ's vicar: the Pope Christ's vicar, and
successor of Peter: but neither Peter, nor the Pope, successor of Christ.


Rainoldes. If it be as you say, then raze out for shame that profane speech
out of your Sa^rar. ceremon. Roman. eccl. lib. 1. (...) 1.
sacred Ceremonies of the Church of Rome: Ch^^^tus primum denominatione
successorem instituit, dicens Petro, pasce oues mea^: and ea ratione Petrus
Clementem etiam nominauit.
Christ did first name and ordain Peter, his successor, saying to him, Feed
my sheep: and in the same sort did Peter also name Clemens. But since you
acknowledge that Christ is one Pastor, and yet has no successor: you have
given over the fortress of that which you meant to seize on by those words of
Christ, that there should be one flock, one Pastor. For where as you said
that this sovereign Pastor must and does continue one by succession, in Peter,
and the Pope: you confess now, that without succession he does continue one in
person, even Christ, 1. Pet. 2.25.
the Pastor of our souls, Heb. 13.20.
the great, 1. Pet. 5.4.
the chief Pastor, Revel. 1.13. and ^.1.
who walks in the midst of the seven golden candlestickes, that is, of the
seven (and by consequent of all) Churches.


Heart. I confess, that Christ continues the Pastor of our souls, the chief
Pastor, and has no successor, as succession is taken properly. But he made a
vicar, that is a chief Pastor, under him, in earth to continue by succession.
Whom also he meant by the name of one Pastor, and not himself alone.


Rainoldes. The very words of scripture, and circumstances of the text do
prove the contrary. For, to whom did Christ speak, when he said: John. 10.
verse. 15.
I have other sheep, which are not of this fold: and them must I bring, and
they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one flock, one Pastor? was it not
to verse. 7. and 19.
the Jews?


Heart. To the Jews.


Rainoldes. Then by other sheep, not of that fold, he meant the Gentiles.


Heart. The Gentiles.


Rainoldes. And it was Christ's office, to bring them also to his fold.


Heart. It was so.


Roinoldes. To bring them by his voice, which they should hear.


Heart. What then?


Rainoldes. Is not he verse. ^.
the Pastor, verse. 3.
whose voice the sheep hear?


Heart. Who denies it?


Rainoldes. Then if the Jews and Gentiles hear the voice of Christ, and so
become one flock: how could he mean any but himself alone by the one Pastor?


Heart. Him self alone (I grant) directly, and first: but secondarily, and by
consequent, his vicar too, Peter, and Peter's successor. For Christ, while he
lived in flesh upon the earth, did not bring the Gentiles: Mat. 15.24,
he was not sent (he said) but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. In
the which respect S. Paul calls him Romans 15.8.
ye minister of circumcision, because he did execute his office, and ministry,
only toward the people of circumcision, that is, the Jews. The Gentiles he
did bring after his ascension, by the ministry of his servants, chiefly of S.
Peter: whom Act. 10.11.
having instructed by a vision from heaven, he sent him to Cornelius, and Act.
15.7.
chose him that the Gentiles should hear by his mouth the word of the
Gospel, and believe. Wherefore, as Christ said, that he must bring the
Gentiles, though he meant to bring them not by his own preaching, but by the
mouth of Peter; and so Peter brought them after a sort too: likewise he gave
him self the name of one Pastor, though he fed his flock not in his own
person, but in his vicar; and so might he mean his vicar too thereby.


Rainoldes. This is a greater argument, that he meant not Peter, nor Peter's
successor (as you term him) by the name of one Pastor. For if he meant him
self, not as he lived in the flesh, but as he Ephesians. 1. verse. 2^
reigns in glory: then meant he that prerogative which is only his, as
verse. 22.
head of the Church, and may be no way given unto flesh and blood. For the
proof whereof we are to weigh farther, that in saying Ioh. 10. ver. 16
I must bring them, and they shall hear my voice: he means effectual
bringing, and hearing, through which they, who are ver. 4. and 27.
his sheep, do follow him, and ver. 28.
he does give them eternal life, and they shall never perish: and none shall
pluck them out of his hand. Now, whom Christ brings after this manner, he
brings them by two means: by the preaching of his word, and the working of
his Spirit. As he works by his Spirit: so he has no vicar, him self does
Act. 16.14.
open the heart of Lydia: and Mat. 1.8.
baptize with the holy Ghost: and Mat. 28.20.
is with his disciples still until the end of the world. As he calls by his
word: so are all ministers of the word, his vicars. For he sends them in
his steed, and preaches unto men by them. So he says to the Mat. 10.40.
twelve Apostles, He that receives you, receives me: and to the Luc. 10.16.
seventy disciples, He that hears you, hears me. So Paul says of ^. Cor.
5.20.
him self, Timothee, Siluanus, and the rest that labored with him, We are
ambassadors for Christ, God as it were beseeching you through us: we pray you
in Christ's steed, be ye reconciled to God. First therefore, since the Spirit
does make the word effectual, and Christ has no vicar, as he works by his
Spirit: it follows, yt in naming him self, ye one Pastor, who does bring his
sheep, and they hear his voice, he could imply no vicar. For the word does
sound in vain to the ear, unless the Lord do open the heart with his
Spirit: and 1. Cor. 3.7.
neither he that planteth is any thing, nor he that waters, but God that
gives the increase. Again, if he had implied their ministry, by whom the
sheep hear his voice, and so are brought: yet must that belong to many
vicars, not to one; or if to one, not to Peter. For they, who should be brought
thereby, are the Gentiles: and Christ has brought the Gentiles by many Ephesians.
4.11.
Pastors and teachers, not only by the Apostles: nor amongst the Apostles by
Peter chiefly, but by Romans 11.13.
Paul: and that, through Act. 13.2.
the calling of the holy Ghost, and Gal. 2.9.
their agreement between them selves. Finally, if Christ had meant (as you
distinguish it) him self first, and directly; secondarily, and by co^sequent
Peter: it must be for his preaching ye word to the flock. And what is this to
Peter's successor the Pope: who preaches not as Peter did? For, Sacra^. cerem.
Romans eccles. lib. ^. sect. 4.
he uses not to preach, but when he says Mass; nor then, unless he list:
and sect. 5.
he says not Mass, but on a few hie feasts; nor then, if he be let: and the
Italian government, specially As D. Alle^ speaks of it: in his Apolog. ^f the
Engl. Se^^n. chapt. 6.
the Papacy so discreetly menaged, must needs have lets a number. His Princely
cares do trouble him: he leaves Priestly to the Friars. Wherefore, that
sacrilegious usurper of Rome commits two evils, against, both the head, and
the body of the Church. Against the head: in that he makes the prerogative of
one Pastor common to all Popes, which is proper to Christ. Against the body: in
that he claims the title of Christ's vicar, as proper to him self, which is
common to all Pastors.


Heart. Nay, you who (...). ^3.4.
revile the high priest of God, commit a great evil. But he commits none at
all. For he takes not the prerogative of one Pastor as Christ, but under
Christ. And he claims the title of Christ's vicar, by an excellency, as the
chief, and general: though all other Bishops be Christ's vicars also.


Rainoldes. This is to roale the stone of Sisyphus. You drive it up the hill,
and still it slippeth backward: yet cease you not to strive, but you strive in
vain. For though you fetch it up never so often, down again it will. All
Bishops (you say) are the vicars of Christ: but the Pope claims that title by
an excellency. True. By an excellency he robs al Bishops of that honor,
which Christ has given them. For he does account them all to be his vicars, as
Cardinal In Sum. de eccles. lib. 2. cap^. 62.
Turrecremata calls them expressly the vicars of the Pope: and proves by 2.
q. 6. c. decre^to. c. sequenti.
the Popes own law, that they are so. Wherefore if you will have them Christ's
vicars too: the matter must be helped out with your distinction, that first,
and directly, they are the Popes vicars; and Christ's, by a consequent, and
secondarilie. As for the man, whom you call the hie priest of God: I know him
not. For he is not the hie priest, of the Jews, I trow. And Christians have no
hie priest, but the Son of the Highest: even him, of whom Heb. 7.2^.
it is written, such an hie priest it became us to have, which is holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher then the heavens.
Wherefore, I speak not the words of reuiling, but of truth and modesty, when
I call him a sacrilegious usurper, who takes the crown of the king of kings,
and fetteth it on his own head. This does that man of sin: who says that De
necessitat^ salutis omni humanae creaturae, subesse Romano Pontifici. c. Vnam
sanctam. Extrauag. de maiori^^. and obedient.
it is necessary for every man unto salvation, to be subject to the Pope: and
that they, who say he has not charge over them, are not of Christ's sheep,
because the Lord says in John, that there shall be one flock and one pastor.


Heart. You need not account it so heinous a matter to conclude that doctrine
by these words of Christ. Chiefly, since it is probable, that he meant them
rather of the Pope then him self. For he says, there shall be one flock and
one Pastor: he says not, there has been; but, there shall be. Now him self,
as being God, was always Pastor of the Gentiles also, no less the^ of the
Jews. And so in respect of him there had before been one flock, and one
pastor. Wherefore since he speaks of a thing that should be, not that had been
already: he might be well thought to have meant not him self but the Pope
rather, who (in his steed) is Pastor both of Jews and Gentiles.


Rainoldes. Had the Gentiles always God for their Pastor, as well as the Jews?
What meant S. Paul then, who says, Ephesians. 2.12.
to the Gentiles: ye were without Christ, and aliants from the common wealth of
Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, and had no hope, and
were without God in the world? For Psalm. 23.1. and 80.1.
God is called Pastor, in respect of them, whom he guides, and feeds with
the food of life. So that if he were Pastor of the Gentiles always, as you say
he was: then they were always faithful, and members of the Church, and had the
hope of God in Christ. But if they were before without Christ, without hope,
without God in the world, and aliants from the common wealth of Israel, that
is, the Church, and strangers from the covenants of promise made to the
faithful, as they were, S. Paul says: then neither were they one flock with
the Jews, neither was God their one Pastor. wherefore what ^oeuer show of
probability the Pope might seem to have for abusing those words to maintain
his own pride: in truth they agree to him, Ephesians. 2.14.
who broke the stop of the partition wall, and made of both one, that is to
Christ Jesus, and only to Christ.


Heart. Well. If the words agree not to the Pope perhaps in one sense: they may
in an other. For there are sundry senses of the holy scriptures, but in
general two, as Robert. Bellarmin. in lection. Roman. con^^. 1. quest. 5.
Father Robert shows whereof the one is called historical, or literal; the
other, mystical, or spiritual. And so the speech of Christ touching one
Pastor, might signify the Pope in a mystical sense, though not in the
literal. As likewise the name of hye priest, signifying the Jewish literally,
does mystically betoken him.


Rainoldes. That sense is the right sense of the scriptures, which the holy
Ghost, the author of them, meant. Now, the holy Ghost has uttered them in
such sort, that not the words only do signify things, according to their
natural sense: but the things also expressed by the words do signify other
things, according to the Lords ordinance, who shadowed that by figures in the
old Testament, which is performed in the new. As, for example, it is written
in Exodus 12.46.
the law of Moses, you shall not break a bone of him. These words are spoken
touching the lamb of the passover: and signify, as they sound, that the
Jews should dress it whole, without breaking any bone thereof. But this thing
does signify a fa^ther thing in secret: to weete, that when John 19.3^.
Christ, who was represented and figured by the lamb, should suffer death to
save us, a bone of him should not be broken. Thus, of one place there are two
senses: the former called literal, because the letter, as it were that is the
very words, being understood aright, do import it; and the later, mystical,
because the thing imported and meant by the letter, does betoken a deeper
mystery. Of these, the literal sense is known to be the meaning of the holy
Ghost. For words were made to open the conceits of our mind: and so are they
used by the holy Ghost to show the will of God unto us. The mystical is known
to be his meaning also, when himself reuealeth it: as he has done in that
touching the lamb. Otherwise it is not. For men may devise many mystical
senses of a place in scripture, and them, one contrary to an other: as often
times they do. Which all could not be meant by the Spirit of truth: and
whether any of them were, who can say? We have no assurance then of mystical
senses: which may be men's fancies. Only the literal sense, which is meant
undoubtedly by the holy Ghost, is of force to prove the assured truth, and
therefore does bind in matters of belief. And this is so clear that Thom.
Aquin. Sum. Theolo. part. 1. q. 1.211.10. Alfons. a Castr. aduers. Haer. l. 1.
c* 3. Sanders ^ocke of the Church chapt. 3. The narration of the Seminaries.
your own Doctors acknowledge it, and teach it: even Robert Bellarmin. contr.
1. quast. 5.
he whom you alleged. For he says, It is agreed between you and us Ex solo
literali sensu, pe ti debere argumenta efficacia.
that forcible aguments ought to be drawn only from the literal sense: and
that is surely known to be the sense and meaning of the holy Ghost. As for
mystical senses, it is not always sure, whether the holy Ghost meant them:
unless they be expounded in the scriptures, as that in John, you shall not
break a bone of him. His exceptis, stultum est ex mysticis sensibus velle
eflicaciter probare dog^ata fidei.
Which excepted, it is a folly to go about to prove the points of faith
forcibly by mystical senses. Wherefore if it be not expounded in the
scriptures, that the words of Christ (touching one Pastor) are meant, as of
him self, by the literal sense; so, by the mystical, of the Pope: you see
that Father Robert says, it is a folly, to go about to prove the Popes
supremacy by them, if you will prove it forcibly. Now, what I say of one
Pastor: the same I say of high Priest. By whom, Exodus 28.4.
the law of Moses does signify the hye priest, literally: Heb. 8.5.
the epistle to the Hebrews does show that mystically he betokened Christ. But
that the Pope was meant by him in any sense either literal or mystical: I
find not in the scriptures.


Heart. The second Division.
But I find in the scriptures that Christians must still have a hye Priest
amongst the^ on earth, to be their chief judge.


Rainoldes. Were find you that?


Heart. In the seventeenth chapter of the book of Deuteronomie, even in these
words. Deuteronomy. 17.8.
If there rise a matter too hard for thee in judgment between blood and
blood, between Causam and causam. vulgat. ^dit latin.
cause and cause, between plague and plague, in the matters of controversy
within thy gates: then shall thou arise, and go up to the place which the
Lord thy God shall choose, and thou shall come to the Leuiticall priests, and
to the judge, that shall be in those days, and ask, and they shall show thee
the sentence of judgment. And thou shall do according to that thing which they
shall show thee from that place that the Lord shall choose: and thou shall
observe to do according to all that they shall inform thee. According to the
law which they shall teach thee, and according to the judgment which they
shall tell thee, shall thou do. Thou shall not decline from the thing which
they shall show thee, neither to the right hand, nor to the left. And he that
shall presumptuously refuse to obey the commandment of the Priest who serves
then the Lord thy God: Vulgat. edit. ^x decreto iudicis morietur homo ille.
by the decree of the judge shall that man dye, and thou shall take away evil
out of Israel. Here the hye Priest is made the chief judge, to hear, and
determine, hard and doubtful causes, amongst the people of God. And who
amongst Christians is such a Priest and judge, but the Pope only?


Rainoldes. Now the first chapter of the book of Genesis would serve you as
well to prove the Popes supremacy, if it were considered. For Genesis 1.1.
it is written there: In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. ^.
vnam sanctam. Extrauag. de maioritat. and obedient.



Heart. What mean you so to say?


Rainoldes. Nay ask that of Pope Boniface the eight.
him who does expound it so: saying, that whosoever resists his supremacy,
resists Gods ordinance; unless he feign (as Manichee did) that there are Duo
principia, sicut Manichaeus.
two beginninges, which is false and heretical: because, as Moses witnesses,
Non in princ^pijs, sed in principio, creauit Deus coelum and ^ecram.
not, in the beginninges, but in the beginning God created heaven and earth*
See, in the beginning, not, in the beginninges: and therefore not many are hye
Priests of the Church, but the Pope only.


Heart. The place, which I alleged, does plainly speak of the high Priest:
and so it does serve my purpose more fitly, then this, which does not touch
him. Howbeit, as learned men, when they have proved a point by stronger
arguments, are wont to set it forth with floorishes of lighter reasons, rather
to polishe it as it were, then to work it and frame it: so the Pope having
brought better evidence for proof of his supremacy, does trim it up with
this of Genesis, as you would say, by an allusion.


Rainoldes. An illusion, you should say. But the places both, as well this of
Genesis, as that of Deuteronomie, are taken in a mystical sense of your own:
so that to win a matter which must be wunne by sound proof, they are both of
like force, because that neither is of any. For the literal sense of that in
Deuteronomie does concern the Jews: to whom the Lord spoke it by his servant
Moses. Now, how dangerous it is to buyld, as upon scripture, things, which are
not grounded upon ye literal sense thereof: we may learn by the mystical
sense of that place, which a Pope gives; and no common Pope, but Innocentius
the third, the Father of the Lateran-councel, in which your popish Shrift and
Transsubstantiation were enacted first. He, in a decretal (which is enrolled in
ye c. per venerabilem. extra. qui sint filij legitimi.
canon law, as a rule of the government of ye Church for ever) does bring
forth that same place of Deuteronomie, to prove that the Pope may exercise
temporal jurisdiction not only in his own dominion, but in other countries
too, on certain causes. And, Sane, cum Deu^eronomi^^, lex secunda
interpretetur: ex vi vocabuli comprobatur, vt quod ibi decernitur in nouo
Testamento de beat obseruari. A principle for a Pope.
because Deuteronomi^ is the second law, by interpretation: it is proved
(says he) by the force of the word, that what is there decreed ought to be
observed in the new Testament. Upon the which principle he does expound it
thus: that the place which the Lord has chosen, is Rome: the Leuiticall
Priests are his brethren, the Cardinals: the judge is himself, the vicar of
Christ: the judgments are of three sorts; the first, between blood and
blood, is meant of Criminale, and civil.
criminal and civil causes; the last, between plague and plague, of
Ecclesiasticum, and criminale.
ecclesiastical and criminal; the middle, between cause and cause, pertains
unto Tam ecclesiasticum, ^uam (...).
both ecclesiastical and civil. In the which when any thing shall be hard or
doubtful: recourse must be had to the judgment of the Sea Apostolic (that
is, of Rome:) whose determination if any man presumptuously refuse to obey, he
is adjudged to dye, that is, to be cut off, as a dead man, from the communion
of the faithful by excommunication. Lo: this is a mystical sense of that
place, which you alleged out of Deuteronomie. It runs very roundly with
the Popes supremacy. But Christian States (I hope) will hold the literal
sense against it. For if they allow this doctrine of Pope Innocentius, as
catholic: the Pope must be supreme head of all Christians, both in
ecclesiastical causes and civil. The 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
mystery of iniquity did work very fast, when the chiefest mysteries of the
Romish faith were built upon such mystical senses.


Heart. I know that the mystical senses of the scripture are of no strength to
convince an adversary. But the literal sense of that which I alleged does
prove the point in question. For there lies often times, within the literal,
an other sense hidden: which is not directly uttered, and plainly, but is
gathered and inferred by the force of argument. As, for example, Exodus 3.6.
God said to comfort Moses and the Israelites, I am the God of Abraham, the God
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. These words in the first sense, do signify
the covenant that God made with Abraham and with Abraham's seed, whom he chose
to be his servants, and promised he would be their God. But Mat. 22.32.
Christ alleges them to prove (against the Sadduces) the resurrection of the
dead. Which he does conclude by consequence of reason. God is not the God of
the dead, but of the living. He is the God of Abraham* Therefore Abraham is not
dead. Abraham is a man consisting of two parts, the soul and the body. If
Abraham then live, and yet his body be dead: his body must rise again, to
the end that God may justly be called the God, not of Abraham's soul, but of
Abraham. Wherefore, in that God is called the God of Abraham, it follows (by
discourse) that the bodies of men shall be raised from death to life. Is not
this reason contained in the literal sense of the scripture, from which it is
deduced?


Rainoldes. Yes: and is of force to prove the point in controversy. For
whatsoever follows necessarily of the literal sense: that is as true and
sound as the sense, whereof it follows. But how will you gather so the Popes
supremacy from the place in Deuteronomie.


Heart. By a reason, which I ground upon the likeness and proportion of the
Church of Christ to the children of Israel. For if the Israelites had a high
Priest to be their judge in matters of difficulty and doubt, between blood
and blood, between cause and cause, between plague and plague: why should not
we semblably have a hie Priest to be the judge in our causes?


Rainoldes. This reason is drawn from a similitude: that, as it was amongst the
Jews in the old Testament; so must it be amongst Christians in the new.
Logicians say, that similitudes do halt of one foot. But this does halt of
both. For neither was the high Priest amongst the Jews, judge of all those
matters: nether does it follow thereof, although he had been, that amongst
Christians there must a high priest be likewise judge of all. Else, it must be
lawful for all your priests to marry. For Leuit. 21.7^
it was so amongst the Jews. And Mass must be be said no where but at Rome.
For the Jews Deuteronomy. 12.14.
might not sacrifice, but in the place which the Lord had chosen. And Deuteronomy.
16.16.
all the males, amongst the Jews, must go thither every year thrice. Which
were overmuch for all your males, to Rome. Yet must they do it by your reason.
For it is written in Deuteronomie. And because Deuteronomium: of the greek
words, (...).
Deuteronomie is the second law by interpretation: the force of the word
proves, that, what is there decreed, ought to be observed in the new
Testament, says Pope Innocentius.


Heart. The condition of Christians is not in all respects like unto the Jews,
nor Rome unto Jerusalem. And why it is not like in the matters which you
mention: there may be reasons given.


Rainoldes. May there be reasons given? Then reasons may be given, why your
reason is naught. But, that you may see what a lame thing it is: mark the
points whereon it stands. First, the high Priest (you say) is the judge, to
whom, for the deciding of hard and doubtful controversies, the Lord does send
the Jews. This the scripture says not: but makes a difference between the
judge and the Priest. For it gives sentence of death, upon him, who refuses
to harken (...)
to the Priest, or to the judge. Wherein, by disioyning the Priest from the
judge, it declares plainly that the Priest was not the same that the judge.


Heart. Our common editio^ in Latin does not read it so: but in this sort: he
that shall presumptuously refuse to obey Sacerdotis ^mperio: exiudicis decreto.
the commandment of the Priest, by the decree of the judge shall that man die.
You see it is here, the commandment of the Priest: and the decree of the judge
is an other point. It is not, as you cite it, the Priest, or the judge.


Rainoldes. It is not so in your Latin, which man has translated. But it is so
in the Hebrew, written by the Spirit of God.


Heart. But we have a decree of the Council of Trent, Council. Trident. Session.
4.
that our old and common edition in Latin shall be taken as authentical, in
public lectures, disputations, sermons and expositions: and that Nemo illam
reiicere quouis praetextu audeat vel praesumat.
no man may dare or presume to reject it under any pretense. If no man may
reject it under any pretense: then not under pretense of the Hebrew text. And
that for great reason. For the Hebrewe Bibles, which are extant now, are
shamefully corrupted in many places by the Jews, of spite and malice against
Christians: as Bishop Lindan. de opt. genesis interpret. scriptur. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Lindan shows largely and learnedly, in the defense of that decree of the
Tre^t-councell.


Rainoldes. This is a shameful sclaunder brewed by Satan, and set a broch by
Lindan; to the intent, that errors, which have prevailed in Popery, either by
the fault of the Latin translator, or by the over sight of them who have
mistaken him, should not be discovered and put to shame by the light of the
Hebrew truth. And this shall appear by his arguments and dealings, if you will
sift them in particular. If in general only you mean to use his name to
discredit the truth, as Staplet. princ. doct. l. 11. c. 12.
your Doctor does: I will send both you, and him, for an answer to three of
the learned and fittest judges of this matter, that your church has, even
Isaac Leuita, Arias Montanus, and Payua Andradius. Of whom Johan. Isaac Leu.
German. defensio veritatis Hebra icae sacrarum scripturarum aduersus libros
tres reuerendi D. Wilhelmi Lindani quos de optimo scripturas interpretandi
genere inscripfit.
the first, being Lindans own master, and professor of the Hebrew tongue in
the university of Coolen, has written three books in defense of the Hebrew
truth against the cauils of his scholar. Benedict. Arias Montanus de varia in
Hebraicis libris lectione: and, de exemplari psalterii Anglicani. In sacro
appatatu Regiorum Biblior. Tom. 6.
The next, for his rare skill of tongues and arts, was put in trust by king
Philip to set forth the Bible in Hebrew, Chaldee, Greek and Latin; wherein he
has reproved that treatise of Lindan, and disclosed his folly. Diegu. Payuae
d'Andrada de^ensio fidei ^ridentin. lib. 4.
The last, was the chiefest of the Divines and Doctors, at the Council of
Trent. The decrees whereof though he have defended, and namely that which you
mention: yet not so, but he has withal con^uted them, who say, that the Jews
have corrupted the Hebrew text. Your cause (M. Heart) begins to be desperate,
when it can find no coouert* but such as your own patrones are ashamed off.


Heart. I have not read th^se men's discourses. But certainly what soever they
say for the rest: neither they nor you shall be ever able to prove, Staplet.
princ. doctr. l. 11. c. 12.
that the Jews have not corrupted the Hebrew t^xt in the one and twenteeth
Psalm, or Psalm. 22.17.
two and twenteeth as they number it. For where it should be read (as our Latin
has it, and the Greek also) they have pierced my hands and my feet: the
Hebrews now do read, not Caaru, that is, they have pierced; but Caari, that
is, as a Lion; as a Lion my hands and my feet. Whereby, a notable prophecy
describing so plainly the manner and kind of the passion of Christ should be
taken out of our hands through the treachery of the Jews, if we should follow
the Hebrew text as it is now. But it is so manifestly known to be corrupted:
that your selves, though allowing the Hebrew, as authentical, yet follow it
not in this place, in your English Bibles.


Rainoldes. This is the only argument, that De opt. genesis interpret. script.
lib. 1. cap. 6.
Lindan has of any show, to prove, that the Jews have corrupted the Hebrew
text. But if it be weighed with an even balance: you shall find it a mere
cavil. For what will you say of your own selves? Did the Church of Rome
corrupt the Latin text in the third of Genesis, Genesis 3.15.
where it is read of the woman, she shall bruise thy head: for that which should
be read of thewomans seed, he shall bruise thy head?


Heart. Some of your men say so. But they do great injury to the Church therein.


Rainoldes. They have as great cause, at least, if not greater, to say this of
Romanistes, as you the other of the Jews. For if* we match the prophecies;
this is more notable, De opt. genesis interpret. Scrip. lib. 3 cap. 9.
which is corrupted in your Latin: of the victory of Christ over Satan, and
ours through him. If we compare errors; this is more manifest: in so much that
it is proved to be an error even by Lindan also, not only by Augustine.
Steuchus in recognit. Genes. ad verit. Heb. Andrad. defens. sid. Trident. lib.
4.
others; and the Hebrew text, with the Chaldee paraphrase, and the Greek
translation, do all make against it, as In (...) lection. Bibl. edition. vulgat
Regioru^ Biblior. Tom. 6.
the Divines of Louan grant.


Heart. But this might creep in by some humane oversight, or negligence of
scriueners: as sundry such errors have crept in to written books of all
sorts, even in the best copies. The words [ipsa] and [ipse] in which the
variance lies, do not so greatly differ, but that a man might easily mistake
the one for the other,


Rainoldes. No more do the words (...)
Caaru, and (...)
Caari. The difference is as small. Wherefore if the one might be an oversight of
scriueners in the Latin, as you say, and truly: why might not the other be
likewise in the Hebrew, as it is gessed by Defension. fidei Tride^t. lib. 4.
Andradius. And that it was so, it is declared at large by In praefat. ad
lectorem de varia in Hebraicis libris lectione: (...) de Masoreth ratione atque
vsu.
Arias Montanus: who for his singular knowledge and judgment both in arts and
tongues, was chosen, (as I said) to ouersee the setting forth of that famous
Bible in Hebrewe, Chaldee, Greek, and Latin, which was printed at Anwerpe,
with the approbation of your Pius the fifth in praefat. Regior. Biblior. and
Gregory the thirteenth, praefat. Ar. Montan. ^lucid. in nou. Test.
Popes and Doctors. For (in the sixth tome of that work) he shows, that,
when the Jews returned into their country after their captivity of seventy
years in Babylon: it befell unto them, partly by occasion of their long
troubles which did distract their minds, partly by corruption of their native
tongue which was grown out of kind, first into the Chaldee and afterward into
the Syriake, that they neither knew nor pronounced so well the words of the
scripture, written (as the manner was) without vowels. Whereby it came to pass
that in the writing of them their crept in some fault, either through injury
of the times, or by reason of troubles which fell upon the people, or by
negligence of some scriueners. But this inconvenience was met withal afterward
by most learned men: such as Esdras was, and afterward Gamaliel, Ioseus,
Eleazar, and other of great name: who provided by common travel with great
care and industry, that the text of scripture and the true reading thereof,
should be preserved most sound and vncorrupt. And from these men, or from their
instruction, being received and poolished by their scholars in the ages
following, there came (says he) as we judge, that most profitable treasure
which is called (...) traditio, vel, traditionalis, quod tradat abunde and
fideliter varias. Hebraicorum Bibliorum lectiones, quaecun -- que vnquam fuere.
Masoreth, that is to say, a delivery, because it does deliver abundantly and
faithfully all the diverse readings (that ever were) of the Hebrewe Bibles,
Wherein there appears an evident token of the providence of God, for the
preservation of the sacred books of scripture whole, and sound: that the
Masoreth has been kept till our time these many hundred years with such care
and diligence, that Nullam vel minimam in variis exemplaribus discrepanti am
admisisse doprche^sus vnquam.
in sundry copies of it (which have been written) no difference was ever found;
and it has been added in all the written Bibles that are in Europe, Afrike, or
Asia, each of them agreing thoroughly therein with other, even as it is printed
in the Venice-bibles, to the great wonder of them who read it. Now, in this
Masoreth, made so long ago, so diligently written, so faithfully kept, in so
many countries, through so many ages, as Arias Montanus witnesses, the Jews
them selves acknowledge by their own testimony, that where in common books
it is read Caari, in certain it is Caaru. Wherefore, if some Jewish scriueners
(who wrote out books) depraved it of malice, and spite, which might be, though
they who accuse them do bring neither autour, nor time, nor any sure argument
to prove it, but if some depraved it: yet, seeing their Masoreth does note the
diverse reading, and in part does justify that which is the truer: it is hard
to charge them (as you do) with corrupting of the Hebrewe text. Much harder,
then if we should charge your Romish church, with corrupting of the Latin,
where you read [ipsa] in steed of [ipse,] not he, but she shall bruise thy head.


Heart. Not so: for we have kept also that reading [ipse] even in our vulgar
Latin translation. For In Bibliis excusis Antuerp. 8. Plantino.
the Divines of Louan do note that it is found in two written copies. And we do
confess it to be more agreeable both to the Hebrewe text, and the Chaldee
paraphrase, and the Greek translation: yea that S. Ierom read it so too: as
you may see in the Notations of Notationes in sacra Biblia, quibus, va^iantia
discrepantibus exemplaribus loca discutiuntur: autore Francisco Luca Brugensi,
S. Theologiae Liccutiato.
Franciscus Lucas, to which our latin Bibles (set forth by the Divines of
Louan) do refer you.


Rainoldes. Yet Franciscus Lucas does wrangle still about it: and says, that
all the Latin copies, which they could find do read it [ipsa;] and of the
two, which you mention, he doubts, whether one did follow the Latin or the
Hebrewe; and he makes show of proof that the Hebrew may well agree to the
Latin, with a little hammering of it. Yea, and that is more, as in all ye Bibles,
yt I have seen of yours, ye Latin has ipsa, not ipse, she, not he; though
Andradius, and Lindanus, in the places before alleged
your greatest friends have wished you (forshame) to me^d it: so in an Hebrew
text of ye famous Tom. 8. in Hebraitis Biblijs. q^^bus Latina interpretatio
inse^^a est.
Bible of king Philip, (which but now I mentioned) ye word [ (...)
he] is altered according to the latin [ (...)
she;] and that not of error but of purpose, as it is witnessed by
Notationibus in Gene. in cap. 3. ver. 15. Guido Fabricius excudi (...) ^uraui t
quanquam errore positum (...) sit
Franciscus Lucas. Which is greater boldness in corrupting the Hebrew, the^ you
can justly charge ye Jews with. But if it besufficient to clear both ye Latin
edition, and your selves, yt you have found a book, or two, wherein [ipse] is
read as your Divines say: how much more justly may we clear both the Hebrew
text and the Jews, who, (as it is noted in their Masoreth) found sundry
books with [Caaru.] Chiefly, since they commend the books, as (...)
well corrected, which had that reading: you commend not yours. And they (...)
reprove a note, which some had made rashly, to bring in the other reading in
steed of that: you make such notes your selves. And they (upon the text, where
[Caari] is read) do note (...)
that the word has another meaning. then where it signifies [as a Lion:] what
note you so of [ipsa?] And you these many ages have kept in your Bibles a
faulty reading, without any mention of the true: they have done the contrary
in theirs of ancient time. Finally, where you can find but two copies, in
which the Latin edition does read ipse, not ipsa: if yet you can find two,
(for of them you doubt:) they, beside the copies extant at the time that the
Masoreth was written, have had sundry amongst them even till our days, in
which it is read not Caari, but Caaru. For it is avouched out of many singular
good copies, by Defens. fidei Trident. lib. 4*
Andradius: and In defens. verit. Hebr. sacrar. scriptur. lib. 2.
Isaac protests that he saw such a one him self with his grandfather: and
De arcanis catholicae verit. lib. 8. cap. 17.
Petrus Galatinus says, that even yet it is found so written in certain copies
most ancient. Whereby you may see withal, how unjustly you cast us in the
teeth, that our English Bibles follow not the Hebrew text in this place. For
tell me, I pray. In the English translation of the new Testament (which you at
Rhemes did travel in) translated you never a word, that you found not in the
common text of the Latin edition?


Heart. Yes: The preface of the Rhemish Testament.
when by the Greek or the Fathers we saw it was a manifest fault of the
writers heretofore, that mistook one word for another.


Rainoldes. Yet, when you did so, you The title of the Rhemish Testament.
translated faithfully out of the authentical Latin into English.


Heart What else? Because we did it according to the best corrected copies of the
Latin.


Rainoldes. And why say you then, that we translate not according to the
Hebrew, when we translate according to the best corrected copies of the Hebrew?
Specially, when we, beside ye Masoreth, do follow the consent of written copies
so many: where you As namely Heb. 13.2. latacrunt. whereon the Divines of Louan
note, they found it in one written copy. In Biblijs excusis Antaer^. ^*
Planti^^.
sometime translate that which was found in one, though all the rest were
against it. But thus shall they dash their foot against the stones, who will
run when they are blind.


Heart. Nay you are blind rather, who do call us blind. We can speak such
words as easily of you, as you may of us.


Rainoldes. As easily: but not as justly. For it is notorious, that, in this
opinion, which you hold out of Stapleton, and he ^ut of Lindan, both they and
you are blinded: what through ignorance of truth, touching the Hebrew text;
what through fancy to error, in the Latin translation. Through ignorance of
the Hebrew: in that you say, the Jews have shamefully corrupted it. Which
Pra^fat ad lectorem de var^a in Hebra. lib lectione. Regior. Biblior. Tom. 6.
Arias Montanus (no partial judge herein) A n^re for Gregory Martin. who
should have learned rather of Arias Monta^us to search and to r^uerence the
truth of the Hebrew te^t: then to ca^^l at it, and lewdly ^tan^er it of
falsehood. In his Discover. chap. 22.
notes to be their saying who know not the Masoreth. Through fancy to the
Latin: in that you account of it, as authentical. And refusing the original
text, under color, that one place thereof has in some copies a fault in one
letter: you prefer a translation which has many such throughout all copies,
as In va^. lection. b. latin. Biblior. edit v^lgat. Reg. Bibl. Tom. 6.
the Divines of Louan show; which has (by confession of your own De op. genesis
interpt. scrip. lib. 3. cap. 4.
Lindan) monstrous corruptions of all sorts; which is printed so, even among
your selves, that scarce one copy can be found, that has one book of
scripture whole and undefiled: in which there are cap. 1.
many points that are translated too intricately, and darkely, yea some
improperly, some abusiuely, some not so fully, yea not so well and truly; and
(to be short) which has cap. 2.
sundry places thrust out from their plain and natural sense, chiefly in the
Psalms and the Which yet our countriemen at Rheme^^ have (...) and (...) Latin
have made a (...) English.
new Testament: as Lindan (not content to vouch it of him self) does prove by
the testimonies of the ancient Fathers, Austin, and Ierom, and Hilarie, and
Victorinus. Are not they blind, who prefer a translation, and such a
translation before the original? yea, who Council. Trident. Sess. 4. Si quis
libros ipsos (veteris and noui Testamenti) integros cum omnibus suis partibus,
prout in veteri vulgara Latina editione habentur, pro sacris and canonicis non
susceperit: anathema sit.
bind men to receive it as authentical, or rather as holy as sacred, as
canonical, under pain of damnation. And if they think themselves not to be
blind in that they do so: are they not so much the blinder (like Io^. 9.41.
the Pharisees) because they say, we see.


Heart. You take much pains in vain with this talk about the Hebrew* For I
will not yield one jot from the decree of the Council of Trent. Wherefore if
you can prove out of our authentical latin translation, that the Priest is not
meant by the judge, in that place of Deuteronomie: I will harken to you.
Otherwise you may allege the Hebrew against the Jews: for it shall never move
me.


Rainoldes. I am sorry, if you be so frowardly set. Yet well fare Defens. fid.
Trident. lib. 4.
Andradius, who thinks that the Council of Trent did not mean either to
condemn the Hebrew truth (as he calls it,) or to acquit the latin
translation from all error, when they named it authentical: but only, that
the latin has no such error, by which any pestilent opinion in faith and
manners may be gathered. But if you will not be moved with the Hebrew: what say
you to the (...)
Chaldee paraphrase? Or if that also have as small credit, because it
expresses the Hebrew so faithfully in the books of Moses: what say you to the
Greek of the seventy interpreters? Which Irenaeus aduers. haeres. l. 3. c.
25. Hilar. in Psalm. 2. Epiphan. de mensur. and pond. Augustine. de ciuitat. Dei.
l. 18. c. 43. Cyprian does follow them even in this point also, ^ran^^ating it,
sacerdotem autiudicem: cp. 40. and 55. and 62. and 65. and 69.
the ancient Fathers who either knew not your latin at all, or had it not in
such price, did marvelously esteem off. In (...).
them it is as in the Hebrew, to the Priest or the judge: whereby it is
apparent they thought the judge, one; and the Priest, another. Will you be
moved by them: or may I allege the Greek against the Grecians too?


Heart. I reverence the Greek of the seventy interpreters. But I think it
might be corrupted more easily, then the latin might: yea, and that it has
been so in many places. Wherefore I appeal still unto our latin: and will not
forsake it under any pretense.


Rainoldes. Let us examine then (if there be no remedy) the words of your
latin. Qui superbierit nole^s obedi^e sacerdotis imperio: ex decreto iudicis
mori^^ur homo ille.
He that shall presumptuously refuse to obey the commandment of the Priest: by
the decree of the judge shall that man dye. Is there not a difference put, even
by this speech, between the Priest and the judge: the Priest, as
ecclesiastical; the judge as civil magistrate; Let the judge put him to death,
who disobeyeth the Priest?


Heart. I deny not, but the sword of justice is given to the civil magistrate:
and so there is a difference between the judge and the Priest. Yet amongst the
Jews sometimes both the offices did meet in one person, as you may seee by 1.
Sam. 4.18.
Eli.


Rainoldes. But this was very rare, and extraordinary. Now the Law, which God
prescribed in Deuteronomie by his servant Moses, did touch the common state and
ordinary government of the people of Israel. For both it is general without
limitation of persons or times, as to be kept still for the ending of their
controversies, not only in the days of Eli: and it is written, that when king
Iosaphat restored the state decayed, 2. Chron. 1^. ver. 8.
in Jerusalem he set of the Levites and the Priests, and of the chief of the
families of Israel, for the judgments of the Lord and for controversies.
Which to have been done in respect of that law: it appears by the words
that he spoke unto them. ver. 10*
Whatsoever controversy shall come unto you, from your brethren who dwell in
their cities, between blood and blood, between law and precept, statutes and
judgments: do ye admonish them that they offend not against the Lord.
Wherefore seeing that the law in Deuteronomie, was made to establish a highest
court of judgment, in which all harder causes ecclesiastical and civil should
be determined without appeal farther: the reason and the practice of the law
do show, that, in respect of the two kinds of causes, there were ordained two
sorts of men to hear them, ecclesiastical, and civil; the civil meant by
the judge, the ecclesiastical, by the Priest. Who because they were distinct,
as in office, so in person too ordinarily: it follows thereof, that the
Priest was not meant by the judge.


Heart. Yet the Gloss, expounding that place of Deuteronomie, does say that by
the judge* is meant the high Priest, even as I say.


Rainoldes. But Comment. in 17. Deuteronomy,
Lyra, and Caietan (as worthy men, as they who compiled the Gloss, if you
will hear men) do say that by the judge is meant the civil magistrate, even
as I say. Which sense of the place is so plain and certain: that Carolus
Sigonius, the Popes own historian (in De repub. Hebraeor. lib. 6. cap. 7.
a book which In the year of Christ. 158^^
lately he set forth at Bononia, with approbation of the Bishop, and holy
Inquisition, and dedicated to Pope Gregory the thirteenth, affirms that the
king is meant by the judge in that place of Deuteronomie. It may be, M. Heart,
that since you were beyond sea, they have bethought them selves: and seeing that
your Gloss does go against the text, they will no longer stand unto it.
Indeed, if the supremacy belong to the judge* the Prince has greater right
thereto then the Pope. For it is certain (as I have declared by circumstances
of the scripture,) that the Priest was not meant by the judge.


Heart. It skilleth not to my purpose, whether he were, or no. It suffices me,
that he who refuses to obey the Priest, must die, by the law. Which is enough
to prove the soueraintie of one Priest.


Rainoldes. Not so. For the name of Priest (in this law) does signify the
Priests. Which is clear, by reason that the punishment of the transgressor
has a relation to the law: and the law does will men to go to Deuteronomy. 17.9.
the Priests: the Priests, it says, as of many; not, as of one, the hie
Priest. Wherefore, in giving sentence of death against him, who disobeieth the
Priest; it means the Priests: according to (...)
a kind of speech, wherein ye whole is noted by the part. As afterward likewise,
Deuteronomy. 18. ver. 3.
entreating of the duty and right of the Priests, it notes them in general
by name of the Priest.


Heart. But here, upon mention of the Priest, it follows: who does serve the
Lord thy God. By the which title the hie Priest may seem to have been namely
noted, and severed from the rest.


Rainoldes. He might so, were it not that the same title is also given ver. 5.
afterward to Priests, generally: yea, where this matter is touched Deuteronomy. 21.5.
again of purpose, the Lord thy God has chosen the Priests, the sons of
Leui, to serve him, and to bless in the name of the Lord; and by their word
shall every controversy, and every plague be tried.


Heart. Yet you will grant, (I trust,) that amongst the Priests there was one
chief: yea, even in this matter of highest judgment in doubtful causes.
Which, (in 2. Chr. 1^.11.
the same place of Scripture that you brought to expound this,) is showed by
king Iosaphat: saying unto them, to whom that judgment was committed; Amarias
the Priest shall be the chief over you in matters of the Lord.


Rainoldes. This I will grant you. But you must grant me also, that look
what is given to him, amongst the Priests, in matters of the Lord, yt is, in
ecclesiastical: the same, amongst the judges, is given to Zebadias in matters
of the king, that is in civil causes. For, Iosaphat does say as well the one,
as the other. So that (to come now to the later point of your lame similitude,)
if Christians must have a sovereign Bishop over all, because the Jews had one
chief Priest* then Christians must have a sovereign Prince over all, because
the Jews had one chief judge. And as all harder causes, at least of religion
must be referred to the Pope: so all of civil matters must be referred to the
Emperor. And as, amongst the Jews, the Priest and judge were resident in the
place which the Lord had chosen: so the Pope and the Emperor must both abide
in Rome. Which Onuphrius in vit. Pont. Pauli tert. Pontifex ex quibusd^m
C^sa^is verbis veritus, ne Caesar Romae diu commoratus eius occupandae
illecebtis caperetur, clam Bellai^m and Stephanum Columna, vt in Italia^ Gallos
accirent, emisit.
Pope Paul the third did fear that Emperor Charles the fifth would have
done. But he sent for the French men to keep him out. If Gregory (that now is
Pope) be better minded, and will resign his civil State unto the Emperor
with the Palace of Vaticane, and Castle of Saint Angelo: then may the reason,
which you ground upon the law in Deuteronomie, serve you with greater show.
Howbeit, even in that case it would rather further the Emperor then the Pope:
because it mentions the judge, as one; the Priests, as many.


Heart. It is not necessary for the government of the commonwealth among
Princes, that any one of them be Prince over all. But as the king of Judah was
in his own kingdom: so every Prince is highest in his own dominion.


Rainoldes. Neither it is necessary for the administration of the Church,
amongst Bishops, that any one of them be Bishop over all. But as the hie Priest
was chief over the Jews, so is every Bishop over his own charge.


Heart. Nay, the case of the Church and commonwealth herein are unlike, and
different. Because that commonweals may be vpholden, although they be
governed not only by diverse kings, and civil magistrates, but also by
diverse ordinances and laws. But the Church as it has one faith, in all
Christians: so ought it to have the same laws and ordinances of religion in
all countries.


Rainoldes. This difference and unlikeness between the Church and
commonwealth, is lesser then you imagine, if it be marked well. For justice,
and right, in giving every one his due, should have the same place in the
commonwealth, which faith and religion claims in the Church. Now, as in
religion there are some things of substance, and some of ceremony: so there
are some points essential in justice, and some accidental. The essential
points of justice are the same in laws of all commonwealths. For what is
C^^. de Legib. lib. 1. ^. Nam and (...) legib^s.
a law, but a divine ordinance, commanding things honest, and forbidding the
contrary? The accidental points do and may vary according to circumstances
of places, times, and persons. So laws of religion must be the same for
substance in all Christian Churches: in ceremonies they may differ, as in
Eusebius. histor. ^ccles. l. 5. c. 23. Socrat. histor. ^ccles. l. 5. c. 21.
the primitive Church they did. Wherefore the same faith, and laws of religion
do no more enforce all churches to obey one Bishop, then the same right and
ordinances of justice do require one Prince to rule all commonwealths. But
what soever your fancy make you think of this point: the place in
Deuteronomie adiudging them to death who disobey the Priest, can not help your
fancy, though it had been meant of no other Priest, but of the high Priest
only. For Christ, when he sent his Apostles to preach the Gospel, said unto
them: Mat. 10.14.
Whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart out of
that house, or that city, shake of the dust of your feet. Truly I say unto
you, it shall be easier for them of the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day
of judgment, then for that city. Which words being spoken to all the
Apostles, not to Peter only, and therefore belonging to all their successors,
as well as to Peter's: do show that every Bishop, has as great authority
given him by Christ, as the Priest had by that law in Deuteronomie. In so much
that Epist. 40. and 55. and 62. and 65. and 69.
Cyprian does allege it often, (by a better reason of proportion then yours,)
to prove the authority of Bishops each in several over the flocks committed
to them.


Heart. And what if a matter of religion be harder then Bishops each in several
be able to decide it? What if they disagree, and will not yield one to another?
Does not wisdom show, that there must be a chief judge to end the
controversy? to keep the truth of faith, and peace of the Church, that it be
not pestered with heresies and schisms?


Rainoldes. The wisdom of God has committed that chieftie of judgment (so
to call it) not to the sovereign power of one, but to the common care of many.
For when there was a controversy in the Church of Antioche about the
observation of the law of Moses, some Jews teaching contrary to that which
Paul and Barnabas taught: Act. 15.2.
they ordained that Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them, should go
up to Jerusalem to the Apostles and Elders about that question. And so by their
common agreement and decree, the controversy was ended, the truth of faith
kept, and peace maintained in the Church. After which example, Eusebius. histor.
eccle. lib. 5. cap. 14. and 21. and 22. lib. 7. cap. 26. and 28. Cyprian. ^p.
6. and 14. and 31. and 53. and 72. and 75. Council. An^vr. Gangr. A^^ioc.
Laodic. and caet*
the Bishops (that succeeded them) made the like assemblies, on the like
occasions: and by common conference took order for such matters, both of
doctrine, and discipline, as concerned in common the state of their Churches.
So did the Apostles and Apostolic men provide against schisms and heresies.
Their wisdom reached not unto your policy of one chief judge.


Heart. The profit of Councels and Synods of Bishops is very great, we grant.
For many eyes see more then one. But it will be greater, if they be all
counselors unto one governor, then if they govern each his own, and all in
common. For reason does teach us, that the regiment of one, which we call a
monarchy, is better and worthier then the regiment of many: as the
Philosophers show, who write of Commonweals.


Rainoldes. Reason, is a notable help of man's weakness, if it be obedient to
faith, as a handmaide; not rule it, as a maistresse. And humane arts, wherein
the Philosophers have seen many sparkles of the truth of God by the light of
reason, are profitable instruments to set forth the truth, so far as they
have peace, not war, with Gods word. But if the Philosophers have erred, as
1. Cor. 2.14*
natural men, who neither do conceive the things of the spirit of God, nor
can know them; if reason have her eyes (as it were) dazeled, because Ioh. 1.5.
the light shines in darkness, and the darkness did not comprehend it:
then is it to be feared 2. Cor. 11.3.
least, as the Serpent seduced Eve through his suttletie, so he beguile you by
reason; and you forget that lesson of the holy Ghost, Col. 2.8.
beware least there be any man that spoil you through philosophy. Which I say
not so much in respect of this point of the Church government, as of your whole
doctrine: a mighty ground whereof in your Schoolmen, is philosophy; and
Campian in the fifth art. of his epist.
your Jesuits challenge does offer to prove it by natural and moral reason.
For here if I would justify the cause by Philosophers, it is ^asily showed,
that the Churches state is a most perfect monarchy: wherein Christ is king;
his laws, are the scriptures; his officers, are the Bishops; not ordained to
be assistantes unto one deputy, but to be deputies all them selves, even 1.
Pet. 5.2.
Pastors of his flock, and Heb. 2^.17.
guides and (...). 10.^8.
rulers of his Church. Howbeit, if it differ from the kingly states of worldly
co^mon-weales, which philosophy writes off, as it does in part: Philosophers
must not marvel, since Ioh. 18.36.
Christ has declared his kingdom is not of this world. Indeed, the Apostles
thought of such a kingdom: Mat. 20.26.
but Christ said, it should not be so amongst them, as with the Princes of the
Gentiles. Which sentence of Christ your Popes not understanding, and weening
the Apostles to be forbidden nothing but an heathnish tyranny, and liking well
a monarchy because Philosophers praise it: they have raised a Nicol. Sander.
de visib. Monar.
visible monarchy of their own, in steed of Christ's monarchy; and have
changed his kingdom, which is not of this world, into a worldly kingdom, the
kingdom of the Romans, as Francis. Turrian. de eccle. and ordin. minist.
eccl. l. 1. c. 2.
a Jesuit calls it. Neither contenting them selves with such a kingdom, as
Princes of the Gentiles had: they make them selves Princes Super gentes and
regna, says Pope John the two and twe^tieth in extrauagant. commun.
over all the kingdoms and nations of the earth. Which is a greater monarchy
then Philosophers like off: as I could prove out of them, if the Popes cause
were to be handled in their schools. But because I list not to trifle out the
time with idle discourses about points of State; as your Sand. visib. monar.
l. 3. c. 3 Bellar. controuers. 4. quaest. 1.
Rabbines do, to prove yt a monarchy is the best regiment: therefore against
such reasons I lay that exception which De praescript. aduers. haeret.
Tertullian did of old against heretics: What has Athens to do with
Jerusalem? the school of philosophy with the Church of Christ? The duty of
Christians is to search and weigh in matters of faith, not what reason, but
what religion; not what the Philosophers, but what the Prophets, and Apostles;
not what man's fancy, but what the Spirit of God does say. And so the former
parts of your maine argument for the Popes supremacy, are too weak to prove
it. The last is weaker then they both. For, that there should be one chief and
highest Pastor of the Church in earth: it has some reason by philosophy. That
Peter was appointed by Christ to be that one: it has some show of scripture.
But that the Pope succeeds Peter therein, it has no show of scripture; and
(I trow) you will not prove it by philosophy.


Heart. That the Pope succeeds Peter therein: The third Division.
it is a clear case. For In Chronic^
Eusebius writes, that Peter, having laid the foundation of the Church of
Antioche, (where he sat seven years) went to Rome: and (preaching the
gospel there five and twenty years) continued Bishop of that city. Now, the
Pope is Bishop of Rome: that you grant. Then I conclude thereof, that he
succedeth Peter. For Peter continued Bishop of that city, as it is witnessed
by Eusebius.


Rainoldes. I desired that I might hear, Thus says the Lord: and you told me
that I should hear it. In the first part of your argument, you fell from it,
to, Thus says the Pope. In the next you mended it, with, Thus say
Philosophers. Now you prove the last, by, Thus says Eusebius. And this is more
sightly somewhat, then the former: but no stay of faith, without the word of
God.


Heart. You ought not to cast off Eusebius so lightly, as though he were of no
credit. For he is the best and auncientest historian of all that have traueled
in setting forth the stories of the Church of Christ. And the pains, the
diligence, the reading and judgment, which in his Chronicle he showed, was
great and wonderful. In so much that Loeor. Theolog. lib. 11. cap. 6.
Canus is persuaded of him, that no ecclesiastical Greek or Latin author could
have left more excellent monuments of times.


Rainoldes. I like of Eusebius, as of a good historian: and I allow the praise
given him by Canus. But cap. 4.
Canus has a good conclusion withal, touching both him, and al historians, to
weet, that Praeter autotores sacros nullus histori^us certus esse potest, id
est, idoneus ad faci endam certam in Theologia fidem.
beside the writers of the scripture, no historian can be sure; that is to say,
able to make sure and certain proof in Divinity. A thing so apparent and
evident of it self, that he says, it is not to be confirmed with his
proofs. Only, he reherseth to the same effect a true and pleasant speech of
In vit. (...).
Flauius Vopiscus: who, beginning to write stories, said that he enterprised it
the more boldly, because he should have companions in lying; since he knew no
historian, that had not lied in somewhat. Now, if this be incident unto all
historians, except them of scripture: who wrote by the Spirit of God, and not
of man: then Eusebius also, though a good historian, might be subject to it.
Which you must the rather be persuaded of him, because Did. 15. c. Sanc^^
Romana.
Pope Gelasius (in a Council of seventy Bishops) reproved his story, as
faulty. Which reproof your (...). 11. cap 6.
Canus allows as just, and gives reasons of it: namely, for Eusebius. histo.
eccles. l. 1. c. 14.
his reporting of Christ's epistle to Agbarus, and l. 1. c. 1. and so forth
commonly.
his auouching many things by Clemens Alexandrinus; whereas the fable of the
one, and the works of the other are reproved by Did. 15. c. San^^^ Romana.
the Council,


Heart. These faults, and the rest, that Canus does touch, are in the history
of Eusebius: which yet not only Canus but the Council also commend, as not
to be refused altogether. But that which I alleged is in the Chronicle of
Eusebius: a book, neither noted so by the Council, and greatly praised by
Canus.


Rainoldes. The man is one, who wrote them both: and might be ouerseene, as in
the one, so in the other. Yea Lib. 11. cap. 6.
Canus himself, who praises his Chronicle, yet praises it with this
exception, that neither all things which Eusebius there reports, are true.
But men may find some things which may be worthily and truly blamed. As, for
example, that he writes, that Sennacherib who besieged Jerusalem, and
Salmanassar who took Samaria, were one, and the same man. Which thing to be
contrary to the holy scripture Comment. in Esai. cap. 36.
S. Ierom has showed. Now this, which I stick at in the Chronicle of
Eusebius, is such an other oversight: and may be as worthily reproved, as that
of Canus; because it is no less against the scripture then that. For whereas
he says, that Peter, having laid the foundation of the Church of Antioche,
(where he sat In the Chronicle of Eusebiu^ it is [^iue and twenty:] through
the fault of the printers or written copies which they followed. For (by the
count of years, and consent of writers who seem to follow him) it should be
seven only.
seven years) went to Rome, and preaching the Gospel there five and twenty
years continued Bishop of that city: Peter (by this account) should have gone
to Antioche about the fourth year after Christ's death, and there abode seven
years, eue^ till the second year of Claudius ye Emperor, in which he went to
Rome. But ye scripture shows, yt Paul (who was Act. 9.^.
not presently converted after Christ's death) yet Gal. 1.18. Act. 9. ver. ^8.
after three years found Peter at Jerusalem: and Peter, after that, abode
within ver. 32.
the coasts of Iewrie, first ver. 38.
at Lydda, then ver. 43.
at Ioppe, then at Act. 10.48.
Caesarea, then Act. 11.2.
at Jerusalem, where Act. 12. ver. 3.
Herod cast him into prison, in ye second or third year of Claudius, as it is
likely, (for ver. 23.
he died Joseph Antiquitat. Iudaicar. l. 19. c. 7. where this Herod is called
Agrippa. Eusebius. hist. ecles. ^. 2. c. 10.
in the fourth:) when, Act. 1^.22.
the Church of Antioche was in the mean season both planted and watered by
others, not by Peter. Wherefore, the former branch of that which Eusebius
reports touching Peter, that he had sat seven years at Antioche, in the
second year of Claudius, is flatly contrary to the scripture. The later is as
contrary, that from that year forward he did sit at Rome five and twenty
years, that is, all his life time, till he was put to death by Nero. For, (to
grant the uttermost, which may have any show of reason,) admit, that he was
cast by Herod into prison, in the first year of Claudius; before which he
could not; for Joseph. antiquit. Iudaicar. l. 19. c. 5.
Claudius gave the kingdom of Iewry to Herod. When the Angel had delivered
him out of prison, Act. 12.17.
he went into an other place: whether to Rome or to Antioche, or perhaps to
neither, ye scripture leaves it uncertain; but, by the Chronicle of Eusebius,
either to Antioche or to Rome. If he went to Antioche, and there abode some
years, before he came to Rome: then is the second year of Claudius past, and
his abode at Rome could not be five and twenty years. Now, it is certain
that he went to Antioche at that time or some other. For Gal. 2.11.
the scripture witnesses that Paul did there reprove him. But if that were
some other time, and from his prison in Jerusalem he went straight to Rome: yet
neither could he so be five and twenty years there. For after he came
thither, a time must be found wherein he was at Antioch; and an other time
wherein he was at 1. Pet. 5.13.
Babylon; and an other time, wherein he was at Gal. 2.1. and Act. 15.7.
Jerusalem, at the Council of the Apostles; and some years after that, Romans
15.25. Act. 19.21. and 20.22.
when Paul wrote to the Romans, Romans 16.3.
amongst the chief, whom he saluted, he named not Peter; and some years after
that, when Paul Act. 28. ver. 17.
came prisoner to Rome, when he ver. 30.
abode there certain years, when he To the Galat. Ephesians. Philip. Colos. Tim.
and Philemon.
wrote many epistles thence, Peter is not mentioned, nay those things are
mentioned which would be stains of his Apostleship, if he had been at Rome.
For, Col. 4.11.
Paul says of others, these only are my worke-fellowes unto the kingdom of
God, which have been a comfort to me:, and 2. Tim. 4.16.
at my first answering, no man assisted me, but all forsook me: I pray God it
be not laid unto their charge. Of the which reasons, though some are but
probable, yet some are sure proofs, that Peter's continuance at Rome was not
such, as is reported by Eusebius. And this is so manifest, that, to say nothing
of Methodius* in Chronic. Marian. Scot. Chr^. lib. 2. Regino, Chron. lib. 2.
auncienter writers, who (to make the scriptures agree somewhat better with his
five and twenty years abode at Rome,) brought him thither later, and gave him
longer time of life: Onuphrius Panuinius, a Friar of your own, most devout to
the Pope, most skillful in antiquities and stories of the Church, acknowledges
and confirms it. For, in the discourses of his Annotations on De viti^ Pont.
^om. Annotat. in vitam B. Petri Apost.
Platina, printed at Venice, and afterward at Coolein: Apertissim^ constat ex
actis Apostolorum, and ^auli epistola ad Galatas.
it is most clear (says he) and surely known by the Acts of the Apostles,
and Paul's epistle to the Galatians, that, for nine years after Christ's death,
until the second year of the reign of Claudius, Peter never went out of
Iewry. Wherefore if he came to Rome, at that time, as it is agreed amongst all
autours that he did: it follows of necessity, Antiochiae septem annis non
sedisse ante aduentum ad vrbem.
that he did not sit seven years at Antioche before he came thither, but that
his sitting at Antioche was some other time. Which thing I have resolved on,
thus, by the testimony of most ancient writers. He did come to Rome the
second year of Claudius. From which time there are to the time of his death
about five and twenty years. Wherein, although the ancient writers do say
that he sat at Rome: yet does it not follow thereof that he abode still in the
city. For in the fourth year after his coming thither, he returned to
Jerusalem: and there was present at the Council ofthe Apostles. Inde
Antio^^iam prosec^us septem ibidem annis permansit.
Thence he went to Antioche, and there continued seven years; until that Nero
was Emperor. In the beginning of whose reign, he came again to Rome: where
he repaired the Roman church, which was decaying. And after that
Peregrinatio^e per uniuersam Europam fere suscepta.
when he had traueiled almost throughout al Europe, he returned to Rome in the
last year of the reign of Nero, and there was put to death. This is the
confession of your own Onuphrius, made perhaps against the hear (as I may
term it:) but the light of truth and scripture forced him to it. Whereby you
may perceive that when Eusebius wrote, that Peter sat, first, seven years at
Antioch, and five and twenty at Rome, after: that befell to him, which Hist^r.
lib. 1.
Thucydides says of the old stories of the Grecians; men receive reports of
things done before them from hand to hand, one from another, (...).
without examining and trying them. Some, through a desire (as it is likely) of
honoring the Sees of Antioche and Rome, hearing that S. Peter had preached in
them both, devised that he sat seven years in the one, and five and twenty
in the other. Eusebius fell upon it, and wrote it in his Chronicle without
farther trial. But if he had tried it by the touchstone of scripture: he
would have cast it off, as counterfeite. Which I think the rather, because in
his story Histor. ecclesiast. l. 2. c. 14.
he mentions ye coming of Peter to Rome as out of Jury, not from Antioche,
for his first coming thither in the time of Claudius: and for his coming
thither again in Neros time, l. 3. c. 1
he shows out of Exposit. in Gene^. Tom. ^
Origin that it was toward his end, when he had preached the gospel to the
Jews in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia. Wherefore since
Eusebius does in his story dissent from his Chronicle, and in his Chronicle
dissent from the scripture: you must not blame me if I require a surer proof
then his word, that Peter was Bishop of the City of Rome.


Heart. To talk about the years of Peter's coming to Rome, or his continuance
there, I am not disposed. I leave it to them, who list to search antiquities.
But that he was in Rome, it is a thing undoubted: the scripture does witness
it. For in ye first epistle of his, the fifth chapter, 1. Pet. 5.13.
the Church (says he) saluteth you, that is in Babylon, coelect, and Mark my
son. Where your Protestants show them selves (as in all places, that do make
against them) to be most dishonest and partial handlers of Gods word. The
ancient Fathers, namely In catalog de scriptoribus ecclesiasticis, verbo
Marcus.
S. Ierom, Histor ecclesi^st. lib. 2. c. 14.
Eusebius, in 1. Pet. 5.13.
Oecumenius, and many more agree, that Rome is meant by the word Babylon here
also, as in the 16. and 17. chapters.
in the Apocalypse: saying plainly that S. Peter wrote this epistle at Rome,
which is called Babylon for the resemblance it had to Babylon that great city
in Chaldaea (where the Jews were captives) for magnificence, monarchy, resort
and confusion of all peoples and tongues, and for that it was, before Christ
and long after, the seat of all Ethnike superstition and idolatry, and the
sl^ughter-house of the Apostles and other Christian men, the heath^ Emperors
then keeping their chief residence there. This being most plain and consonant
to yt which follows of S. Mark, whom all the ecclesiastical histories agree
to have been Peter's scholar at Rome, and that he there wrote his gospel: yet
you, As the Rhemists say: who charge the Protestants with all this, in their
Annotat. on ^ Pet. 5.13. and Romans 16.16.
fearing hereby the sequel of Peter's or the Popes supremacy at Rome, deny
that ever he was there, or that this epistle was written there, or that Babylon
does here signify Rome. But you say that Peter wrote this epistle at Babylon
in Chaldaea, though you never read either in scriptures, or other holy or
profane history, that he was ever in that city. But see your shameless
partiality. Here, Babylon (say you) is not taken for Rome: because it would
follow that Peter was at Rome, and so forth. But in the Apocalypse, where all
evil is spoken of Babylon, there you will have it signify nothing else but
Rome, and the Roman church also, not (as the Fathers interpret it) the
temporal state of the heathen Empire there. So do you follow in every word no
other thing, but ye advantage of your own heresy. Which is most notorious by
this, that you hold that Peter was neue^ at Rome. Wherein you pass your selves
in impudency. For it is against all the ecclesiastical histories, all the
Fathers Greek and Latin, Comment in epist. ad Romans cap. 16.
Theodoret, C^^mine de ingratis: in prin^i^io.
Prosper, De nat^li Petri.
S. Leo, ^om. 6. c. ^. ^ontr. epist. ^undam.
S. Austin, Lib. 7. cap. 6.
Orosius, In Psalm. 48.
S. Chrysostom, Haeres. 27.
S. Epiphanius, In hymn. ^. S. Laurent. and hymn. 12.
Prudentius, Lib. 2. contr. Donatistas.
Optatus, Lib. 5. epist. de Basilicis tra^endi^.
S. Ambrose, In catalogo.
S. Ierom, Lib. 4. cap. 21. de vera sapi^ntia.
Lactantius, Hist. eccles. lib. 2. cap. 13. and 15.
Eusebius, De ^uga su^.
S. Athanasius, Epist. 55. number. 6.
S. Cyprian, De praescript. ^um. 14. and co^tr. Marcion. l. 4. ^. 4.
Tertullian, In Gene^. apud Eusebius. l. 3. c. 1.
Origin, Lib. 3. cap. 3.
Irenaeus, Lib. 3. c. 2. de excidio ^ero^olym.
Hegesippus, Alleged by Eusebius l. 2. c. 14. and 24.
Caius and Papias, the Apostles own scholars, and Dionysius the Bishop of
Corinth, Ep. ad Roma^os.
Ignatius, Council. Chalcedon. act. 3.
the holy council of Chalcedon, and many others. Yea Peter him self
(according to the judgment of the Fathers, as I have showed) confesses that
he was at Rome, calling it Babylon.


Rainoldes. Here is a grievous crime, wherewith you charge our Protestants, of
shameless partiality. But whether show them selves more partial and dishonest
handlers of Gods word, our Protestants, or your Papists: you are too partial
(M. Heart) to judge. There is a just judge who will reveal it in that day,
before the eyes of all men: and in the mean season he does reveal it daily,
to them whom he makes wise to try spirits, and to discern the truth from
error. As for this particular, wherein we seem to you most dishonest and
partial, that in Peter's epistle we take the word [ Babylon] properly, for the
city of that name in Chaldaea; and in the Revelation we say that it
signifies Rome, figuratively: we do not this for any advantage of heresy, as
you falsely charge us, but in sincerity before God. For in the Revelation, in
which there are as many Hieron. in ep. ad Paulin. presb^t.
mysteries as words, and words applied commonly to allegories and figures:
Rome might be fitly meant by the name of Babylon. And that it was so, it
appereeth by the circumstances: if not, of Reu. 17.^.
the seven hills, whereon Rome was built, (and In epist. Paulae and (...) ^pist.
17.
Ierom gathers it thereof;) yet of Reu. 17.18.
the great city, which reigns over the kings of the earth, which in S.
John's time was Rome; ^ertullian. aduer. Iu^aeos and adue^^. Marcion. lib 3
Hieron. ad Algasiam quaest. 11. and praefat. in lib. (...)
the Fathers so interpret it; you say it, and subscribe unto it. But, in all
the rest of the new Testament, where things are plainly spoken off, it si^teth
most with reason that the word Babylon be taken in his proper meaning: the text
does force it in Mat. ^.11. Act. 7.^3.
other places; and, in that epistle of Peter it is the likelier, because 1.
Cor. 1.2. Reu. 14. and 2.1^ and 3.7. 1. Cor. 16.^^ Col. 4.16.
the like speeches in superscriptions, in salutations, in dates of epistles,
are elsewhere meant simply. In the Revelation, Re^. 11.8.
the great city is called spiritually Sodom. In 2. Pe^. ^.^
Peter's epistle, we take the name of Sodom properly. Is it partiality in us,
to take it so? Or were it not a folly in you to reprove it? But this is the
matter belike, which pincheth you, yt in the Revelation, where all evil is
spoken of Babylon, we will have it signify nothing else but Rome, and the
Roman Church also, not the temporal state of the heathen Empire there, as the
Fathers interpret it. The Fathers then interpret it of Rome, you confess. If
you condemn us for interpreting it so: you must condemn them with us. If you
say that we do not therein, as they, because we expound it of nothing else but
Rome, and they not so: you slander us. For Babylonis nomine, Satanae
congregation^ significat: sed eam potissimu^ quae ab ecclesia Romana pend^^ In
exposit ecclesiast. Nou. Test. excerpt (...) probat. Theologis ab A^gustino
Marlora^^.
some of us expound it of the city of the Devil, that is, the society and
company of all the wicked, as some of them do. And what does it advantage you,
or your quarrel, if, as by Reu. 21.10.
Jerusalem is meant the city of God, that is, the society and company of all
the faithful: so Rome, an other Babylon, do note the Devils city, as a
figure and sampler of it? For, in this sort also will Babylon be Rome still.
Wherein, that you may learn the less to carpe at us, hearken to Robert
Bellarmin. Contr. 4. quaest. 6.
your Jesuit: who having showed, that the whore which sits on the seven
hills, is (in Augustine. Aret. Haim. (...) Rupert.
some men's judgment) the city of the Devil, which often times is called
Babylon, and set against Jerusalem, the city of God, that is, the Church: but
in my judgment (says he) it is beter to understand the city of Rome by the
whore, as Aduers. Iudaeos: and Marcion lib 3.
Tertullian and Ad Alga^. quaest. 11.
Ierom do. To whom he might have added (...) Apocalypsin cap. 1^.
sundry of the Grecians: and De ciuitate De^ lib. 18. c. ^.
S. Austin also. But they interpret it (you say) of the temporal state, not
ecclesiastical; of the Roman Empire, not of the Roman Church, as we do. No
marvel. For in their ^aies the Church did differ from the Empire: the Empire,
wicked; Church, godly. In ours it is not so. The state ecclesiastical is
changed into the temporal: the Church has swallowed up the Empire; and what
the Roman Empire was, that now the Roman Popedo e is. Wherefore when we apply
the mystery of Babylon to the Church of Rome: we apply it still (as the
Fathers did) to the temporal state, if not of an heathen Empire there, yet of
a Christian waxing heathnish. There we see ^euel. 17.4.
a purple whore, sitting upon many waters, droonken with the blood of Saints,
and with the blood of Christ's martyrs, having a golden cup in her hand, full
of abominations and filthiness of her whooredome. De visib. Mo^a^. lib. 8. cap.
8.
Sanders, the greatest patron of the Popes monarchy, does prove out of
Tertullian, that where there is the greatness of the kingly city, where the
pride of the Empire, where the persecution of Christians does rage: there is
Babylon, no doubt, there is the great city, there is that woman which sits
upon peoples, nations, and languages, with whom the kings of the earth do
commit whooredom, and the inhabitants of the earth are droonken with the wine
of her whooredome. Now Rome in these respects was Babylon (as he construeth it)
while the heathen Emperors obtained the temporal state there, not since the
Popes have had it. But let the states of the Popedom and of the Empire be
compared; and the stories of In Su^ton. Capitolin. 1. amprid. etc. histor.
Ethnicor.
the Emperors, who reigned there before the Popes, and of In Platina. Onuph.
Guicciardin. and histor. eccles. Ang. Gal. ^erman. etc.
the Popes (who have succeeded them) be examined: and if it be not found that
the Papal state has matched the Imperial in greatness of power, in pride of
dominion, in persecuting of Christians; then let us be judged to vary from the
Fathers in giving Rome the name of Babylon. Else are we cleared by verdit of
Sanders from that wherewith you charge us, of expounding it to the advantage of
our heresy: and you must pronounce that we deal uprightly with the name of
Babylon, in the Revelation. As for our usage of it in the epistle of Peter: the
reasons which you bring to prove a fault therein, may serve for our acquitall.
You say, that we never read either in scriptures, or other holy, or profane
history, that Peter was ever in the city of Chaldaea, which is named Babylon.
A simple proof, if we had not. For, the Apostles, being sent to ^at. ^8.19.
al nations, were in many cities, wherein we never read they were. And yet we
have read in Methodius (an ancient bishop, and historian) alleged by Ch^on.
lib. 2
Marianus Scotus, that Peter did preach the gospel in Babylon^a* taken ^y
others, for the country: by sundry w^iters ec^lesias^^call, ^or the c^tie of
Babylon. Hist. eccle. ^useb. Rufin. interpret. l. ^. cap. 1^. August. in Psalm.
26. and 61. de ^iuitat. De^ l. 18. cap. 2. Joseph. antiquit. Iudaic. l. 20. c.
18 Prosper in dimid. Temp. cap. 7. and lib. senten. ex August. sent. 221. Oath.
Frising. chr^n lib. 7. cap. 3.
Babylon: yt is, either the city, or at least the country; and where they
preached in the country, they did it in the chief and mother-citie commonly.
But the ancient Fathers, namely S. Ierom, Eusebius, Oecumenius, and many more
agree, that Peter meant Rome by the word Babylon. They deliver it, I grant:
but they received it from Papias, a man, though you commend him for the
Apostles own scholar, yet (...). Eusebius. l. 3. c. 36.
of very small judgment: who, mistaking the meaning of the Apostles speeches
in The fancy of the Millenaries, or Chiliasts as they were called.
a matter of greater weight, deceived many Fathers that followed him for his
antiquity, as both Histor. ecclesiast. l. 3. cap. 36.
Eusebius and De scriptor. ecclesiast. in verbo Papias.
Ierom do report of him. The less strange it is, if they believed him, and
others them, in this point, of no such importance. But, it is consonant to that
which follows of Mark: whom all the ecclesiastical histories agree to have
been Peter's scholar at Rome, and that he there wrote his gospel. And Eusebius.
histor. ecclesiast. lib. 2. cap. 15. Hieron. de scriptor. eccle^. verbo Marcus.
this does come from Papias also, by one as good as himself, even by Clemens
Alexandrinus. Wherefore, I know, what credit it has; what truth, I know not.
For if In Chronic.
Cassiodorus, Chronic. l. 2.
Rhegino, Ado Vienn. breu. Chr. aet. 6.
Ado, and Beda in Martyrolog. Maria^^ Scot. Chron. lib. 2. Martin. Polon.
s^ppu^^ P^nt. Roman. Platina de vit. Pont. and the rest.
all the ecclesiastical histories have erred, in saying that Peter did abide
at Rome five and twenty years; which error they were carried into by In Chron.
Eusebius, or whosoever first reported it: why might they not also be deceived
in this point by the report of Papias, or some who had it from Papias? Though,
if it be true, that S. Mark was Peter's scholar at Rome: yet this proves not,
that he meant Rome by the name of Babylon. For Peter says only, the Church
which is in Babylon, and Mark my son salute you. Now Mark (as Eusebius. hist.
ecclesiast. l. 3. c. 36.
your Papias also does report) did follow and accompany Peter in his travel.
So that he might be with him as well at Babylon in Chaldaea, as in Italy at
Rome. Wherefore whether Peter were at Rome or no: the proof thereof rests
upon humane histories. For this of Gods word, whereby you would prove it feign,
says nothing for it. Which Vi^^cus Velenus, in opusculo inscripto, Petrum non
venisse Romam, ne ^ue illi^ passum.
a learned man of our side having weighed, and seeing persuas* ^.
the dissension of writers touching the time that he came to Rome; and knowing
by pe^s. 3.4.10.12. and 13.
the scripture that their speech of his abode in Rome, is false; and marking
the shameful practice of the Romanists in pers. 18.
forging tales for their advancement, as Constantines donation; and spying some
such forgerie amongst their monuments of Peter, pe^s. 16.
as Linus fable of his death; and finding pe^s. 17.
his martyrdom mentioned by Comme^tar. ^n Matthae. c. 23
Ierom and Lyra, in such sort, as though he had been crucified by the Scribes
and Pharisees: he was brought (by these and the like persuasions) into this
opinion, that Peter never came to Rome. If you ask my judgment: I think he
was deceived therein. And so do many mo. None of all the Protestants, Carrion
and Melanch^hon in Chron. lib. 3. Pantaleon in Chronographia. Vadian. ^pitome
trium terrae partium, in Italia. M. Fox in his ecclesiastical history.
who have dealt in writing of histories and Chronicles, to my knowledge, (
Balaeus in Act. Romans pont. lib. 1. in praefat.
one excepted) denies, that he was at Rome. They who are straitest in it, do
say Funccius comment* in Chronolog. lib. 5.
it may be doubted, it is no article of our faith: and Histor. eccles.
Magdeburg. Centur. 1. lib. 2. cap. 10.
either he was not there, or at another time then most autors think, and less
then five and twenty years. Wherein, what do they say, but that which is
most true and manifest? The greater wrong you do us, to charge us in general,
that we hold that Peter was never at Rome. And, to aggrauate the matter you
muster up the names of the ancient Fathers, as though we did band our selves
against them all. Whereas in very deed, Calvin. institut. lib. 4. cap. 6.
^ect. 15. Petrus Martyr in lib. 1. Regum. c. 12.
they, whom you count our captains, do therefore grant Peter to have been
at Rome, because the ancient Fathers affirm it so with one consent. Yea
Luther. in. 1. Pet. cap. 5. Bullinger. in Apocalypsin cap. 14. concion. 64.
some of them (expounding those same words of Peter) apply the name of Babylon
to Rome, as you do: some, who allow not of that exposition, yet grant he was
at Rome. And so the reproach of shameless partiality which you cast on us,
redoundeth on your selves. For if you had any modesty and equity, you would
never say, that we deny Rome to be meant by Babylon, because it would follow
that Peter was at Rome, and so forth. Specially, since neither all of us deny
it: and many who deny it, yet deny not but Peter was at Rome. But whereas you
add, that we deny it, fearing hereby the sequel of Peter's or the Popes
supremacy at Rome: Theodor. Bez. and Erasmus annot. in nou. Test. 1. Pet. 5.
therein you pass your selves in impudency. For we do confess, (and you
too) I trust, that Act. 9.43.
Peter was at Ioppe. And do we (or rather you) fear hereby the sequel of
Peter's or the Popes supremacy at Ioppe.


Heart. No: because we read not that he was Bishop of Ioppe. We read that he
was Bishop of Rome.


Rainoldes. But you can not prove it by those words of Peter, which you would
ground it on: although it were granted that he meant Rome by Babylon. For ye
most that might be proved so thereby, is, yt he was at Rome. Which furthereth no
more the Pope of Rome then of Ioppe. And thus you may see, what tragedies you
make for how small trifles: when you lay so heinous a crime to our charge for
denying that, which although we grant, we neither win, nor lose by it.


Heart. But if he were at Rome, it will be the likelyer that he was Bishop
there. And that he was so, Eusebius shows in his Chronicle.


Rainoldes. I perceive the Pope must fetch his supremacy from earth and not
from heaven. You are fallen again, from scripture, to Eusebius. Against whose
authority I might take exception, because he says that Peter continued bishop
of Rome, preaching the gospel there, five and twenty years: which I have
proved to be untrue. Though, (if I may speak mine own conjecture of it,) the
difference of the Chronicle and history of Eusebius concerning that point,
does move me to think, that it was not written by Eusebius, but by Ierom. For
Hieron. praefat. in Eusebij Chron.
he, in translating the Chronicle of Eusebius, did enterlace some things which
seemed to be omitted: In Romana maxim historia.
chiefly, in the Roman story. Now Ierom might receive it from In pontificali.
Damasus bishop of Rome: on whom Hieron. epist. 11. ad Ager. and l. 2. contra
Rufinum.
he attended as a secretary. And Damasus was not so void of all affection,
but Theodoret. histor. ecclesiast. l. 5. c. 9. Sozom. l, 6. c. 23. Ammia^.
Mar^ellin. l. 27.
he could be content to advance the credit of his own See by helping it to be
reputed the bishoply See of Peter. But whether Eusebius, or Ierom, or Damasus,
or whosoever have said that Peter was a Bishop: either they used the name of
[Bishop] generally, and so it proves not your purpose; or if they meant it, as
commonly we do, they missed the truth. For generally, (...) whence the Latin
(Episcopus) and our English word (Bishop) are derived.
a Bishop, is an ouerseer. In which signification it reaches to all, who are
put in trust with oversight and charge of any thing: as In the Greek
translation o^ the Seventy interpreter^, Numb 4.16.
Eleazar is called Bishop of the tabernacle; and Christ, 1. Pet. 2.^5.
the Bishop of our souls. But, in our common use of speech it notes him, to
who^ ye oversight and charge of a particular Church is committed: such as were
the Bishops of Act 20.28.
Ephesus, of Philip. 1.1
Philippi; and they whom Christ calls Revel. ^.20*
the Angels of the Churches. Now Peter was not Bishop after this later sort:
for he was an Apostle, and (...), so called, as chosen to be sent ^^road to
preach to every creature. Mark. 3.14. and 16.15.
the Apostles were sent to preach to all the world. Wherefore when the Fathers
said, he was a Bishop: either they meant it in the former sense, or ought to
have meant it. This is somewhat harder to be perceived by Ierom: but others
open it more plainly. For Hieronym. de scriptor. e^cle. verbo, Clemens.
he reckeneth Peter the first Bishop of Rome; Linus, the second; Cletus, the
third; Clemens, the fourth, and so the rest successively: as likewise, verbo,
Ignatius.
in Antioche, Ignatius, the third; whereby Euodius is the second; verbo, Simon
Pet.
and Peter, the first. But In chronic. and histor. l. 3. c. 19
Eusebius names Euodius, the first Bishop of Antioche; Ignatius, the second:
and Aduers. haere. l. 3. cap. 3.
Irenaeus names Linus, the first Bishop of Rome; Who is called Anacletus, by
Irenaeus and Eusebius.
Cletus the second; and so forth. Whereby they declare, that (in their
judgment) although Peter preached at Antioche and Rome both, yet he was
neither Bishop of Antioche, nor Rome, as usually that name is taken. Yea they
distinguish the Bishops, and the Apostles therein purposely. For Aduers. her.
lib. 3. cap. 3.
Irenaeus says, that the two Apostoli.
Apostles, namely Peter and Paul, when they had founded and taught the Roman
Church, committed Episcopatum.
the Bishoply charge thereof to Linus. And he repeateth often in reckening up
the Bishops, (as does Histor. eccles, l. 3. c. 2. and 19. l. 4. c. 1. and 5. l.
5. c. 1. etc.
Eusebius also) that they were such, and such, in order, and number, from the
Apostles. And Praefat. Recognitionum Clementis ad Gaudentium.
Rufinus writes, that Linus and Cletus were Bishops while Peter lived: that
they might have Episcopatus curam.
the care of the Bishoply charge, and he might do Apostolatus officium.
the duty of the Apostleship. Which is confirmed farther by Haeres. 27.
Epiphanius. Who, though he say that Peter and Paul were both Apostles and
Bishops in Rome: yet he says withal that there were other Bishops of Rome,
while they lived; because that (...).
the Apostles, went often into other countries to preach Christ; and the city
of Rome might not be without (...).
a Bishop. As if he should have said, that a Bishops duty does bind him to
attend the Church, whereof the holy Ghost has made him ouerseer. Now, though
the Apostles Peter and Paul did perform that duty to the Church of Rome,
while they abode there: yet because it was the charge of their Apostleship to
preach to others also, therefore they went thence to other coasts and nations,
and left the Roman charge to the Bishop of Rome. And so you may learn by the
Fathers the^ selves, that when they termed any Apostle a Bishop of this or that
city, as namely, S. Peter of Antioche, or Rome: they meant it in a general
sort, and signification, because he did attend that Church for a time, and
supplied that room in preaching of the Gospel, which Bishops did after. But as
the name of [Bishop] is commonly taken for the ouerseer of a particular church,
and pastor of a several flock: so Peter was not Bishop of any one city, and
therefore not of Rome.


Heart. Yet the Bishops of Rome did succeed Peter: even by the testimony of
the same autors namely of Irenaeus, Eusebius, The fourth Division.
and Epiphanius, in the places by you alleged.


Rainoldes. They did succeed Peter, as Bishops an Apostle: and they did
succeed him in Rome, as other Bishops did in other cities. Wherefore if the
Bishop of Rome by this succession have right to the supremacy: what has the
Bishop of Antioche? For he succeeded Peter too.


Heart. The Bishop of Antioche did succeed Peter, while Peter lived yet, and
had not left his right. But the Bishop of Rome succeeded him, when he died: and
thereby was advanced unto that supremacy, which Peter kept while he lived.


Rainoldes. Your men were wont to answer, As Pope Marcellus says c. Rogamus.
24. q. 1. Turre oremata Sum. de eccles. l. 2. c. 36. Canus Locor. Theologi^or.
l. 6. c. 8.
that Antioche had first right to the supremacy by the chair of Peter: but
Peter did remove his chair thence to Rome. This was somewhat stale. Which your
Father Rober^. Bellarm. Controuer. 4. quaest. 5.
Robert smelled belike, and so he thought it better to say that Peter kept his
right, while he lived: but, when he died, the Bishop of Rome was his
successor, and had it (as I trow) by legacy. A pretty shift if it would
stand: but it lacks life. For Linus Bishop of Rome, who succeeded Peter,
succeeded Peter living: in the same manner as did the Bishop of Antioche.


Heart. Not so. But Clemens rather did succeed Peter: and that, after his
death. For, when he perceived his end to draw near, he took Clemens by the
hand: and said, in the hearing of the whole Church, (which was then assembled,)
Hearken unto me, my brethren and fellow-seruants. Because (as my Lord and
master Jesus Christ, who sent me, has told me,) the day of my death
approaches: I ordeine this Clemens to be your Bishop, unto whom alone I commit
the chair of my preaching and doctrine; and I give to him that power of
binding and loosing which Christ gave to me, that whatsoever he decrees of any
thing in earth, the same shall be decreed in heaven.


Rainoldes. Who told you this tale?


Heart. A tale? It is recorded in an old monument.


Rainoldes. Whence came that old monument?


Heart. From Clemens himself: who lived in the time of the Apostles; and is
mentioned by Phil. 4.3.
S. Paul.


Rainoldes. But where does he record it?


Heart. In his first epistle, written to James the brother of the Lord.


Rainoldes. In deed an old monument. It is so old, that it is rotten. A very
drunken forgerie: wherein it is said, that Peter prayed Clemens to write (after
his death) this epistle to James the brother of the Lord, to comfort him: and
Clemens did so. Whereas Joseph. antiquit. Iudaicar. l. 20. c. 16. Eusebius.
histor. eccles. l. 2. c. 23.
James was dead long before Peter, about an eight years at least.


Heart. This is one of the arguments that are brought against it by your
Centuries of Meydenburg: which I make no account off, Histor. ecclesiast. Magd.
Cent. 2. cap. 7.
though you allege them all. For Francis. Turrian. pro epistolis Pontificum l.
2. c. 13.
Turrian has sifted and confuted them, in his defense of the decretal epistles
of the Popes: where he brings reasons why Clemens might write well to James
being dead, and Peter with him so to do.


Rainoldes. Turrian; a Jesuit: a cover fit for such a cup. Whose defense of
those bastards fathered on the ancient Bishops of Rome falsely, may be justly
censured with that which De causis corruptarum art. lib. 2.
Viues says of your golden legend: it is written by a man of a brazen face and
a leade^ heart. For nothing can be spoken so fondly and absu^dly, which he has
not some reason for: as though he had resolved to be man with reason. Howbeit,
since you are fore-stalled with a prejudice of his defense against the
Centuries: I will not touch ye arguments whereupon they stand. Though his
answers to them, if they should be laid in the skales together, would be found
lighter then vanity it self, in all indifferent readers eyes. His dealing in
this one point may give a taste thereof. For though to write letters to a dead
man be a thing so senseless, that the epistle therefore is nipped, as
unlikely, by De sum. eccles. l. 2. cap. 101.
Cardinal Turrecremata; and cast off, as counterfeit, by De concordant.
catholica l. 2. c. 17 and l. 3. c. 2.
Cardinal Cusanus: yet Turrian defends it as wisely done, and omitteth
nothing to show with how good reason Clemens might write letters to James being
dead, yea though he knew him to be dead; save that, (as Antonius Sade^l in
respons. ad repetita Turriani sophismata. part. 1.
a learned man told him pleasantly) he shows not by what carier Clemens did
send the letters to him. But, to let both Turrian and the Centuries go: the
drift of the epistle being to prove that Peter ordained Clemens his
successor, disc^editeth, it self (as De concord. catholica l. 3. cap. 2.
Cusanus has also noted) by the judgment of the Fathers, S. Epist. 165.
Austin, S. De scriptor. eccle. in verbo Clemens.
Ierom, De schism. Dona^ist. lib. 2.
Optatus, and Irenaeus lib. 3. c. 3. Eusebius in Chron. and histor. eccl. l. 3.
c. 2. Epiphanius haeres. 27. Dorotheus in Synopsi. Beda in Martyrologio.
the rest, yea by ^latina, Onuph^ius Pon^acus Genebrardus, and the auncienter
whom they follow.
your own Chronicles and histories ecclesiastical, who all agree that Linus
was Peter's successor, and so they mar the tale of Clemens.


Heart. You do ill to call it a tale, and droonken forgerie: such reprochefull
terms.


Rainoldes. You must bear with my plainenes, I call a ^^gge, a fig; and a
spade, a spade.


Heart. Nay, it is neither a forgerie, nor a tale. For, the epistle is ancient,
translated out of Greek into Latin by Rufinus, who lived within four hundred
years after Christ. And this touching Linus, the story of whose succession
(you think) dispro^eth it, was thought upon then, and is answered by Praefat.
Recognit. Clement. ad Gaudent.
Rufinus. For (...) his preface to the book entitled the recognitions of
Clemens, which he translated too, some demand (says he) how, when as Linus
and Cletus were Bishops of Rome before Clemens, himself (in his epistle to
James) says that the chair of teaching was committed to him by Peter. Whereof
this is the reason, as we have heard, that Linus and Cletus were in deed
Bishops in Rome before Clemens, but while Peter lived: that they might have the
care of the Bishoply charge, and he might do the duty of the Apostleship. As
it is found that also he did at Caesarea: where, though being present himself,
yet he had a Bishop whom he had ordained, namely Zachaeus. And thus may each of
these things be thought to be true: both that they were reckened Bishops,
before Clemens; and Clemens nevertheless received the chair of teaching after
the death of Peter.


Rainoldes. The auncientie of the epistle is no warrant for it, but that it
might be false and forged. Lin^s de passion. Pet. and Paul. lib. 2. Hi^^ron. de
script. eccles. verbo Seneca.
The epistles of Seneca to Paul, of Paul to Seneca, are no less ancient:
which yet have nothing worthy of either Paul, or Seneca. There have been
very many misbegotten pamphlets wandering abroad, Hieron. de scriptor. eccle^
verbo Paulus. and Lucas, and Clemens. c. santa Romana. distinct. 15.
even from the time of the Apostles; yea, under the names of the Apostles
themselves. The less have you to marvel, if there were some miscreant who
wrote in the name of Clemens to James. As for Rufinus, who translated it, (if
yet he did translate it, and some have not abused Clementis recognitionis
posterio^^^ opus Rusini praefatione, aut confieta, aut aliunde petita
tra^s^orma^um. Sixth. Senens. Biblioth. sanct. lib. 2.
him as well as Clemens:) his judgment was not such, but he might be deceived
in a greater matter. Which, if you believe not on S. Apologia co^tra Rufinum.
Ieroms credit, because he was his adversary: look into these same works
that he translated, and you shall perceive it. For, the things written in the
Recognitions of Clemens (which you mention) sent to James also, are, the most
of them, uncertain; many, fabulous; yea and some, heretical, as Sixth.
Senensis Biblioth. sanct. lib. 2.
your selves confess. Yet Praefat. recognit. Clement. ad Gaudent.
Rufinus judged it a hidden treasure of wisdom, and thought he had a booty
of it. Again, in Clement. epist. 1. ad Iaco^um fratrem Domini.
that epistle, wherein Clemens makes him self Peter's successor, he certifieth
James, that he sent him before (by the commandment of Peter) an other book,
entitled, Itinerarium Clementis.
the book of Clemens touching things which Peter did in his journey. Now,
this iourney-booke has been so long, so famously known, for a rogue: that
he has not only been burnt through the ^are of old by Athanasius in
Synopsi. Gelasi^s in concili^ 70. episcoporum. did. 15. c. sacta Romana.
sundry Fathers and Bishops in a Council; but also of late Sixtus Sen.
Bibliothecae sanct. lib. 2.
the college of Inquisitors at Rome have enrolled him in the Register of books
condemned by the Church. Wherefore he was a counterfeit, that set abroad these
bastardes in the name of Clemens: howsoever Rufinus thought them (of
simplicity,) to be his own, whose they were named. And with this persuasion
was he moved to think on some probability how that might be true, which
seemed false therein: of Peter's ordeining Clemens to be his successor, when
Linus and Cletus were Bishops before him. The only show whereof being Cuius rei
hanc accepimus esse rationem. Praefat. recognit. Clement. ad Gaudent.
a report, received by tradition: he was feign to take it, for lack of a
better. But he erred in it: either not knowing, or not considering times and
stories. For, by his answer, Linus and Cletus should be no longer Bishops then
while Peter lived: and, when he dyed, Clemens should succeed him next
immediately. Whereas it is apparent by Eusebius in Chronico.
records of times, that Linus continued Bishop eleven years, after Peter's
death: and Cletus twelve, after Linus; before that Clemens had the room. Which
albeit Pro decretalib. epist. Pont. lib. 3. cap. 10.
Turrian the Jesuit do^ gnaw upon (as he is wont,) to make it away: yet is the
matter so manifest and certain, that Chronogr. lib. 3. in Lino.
Genebrard, the freshest of your Popish Chroniclers, and passing all the rest
as in skill, so in zeal for the Popes causes, could not but set it down as
true.


Heart. Yet he says withal, that Peter did nominate Clemens to succeed him.
But Clemens gave the room first to Linus, and then to Cletus, not so much of
modesty, as by the counsel of the Lord, Ne huius nominationi^ exemplum
transiret ad posteros* and liberae ecclesiae prouidenti^ in deligendo sibi
praesule decerperet.
least the example of this nomination should pass to the posterity, and
derogate from the free providence of the Church in choosing of her own Bishop.


Rainoldes. He says so in deed. But who sees not that this was devised to
make stories agree with the tale of Clemens: and (by the way) to countenance
the election of Popes, which now the Cardinals use? For, Sacrar. cer^mon. Romans
eccles. l. 1. sect. 1.
the book of Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, treating of that election,
affirms that Peter nominated Clemens to be his successor, with this
condition (it is thought,) if the Cardinals would admit him. But they,
Huiusmodi denominationis formam grauiter in futurum ecclesiae posse nocere.
perceiving that the form of this nomination might greatly hurt the Church in
process of time, did not accept of Clemens, but did choose Linus, and made him
Pope after Peter. Howbeit Clemens afterward was chosen by the Cardinals, when
Linus and Cletus were deceased. Though Genebrard in ^^^ming the fancy to his
purpose, does not so much follow the book of the Ceremonies as the gloss of
the c. Si Petrus ^. q. 1. in glossa.
Canon law: which (with better care of the Popes credit) says, that Pope
Clemens him self Renunciauit Papatui, videns quod esset perniciosum exemplo
quod aliquis sibi eligeret successorem.
renounced the Papacy, considering that it would be an evil and pernicious
thing for the example, that any should choose his own successor. Into such
follies do you (...) your selves, to say that the blessed Apostle of Christ, S.
Peter, did ordeine that, which was pernicious for the example, refused by the
Pope, mislyked by the Cardinals, prejudicial to the Church: and all to
maintain the epistle of Clemens, with the tale in it, that Peter made him his
successor. A thing so absurd, that where it is mentioned in c. vn^e. 8. q. 1.
the Canon law, there is it n^^ed to ^e Palea.
chafe: and In annotat. ad c. vnde 8. q. 1.
Contius, a learned lawier of your own, does note upon that note, that it is
counted chafe worthily, Nam tota est commentitia.
for it is all counterfeite: and Petr. Come. histor. scholast. in Act. Apol^.
cap. 101.
Comestor, the author of the scholastical history, who lived when the darkness
of Popery was grossest, refuteth and rejects it as a mere forgerie. But
whatsoever it ^e, and ho^ so ever ancient, (...) the same (it may be) which S.
De scriptorib. eccles. verbo C^emens.
Ierom says, did bear the name of Clemens, and was reproved by old writers,
but be it, what you will: you confess your self that to be untrue, for proof
whereof you cited it, that Clemens succeeded Peter, and not Linus. Wherefore,
seeing Linus did succeed Peter, and that while Peter lived, in the same sort
as Zachaeus did (you say) at Caesarea, and Euodius at Antioche: the Bishops of
Antioche, and of Caesarea, may claim as well the Papacy by Peter's succession,
as may the Bishop of Rome.


Heart. Yet by your own grant and the consent of histories, Linus who
succeeded him in Rome, did out-liue him. And therefore he was the successor of
Peter, not only while Peter was alive yet, but when he was deceased also.


Rainoldes. He was so. What of that?


Heart. Of that I conclude the Bishop of Romes supremacy, and convince you of
error. For Peter had charge of all the Church of Christ. But the Bishop of
Rome is the successor of Peter. The Bishop of Rome therefore has charge of
all the Church of Christ.


Rainoldes. As if you should say: ^. King. 11. verse. 42.
Solomon did reign over all Israel. But verse. 43.
Roboam, Salomons son, was his successor. Roboam therefore reigned over all
Israel. Whereby you might convince the scripture of error, for saying that ^.
King. 12. verse. 20.
Jeroboam was king over all Israel, and none did follow Roboam, but the tribe
of Judah only.


Heart. They revolted from Roboam. But he had right to be their king, as being
heir of Solomon.


Rainoldes. But what is that to my reason? For points in a similitude are
bound to hold no farther, then that, wherein they are resembled. Else you might
add too, that the Pope is liker to Jeroboam then to Roboam, because of his
verse. 28.
golden gods: and therefore should be king rather of all Christendom, then of
the province of Rome only. But if your cavil please you against that reason:
hear an other. The Apostles of Christ had charge of all nations. All Bishops
are successors of the Apostles. Therefore all Bishops have charge of all
nations. Will you reply now that men revolt from Bishops: but they have right
to be Popes, as being heirs of the Apostles?


Heart. No: For though all Bishops succeed the Apostles, as S. Epist. ad Euagr
Ierom says well, and it is true: yet they succeed them not in their whole
right. They succeed them in the kind of charge, Marc. 16.15.
to preach the Gospel: but not in the amplenes, to preach it unto every
creature. They succeed the Apostles, but not in the Apostleship. For of the
Apostleship there is no succession, as D. Princip. doctrinal. l. 6. c. 7.
Stapleton shows.


Rainoldes. Then D. Stapleton shows, that the Bishop of Rome does not
succeed Peter in the Apostleship neither.


Heart. And what if he do not?


Rainoldes. Then he succeeds not to all the right of Peter. Then how is the
supremacy proved by this succession? Then the Pope usurps, who will be the
Apostles successor in the Apostleship. For he calls his office In praefatione
Clementinarum.
the office of the Apostleship; and things which he does hear, c. a^
Apostolatus. extrauag. Ioh. 22. de concession. praebend. de priuil.
his Apostleship does hear them; and in his prohibitions, he wills weighty
matters c. Porro. Did. 63.
to be referred to his Apostleship; and in his usual style, the style of the
Court of Rome, his c. ad audientiam. i. de rescriptis.
letters, his c. Nulli. Did. 19.
decrees, his Sacrar. cer^moniar. Romans eccles. lib. 1. sect. 8.
mandates and precepts are called Apostolic, and all Apostolic, that touches
him; the Apostolic sect. 6.
Bull, the Apostolic sect. 14.
seal, the Apostolic sect. 5.
messenger, Apostolic sect. 1.
palace, sect. 8.
chamber, Reg. Cancellariae Apost.
chauncerie, Apostolic Sacr. cerem. Romans eccles. l. 1. sect. 5.
Legate, Apostolic c. In his. de priuileg. and excessibus priuilegiat.
pardon, Apostolic c. Ideo. 25. q. 1.
authority, Apostolic Albert. Krantz. Saxon. l. 5. c. 8.
dispensation; and what not? Wherein we have an other of your spiritual
coosinages, as kindly as Chapt. 1. Diuis. 2.
the former, wherein you clad the Pope with the name of Peter. Nay, this does
pass that. For, in that, he comes forth with the spoils of Peter, one
Apostle: in this, of more then one. For Bishops, in their c. ego N. extra. de
iureiurando.
oath of fealty to the Pope, are sworn Limina Apostolorum visitabo.
to visit yearly the Court of the Apostles, that is, of the Pope; Nisi eorum
absoluar licentia.
unless they be dispensed withal by the Apostles, that is, by the Pope.


Heart. You need not think this kind of speeches so disorderly. For S. Bernard
uses them, or the like unto them. Yea, De consid. ad Eugen lib. 1.
the very title of the Apostleship is given to the Pope by him.


Rainoldes. S. Bernard was a worthy man, in About the year. 1140.
that corrupt age, in which he lived. But your selves have a proverb, that
Bernardus no^ vidit omnia.
Bernard saw not all things. Yet he saw many more, then you can well brook:
and Bernard. de co^sid. ad Eugen. lib. 4.
some wherein the Pope succeeds Constantine, not Peter; lib. 1.2. and 3.
some wherein he succeeds neither. That he saw the filth of the Papacy but
in part: it may be imputed (...) never had himself you^ Popes supremacy, the
right of the heavenly and of the earthly kingdom, the princehood both in
temporal and spiritual things. Such power neither the scriptures nor Fathers
give to Peter. But what are the scriptures which the Fathers allege?


Heart. How far the supremacy of Peter did reach in earthly things and
heavenly, spiritual and temporal: I will not reason now. But Staplet.
principior. doctrine. lib. 6. cap. 15.
the ancient Fathers allege the same scriptures to prove that his supremacy
came to his successors in the Church of Rome, which I alleged before to prove
his right to the supremacy. For, that the promise in the sixteenth of Matthew,
upon this rock I will build my Church, and so forth, is verified in the Sea of
Rome, S. In Psalm. cont^a partem Donati.
Augustine teaches: Number (says he) the Priests even from the very seat
of Peter, and in that rank of fathers mark who succeeded whom: that is the
rock against which the proud gates of hell prevail not. And, that the
performance of the said promise in the last of John, Feed my sheep, pertains
also to the Pope, S. De sacerdotio, lib. 2.
Chrysostom is witness, auouching expressly, that Christ did commit his
sheep to be fed both unto Peter, and to Peter's successors. Which to be
likewise meant by those words in the two and twenteeth of Luke, I have prayed
for thee that thy faith fail not, and thou being converted strengthen thy
brethren: In decretali^^s epist. Council. Tom. 1.
Pope Marcus in his decretall epistle to Athanasius, Pope Lucius in his
decretal epistle to the demands of French and Spanish Bishops, Pope Felix in
his decretall epistle to Benignus, have manifestly taught.


Rainoldes. Nettles amongst roses, when you set the bastard autours of these
decretals amongst the ancient Fathers. But tell me in good sooth: think you
that every Pope must deny Christ?


Heart. Deny Christ? What mean you to ask me that question?


Rainoldes. Because you seem to say, that Luc. 22. ver. 32.
Christ's words to Peter, and thou being converted strengthen thy brethren, are
meant of all them.


Heart. What? And say I therefore, that they must deny Christ?


Rainoldes. Or else you say nothing. For why said Christ to Peter, and thou
being converted? Did he not say it ver. 34.
in respect that Peter would auert and turn him self away from him, when he
denied him thrice?


Heart. So: what if he did?


Rainoldes. Then if the same words be meant of al Popes, every Pope must
first be turned away from Christ, that he may be converted after: and therefore
every Pope must deny Christ. If I should say so: some would be angry with me.
But you may say what you list.


Heart. This is such a reason, as yt, (which has been made too,) yt if the
words, Mat. 16. ver. 1^
Thou art Peter, concern Peter's successor, then the words, ver. 23.
Satan, thou art an offense to me, must concern him also, because they were
spoken by Christ to Peter both. But, as Rob. Bellarm. contr. 4. quaest. ^.
Father Robert answers to that, so do I to this, that the reason follows
not. For certain things (says he) are spoken to Peter for himself alone;
certain for himself, and for all Christians; certain for himself, and for
his successors. This is plainly gathered by the diverse reason and
consideration, whereon they are spoken to him. For those things which are
spoken to him as one of the faithful, are understood to be spoken unto all the
faithful: as, Mat. 18.2^,
if thy brother trespass against thee. Those things which are spoken in some
respect of his own person, are spoken unto him alone: as, Luc. 22.34.
thou shall deny me thrice. Those things which are spoken in regard of his
pastoral duty, are spoken unto all pastors: as Ioh. 21.15.
feed my sheep, and, strengthen thy brethren. And thus you may see yt the
words of Christ, I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not, and,
strenghthen thy brethren, might in such sort be spoken unto Peter, that they
might pertain to every Pope also: though the other words, to deny Christ,
and to be converted, do not perteine to them. You will not say your self, (I
trust) of faithful Christians, that they must all deny Christ. Yet Chapt. 3.
Diuis. 2.
you said that this prayer and commandment of Christ perteine to them all, if
you be remembered.


Rainoldes. I remember it well: and it is very true. But this does give a
deadly stripe to that argument, which you pretended to be made by the Fathers.
For if the words of Christ, Feed my sheep, and, strengthen thy brethren,
must be understood as spoken unto all Pastors, which by your answer you
grant: then how can they prove the supremacy of one Pastor, which you
conclude in your argument?


Heart. I did not mean by [all Pastors] the Pastors of all Churches: but all
the Pastors of one Church, namely of the Church of Rome.


Rainoldes. But Robert, the Father whose words you alleged, does mean the
Pastors of all Churches. And the commandment of Christ, Feed my sheep,
belongs to them also: unless (...) 23. de reformat. c. 1.
the council of Trent mistake it.


Heart. It belongs to them: but to the Bishop of Rome chiefly. For De
sacerdo^io lib. 2.
Chrysostom expressly says, (as I alleged,) that Christ did commit the
feeding of his sheep to Peter and to Peter's successors.


Rainoldes. And be you certain, that by [Peters successours] he meant the
Bishops of Rome?


Heart. Whom should he mean but them?


Rainoldes. He meant all Bishops: not all ye Bishops of one Church, but the
Bishops of all Churches. Which is evident by his words, and the intent whereto
he spoke them. For to stir up Basil, and make him glad and willing to do the
office of a Bishop, which he had undertaken, he tells him, that Christ when
he said to Peter, Do thou love me? Feed my sheep, did thereby show how
dear his sheep are unto him, and therefore would surely give great reward to
Pastors who feed them, and guide them. For why did he shed his own blood,
(says Chrysostom) but eue^ to purchase those sheep, the care of whom he
committed to Peter and to Peter's successors. Whereupon he goes forward, and
declares what that charge is, which Christ gave to Peter and to all Pastors by
that commission Feed my sheep. So that both the course of Chrysostom^ speech,
and the drift of his reason, and the person whom it implies, S. Basil, Bishop,
not of Rome, but of Caesarea, do manifestly show, that he meant, by naming
[the successors of Peter] all Pastors of the flock, al Bishops of the Church
of Christ. And this is so clear, that Rob. Bellarmin. contr. 4. quaest. 3.
Father Robert himself (in his Roman Lectures) does not only grant it, but
also prove it by two reasons: one, out of De agone Christian. c. 30
Austin, that Peter was a figure of the Church, that is to say, he represented
all Pastors, when Christ said to him, feed my sheep: an other, out of Sermon.
3. in an^iuersar. assump^ionis su^.
Leo, that Peter is an example and as it were a pattern, the which all Pastors
ought to follow. How much the more shameful is the ignorance of your Doctors,
if they knew it not; the wilfulnes, if they knew it: who bear men in hand that
Chrysostom does prove the Popes supremacy by those successors. Wherein the
oversight Who allege it, and urge i^ as very forcible to that purpose: in
their Annotat. on Ioh. 21.17.
of your Rhemists is great: but a pair of Jesuits, Cani^ius and Busaeus, do
go beyond their fellows. For In opere Catechistico Petri Canisij edito a Busae
o. de praeceptis eccles. art. 9.
they, amongst many sentences of the Fathers, the woorst of them as fit as this
to prove the Papacy, do set out this as the best; and triumph of it, as of a
peerless proof, by giving it a special note in the margent: Nota^tum Petro,
tum succes soribus curam ouium commissam.
Note, (say they,) to Peter, and to Peter's successors. Note it, say the
Jesuits. In deed it is a point well worth the noting, that you do so
notoriously abuse the Church of Christ. For you persuade the simple, and
chiefly young scholars who trust your common-place-bookes, that Chrysostom
spoke of Peter and Peter's successors, in the same meaning that the Pope does,
when he Pope Boniface the eighth* c. vna sanctam. extra. de maioritat. and
obedientia.
says that Peter and Peter's successor is the head of the Church; and Pope
Pius the fourth. In bulla super ^orma iuramenti prosessionis fidei.
binds men by solemn oath to be obedient to the Bishop of Rome, the
successor of Peter. Whereas S. Chrysostom meant by Peter's successors, all
them whom Christ does put in trust to feed his sheep: as Lib. 4. did. 18.
the Master of the sentences, and In 4. sentent. did. 18. q. 1. art. 1
Thomas of Aquine do give the name of Peter's successors to all Priests and
Prelates (as they term them,) that is, to all Pastors and Doctors of the
Church: as S. De agone Christ. cap. 30.
Austin teaches that it is said to all when it is said to Peter, Do thou
love me? Feed my sheep: as S. De dignitat^ ^acerd. cap. 2.
Ambrose writes that he and all Bishops have received the charge of the sheep
with Peter: as In epist. ad cleru^ Carthag. apud Cyprian. epist. 3.
the Roman clergy apply it to the rest of the disciples of Christ, and to the
clergy of Carthage too. Such invincible reasons you fetch out of the Fathers
for the Roman Papacy: by which every Bishop may claim as much above the Roman,
as may the Roman above any.


Heart. In deed, to feed the sheep is common after a sort to the Pastors of
all Churches. But in many Churches the faith of Pastors has failed. Wherefore
Christ's prayer for the faith of Peter, that it should not fail, is not common
to them all. Only the Bishops of the Church of Rome have never failed in
faith. By the which event of things it is plain, that Christ made that prayer
for Peter's successors in the Sea of Rome: and so did establish them over al,
in charging them to strengthen their brethren.


Rainoldes. And do you think that all the Bishops of Rome have had the same
privilege which Christ obtained for Peter in that his faith failed not?


Heart. The very same, no doubt.


Rainoldes. And have they showed their faith by Iam. 2.18.
their works too, by 1. Ioh. ^.4. and 3.2^.
keeping Christ's commandments, by loving one another?


Heart. They have so perhaps.


Rainoldes. Away with that [perhaps:] for all the world knows they have not.
Yea seven hundred years ago, not to speak of later times, wherein their power
and wealth have kindled sparks of greater license, and loosed the reins unto
their lusts, but seven hundred years ago, when they were yet of meaner estate,
the proof hereof was famous by sundry of their lives succeeding one another:
Formosus, Boniface, Stephen, Romanus, Theodore, John the ninth, and a little
after them, Christopher, and Sergius. Of whom their own friends and favorers
do write that (...) Johan. decim.
they were gone from Peter's steps, that In Benedicto quart. and Sergio (...).
they did get his See by briberie, that they were ^^odigiosi. ^^^ebraid.
Chronogr. lib. 4.
monstrous men, or rather Portenta and monstra. Platina in Bene^icto quart. and
Christophoro. prim.
beasts and monsters. Amongst whom, the Platina in vita Formosi.
first was accursed by a Pope, and made himself Pope by perjury. The Sigon.
de regno Ital. lib. 6.
second would (but that he was prevented by death;) the Platina in vita Steph.
sexti.
third did repeal the decrees of the first, and condemn his acts: the Romani.
fourth condemned the third, and justified the first: the Theodo^i secundi.
fifth did keep the same race: the Iohannis decimi.
sixth confirmed it by a Council: the Sergij tertij.
last, for all the Council and the Popes allowing it, restored the third to
his credit, and again condemned the first. Ita vertigo ^otabat Petri
successores. Jesus Christi vicarios i^ ^erris.
Thus were Peter's successors whirled about with giddiness, as Metropolis lib.
2. cap. 22.
Krantzius speaks of them: and the head of the Church was long without a
brain. A thing very strange, and such as (I think) has scarce been heard
off amongst the Barbarians: that Pope Stephen the sixth.
one of these successors, did take up the carcass of Pope Formosus. Sigonius
de regn. Ital. l. 6.
his predecessor out of his grave, brought it into judgment before a Council
of Bishops, spoiled it of his Papal roabes, clad it with a lay-mans garments,
endited it, arraigned it, condemned it, Lui^prand. ^^cin. l. 1. c. 8. where he
ascribes it to Sergius, because they were of Sergius faction whose ministry
Stephen did use in it: Sigon. lib. 6. ^ergiani.
cut off three fingers ofit, and cast it into the stream of Tiber. Yet this
Pope might have been a Saint of the Popes, in comparison of whom Platina
calls John the thirteenth.
John the twelfth. For he did show more cruelty upon the bodies of many
living; then the other, of one dead: and the other excelled not so much in one
vice, as John the twelfth in all, in ungodliness, unrighteousness,
intemperance, pride, in whooredomes, adulteri^s, incestes, murders, in
periuries, simonie, sacrileges, blasphemies, and such abominations as I abhor
to mention. Not Catiline, not Nero, not Heliogabalus, not ye most monstrous
wretches that ever lived in Rome, came near unto him. It were incredible that
one caraine should have so much, so horrible filth, but that his own Church
and the Italian Bishops (in a Council assembled by the Emperor Otho) did
charge him with these things, and with things more vilanous and outrageous
then these. And himself, when the Emperor and Council wrote unto him, that
he should come to make his answer, made this answer to them, and other he
would make none, that he cursed them all to hell if they attempted to deprive
him, as he heard say they did. Luitprandus, a deacon of a Church in Italy,
Platina in vita Stephani quint.
a man commended for his holiness, who lived at the same time, Histor. re^u^ per
Europam gesta^um l. 6. c. 6. and 7. and 8. and 10
does write this story of Pope John; and that with such credit, that beside
Martin. Polon. in supput. Pont.
Martinus, In Chronic. monast. Hirsau.
Tritemius, in Iohann. decimo tert.
Platina, Saxon. l. 4. c. 9. and Metrop. l. 3. c. 1.
Kra^tzius, and Sigibertus in Chronic. Blondus decad. 2. lib. 3.
others, men of your own religion, who write the sum of it after him:
Sigonius (an Italian, The discovery of Nicols, part. 2.
to whom your Pope gives almost a thousand crowns yearly to read in one of
his Uniuersities,) though he dissemble much, in his Italian history, the
things that touch the Popes state; yet Sigon. de regno Italiae lib. 7.
he acknowledges this, and writes it somewhatfully. Now (I hope) you will not
say of this Pope, Pope John the twelfth, that perhaps he showed his faith by
his works: or if you would say that he showed his faith (as it may be he did,)
yet you will not say that it was such a faith, as was the faith of Peter for
which our Savior prayed. For, if you think here, that notwithstanding all
these crimes he might be good after, as Peter repented when he had denied
Christ, and so his faith did not fail, though it did fainte: then I must tell
you further, that Pope John went forward as he had begoon, and his death was
answerable unto his life. Alb. Krantz. Metrop. l. 5 c. 1.
While he was committing adultery* he was slain: whether Platina in vita
Johan. decimi tert. Blondus decad 2. lib. 3.
thrust through by some who took him in the act, or Luitpr^nd. Ticin. l. 6. c.
11. Sigibert. in Chron. Tritem. in Chron. monast. Hirsaug.
stricken by the devil; historians agree not. But Summa de eccles. l. 2. c. 103.
Cardinal Turrecremata does take that as more likely, which is more dreadful.
Because the life (says he) of Pope John was detestable, and marvelous
offensive to the Christian people: therefore Christ himself gave out the
sentence of condemnation against him. For, while he was abusing a certain man's
wife, the Devil struck him suddenly, and so he died without repentance.


Heart. What if Pope John, and some others of them, offended in their lives? Yet
their faith failed not, that faith which Christ spoke off. For by the name of
[faith] he meant the doctrine of faith, which he prayed for Peter and so for
his successors that they might keep sound, and never be seduced from it to
any heresy. No more was Pope John, nor any other of the Popes: though in their
lives they were not all of the best.


Rainoldes. I thought that Christ had meant by the name of [faith] a lively
Christian faith: which Romans 3.25.
imbraceth the promise of the mercy of God; which Gal. 5.6.
works by love, and brings forth the fruits of faith; which Ioh. 6.47.
whosoever have, they have assurance of everlasting life. But you think belike
that he meant a dead faith: a faith, which they have of whom Iam. 2.19.
it is written, the Devils believe, and tremble; a faith, which Pope John might
have, and be a reprobate, and dye without repentance, and be the heir of death
eternal.


Heart. I say not that Christ meant a dead faith, but the right faith: that is,
as I said, the true and Catholic doctrine of the faith of Christ. As the
scripture uses that word, where it is written, that 1. Tim. 1.1.
in the later times some shall depart from the faith, and shall give heed to
spirits of error, and doctrines of Devils. The doctrines of Devils are
heresies whatsoever. The faith is the true doctrine set against heresies. S.
Pe^er held this faith when he said, Matt. 16.16.
Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God. From this faith the devil would
have removed him. But Christ prayed for him that it should not fail. And so I
say he prayed for the Bishops of Rome, that it should fail in none of them.


Rainoldes. But this faith is also a faith, which Luc. 4.^1.
the Devils may have, and yet tremble: a faith, which Pope John might have and
be a reprobate, and die without repentance, and be the heir of death eternal.


Heart. What if it be so?


Rainoldes. Then Christ prayed for Peter, that he should never lose that faith,
which faith he might have kept and yet be lost himself, even lost both body
and soul to everlasting death.


Heart. If I should grant you so much:


Rainoldes. Nay, you must needs grant it: for it is proved by Pope John. But
why said Christ to Peter, Luc. 22* ^^.
Satan has desired, that he may sift you, as wheat? What is that to sift the
disciples, as wheat?


Heart. To sift them, as wheaten meal: that is, to shake out of them all their
truth and faithfulness, as flower out of the sieue, and leave nothing within
them but branne as it were.


Rainoldes. Then Satan desired to shake out of them al their love toward
Christ, that they might forsake him, and reuolte from him.


Heart. He did so.


Rainoldes. And this he did, to what end, but that he might destroy them: Job
1.11. and 2.5.
as he desired to sift Job? As S. Peter warns us: 1. Pet. 5. ver. ^.
the Devil goes about like a roaring lion seeking whom he may devour.


Heart. It is true.


Rainoldes. And as S. Peter armeth us against the attempts of the Devil by
this lesson, ver. ^*
whom resist ye strong in faith: so Christ did arm him by praying to God, and
obteining for him, that his faith should not fail.


Heart. Uery true. He armed him and made him most strong Luc. 22.3^.
that he being converted might strengthen his brethren.


Rainoldes. Do you not see then that he must needs mean by [faith] a lively
faith, which has the love of Christ and constant godliness joined with it? by
which the Devil is conquered, hell escaped, heaven assured? For, if he had
meant the doctrine, as you construe it, the true and Catholic doctrine of the
faith of Christ: how had he armed Peter against those fiery darts of Satan,
which a right opinion in matters of faith was not able to quench? Wherein mark,
I pray, what blemish you cast on the wisdom of Christ, whom you suppose to
have said to Peter: the Devil will tempt you to draw you from my love, and to
destroy you body and soul; but I have prayed for thee, that thou shall think
aright in matters of faith. Which is, as if a Captain, to cheer up a
soldier (whom he had special care off) against the battle, should tell
him: the enemy will assault you with poisoned shot, to kill you; but I have
got a shield of paper for thee, to defend thee from it. Then which what can be
spoken more ridiculous, or absurd?


Heart. As though a right faith were no stronger fense against assaults of the
Devil, then is a shield of paper against poisoned shot. S. Paul thought not
so, (...) 6.16.
who in the armor of a Christian exhorts us above all things to take the
shield of faith.


Rainoldes. S. Paul means not the same by [faith] that you do. For he
adds of that shield, that we may quench all the fiery darts of (...).
the wicked (that is to say, of the devil) with it. But a right opinion in
matters of faith cannot quench them all: as it is plain by Ioh. 13.^. Mat.
27.4. Act. 1.18.
Judas, or by Pope John. Therefore, he means by [the shield of faith] a
lively Christian faith, which God does give to his elect, and to them only;
Re^. 12.11. Heb. 10. ver. 19.22. and ^8.
by which we overcome the devil, and all his forces, and enter into heaven.
Howbeit, I deny not, that a right opinion in matters of faith is stronger then
paper against some darts of Satan, to weete, against errors. But to be
preserved safe from these darts, is not enough to life: neither do all of
them give mortal wounds. The darts, whereof I spoke, are more sharp, and
deadly. Whom they wound, they kill. Against the which kind, if Christ had armed
Peter with such a faith as you imagine, when Satan desired to sift him as
wheat: it is profane to think it, but it follows of your fancy, that he
armed him with (as it were) a paper-shield against poisoned shot. For, as
against this shot a shield of paper cannot preserve our temporal life: so a
right opinion in matters of faith could not save him to life eternal from
those darts.


Heart. And what if our Savior meant a lively faith in that he prayed for Peter?


Rainoldes. Then he prayed for Peter that which he prayed not for the Popes.
For ^
he obteineth always the things which he prays for. But he obtained not a
lively faith for all the Popes, as I have proved. Therefore he prayed not for
it. And so is that position found to be false, on which you pitch the Papacy;
that Christ made that prayer for Peter's successors in the Sea of Rome, The
second Division.
which he made for Peter, not to fail in faith.


Heart. Yet Christ gave him also that faith which we speak off: I mean a right
judgment in matters of faith, with grace, that neither it should fail. And in
this privilege the Pope does succeed him, though not in the other.


Rainoldes. You should first prove that Christ meant this privilege in
mentioning [faith] there: or else, I will answer, that Luc. 24.49. Act. 2.4.
he gave it to Peter, as to the Apostles. And so may their successors claim
it, as well as Peter's. But admit he meant it. The Pope does not succeed him in
this privilege neither. For the Pope may, not only err in doctrine, but also
be an heretic. Which (I hope) you will not say that Peter might.


Heart. Neither, by my good will, that the Pope may.


Rainoldes. But you must: no remedy. It is a ruled case. Your Schoolmen and
Canonistes, In dialogo part. 1. lib. 6. cap. 1.
Ockam, In Summa. lib. 5. tit. de ha^eticis.
Hostiensis, Summa de eccles. l. 2. c. 93. and 112.
Turrecremata, (...) Pontificum.
Zabarella, De concord. catholica l. 2. c. 17.
Cusanus, Sum. part. 3 tit. 22. c. 7.
Antoninus, Aduers. haeres. l. 1. c. 2. and 4.
Alfonsus, Loco^. theolog. lib. 6. cap. 8.
Canus, De visib. Monarc. lib. 7.
Sanders, Controuers. 4. part. 2. quaest. 1^
Bellarmin, and Canonistae in Did. 40. c. Si Papa. Archid. and Joan. Andr. c.
in fidei. de haereticis. in Sex^. Caietan. de autoritat. Papae and council. cap.
20. and 23.
others, yea the Did. 40. c. Si Papa.
Canon law it self, yea a Synod. Romana quint. sub Symmacho.
Council, a Roman council, confirmed by the Pope, do grant it.


Heart. They grant that the Pope may be an heretic, perhaps, by a supposall:
as many things may be, which never were, nor are, nor shall be. For you cannot
prove, that ever any Pope was an heretic, actually: though possibly they may
be. Whereof I will not strive.


Rainoldes. If they may be possibly, which you must needs grant: then is it
certain that it was not meant by the words of Christ that they should not
fail in doctrine of faith. For whatsoever he says, that it shall not be: that
cannot be possibly. But it it is no surer that they may be heretics: then it
is manifest, that some of them have been. For when the Church was pestered
with the heresy of the Monothelites, who, (whereas Christ is made our Savior
and redeemer by that he does consist of 1. Tim. 3.1^.
two natures, God and man; and as of two natures, so of Luc. 22.42.
two wills, agreeably to the natures,) they say that Christ has but only
Whence they are called (after ye Greek) Monothelites, as you would say
One-wilmen.
one will, and by consequent but one nature; which razeth the ground of our
salvation: Honorius the Pope did hold and teach this heresy. The Sext. synod.
Constantinopolit. action 12. and 13.
sixth general council found him guilty of it: condemned him, and cursed him
for it.


Heart. Whether Pope Honorius held that heresy or no: the Catholics are of
diverse judgments; some thinking that he did, some that he did not. Father
Robert, the reader of controversies in Rome, prefers the opinion of De
hierar. ecclesiast. l. 4. c. 8.
Pighius, Contra Brentium. lib. 2.
Hosius, and Annotat. in ^ latin. vit. Hon or. prim.
Onuphrius, before them al who think otherwise: and so with their consent, he
does acquit Honorius.


Rainoldes. How? by a pardon? as Job. 18.40.
Barrabas was acquitted? Or, have they empaneled a jury of Clerks, and found
him not guilty?


Heart. They show by good reasons that he is falsely slaundered. For Pighius and
Hosius do bring the testimonies of historians, Platina, Sabellicus, Nauclerus,
Blondus, and Aeneas Siluius: who say, that Honorius did condemn the heresy of
the Monothelites. Whereto Onuphrius adds the authorities of Emmanuell
Calleca, a Grecian; and John of Turrecremata, Cardinal of San-sisto: who have
proved by their writings that he was a Catholic Bishop.


Rainoldes. Have proved? Nay they would, had not their proofs failed. But is
not this a strange answer? The question is touching Honorius, a Pope, who
lived almost a thousand years ago, what he taught in a point of faith. The
Bishops, who lived about the same time, Synod. sent. subscript. act. ^^
not many fewer then two hundred or (as Histor. mis^ell. Paul. Diac. (...). 19.
some write) three hundred, do say, and prove their saying by his own
writings, that he taught erroneously as the Monothelites. Platina, Sabellicus,
Nauclerus, Blondus, Siluius, Calleca, and Turrecremata, seven of the Popes
friends, of whom the eldest lived above six hundred years after him, do
affirm the contrary. Whether of these are likelier to know and say the truth
thereof?


Heart. But there are also in the Popes library the writings of Maximus, who
lived about the same time. And it is plain by him that Honorius did not
subscribe to that heresy: yea, that of a certainetie he did condemn it.


Rainoldes. Onuphrius might say so, and (as he thought) safely, because it was
not likely, that we should see Maximus in ye Popes library to disprove his
saying. But it is disproued by your own De^ens. fidei Trident. lib. 2.
Andradius. Who discoursing hereof, to show that it is not certain that
Honorius did first condemn the heresy of the Monothelites, though Platina,
and Sabellicus, and Blondus, and Aeneas Siluius say he did: for Theophanes,
(says he) and Anastasius, historians much ancienter then they, do write that
John the fourth Pope after him was the first who did it. And Maximus (as it is
well noted by Torrensis a singular learned man, having purposly undertaken to
clear Honorius of that heresy, made not any mention of his condemning it:
though, if it had been so, he must have known it needs, and could not have
omitted it. Now, this Lib. de sexta. sep^ima, and octaua synod^.
Torrensis, whom Andradius prayseth, has alleged that whole place of Maximus
touching Honorius: whereof the sum is this, that the secretary of Honorius,
who wrote the very epistle that he was charged by, and knew belike his
meaning best, expounded part thereof in a good sense, that it might seem
sound. And this is that Maximus In Biblio^heca Palatina.
in the Popes library, by which your Onuphrius does take it to be Satis
manifestum est.
plain, (or at the least would have us take it,) that Honorius did never
subscribe to that heresy, yea, that of a certainty he did condemn it. But
see what difference between men. Andradius, who allows the secretaries
exposition which Maximus alleged to clear Honorius of that heresy, yet
thinks it plain by that place of Maximus, that he did not condemn it.
Torrensis, a friend of the Popes too, declares, that a part of the epistle of
Honorius is helped reasonably by the secretaries exposition: but it fitteth not
another part thereof, in which it is plain by his own words, that he was a
Monothelite. So Torrensis who had access to the Popes library as well as
Onuphrius, has showed that Onuphrius did mean to steal a lie by sending us
to Maximus in the Popes library. As for Maximus himself, he was loath, for good
will both to Honorius and the truth, that the heretics should boast (as In
council. Roman. Martin. Secreta^ 4.
they did) of such a patron: and therefore he desired to withdraw him from
them. But Sext. Synod. Constantinop. act. 11.
the general Council (before which he wrote) found after, on better
examination of the matter, that Honorius joined with them, and taught as they
did. Wherefore, whatsoever Maximus has written or rather wished of it: the
Council is of greater credit then Maximus; much more, then Calleca or
Turrecremata, who could not say therein so much as Maximus, Joan. de Turrecrem.
in summa de eccles. l. 2. c. 93.
and Maximus is the best that they say.


Heart. That which you allege of the Council, were somewhat, if they had
condemned Honorius of that heresy. But they did not: although it be so written
in the Council now. For Anastasius, the keeper of the Popes library, who lived
within two hundred years after Honorius, does teach in his Latin history, out
of Theophanes a Greek writer, that the Vulg^^a exempla^^a sextae synodi a
Graecis cor^upta.
common copies of the sixth Council were corrupted by the Grecians; and the
Canones, in quibus Honorius condemna^ur, supposititios esse.
Canons thereof, in the which Honorius is condemned, were forged.


Rainoldes. Canons? what Canons? There are no Canons of the sixth Council in
which Honorius is condemned. Neither does Anastasius or Theophanes say it.


Heart. No? Sure Annotat. in Plat. vit. Honor.
Onuphrius says as I said. And that which he says, he says that Sirletus,
then, a chief Notarie, now Cardinal of Rome, an excellent learned man, had
marked it.


Rainoldes. A foul and gross fault, either of Sirletus, or Onuphrius, or
both. For there were two meetinges of Bishops at Constantinople, which both do
bear the name of the sixth Council: Sexta Synodus Constantinop.
the former, under the Emperor Constantine the fourth, about the year of
Christ six hundred and eighty; Canones patrum Constantinop. in Trullo.
the later, under his son Justinian, toward a thirty years after. The
former was assembled against the heresy of the Monothelites: the Bishops of
the west Church, as well as of the east were present, and they with one consent
did al condemn Honorius. In the later there met the Bishops of the east only,
who made rules and orders of ecclesiastical discipline, which are the Canons
that you mention. These Canons do contain the sum of the ordinances of the
Greek Church: wherein the Church of Rome is grated upon, both for can. 3. and
13. and 55. and 69.
other points, and chiefly for can. 36. and 39.
the Popes supremacy. The Greek Bishops therefore to win the more credit
unto their Canons, said that they were made by the sixth general Council. Of
which Synod. Nicen. secund. action. 4. ^. Habeo librum. distinct. ^6.
they reported, that, when it was dimissed, the very same Fathers, whom
Constantine the Emperor assembled before, were again assembled by his son
Justinian, after a four or five years, and ordained those Canons. But
Theophanes, and Anastasius have showed that to be a tale, as it is in deed:
and in discourse thereof have said of those Canons, that they are falsely named
the Canons of the sixth Council. Now Sirletus, falling belike on these words,
and remembering that the sixth Council is said to have condemned Honorius:
thought it either true, or wholesome to be taught as true, that he was
condemned by harlotrie Canons not made by the Council, but forged in the
Councels name. Which fancy peradventure he told his friend Onuphrius: and
Onuphrius for joy went and set it in print. So, by the conueiance of Onuphrius
and Sirletus, pretending and abusing the countenance and names of Anastasius,
and Theophanes: the sixth general Council is put to silence (as it were,)
from bearing witness against Honorius. But, the mischief of it is, that Lib.
de sext^. septima, and octaua synod.
Torrensis again does mar the play. For out of the histories of Theophanes
and Anastasius (which are not common to be seen) he has alleged also this
place touching those Canons. Whereby it is manifest that their meaning was not
to discredit the actions of the sixth Council which condemned Honorius in the
time of Constantine, as you would have us to imagine. Their meaning was only to
show that the Canons, which are called the Canons of the sixth Council, were
made by other Bishops in the time of Justinian, long after that Council, and
therefore are falsely fathered upon that.


Heart. But is not Honorius condemned by those Canons, whosoever made them?


Rainoldes. He is not as much as named in any of them, Can. patru^^
Constantinop. in Trullo. can. ^.
save only in the first: where they who named him, have named him so, that
both they have severed them selves from the sixth Council, by which he was
condemned, and have increased the credit of it. For they reckon him amongst the
heads of the Monotheli^es, and say of them all, that the sixth Council did
condemn them justly.


Heart. That Canon sauoureth of corruption, which speaks so of Pope Honorius.


Rainoldes. So. What say you then to the Sexta Synod Constantinop. act. 13.
sixth general Council it se^fe? They do speak of him a great deal more
bitt^rly, reproving his doctrine as the doctrine of heretics, false, wicked,
pestilent. Nor thinking it enough to condemn his doctrine, they curse his name
and person also.


Heart. I say yt the copies of ye sixth general council are corrupted.


Rainoldes. The sixth general Council has handled the cause of the
Monothelite heretics in eightene actions, as they are termed. In the first
action, the eight, and the eleventh: the heretics allege in their own
defense, that Pope Honorius taught as they do. In the twelfth, and thirtenth,
his writings are examined, his heresy discovered, himself condemned, and
cursed. In the sixtenth, seuententh, and eightenth, the sentence which was
given against him, and Honorio haeretico ^nathema.
the curse, are repeated often, again and again, with acclamation of the
Council. Think you that the copies of the actions of the Council are
corrupted in all those places?


Heart. In all, in which Honorius is condemned, or cursed.


Rainoldes. What? and that those places are corrupted in all copies, and that
without difference, all after one sort* al with the same words?


Heart. All? why not? is that impossible?


Rainoldes. Not impossible: yet improbable. But the Synod. Nicaena 2 action. 7.
in definit. Synod.
seventh general Council, which you es^eeme so greatly for their defense of
image worship, this seventh does make no better account of Honorius.


Heart. The seventh general Council is corrupted too.


Rainoldes. But in the Synodus octaua Constantinop. sub Adrian. secund. act. 7.
eight general Council there is rehearsed a speech of Adrian the Pope, which he
had uttered in a council assembled by himself. In that he affirms, that the
Bishops of the east did condemn Honorius with the consent of the Bishop of
Rome.


Heart. The eight general Council is corrupted too.


Rainoldes. But In epist. ad Constantin. August. Synod. sext. act. 18.
Leo the second, who was Pope then when the sixth Council was ended, does
namely confirm this point with these words: we accurse Honorius, who has not
lightened this Apostolic Church with Apostolic doctrine, but by wicked
treachery has labored to subvert the undefiled faith.


Heart. That epistle of Leo is corrupted too.


Rainoldes. But many other learned both Greek and Latin autors, De ration.
temp. and in martyrologio.
Beda, De sept. sacris synod. Graecor.
Psellus, Contra Nicetam.
Vmbertus, In paefat. ad sextam Synod.
Balsamon, Chronic. l. 2.
Marianus Scotus, Sept. Synod. act. 3. in epist. ad ^pisc. and
Tharasius, and the episcopor. ad Tharas.
eastern bishops, yea Pontifical. in v^r. 1 con. secu^d.
your own Pontifical of the Popes lives, make report of it.


Heart. What needs this adoo? It is all answered by Bellarm. controuer. 4.
part. ^. quaest. 1.
Father Robert in a word. For either these autors are corrupted them selves, or
they were deceived by the copies of the sixth council being corrupted.


Rainoldes. The saying of Tully (I see) is very true: Cic. ad Luc. epist. lib.
5.
He that is once gone beyond the bounds of modesty, must lustily be impudent.
De hierar. ecclesiast. lib. 4.
Albertus Pighius, an Archpapist, intending to prove (in his books of the holy
princehood of the Church,) that in all causes of faith and religion the Pope is
the sovereign judge of all Christians, whom they are bound to hear and follow:
because it was absurd, he thought, and very dangerous to attribute so great a
power to one man, unless ye man were such, as might not err in faith, cap. 6.
and 7.
therefore he took upon him to bring in this doctrine that the prayer of
Christ for Peter's faith not to fail, does privilege the Pope from falling into
any heresy. Whereupon, as in general he denied that the Pope may be an
heretic, cap. 8.
though all Divines and Canonistes (by his confession) grant it: so, to cleanse
Honorius thereof in particular, he said that the copies of the sixth Council,
which made against him, were corrupted. This dealing of Pighius was greatly
misliked by learned men of his own side, Pighius praefat. in diatrib. de actis
sext. and sept. synod.
in so much yt one of them reproved him for it in a public assembly, and wished
him to recant it. They alleged against him, that Honorius was condemned and
pronounced an heretic by two general Councels, the sixth, and the seventh:
wherofthe authority ought to be held as sacred. But Pighius was so far from
being moved therewith, that he wrote a De actis sextae and septimae synodi,
quod sint parengrapha and minime germana* Alberti Pighii Diatribe.
new treatise against those two Councels, affirming them to be corrupted: and
in heat of zeal for the Popes quarrel he called the sixth Council Ter
execrandum concilium.
a most cursed Council. Here the Councels case and peril that was like to
fall on all autours, if such hot heads might make such desperate answers, did
stir up the spirit of Lib. de ^exta, septima and octaua synodo.
Franciscus Torrensis to write against Pighius: whom he has confuted, and
proved that Honorius was in deed an heretic, condemned by the Council
justly. Since the which time though Con^^. Brent. lib. 2.
Hosius a Cardinal, and Annot. in Platin. vit. Honor.
Onuphrius a Friar, men of hard foreheads, have taken Pighius part: yet neither
have they strengthened the reasons of Pighius, shaken in pieces by Torrensis;
and other of your Doctors more ingenuous and sound, namely Sanction. eccles.
clas^. 1. in propugnaculo sextae synodi.
Iouerius, Locor. the ^l^^gicor. l. 6. c. 8.
Canus, De^ens. f^dei. Trident. l ^.
Andradius, and De just (...) lib. 2. cap. 23.
Alfonsus a Castro, have showed their mislike of Pighius and Honorius both.
Yea, ^ur countriman In his Det^^tion lib ^.
Harding, who would not grant so much of any other Pope, yet granted of
Honorius, that he may be justly burdened with heresy, and fell in deed into
it. But now, behold, a new gamster, a Jesuit, Father Robert, does set upon the
matter fresh, and teaches in his solemn lectures at Rome, that Opinio vera
est, posse esse haereticum.
it is true, the Pope may be an heretic: marry Probabile est, and pi^ credi
potest, hereticum (...) non posse.
it is probable, and godly to be thought, that he cannot be an heretic. A
strange resolution, and fit for a Jesuit. Yet to show how probable he can
make that seem which he confesses to be false, by holding the contrary
thereof to be true: he says somewhat for every one of those Popes that are
charged with heresy; and for Pope Honorius he deals more impudently then
Pighius himself. For he touches not the credit of the sixth, or seventh
Council, only; but all that come in his way: Councels, Popes, Gr^ekes,
Latins, Historians, Divines, either they are corrupted, or abused by
corruption. Well may the opinion, which Father Robert says for, be probable
and false both. But this of Honorius, by which he would confirm it, is (out of
all doubt) though false, yet not probable.


Heart. It is probable enough, as Father Robert handles it. For streams may be
corrupted as easily as the fountain, or take infection at least from the
fountain being corrupted. Now the fountain as it were, whence the rest have
drawn it, is the sixth Council. And he says, that there the name of Honorius
was thrust in amongst the names of other heretics, by malicious men, of spite
against the Pope. Whereof he brings two proofs. One, that Anastasius
witnesses it to have been so, out of Theophanes. An other, that the Greeks
adventured sometimes to corrupt books: as ^ext. synod. Constantinop. act. 3.
the same Council declares by their practices.


Rainoldes. The Council declares that there were some copies of a former
Council, that had been corrupted by heretics among the Greeks. But, as evil
dealing does still leave steps behind it, whereby it may be traced out, Act.
3. and 14.
their corruption was discovered both by circumstances of the thing, and by the
manner of writing, and by conference with other copies. Now in these places of
the sixth Council in which Honorius is touched: you can show no token of any
such suspicion. Nay, the tokens all are clear to the contrary: even yt which
you allege of the Greeks convicted to have corrupted books. For if they had
corrupted so much of the Council in so many places: it is very likely that
they would have also corrupted those places, wherein they are noted and
discredited for such corruptions. Neither does Anastasius report out of
Theophanes, that the Greeks did so. Perhaps Father Robert did dream out of
Onuphrius, that he had said so. But, although Onuphrius say more in that point
then truth did afford: yet he says not that. As for Anastasius: he is so far
from saying it, that he gainesayeth it rather. For, Anastas. bibl^^othecar. in
vit. Leon. 2.
in his story of the Popes lives, he sets Honorius down amongst the
heretics who were condemned by the sixth Council. The same is confirmed F^an.
Torrensis de. sext. sept. and octau. synod^.
in an old copy of the seventh Council, which he translated out of Greek,
and left it in the Popes library. And at the eight Council he was him self
present, and put it into Latin most diligently and faithfully: there a Pope
does witness it. To be short, Torrensis adds moreover touching Anastasius,
that if he had suspected the Greeks to have corrupted any of the places
concerning this matter: he would have given warning (no doubt) of it also, as
he has done of other. Wherefore, though ill disposed men amongst the Greeks
corrupted books sometimes: yet the consent of copies, chiefly of the Latin
Scriptus est hic codextem poribus Se^gii primi Papae: reconditus in patriarchio
ecclesiae ^omanae. Concilior. Tom. 2. in calce sextae synodi.
written shortly after the time of the Council and laid up at Rome, the
coherence of things, the agreement of autours, and circumstances of the story,
do make it very unlikely that they dealt so with the sixth Council in the
matter of Honorius. It were pity that all evidences of men should be
distrusted, because there are some evidences falsified by evil men. But Father
Robert deals, as Alexander the great: who, when he could not undo the knot
of Gordius, did cut it a sunder with his sword.


Heart. Your knot of Honorius (I wisse) is not so hard, but that he might undo
it without this sword: and he does so. For Bellarmi^. co^trouers. 4. pa^^ 2.
quaes^. 1.
he shows, that the epistles of Honorius to Sergius, on which the sixth
Council adjudged him an heretic, are both wisely written, and Nullum con^inent
errorem.
sound, without error. Wherefore though we should grant that he had
sentence given against him by the Council: it follows not thereof, that he
was an heretic. They might condemn him unjustly.


Rainoldes. Take heed. You were better let the knot alone then undo it so.
This medicine will do more harm, then the disease. In deed a great
Turrecre^^^. in ^umm. de ecclesia l. 2. c. 93.
Cardinal, on whom you rely much, would play fast and loose with it in such
sort upon the speech of Pope Adrian: who says that Honorius was cursed by the
Bishops of the East after his death, because he was accucused of heresy. For
hereupon he gathers, that Honorius was not an heretic while he lived, nor
cursed by the Pope, or Bishops of the west. But it follows straight in
Alloquut. 3. (...) concilio ^omano, lecta in Synod. act. 7.
the speech of Adrian, (which the Cardinal cut off,) that unless the Pope had
consented to it, the Bishops of the east would not have condemned him.
Moreover, the acts of the Counc^ll show, how Bishops of the west were also
Sext. Synod. Const^ntinop. (...).
present, and Act. 17. and 18.
subscribed. So that the sentence (given against Honorius) was given by the
Council, and by the Pope him self, not by the eastern Bishops only. Wherefore
if the epistles of Honorius were sound, on which, as unsound, he was condemned
of heresy: then a general Council confirmed by the Pope did err in
condemning him. And if you grant this, as you must by consequent: you betraye
the strongest castle of Popery, to save a captains honor. For men of
judgment will think, that the doctrine of the reformed Churches may be sound,
for which as unsound the Council of Trent confirmed by the Pope has condemned
us. They might condemn us unjustly.


Heart. Not so. For they examined and knew very perfitly the doctrine of the
reformed Churches, as you call them.


Rainoldes. What? And did the other condemn and curse the doctrine of Honorius
a Pope: and did they not examine and know it very perfitly?


Heart. If this do not stand with the Councels credit: Father Robert makes an
other answer yet, which may be liked better. Namely, that the epistles were
perhaps Portas^is episto^l^sunt con^ic^^.
counterfeited: not written by Honorius, but by some heretic in his name. And
so might the Council condemn the doctrine justly, but err in the person.


Rainoldes. Yet were this also a blemish of the Council, to condemn a Pope in
steed of an heretic. But they have not deserved to be touched with it. For,
the Sext. synod. Constantinop. act. 12.
former epistle, upon the proof whereof they did proceed to sentence, they saw
it conferred with the authe^tical Latin copy, and found it to agree. Beside
that, Maximus in disputat. contr. Pyr^hum.
ye author whom your selves allege to clear Honorius, confessed it to be
Honorius his own: and he confessed it then, when the secretary of Honorius,
who wrote it with his own hand, was alive, of good account, and bare witness
of it. The Sext. synod. Constantinop. ^ction. 13.
later was approved to the Council, as the former: though they stood less
about it, as needing less inquiry, when he was now already cast. But it has
all presumptions for it, so probable, that not as much as Hierar. (...). ib. 4.
cap ^.
Pighius could suspect it, though he suspected the other. Neither do I think
that father Robert thought them in deed to be counterfeited. But as a man that
is in danger of drowning does snatch at every bulrush to save his life, if it
may be: so he, seeing the Pope made subject to heresy by the sixth general
Council, does catch at every fancy, whereby he has some hope to help him.
The fancy of Pighius is, that the Council did not condemn Honorius: the
copies of it are corrupted. Defens. (...). Trident. lib. 2.
Andradius checketh that, and says he was condemned: but the Council erred in
condemning him, as judging him to err, who did not. De sext. sept. and octau.
Synod.
Torrensis varieth from them both, and comes in with a finer quirke: to weete,
that Pope Honorius did consent with heretics, but, as a private man; and not,
as Pope. This In the places before quoted.
Canus, and Alfonsus, and Harding rest upon, and Ch^onog^. lib. 3.
Genebrard after them: who adds yet withal (for fear of the worst) that the
heretical epistles of Honorius were counterfeited perhaps. All these has
Father Robert, and flitteth up and down, to this, to that, amidst them: at the
last, as one half gone and past sense, he lays hold on the weakest, even on
the bulrush of Pighius. Now, if that of Pighius be so inconvenient, that the
force of truth does drive you back from it: you must retire also from that, as
inconvenient, whereof it does follow. That is the false principle, wherein you
join with him, and Pighius pr^fat. in diatrib. and in dia^^ibe de actis sext.
and se^^. Synod.
he thereon does reason thus: Christ prayed for the Pope, in that he prayed for
Peter, his faith not to fail: therefore the Pope cannot err. The Pope cannot
err: therefore Pope Honorius was not an heretic. Honorius was not an
heretic: therefore the sixth general Council did not condemn him. For the
conclusion hereof, being false, does argue a falsehood in that which does
infer it. That is the first proposition: which you must amend, and reason
thus of the contrary. The sixth general Council did condemn Honorius:
therefore he was an heretic. Pope Honorius was an heretic: therefore the Pope
may err. The Pope may err: Christ therefore prayed not for the Pope, in that
he prayed for Peter. For had he prayed for the Pope, then the faith of Pope
Honorius had not failed. But his faith failed. Christ therefore prayed not for
him.


Heart. The third Division.
You shall not teach me how to reason. The first proposition of Pighius is
good, though it be admitted that his conclusion is fawtie. For the learned
Catholics, albeit they grant that Honorius was an heretic and condemned
justly by the sixth general Council: yet they hold that Christ prayed for the
Pope, and that therefore the Pope cannot err; but how? Christ did not respect
S. Peter's person, but his office, when he prayed for him that his faith should
not fail: for it was to this end, that he being converted might strengthen and
confirm his brethren. Now, because the Church, for whose sake that privilege
was given unto Peter, should need to be strengthened afterward no less then
in his time: therefore was it given to him, not as to him alone for himself,
but as for his successors in the Church of Rome too. So, the Pope is
priuileged from falling into error by the prerogative of his office, through
the ordinance of Christ: that would have all Bishops and Pastors of the world
to depend on him for their confirmation in faith and ecclesiastical regiment.
Whereof it ensues that he cannot err in respect of his office, although in
respect of his person he may: or (to speak it after the phrase of the Er^orem
esse duplicem: alte^u^ personalem. al^erum iudiciale^. Melchior Canus locorum
Theolog. lib. 6. cap. 8.
Schoolmen) he may err personally, but not iudicially. For error is twofold:
personal, and judicial. Error personal, is the private error of a man:
judicial, the public. Into public errors Popes can not fall: they may into
private. I mean, As the Rhemists expound that distinction of Canu^: in their
Annotat. ^n Luke ^2.^1.
they may err in person, understanding, private doctrine, or writings: but
they cannot nor shall not ever iudicially conclude or give definitive sentence
for falsehood or heresy against the Catholic faith, in their Consistories,
Courts, Councels, decrees, deliberations, or consultations kept for decision
and determination of such controversies, doutes, or questions of faith as
shall be proposed unto them: because Christ's prayer and promise protecteth them
therein for confirmation of their brethren. And hereupon we say the Pope may
err, as a private man, but not as Pope. Which, although you call it a quirke,
and fancy, yet has it pith and weight. For [Pope] does note the office: [a
private man] the person. And any man of sense may see the difference between
the person and the office, as well in doctrine, as life. Liberius in
persecution might yield, Marcellinus for fear might commit idolatry, Honorius
might fall to heresy, and more then all this, some Judas might creep into the
office: and yet all this without prejudice of the office and seat, in which
(says S. Epist. 166. in fine.
Augustine) our Lord has set the doctrine of truth. Ioh. 11.50
Caiphas by privilege of his office prophesied right of Christ: but according
to his own faith and knowledge, knew not Christ. The Evangelists and other
penne^s of holy write, for the execution of that function had the assistance of
God, and so far could not possibly err: but that Luke, Mark, Solomon, or
the rest might not err in other their private writings, that we say not. It
was not the personal-


Rainoldes. You need not prove a thing confessed. Common sense does teach it.
A ruler of a company may be a good man and an evil magistrate. King Alexander
had two friends, of whom he called Crat^^^^ (...).
one, the kings friend; Hephaestio (...).
the other, Alexanders friend. The magistrate and the man, the king and
Alexander, the office and the person, we do not deny a difference betwixt
them. Neither did I mean that every such answer is a quirke and fancy. Pope
c. quia quor^dam. extrauag. Johan. 23. de verborum significatione.
John the two and twentieth, when (upon a controversy about the beggerie of
Friars) there was alleged against him a saying of Pope Innocentius the fifth:
Dicimus, quo^ hoc dix^rit, non vt Papa, sed vt frater Petrus d^ Tarantasia, in
quadam postilla sua.
he said, that Innocentius had said it, not as Pope, but as Friar Peter of
Tarantasia (that was his name, as a private man) in one of his postils. And
this was well said of John. For when Innocentius was Pope, he had no leisure
(I trow) to write postils: it is likely that he wrote them before he was Pope,
when he was Friar Peter of Tarantasia. But as that distinction of [Pope] and
[priuate man] is used by your doctors in the case of Honorius: so I said and
say again, it is a quirke, a vain quirke and fancy. For that, which Honorius
wrote, and was condemned for, he wrote it as Pope, not as a private man.


Heart. You mean, that he wrote it when he was Pope: that is true. But he wrote
it not as Pope.


Rainoldes. I mean, that he wrote it as Pope: and I will prove it if you will
give me leave. But first to take up that which you have laid to disprove it:
you allege that Caiphas was exempt from error, nay prophesied right of
Christ, by privilege of his office. Whereby you would imply the like touching
the Pope. The example agrees very fitly in part. But does it agree (think
you) in that part, in which it must to serve your turn?


Heart. What else? For it is written in the holy gospel, that when the Jews
consulted in a Council what to do with Christ, whether to let let him alone,
or apprehend him: Ioh. 11.44.
Caiphas, being the high Priest of that year, said to them, you know nothing,
neither do you consider, that it is expedient for us, that one man dye for the
people, and the whole nation perish not. And this he said not of himself: but
being the hie priest of that year, he prophesied that Jesus should die for the
nation.


Rainoldes. But it is written also in the holy Gospel, that in an other
Council and consultation of the Jews, wherein they sought unjustly to
condemn the just, when Jesus being asked whether he were Christ, the son of
God, confessed him self to be so: Caiphas, Matt. 26.65.
the hye priest, said, he has blasphemed: what need we witnesses any
further? behold, now you have heard his blasphemy. Was this speech of
Caiphas, a prophecy, or an error?


Heart. What if it were an error?


Rainoldes. How see you not then that Caiphas did not prophecy by privilege of
his office? For so he should have prophesied in this Council too, in which he
sat as hye Priest, he spoke as hye Priest, and to him as hye Priest the
Council did assent in giving sentence against Christ. But that amongst many
mischiefs and falshoodes he spoke the words of truth once, in a sense, not
which he meant, (for he meant wickedly) but which his speech yielded: there
was a work of God in it. Who, having sent his son, a savior to the Jews,
as he stirred them up to know him, and receive him, by Angels, by wonders, by
voices from heaven, by Matt. 2.1.
wise men from the east, Luc. 2.36.
a prophetisse in the temple, Matt. 3.1. and the rest* through the whole st^^ies
of the E^^ngelists.
John Baptist in the wilderness, by men, women, children, all sorts of persons,
yea by ye devils them selves: so he made the hye Priest to bear witness of
him, by giving out an O^^cle under doutfull words, to make the Jews more
inexcusable, that by his own mouth the naughty servant might be judged.
Wherefore not the ordinary privilege of office, but an extraordinary motion
of God, did guide the tongue of Caiphas to prophecy of Christ: as Number. 22.28.
he opened the mouth of the ass of Balaam, to reprove her master. And you,
who would gather an ordinary privilege of the Popes office by that
extraordinary prophesying of Caiphas: do make a like reason, as if you should
conclude that ye Popes horse can speak, because that Balaams ass did. Nay,
you might conclude this on greater reason. For Balaams ass spoke twice:
Caiphas prophesied but once.


Heart. Your similitude is odious. I marvel why you use such.


Rainoldes. Because your reason is absurd: and I would feign have you see it.


Heart. Absurd? He that should call it absurd in our schools, would be thought
him self absurd. For, it is grounded upon a proportion betwixt the hie Priest,
and the Pope; the Church of the Jews, and of the Christians.


Rainoldes. Then by a reason of proportion (belike) the Pope condemns Christ,
as Caiphas did; and vexes Christians, as Act. 4.^.
Annas. Do you allow hereof in your schools also?


Heart. Yet again? I see you will never leave these odious comparisons. The
Pope, to Caiphas, and Annas?


Rainoldes. You are a strange man: who go about to prove by the example of
Caiphas, that the Pope can not err in office; and are angry with me for
touching the weakness of your reason therein.


Heart. Well. Staple^. princ. doctr. l. 2. c. 12.
I grant that Caiphas had not that privilege. For it was not promised to the
hie Priests of the Jewish Church, but till the coming of Christ: at which
time the Prophets showed that it should fail them. For Jeremy says thereof:
Ier. 4.9,
In that day the heart of the king shall perish, and the heart of the Princes
and the Priests shall be astonished. And Ezekiel, more plainly: Ezekiel. 7.26*
The law shall perish from the Priest, and counsel from the Elders. But, till
that time they had it, and did teach the truth according to the law, and were
to be obeyed in all things which they taught.


Rainoldes. Yea? What say you then of Vrias, who was hie Priest under king
Achaz, six hundred years before Christ? He ceased to sacrifice on the altar
of God, appointed by the law: and, 2. King. 16.16.
having made a new one like to the altar of Damascus, he sacrificed upon it.
Whereby he defiled himself and the land with rebellion against the Lord.


Heart. I say that Vrias did err in doing so. But we may refute this reason of
yours by denying that Vrias did succeed Aaron, and was of the tribe of Leui.


Rainoldes. In deed Hosius contr. Brent. lib. 2.
a Cardinal answers that you may refute it so in one word. And that is
showed plainelye enough (as he says) by those words of scripture which are
written of Jeroboam; 1. King. 12.31.
He made Chapels in hie places, and Priests of the lowest of the people, who
were not of the sons of Leui. But this refutation is as fit against our
reason of Vrias: as if a man should say that Bishops in England are not
Protestants, because the Bishops of France are Papists. For, the Priests,
which Jeroboam made of the lowest of the people not of the sons of Leui, were
in the kingdom of Israel, at Bethel and Dan: and Vrias was Priest in the
temple at Jerusalem, in the kingdom of Judah. The thing is apparent by For
Ieroboams Priests, 1. King. 12.29. For Vrias, 2. King. 16.2.
the very course and text of the scripture. And The Jews in S^der Olamzuta
Lira comment. in 4. Reg. 16. Nicephor. hist eccles. lib. 2. cap. 4. Genebrard.
Chronogr. lib. 1. Sig^^ius de rep. Hebraeorum lib. 5. c. 2.
they, who would save the Priesthood most gladly from ye shameful stain,
agree that he was hie Priest, the successor of Aaron.


Heart. Let it be admitted that he was so. The stain of his fault is not so
foul as you make it. For what did he else, but that which we read Pope
Marcellinus to have done? Who, in the horrible persecution of Christians under
Maximian and Diocletian, took incense for fear, and offered it to Idols. Vrias
did transgress the law of God, not wilfully, but through the frailty of the
flesh: not of his own accord, but by the kings commandment. Wherefore it came
rather of fear, then of rashness or ignorance, that he offended.


Rainoldes. So did it Mat. 26.70.
in Peter, that he denied Christ. And may you therefore say, that Peter was
priuileged not to deny Christ? I marvel that you feel not the grossenes of
your dealing. You say that hie Priests are priuileged by their office to
persevere in true doctrine. It is showed, that they fall to manifest Idolatry.
You grant they do so: but they do it for fear, you say. Where is the
privilege then? For God, to whom so ever he gives any benefit as it were by
privilege: he gives them a privilege withal of special favor to free them
from the lettes that might debar them of the benefit. 2. King. ^0. ver. 1.
Ezekias was sick of a pestilent disease, whereof he should have died. ver. 6.
God did add fifteen years to his life. ver. ^.
He took away his sickness, that he might enjoy it. S. Act. 27. ver. 20.
Paul was in danger to be lost with shipwreck, and all the rest who sailed
with him. ver. 24.
God did give to him his own life, and theirs. ver. 43.
He kept them all from danger and brought them safe unto the land. Wherefore if
God had given a privilege of true doctrine to the hie Priests, he would have
given them a privilege of grace too, that no deceit of flesh should make them
fall away from it. But they might fall away from it by sundry means, to
error, yea to Idolatry. For if they might for fear, why not for love also,
1. King. 1^^
as Solomon did? If for love: why not for hope? If for hope: why not for
hatred? If for any of these, why not for other causes? It remains therefore,
that either the hie Priests had not that privilege: or, if they had it, they
had it with exception, that they should not err, unless either fear, or
other cause did move them to it. Which if you affirm of Popes in like sort, as
you seem to do by the example of Marcellinus: I will agree with you. For I am
persuaded that no Pope can err, unless he be moved thereto by some cause,
either blindness of mind, or lewdnes of heart, or such humane affections. Nihil
in terra sine causa fit. Job. 5.6.
Nothing in the earth is done without a cause, says your old translation.
Howbeit, for Vrias, perhaps you do him injury to say that he offended as
Marcellinus did, of fear. For it appears not by circumstances of ye text,
but yt he was as willing to transgress the law, as was the king to bid him. 2.
King. 16. ver. 10.
When king Achaz saw the altar that was at Damascus, he sent to Vrias the
Priest the pattern of the altar and the facion of it, and all the workmanship
thereof. And Vrias the Priest made an altar, in all points according as king
Achaz had sent from Damascus: so did Vrias the Priest against king Achaz came
from Damascus. What a ready mind was here in the Priest, who stayed not to
speak with the king at his return, to dissuade him from it: but made the
heathnish altar, against he came from Damascus? ^
And king Achaz commanded Vrias the Priest, saying, upon this great altar, set
on fire the morning burnt-offring and evening meat-offring, and the kings burnt
offering and his meat-offring, with the burnt-offring of all the people of the
land, and their meat-offring, and their drinke-offrings: and sprinckle upon it
all the blood of the burnt-offring, and all the blood of the sacrifice. As for
the brazen altar, it shall be for me to enquire. And Vrias did according to all
that king Achaz had commanded. Behold, as Moses was faithful in all the house
of the Lord: so was Vrias the Priest in all that Achaz did command. Such a
Prince, such a Priest.


Heart. Great was the privilege of the hie Priesthood, and chair of Moses, in
the old law. Yet nothing like the Churches and Peter's prerogative. Wherefore
howsoever Vrias did offend: The Pope cannot fall away from the faith. For
Damasus in Pontificali.
even Marcellinus himself, who did commit idolatry for fear of death, yet
repented afterward and shed his blood for Christ.


Rainoldes. But in the mean season he did commit idolatry by your own
confession. So that, this example must force you to yield that the Pope may
err, though not abide in error.


Heart. Nay rather, that he cannot teach error, though he may err. As Pope
Marcellinus, though he did commit, he did not teach idolatry.


Rainoldes. Yes, he did teach it, by committing it. For, to teach, is to
deliver the things that one knows, to him, who knows them not. The which
that we may receive, that is, learn, God has given us two senses: the
hearing, and the sight. We hear words: we see deeds. The ministers of
Christ, whom he has ordained to teach the wisdom of his Father, the way to
life eternal, ought to teach by both: that men may be edified by their
words, which they hear; and by their deeds, which they see. Therefore S.
Paul requires in Tim. 4.12.
Timothee, in Tit. 2.7.
Titus, and in 1. Tim. 3.2. Tit. 1.7.
all Bishops, that both their life be good, and their doctrine sound. And him
self had ranns this race so before them, that, when he exhorted the
Philippians to do whatsoever things are true, honest, just, pure, worthy love,
and of good report: he was able to say, that by his preaching and living they
had learned them; Phil. 4.9^
which things you have heard and you have seen in me. Yea, it is so forcible
to teach by living well: y^ In act. Aposto^or. hom. 30.
Chrysostom (commending S. Paul in yt point) prefers it before the other. It
is very easy (says he) to teach by words. Teach me by thy life. This is the
best teaching. For words do not so stick unto the mind, as works. And if
thy work be not good, thou shall not only not profit, but also hurt more by
speaking, and it were better to hold thy peace. Why? Because thou show me
the work so, as if it could not be done. For I think with my self, if thou
who speak so great things, do them not: much more am I to be excused, who
speak no such thing. Therefore says the Prophet, Psalm. 50.16.
unto the wicked man says God, why take thou upon thee to declare my
ordinances? For this is greater harm, when a man teaches well in words, and
fights against it with his works. Thus you may see that Bishops do teach by
their life, not by their preaching only. Wherefore, though Marcellinus the
Pope did not teach idolatry by word: yet by his fact he did. And so your
answer falls that he did commit, but not teach idolatry.


Heart. I grant that he did teach it after a sort: The fourth division.
but not as I meant. I meant he taught it not by preaching. In that he could
not err. For as I said before, that the Pope in respect of his person may
err, not in respect of his office: so I say farther, that his office
priuilegeth him in his sayings, not in his doings. Matt. 23.2.
The Scribes and the Pharisees (says our Savior Christ) do sit upon the
chair of Moses. All things therefore, whatsoever they shall say unto you,
observe ye, and do ye. But according to their works do ye not. For they say
and do not.


Rainoldes. What? will you also make odious comparisons of Popes to Scribes and
Pharisees?


Heart. O, I touch you now: and therefore you would interrupt me. In deed that
sentence of Christ does confound you: no marvel you are loath to hear it. For
were the Popes never so evil, even monsters, as Do vitis Pont.. in Benedicto.
quart, and Christophor. prim.
Platina does call some few of them, and they might be so for their lives: yet
they were not worse then the Scribes and Pharisees.


Rainoldes. Believe me, but they were. Beware of Pope John. All the Scribes and
Pharisees might cast their cappes at him. He was a peerlesse monster.


Heart. You are ever interrupting, to put me from my argument.


Rainoldes. I cannot abide, that you should detract from the Popes. Nay, yet
give them their due. It is a fault (they say) to belie the devil.


Heart. If some of them were worse then the Scribes and Pharisees: my argument
will hold yet. For (as D. Princip. doct^^nal. l. 5. c. 9.
Stapleton notes out of De ^erbi* Domini se^m. 49.
Austin, Christ, when he said of the Scribes and Pharisees, They sit upon the
chair of Moses, meant not them alone, as though he sent Christians to the
school of the Jews to learn religion there: but by the name of Scribes and
Pharisees he signified, that certain in his Church would say and not do; and
by the person of Moses he signified him self, for Moses was a figure of him.
In like sort S. In Iohannem homil. 85.
Chrysostom and In Ezech. hom. 7.
Origin expound it too. He charge us therefore, to hear wicked preachers,
professing God with their words, but denying him in their deeds: All things
(says he) whatsoever they shall say unto you, observe ye and do ye. Now the
cause and reason thereof is given in this, because they sit upon the chair, As
D. Stapleton expounds it, Quia super cathe^^am sedent: quia locu Christi
tenent.
because they hold the room of Christ, as Scribes and Pharisees did of Moses.
For so does our Savior reason as it were: They sit upon the chair; therefore,
that which they say must be observed, and done. Epist. 166. in ^ine.
S. Austin handling these words has excellently noted it. Christ (says he)
has made his people secure concerning wicked Prelates, that men should not for
their sakes forsake the chair of wholesome doctrine, in which even they who be
wicked, are constrained to speak good things. And why are they constrained?
For (says he) they be not their own things, but the things of God, which
they speak. And how may this be? Because (says he) in the chair of unity,
God has set the doctrine of truth. And by what words has he set it? or
where? He adds: Therefore of Prelates, who do their own evil things and
speak the good things of God, he says in the gospel, Do that they say, but
do not that they do, for they say and do not. Thus says Austin. In the same
sense are these words expounded both by Epist. 137. De verbis Domin. sermon. 49.
Tractat. in Ioh. 46. lib. de pastorib. cap. 10.
Austin himself again, and by In Ioh. hom. 85.
Chrysostom, and by In Ezech. hom. 7.
Origin: whose words I pass over for breuities sake. Wherefore to conclude,
in despite of heretics, a sure undoubted certainty of doctrine and faith is no
less knit to the chair of Christ, then to the chair of Moses, Ipsi
successioni Apostolicae, non minus quam Aaronic^
to the very succession of the Apostles then of Aaron: nay rather much more,
by how much Heb. 8.6.
the new testament is established on better promises then the old. Mark
therefore Christ's words: observe ye, and do ye. For Dogmata fidei seruamus:
praecepta mor^^ facimus.
we observe points of faith: we do precepts of manners. In them both we must
be obedient even to Pharisees, that is, to wicked men and hypocrites, sitting in
the chair, that is, Succedentibus in sede ^ Apostolorum.
succeeding into the seat of the Apostles, or Christ. Moreover, mark the
word, observe, that is to keep those things which they command to be
observed: Non alia doce^t quam quae seruanda sunt.
because they teach not other things but such as are to be observed. And in
this respect does Christ allow of them. For so the Pharisees also them selves,
though they were wicked men and hypocrites, yet (as In Matthaeum homil. 73.
Chrysostom notes) they did not preach their own things, but those things
which God had commanded by Moses. And therefore since Christ could not commend
them for their manners, he does it for his chair and doctrine. Wherefore Qui
cathedram tenet Apostolicam.
he that sittteth in the chair of the Apostles, does speak not of himself,
but of the chair; that is, not his own things, but the things of God: and
therefore must be heard whether he say and do both, or only say, and not do.
Hence it is, that Contr. literas Petilian. l. 2. c. ^^
Austin says against Petilian: Neither for the Pharisees did our Lord command
the chair of Moses to be forsaken: in which chair verily he figured his own.
For he warns the people to do that which they ^ay, and not to do that which
they do: that the holiness of the chair be not forsaken, nor the unity of
the flock divided, for the naughty Pastors. Do you see how much the Fathers
attribute to the chair? You were in ha^te ere-while to interrupt my argument.
Now what say you to it?


Rainoldes. Your argument is hansome a far off, at first sight. But if a man
come near it, and vewe it, and feel it: he cannot choose but grow in great
mislike of it; it is so misshapen. Libr. de reprehens. Sophistar.
Aristotle compares the arguments of Sophisters to weak ill-featured persons:
who by stuffing out and tricking up them selves, do seem to be of strong and
comely plight of body. The most of your Doctors arguments be such: and this is
one of them. It seems strong, and comely, as you do bumbast it with fancies
of your own, and deck it with the names of Austin, Chrysostom, and Origin.
But strippe it out of this apparel, and all the limbs of it are full of sores
and blisters, worse then the French evil.


Heart. This is a spiteful speech, and a malicious sclander. But you keep your
wont.


Rainoldes. If I speak untruly, convince me of untruth. If not: why use you
these reproaches? This was your argument out of Doctor Stapleton* if you will
give me leave to strip it. The Scribes and the Pharisees were to be obeyed in
all things which they said, because they sat in the chair of Moses, that
is, Successioni Aaronicae.
they did succeed Aaron. The Popes, (howsoever they live,) do sit in Christ's
chair, that is, S^cce^entibu^ in sedem Apo^^olorum.
they are successors of the Apostles: which has a greater prerogative. The
Popes must be therefore obeyed much more in all things which they say. But men
might not obey them, if they should err. Therefore they cannot err in any
thing they say. Was not this the very body of your argument?


Heart. It was so, in substance: and what fault find you with it?


Rainoldes. None, but (as I said) that all the limbs of it are full of sores
and blisters. For the first proposition (the contagion whereof infecteth the
whole argument) has two notorious fautes touching the Scribes and Pharisees:
one, that by their sitting in the chair of Moses, is meant that they succeeded
Aaron: an other, that, because they succeeded Aaron, they were to be obeyed in
all things which they said.


Heart. What? did not the Pharisees and Scribes succeed Aaron?


Rainoldes. That is not the question. Yet you may dout of that too. And how do
you prove it?


Heart. Nay, how do you disprove it?


Rainoldes. None succeeded Aaron, in offering sacrifices to God, and teaching
Israel his law, saving Deuteronomy. 33.10.
the tribe of Leui. But the Pharisees might be of other tribes: and were so.


Heart. How prove you that?


Rainoldes. S. Paul was Phil. 3.5.
of the tribe of Benjamin, an Ebrue borne of Ebrues, according to the law a
Pharisee. So was Act 23.6.
his father too. And if the tribes of all, of whom account was made that way,
had been registered: it would be as easily proved of others, as it is of
Benjamin. For whereas there were three sects among the Jews, each differing
from other in points of religion, Pharisees, Sadduces, and Esses: the Philo
Iudaeus, quod quisque bonus sit liber: and, De vita contemplatiua.
Esses avoiding the company of other men, least they should stain their
manners, and living with them selves alone (like to moonkes,) did leave ye
Temple and cities to Pharisees and Sadduces. The Joseph. antiquit* Iudaicar. l.
18. c. 2.
Sadduces were few, and their opinions wicked: in so much, that even the common
people did detest them. The Pharisees in number more, in reputation greater, and
Act. 23.8.
sounder in belief: Act. 2.6.5.
the most exact sect, and Act. 22.3.
coming nearest to the law. Which Joseph. de bello Iud. l. 2. c. 7. and l. 1.
c. 4. Antiq. Iudaic. l. 18. cap. ^.
they expounded in such exact manner, and seemed holy withal: that they bare
the sway for religion amongst the multitude; yea, cities flowed unto them,
accounting them the best both in life and doctrine. Wherefore since the Pharisees
were so well esteemed, and did swarm in Jury: it is not to be thought, but
that other tribes had some of that profession, chiefly the tribe of Judah.


Heart. If Judah, if Benjamin, if other tribes had of them: much more by all
likelihood had the tribe of Leui. And them might our Savior specially mean,
not generally all, in saying, The Pharisees do sit upon the chair of Moses.
As, if I should say that the Catholics sit upon the chair of Christ: you must
not think I mean of Catholics who be scholars, but of Catholics who be
teachers; of Catholic Priests, and Bishops.


Rainoldes. Your answer has reason. For Act. 22.^.
as S. Paul was a Pharise-scholer; so was Gamaliel a Pharise-teacher. And,
that there were Pharisees of ye Priests and Levites, ye scripture shows,
saying, that Ioh. 1. ver. 1^.
the Jews sent Priests and Levites from Jerusalem to talk with John Baptist:
and ver. 24.
they who were sent, were of the Pharisees. Wherefore, that the Pharisees did
succeed Aaron: the likelihood is great. That the Scribes: greater. For, they
Mat. 7.29.
expounded and taught the law of God, (whence they were also called now (...).
Luc. 5.17.
Doctors of the law, now (...). Luke 7.30.
Lawiers) by duty and office. Whereupon, when Herod desired to know where
Christ should be borne: Matt. 2.4.
he gathered together all the chief Priests and Scribes of the people to
learn it of them. It is most likely then, that they succeeded Aaron too: as
did their predecessor Ezra Ezr. 7.6.
the Scribe, prompt in the law of Moses. Yet your Doctor Chronograph^ae lib. 2.
Genebrard says, that the Scribes were lightly of the tribe of Simeon: and
they with the Pharisees are said to have sat in the chair of Moses, as who had
thrust them selves into it being empty, while the Priests abusing the riches
of the Church did forsake their duty.


Heart. If Genebrard, or any other of our Doctors, have a conceit of his own:
what is that to me? I follow the received s^ntence of the Church, that the
Scribes and Pharisees came into the chair of Moses by succession, and not by
intrusion. But why do you, agreeing with me in this point, reprove it in my
argument?


Rainoldes. I reproved it not. The point which I reproved, was that you
expounded the words of Christ so: They sat in ^^thed^ae Mo^sis, succes^io^i
Aaronic^.
the chair of Moses, that is, they did succeed Aaron. Which exposition is
erroneous, and very dangerous to the truth: though the danger of it not so
apparent in it self, as in the consequent. For it is the mother of a greater
error.


Heart. And how would you have it expounded, I pray?


Rainoldes. According to the word and meaning of Christ. The Scribes and the
Pharisees sit in the chair of Moses: that is, they teach the law of Moses. For
as Deuteronomy. 5.31. and 6.1.
Moses him self received it of God to teach it the children of Israel, and he
did so: in like sort Nehem. 8.8.
the Priests and Levites after him were used to read it in the assemblies of
the people, and to expound it. To this end their synagogues were built in every
city, and every Sabbat day they met there, as it is written, Act. 15.21.
Moses of old time has in every city them that preach him being read in the
Synagogues every Sabbat day. Now they, who did teach, were wont to teach
sitting: which appears by our Saviors example Mat. 26.25. Ioh. 8.2.
in the temple, Luc. 4.20.
in the synagogues, Mat. 5.1. Luc. 5.3.
in other places. Wherefore the Scribes and Pharisees (of whom there were some
Luc. 5.17.
in every town of Galile, and Jury, and Jerusalem, to discharge this duty)
are said to have (...).
sat in the seat of Moses (or chair, as we term it) because they did teach
the same which Moses did, even the law of God delivered to Moses.


Heart. The matter is not great, whether you expound it thus or as we do.


Rainoldes. Yes. For it follows of your exposition that the Scribes and
Pharisees said well in all things which they said, because they did succeed
Aaron: and so, that Successioni adiuncta fidei and doctrinae indu^^tata
firmit^^.
succession (which is the mark you shoot at) has certainty of doctrine and
faith knit unto it. Whereas the right lesson, which you should gather thence,
is, that the Scribes and Pharisees said well in all things which they said out
of the word of God* and so that Gods word is simply true and certain; but men
ordained to teach it must be heard no farther th^n they agree with it. And this
might D. Stapleton have learned of the same Fathers whom he cited* but that he
rather reads them to mainetaine a faction, then to learn the truth. For
Austin does interpret the chair, not of succession, but Augustine. epis^. 166.
in sine.
of wholesome doctrine, in the which they sit, who speak the good things of
God: and, Tractat. in Iohann. ^6. and so in all the places quoted by D.
Stapleton.
we are willed to hear God speaking by them, when we are willed to do the
things which they say. For in sitting on Moses chair, they teach the law of
God* therefore by them God does teach. But if they would teach their own
things, (says Austin) hear them not, obey them not. So does In Matthaeum hom.
73.
Chrysostom expound it, Do all things which the Scribes and Pharisees say you
must do: for they preach not their own things, but the things which God
commanded by Moses. So does In Ezekiel. hom. 7.
Origin apply it to them who teach the faith aright: with a special clause,
that Christians, if they see a preacher live ill, and have not to charge him
with teaching ill doctrine; they must frame their lives according to his words
not deeds. If they have not to charge him with teaching ill doctrine: as if he
should say, that who soever teach ill doctrine, they sit not in the chair of
Moses. Let them succeed Aaron never so directly* yet if their doctrine be ill,
they sit not in the chair of Moses. Whereby you may see the wretched state of
yt argument of which you made so great vaunt. For the first proposition, that
the Scribes and Pharisees were to be obeyed in all things which they said,
because they sat in the chair of Moses, that is, they did succeed Aaron: is
foully corrupted in the point of succession. The second, that the Popes do sit
in Christ's chair, that is, they are successors of the Apostles: is tainted
with the same^canker that the first. The conclusion therefore, that men must
obey the Popes in all things which they say; and the consequent thereof, that
they cannot err in any thing they say: are children like their parents, as
sound as the propositions of which they are begotten. The filthiness of all the
which if yet you see not* behold an other light to see it by. The Scribes,
amongst the Jews, were as the Canonists are with you; the Pharisees, as the
Schoolmen: your Chronogr. lib. ^.
Genebrard does match them so. Or, if you like not his judgment therein,
because Schoolmen and Canonists say not true in all things: yet this you must
grant that Priests are with you, as Scribes and Pharisees were with them. For
In Ioh^n. hom. 85.
Chrysostom says, (they be the very words which you did pass over for
breuities sake:) we must not say now, In the chair of Moses, but, in the
chair of Christ do the Priests sit: for they have received his doctrine.
Which point (unless your former argument were naught) will prove that Quia
super ^a^hedram sedent, quia lo^um Christi tenent.
Priests cannot err no more then Popes. For they, who sit in Christ's chair,
have greater prerogative then they who sat in the chair of Moses: Priests,
then Scribes and Pharisees. The Scribes and the Pharisees were to be obeyed in
all things which they said. The Priests must be therefore much more obeyed in
all things. But if they should err, then ought they not to be obeyed.
Therefore they cannot err in any thing they say. Acknowledge you the form of
your own argument? Does not the conclusion follow as necessarily here, as
there? And think you (M. Heart) that Priests cannot err? Think you that your
self are of this perfection? that we ought to obey, both you, and your
companions, in all things which you say? Or if you think not so fondly of
them, so proudly of your self, as (I hope) you do not: then leave Doctor
Stapletons exposition, which infers it; which he patcheth up with the words
of Austin, Chrysostom, and Origin, whereas not one of them meant it. Yield
rather (if you be wedded to Doctors of your own side) unto their authority,
then whom ye Church of Rome has none of greater knowledge and perfiter
judgment for right interpreting of ye scriptures: I mean, John Ferus, and
Arias Montanus. Of whom Ar. Montan. Elucidat. in Matt. 23.
the one says, that Christ taught his disciples to observe and do whatsoever
the Scribes and the Pharisees commanded Ex praescripto legis, id est ex cathedra
Mosis.
by the prescript of the law, that is, out of the chair of Moses: Io. Ferus
comment. in Mart. lib. 3.
the other, that he charge us to obey evil prelates, yet withal he adds
how far we must obey them. Do ye (says he) all things, which they shall say
unto you: but he had told them first, they sit upon the chair of Moses. For
Christ did not mean, that they should observe all the decrees of Pharisees, but
Qua^enus le^^ conso^arent.
so far forth, as they agreed with the law. According whereunto, when he had
showed before also, that Mat. 15.5.
they taught contrary to the law in some points: after certain things
touched between, he added, Mat. 16.6.
Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees. In like sort he said to the Apostles and
their successors; Luc. 10.1^.
He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me:
and, Mat^. 10. verse. 14.
it shall be easier for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, then for
them, who shall not receive you and hear your words. But Matthew had set
down before that Christ chose verse. 1.
twelve, whom he verse. 2. and 5.
called Apostles, and verse. 7.
charged them to preach the gospel. Whereby it appears that the Apostles
must be heard, but so far forth as they be Apostles, that is, as they do
Christ's work, and preach and teach the things which Christ commanded. But if
they teach other things and contrary to Christ: then are they not Apostles
now, but seducers, and therefore not to be heard. O the great light of truth:
which forces even the adversaries not only to perceive it, but also to
reveal it often. So will it force you too: if you have so much grace as Ferus
and Montanus had.


Heart. So much grace, as to say, that if the Apostles teach things contrary
to Christ, they are no Apostles now, but seducers. Do you allow that speech of
Ferus? And might the Apostles be seducers?


Rainoldes. Peter, an Apostle, might say unto Christ, (when he heard him speak
of suffering at Jerusalem,) Matt. 1^. verse. 22.
Master, pity thy self, this shall not be unto thee. And Christ would not
therefore have called him verse. 22.
Satan, had he not thought him a seducer.


Heart. But Christ did give them afterward Act. 2.4.
the holy ghost in greater abundance from heaven: when he sent them to preach
unto all the world.


Rainoldes. But Christ had told them before, that Matt. 10.15.
it should be easier for Sodom and Gomorrha, then for the city that should not
hear their words. Yet Christ himself refused to hear the words of Peter.
Wherefore the exposition of Ferus is good, that Christ meant those words,
which he had willed them to preach, that is, the gospel. Beside that, Ferus
speaks not only of Apostles, but also of their successors. Now though the
Apostles were priuileged afterward by the special graces of the holy ghost to
teach the truth in all things: yet Bishops, who succeeded them, have not that
privilege. You must renounce therefore that erroneous exposition which knitteth
an assured truth of faith and doctrine Ipsi successioni Apo ^^olica.
to the succession of the Apostles, and binds us in all things to obey
Suceedenubus in sedem Apostolorum.
them who succeed into the seat of the Apostles, and says that O^ cathedra^
tenet Apostolicam.
he who sits in the chair of the Apostles, does speak not his own
things, but the things of God. For our Savior meant, that the Scribes and
Pharisees ought to be obeyed in all things which they taught out of the law of
God: not, that they c^uld not err in faith and doctrine, because Successioni
Aaronicae.
they did succeed Aaron.


Heart. I cannot conceive, but that he meant to clear their doctrine from
error. For his words of doing that which they say, because they sit in the
chair of Moses, are rather a warrant for them, in all things which they
teach; then a restraint for others, how far they must obey them.


Rainoldes. His words belong properly to the instruction of hearers: that they
despise not the doctrine of God for the fautes of teachers. So are they both a
warrant, and a restraint by consequent. A warrant, for teachers to be obeyed in
all things, which they shall say out of the law. A restraint, for hearers not
to do those things which the teachers say, if they shall teach against the
law. As letters of credence given by Princes unto their ambassadors, do
warrant them, for their commission; restrain them, if they go beyond it.


Heart. But the commission here is general for all things that concern
teachers. For Christ expressly s^ith: observe ye and do ye. Now, Dogmata fidei
seruamus. Praecepta morum facimus.
we observe points of faith; we do precepts of manners. Wherefore, whatsoever
the Scribes and Pharisees taught either of faith, or manners: they were to be
obeyed in it.


Rainoldes. That were a pretty proof for your Traditiones ^um ad fidem tum ad
mores pertinentes. Conc. Trid. Sess. 4.
traditions of both sorts, if it had ground in the text. But [to obserue] and
[doo] are both referred by Christ to the same things: as he shows by
comprising them first in the one word, then in the other. All things
whatsoever they say you must (...).
observe, observe ye, and do ye: but after their works (...).
do not: for they say, and do not. So it seems, that to fasten his lesson
of obeying the commandments of God, which the Scribes and Pharisees taught out
of Moses, he doubleth (as it were) his stroke, by saying both (...).
observe ye, and do ye. Wherein he might express and call to their
remembrance that which he does commend of Moses: who doubleth often (...) Deuteronomy.
4.6. and 7.12. and 16.12. and 26.16. and 28.13.
the same words in urging of the same doctrine. To be short, (...).
the word which your exposition forces to points of faith: Christ himself
applies it to precepts of manners, (...). Matt. 19.17.
keep the commandments. So pithie is the timber of which you frame your
fancies. Though if we should take it all as very sound, and grant that
Christ meant [obseruing] and [dooing] of belief and life: your purpose is not
proved thereby. For whether points of faith, or precepts of manners: he wills
Scribes and Pharisees to be obeyed no farther, then in what they teach out of
the chair of Moses.


Heart. The words of our Savior are a great deal larger. You straite^ them, I
know not how. All things whatsoever they shall say unto you, observe ye, and
do ye: mark, he says all things. And he that says all things, does except
nothing. You except many.


Rainoldes. The Lord did command the people of Israel to repair in causes of
difficulty and doubt to the Priests and to the judge: and ask, and they
shall show thee the sentence of judgment; and Deuteronomy. 17.10.
thou shall observe to do according unto all that they shall teach thee. These
words [thou shall observe to do according unto all that they shall teach
thee,] the Jews are accustomed to allege commonly, when they defend their
fond traditions received of their Fathers. And R. Selom. Iarchi, in Deuteronomy. 17.
Selomoh, a Rabbin whom they make great account off, does gloss them with this
note, Thou must not decline from that which they shall tell thee, (...)
no not though they say that the right hand is the left, and the left hand is
the right. A mighty spirit of error, that has bewitched these men. But you
and your Church do run apace after them. Perhaps you think you may be as
bold for your Popes, as Rabbi Selomoh for their Priests.


Heart. No sir. For I grant that Rabbi Selomoh speaks foolishly. Which is
plain by the place it self whereon he gloseth. For the scripture says there:
thou shall do all that they shall teach thee; according to the law, or to
Iuxta legem eius. vulg. edit.
his law, as we read it. Wherefore to do all that the Priests taught, is not
meant of things ungodly or false, but only true and consonant to the law of
God.


Rainoldes. Even so the scripture sarth here: The Scribes and the Pharisees do
sit in the chair of Moses; all things therefore whatsoever they say you must
observe, observe ye and do ye. Wherein the word [therefore] restrains all
things to that which they teach in the chair of Moses: that is, (as I have
showed,) out of the law of God. So that (by your leave) the dream of the Jews
is as wise as yours, in this point of all. And as you say to us, so may they to
you: he that says all things, does except nothing. You except many.


Heart. Nay, I except nothing of all which the Scribes and the Pharisees teach.
For Christ (as I said) requires all those things to be observed which they
teach: because Non alia docent quam quae seruanda sunt.
they teach not other things but such as are to be observed.


Rainoldes. But if they taught any thing against the law of God: I trust you
will except that, and grant that all was not to be observed which they taught.


Heart. If they taught any thing against the law: I grant. But I deny that they
taught any thing against it: yea, or could teach.


Rainoldes. And why do you deny it?


Heart. Because Christ says of them, they sit upon the chair of Moses. Whereby
(to take your own exposition,) he meant, they teach as Moses did. Now, if they
taught as Moses: then taught they not against the law; neither could they. For
if they could teach against the law of God: then might that be false which was
meant by Christ, that they teach as Moses.


Rainoldes. That reason holds not. For many speak the truth, who can lie, if
need be: and many speak the truth in some things, who in all things do
not. Christ respects that which the Scribes and Pharisees did ordinarily: they
read the law in the Synagogues; they willed the people to observe it; yea, in
outward things, as ceremonies, tithes, purifyings, and sabbats, they did exact
it most straightly. But as Paul said unto the hye Priest, Act. 23.3.
thou sit to judge me according to the law, and do thou command me to be
smitten against the law? so did they some times teach against the law, when
they should teach according to it. And hereof is proof made by Christ him
self: who therefore willed his disciples to beware of Mat. 16. verse. 6.
the leaven, that is, verse. 12.
the doctrine of the Pharisees.


Heart. Then belike they sat not upon the chair of Moses, at some times when
they taught.


Rainoldes. True: but clean beside it, upon a stool of their own. For Moses
Ioh. 5.46.
wrote of Christ, and Romans 10.4.
Christ is the end of his law. But Ioh. 7.48. and 8.13. and 9.22. and 12.42.
they refused Christ, and taught the people so to do. Luc. 6.7.
They watched him of purpose, that they might find matter of accusation
against him. The Scribes: Mar. 3.22. The Pharisees: Matt. 12.24.
They pronounced of him, that he cast out devils by the Prince of devils. Mar.
14.64.
They condemned him as guilty of death. Luc. 23.2.
They said that they had found him a man perverting the nation, forbidding to
pay tribute to Caesar. They sclaunderously accused the just: they did blaspheme
the God of glory: they put to death the Lord of life. Matt. 23.13.
They neither entered them selves into the kingdom of heaven, nor suffered
others to enter in.


Heart. I grant that in the person of Christ they did err: but they did not
err in expounding the law. For when they were demanded where Christ should
be borne, Matt. 2.5.
they said, at Bethleem in Iudaea: and they said well. But because Luc. 1.26.
and 2.4.
the virgin Marie and Joseph dwelt at Nazareth in Galile, before he was borne,
and Matt. 2.23.
there he lived with them after, in so much that he was called Jesus of
Nazareth: Ioh. 7. verse. 41.41. and ^2.
they thought he had been borne there, not at Bethleem; and so they were
deceived, and did not know him to be Christ.


Rainoldes. Yet this is the substance of the word of life: not that there
shall be a Christ, which the Jews believe till this day; but that Jesus of
Nazareth, whom they crucified, was that Christ. The Scribes and the Pharisees
said, he was not. Ought the Jews herein to believe, as they said? If you
think that they ought: no marvel if you hold, that we must do as Popes say.
If you think, they ought not: then the Scribes and Pharisees did err in some
thing that they taught. As for that you answer, they erred in Christ's
person, not in expounding the law: it is a mere cavil. For we speak in
general of the chair of Moses, that is, of his doctrine. They erred in
expounding the doctrine of Moses, when they denied to Christ the things which
Moses wrote of him. Howbeit that it is false too, that they erred not in
expounding the law. For whereas To. 7. verse. 12.
the law is holy and verse. 14.
spiritual, requiring perfect righteousness Matt. 22.37.1 Deuteronomy. 6.5. Leuit ^7.^8.
not only in the outward actions of the body, but also in the in ward
affections of the mind: the Scribes and the Pharisees taught that the affection
is no transgression of the law, so that a man refrain from the action of
doing evil. As, for example, it is said in the law, Thou shall not kill.
This commandment Mat. 5. ver. 21.
they tied to the act of murder, and glosed thus upon it; whosoever kills
shall be culpable of judgment: as though it bridled only the hand, and not the
heart. In like sort ver. 27.
they expounded, Thou shall not commit adultery: as if it were enough to keep
the flesh chaste, the soul defiled with uncleanness. But our Savior teaches
them an other lesson: that, howsoever they pretend ver. 21. and 27.
antiquity for their gloses, yet wrath, malice, lust, even the very affections
of murder and adultery do break the commandments, and not the outward
deeds only. The rest of their perverse expositions I pass over. ver. 43.
The last may serve for all. Thou shall love thy neighbor, as thy self, says
the law. Wherein, the word [ Heb. (...) of a verb that signifies to join
and consociate.
neighbour] does signify, as you would say, one that is joined to us, as all
men are, some more, some less, but all in a natural bond of humanity. The
very light of nature has taught the heathens so much: who Cicero de officiis
lib. 1.
saw that certain duties are due from all men, each to other, through this
conjunction of mankind, and so Aeschines in orat. contr. C^e ^ip. Aristot.
Rhetor. ad Theodect. l. 2.
have likewise used the name of [neighbors] generally for all other men; as Luc.
10.30.
it is meant in this commandment, Thou shall love thy neighbor. But the
Scribes and Pharisees, thinking that [a neighbour] does signify a friend, who
bears us good will, and him we ought to love: did thereupon gather and gloss
of the contrary, And thou shall hate thine enemy. Which interpretation of the
law is lewd: and shows that they were grossly blind in expounding it.
Wherefore our Savior reproving their corruptions in this and other of their
doctrines, does say to his disciples: Matt. 5 20.
Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.


Heart. Our Savior might speak these words of their lives, and not of their
doctrines because they were wont to say, and not to do. As for the points
which you say were gloses of the Scribes and Pharisees: some of the Fathers take
them to be the law of Moses it self, corrected, and supplied, or rather
perfited by Christ. So does S. In Matthaeum hom. 16.17. and 18. Homil. 10. in
opere imperfect.
Chrysostom compare the one with the other, as the old law with the new: and
says that the commandments of Moses are easy, refrain from murder and
adultery; but the commandments of Christ hard, refrain from wrath and lust.
So does S. De sermon Domini in monte l. 1. c. 9.12.17.19. and 21.
Austin seem to have thought also.


Rainoldes. They thought so, (I grant,) good men, and well meaning, abused by
the craft of the Scribes and Pharisees: who, to win the people thereby the
more easily unto their opinions, did utter them in Moses words, though with an
other sense then Moses. As, that which Leu. 19.12. Number. 30.3.
he meant of lawful oaths, and vows; Mat. 5.33.
they turned it to unlawful: Exodus 21.24.
of punishment by public judgment; Mat. 5.38.
they turned it to private reuengement. But this shift of theirs, (which Christ
does but allude unto, as notorious,) did carry S. De Sermon. Dom. in mont. l. 1.
c. 21.
Austin away with such a prejudice: that he thought this also to be written in
the law, (because Matt. 5.43.
it comes in, as the rest,) Thou shall hate thine enemy; whereas the law
Exodus 23.4.
commands men to love their enemies, and to do them good. The less marvel
is it, if he were deceived in the former points. In the which yet afterward he
saw his error and corrected it. For, when the Manichees, who condemned the God
of the old Testament as contrary to the new, did reason out of this place that
Christ reproves sundry points in the law of Moses: Augustine. contr. Faust.
Manich. lib. 19. cap. 23.
he answered that Christ reproves not the law, but them who mistook it, who
thought that the forbidding of murder and adultery did touch, not the
affections and lusts, but acts only. And though it came not then into his
mind neither, that the law says not, Thou shall hate thine enemy: cap. 24.
yet he considered, that it could not otherwise be meant in the old Testament,
then, as in the new we must hate our enemies, or rather Gods enemies, hate Reu.
2.6. Augustine. in Psalm. 138.
their vices, not their persons. S. Chrysostom in this point slipped not so
much. For He says the speech is lewd, and the thing unjust. In Matthew. hom. 13.
in opere imperfect.
his words thereof be such, that it seems not, he thought it written in the
law. If in the rest he did not retract, as Austin did: he had not the Manichees
to sharpen him, as Austin had. Their folly would have made him wiser. At least,
what soever the Fathers thought therein: it is certain that Christ reproved
not the law of God, but the gloses of men upon it. Which the newer writers,
even of Arias Montanus and Johannes Ferus in Mat. 5.
your own, acknowledge: yea, In exposit. praecepti, Non occides.
the Catechism of Trent too. And one, Nic. Lira in Matt. 5. and Exodus 20.
a Jew by offspring, converted to the Christian faith, does note out of the
writings of an Joseph. antiquit. Iud. l. 12. c. 23.
ancient Jew, who lived about the time of Christ, that the Jews thought the
outward deeds only, and not the motions of the mind to be forbidden by the
commandments. Wherefore in that you say, that Christ, when he taught that his
disciples righteousness ought to exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, might speak that of their lives, and not of their doctrines: you say
well of the one side, but not of the other. For he meant it of both. Which
appears by this, that he therein gives a reason of his former speech, as ye
word [for] does show: Matt. 5. ver. 20.
for I say unto you, except your righteousness excede the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Now the
former speech was, that ver. 19.
who soever shall break one of these least commandments, and teach men so,
he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven, that is, he shall be
none in it. The Scribes and Pharisees therefore, men famous for their
righteousness, who counted these commandments (mentioned by Christ) least,
that is, they made no count of them, as thinking wrath, and malice, and lust,
no transgressions; are noted to have offended not only in breaking them, but
in teaching so too. And how did they teach so, but (as Christ declares) by
misexpounding the law? Therefore in expounding the law they did err.


Heart. They did err, after a sort: yet mark withal, how. They taught that
the actions of muther and adultery are forbidden by the law: but they taught
not that the affections are forbidden. This was in deed to teach less then
the law* but not to teach against the law. Yea, to hate their enemies was after
a sort also commanded in the law. For when God sent the children of Israel
into the land of Canaan, Number. 33.52.
he charged them to cast out all the inhabitants of that land. Now those
inhabitants were Deuteronomy. 6.19.
their enemies: and of these enemies God says, Deuteronomy. 7.2.
Thou shall utterly destroy them, thou shall make no covenant with them, nor
have compassion upon them. Behold, they must destroy them. Was this to hate
them, or no?


Rainoldes. It was to kill them, I am sure. And so, by your reason, the law
commanded men to kill their enemies also, not to hate them only. But in truth
they were not charged to hate them, though they were charged to destroy them.
For, the inhabitants of the land of Canaan whom God did will them to destroy,
the Hittites, and Amorites, and Iebusites, and the re^t, were destroyed Deuteronomy.
9.5.
for their wickedness, Deuteronomy. 18.11.
their idolatries, their sorceries, Leu. 18.24.
and other horrible abominations. It was a punishment then and judgment of
God, which the Israelites did execute in putting them to death. Now, to punish
the wicked, is to do them good, For (as natural reason taught Plat. in Gorgia.
a Philosopher) vices in the mind, are, as diseases in the body; and
punishments, as medicines. So that, as for a sick man to drink a bitter
potion, or to be launced, or seared, it is good, though it be grievous: in like
sort, to be punished, is for a lewd person. Therefore when the Israelites did
punish and destroy the inhabitants of Canaan: they did not hate them in so
doing; at least they were not charged to hate them. For, to hate a man, is to
wish him evil. To punish an offender, is to do him good. The charge of the
Israelites was that they should punish them. In that they were therefore
charged to destroy them, they were not charged to hate them. And this is yet
plainer by the new Testament. Where, though Mat. 5.44.
we be charged to hate no man living, but to love all: yet Romans 13.4.
the sword is left to execute vengeance on him that does evil. Wherefore (to
return unto the point in question) when the Scribes and Pharisees made that
wicked gloss, Thou shall hate thine enemy: they taught against the law. And so
did they too, when they taught, that evil and sinful affections are not
forbidden by the law. You say they taught less therein then the law, but they
taught not against it. I say, they taught against it, because they taught
less. For it is written, Deuteronomy. 4.^.
ye shall not add unto it, nor shall ye take from it. To do less then it
wills, is to take from it. To take from it, is to break it. Matt 5.19.
To break it, and to teach so, was the fault of the Scribes and Pharisees.
Howbeit, if you think them not yet sufficiently convicted: you shall hear a
farther and manifester proof, which is without al exception. In ye law of
Moses God has commanded, Exodus 20.12.
Honor thy father and thy mother* where the word [honour] contains all
duties of service, love, and awe, which children owe unto their parents. The
Jews, as they were prone to make ungodly vows, Philo Iudaeus de specialibus
legibus: (...).
so this was an usual kind of vow amongst them, and they would bind it with
an oath, that such or such a man should have no profit by them. The oath, which
they used herein, as most solemn, was, By the gift, or offering. For so they
were instructed (...)


Heart. It was proper to Sacerdotum (...) proprium.
the Priests to sit upon the chair of Moses. But the Scribes*


Rainoldes. That is false first. It was not proper to the Priests, but common
to them with the Levites: as Deuteronomy. 33.10.
the words of Moses compared with Nehem. 8.8.
their practice show.


Heart. Perhaps by [the Priestes] he means the Priestly tribe, the tribe of
Leui. And so I take his words. Then it was proper to that tribe to sit upon
the chair of Moses. But Neque Scribae ne que Pharisaei erant necessario de
genere sacerdotum.
the Scribes and Pharisees were not of that tribe necessarily: for they might be
of other tribes.


Rainoldes. But the Scribes and Pharisees were not of that tribe necessarily.
Therefore they were not of that tribe. Is this the Doctors reason? As if a man
should say, M. Doctor Genebrard does not speak the truth necessarily (for he
can lie some times:) therefore he speaks not the truth.


Heart. Nay, my meaning is, that they were of other tribes, not only that they
might be.


Rainoldes. So is my meaning too, that he does lie sometimes, not only that he
can lie. Yet how does he prove, that they were of other tribes?


Heart. That the Pharisees were; his proof needs not: for you grant it your
self. That Scrib^ fere erant de paupere triba Simeoni^.
the Scribes were lightly of the poor tribe of Simeon, he proves by two
witnesses: the one, Rabbi Selomoh; the other, the Chaldee, upon the nine and
fourtieth chapter of Genesis.


Rainoldes. He abuses two witnesses. For he seems by the Chaldee, to mean
the Chaldee Paraphrast: and the Chaldee Paraphrast has not a word to that
purpose. As for Rabbi Selomoh, he has some such words: but D. Genebrard
wresteth and depraueth them. For whereas the Rabbin says, that (...)
poor Scribes and such as taught little children, were not but of the tribe of
Simeon: he makes him to say, that Scribes for the most part were of the poor
tribe of Simeon. In the which report he commits two faults. One, that where
his author does speak of poor Scribes who taught little children, as scriueners
do with us to write: he takes it of great Scribes, who expounded the law to
all the people, Matt. 2.5.
yea, to Princes. An other, that where his author says, they were not but of
the tribe of Simeon, which in the great Scribes would be clearly false (for
Ezra Ezr. 7. ver. 6.
the Scribe was of the ver. 5
tribe of Leui: he, to mend the bolt and make it fit for his bow, says that
they were Fere.
lightly (or, for the most part) of the tribe of Simeon. So, what Rabbi Selomoh
does absolutely deny, that Doctor Genebrard tempereth with a qualification: and
of these words, [the poor Scribes were of the tribe of Simeon;] he makes
these, [the Scribes were of the poor tribe of Simeon.] This is a pretty
slight, and such as is not common amongst the ancient Sophisters, whom In
Gorgia and Euthydem.
Plato painteth out. But the Sorbonists do pass them. Yet is D. Genebrard to
blame to play such tri^kes when he shall gain so little by them. For what if a
Rabbin, a Jew, who lived of late years, had said, that the Scribes were not of
the Leuiticall tribe? That nation is stricken with madness, and with blindness,
and with astonishment of heart, since they have shut their eyes against Mal.
4.2.
the Sun of righteousness: and the plague which God did threaten them, is
come upon them; Deuteronomy. 28.29.
Thou shall grope at noone days, as the blind does grope in darkness. The
tokens hereof are rife in their Rabbines handling of the scriptures. Who
(beside the filth of many other folies wherewith they do soil them) are wont
in such places as they are coombred with, (though often plain and easy;) to
piece out their gloses with braine-sicke dreams, and sotti^h fables. In
Genesis it is prophesied of Simeon, and Leui, Genesis 49.7.
I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. In Joshua it is showed
how this prophecy was performed both in Ios^. 19.1.
Simeon, and Iosu. 21.3.
Leui Rabbi Selomoh, not perceiving it, surmised that the trib^ of Simeon must
be scattered in the same sort as was the t^ibe of Leui. Wherefore as the
Levites were sc^ttered throughout Israel, Deuteronomy. 33.10.
to teach the whole Church: so he had a fancy that the Simeonites were to
teach little children. With this he did travel, and he brought it forth: he
thought it might be; he liked it should be; he wrote it was so. Wherefore, if
Rabbi Selomoh had meant the same Scribes of whom our Savior spoke: his credit
is too poor to witness what they were, who lived a thousand years before
him, unless he prove it better. But that the Pharisees were of other tribes and
not of Leui only: D. Genebrard proves (you say) and I grant it. True. And I
grant farther (which Chronog. lib. 2 Phar^s^^ erant Catholici.
he proves too) that they were Catholics. But your self did tell me that if
you should say, that the Catholics sit upon the chair of Christ, I must not
think you mean of Catholics who be scholars, but of Catholics who be
teachers; of Catholic Priests, and Bishops. The Scribes and Pharisees
therefore had ordinary succession, for any thing that Genebrard shows to the
contrary. But they did both err them selves, and teach errors. Then they,
who succeed ordinarily, may err and teach errors. Now the Popes succeed in
the chair of the Apostles, as the Scribes and Pharisees did in the chair of
Aaron. The Popes are not warranted therefore by succession but they may err,
and teach errors.


Heart. Nay, I deny that. For they have greater grace then had the Scribes and
Pharisees. Wherefore, not, if the Scribes and Pharisees erred, therefore the
Popes may.


Rainoldes. Nay, as you brew, so must you drink. It is your own comparison of
Popes with Scribes and Pharisees, even in the chair too. And (to say the truth)
they are well compared: saving that the Popes are somewhat behind them in
succession, and far beyond them in errors.


Heart. Not so. For howsoever it fared with Scribes and Pharisees: The fifth
Division.
I will prove by a manifest demonstration out of the scripture, that Popes
cannot err in doctrine.


Rainoldes. If you do so, I yield. For one out of the scripture, as good with
me, as a thousand.


Heart. You must observe then, Staplet. prine. doct^in. lib. 5. ^ap. 9.
that the scripture notes four kinds of men, who by teaching the folk that
are named Christians, do either lead them, or misleade them, that is, do
either guide them in the right way, or seduce them from it. The first of them,
Pastors; the second, Hirelinges; the third, Thieves; and the fourth, Woolues.
All whom Christ has showed almost in one place together. For in S. Ioh. 1^.
John's gospel he says of the thief: He that enters not by the door into
the sheepefold, but climeth up an other way, he is a thief and a robber. Of
the pastor he says; But he that enters by the door, is the pastor of the
sheep. And a little after, I am (says he) the door. And anon, making a
subdiuision of the pastor into his members, he shows that a pastor is of two
sorts, the one, good; the other, an hireling. The good pastor (says he) does
give his life for his sheep. But an hireling, and he which is not the pastor,
that is, which deserves not the name of a pastor, because he loves more the
goods of the world then the sheep (says Homil. 14. super euangelia.
Gregory the great) sees the woolfe coming, and leaves the sheep, and
flees. He is a thief therefore who climeth up an other way: that is (as Lib.
1. epist. 6.
Cyprian writes) who succeeding no man is ordained of him self, not of them
who entered by Christ, that is, not of Christ. He is a pastor, who enters in
by the door, and loves the sheep: that is (as Lib. 4. cap. 4
Irenee writes) he that has both succession from the Apostles sent by Christ,
and with succession of Bishopric has received through Gods favor, the sure
and gracious gift of truth. The hireling feeds the sheep, unless the wolf
come. For (as Gregory says in the place alleged) it cannot be surely known,
whether a man be a pastor or an hireling, if time of need come not, if
persecution and trial want. The fourth kind, is the woolfe, at whose coming
the hireling flees. For he is a woolfe who entered in by the door, he was
ordained lawfully: but being set in the pastors room after ward became a
woolfe. Such as S. Paul describes; Act. 20.19.
I do know (says he) that after my departure there will ravening woolues enter
in among you, not sparing the flock, that is, scattering the sheepefold: and
of your selves, that is, of the number and order of pastors, (^or such he
speaks to,) there shall arise men speaking perverse things, to draw away
disciples after them selves. Such were Arius, Macedonius, Nestorius, Marcion,
Paulus Samosatenus, Eutyches, and many other Arch-heretikes: who of Bishops,
and Priests, that is, of pastors, became woolues. Wherefore of these four
kinds of men, we must love the pastor, we must tolerate the hireling, we must
beware of the thief, ( De verbis ^^min. Sermon. 49.
says Austin:) and I would add (says D. Stapleton) we must drive away the
woolfe. For the woolfe must be kept off with greater care and diligence, who
comes in the sheep clothing, and being made a pastor does play the woolfe,
and seduceth: then the thief who climeth up an other way, by open wrong and
injury. For it is enough to beware of him because of lawful succession, which
never is unknown or lies hidden, no more then the Church it self. Moreover
the hireling is of two sorts. One in respect of his end, and secret: because
he does feed for hope of gain or honor only, but lives not offensiuely. An
other, who is openly wicked and ungodly. The hirelings of the former sort S.
Paul describes: Phil. 1.15.
Some (says he) preach Christ for envy and contion, that is, for honors
sake: some for good will and of charity. And what of such he thinks, he
adds* but what? So that by all means, whether by occasion, or by truth,
Christ be preached: in this also I rejoice, yea and will rejoice. Now, he
preaches Christ by occasion, not sincerely, who does it for his own
commodities of money, or of honor, and the praise of man (as De verbis De^in.
Sermon. 49.
Austin does expound it:) and of such S. Paul says, that he rejoices. So
far is he from saying, that men ought not to hear them. As for the other
sort of hirelinges, that openly are wicked and ungodly: such were the Scribes
and Pharisees, and yet the scripture says of them, Matt. 23.2.
The Scribes and the Pharisees do sit upon the chair of Moses. All things
therefore whatsoever they shall say unto you, observe ye, and do ye. But of
this I have spoken sufficiently before. And so you may see, that hirelings,
whether they be secret, or open, yet they teach the truth, and Christians are
bound to hear them.


Rainoldes. When shall we have the demonstration out of the scripture, by which
you promised to prove that Popes can not err in doctrine?


Heart. You have it already. What? You can not see the wood for the trees.


Rainoldes. In deed I cannot see that wood amongst these trees. But you who
see it better, will show it me, I hope.


Heart. See you not the words of Christ and S. Paul, of pastors, and
hirelinges, and thieves, and woolues, and secret hirelings, and open?


Rainoldes. All these trees I see, and many shrubbes besides. But I see no
stuff in any of them all for your demonstration.


Heart. No? Then will I make it plainer from point to point. First, all the Popes
are either pastors or hirelinges. Next, pastors and hirelinges do all teach
the truth. Thirdly, I conclude*


Rainoldes. Stay. I doubt of the first: or rather I doubt not of it. For
although the ancient Popes (as they are called) were pastors for the most
part, and hirelinges now and then some: yet after, there succeeded many thieves
and robbers: and so they do till this day.


Heart. Mark what you say: [succeeded.] For I grant that in schisms and
contentions about the Popedom, a part of the electors sometimes has set up
one, who was a thief and a robber, Cyprian. ep. 4 ad Cornelium.
as Nouatian against Cornelius, Hieron. in Chronic. Eusebius.
and Vrsicinus against Damasus. But he whom so they set up, was an Antipapa,
one set up against the Pope.
Antipope, as historians do call him, not a Pope. They are Popes, who by the
line of orderly succession have followed one an other from Peter until our
time: whose names are enrolled both in Chronicles, and Tables, by Pontacus,
Onuphrius, Genebrard, Bristow, and many other learned men. And them I mean
only, when I say that all Popes are either pastors, or hirelinges.


Rainoldes. And them I mean too, when I say that many thieves and robbers have
succeeded. Though sometimes the Antipope had better right to the room, then
he whom your Chronicles and tables count Pope, whose might did ouerbeare the
right: Council. Basil. Session. 39. Aeneas Siluius de gestis Basil. Council. lib.
2.
as Felix, elected in the Council of Basil; then Eugenius, who surprised him.
But, I let go these blemishes of the Papal line. And of the lawful Popes, the
line of whose succession your Genebrard. Chronographia, in fine lib. 4.
Chronicles and Bristow in his Demaundes and Rishtons Table of the Church
praised and glosed on by him.
Tables do paint and praise so highly, as a certain mark whereby the
Catholic church and faith may be known: of them I say, that many have been
thieves and robbers.


Heart. I prove that in saying so you say untruly. For they are thieves, and
robbers, who enter not in by the door into the sheepefold, but clime up an
other way. But all the Popes have entered in by the door into the sheepefold.
Therefore not one of them has been a thief and a robber.


Rainoldes. Into what sheepefold they entered, I know not. But this I know that
many of them entered in by that, Cic. ad Attic. lib. 1. epist. 15.
which Philip said all castles might be conquered by, if an Asellus on^stus
auro.
ass laden therewith might enter in. Is this to enter in by the door, or by
the loouer? Horat. Carm. lib. 3. ode 16.
as Jupiter did to Danae in a shower of gold?


Heart. You mean them perhaps, of whom you showed In the 1. Diuis. of this
chapt.
before, that they were monstrous men, or rather beasts and monsters: who did
get the Popedom (I grant) the most of them by briberie and evil means. But
the fault both of that and of their corrupt lives is to be laid rather on the
German Emperors, then on ye See of Rome. For (as D. Chronog. lib. 4. saecul^
10.
Genebrard has noted very well) the Popes, for the space almost of seven score
years and ten, from John the eight to Leo the ninth, Pontifices circiter 50.
about a fifty Popes did revolt wholly from the virtue of their ancestors, and
were Apotactici, Apostati^i v^ potius, quam Apo^tolici.
Apostaticall rather then Apostolical. Of this so great wickedness the German
Emperors are guilty: who did oppress the Church so, that (orderly elections
being set apart) they appointed Popes at their lust, and Saepius pecunia, and
pactis.
often times for money and couenantes; and the Pope elected would not take the
Popedom before the Emperor had confirmed him. Yea some did get into the sea
Vi, aut larg i^^o^e.
by force or bribery. Wherefote it is no marvel, if they were monstrous and so
many in so few years, and dyed so quickly, since that they entered in, Non per
ostium, sed per posticum.
not by the door, but by a posterne gate. For they were not chosen after the
manner of their ancestors, but A Caesaribus intrudebantur.
intruded by the Emperors. Only five amongst so great a number of Popes (and
they but meanly) are praised.


Rainoldes. This is well and wisely noted by your Genebrard. Many Popes were
Prodigiosi.
monstrous: but the fault thereof was in the German Emperors. This will stop
the mouths of the German heretics, who do praise those Emperors. But here
you grant withal, that fifty Popes or there about did not enter in by the
door. Wherein you grant (by consequent) that they were thieves and robbers.
You said that I spoke untruly when I said so. Is it become a truth now?


Heart. They were thieves and robbers: but they were not Popes.


Rainoldes. They do go for Popes in all your Platina, Onuphrius, Po^taeus.
Chronicles, and Bristow, Rishton, Prateolus.
Tables.


Heart. Because they kept the room, and were called so. The name of Popes is
given them by D. Genebrard too: but he accounts them usurpers, and so does
mean it improperly. For properly they only are Popes, who have the Popedom
by lawful succession. But these men had it not by lawful succession.
Therefore they were not Popes, as we must speak of Popes now. And this is
declared plainly by D. Chronog. lib. 4. saeculo 11.
Genebrard: who having said, that the Popes of that time were Monstra, vt
intrusi potius quam electi.
monsters, as intruded rather by the Emperors then elected; does add, these
are the fruits of the Church oppressed by tyrants, and of elections taken from
it. Yea, Turbata hic fuit legitima successio.
the lawful succession was here disordered also: as in The Church of the Jews.
the Synagogue of old time under the Antiochi, a little before the Machabes.
This blemish let the writers of the Centuries acknowledge to have sproong from
the German Emperors, whom they praise so greatly. For they had taken the right
of the Church to themselves, and did provide for it by the right of Herod.
Thus far D. Genebrard. Whereby you may see that although he grant they were
thieves and robbers, yet he denies they were Popes: for they did not succeed
lawfully.


Rainoldes. Genebrard was blinded with spite against the Centuries, and
Emperors of Germany, when he sewed these figge-leaues to cover the nakedness
of his cause. For the fifty Popes (let me call them so, that my speech may be
the plainer,) the fifty Popes, whom you grant to have been thieves and
robbers, because they were usurpers rather, then successors, as being not
chosen after the manner of their ancestors, but intruded by the Emperors: the
fifty Popes began in the year of Christ After Genebrards account. Onuphrus
and Platina differ from it somewhat in a few years. But that alters not the
point.
eight hundred eighty and four, when John the eighth dyed; and ended in the
year a thousand forty and eight, when Leo the ninth succeeded. Now the
Emperors had no more so do in the Popes election, for the later half of that
time; then they had before, when Popes were good, (in Genebrards ei^,) and
their succession lawful. And for the former half thereof; they had less. For,
about the year five hundred and fifty, when Justinian the Emperor had
recovered Italy from the Goths, his enemies, who long had reigned there:
Anast. biblioth. in vit. Vigilij, Pelagij, Vitaliani, Agathonis. Gregor. in
Regist. lib. 1. ep. 4. Ioh. Diac. in vit. Gregor. l. 1. c. 40.

Platina in Pelagio secund. Did. ^3. c. Aga^ho.


it was provided, yt none should be ordained Pope (though elected) before that
his election were confirmed by the Emperor. Which order was taken for ye peace
and safety both of the country and the State: least, the Emperors being
absent out of Italy, abiding at Constantinople, the Pope (whose authority was
grown to be great) if he should mislike the State, or be factious, might
entise both Rome and Italy to revolt from them to their enemies, as Justinian
was persuaded that Pope Siluerius sought to do. This order continued until
the year six hundred eighty and six: about the which time Anastas. in vita
Benedicti secund.
the Emperor released the Pope from that bond. But afterward the Pope did
bind himself again unto it. For in the year seven hundred seventy and
three, Sigibert. in Chronic. Did. 63. c. Adrianus. 2
Pope Adrian the first gave to Charles the great, the Ius and potestatem
eligendi pontificem, and ordinandi Apostolicam sede^.
right and authority of choosing the Pope and ordering the Sea of Rome: and he
gave it with consent of a Council of Bishops, not of his own fancy. The
decreee of which Council did stand in strength and virtue above a hundred
years, until the time of the fifty Popes. For in the year eight hundred
eighty and five, Pla^ina in Adrian. tert. Sigon. de regn. Ital. l. 5. and 7.
Pope Adrian the third made a contrary decree: to weete, that Ne in creando
pontifice Imperatoris autoritas expectaretur. vtque libera essent cleri and
populi suffragia.
in creating of Popes they should not wait for the consent of the Emperor,
but the voices of the clergy and people should be free. Neither had any
Emperor that prerogative after, till the year nine hundred sixty and three,
when it was restored again unto Otho. Now in the mean time the monsters came
in, In the year of Christ 892.
Formosus, 898.
Boniface, 898.
Stephen, 899.
Romanus, 899.
Theodore, 899.
John the ninth, ^04.
Christopher, 905.
Sergius, and finally that monster of monsters 955.
John the twelfth. Of whom there was not one appointed by the Emperor. And yet
(to see the spirit of a Popish zeal how it will besotte men,) Chronog. lib.
4. saeculo 10.
Genebrard, having written that Sergius did imprison his predecessor Christopher
and commanded the body of Formosus to be dug out of his grave and beheaded,
does add this note upon it: No marvel if these Popes were monstrous; for they
were not chosen after the manner of their ancestors, but intruded by the
Emperors. Whereas Onuph. in Chron. Romans Pont. Sigon. de ^egno Ital. lib. 6.
your Chronicles show that Sergius conspiring against his predecessor
Christopher (as Christopher had conspired against his predecessor Leo) did
force him to renounce the Popedom on one day, and himself Post^idi^.
the next day did stall himself in it. So that not as much as the presence of
the Emperors ambassadors was stayed for at his consecration, (which yet
Council. Raven. in the year 898. Sigon de reg. It. lib. 6.
by order should have been, to hinder violence and offenses:) much less was
he intruded (as Genebrard says) by the Emperor. But when John the twelfth had
gotten the room, then the which there could not a wretcheder thing possess
it, unless the devil himself should hold it in person: Luitprand. Ticin.
lib. 6. cap. 6.10. and 11. Sigibert. in Chron.
the Emperor Otho being earnestly sued too by the Romans to set the Church in
better order, caused the Bishops of Italy with others, and the Roman clergy,
to be assembled in a Council. Wherein after that they had deposed John, and
chosen Leo the eigth, all, with one consent: Disti^^t. ^3. c. in Synodo.
Pope Leo, with the whole clergy, and people of Rome, did grant unto Otho and
his successors for ever, Facultatem eligendi successorem, atque suminae sedis
Apostolae pontificem ordinandi.
the power of choosing the Pope. The cause which moved him to stablish this
order, was, that no such monsters might sit in Peter's seat as there had
before. Sigon. de regn. Ital. lib. 7.
For, he considered, that since the time that Adrian the third had taken away
that power from the Emperors, and left it to the people and clergy: the foul
and inordinate ambition of the Romans had filled the Church with beasts, the
city with tumults, and the elections with vilanie. He saw that this outrage
must be repressed some way. He thought no bridle fitter, then that the decree
of Adrian the first, who gave the right of choosing the Pope to the Emperor,
should be revived. And so he proposed the matter to the Council: and the
Council agreed upon it. Wherefore the former half of the fifty monsters were
not intruded by the Emperors. If the later were: whose was the fault? the
Emperors? or the Popes and Councels, who gave the Emperor that right? But in
deed they were not. For, Luitprand. l. 6. c 6. Sigibert. in Chron.
although the Romans had sworn to Otho that they would never choose Pope
without his consent, and his sons: yet Sigon. de reg^. Ital. lib. 7.
by and by they turned to their old bent, like a deceitful bow. Howbeit in
his days they could not have their purpose. For when they cast out Leo, and
brought in John again, and chose one after him too: Otho the first.
Otho by force of arms made them repent it, and redressed it. But in Otho the
second.
his sons days they went thorough with it. Otho the third.
His nephew had a stroke in the choice of one or two: but they were of the
better sort. It was the Romans choice that thrust the monsters in. Of whom we
may esteem what the rest were by their head, and tail; Boniface, and
Benedict. Platina de vit. Pont. in Bonifac. sept. Sigon de regno Ital. lib. 7.
in the year 974.
Boniface the seventh, who came in by briberie, was cast out by violence, went
away with sacrilege, made money of his Church-robberies, and therewith got
again the Popedom. Plat. Bened. non. Sigon. lib. 8. in the year 1046.
Benedict the ninth, who when he was thrown out for his unworthiness, and
Siuester placed in his steed; he, by help of the faction which had made him
Pope, threw Siluester out again: and fearing that men's stomakes would not
brook him long (they did so loath him and abhor him) he set the Popedom to
sale, and Gregory the sixth bought it. These dealinges of Gregory, Siluester,
and Benedict, Tria ^aete trima monst^a.
three most ugly monsters (as they are called by In Gregor. sext.
Platina) stirred up the Emperor Henry the second to look unto the Church,
as Otho had done. Whereupon, when he was come into Italy, Otho Fri^^gens.
Chron. lib. 6. cap. 32.
Pope Gregory went unto him: and offered him a precious diadem to win his
favor. But he nevertheless assembled together a Council of Bishops: Sigo^.
lib. 8.
who having examined the cause of Pope Gregory, and found that money made him
Pope, judged him unlawfully made, and so he was deprived for Simonie. Then, in
consultation about a new Pope, when the Romans themselves did not name any, ye
Emperor named a German, Suidiger, a Bishop commended for his skill and virtue:
who being approved by them all was chosen Pope, and called Clemens. By whom and
by an other Council held at Rome ye same power was given to Henry again for
ordering of ye Popedom, yt was before to Otho. So neither did the Emperors
intrude ye later monsters of the fifty Popes: no more then the former. For
there is but Namely Damasus the second: whom Onaphrius calls optim^m
Pontificem, reproving them who write otherwise of him. Annotat. in Platin.
Clement. secund.
one of the fifty after Clemens, and he none of the monsters; (though
Genebrard make him one, because the Emperor chose him:) nor had the Romans
needed to have been troubled with him, but that Clemens the German took some
He was poisoned. Krantz. Saxon. l. 4. c. 41. Genebr. Chron. l. ^. in the year
1047.
Italian drugs amongst them. Nay, the Emperors were so far from intruding of
monsters: that they did extrude them, and were the chiefest means to rid the
Church of them. Which as it is evident by the whole course of their lives and
stories so Carolus Sigonius in his Histor. de regno Italiae lib. 8.
story of Italy (no partial man against the Popes) does bear the Emperors
this witness, and lays the blame of those monsters upon the Romans
themselves. Romani pro^ere^, priuatae qu^erend^e po^^nti^ causa.
The noble men (says he) of Rome, to advance their own private power,
corrupted them to whom the Popes election belonged: and thereby filled the
Church (almost two hundred years together) with grievous seditions, and
shameful evils, and disorders. These were the Marquis Albert, and Alberike,
his son, a Consul, the Earls of Thusculum* and they who were of their
kin, or by their means had grown to wealth. Who, either bribing the people
and clergy with money, or spoiling them of the ancient liberty of the
election by whatsoever other means, Amicos aut pr^pinquo^ suos pro ar^itrio
prouexerunt.
preferred at their lust their kinsmen, or friends, men commonly nothing like
to the former Popes in holiness and good order. For the repressing of whose
outrage, Pope Leo the eighth revived the law, which had been made by Adrian
the first, and repealed by the third: that no Pope elected should undertake the
Popedom without the Emperors consent. Which law being taken away by occasion
that the room was sought ambitiously in the city, and purchased by bribes*
the state of the Church was put again in great danger Priuatis Earundem
factionum studiis.
through the private lusts of the same factions. To provide therefore a remedy
for these things, Henry the Emperor came into Italy: as hereupon Sigonius
shows. And so you may see the lewdnes of Genebrard, that shameless parasite
of the Popes who without all reverence both of God and man, does rail, lie,
and falsify stories, to deface the Emperors, and cross the writers of the
Centuries. For he says, that the Emperors Genebr. Chronogr. lib. 4. saeculo 9.
did, as wild boares, eat up the vineyard of the Lord: the stories say, that
they delivered it from wild boares. The stories say, that the monsters of the
Popes were chosen by the Romans them selves: saeculo 10. and 11.
he says, that they came in by intrusion of the Emperors. The stories say,
that the Emperors, who hunted out those beasts, were virtuous and lawful
Princes: he calls saeculo 11.
them tyrants; nor only them, but also saeculo 16.
many good Emperors more, who meddled with the Popes election. Finally, the
stories say, that the Emperors were allowed by Popes and Councels to do it:
he says saeculo 11.
that they usurped it by the right of Herod. And yet him self records, and
that in the same Chronicle too, that Lib. 3. saeculo 8.
Pope Adrian with a Council, Lib. 4. saeculo 10.
Pope Leo with a Council, saeculo 11.
Pope Clemens with a Council, did grant it unto Charles, Otho, and Henry the
Emperors. I have read of an envious man, who was content to lose one of his
own eyes, that an other might lose both. Genebrard is gone farther. For he is
content to put out both his own eyes, that the writers of the Centuries may
put out one of theirs. That they may Hanc labem Centuriatores agnoscanta
Germa^is Imp^. exortam* qu^s la^dant ^^^topere.
acknowledge them selves to have praised the German Emperors unjustly: he
grants both that Popes with Councels have erred, and that their succession
wa^ broken off a great while. Wherein if you say the same with him, M. Heart: I
am glad of it. But your fellows (I fear me) will not allow that you say, if
you allow that he says.


Heart. No body says that the succession of Popes was broken off: nor that the
Popes may err and Councels. For as Genebrard takes it, Leo the eighth and
Clemens the second were not Popes.


Rainoldes. But Adrian the first was, as Genebrard takes it, and that one of
the best Popes. Yet he did grant as much to Charles the Emperor, as Leo did
to Otho, as Clemens did to Henry. And if it be true that they were not Popes,
whom yet the Roman clergy with many Bishops chose: then the Popes succession,
which is almost the only eye of your Cyclops, will be clean put out by the
devise of this (...). Homer. Odyss. lib. 9.
Nobody. And how shall the writings of our Countriemen, Visib. Monarch. lib. 7.
Sanders, and Moti^. 22. and Demand. 43.
Bristow and Table of the Church.
Rishton, and such others do then? who make the Popes succession ye chiefest
bulwark of your Church, a certain mark that never fails? And what will
Genebr. chronogr. lib. 3. in princip.
Nobody him self say to the third book of his Chronicle: where he wrote that
Petri successionem ad saecu^orum extremum d^taturam.
Peter's succession shall endure in the Church of Rome until the end of the
world? Was this true when he wrote the third book? and was it false when he
wrote the fourth?


Heart. D. Genebrard (whom you shall prove to be somebody ere you have done,
though you be flouting him with Nobody,) does show by the one place his
meaning in the other. For since he wrote that Peter's succession shall endure in
the Church of Rome until the end of the world: it is plain he meant not that
it was broken of at any time absolutely, and simply. Wherefore, in that he
adds about the fifty Popes, Lib. 4. saec. 11.
that Turbata hic ^uit legitim^ successio.
the lawful succession was disordered then: he meant that it was broken but in
some sort, as it were; or (to say the truth) rather bruised, then broken; not
interrupted, but disturbed. For neither Genebrard says, nor any Catholic
writer else, but that the succession of Popes has continued, and shall unto the
end.


Rainoldes. Then I mistook his meaning, touching the succession; and yours,
touching the Popes. For I thought that you had denied that they were Popes, who
were thieves and robbers. Now I perceive you meant not absolutely, and simply,
that they were not Popes; but that they were not Popes after a kind of sort:
they were cracked Popes, as you would say, and not sound; or perhaps (in truth)
rather crased, then cracked. Yet the reason which you brought why they were not
Popes, does stand in force against them still. For it is true, as you said,
that they did not succeed lawfully. Wherefore, either lawful succession is
not necessary unto your succession: or the crased Popes were no Popes at al.
They did succeed Simon, but Act. ^.1^
Simon the sorcerer, and not Simon Peter. Howbeit you must count them Simon
Peter's successors for your successions sake. Else you spoil your Church of
her gayest ornament, through which ye unskillful are most enamored of her.
Beside that neither would it help your cause a whit in trial of the issue.
For sithence the Pope has ouermaistred the Emperors, and thrust from his
election, first them, then the people, afterward the clergy; and In ye year
of Christ 1180. Council. Lateran. sub Alexandro ter. cap. 1.
brought it to a few Cardinals: there have been as monstrous Popes as were
before, (still I except Pope John the twelfth: of whom in the 1. Diuis. of this
chapt.
John,) and have come in as unlawfully.


Heart. There were many tumultes and schisms in the Church, chiefly through
the Emperors means, before that the matter could be brought about to that
perfection and ripenes which it is now at. But things began to mend from that
time of disorder. For by the virtue of Leo the ninth, and the Popes following,
that usurpation was taken from the Emperor Henry the fourth, although with
great sturres. And so was the Sea Apostolic of Rome restored to her ancient
brightness and beauty. Whereof our own days have seen the proof and trial
in many good Popes, elected lawfully, no doubt: Pius the fourth, Pius the
fifth, and him who reigns now, Gregory the thirteenth, a most loving father
of the Churches children.


Rainoldes. Whether that these Popes, or other, have been good; and their
elections lawful: it is not the question. Perhaps you praise them for
affection: perhaps they have been good, as Popes. For Popes in our days are
praised for their goodness, when they surpass not the wickedness of other men:
as a Guicciardia. histor. Ital. l. 16.
good historian, who knew and loved them well, does note in Who was Pope in the
year 1533.
Clemens the seventh. Pope in Queen Mary's days. 1555.
Marcellus the second dyed the two and twenteeth day of his Popedom not
without suspicion of poison, (says your Genebrard,) Quod nimium rectus
quibusdam futurus videretur. Gene^brard. Chronogr. lib. 4.
because some men thought that he would be to good. Pius the fourth, Pius the
fifth, and Gregory the thirteenth have held the Popedom longer. If they were
good Popes: I trust they were not too good. As for their electious: the days
are yet too young to see the faithful stories of them. But, if they were
chosen as their predecessors, according to the custom of the Church of Rome:
then by ye elections of Guicciard. histor. Ital. l. 6.
Pius the third, lib. 6. and 10.
Julius the second, lib. 11.
Leo the tenth, lib. 15.
Clemens the seventh, and Cardinal In M. Foxc^ English ecclesiast. history.
Woolseis letters suing to succeed Clemens, wise men may conjecture* how
lawfully they were chosen. You say that there were many tumultes, and schisms,
chiefly through the Emperors means, before the Popes election could be
wrested from them, and brought to the Cardinals: but after that time, things
began to mende. In deed they have mended, as sower ale does in summer. For of
O^uphr. in Chronic. Romans ^out.
thirty schisms in the Church of Rome (so many as no Church can boast of
besides*) the worst and the longest has been since that time, even Schisma
omnium pessimum, and diuturnius in ecclesia Romans xxix. quod quinquaginta annos
perdurauit.
the nine and twentieth: which lasted by the space of fifty years together,
first, with two Popes at once; then, with three. And, if the Emperor Sigismund
had not been, Antonin. hist. part. 3. tit. 22. c. 6. Paul. Aemil. de reb.
gest. Francor. l. 10.
through whose means the Council of Constance was assembled, and the three
removed: by this time your Church might have had as many Popes, as (in Revel.
17.3.
the Revelation) the scarlet colored beast has heads. But to leave the
Emperors, and prove the point in question, that since the Popes were chosen
only by the Cardinals there have been as monstrous Popes as were before, and
have come in as unlawfully: there are so many examples, that it is hard to make
choice, or know where to begin amongst them. Let him be the first, who
compiled The sixth book of the Decretals.
part of the canon law, and In the common Extrauagants c. vnam sanctam tit. de
maiorit. and obedient.
that lusty decretall of the Popes supremacy, even Boniface ye eighth. Who
being inflamed with desire of the Popedom, Platin. in Caelestino quint.
induced Pope Caelestin, a simple man to resign it; whether Blond. decad. 2.
lib. 9.
by persuading him, that he was not able to weelde a charge so weighty, or
Platin. in Bonifac. octau. Genebrard. Chronog. lib. 4.
by procuring some to sound unto him in the night a voice as it were from
heaven, that, if he would be saved he must resign the Popedom, or by both
these practices, but he induced him to resign it: and Antonin. hist. part. 3.
tit. 20. c. 8
not looking to be called by God, as was Aaron, he got it to him self by
unorderly means, Platin. in Bonifac. octau.
all that ambition could devise. Neither did he govern it better, then he got
it. For being a man of intolerable pride, and thirsting after gold
unspeakably, he bore himself as Martin. Polon. in supput. Pont. in append.
Lord of spiritual things and temporal throughout the whole world. Gaguin.
hist. Francor. lib. 7. Platin. in Bonifac. octau.
He took upon him at his lust to give and take away kingdoms; to banish men,
and to restore them: and sought to breed terror rather then religion in the
minds of Emperors, of Kings, of Princes, of peoples and of nations. Tritem*
in Chron. monast. Hir^.
He was the In the year of Christ 1300.
first autour of your year of Iubilee, c. Antiquoru^. extra. De poenit. and
remissionib.
proclaiming full remission ofsinnes, to all them, who came in pilgrimage to
Rome, (a great gain Antonin. hist.. part. 3. tit. 20. c. 8.
to him and his:) and Kran^z. Sax^^ lib. 8. cap. 36.
at that Iubilee he showed himself in his solemnities, one day attired like a
Pope, an other like an Emperor, and having a naked sword before him, he sat
and said with loud voice, Behold the two swords here. Platin. in Caelestin.
qui^t.
He cast his predecessor Caelestine into prison, and brought him there unto
his grave. Blond. decad. 2. lib. 9. Platinan Bonifac. octan.
He vexed the country of Italy with wars, and nourished discords amongst
them. ^ho. Walsin. hist. Angl. in Edward p^im.
He said that both the land and persons of the Scotts Pe^t^ ^^bant su^^
ca^^llae, that is, to the C^^rch of Romes right, as afterward the (...)
expounded it.
belonged to his Chapel, that under that pretense he might trouble England,
and cite king Edward to his judgment. Al^e^^. Kr^tz. Saxon l. 8 c. 3^.
He refused to accept of Albert chosen Emperor by the Princes of Germany,
because they made choice without his authority, who had (he said him self)
the right ofboth swords. G^gian. hi^^. Francor. lib. 7.
He deprived the French king of his kingdom upon displeasure; ^al^i^gam in
Edw^r. prim.
and moved the king of England to make war against him; Kran^z. Saxon l. 8.
c. 3^. and 37. Metrop. l. 8. c. 48.
and granted to Albert that he should be Emperor, on condition that he would
take the realm of France also, and thrust the lawful king out of it. And
more he would have done of such Papal affairs, Tritem. in Chron. Monast.
Hi^^aug. Platin. in Bonifac. octa.
unless the French king to tame his pride had took him prisoner: whereupon he
dyed within a few days for grief. This is that Boniface, ofwhom Walsingam in
Edward. prim. Marius de schism. and council. part. 2. c. 18. Genebrard.
Chronogr. lib. 4.
the saying goes: He entered like a fox, he reigned like a lion, he dyed like
a dog. An other like to him, but in an other kind, is Whom Platina calls
the four^ and twentieth: Onuphrius, the two and twentieth.
John the three and twenteeth. Platin. in Iohanne vige^im^ quart.
Who got (while he was Cardinal) a great deal of money, and finding the
Cardinals somewhat poor and needy gave them gentle rewards. Whereupon they,
seeing him to be a liberal man, made him Pope for it. But that liberality was
his chiefest virtue. For, he was Onuphr. in Platinae append.
fitter for the camp, then for the Church; for profane things, then for the
service of god; as knowing no faith nor religion at all: Council. Constantiense
lession. 11. art. 6. and caet. and session. 12.
an oppressor of ye poor, a persecuter of justice, a mainteiner of the
wicked, a sanctuary of Simonie, an ofscouring of vices, given wholly to sleep
and to fleshly lusts, wholly contrary to the life and manners of Christ, a
mirror of dishonest and infamous behavior, and a deviser, a profound deviser of
all vilanies: in a word, so lewd and wretched a caitife, that amongst them
who knew his conversation he was called commonly Diabolus incarnatus.
a devil incarnate. Yet these most holy Lords Boniface and John, are nothing
in comparison of Alexander the sixth. For, although they both did get the
triple crown corruptly: yet they conveyed it closely. Alexander the sixth
Guicciardin. hist. Ital. lib. 1.
did buy the voices of many Cardinals Palesamente.
openly, partly Co^danari.
with money, partly Con promise de gl^^usticii, and beneficii (...), che^erano
^^plissi^i.
with promises of his offices and liuinges, chiefly the voice of Cardinal
Ascanio: for which he did covenant to give the chiefest office of the Court of
Rome, and Churches, and castles, and a palace full of moveable goods of
marvelous great value. According unto which beginning he went forward: and
proved (as it was thought he would) most pernicious to Italy and all
Christendom. For though he excelled in sharpenes of wit, in judgment, in
eloquence, and was very careful and quick in matters of importance: yet he
passed far these virtues with his vices, manners most beastly, not sincerity,
not modesty, not truth, not faith, not religion, covetousness insatiable,
unmeasurable ambition, cruelty more then barbarous, and a most fervent desire
of advancing (by whatsoever means) That is to say, his bastards. Onuphrius in
Alexandr. sext. Vola^erran. Anthropolog. l. 22.
his children, of whom he had many, and amongst them The Duke of Valence,
Caesar Borgia, who first was Cardinal of Valence, and killed his elder brother
the Duke of Candi^ to have his ^oome. Guicciard. lib. 3. Onuphr. in Alexand.
sext.
one (that to execute lewd devises there might not want lewd instruments) no
less abominable in any point then his father. Such a serpent held the seat
of S. Peter for the space of ten years, until his own venoome killed him.
For Guicciard. hist. Ital. lib. 6.
when he and his son and heir, the Duke of Ualence, had purposed to poison
The Cardinal of Corne^o.
a Cardinal whom they were to suppe with, (as commonly they used not only
their enemies, but also their Both other Courtiers and Cardinals: as the
Cardinal of S. Angelo, the Cardinal of C^pua, and the Cardinal of ^^odana.
friends, yea nearest friends which had riches, that themselves might be
enriched with their spoils:) the Duke had sent thither flagons of wine
poisoned, by a servant whom he made not privy to the matter, vut willed him
to give them no man. The Pope coming into the Cardinals before supper time,
the weather being hot, he thirsty, called for wine. Now, because his own
provision for supper was not come from the palace yet, the servant of the Duke
gave him of that wine, which he thought his mai^ter had willed to be kept for
himself as the best. Whereof while he was drinking, his son, the Duke came
in: and thinking the wine to be his fathers own, he drank of it too. So the
Pope was carried suddenly for dead home to the palace: and the next day he was
carried dead (after the manner of the Popes) into S. Peter's Church: black,
swollen, and ougly: most manifest signs of poison. All Rome did run together
to his dead carcass with wonderful joy: no man being able to satisfy his
eyes with beholding a ser^ent dispatched and quelled, that had poisoned all the
world with his outrageous ambition, and pestilent treachery, and with all
examples of horrible cruelty, of monstrous lust, and of incredible
covetousness in selling without difference things holy and profane.


Heart. I skill not greatly of these stories: and it may ^e douted whether they
be true. For men are prone commonly to think and speak evil: specia^ly of
such as are of high calling. Howbeit, if they be true: what is that to us? The
Popes may err in manners, we grant, but not in doctrine. Neither if a man be
naught in conversation, is therefore his religion naught. Judas an Apostle,
Nicolas a Deacon; Matt. 26.47.
the one betrayed Christ, Reu. 2.15.
the other bredde the Nicolaitans: both fa^tie in their lives; but the
Christian faith, which they professed is not fautie. There be, that write also
reports very shameful of your Doctors and Pastors: Bolsecus, in vita Caluini.
of Calvin, that he committed a detestable sin; Lindanus, Dubitant. dialog. 2.
of Bucer, that he denied Christ at his death. Which things are as odious, as
those that you rehearse of this or that Pope. But if I should urge them, you
would reject them as impertinent.


Rainoldes. In deed the truth of God does not depend of men's manners. Many
Jews, inferior in life to many Paynims: many Christians, to many Jews.
Neither did I mention the Popes to that purpose. Howbeit, where you call the
truth of their stories (which I touched) into doubt, and match them with
reports that some men have written of Bucer and Calvin: it is the part of wise
men, to weigh (as judges do in witnesses,) who writes, what, of whom. The L.
Testium fides. Dig. l. Siqui^ testibus. Cod. tit. de testibus. 3. q. 5. c.
Accusatores, and testes.
law allows not that a man's enemy shall be a witness against him. No enemy
more deadly, then he, who bears hatred for quarrel of religion: as Luc. 9.53.
the Samaritans to the Jews. Such hatred is borne to Bucer and Calvin, by
Lindan and Bolsecke, the autours of those lewd reports. And a farther hatred
by Bolsecke to Calvin: because In the year of Christ 1551. as it appears by
the acts in Calvin and Beza. Bolsecke says it was 1552. of forgetfulness (it
seems) (...) the printers error. Praefat. in vit. Calvin.
when he would have troubled Geneua with erroneous doctrine, Calvin did set
himself openly against him; Epist. ad ministros Hel^et.
the ministers of Geneua reproved him by word and writing; Calvin. in epist ad
ministr. Basil.
the magistrates of Geneua did banish him out of their city. Theod. Bez. in
vita Calvin.
On like cause whereof when he was driven twice out of the coasts of Berna
too, and things fell not out to his mind amongst the Protestants: he revolted
from them again to the Papists, and returned to Popery as a dog to his
vomit. Wherefore they do injury to Calvin and Bucer, who believe so heinous
matters against them upon no better proof then Lindans word, or Bolseckes:
chiefly, since the knowledge of many, Epist. Nic. (...) obitu (...).
who were present at the death of Bucer, of infinite who either lived with
Calvin, or read his godly writings, wherein he lives still, may clear them
from the cankred spite of one enemy in all indifferent judges eyes. But the
things which I did mention of your Popes are witnessed not by enemies, but by
friends; not one, but many; most like to know the truth, and to report
thereof no worse, then they knew. For stories do consent that Boniface the
eighth was such A fox in his entrance, a lion in his reign, a dog in his
death.
a threeformed beast, as I declared. The Council of Constance examined and
found John the three and twenteeth to be a sink of sins, a Devil in
carnate, as they called him. Of Alexander the sixth I said not a word more then
is in Guicciardin, a gentleman, who lived at the same time and wrote the story
of it: an Italian by nation, Guicciard. hist. Ital. lib. 1.
by religion a Papist, lib. 14. and 17.
the Popes lieutenant by his office, a faithful captain to his State, lib. 13.
a bitter enemy to the Lutherans. And Guicciardins report of him is confirmed
by two Italians mo, Histor. sui ^emp. lib. 1. and 8. De vita Leon decim. lib.
1. and vita Pomp. Colui^^.
Iouius, and In vita Alexand. sext. append. Platin.
Onuphrius. Who, though in certain of the Popes lives, they do blanch their
histories, of love and devotion; yet they consent with Guicciardin in Alexander
the sixth: saving that, where Guicciardin says he would have poisoned one
Cardinal at his last supper, they say that he intended to have poisoned
sundry. Now these were sworn friends to them, of whom they wrote: they were
not Lindans, and Bolseckes. They sought not of malice what they might write
against them: but they wrote the truth by Nequid falsi dicere and eat, ne quid
very non audeat. Cic. de Orat. l. 1.
the law of history. They did not misreport them to revenge themselves. In his
letters written to the Ministers of Basil 1552. set forth in print 1575.
Bolsecke wrote his preface 1577. printed the book 1580.
Calvin had touched Bolsecke: the Popes had not so them. They were not
requested and sued to by Protestants to set forth their works in print against
the Popes: as Bolsecke was by Papists ( A perquam multis Dominis amicis que
^eis rogatus and sollicitatus. Bol^ec. in epist. dedicator. ad archiepiscopum
^ngdunensem.
his Lords and friends,) against Calvin. If I had gone about to touch in such
sort your Popes with odious matters: I could have made mention of a young
stripling Productus a Paulo tertio ex arcanis cubiculi ^ord^ous. Alciat. in
epist. ad Iouium.
created Bishop by a Pope; and an other, Julius ^ertius Innocentium, quem.
Sleidan. lib. 2^.
whom a Pope made his first Cardinal; and Lucretia nomine, sed re Thais:
Alexandri filia, spo^s^* (...). Sannazar, in Epigram.
Lucretia, a Popes daughter, he liker to Tarquinius, then she to Lucretia; and
Filius Pauli tertii, qui Cosmum Cherium per vim. Sleidan. lib. 19.
Aloisius, a Popes son, worthy of his father; with Honoranda Diu^m
Ganymedibus aedes. Baptist. Mant. de calamit. temp. l. 3.
other vilanies more notorious; all proved by more credible witnesses then
Bolseckes. But I neither ripped up all that I might, (many things they have
done, which a shamefa^t adversary would be loath to open:) neither did I speak
of any thing but that, which your selves do, or must, confess of necessity.
And therefore when I spoke of faithless wicked Popes* I said not a word either
of Called John the eighth. Platina.
Ioane, the whore; or of Called Gregory the seventh. Benn^ Card. de vita
Hiltebrandi.
Hildebrand, the traitor: because you take exception, Onuphr. annot. in Plat.
Gregor. ^ept. Harding in the preface of his De^ect.
for Hildebrand, that they who write much evil of him did it to please his
enemy; for Onuphr. annot. in Plat. Joan. octa^. ex. Luitprand. Ticin. l. 6. c.
6. and 7.
Ioane, that she was harlot to Pope John the twelfth, so that John and Ioane
were not two Popes, but one. As for that you say that if all the stories were
true, they are impertinent, since you defend the doctrine of Popes and not their
manners* that answer other where is fit, and to purpose; but here it comes out
of season. For, the point in question touching the Popes was, whether any of
them had been thieves and robbers. You granted that about a fifty of them were
so; and monsters too, not only thieves: but the fault thereof you said was in
the Emperors, who intruded them. I replied, that since the Cardinals did
choose them, there have been as monstrous of them as were before, and that
have come in as unlawfully. For proof hereof I named Boniface the eighth, John
the three and twenteeth, and Alexander the sixth: who were Popes then when the
election by Cardinals was grown to the perfitest, the first a thirteen
hundred, the next a fourteen hundred, the last a fifteen hundred years
after Christ. That these were monstrous, their whole lives do show: that they
came in unlawfully, their entrances. That they were as monstrous, and came in
as unlawfully, as the fifty Popes: I will not prove, unless you force me; for
comparisons are odious. And here I must add, least I be accused as partial to
the Emperors, that although I clear them from intruding those Popes, yet I
clear them not from all fault therein. For it was a fault in them, that they
suffered such vilaines to enjoy the room: as it is well noted by Platina de
^^tis Pont. in Benedict. quar^.
your own historian, who says, that great licentiousnes did bring forth those
monsters, Nullo Principe flagitia hominum tum coercente.
no Prince then repressing the wicked deeeds of men. Of the which fault the
later Emperors also (I speak it with reverence, as of Princes, not of
Tyrants,) have been, and do continue guilty. But to conclude the point, if he
be a thief and a robber, who enters in unlawfully into the sheepefolde; then
many of your Popes have been thieves and robbers. Yet take I not advantage of
that which you have said about the fifty Popes. For so, not only they, but
all the rest might prove thieves.


Heart. Nay you were best to say that the Saints them selves, Martyrs, and
Confessors, and Doctors, were thieves. For As Bristow says in ye Table of
Popes in his Demands.
the ancient Popes were all Saints, but one, from Peter to Honorius, until
above six hundred years after Christ.


Rainoldes. Were they so? What mean you then to endite them of so great a
crime? Where was your Genebrards wit, when he wrote of the fifty Popes? For if
they did enter in Non per ostium, sed per posti^um: Genebrard. Chronog. lib. 4.
saeculo 10.
not by the door, but by a posterne gate, because when they were chosen they
would not take the Popedom until the Emperor had confirmed them: how may ye
Saints, as Io. Dia^on. ^n vit. Gregor. l. 1. c. 40. Platin. in Gregor. Sigon.
de regno Ital. l. 1.
Gregory namely, be excused, who entered in the same way? And if these were
thieves, because they entered in by the Emperors consent: what were their
predecessors, Eusebius. hist. eccles. l. 6. c. 21. Cyprian. ep 52.
who entered in by the peoples? For the Emperor Friderike had reason when Otho
Frising. de rebus gest. Friderici Imper. l. 1. c. 1.
he said, that Qui tanquam ^ex, and patricius, primus in electione suae vrbis
episcopi esse deberet.
himself, as king, ought to be chief in choosing the Bishop of his own
city. Wherefore if the people had voices in the choice of him: why not the
German Emperor? Sigon. de regn. Ital. l. 4. and 7.
who then was king of Rome, though now the Pope be. And if they were thieves
too, because the people chose them, and not the clergy only: what have ye
Popes been these four hundred years, Genebr. Chronogr. l. 4. Plat. and Onuphr.
de ^itis Pontifica^.
whom neither the Emperor, nor people, nor clergy, but only a few Cardinals
have chosen? See you not how all the Popes are brought in danger by you, to be
thieves? But (as I said) I mean not to take this advantage. It suffices me,
first, that many of them purchased the Popedom with bribery and corruption, as
I have showed by their stories: next, that all such purchasers are (by their
own law) Did. 79. c. Siquis pecunia. Non Apostolicus, sed apostaticus
habeatur. which decree was made by Pope Nicolas the second in a Council* held
at Rome.
not Apostolical, but Apostaticall, that is to say, revolters from the faith
of Christ, not successors of the Apostles. For hereof it follows that many,
not only Antipopes, but Popes, and they elected, not intruded, have been
thieves and robbers, by your own definition. Wherefore, not all Popes are
pastors, or hirelinges. And so the demonstration by which you promised to prove
out of the scripture, that Popes cannot err in doctrine, is fallen.


Heart. But as D. Princip. doctr. lib. 5. cap. ^.
Stapleton does define a thief out of S. Cyprians words: no Pope can be a
thief. For he is a thief, who succeeding no man, is ordained of himself.
Now, it is manifest that the Popes, all, both have succeeded others, and were
ordained by others. Yet, though some of them were thieves, and robbers, in D.
Genebrards sense: they could not err in doctrine. Such is the force of
succession.


Rainoldes. Why? Is the force, I say not of succession, but of lawful
succession, such, that they, who have it, can not err in doctrine? May not
true Bishops and pastors teach heresy, as Of Alexandria. Theodoret. lib. 1.
cap. 2.
Arius, Of Constantinople. Socrat. l. 7. c. 29. and 32.
Nestorius, and Of Antioche. Eusebius. l. 7. c. ^^.
Samosatenus did?


Heart. Yes: they may. But then they become woolues, as you heard out of D.
Stapleton. They are not thieves and robbers.


Rainoldes. Then the Popes succession does not warrant them but that they may
be woolues. Which is as much to my purpose, as if you said, thieves, and
robbers. And in very truth, unless D. Stapleton had slubbered up that place of
scripture (in S. John) to make it serve for his succession: it would be
apparent that Christ meant the same by thieves and robbers, that you by
woolues. For when the Pharisees had Ioh. 7.47. and^* 13. and 9.16.
spoken much against him, and sought by Ioh. 9. ver. 24. and 29.
persuasion and ver. 22. and 34.
excommunication to lead away the people: he (to make the faithful wise
against their practices) Ioh. 10. ver. 14. and 3^*
declares both his office and person in a parable, wherein he compares Gods
chosen to sheep, and him self to a shepherd. And by that occasion he
aduertiseth them of three sorts of teachers, which meddle with the flock of
God: the first, a shepherd; the second, a hireling; the third, a thief and a
robber. ver. 2. and 11.
A shepherd enters in by the door into the sheepefold, and cares for the
sheep so, that when the woolfe comes, he stands in their defense,
aduenturing his life for them. ver. 12* and 13.
A hireling enters in, as the shepherd does, but cares not for the sheep:
and therefore in the time of danger he flees, and leaves them to be
scattered. ver. ^^ and ^^.
A thief and a robber neither enters in by the door, as they: and he comes
to steal, and to kill, and to destroy. These three sorts of teachers are
mentioned by Christ, perhaps to touch the Pharisees by the way covertly, but
manifestly to clear himself, whom they reproved as a false teacher, that is
(in this similitude,) as a thief and a robber. Which s^launder to confute, he
shows himself to be^ a shepherd, neither a shepeheard hireling, but a good
shepeheard, that is, a true and godly teacher. And to this end he notes two
differences between a shepeheard and a thief: the one, in their doctrine; the
other, in their end. In their doctrine; verse. 1. and 2.
that a thief enters not in by the door, the lawful way: but the shepeheard
enters in by the door, that is, he preaches Christ. For ver. 7. and 9.
Christ is the door: and by him the shepeheard leads his sheep in, and out,
to feed them and save them. In their end, verse. 10.
that a thief comes to steal, kill, destroy, that is, to spoil them of
their life, of life spiritual and eternal: but the shepeheard comes that
they may have life, and have it in abundance. Whereby it is evident that
Christ did mean the same by thieves and robbers here, which other where by
false Prophets: Matt. 7.15.
Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in sheep clothing, but inwardly
are ravening woolues. For else, neither they could have been noted well by the
property of woolues, that is, to kill and destroy: neither had his doctrine
and division of teachers been perfect to his purpose: neither were his answer
fit against the Pharisees, who touched him as a seducer, and not as an intruder;
not for succession, but for doctrine. If you believe not me that this is the
natural meaning of the text, you may believe S. In euang Iohann. Tract. 45.
Austin, who says, that to enter into the shepefold by the door, is, to
preach Christ: whom who so preach not rightly, they are thieves and robbers. Of
these, for example, he names Arius: who yet succeeded lawfully as D.
Stapleton grants, though he count him a woolfe, and not a thief and a
robber, upon a point that Austin saw not. In which point his fancy carried him
so far, that whereas De verbis Dom. sermon 49.
Austin said, we must love the Pastor, tolerate the hireling, beware of the
thief, Staplet. princip. doctrine. l. 5. cap. 9.
he would add to Austin, and drive away the woolfe: as though S. Austin meant
not [the woolfe] by [the thief;] and [driue away,] by [beware;] belike nor
Christ neither, when he said Matt. 7.15.
beware of woolues. How much more seemly had it been for Stapleton to have
followed Austin (with your Arias Monta^us, Johannes Ferus, and Claudius
Guillia^dus in Euangel. Iohann* cap. 10.
best interpreters) then so to have corrected him.


Heart. He does not correct him so much, as vary from him: and that not on his
own, but on S. Cyprians judgment, a Father most ancient. Whose definition if
he liked better then he did Austins: why might he not take it?


Rainoldes. Good reason, if it were as true as S. Austins. But what is that
definition?


Heart. A thief is he, who climeth up another way, that is, (as Cyprian
writes,) who succeeding no man is ordained of him self.


Rainoldes. These words are Epist. 76. ad Magnum: or as Stapleto^ cites it,
lib. 1. epist. 6.
Cyprians words: but the definition is Stapletons definition. For Cyprian does
not write them more of a thief, then of a woolfe.


Heart. He writes them of Nouatian, who entered not in by the door into the
shepefold, but climed up another way. Therefore he writes them of a thief.


Rainoldes. He writes them of Nouatian, who was a false prophet, and came in
sheep clothing, but inwardly was a rauener. Therefore he writes them of a
woolfe. For Ad Nouatian. haereticum. quod lapsis s^e^ veniae non est deneganda.
Cyprian does count Nouatian the heretic, both a thief, and a woolfe. Which
proves that sense that I gave thereof, against your distinction who sever
woolues from thieves. But Stapleton in handling this place of Cyprian does
play us three feats: which if they be marked, will show with what art so many
sayings of the Fathers are interlaced in his books. First he changes the
words. For where it is in Epist. 76. ad Magnum.
Cyprian, a se ipso ortus est, arose of him self: Stapleton does read it, a
se ipso ordinatus est, is ordained of him self.


Heart. It has been heretofore read so in some printes.


Rainoldes. It has so: but amiss. For Nouatian was ordained of others, though
unlawfully: as Hist. eccles. lib. 6. c. 4^. when the name of Nouatus is given
(through error) to Nouatianus.
Eusebius shows, and Epist. 41. ad Cornelium.
Cyprian did know. Whereupon, that fa^tie reading is amended in the Of Manutius
at Rome, Morelius at Paris, Pamelius at Anwerpt.
later printes out of written copies: and Annotat. in ep. Cyprian. 76. Neque
e^at co^moda prior lectio* Lordinatus est: Inemo enim a seipso ordinati potest.
a note reproving it (least it creep in again) is left by Pamelius. Whose
edition since Princip. doctr. lib. 6. cap. 15. Iuxta emendat^ editionem.
Stapleton prayseth as best corrected, and follows it for advantage: to
change a word of it here, in such sort, it was a feate and had a purpose. But
the second feate does excel this. For, because Cyprian says of a thief, that
he succeeding no man arose of him self: Stapleton does take him as though he
had defined a thief by those words. Whereof he would have the reader to
conceive that they who have succession, and are ordained lawfully, can not be
thieves: a thing which Cyprian meant not. But therein he deals with the
words of Cyprian as if a man should say to define a doctor: a doctor is he,
who interprets the scriptures, that is (as Lib. de vnitat. ecclesiae.
Cyprian writes) who does corrupt the gospel, and is a false expounder of it.
For these are Cyprians words, and spoken of Nouatian Doctors. But they were
not spoken to define a doctor. For then they should be verified as well of all
doctors, as they be of Doctor Stapleton. Yet he who should define a doctor
so, to prove him one, and that out of Cyprian: should serve him such a feate as
he does serve a thief, and take him in the snare which him self has framed.


Heart. As though that of thieves some might be good, and some naught. There may
be so of doctors.


Rainoldes. No. But, as doctors, some are good, some are naught; and since that
both these qualities are incident into doctors, a doctor should not be
defined by either of them: so thieves, some succeed, some do not succeed;
and since that both these qualities are incident into thieves, no one of them
can open the nature of a thief, nor both in deed pithily. Wherefore to say in
defining a thief, that he succeeds no man: it is a iuggling feate, which
conuerteth accidents into the shape of substance, and makes essence of a
quality. A feate that is used much by D. Stapleton, and does amaze the simple
who see not the slight: where they who discern the conueiance of it, esteem
it as a feat of sophistry. But the third feate, is a feate of folly. For when
he had made four kinds of teachers, the first, pastors; the next, hirelings;
the third, thieves; the last, woolues; and granted that they all are called to
that office by lawful succession, excepting thieves only: he divides
hirelings into two sorts; and having proved that both of them do teach the
truth, concludes thereupon, that an undoubted certainty of doctrine and faith
is knit to succession. Then the which what kind of legierdemaine can be more
fond? to say in the conclusion, that they who by lawful succession are
teachers, do surely teach the truth, because that hirelings do, and pastors:
when he had showed before that not only they do succeed lawfully, but also
woolues, who teach errors.


Heart. It was not his meaning that succession alone has vnd^uted certainty of
doctrine and faith, but, succession with unity. For other-where Staplet
princip. doctrine. lib. 5. cap. 5.
he says, that to this prerogative of Bishops and Priests, there are required
two conditions: one, that they be lawfully ordained, least they be thieves,
who enter in not by the door; an other, that being lawfully ordained they
keep and hold unity, least they become woolues of pastors.


Rainoldes. Then is not truth of doctrine knit necessarily to succession it
self: no not though it be lawful and Apostolic succession.


Heart. I grant: but with unity.


Rainoldes. Then is there much vanity in Stapletons discourses, and in his
vaunt more vanity, that Lib. 5. ^ap. 9.
in spite of heretics a sure undoubted certainty of doctrine and faith is knit
Ip^i succession^ Apostolica.
to the very succession of the Apostles, to the succession it self. And you,
by retayning this unity with Stapleton, have razed to the ground that
prerogative of the Pope, whereon you builded his supremacy. For if unity with
succession have undoubted certainty of doctrine and faith: all Pastors keeping
unity are as free from error in doctrine, as the Pope is. And so if not to
err in doctrine be a privilege and proof of the supremacy: all Pastors have
as high supremacy by this unity, as the Pope has. The Pope, I can tell you,
will not like this unity. How much the more wisely (me thought) you dealt In
the begi^^ning of the third Division.
before, when, laying the foundation of the prerogative Papal, you removed
this unity out of the chair, that His unity might sit in it. For whereas S.
Austin says, that God has set the doctrine of truth in the chair of unity,
meaning of all pastors and teachers of the Church which held the faith with
^oncord against the sect and schism of Donatistes: you applied that saying to
the chair of the Pope, displacing altogether both unity and other pastors.
Wherein though you forsook the steps of D. Princip. doct. lib. 5. cap. 9.
Stapleton, who proves by that very saying of S. Austin, that all Priests
and Bishops, whether they be pastors or hirelinges, teach the truth: yet you
followed that which you had received of your Divines at Rhemes. For In their
Annotations (...) Luke 22.31.
they do so apply it to the Popes prerogative. Belike the great benefits
flowing from the Pope to the Rhemish Seminary did move them to adventure
somewhat in his quarrel more then D. Stapletons heart did ^erue him too.


Heart No more, then in truth and conscience they might. For though in deed that
saying of S. Austin were meant of al Bishops that held the faith with concord;
which our Divines of Rhemes (I warrant you) knew well enough: yet they might
apply it to the Pope, as chiefly belonging unto him, the fountain (as it
were) of unity.


Rainoldes. But they do apply it to the Pope, as only belonging unto him. For
they allege it to prove the prerogative and privilege of the Pope, that
howsoever he do in person, yet he cannot err in office. Liberius (say they)
in persecution might yield, Marcellinus for fear might commit idolatry,
Honorius might fall to heresy, and more then all this, some Judas might creep
into the office, and yet all this without prejudice of the office and seat, in
which (says S. Augustine. op. ^66. in (...).
Austin) our Lord has set the doctrine of truth. If your Divines of Rhemes
knew that S. Austin wrote this of all Bishops that held the faith with concord:
their sin is the greater. For, that which he made common to the In cathedra
vnitatis.
unity of all: they nippe it as proper to the singular seat of one. And, that
which he spoke in general De malis praepositis* and, de praepositis (...) mala
facientibus and Dei bona d^centibus.
of wicked bishops who say good things and do evil: they abridge it to
Popes. As who say that Popes only could be wicked: not other Bishops also.


Heart. If there were perhaps either a slip ofmemory, or other oversight in
citing of S. Austins words, the matter is not great, so long as the thing is
true which they be cited for: namely, that the Pope may err in person, not in
office; as a private man, not as Pope.


Rainoldes. The matter is so great, that the tracke thereof will find us out
that, which by this distinction you seek to steal away. For you say that the
Pope cannot err in office, though he may in person. And why? Because, although
his person be wicked: yet in the seat has God set the doctrine of truth, as
S. Austin says. But as S. Austin says it, all Bishops, be they good or evil,
pastors or hirelinges, do sit in that seat. So that none of them can err in
office neither, by consequence of your reason. Wherefore if the Pope cannot
err, as Pope: a Bishop cannot err, as Bishop. But you will not say (I think)
that a Bishop cannot err, as Bishop. Therefore you must yield, that the Pope
may err, as Pope.


Heart. What if I said that a Bishop can not err, as Bishop? I could maintain
it after a sort.


Rainoldes. I doubt not of that. But you should mar the Popes privilege:
which if you do-


Heart. Nay, I say it not. The fault of your argument is rather in the former
part: I mean, in the ground thereofwhich you said as out of S. Austin, that
the office and seat, wherein God has set the doctrine of truth, is common to
al Bishops. For, though he may seem to have so thought in Epist. 166.
that epistle: yet in Epist. 165.
the next before it, he gives that prerogative to the Sea of Rome.


Rainoldes. Unless your Divines of Rhemes do abuse him. For out of that
epistle In their Annotations on Matt. 23.2.
they teach us this lesson. God preserves the truth of Christian religion in
the Apostolic See of Rome, which is in the new Law answerable to the chair of
Moses, notwithstanding the Bishops of the same were never so wicked of life:
yea though some traitor as ill as Judas were Bishop thereof, it should not be
prejudicial to the Church, and innocent Christians, for whom our Lord
providing said, Do that which they say, but do not as they do. August.
Epist. 165. Now, in Epist. 165.
the epistle alleged and quoted for proof of this lesson, S. Austin says the
very same, which in Epist. 166.
the other, of wicked Bishops in general; though applying it in particular to
the Bishops of Rome, if any of them had been wicked. Your Divines of Rhemes,
leave out De praepositi^ malis.
the general words: that simple men may think he meant a special privilege
of the Sea of Rome. Whereto they note in the margent: The Sea of Rome preserved
in truth. And upon In their Annotat. on Matt. 23.3. out of Augustine. contr.
literas Petilian. lib. 2. c. 51. and 61.
other like places: The dignity of the Sea of Rome. And that which passes
all, they say that in the new law the Sea of Rome is answerable to the chair
of Moses: the Apostolic See of Rome. I was of opinion (before I saw these
gloses of theirs upon the Testament,) that Stapleton had passed all the Popes
retayners in abusing Scriptures and Fathers for the Papacy. But now I perceive
and confess, that as Ezekiel. 16.5^.
Jerusalem did justify her sister Sodom: so the Divines of Rhemes have
justified their brother Stapleton. For Stapleton, as he has dealt with greater
truth and honesty then they, in many other points* so has Princip. doctri*
l. 5. c. 9.
he showed in this of Scribes and Pharisees sitting in Moses chair, both, that
the text is meant of wicked Bishops, all such as say and do not, and, that S.
Austin gives that sense of the text. But the Divines of Rhemes have set down
S. Austins name, and words so, as if he had thought that to be Scribes and
Pharisees had been a peculiar grace unto the Popes. And, under color of his
authority, and judgment, they force the scriptures also to it, saying, that
the chair of Moses in the old law was that the Sea of Rome is now, The Sea of
Rome is answerable to the chair of Moses. Which sentence is so gross, that
unless they had hoped to find swine in England, whom any doung would please
that sauoured of the Pope, they would not have durst to lay it on the
scriptures, no not though their hearts had been as fat as brawne, and their
faces as hard as adamant.


Heart. What mean you to sclaunder a college of so learned Divines in such
sort? Does not S. Austin mention the Sea and Bishops of Rome in all the places
which they cite, both in the epistles, and against Petilian?


Rainoldes. Not in all: in some he does. But does he mention him in any of them
so, as though the chair of Moses were proper unto him, and he alone should sit
in it?


Heart. Perhaps, not expressly: yet he does impliedly, and by a consequent. For
else why made he special mention of him more then of others?


Rainoldes. Because he had occasion to speak of him specially through the
objections of his adversaries. Yet he makes mention of other Sees and Bishops
too, as Contr. liter. Petilian. lib. 2. cap. 51.
of Jerusalem. But, the scripture witnesses that Romans 3.4.
all men are liars. If I should hence avouch that the Pope is a liar: would you
say that I avouch the Pope alone to to be a liar, and not the Turk also?


Heart. The Pope may lie by nature* but God by grace can free him from it.


Rainoldes. The question is, what God does: not what he can do.


Heart. But as he can, so he does, by privilege of the Sea of Rome.


Rainoldes. As true as Austin says it. Such a proof, such a privilege.


Heart. S. Austin may have said it, if not in the former places, yet in the
other, For certes D. Chronogr. l. 3. ^n Honorio.
Genebrard, to prove that the Pope may be an heretic in person, but cannot
err iudicially, does bring forth a reason from the chair, that is, the Sea,
and quoteth him for it. For the force (says he) of the chair is such, that it
constrains them to speak good things and true, who do not good, nor think
true: neither does it suffer them to teach their own things, but the things
of God. Augustine. lib. 4. de dectr. Christ cap. 27. and epist. 166.


Rainoldes. Of the two places, whence he gathers this, the former agrees
fully with the later; the later is the same that your Divines of Rhemes abuse,
as I have showed. In both S. Austin speaks of wicked Bishops generally, not
specially of the Pope. In both he means the office of teaching by [the
chair:] the office, committed not to one Bishop, but to all. If Genebrard do
take [the chaire] in this sense: how proves it your privilege? If he mean the Sea of Rome by [the chair:] then is there Ezekiel. 22.25.
a conspiracy of Prophets among you, as there was among the Jews, and
Genebrard is one of them.


Heart. It is not likely that S. Austin used the name of the chair, for the
office of teaching, which is common to all Bishops, as well to hirelinges, as
to pastors. For he says that the chair constrains them to speak good
things and true: the chair constrains them. How are they constrained but by
a special grace for the benefit of the Church? And in what Bishops may this
grace be showed, but in the Popes only?


Rainoldes. S. Austin, as he notes that grace in the Popes, so does he show it
in all other Catholic Bishops of his time, whose doctrine the Donatists
(against whom he writes) did not reprove, but their manners. He calls August.
epist. 166.
the chair, (in which they all sit) the chair of wholesome doctrine: and
says, they are constrained to speak good things in it. He opens the cause
why they are constrained: De doctrine. Christian. lib. 4. cap. 27.
to weete, that although they seek their own things; yet Sua docere non
audent.
they are afraid, and dare not teach their own things, out of the pulpit of
that Church in which sound doctrine is established. So that the special grace,
whereby they are constrained to speak good things and true: is an ungracious
grace, whereby they are induced to seek their wealth or honor. For, In euang
Johan. Tractat. 4^.
they preach Christ for ear^hly commodities, De ve^bi^ Dom. Sermon. ^^.
of money, or dignities, and the praise of man. The love of which things is so
mighty with them, that it does move them effectually and forcibly to preach in
such sort as is fit to get or keep the things which they love. And hereupon
S. Austin says, they are constrained and enforced to it: as Gal. 2.14.
Paul said to Peter that he constrained the Gentiles to do like the Jews,
because by his example he moved them effectually; as In Cice 1. de ^micitia.
Laelius told his friends that they constrained him to grant them a thing,
which they by earnest suite entreated. For that he used the word [constraine]
in that sense: himself has declared Libr. de pastoribus cap. 10.
other-where, by saying, that Velint nolint pastores vt perueniant ad lac and
lanam, verba Dei dicturi sunt.
shepeheardes (he means hirelinges) will they, nill they, will say the words
of God that they may come to milk and wool. The speech may seem harsh, that
shepeheardes will they, nill they, will say the words of God: but he speaks
so, to note that the love of milk and of wolle, that is, of commodities,
constrains them to feed the sheep with Gods word, whether they like of it,
or no. Now because the doing hereof is in, and by, their office of teaching,
which the chair betokened, as, the chair of Moses: therefore De doctrine.
Christian. l. 4. ^. 27.
he says that Moses chair did constrain the Scribes and Pharisees to say good
things; and that Epist. 166.
amongst Christians, hirelinges are constrained to say them in the chair too.
As if I should say, when in the Church of England a Papist preaches against
Popery, a worldling against worldliness, an hypocrite against hypocrisy,
(which some times they do:) the pulpit constrains them to preach so. You
should mistake me, if you should imagine that I mean our pulpit has a special
grace to keep all preachers still from error. Even so do they S. Austin, who
dream of such a chair in his words. Howbeit, if you think that a chair
with him is of greater force, then a pulpit with us: yet you can not think but
that his words spoken of the Scribes and Pharisees are meant of all Bishops,
who say and do not. For so he expounds the Scribes and Pharisees often, even
in the same Contr. liter. Petilian. l. ^. c, 7. and l. 2. c. 6. and l. 3. c. 2.
book which your Rhemists allege. Wherefore if the Pope by virtue of the
chair cannot err as Pope: then an other Bishop cannot err as Bishop by
virtue of the same chair. But any other Bishop, you grant, may err as
Bishop. Therefore you must grant, the Pope may err as Pope.


Heart. Nay, I will grant rather that S. Austin erred, and laid a false
ground: if he do impart the privilege of the chair to all other Bishops as
well as to the Pope.


Rainoldes. Then you must grant withal that Genebrard and your Rhemists have
abused S. Austin, to bring him as for that, which he is flat against. But I
will defend S. Austin in a truth: and prove that the argument which I have
grounded on him is so sure and sound, that you must needs grant it, unless
you will be froward wilfully. For what think you, first: may a Bishop err as
Bishop?


Heart. Who does deny it?


Rainoldes. There is one in De repub. (...) 1. Thrasymachus.
Plato who says that a magistrate cannot err, as magistrate; nor a Prince, as
Prince.


Heart. Not a Prince? Why?


Rainoldes. Because a Prince is, as it were, a physician of the common wealth:
and a physician can not err, as physician. For in that he erreth, he misseth
of his art. Wherefore, by want of physic he erreth, not by physic. And so
(to speak exactly) no artificer can err: at the least he cannot err as an
artificer. For he which erreth, erreth because he has not skill enough, and
not because he has skill.


Heart. But yet an artificer may err in practice of his art: as a physician,
in curing sick men: a Prince, in ruling the common wealth. And therefore, me
thinks, that shift is but a quidditie. For an artificer may be justly said
to err as an artificer, when he does err in that which he deals with in
respect of his art. At least, if he err not therein as an artificer, he
erreth as an evil artificer.


Rainoldes. That is true, as an evil artificer.


Heart. Then your man in Plato must amend his speech: and say, that a Prince may
err as an evil Prince, though he cannot, as good; and a magistrate, as an
evil magistrate.


Rainoldes. And of a physician he must amend it too: and say, that a physician
if he cure not the sick well, does err as an evil physician.


Heart. He must so.


Rainoldes. Likewise if an auditor do miss in casting of accounts: he erreth
as an evil auditor.


Heart. An evil auditor.


Rainoldes. And if a cook do miss in dressing of meat, he erreth as an
evil cook; a tailor in making garments, as an evil tailor; a shoemaker in
making shoes, as an evil shoemaker.


Heart. What else? and all artificers after the same sort.


Rainoldes. Nor only artificers, as they are called commonly, but all, in
whose functions skill and art is needful for the discharge of them: whether
they be civil, as lawiers, judges, counseilors; or ecclesiastical, as
deacons, pastors, doctors. Do you not mean so?


Heart. I mean of all such, except the Pope only.


Rainoldes. You prevent me before you need. I come not to the Pope yet.


Heart. No: but I see what you go about. You would fish out of me, that a Pope
may err as an evil Pope.


Rainoldes. You are too suspicious. I meant to conclude, that a Bishop may err
as an evil Bishop For it is a Bishops duty, ^. Tim. 2.15. (...).
to divide the word of truth aright. If he err, in dividing it: he erreth in a
point of the Bishops duty. Shall we say that he erreth as an evil Bishop?


Heart. We must so, it seems, by proportion to the rest.


Rainoldes. But perhaps we have dealt too hardly with the rest. And now in
Bishops I perceive it. For would you call S. Austin, and S. Cyprian, evil
Bishops?


Heart. Evil? God forbid.


Rainoldes. Yet they have erred sometimes in dividing the word of truth: as
you confess of the Ad Iubaianu^, epist. 73. and in council. Carthag.
one; the other ^ibris duobus retractionum.
shows of himself. And Iam. 3.2.
we do all offend in many things. Even the best physician does err some
times in curing; the best Prince, in ruling. Through defaute, I grant: because
they are not good enough. And to speak exactly, Mar. 1^.18.
there is none good, but one, even God. But if we speak as men are commonly
wont: we may not call the best, evil. Wherefore I am loath to say, that a
Bishop erreth as an evil Bishop, if he err in dividing the word of truth. I
had rather say, that he erreth as Bishop offending in a point of duty. And so
would I mitigate our speeches of the rest: not to call them evil, whom all
account good; but to note that good, in men, has imperfection.


Heart. Do so, if you list.


Rainoldes. Then we will bid the sophister in Plato farewell: and say that a
magistrate may err, as magistrate: and a Prince, as Prince.


Heart. I was of that mind at the first.


Rainoldes. And a Doctor, as Doctor; and a Bishop, as Bishop.


Heart. True: and likewise the like.


Rainoldes. Is not the Pope a Bishop? the Bishop of Rome, I trow.


Heart. I thought that hither you would at last. And therefore I did purposely
except him by name. For it is true in all Bishops, save in the Bishop of Rome.


Rainoldes. I know you did except him: but with what reason? For if it be true
in general of Princes, that they may err as Princes; it follows in special
that any Prince may err as Prince: the Queen of England, as Queen; the King
of Scotland, as King; the German Emperor, as Emperor; and so forth all the
rest, whose office is Princely. This you grant. Do you not?


Heart. Yes, it is so in Princes, I grant.


Rainoldes. Then, in like sort, if it be true of Bishops that they may err as
Bishops, it follows that any Bishop may err as Bishop: the Patriarch of
Venice, as Patriarch: the Cardinal of Alba, as Cardinal; the Pope of Rome, as
Pope; and so forth all the rest, whose office is Bishoply. Does not reason
teach you, that you must grant this also?


Heart. No. Because the state and condition of Bishops is not like to Princes in
this consideration. For amongst Princes there is none priuileged by virtue of
his office not to err, as Prince. But amongst Bishops the Pope of Rome is
priuileged not to err, as Pope.


Rainoldes. The date of this privilege is out, M. Heart: it cannot serve you
now. For your self misliked Thrasymachus in Plato as shifting with a
quidditie, for saying that a Prince cannot err as Prince.


Heart. And I mislike him still.


Rainoldes. You confessed also, that an artificer may be justly said to err as
an artificer, when he does err in that which he deals with in respect of
his art.


Heart. I did so. What then?


Rainoldes. And you thought it meet, that we should say a Bishop erreth as
Bishop, when he erreth in a peint of the Bishops duty.


Heart. And this I grant too.


Rainoldes. How can you deny then, but the Pope may justly be said to err as
Pope, when he erreth in a point of ye Popes duty? And since a point thereof, is,
to divide the word of truth aright, belonging to him, as to all Bishops, by the
chair and seat, that is, the office of teaching, wherein God has set them:
the Pope is not priuileged by virtue of the chair from erring as Pope, more
then all Bishops are priuileged as Bishops. That, if an other Bishop may err
notwithstanding as Bishop, which you grant: you must needs grant the Pope
may also err as Pope. Yea, though all Popes were pastors or hirelinges, and
none of them thieves: yet might they err as Popes too. For S. Austin and S.
Cyprian erred, as Bishops. Yet they were pastors both.


Heart. Nay, the Pope certainly can not err as Pope, that is to say, in office:
though he may in person, as Pope Honorius did.


Rainoldes. Nay in Pope Honorius you are cast certainly. For I have proved now
that he wrote that as Pope, which he was condemned for: and therefore erred as
Pope.


Heart. It may seem he wrote it as Pope, and so erred. But that is not enough
to prove that ye Pope may err in office, as I take it.


Rainoldes. The sixth Division.
To prove it then more fully: let us see first, what is the office of the Pope,
that so it may appear whether he may err in office, or no. S. Peter the
Apostle writing unto Elders, by whom he means Bishops and all who have the
charge of souls (as Council. Trident. Session. 23. de reformat. c. 1.
you acknowledge:) 1. Pet. 5.2.
Feed ye, says he, the flock of God which is committed to you, taking care
for it, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready
mind; not as though you were Lords over Gods heritages, but that ye may be
ensamples to the flock. Wherein he charge them to preach the word of God,
and lead a godly life: that they may feed the Church both with doctrine and
example. This is the Popes office, I think, if he be a Bishop: for it does
touch them all. But what think you of it, least I lose my labor through an
[except the Pope:] does it touch all Bishops, or al save him only?


Heart. It does touch them all.


Rainoldes. The Council of Trent has made One under Paul the third, Session.
6. de refo^mat. cap. 1. the other under Pius the f^urth, Se^^. 23. de re^ormat.
cap. 1.
two decrees against the sin of non-residence; in the later whereof it
proves that all they who have the charge of souls are bound to be resident,
because they ought to feed their flock with the word, with sacraments, with
prayers, and with good works; and feed it so they cannot, if they forsake it,
as hirelinges, and be not resident upon it. Beside the which necessary
consequence of reason, (...).
the term whereby S. Peter does note the care, that they should take,
imports as much. For it signifies to look too, and as it were to watch
over: to look, as shepherds to the flock, Genesis 31.44. Luc. 2.8.
which they must day and night, where there are woolues and wild beasts: to
watch as Ez^k. 3.17. Heb. 13.17.
watchmen in the city, a needful thing in peace, but in war specially.
Wherefore since every flock of Christ is in danger of Ioh. 10.12.
the woolfe, that is the devil, 1. Pet. 5.8.
who seeks whom he may devour; and Reu. 12.7.
Satan with his Angels, even with Ephesians. 6.1^*
spiritual wickednesses, is still in war against the faithful: it follows
that all Bishops ought to be resident on their charge, all pastors to attend
their flocks, all watchmen to regard their cities. Do you allow of this too?


Heart. So: as the Council has decreede it.


Rainoldes. By your confession then upon the scripture, with the Council, the
office of a Bishop requires three things: that he preach faithfully, that he
live uprightly, and that he be resident on his charge. But the Bishop of Rome
may err in each of these. Therefore in office he may err. How say you? May he
not?


Heart. He cannot err in them all.


Rainoldes. He may err in office, if he may err in any of them: for each of
them touches his office, you grant. But I prove, in them all. And to begin
with the last: he may be non-resident. For he was so by the space of threescore
and ten years together: all the which time, Platin. de (...) Pontificum.
Onuphr. in R^m. Pontif. ^ Chron.
seven Popes, who followed one an other, Clemens the fifth, John the two and
twenteeth, Benedict the twelfth, Clemens the sixth, Innocent the sixth, Urban
the fifth, and Gregory the eleventh, abode first at Lions in France, then at
Auinion, and never came as much as once to Rome. Is not this true?


Heart. Yet you may not say that they were non-residents. For the Pope has
charge over the whole world, not over Rome only. So that wheresoever he
abides, he is resident.


Rainoldes. And wheresoever he abides not, he is non-resident. Will not that
follow? For he that has two benefices smaller then Rome, ^
is not resident on ye one, if he be resident on ye other. And whatsoeueryou
imagine of ye Popes residence upon the whole world: unless he be resident at
Rome, he is non-resident. Which himself acknowledged, even Gregory the
eleventh, the last of the seven: who therefore went at length from Auinion to
Rome. For Platin. in vita Gregor. vndeci^i.
the chiefest cause that moved him thereto, was the speech of a certain
Bishop. Whom when he had asked, why he went not to his charge, from which a
Pastor ought not to be so long absent: the Bishop answered him, And why most
holy Father, go not you to yours? The Pope was not so wise to reply, as you
do, that the whole world was his charge: but being moved with the just
reproof of his fault he went to Rome straight. And when after his death the
Cardinals were to choose a new Pope: In vita Vrba^i sexti.
the clergy and people of Rome beseeching them to choose an Italian (least, if
a French m^n were chosen, the Court should into France again) said, that it
was me^te the Pope should be resident upon the Papal See. Whereby you may
perceive that the Pope, and clergy, and people of Rome thought the Pope
non-resident when he abode in France. What think you? that he was so? or
that they erred who thought so?


Heart. You are too full of questions, by which you seek to entangle me. Go
forward with you^ argument: and when you have done, I will answer to it.


Rainoldes. I seek not to entangle you, but with the truth: wherein I wish
your company. But if I should go forward alone, till I had done; my pains
might be perhaps either fruitless or needelesse. Wherefore I must desire you
to go forward with me, and answer to my question, whether you think the seven
Popes were non-residents.


Heart. They were Frenchmen all, and, upon a fancy belike to their country,
they abode in France to the great hurt of Italy and Rome. They might have
done better to have stayed at Rome still: but what then?


Rainoldes. That is as much (in gentler words) as if you said; they did amiss
in it. The Pope may offend then in that point of duty which requires
residence. The next, of godly life, he may offend in also. Which I have proved
already by sundry examples: but if you will you shall have more, Theodorie.
Niem. in Nem. vn^on. tra^^^t. 6. c 39. and de Schismate lib. ^. and 2.
Urban the sixth, and Boniface the ninth*


Heart. It is superfluous to rehearse more of their stories. We grant, as I
have said, that they may err in manners. And in deed non-residence is a fault
rather of manners, then of doctrine. Wherefore though they may err in residence
and life: they cannot err in doctrine. And that is it, which we defend.


Rainoldes. I speak not of their doctrine now, but of their office. In two
points whereof you grant that they may err. The third is as manifest. For he
which now is Pope, Gregory the thirteenth, preaches not at all. If he preach
not at all: he preaches not faithfully. If he preach not faithfully: then may
he err in that point too.


Heart. How know you, that he preaches not?


Rainoldes. Your self did tell me so; and it is the likelier, because
Genebrard. Chronograph. lib. 4. Anton. Amic. praefat. in C^^is^ran. de Papae
and concilii au^oritat,
they, who commend him, commend him for a lawier and not for a Divine.


Heart. But his predecessor Pius the fifth did visit often times the Churches
of the city, and preached to the clergy, as In commentar. rer. in orbegestar.
Surius notes of him.


Rainoldes. That is a greater proof, that the Popes use not commonly to
preach. For Surius does likewise note of him also, that he suffered fewer
Courtisans in Rome, and them in streets less famous: because they dwelt before
In vicis publicis, and splendidis aedibus, magno numer^.
in the hie streets and gorgeous houses in great number. And peradventure
Surius who prayseth Pius for his preaching, made the most of it. Pope Pius was
alive, when Friar Surius praised him. Moreover Surius reckeneth this amongst
his praises, that in a procession he was not carried on men's shoulders (as Popes
are wont to be) but Cum max impopuli aedi^icatione pedibu^ ingredien^
he went a foot to the great edifying of the people. Small preaching of the
Pope may be praised as great: when his going a foot shall edify the people
so. Neither yet does Surius report of his preaching more then to the clergy.
Of sermons to the people he gives him this praise, that he vouchsafed them of
his presence at solemn times. Belike he did edify the people enough with
going a foot. But if Pope Pius had preached to the people as well as to the
clergy: one swallowe makes not summer; his preaching had not done his duty.
M. Pacie, Secretary to king Henry the eighth, and his Ambassador in Italy,
(a man who saw farther into the state of Popes, then Surius) does write Ricard.
P^caeus lib. de (...) qui ex do^trina percipitur.
that Pope Julius the second was requested to make one Giles, (a learned Friar,)
Cardinal. To the which intent when it was alleged that the man had learning
and preached diligently: nay marry, quoth the Pope, that is the only reason,
why I can not make him Cardinal with safe conscience, that he may preach the
word of God the better still, which he might not if he were Cardinal. For
that is very far from the dignity and custom of Cardinals, (says Pacie,)
and therefore Pope Julius, as he was a Pastor most careful of the flock,
would not agree to that request. Now, if it be so strange for Cardinals to
preach: what think you of the Popes them selves, who are more occupied with
affairs of state, and may less attend so base things as preaching? As the
example shows of the same Julius. Who bending all his powers ( Guicciard.
have. Ital lib. 6.
as soon as he had bought the Popedom) Onuphr. de vit. Po^t. in Iulio secund.
partly to recover, and partly to enlarge the patrimony of Peter, that is the
Popes dominion temporal: he moved war Guicciard. lib. 7
against the Lords of Bononie, Perusium, and the land about, lib. 8.
against the Venetians, lib. 9.
the Duke of Ferrara, the State of Genua, and lib. 10. and 11.
the French king. Wherein to have his purposes, he gave himself wholly to the
conueyance of devises, confederacies, practices, with Princes, peoples,
Signories, English, French, Spanish, Dutch, Swizzers, Italian, and set them all
by the ears together. Neither did he wage these wars, by others only, that
himself might preach the mean while at Rome: but himself was present at lib.
7. and 9.
some of them in person. Amongst which he bore himself most valiantly at the
siege of Mirandula. Whether he came twice, in the deep of winter, through
great cold, and snow, and did a captains duty both in words, and deeds:
yea, pitched his tent so near the town wall, that the shot of the artillery
had twice almost killed him; it killed two even fast by him. And surely (says
lib. 9.
Guicciardin) it was Co^a notabi^e, and molto nu^^^.
a thing worth the noting, and very strange to men's eyes, that the king of
France, a secular Prince, fresh of age, strong of body, brought up in armor
from his youth, should rest himself at home, dealing by captains, in a war
which was made chiefly against him: and of the other side to see that the Pope
Vicario di Christo.
the vicar of Christ in earth, an old man, and sickly, and brought up
pleasurably at ease, should come in person to a war Suscita^a de lui c^ntro a
Chris^^^ni.
which he had made against Christians, and come into the camp unto a base
town: where putting himself (as a captain of soldiers) to labors and
perils, he retained nothing of a Pope but only the robes, and the name. To be
short, the captain, the Pope (I would say,) was troubled so with warring that
he had no leisure to think of making sermons. Melanchthon. Brus^hius,
Ducherius, (...) Scriptor. Britann. Centur. 1.
Some do write of him, that when he was going once out of Rome against the
French men with an army, he cast S. Peter's keys into the river of Tiber,
saying, since Peter's keys can not defend us, let us try what the sword of Paul
will do. Which though peradventure it be but a jest, yet shows it a truth,
Guicciard. hist. Ital. lib. 11.
that Julius did labor to advance his Church by war in things temporal,
which he should have edified by godliness in things spiritual, that is, for
Peter's keys, he took the sword of Paul: not that sword of Paul whereof he
says, 2. Cor. 10.4.
the weapons of our warfare are not carnal; but that sword with which Pope
O^osius hi^t. lib. 7. cap. 7.
Nero did behead S. Paul. All Popes have not had so much to do with war, as
Julius the second: nor al so much with peace, as Gregory the thirtenth. But
for these thousand years, almost, they have been proling to keep their State,
or to increase it: and for these last five hundred, since the Roman Church, of
small, weak, and (in a manner) a Imperatorum ancilla.
handmaide of the Emperors, is become Domina omnium.
the lady of Emperors, nay, of all, (as In Roman. Pontif. praefation. ad
Lectorem
Onuphrius writes,) they have been troubled more about it. Wherefore though
some of them, it may be, have preached, sometimes, for a fashion, at solemn
feasts, after the order of Sacra^. ceremon. eccles. Romans lib. 3.
their book of ceremonies: yet that which the duty of a faithful pastor and
steward does require Luc. 12.42.
to give the household meat in season, Act. 20.20.
to teach both publicly and privately, 2. Tim. 4.2.
to be instant in season and out of season, to improve, rebuke, exhort with all
long suffering and doctrine: they were 2. Tim. 2.4.
entangled so with the affairs of this life, that they could not do it. At
least, if you say, that they, who did preach, discharged faithfully the whole
duty: with what face can you say it ofthem, who preached not, as Gregory the
lawier, and Julius the warrior?


Heart. You are not sure that neither of them did ever preach. But if they were
not able to preach by them selves: yet they might preach by others. And so I am
sure that our most holy Father Gregory the thirtenth does faithfully discharge
that duty.


Rainoldes. By others? What means that?


Heart. As if a man that owes money, should procure his friend, or send his
servant, to pay it: he pays it by an other, because an other pays it for
him. Princes have their officers in peace, in war their captains. Them
selves do not all things which they are said to do: and yet in deed they
do them, because they do them by others.


Rainoldes. O: by others. I understand it. You mean as Pope Julius, though he
were in the camp, and warred by him self: yet he was in the pulpit, and
preached by Friar Giles. And when Pope Leo the tenth (next after Julius) made
Frater Egi^^us, nunc crea^us Car^ina^is vt taceat. Ricard. Pacae. lib. de
fruct. qui ex ^oct. percip.
Friar Giles Cardinal, that he might hold his peace: then other Friars stepped
up in his room, and Pope Leo preached by them in like sort, while Iouius de
vita Leon. decim. lib. 4.
by himself he played the wanton. But Christ when he commanded Peter to feed
his sheep: meant not that he should take his Princely sportes and pleasures in
The name of the Popes most delicate gar^en or paradise, so called, as you would
say, (...) to see.
Belvedere by him self, and preach the word of God by others. If you think
the Pope may be discharged so for this point of a Bishops duty: it was an
oversight that you forgot it in the former. For you might say as well, that if
he be not resident by him self, he may by others: and if he live not godly by
him self, he may by others. And thus, although the Pope be damned by himself:
yet with your distinction he may be saved also. He may be saved by others.


Heart. The case in these things is not like. For all are bound to lead a
godly life by them selves: and he, who is not resident by himself, is not
resident.


Rainoldes. So he, who does not preach by himself, does not preach. For
therefore is a pastor bound to personal residence, that he may attend his
flock by himself, and preach unto it personally. Which you may learn by the
decree of the Council of Lateran made against non-residence, and pluralities, a
root of it. ^
Because (says the Council) some men through exceeding covetousness do
seek to get diverse dignities ecclesiastical, and benefices mo then one,
against the ordinances of holy rules and canons, so that ^
being scarce able to execute and discharge one office they take unto them
selves the stipendes of many: we command straightly that this be not done
hereafter. When therefore a benefice or charge ecclesiastical is to be
bestowed, ^
let such a person be sought for it, as may be resident on the place, and
perform the duty thereof by him self. The cause then why persons are charged
to be resident, is, that they may perform the duty ( which phi^se of ours
answers to the^of the (...).
serve the cure, as it is termed) by them selves, and not by vicars. Wherefore
if they may preach (which is the duty) by others: they may be resident by
others. To say they maybe resident by others, were ridiculous. It is no reason
therefore to hold that they may preach by others.


Heart. No? What say you then to ^
those rules of law: A man may do that by an other, which he may do by him
self, and, he that does a thing by an other, it is as well as if he do it by
him self?


Rainoldes. I say that ^
rules of law must be expounded by the law, whence they are taken: and there
are few of them which suffer not exception. As here we have to weigh, that men
may commit some things to others to be done, some things they may not. A
thing which they may commit unto others, ^^Ita autem* D. de administ. and
pe^i^^t^toru^. l. non solus. D. de liber. causa. l. quod iussu. D. de regulis
^u^is, l. procurator. D. de procuratoribus, and defensoribus.
if they do it by others, it is as if them selu^s had done it. So Princes by
their Council, their Lieutenantes, their officers do look unto their state,
and minister justice and judgment. So men in law-matters do deal by
atturneyes; in traffic, by factors; in household, by servants: in all affairs
of life, by friends, whom they do put in trust. But if a thing be such as you
ought of duty to do it personally your self: then you do amiss if you
commit it to an other, and, though an other do it, your are not discharged.
As, for example, L. inter artifices. D. de ^^^^tionibus.
amongst workmen there is a great difference both of wit, and nature, and
knowledge, and instruction. A man who desires to have a fair and strong
house, chooses him a workman, whom he knows to be a wise and skillful
builder, and couenanteth with him to build his house thus and thus. If this
builder do not build the house himself, but get an other to do it: he has
built it by another, but he has not discharged his duty. Why? Because the
owner did regard his skill, when he made choice of him, and meant that himself
should be the builder of it. The like may be observed in Noble men and
Counselors, whom Princes put in trust with matters of importance. For when
they are chosen to do this or that in respect of their industry (as c. is
cui^de o^fic. and potest. ^udicis delegat. (...) Sent.
the law does term it) that is of special virtues by which they are the fitter
unto this or that: their allegiaunce binds them to do it them selves; they
may not do it by others. As, the Earl of Warwick, when the Queens Majesty
appointed him General over the army, which she sent against the Rebels in the
North ( ^ander. de v^^ib. monar. eccles. l. 7.
Whom Pius the fifth, your preaching Pope, had stirred up:) he might not send
an other General in his steed; himself in person was to go; because to that
charge, his prowess, his valor, his wisdom, his faith, his industry was
chosen. Now, the Church of God is a 1. Pet. 2.5.
spiritual house: and his people must 1. Tim. 1.18.
fight against the Rebels of the North, I mean, the flesh, the world, the
devil. Christ, the Lord of the house, and Prince of the people, has ordained
Bishops to be the 1. Cor. 3.10.
builders of the one, and Heb. 13.17. (...).
captains of the other. And he has chosen them in respect of their industry,
that is, that they be Tit. 1.8.
wise, righteous, holy, temperate, 1. Tim. 3.2.
modest, watchful, apt to teach, fit as you would say to build an house, and
guide an army. But he that is so chosen must discharge the duty by him
self, and not by others: according to the law, whence your rules are taken.
Wherefore those rules of law cannot discharge Bishops, and therefore not the
Popes, from preaching by themselves in person.


Heart. That (...) cui. de offic. and potest. ^udicis delegat. in Sext.
law, which your exception against my rules is grounded on, has an exception
too. For it says, that he, whose industry is chosen, may not commit that
charge unto an other, which is committed unto him, unless it be expressed in
the tenor of the commission, that he may do the thing Perse, vel per ^lium.
by him self, or by another.


Rainoldes. True. But this exception has nothing to your purpose. For it is
not expressed in the tenor of the commission, which Christ has made to
Bishops, that they may do their duty by them selves, or by others.


Heart. Why, then if a Bishop be sick, extremely sick, so that he is not able
to move out of his bed, much less to come into the pulpit: yet he is bound
still to preach by him self, because it is his duty.


Rainoldes. Nay, if he be sick, it is his duty then not to preach by him
self. God has laid an other duty upon him, to look to his health that he
may do his former duty: or, (if his appointed time be fulfilled,) to think
upon a higher duty. But by this reason no Christian is bound to come to
Church by him self. For he is not bound if he be sick extremely. Neither has
the Pope need to preach by others. For, if he be sick that he cannot preach,
he is discharged before God: yea, although no other do preach in his steed.


Heart. But it is better yet, if he supply his room by others.


Rainoldes. Be it better. What then?


Heart. If sickness may excuse him: then imprisonment may.


Rainoldes. And banishment, and death, and whatsoever difficulty, whereby God
depriueth him of power to preach. What then?


Heart. And why may not then the great affairs of the Churches state excuse him
too?


Rainoldes. What else? As Pope Julius, that he may lie in camp to beat
Mirandula to the ground; that he may recover Rauenna, and Ceruia; that he may
conquer Placentia, and Parma; that he may raise England, and Spain, against
France; France, and Germany, against Venice; Venice, and Rome, against
Genua; them both, and others, against Ferrara; Italy, against it self; the
Swizzers, against all; Guieciard. hist. Ital. l. ^.
saving that the Swizzers played the Swizzers with him, that is, for lack of
pay and food they forsook him.


Heart. You take a delight in discovering still the frailties of the Popes, as
cursed Genesis 9.^2.
Cham did the priuities of his father Noe. The great affairs that I meant of
the Churches state, are the affairs of religion and government of the Church
throughout all Christendom: whereof the charge belongs unto them by duty,
and does greatly busy them.


Rainoldes. How far I am from Cham, and your Pope from Noe: I could declare
easily, if it perteined to my purpose. But I am the willinger to bear this
reproach, because, when S. Bernard reproved the corruptions of the Court of
Rome, he did incur it too, and has defended me against it. For that which he
said on lesser occasion, I may more justly say on greater: Bernard. epi^t* 42.
ad Archiep, Senon.
I speak things naked, nakedly; neither discover I privy shame, but open
shamelessenes I reprove. I would to God that these things were done privately,
and in chambers. I would that we alone had seen them and heard them. I would
that the Mode^^i Noe.
Noes of our time had left us some what whereby we might cover them in part.
Now, when all men see that which is Mundi fab^lam.
a common talk throughout the world: shall we alone hold our peace? My head
is bruised round about; the blood does gush out on all sides; and shall I
think that I must cover it? Whatsoever I lay thereon, it will be bloodied:
and it will turn to greater shame and confusion, that I should seek to cover
that which cannot be covered. These things S. Bernard wrote about the time of
Pope Eugenius the third, (above four hundred years ago,) when Popes either
had, or made a semblaunce of more honesty. What would he have written, if he
had lived since, under Boniface the eighth, or Urban the sixth, or Boniface the
ninth, or John the three and twenteeth, or Paul the second, or Alexander the
sixth, or Leo the tenth, or him of whom I talked last, the warrior Julius?
Wherefore if I should seek to cover them now, when in Bernards time they could
not be covered: the shame which he feared might fall upon me, and mine own
conscience would condemn me. Look you to it, M. Heart, who sooth up those men
of sin in their iniquities; and call their furies, fraileties; and make a
Noe, of a Genesis 10.9.
Nimrod; and bring the fall of Saints to excuse the wilful outrages of
thieves and robbers. You say that you meant by the great affairs of the
Churches state, the affairs of religion and government of the Church
throughout all Christendom. Whatsoever you meant: that is the truth which I
showed by the affairs of Pope Julius. For in the Popes language, the name of
[the Church] does signify the Papacy, that is, the dominion and princehood of
the Pope, in things both temporal and spiritual. So that when Julius warred,
either to recover, or to enlarge ye bounds of his dominion temporal, then was
he about the affairs of the Church. And this is apparent by the Ita^ian
history written of those affairs: (...) lib. ^.
wherein Faenza, and the cities which he requires the Venetians to restore
unto him, are called cities of the Church; and (...) 6. and 7.
when he seazeth on them by force or composition, they return to the
government and obedience of the Church; and if his martial feats do stick
in some distress, lib. 7. and 9.
though things go hard (quoth Julius) yet God will help his Church; and the
means by which, the ends whereto he fights, are invested all with the
Churches title, lib. 8. and 9.
the captains of the Church, and armies of the Church, against the Churches
enemies, and rebels to the Church; the Churches horsemen; the Churches
footmen, the Churches subjects, the Churches vasals: in a word, the things
which the Pope possesses, they are the Churches state; the lib. ^.
Churches state is said to be in peril and danger, when he is like to lose
somewhat; lib. 9.
he binds the Spanish king to find him yearly three hundred men of arms to
defend the Churches state; lib. 7.
he sends word to sundry princes, that the French king will bring a mighty
host to oppress the Churches state; lib. 9.
the French king offreth to the Emperor, that he will help him Ad occupar
Roma and tutto lo stato della chiesa, come appartenente di ^agi^ne all Imperio.
by force of arms to get Rome and all the Churches state, as belonging by
right and reason to the Empire. This is the state in deed, about the affairs
whereof the Popes are busied. The affairs of religion and government of the
Church throughout all Christendom, are but pretenses and pillars to support
this state. For, as Epist. 42.2^ archiep. Senon.
Bernard wrote of the Court of Rome, that they who went thither to multiply
their church-promotions, should there find favorers of their lusts; Non quod
val de Romani curent.
not that the Romans care greatly how things go, Sed quia valde diligunt
munera.
but because they greatly love bribes, and follow rewards: so men ofskill and
judgment, who knew the Popes thoroughly, and faithfully set forth their
lives, have opened this secret and mystery of their state, (as it has been
menaged since it grew to majesty,) that they mind the propping of their own
kingdom, while they pretend the worship of Christ, as Mat. 2.8.
Herod did. Pope Guiccia^^ lib. 7.
Iulilius (says his story) did pretend godliness and zeal of religion: but
it was ambition that moved him to his warlike interprises. When I name Pope
Julius, I name him for example. For he was neither first nor last of those
Herodes. But you may guess the rest by one.


Heart. In deed they have warred, I grant, in time of need: and why should
they not? Though I will not defend ambition in any of them. But this I will
defend that they might lawfully provide for the maintenance of their state
temporal. For what says S. Paul? 1. Tim. 5.^.
If any man have not care of his own, and specially of his domesticals: he
has denied the faith, and is worse then an infidel. Wherefore you must
consider that the Pope susteineth a double person as it were: the one of a
Prince, the other of a Bishop. As a Prince, he governs his temporal
dominion: as a Bishop, his spiritual. His spiritual charge is all the church
of Christ: his temporal, a part of it. And so, though both of them concern
after a sort the state of the Church: yet his affairs spiritual, which
stretch through all Christendoom, do differ from his temporal, which touch
the Church of Rome chiefly. For example, Sigon de regno Ital. lib. 8.
Leo the ninth, a very good Pope, above five hundred years since, when the
Normans spoiled the land of the Church and he had cursed them for it, but could
not conquer them by curses: he got of the Emperor a strong band of soldiers,
whom he lead in person himself against the varletes, and met them in the field
manfully. At the same time Michael the Patriarch of Constantinople denied the
supremacy of the Church of Rome, and claimed it to his own See. Whereof when
Pope Leo heard, he sent three legates to Constantinople, to root out that
heresy. Now the former of these things he did as Prince, against the Normans,
who set upon his temporal dominion with arms: the later, as Bishop, against
the Patriarch, who taught heresy, a point of his spiritual charge. Affairs
of this later sort let me name (for difference sake) the Church-affaires; the
former, the affairs of state. And so it shall appear, what injury you do
them, whom spitefully you call Herodes. For you say that the affairs which
they are busied about, are their affairs of state. Whereas in very truth the
affairs of the Church do busy them a great deal more: to see that the
Catholic religion be taught, that errors be suppressed; to provide dioceses of
good and learned Bishops, and parishes of able pastors: to hear appeals,
determine causes, receive supplications, excommunicate the wicked, absolve the
repentant: to do the whole function of supreme heads of the Church. And may
not these affairs so weighty in charge, in number so many, be a just excuse
for them if they preach not? Or will you slander them that they omit that
duty for their state-affaires, when they omit it for the Church?


Rainoldes. I would to God you were able to prove that I slander them, and
speak more spitefully then truly ofthem. Better had it been and would be
for poor Christians: of whom they have murdered more souls, nay more
thousands of souls, in one country, with their Herodian practices; then Mat.
2.16. Joseph. Antiquitat. Iudaicar. lib. 17. cap. 8.
Herod murdered bodies through his whole dominion. And this have they done by
that profane policy, wherewith I justly charged them: even by pretending the
Churches state, to plant their own; and using the shows of government
spiritual to get them temporal advancement. For under the coolour of binding
and loosing, the credit of forgiving sins, the title of S. Peter's keys,
their ordering of the whole Church, and highest power in all Church-causes: they
have raised up ye tower of their Papacy with the spoils of Christendom, and
have devoured men as bread, and sold the poor for silver, that they might
make themselves strong in power and rich in wealth. The first, and chiefest
means, whereby they finished this work, and having built the walls by
climing up above Bishops, did lay the roof of it by climing up above
Emperors, was excommunication. Which they, not content to use against their
Souerains as a spiritual ceasure, did rack it to a civil punishment;
removing them, not only from the communion of the faithful, but also from
dominion and rule over their subjects; and putting them, as from the Church,
so from the Empire too. When Emperor Leo the third, desirous to abolish the
worship of Images (which then was creeping in) had caused them to be defaced,
and thereupon did punish some who withstood it: Sigon. de regno Ital. lib. 3.
Pope Gregory the second did excommunicate him in that Papal sort, Ne ei aut
tributum dare^t, aut alia ratione obedirent, indixit.
forbidding the Italians to pay him tribute, or obey him. Upon this sentence
and inhibition of the Pope, a great part of Italy rebelled against their
Emperor resiant at Constantinople, and laid violent hands upon his Deputies
and Lieutenants, of whom they slew two, and put out the eyes of the third. By
reason of which uproar and tumults ensuing, part of the country, that
rebelled, was conquered by the king of Lombardie: Rome and the dominion of the
Roman Dukedom fell unto the Pope. So the Pope, who till that time had been a
Bishop only, In the year of Christ 727.
became a Prince by treason. But the Emperor sent another Deputy into Italy
to stay those attemptes. Who entering into league with the king of Lombards,
they joined hosts together and besieged Rome. The Pope perceiving that the
garrisons and munitions wherewith he had fensed and fortified the city, were
not strong enough to make his party good against them: trusting on the king of
Lombards devotion, he went out with a solemn procession unto him, and with
many sweet words of Peter and Paul, Principes A^^tolorum.
Princes of the Apostles, who ^ret^oso suo (...).
with their precious blood had consecrated the church of Rome, and will the
godly virtuous catholic king of Lombards hurt the city of that church? and
draw on him P^acula a (...) ^^igenda.
the vengeance of Peter and Paul? he did entreat the king to give the siege
over, and make the Deputy and him friends. Afterward a Duke one of the
kings subjects, entending to revolt from him, did join in league and
freendship with the Roman Prince, Pope Gregory the third, and on the affiance
thereof he rebelled. The king having recovered his Dukedom by arms, pursued
the Duke to Rome. The Pope, not willing to deliver the rebel, nor able to
defend the city against the king who thereupon besieged it, dealt (as his
predecessor had done) by supplication. But finding the matter to be past
entreaty, and hoping for no aid in Italy: he sent to Charles Martell, the
king of Frances hye steward, desiring him Ecclesiae ^eous succurre^et.
to help the church against the Lombard. Which Charles by an embassage did,
and raised the siege. Now when Charles dyed, his son named Pipine suc^ceded
him in office: who, because Chilperike (that was king then) did no part of the
kingly duty, but left the charge and burden thereof unto him, he took thereby
occasion to make himself king. Which to bring about with greater credit and
authority, the Popes advise was asked. Pope Zachary made answer, that he, who
did execute the duty of the king ought to be king rather, then he who did not
execute it. Whereupon the French men chose Pipine to be king: the Pope released
them of their oath to Chilperike. About a two years after, the king of Lombardy
having won Rauenna, (which city was the seat of the Empire in Italy,)
thought it meet that Rome and the Roman Dukedom should now be subject to him,
who reigned in the imperial city, as it had been before time to the Emperor.
In this consideration he moved war against Stephen, the successor of
Zachary. Pope Stephen remembering his predecessors benefit bestowed on king
Pipine, went to him into France: and putting him in mind of Zacharies good
turn, prayed him to undertake Causam bea^i Petri.
the quarrel of S. Peter, and of the common wealth of Rome against the
Lombards. Yea in an assembly of the Nobles of France, whom Pipine called
together to know what they would say thereto: the Pope did not only exhort
them to war, that they might recover Rauenna and the Emperors land from the
Lombards, but also was importu^^te with them that they should not restore it to
the Emperor. For (he said) the Emperor was unworthy of it, because he had
forsaken the defense of Italy, and was an enemy to the Church. But if that
king Pipine would either do the duty of a thankful man, or Animae suae
con^u^ere.
provide for his soul health, or reward the Popes labor: he should bestow
Rauenna, and the dominion of it, with the rest of that dition, Bea^o Petro
concederer.
by way of gift, upon S. Peter. This sermon as soon as Pope Stephen had made,
the French men agreed to war against the Lombards and Pipine protested that
if he conquered them, he would ( Pro remissione peccatoru^ impetrand^.
for obteining the forgiveness of his sins) give Rauenna with the dominion
and dition joining to it, unto S. Peter and his successou^s. According to which
vow when he was come into Italy, and the Emperor sent him Ambassadors with
presents, desiring him, if he recovered that dition and dominion, to grant it
unto him, and not unto the Pope: he answered that being moved thereunto not
with humane rewards, but Diuinae promerendae grati^studio.
with desire of meriting the favor of God, he had received the church of Rome
into protection, because he was persuaded that it would be auailable Ad animae
su^ salutem and peccatorum ^emi^ sionem.
to the salvation of his soul, and the forgiveness of his sins: and since he
had sworn that he would grant and give it unto S. Peter and his successors,
therefore he must perform it. Which as he said, so he did. Neither did he
give it unto them more willingly, then his son Charles the great In the year^
of Christ 77^.
confirmed the gift, and added more to it, when he had made a full conquest of
the Lombards, and brought into subjection the kingdom of Italy. Howbeit though
the Popes were now become mighty, with spoils of the Emperor, and had cast
off his yoke from them: yet were they still subject to Charles the great, king
of Italy and France, whom afterward they called the Emperor of the Romans,
as the other the Greek Emperor. For though Charles gave the countries to the
Pope: yet (...). de (...) Ital. lib. 4.
he reserved Iu^, prin^^patum* and (...)
the right, soueraintie, and roialtie thereof, to him self. And when (his race
decaying) Otho the great had gotten the Italian kingdom: Sigon. lib. 7.
Rome, and the rest of the Popes dominions, regarded Pontifi^^m vt reipub.
principem, Regem, vt summum Dominum.
the Pope, as Prince of the common wealth, but the king (or Emperor) as their
sovereign Lord; and did yield tributes and services to him. So that the Pope
was but a vasall to the Emperor, and held of him in fee. The chiefest means
whereby they cast of this yoke also, was excommunication, not Christian but
Papal excommunication, such as they had practiced against the Greek Emperor.
Pope Gregory the seventh was the beast that did it. The occasion was the
giving of Bishoprics and church-liuings, which Sigon. lib. 4. and 7.
the Popes themselves had granted to the Emperors, Charles, and Otho: yea the
giving of the Bishopric of Rome, and choosing Popes. But when they had gotten
of them that they sought, and were grown lusty and fatt by their means: they
saw that the giving of Bishoprics and church-liuings did abate that power, to
which they aspired. Wherefore under color that the Emperors gave them not
freely, but for money: lib. 9.
they taught that lay men ought not to give them at all, and cursed both the
giuers and receivers of them. Hereupon there arose great strife between the
Pope, and the Emperor Henry the third: in the flames whereof Pope Gregory
the seventh did ( A^di me princ^^s Apostolorum Petre. Iure autoritatis tuae.
by the right of S. Peter's authority) deprive him of his whole Empire,
discharge his subjects of their oath, and forbid them to obey him. The Princes
of Germany not knowing the bounds either of S. Peter's authority, or of the
Popes, thought them selves bound to disobey their Emperor, and so rebelled
against him. Pitiful and lamentable were the griefs and contumelies which the
poor Emperor was feign to endure between the Pope and Papists, while
sundry ways he sought to retain his state. But in fine Rodulph, a Duke, one
of his subjects, was chosen Emperor against him. The Pope, to strengthen
Rodulph, sent him a kingly crown: and pricking him forward to defend valiantly
the Church against Henry, did grant ( (...), frater tuus. Nomine vest^o.
in the name of Peter and Paul) Omnium peccatorum remi^sionem veniam que, in
hac and in ^^^ra vita.
a pardon and forgiveness of all sins both in this life, and in the life to
come, to all that were obedient and faithful unto him. When that would not
s^rue, (for the new Emperor was stain by Henry in the field;) his own
natural children were raised against their father: first Conrade, the eldest;
then Henry, the next. Which Henry spoiled him at last of the Empire, and
brought him to such misery, that he was feign to beg meat and drink of the
Bishop of Spier, in a Church which him self had built, promising to earne it,
by doing there a clerks duty, for he could serve the quire. And not
obteining that, he pined away, and died for sorrow. This dreadful example of
Henry the third advanced much the credit of the Popes authority. The more,
because that when Archiepiscopus Mogun^inus.
Vecilo, the chiefest Bishop of the Germans, had denied in the time of those
sturres and troubles, that the Emperor might be deprived of his crown and
kingdom by ye Pope: there was a Council gathered, in which (ye Popes legate
being present at it) Vecilo H^^reseos est no^a^us. In the year of Christ* 1085.
was condemned of heresy for that opinion. For when the doctrine also was
received (besides the practice) that the Pope might lawfully depose kings and
Emperors: it made the tallest cedars of Libanus to shake, and to fear Judge.
9.15.
the bramble, least fire should come out from him and consume them. Which
appeered in Henry the fourth, the next Emperor. Sigon. lib. 1^.
Who, though he began to tread his fathers steps, and took Pope Paschal
prisoner, whereby they grew to composition confirmed by the Popes oath, that
Bishops and Abbats chosen by free voices should be invested with ring and
staf^e by the Emperor without Simonie, and being so invested might lawfully
receive consecration of their archbishop; but he who were chosen by the
clergy, and people, and not invested by the Emperor, should be consecrated of
no man: yet when he was set at liberty again, and breaking his covenants
(...) with open perjury, condemned both the grant which he had made to the
Emperor, and the Emperor himself, and that with the consent of many Bishops
of sundry prou^^^es in The former in the year 1112. the later 1116.
two Councels held at Rome; the Emperor, afraid of his fathers end, was glad
to surrender the grant of Pope Paschal into the hands of Pope Calistus, and to
restore him the possessions and Regalia bea^i (...).
royalties of S. Peter. Thus was the Pope n^w become at the least the Emperors
peer. One policy there is left, whereby he became the Emperors Lord. When
Charles the great, king of ^raunce by inheritance, of Italy by conquest, had
after great benefits bestowed on the Papacy restored Pope Leo cast out by the
Romans, and come himself in person to Rome to see him settled: Sigon lib. ^
the Pope in recompense and token of a thankful mind thought good to honor
him with the title of Emperor. Which he did with ioly ceremonies and
solemnity, laying an imperial robe upon his body, a crown of gold upon his
head, anointing him (as ^. King. 1.3^.
Sadok did Solomon) with oil, the people crying out thrice with joyful
shoutes, God save Charles the great, the godly Emperor of the Romans. This
honor, the posterity of Charles which succeeded him, Sigon. lib. 5. in Carolo
Cal^^:
some times the Pope desired them, In Ludouico Balbo, and Carolo Crasso.
sometimes themselves desired and used to receive with the like solemnity and
holy pomp at Rome, as their father had. In process of time the race of
Charles lost the kingdom of Italy: and Otho the German got it (as Charles
did) by conquest. lib. 6.
Otho was crowned Emperor with the like solemnity. lib 7.
And, from that time forward, he that was king of Germany held also the
kingdom of Italy with the western Empire, and therefore did receive three
crowns: one of Germany at Aken, by the Bishop of Men's; an other of Italy at
Milan, by the Bishop of Milan; the third of the Empire at Rome by the Pope.
Neither did he use the title of Emperor before the Pope had crouned him: but
was called the king of Germany and Italy, or, the king of Romans, and
Imperator de^^gnatus.
Emperor appointed. But the Pope, as a wise and politic Prince, turned this
point of ceremony into a point of substance, when he saw his time: and because
he gave the title of Emperor, and set a crown on Emperors heads; he sought
to persuade men that he gave the Empire and right of the crown. The time fit
to do it was when the troubles of the two Henry's, and the Councels sentence
against Bishop Vecilo, had bredde an opinion that the Pope had right to depose
Emperors. For thereof men would gather that he had right to make them also.
Wherefore Sigon. lib. 11.
when Lotharius, the next after the Henry's, was crowned Emperor at Rome: Pope
Innocent the second, who set the crown upon him, In the year of Christ 1133.
caused the doing of it to be painted on a wall in his palace of Lateran, and
under the picture these verses to be written. Rex venit ante fores,
iurans prius vrbis honores:
Post homo fit Papae,
sumit quo dante coronam.
The king does come before the gate*
first swearing to the cities state:
The Popes The Popes vasall. For homo here is uses, as the name of homage is
deri^ed from it. So that it notes the duty and service, which tenants and
vasals do owe unto their Lords.
man then does he become,
and of his gift does take the crown.


So finely by the Popes painting, and poetry, was the feate wrought, and as it
were the wheel of things turned about: that, whereas the Pope before held his
Princedome of the Emperor in fee: now must the Emperor be thought to hold his
Empire of the Pope in ^ee. For though it be said that Pict^ribus a^que Po^^^^.
Painters and Poets may feign by authority: yet he and his mates, w^o fained
this pageant, did mean it should be taken for a matter of truth. The proof
whereof appeared In the year of Christ 1157.
not many years after in the next Emperor that was crowned at Rome, even
Friderike the first. Sigon. lib. 12.
The Pope who crowned him (it was Pope Nicolas Breake-speare, called Adrian the
fourth,) sending by occasion two legates unto him, Rowland, and Bernard,
Cardinals, with letters concerning the thing for which he sent them: did
mention therein what honorable courtesy he had showed the Emperor, and given
him this Beneficium.
benefit, that he Contulimus.
bestowed the crown of the Empire on him. Which letters being read, the
Emperor and his Nobles took it very evil that the Pope should write that he
had given the Emperor the crown of the Empire by way of a benefit. And
fearing least thereby he should mean that, Quod quidam etiam dictitabant.
which some avouched also commonly, that the kings of Germany do obtain the
Empire by the benefit of the Popes, (for Siquidem idem etiam sub Lothario
pictura Lateranensi ae versibus haud ambigue erat expressum.
the picture and verses in the Palace of Lateran did plainly signify as
much:) they could not contain their grief, but they must needs say, that the
Empire is not the Popes benefit. To whom when Cardinal Rowland, one of the
legates, replied, And whose is it then, if it be not the Popes? Otho, the
County Palatine, standing by, was moved so with that speech, that he drew his
sword and would have slain the Cardinal. But the Emperor stayed him, and
willed the legates to get them back to Rome straight, and signified by letters
throughout all Germany what embassage the Pope had sent him: adding that he
acknowledged the Empire to be given him by God alone, and by the Princes who
had chosen him; and therefore desired them, that they would not suffer the
majesty of the Empire, so worthily gotten by their ancestors, to be empaired
by their default. The Pope, understanding by the return of his legates both in
what peril they had been, and what the Emperor answered: wrote letters
thereupon to the Bishops of Germany, wherein he willed them to deal with the
Emperor and make him do his duty. The Bishops spoke unto him, and he
answered them, yt he obeyed the Pope gladly: but the crown of the Empire he
accounted him self to have received of God chiefly, and next of the Princes
Electours of Germany; his regal coronation, of the Bishop of Cooleine; his
imperial, of the Pope. As for the Cardinals whom the Pope had sent: he
forbad them to go forward, because he found that they had brought letters from
the Pope to the endamaging of the Empire. Heretofore the Empire has lifted up
the Church: but now the Church (says he) does press down the Empire. ^^ptum
est ^ pictura^inde ve^tum est ad scripturam: nunc scripturae autoritas
comparatur.
It began with painting: thence it came to writing: now is the writing sought
to be maintained by authority. I will not suffer, nay I will rather leave my
crown, then I will permit the authority of the Empire to be diminished any
way. Pictura deleatur: scriptura ^^^ocetur.
Let the picture be razed out, let the writing be called back, that there
remain not monuments still to raise strife between the kingdom and the
priesthood: and then shall there no duty be wanting of my part toward the
church of Rome. This answer of the Emperor seemed so reasonable to the German
Bishops: that they advised and wished Pope Breake-speare to pacify his wrath
with a gentler embassage. The Popes chiefest instruments to pluck down Henry
the third, were the German Bishops. Wherefore Pope Breake-speare, perceiving
that they were not so forward against Friderike, as they had been against
Henry, was f^ine to follow their advise. So he sent two wiser and discreeter
legates, writing by them unto him, that there was no cause why he should be
offended with his former letters. For though other men (says he) take the word
[benefit] in an other sense; yet you should have taken it in that in which we
took it, and which it seems to have by the first original. For Beneficium.
non se (...), sed bonum ^a^tum. Feud^m, a thing holden in see, (...) man (...)
of a^ (...), and owes him (...). ho^o^, and (...) for it.
it is compounded of two words, good and fact: and it signifies, not a thing
that is given in ^ee, but a good fact. As it is used throughout the whole
course of the holy scripture: wherein we are said to be guided and nourished
by the benefit of God, Non (...).
not as though we had these things of him in fee, but as of his blessing, and
a good fact of his. Now we (as you know) did set upon your head the crown of
the Empire so well and so honorably, that all men may judge it was a goodfact.
And so were the other words mistaken also, we bestowed on you the crown of
the Empire. For by this word [ Co^^u^^^us tibi insigne imperialis (...), id
es^, imposiumus.
bestowed] we meant nothing else, but, we set it upon you. The Emperor had
required the picture to be razed out, the writing to be called back. But he
must be content (and so he was) with this Papal mitigation of the writing,
made somewhat ^mother by the Legates. The picture was too good an evidence to
be defaced. And, for all this smoothing of the writing too, Pope Breake-speare
ceased not to quarrel with him still, and to encroch upon him. The Emperor
exacted hi^ tribute to be taken up in the Popes dominion: the Pope sent him
word that he should not exact it, but at his coronation only. The Emperor
required Bishops to do him homage and to be sworn to him: the Pope wrote
sharp letters and reproved him for it. The Emperor, being offended with the
Popes letters, wrote somewhat sharply back, and Friderike the Emperor to
Adr^^n the Pope.
set his name before the Popes, and That is (as we say in English) he did Thou
him.
spoke to him in the singular number: the Pope again wrote to him that he
marueiled why he gave not due reverence to Beato Petro and sanctae Romanae
Ecclesiae.
S. Peter, and to the holy Church of Rome. The Pope required him not to bind
the Bishops of Italy to do him homage* the Emperor said he was content not
to seek their homage, if they would be content not to hold his lordships. The
Pope would not have him send messengers to Rome, unless he made him privy to
it, since all in that city were S. Petri magistratus cum vniuersis regalibus.
S. Peter's magistrates, with the whole royalty: the Emperor said that that
point did need more consultation; for so the Roman Emperor should have the
bare name of a ruler only, if the City of Rome, whence he is named the Roman
Emperor, were not subject to him. Upon these dealinges and answers too and
fro, the matter was debated between the Popes legates (four Cardinals) and
the Emperor, to bring them to agreement. The Emperor professed that he would
both give and receive judgment. The Popes legates answered, that, Aequum (...)
vt solum acciperet N^que (...).
it was meet, he should receive it only: since the Pope is not subject to any
man's judgment. Whereto when the Emperor said that he would stand to the
arbitriment of six Cardinals, and six Bishops, or Princes: the legates were
content to write thereof unto the Pope. They wrote, and the Pope refused the
condition. To be short they agreeed not, while Pope Breake-speare lived. But
the lusty Cardinal Rowland who succeeded him, and being Pope was named
Alexander the third, Sigo^ l^b. ^^.
did so rowse up Fridericke with their old policy of excommunications Papal,
and rebellions, that Lib. 14.
after great dangers of his state and life, he was enforced to yield at
length and ask him pardon. Which being granted on conditions, In the year of
Christ 1177.
he came to Pope Rowland in the city of Venice, and kissed there his feet,
and gave him the upper hand, and Palaf^idum ascen^^^ti ^t^epam ^en^it.
held his stirrup while he was m^unting on his palf^ie. So by treading down
the Emperor Fridericke, the Popedom was advanced to be the highest state in
earth; and Peter's chair got Caesar's right. If Sigo^. lib 15.
Henry the fifth (the son of Fridericke) sought to stay it, by seazing on S.
Petri patrimonium, and patrimonia Ecclesiae.
S. Peter's lands, and giving them to three Dukes to be held of him in fee: he
sought to stay a watercourse, which the more you stop it, the fiercer it
does break out. For Philip his brother, the greatest of the three, was
excommunicated straight: and Pope Innocentius the third (watching his time)
drew the two swords out against them all: discharged their subjects of their
allegiance and oath; and set both his clergy and laity upon them; neither left
them til he h^d vanqui^ht them, what with curses, what with wars; and that
which Pope Rowland had well begoon, In the year of Christ 1198.
he nobly finished. Thus have I touched briefly the story of the temporal
state and kingdom of the Popes, how ^h^y clime^ up to the soueraintie of it.
The truth of which story is clear by the monuments of historians worthy
credit, Histor. Longobard. lib. 6. and Miscell. l. 21.
Paulus Diaconus, Oth^ Frising in Chron. lib. 5.6. and 7. and de reb. gest.
Frideric. imper^t.
Otho, De rebus gest. Friderici imperat.
Radeuicus, De rebus gest. Francorum.
Aimo^nus, Chronic. lib. 2.
Rhegino, In Chronico.
Sigibertus, and Ado Vienn. in Chron. aetat. 6. Witichind. de reb. gest. Saxon.
Gotthofrid. Viterb. Chron. part. 17. Lambert. Schafnab. in histor. Germanor.
others who lived at the same times, wherein the several things were done.
Yea Ado Vienn. aetat. 6. A^moin. lib. 4. c. 90. Rhegino lib. ^. Otho Frit. de
gest. Frider. l. 1. c. 7. Radeuic. lib. 1. cap. 10 15 and 16. Sigibert. in
Chron. ad ann. Christ. 1088. and so forth the rest.
they, in sundry points and circumstances of importance, have opened partly
more, partly the same more forcibly, then as I have touched it. But lest you
should suspect that some of them perhaps speak somewhat of affection, against
the Popes, or for the Emperors: I have contented my self to touch no more,
nor with more advantage, then Sigonius in his story of the kingdom of Italy,
presented To James Bon-companion, P^pe Gregory the thirtenths son. Sigon
praefat. ad histor.
to the Popes son, and written for the Popes glory (as it became the Popes
reader,) has set down, out of them and other monuments, as most true. Whereby
it is very apparent and evident th^^ under pretense of the Churches state, of
the Church Discipline in excommunication, of the Church-doctrine in meritorious
works, of the Church authority in forgiving sins, in teaching men their
duties, in dispensing with oaths, and lastly of the Kiantz. Saxoniae. lib. 9.
cap. 15. Solen^tates per ecclesiam introductae.
Church-solemnities in setting crowns on Emperors heads; the Pope has
gathered jewels to deck the triple Which crown they call Regnum. Platin. in
Paul secund. Guicci ardin. hist. (...) lib. 9.
crown of his worldly kingdom, and has made himself not only a Prince, but
also a Prince of Princes of the earth. It was almost twelve hundred years
after Christ, when he obtained this soueraintie. Since the which time he has
more notoriously built up his Babylon with the stones of Sion. The common
wealth is witness hereof in the calamit^^s of her civil governors. Whom, by
the devises of the same treacheries, he has deprived of kingdoms, goods,
liberty, and life, when they have stood in his light: as the realms of
Polyd. Virg. hist. Angl. l. 15
England, of Paul. Aemy l. de reb. gest. Frane. lib. 8. Gaguin. lib. 7.
France, of Krantz. Saxon. l. 7. c. 34. and 38. and l. 8. c. 6. and l. 9. c. 14.
Germany, of Kiantz. Wandaliae. l. 12. c. 36.
Boheme, of Bellai. comment. de reb. Gall. lib. 1.
Navarre, and the states of Nic. Machian. histor. Flor. lib. 8.
Florence, Ioui. de vit. Leon. decim. lib. 3. and de vit. Adrian. sexti.
Vrbine, Guicciardin, hist. Ital. lib. 8.
Venice, in Italy, have tried to their smart. But the Church has tried it
with greater smart in her spiritual pastors. For, as Samuel, when the
Israelites would have a king to rule them, (as other nations had,) 1. Sam. 8.11.
told them that the king, who should reign over them, would play the king
with them, and theirs; he would take their sons and appoint them to wait
upon him, to be his horsemen, footmen, captains, to ear his land, to reap
his harvest, to make him instruments of war, and instruments to serve his
charets; he would take their daughters to dress him sweet ointments, and be
his cooks, and bakers; he would take their fields, and vineyardes, and olive
trees, the best, and give them to his servants; yea the tenth of their seed,
and of their vineyardes, and give it to his courtiers, and to his servants; he
would take their men, their maids, their youth, their cattle, and put them to
his work; he would take the tenth of their flocks; and, to conclude, they
should be his servants: even so, when the Pope had gotten the kingdom, that
is, the supremacy, over the Israelites of God, that is, Christians; he took
their sons and daughters, nay their fathers and mothers, who should beget
them in the gospel, and feed them with the milk of life, and appointed them
to serve him, to be his Chauncellors, Treasurers, Secretaries, Masters of
requests, Clerks of the Escheker, Legates, in peace to go on embassages, in
war to look unto his armies; he took their bishoprics, and benefices, and
prebendes, the best, and gave them to his servants, yea the first fruits and
tithes of their livings, and gave them to his Courtiers and to his servants; he
took their pastors, their doctors, their elders, their deacons, and put them
to his work; he took the tithe of their Churches, nay their whole Churches;
and, to conclude, both they and theirs were made to serve him. If you, M. Heart,
who have been at Rome, and seen the Popes person, have not yet perceived this
policy of the Pope: your want of experience, or rather your education in a
Popish Seminary, (where other kind of books are given you to read then as
bewray such mysteries,) may bear the fault of it. But there are two Italians
of your own profession, Franciscus Sansouinus, and Onuphrius the Friar: of
whom Sansouino del govern. de regn. and dell^^ ^epub. lib. 11.
the one has written a treatise of the government of the Court of Rome; Onuphr.
de Roman. Pontisicib. De episcop. tit. and d^^conijs Card. De vitis Pontific.
the other, sundry books of the Popes and Cardinals. By them you may learn
it. For Onuphrius shows Libr. de episcopatibus, titulis, and diaconiis
Cardinalium.
that there are three sorts of the Church Officers which are named Cardinals,
the first Bishops; the second, Priests; and the last, Deacons: Priests, and
Deacons, of the parishes that are within Rome; Bishops, of the cities that lie
near about it. When Rome had received the Christian faith, and the Church
increased there from day to day; the faithful were divided into sundry
parishes for their better government, and had Elders and Deacons ordained to
attend them. Presbyteri.
Elders, or, as you term them, Priests, (and I will call them so, because I
speak of Cardinals known by that title,) were they to whom the charge of
ministering the word and sacracraments; Deacons, to whom the care for the poor
of the church, and their provision, was committed. Now at first, the parishes
had each but one Priest, while they being small, one pastor could discharge the
duty. But after, when the number of the faithful grew, each of them had
more. And Cardinales Presbyteri.
hence did the name of Cardinals arise, that he who was chief amongst the
Priests of one parish was called the Cardinal Priest, that is to say,
principal. In like sort Cardinales Diaconi.
when the several wards of the city could not be served by several Deacons,
but each of them had more: the chief amongst the Deacons of the same ward, was
called the Cardinal Deacon. The name being worshipful amongst Priests and
Deacons of the city of Rome, Cardinales Episcopi.
spread to the Bishops that dwelt near about, and they were called Cardinal
Bishops, though it were long first. For Apud veteres inauditum, Episcopum
Cardinalem dici.
amongst the ancients it was never heard of; neither might with reason, fith
they, being equal in power to other Bishops cannot be called Cardinal in
respect of them. Yet in time, by custom, I know not how, they got it.
Wherefore of the Cardinals of Rome, six are Bishops, the Bishop of Alba,
Tusculum, Praeneste, Sabine, Portuese, and Ostia: the rest, whose number in
old time was certain according to the number of parishes and wards, now they
are more or fewer, as the Pope will, (they were three score and three In the
year of Christ 1557.
when this was written by Onuphrius) but all the rest are Priests, or Deacons
And for almost twelve hundred years after Christ, although the Pope employed
them much in his affairs, yet ordinarily they lived on their charge, and kept
their calling and degree. The honor and power of Cardinal Bishops, was as the
Bishops of other cities. The Cardinal Priests, and Deacons, were neither
Bishops themselves, nor equal unto them in dignity. And if a Cardinal Priest
were chosen (as worthy of a greater charge) to be a Bishop else where: he left
his place in Rome and ceased to be Cardinal, because Antiquis canonibus
cautum, vnum hominem non nisi vno sacerdotio potiri posse.
it is ordered by the ancient rules of ecclesiastical discipline, that one
man may have but one ecclesiastical charge, and therefore no man might be a
Cardinal Priest of Rome, and Bishop of an other Church. But Sub Alexandro
tertio Romana Ecclesia ad maximum in terris fastigium euecta fui^^ Imperatore
^riderico conculcato.
after that the Pope had trodde the Emperor under feet, and lifted up his own
throne above the highest thrones on earth: he lifted up withal Cardinalium
maiestas cum Romani Pontificis autoritate creuit.
the maiest^ie of the Cardinals, as of his Noble men and Counselors, and used
them as principal pillars of his state. He gave to them alone the right of
choosing the Pope: the people, Prince, and clergy being robbed of it. He
decked them with honor of wearing redd hattes: and going, first, before
Bishops; afterward, before Archbishops; and at the last, before Patriarchs.
Onuphr. de Romany Pontificibus and Cardinalibus.
He chose the greatest Prelates of sundry dioceses and provinces, as of York
(for example) and Canterbury in England; Rhemes and Roan, in France; Toledo,
in Spain; Lisbon, in Portugal; Milan, Rauenna, Venice, in Italy; in Germany
Coolcin, Trier, and Men's; in Boheme, Praga; Cracouia, in Poleland; Strigonium,
in Hungary: and so forth the chiefest Bishops of all Christendom, to be his
Cardinal Priests and Deacons. Yea, they were glad to be so, because the
Cardinalship was a degree unto the Popedom. De episcopat* tit. and diacon^^^
Card.
Neither did he accustom them to give over their Bishoply charge, that others
placed in their rooms might supply that duty, and they might attend their
charge of Cardinal Priestship and Deaconship in Rome: but for the better
maintenance of their own port, and strengthening of the Popedom, he suffered
them to keep the livings of their Bishoprics and Cardinalships both. Wherein
least he might seem to break that rule of discipline, one man to have but one
charge: he took order that they should not be called Bishops though they had
Bishoprics. How then? Forsooth, a Bishop, if he were made Cardinal Deacon,
must be called elect Bishop: if he were made Cardinal Priest, must be called
perpetual administrator of his Bishopric. As namely Thomas Wolsey Archbishop
of York, when he was made Cardinal parish priest of Rome, he must be called,
not Archbishop, but Cardinal Woolsey, Presbyter Cardinalis, tit. S. Caeciliae,
perpetuus administrator archiepiscopatus Eboracensis.
Priest of S. Cecilies parish, and perpetual administrator of the
Archbishopricke of York. And Aeneas Siluius, Bishop of Siena, when he was made
Cardinal Deacon, must be called, not Bishop, but Cardinal Siluius, Diaconus
Cardinal^s S. Eustachii, electus episcopus Senensis.
Deacon of S. Eustaces, and elect Bishop of Siena. A shift somewhat strange,
and such as a while the Popes themselves were ashamed off: at least they used
it sparingly, until the time of Clemens the fifth. He, when the yse was
broken, did wade more boldly through. And after him his successors, who staide
in France, as he did, and set the Sea of Rome in the city of Auinion, did
bring it to a common practice: in so much that none almost was made Cardinal,
who had not a Bishopric either In titulum.
in title, or In commendam.
in commenda, or In perpetuam administrationem.
in perpetual administration. So by these devises (which all were invented by
the Popes at Auinion) they had now disfurnished many Churches of Bishops, to
furnish, in word, the Church of Rome with Priests, and Deacons; in deed, the
Court of Rome with rich and mighty Cardinals. Yet this is the least part of
that abomination of desolation, which they have set in the holy places. For
under pretense, that it is their duty to see that all Churches be provided of
fit pastors, they have Reseruationes, and prouisiones.
reserved Church-liuings, when and which they listed, to their own bestowing,
and them have they seized on to maintain the port of their Cardinals too. This
was not only done, but also professed to be done to that end by Clemens the
sixth. Who having made new Cardinals, reserved the benefices in England that
were void, and should be void next, (besides Bishoprics and Abbeies) to the
sum of two thousand marks, and for them he provided two Cardinals to be
their pastors. Whereof when stay was made by king Edward the third, who seeing
how the Church and realm were both decayed by those provisions for aliens, did
inhibit them to be se^u^d: Epist. Clemen^^s Papae ad R^^em Angliae Edwa. du^
tert^um. Walsingam hist. Angl. i^ Edward. (...).
Pope Clemens wrote unto him, that having lately made new Cardinals of the
Church of Rome, he could not with reason but provide for them, Secundum status
sui decenti^m.
as it was seemly for their state; and this he had done by providing benefices
which either were presently void, or should be after, unto a certain sum,
for two of them in England, for the rest in other kingdoms and coasts of
Christendom; through all the which almost he had made the like provision for
new Cardinals, neither amongst them all had found any Rebell^onem.
rebellion, (so he termed it,) save this in England only. The Cardinals, which
Clemens had Onuphr. i^ ^om. Pon^^^. and Ca^di^.
then made, were twelve. Two of them he furnished with so many benefices, as
should be worth two thousand marks. I cannot say precisely what number that
might be. But it must be noted that (as the rate of money and price of things
has grown) a benefice, worth three hundred marks or better now, was then not
worth a hundred; neither did the Pope choose the fattest benefices but such as
next came to the net: and he meant his Cardinals should have that pension
clear, besides their farmers shares, and vicars, or curates. So that the two
Cardinals (by probable conjecture) might have an hundred benefices before they
had their yearly two thousand mark pension. But let it be eighty, seventy,
sixty: let it be fifty: or, if that seem too much, let it be forty. The
Pope did provide, as for them, so for the rest: who being ten mo, must have two
hundred by proportion. Which proportion if it be drawn to all, nay to half,
nay to a quarter of the Cardinals, whom Clemens and his successors have made
since that time Since the year of Christ 1343. in the which Pope Clemens m^de
those proui^ions for his Cardinals.
for these twelve score years: the number of parishes will rise to many
thousands, which they have laid waste, as flocks without pastors, to
maintain the state of their Cardinals only. Yet this is but a part of that
abomination of desolation which they have set in the holy places. For as though
the profits of so many Churches were too small a living for the Priests and
Deacons of ye Court of Rome: they have gone forward from pluralities of
benefices to pluralities of bishoprics. And under the color of Commend^^^
al^cuius cur^ whence the name of commenda comech* c. Obitum. c Catinensis.
Did. 61. c. Clericum. c. qui plures. 2. q. 1. c. dudum. 2. de elect. c. Nemo.
de elect* in Sexto.
commending (as they name it,) that is, commiting them to some of trust for a
time, till good and godly Bishops might be provided for them: Onuphr. de
e^iscopatibus ^^^ulis and diacon^^s Card.
they have put two Bishoprics unto one Cardinal, yea sometimes three, yea
four, yea five, yea some times six. Cardinal Hippolytus, Guicciard. h^^t.
Ital. lib 6.
who plucked out the eyes of the Lord Julius his own natural brother, because
a damsel, whom he loved, did love his brother more then him, and confessed to
him that it was the beauty of his brothers eyes, wherewith she was so
ravished: Onuph. lib. de Romans Pont. and Card.
this Cardinal being deacon of S. Lucies in Rome, and Archpriest of S. Peter's,
had the Bishoprics of Milan, Capua, Strigonium, Agria, Mutina, and Ferrara.
Of the which six, three be Archbishoprickes of sundry kingdoms and
dominions, Milan, of Lombardie; Capua, of Naples; Strigonium, of Hungary;
distant each from other some hundreds of miles: the other three are somewhat
nearer to their fellows, one in Hungary, two in Italy. But if the Popes have
taken six dioceses and provinces lying so far a sunder, and made them all
desolate of Bishops and Archbishops, to maintain one Cardinals pomp, and him
a Deacon: what has the desolation been which they have brought on dioceses
and provinces that might be joined more fitly, to maintain the rest, and them
of higher calling, as Cardinal Priests and Bishops? Yet behold a greater
abomination of desolation then this, nay, then al these, which I have touched
hitherto. For Onuphr. de episcop tit. and diac. Card.
the liuinges of the Cardinals (with Decret Nicolai quart. Council. Basil.
Session. 23.
auailes thereto belonging) were great of themselves, and did perhaps content
some: or if they did not, yet the number of those caterpillars was small in
comparison. But the Popes had other hungry knights about them, kinsmen,
officers, servants, retainers, vasals, hangers on, and all the rabble of their
Court, whose liuing^s were not crummes of ye Cardinals tables, whose number was
as Exodus 10.15.
the grasshoppers which covered the face of Egypt. And they were also made
pastors of Churches, (not to feed them, but to sleese them,) by the same
conueyances of Papal reseruations, commendaes, provisions, and other such
Egyptian t^ickes. An example of it in our Matt. Paris in Henri^. tert. in the
year 12^0.
English Chronicles of Henry the third: in whose days the Pope enjoined by one
mandate to ye Bishops of Canterbury, Lincoln, and Sarisburie, that they
should provide for Trece^tis Romany.
three hundred Romans in benefices next ^^cant, and they should give no
benefice until they had p^ouided for so many, Compe^e^ter.
competently. But what speak I of three hundred? The Romans and Italians were
multiplied so within a few years in English church livings, by Gregory the
ninth much, but more by Innocentius the fourth: that In the ye^re 1245.
when the king caused a vewe thereof to be taken throughout the whole realm,
the sum of their revenues was found to be yearly Sexagi^^^ (...). ^^rum.
three score thousand marks, to the which sum the yearly revenues of the
crown of England did not amount. The king though misliking the disorder
greatly, yet being loath to meddle with the redress of it for fear of the Pope,
(the stripes of whose wrath against his father king John, against his coosen
Otho the Emperor, and Othos successor Fridericke the second, were bleeding
fresh before his eyes:) Epist. magnatum and vniuersitatis ^eg^^ Angliae ad
^^nocent. Papam in Conc Lugdun.
the Nobles and Commons sent a supplication to Pope Innocentius and the
general Council assembled then at Lions. Wherein, upon complaint that
Italici, quorum nume^a^ iam est infinitus.
an infinite number of Italians in England had the charge of flocks, who
neither fed, nor knew, nor cared for their sheep, Fructus tantum percipiunt,
ex^ra regnum aspo^tantes.
but received only the fruits and revenues, and carried them out of the
realm: that the yearly rents of Italians in England amounted to three score
thousand marks, and upward, besides diverse other auailes, which they reaped
where they sowed not: that England hoped for some relief of these grieuances
when Innocentius was made Pope, but now it is oppressed more out of measure by
the Popes legate, who entering late into the land with larger power and
commission then ever legate had, does exceed excessiuely; he gives to
Italians some benefices already void, worth thirty marks or more yearly;
some, that fall void by the decease of Italians, he thrusts new Italians
into; some he does provide when they shall be void to be reserved for
Italians; moreover, he wresteth out immoderate pensions from religious persons,
and Excommunicationis and interdicti sententijs passim supponit.
uses to excommunicate and interdict of Church-seruice, of sacraments, of
Christian burial, them who gainesay him and resist him: upon this complaint
the Nobles and Commons of the realm of England made humble suit unto his
fatherhood, that he would extend the hand of mercy to his children, and ease
them of those burdens of grieuances and oppressions detestable to God and men.
The messengers, by whom this supplication was sent, presented it before the
Pope unto the general Council. To whom they made complaint withal of a
clause in the Popes The Popes letters are called bulls, of bul^^, a tablet or
bosse: because a bosse of lead (...) hanged to t^^m like a ^^^let, (having S.
Peter's image and S. Paul's on one side, the Popes name on the other) with the
which they are sealed.
bulls, called [ That is to say, Notwithstanding.
Non obstante,] by which he brake all laws and orders of the church to serve
these his purposes. For whatsoever made against the tenor of his bull, he used
to remove it with a Non obstante. As, for example, the Churches law and order
confirmed by a Council, was, that one man should have but one benefice, and
none should have any, but he, who could himself discharge the duty
personally. The Pope Matt. Paris in Henrico tert in the year 1231.
sends forth his bulls for five Romans, the son of Rumfrede, and such, and
such, that they shall be provided for of so many benefices as may be worth to
each of them a hundred pound yearly, Non obstante that law. Pope Innocent was
grieved at this supplication, and complaint of England, which touched his
supremacy so near to the quick. Council. Lateran. sub Alexandr. tert. c 13.
Howbeit for the present he made them fair promises, and sent them sundry
privileges from the Council of Lions: that Patrones thenceforth should Libere
absque cuius^ibet contradictionis obstaculo.
freely present, and Bishops should admit fit persons to benefices, who
would and could well serve the charge: that the Clerk of his Escheker (that
was his legate) should provide but for twelve more, without consent of the
Patrones; that if English men would be studious, honest, and thankeful,
(chiefly the sons of Noble men,) he would provide for them also, Super
beneficiorum pluralitate hono^ifice dispensare.
and dispense honorably with the worthiest of them for plurality of benefices;
finally, that no Italian should immediately succeed an Italian; which was
obtained for their treacheries, who when one that had a benefice was dead,
would foyst an other into his room. And these things were promised: but they
were promised only. For after that the Council was dissolved once, the Pope
played the Pope, and Omnia haec and alia per hoc repagulun. [Non obstante]
infirmantur. In the year 1246.
brake them all with Non obstante. And as Exodus 5.9.
Pharao hardened his heart against Israel, and laid more work upon them, when
they desired ease of bondage: so did Innocent against England. In so much, that
after six or seven years, when a view was taken again of the brick made of
our English Israel for ye Italian Pharao: ye sum of those revenues which
before amounted to three score thousand marks, In the year 1252. ad plusquam
septuaginta millia marcarum.
was grown to three score thousand and ten with the advantage. Now if the
outrage of this abominat^on were so monstrous in one realm* what was it in
all, throughout the rest of Christendom? If Popes did so exceed above three
hundred years ago, in the prime of their Papacy, when the iointes of it were
yet scarsely knit: what is it likely they did after? If by one policy they
brought so great wealth unto their Court and state, yea, by part of one applied
to furnish their Italians: what may be thought of the same, applied to furnish
the home-borne, each in their own country? What of so many others, some of
them as fruitful as this, some more fruitful? What of their whole government:
wherein they have claimed a fulness of power to do what they list, and they
have put their claim in practice? What words may serve to utter the spoils
which they have made of the Church of Christ; first, by ordeining of the
Church Officers, in creating Bishops, Archbishops, Patriarchs, and weauing
palls for them; in disanulling the elections of some who lawfully were chosen;
in granting some (who could not be chosen lawfully) to have the rooms by
postulations; in chopping and changing their persons from one See to an other
by translations, and their dioceses by divisions; in giving pastors livings
away ^uer their heads by Expectatiugratiae.
reuersions, or aduowsons; in shaping new creatures, Dominicans, or
blacke-friers, (as they were called commonly,) ^
Preaching Friars, and Franciscans* or begging friars the Popes spies.
Minorites, and giving them the power of pastors; in dispensations with boys,
dispensations with bastards, dispensations with idiotes, that they may have the
charge of souls; dispensations with murderers, with adulterers, with
Simoniaks, that they may keep their benefices; dispensations for pluralities,
that one may have twenty; dispensations for non-residence, that they need
never come unto them; to be short, in reseruaes, acces^es, regresses,
coadiutories, unions, preuentions, permutations, and a thousand such devises
belonging to the market of benefices and bishoprics. Secondly, by dealing
with the Church causes: wherein they have received appeals from all quarters,
that they might fish in troubled water; they have fetched persons a thousand
miles off by citations to their consistory; they have disturbed the peace and
discipline of the Church by sending legates a latere, by putting matters to
their delegates, by priuileging men from laws, and exempting inferiors from
their superiors regiment; they have multiplied human decrees, and made them
snares to catch fowls, laws, that none shall mary in this or that degree of
carnal kindred, or Spiritual kindred, is a kindred imagined by the Pope to be
betwixt them, who are lincked by suretyship for (...) in baptism, as
godfathers, godmothers, godchildren godbrothers, godsisters, and gossyps, as
they are called.
spiritual; canons, that men whose persons have such or such a blemish shall
not ascend to priestly orders; vows, of pilgrimage, of chastity, of poverty,
of obedience, of Nunrie, Moonkry, Fryery; which all they have released for
money; yea, they have released oaths, solemn oaths, and have given licenses to
commit perjury: they have made sale of forgiveness of sins, and merchandise
of men's souls: they have turned repentance into pains of penance, and penance
into mines of silver and gold: they have proclaimed Jubilees of pardons
plenarie (as they call them) to all who came to Rome every hundredth year, and
visited Churches there Hic des deuo^^^ coelestibus associote. Mentes aegrotae
per munera sunt ibi lotae. Ergo venitote gentes a sede re notae. Qui da cis,
estote certi de diuite dote.
devoutly: these Jubilees they have abridged from an hundred years to fifty,
from fifty to thirty three, from thirty three to twenty five; and because
all Christians came to not Rome for them, they have sent their pedlers abroad
with p^ckes of pardons, that all might buy them at their doors: they have
reserved cases and crimes of greatest value, as Simonie, Sodomie, offense of
Church-liberty, from which none might absolve but they: and, to absolve men
upon doing of penance, they have built at Rome a Papal exchange called the
Penitentiarie, where these absolutions are sold at certain rates: neither
being satisfied by this exchange with the living, they have sold their wares
unto the dead also (but ye living must pay for them,) so many crowns, so many
souls to be forgiven all their sins, and rid out of the pains of
purgatory. Thirdly, by disposing of the Church-goods, which they have conveyed
(as Luc. 16.8.
the unjust, but wise steward*) from the Lord to serve them selves: they have
charged the liuinges of Churches and Churchmen with pensions, tributes,
subsidies: they have exacted of them fifteenes, tenthes, fiftes, thirdes,
moyities of their substance, to the maintenance of wars which they have waged
with the Emperors: they have robbed benefices to enrich Abbeies by
appropriations, that afterward themselves might gleane the greater fruit of
Abbeyes: they have made Prelates, and such as would be Prelates, to compound
with them selves, for Pa^les are little tipets made of holy wool of the Popes
lambs. A todde whereof is worth him more then a kings ransom. For the power of
Archbishops and Patriarchs does lie in them. And they who will wear them, must
fetch them far, and buy them ^eare.
palls, for crosier-staues, for miters, for ringes, for signing of bills, and
to compound with their servants for writing, perusing, subscribing, allowing,
conferring, registring, taxing, receiving, keeping, delivering, and for the
coarde and lead, wherewith their bulls are tied and sealed: they have devised
new officers, yea new heardes and companies of officers in their chauncery,
purposely to this intent that they might sell those rooms, the which being
sold for many thousand crowns they forced poor suitors, who came to Rome for
grace or justice, to pay it, by enhauncing the charges of their bulls: the
army of their Registers, Notaries, Protonotaries, Enditers, Writers,
Abridgers, Dataries, Rescribendaries, Accounters, Soliciters, Plumba^^res. So
they call the cle^kes of the signet, because they seal with lead
Plummers, Regarders, Regentes, Poursuiuants, Clerks of their Ceremonies,
Clerks of their chamber, Clerks of their eschequer, and infinite other
peasantes they have kept in wages with the price of Christians blood: they have
raised an yearly and ordinary revenue of first fruits, of tithes, of the
goods of Abbats, Bishops, and Cardinals deceased, which they have seized upon,
as exectors, and when they have licensed them to make testaments, yet have they
kept them selves a share, as, of every Cardinal (beside five hundred ducates
which he pays for his The Pope does give a ring to him whom he creates
Cardinal. And for that ring the Cardinal at his death must pay the Pope five
hundred ducats* which is some what deerer then goldsmiths sell them in
cheapside.
ring) all his chappell-iewels, ornaments, and vessels, whether of gold or
silver, crosses, candlestickes, chalices, Images, and other such eschetes: and,
in a word, their ginnes and hooks have been so many to get the goods of men
out of al coasts, into their coffers, that Theodori^. a Niem in Nemor. union.
T^act. 6. cap. 37.
a Roman Courtier says, Camera Apo^to ica assimilatur mari. in quod intrant
omnia flumina, and non inundat.
the Popes eschequer is like unto the Sea, whereinto all rivers do run, and
yet it ouerfloweth not. Fourthly, by abusing of the Churchcensures: for what
else should I call it? when they have used them as instruments of violence, to
compass all that they did covet. If any, either Patron, or Bishop, or
Archbishop refused to commit the charge of English flocks to Roman pastors, or
rather woolues: if any reproved the wicked sale and godless chaffer of their
dispensations, absolutions, pardons: if any would not yield to pay them such
taxes as they required by their legates, their merchants, their collectors,
their nuntios, spies, and poursuiua^ts: straight, as ye person was, so came a
censure out against him, either suspension from administering his office, or
interditement from use of Church-seruice, or excommunication from the fellowship
of Christians, or citing him to Rome to chastise him by correption, or
denouncing him an heretic if he continued rebellious, and then the secular
power must burn him. A practice so common, that ordinarily the Auditour of the
Popes Eschequer is autorized to excommunicate and execute other censures, if
the Courtisans, (who pay tribute for license to be common whoores) and other
farmers of holy rents, keep not touch in bringing in. And because these
censures have not prevailed always to atchieue their purposes: therefore as
they enlarged them against civil powers to purchase somewhat thence, (as from
the king of England, beside his Peter Pence, a thousand marks yearly, which
yet was but a pety-larceny:) so they strengthened them against ecclesiastical
by the oath of fealty (which they have won of Prelates,) to maintain the
Papacy and royalties of S. Peter. Chiefly by winding in authority withal, that
they may deprive them, and none may deprive Bishops, but they. That if Bishops
will not agree to them in all things, when they are commanded in virtue of
obedience: yet for fear of leesing their liuinges and promotions, yea their
liberty, yea their life, (if they be in the Popes subjection) they may learn
to serve their Lord. But the head of all, whereby those wild boares have made
the chiefest wast of the Lords vineyarde, is the fifth and last point: their
making and establishing of the Church-lawes. For if they had done, and only
done these vilanies: they might seem to have done them, as men, not as Popes;
and it might be hoped, when one tyrant were gone, the next would govern well.
But they have confirmed the doing of them by their laws, and procured those
laws to be received as canons and rules of the Church-gouernment: their
Decretals, their Clementines, their Extrauagants, in deed extrauagant, their
constitutions Apostolic, and their unruly rules of the Apostolic chauncerie.
The gross intent and practice whereof is so palpable, that Budaeus, a learned
lawier, the French kings secretary, making a complaint of the great disorder
of the Popes, and clergy, does lay the blame thereof upon their laws and
jurisdiction. Gulielmus Budaeus de ass and partibus eius, lib. 5.
It is grown (says he) so much out of kind from the ancient love, that
where there was wont to be a motherly lap of equity and goodness, there
seems now to be Litium officina capturaru^ que improb^orum.
a shop of law-quarels, and lewder means to gain by. Thence come those
snares of processes, and cautions of the Popes ordinances, Ad circumscribendam
familiam Domini co^cinnatae.
devised to deceive the household of the Lord. Thence come the punishments of
sin by the purse, to the increase of Prelates profits. Thence Sacrilegae
mundinae.
the sacrilegious and cursed sales of those things which cannot be brought into
men's traffike without abomination. I omit Tesseras non modo veniales sed etiam
^ae^^les.
their dispensations, which give leave for money to sin without punishment,
and license the breach of sacred laws for filthy lucre. So the holy canons
and rules of church discipline, made in better times to guide the life of
cle^gie men: are now become In amusse^ plumbea^ e^asisle, ^uis non videt^
leaden rules, such as Aristotle says the rules of Lesbian building were. For
as leaden and soft rules do not direct the building with an equal tenor, but
are bowed to the building at the lust of the builders: so are the Popes canons
made flexible as lead and wax, that Iam diu.
now this great while the decrees of our ancestors, and the Popes canons serve
not to guide men's manners, but (that I may so say) Arg^ntariae facutandae.
to make a bank and get money. These things In the year of Christ 1514. about
a three years before ^eo the tenth grew to that outrage which Luther dealt
against. (...) lib. 13. Slei^an. lib. 1.
wrote Budaeus, before Luther stirred against the Popes pardons. So manifestly
tended the laws of the Popes to their own profit, and not to the Churches,
even in the eyes of sober Papists. And thus have you the sum of that which I
said you might learn by the writings of your own men, Onuphrius, and
Sansouinus. For whereas the Fathers of the Council of Basil, entending and
endeavoring to reform the Church, did straiten the fulness of the Popes power,
by Council. Basil. Session. 7.12.23. and 31.
cutting off the most of his reseruations, all his Sess. 31.
aduowsons, and Sess. 12.21. and 23.
compositions; by abbridging his Sess. 31.
citations, Sess. 26.
dispensations, Sess. 20. and 31.
appeals, Sess. 4. and 23.
the number and liuinges of his Cardinals; and chiefly by Sess. 2.3.18.26.31*
and 33*
defining (after the Council. Constant. Sess. 4. and ^
Council of Constance,) that the Pope is bound to obey the Council, and so is
subject to it: In ^oman. Pontif. and Cardinalib.
Onuphrius says thereof, that they under pretense of reforming the church did
seek to take away and abrogate altogether the most of Priuilegi^.
the privileges of the church of Rome, yea them that were Magis necessaria.
most needful. Which sentence bewrays the mysteries that I spoke off, if it
be marked well. Chiefly, if it be joined with his De episcop. tit. and diacon.
Cardinalium.
discourse of Cardinals, and In vitis Po^tificum ad^unctis Platinae.
story of the Popes lives: wherein he declares to what end they used those
most needful privileges. Howbeit, in As namely in the lives of Alexa^^er ye
sixth and Leo (...) tenth.
their practice of the fowlest of them, he is somewhat close: and partly does
smooth them, partly does pass them over. But Sansouinus is more open: though
as a friend also of the Popes state. For, setting forth Gouerno della Corte
Roman. Del gou. de reg. and delle repub. lib. 11.
the government of the Court of Rome, first, in the Consistory; next, in the
Penitentiarie; then, in ye Courts of requests, one of grace, the other of
justice; afterward, in the Chauncerie; and last of all in the Escheker: he
touches in effect as much as I have said of the excesses of the Popes, in
ordeining the officers, dealing with the causes, disposing the goods, abusing
the censures, and making laws of the Church. Yea, a point more; which shows
manifestly their growing out of kind from Bishoply state to Princely: to
weete, that there is an ordinary Prelate, called Vicario di Roma.
the Vicar of Rome, to whom they have committed the charge of al those things
within the Roman diocese, that belong to any Bishop in his diocese, and so to
them in theirs, as Bishops of Rome properly. In fine, if any branch of the
particular points, wherewith I have charged them, be not so plain and full in
Sansouinus, or Onuphrius: I shall declare it farther, and prove it, if you
will, by the records, and testimonies of your own Matthew Pa^is, and Thomas
Walsingam, in the English story: Guicciardin, in the Italian: Aemylius, in the
French: Krantzius, in the Saxon: Theodorike Niem, of the Popes: and so forth
others, of other states and countries.
Chroniclers, Franciscus Picus Mirand. in orat. ad Lateran. Council. de moribus
reformandis. Polyd. Virgil. de inuentoribu^ rerum. Magist. ceremon. sanct.
eccles. Romans Taxae Romanae Paenitentiariae.
Antiquaries, Canonist. comment. and Gloss. in Ius Canonicum. Duaren. de sacris
ecclesiae minist. ac benef. Petr. Rebuff* Praxis beneficiaria.
Lawiers, Durand. de modo celebrand. council. gener. Petr. de Aliac. Card. de
reformat. eccles. Hieron. Pauli Barchinon. Practica cancel a^^e Apost. Fran.
Victoria ^elect. 2. and 4. Concilium delectorum Cardinalium.
Doctors, and Pope Gregory the much, Boniface the eighth, Clemens the fifth,
and the rest who were autours of the Decretals, Clementines, and Extrauagants.
Pope Pius the second, in Epist. praesertim de moribus German. Pope Leo the
tenth* in Council. Lateran Session. 9.10. and 11. Pope Paul ye third, in Reg.
Cancellar. Apost. Pope Julius the third, in perpet. constitut. de quingentis
ducatis Cardinalium. Pope Pius the fifth and Gregory the thirteenth in Ecloge
Bullar. and Motu proprior.
Popes. Whereupon I am content to make even your self judge, M. Heart, (if the
bogges of Popery have not quenched all sparkles of conscience, and judgment in
you,) whether that the Pope has not erred in office, and changed his Bishops
See into a Princes Court, and usurped the power of imperial State through
shows of Church-gouernment: by rebelling against the Emperor, and wresting
his dominions from him; by for^ing kings, and nations to serve him, as vasals;
by robbing peoples of their pastors, pastors of their livings, the rude of
instruction, the loose of correction, the distressed of comfort, the poor of
relief and (to conclude) the Christian Church of doctrine, discipline, and
hospitality.

John Rainoldes to the Christian reader.
When I sent this part of our conference to M. Heart, that, if any thing in his
own speeches were not to his mind, he might add, or alter, as he thought
good: I penned not his answer to my former speech, but wrote these words
under it.

I pray, M. Heart, make and pen your own answer to this last speech of mine.
If you can justify the Pope in those things which I have laid unto his charge:
I will subscribe to all Popery. If you cannot: acknowledge his sumacie to be
unlawful.

John Rainoldes.
To this request, and offer, M. Heart sent me his answer in writing. Which I
have set down (here following) word for word, and so have proceeded on in our
conference, as he desired me to do.






If you speak unfeignedly, M. Rainoldes, as I trust you do: The seventh
Division.
I must love you the better for your plain dealing in so weighty a matter.
That you do not see how the Pope may be justified, (I speak not of his
naughty and corrupt manners, but of his supreme and sovereign authority, which
is, as I take it, agreeable to the Scripture, and Christ's own appointment:)
it seems to me that your error herein proceeds of a wrong persuasion, that
he had not that authority by right, but usurped it. Which is not so: as I have
already showed in part, and now will prove unto you farther. For it is so
far off from being usurped authority, that if we will weigh things but with
indifferency and in equal balance, you shall well perceive that both
Emperors, and other Princes adjoining unto him, have rather usurped of his,
then he of theirs. In so much that a good autour does write that through the
Popes negligent looking unto it, S. Peter's patrimony is greatly diminished.
Yea, perhaps, it is much less now at this time, (how great or how lordly
soever it seem in your eye,) then it was in the very best times almost
thirteen hundred years since. For, to begin with the donation of
Constantine the great, he, (as Eugubinus writes) resigned to S. Syluester Pope
and to his successors the city of Rome with all his Imperial roabes, and
ornaments, him self retyring to Constantinople, where he abode as in his
Imperial seat, as also many other Emperors after him for many years
together did, keeping still either at Constantinople in the east, or else at
Milan and Rauenna in the west. And this to be a certain story of the gift of
Constantine to the Bishops of Rome, besides very many witnesses which here I
could cite for proof thereof, as Ammianus Marcellinus a heathen, who was sorry
to see it, Photius Constantinopolitanus, no favorer of the Pope neither and a
Grecian borne, Nicephorus, and many more besides, as you may read in the
Chronicles: S. Damasus, who lived about the same time, and saw Constantine
himself, does write of the said donation and gift of the Emperor. Which gift
moreover, to put it out of all doubt, was confirmed a hundred years after by
the Emperor Justinian, by Arithpert king of the Lombardes, by king Pipine of
France, Charles the great, holy king Jews, and lastly by Otho the great at a
Council holden at Rauenna, as your own men in their Centuries do grant and
confess. For although they say withal that this increase of wealth in the
Church of Rome began after S. Gregory's time; yet are they notably disproued by
S. Gregory himself, in whose reign, (as it may probably be thought,) the
Churches possessions were more then they be now at this present. And this
appears by sundry of his epistles, where he makes express mention of S.
Peter's patrimony in Afric, in Naples, in Campania, in Dalmatia, in France,
in Italy, in Sicilia, in Sardinia, and in many other countries. Now then
whereas for this which is the greatest part, so good proofs may be made: there
is no doubt but for sundry other very great and large gifts of diverse Princes,
many Nobles, men and women, which were bestowed upon that See, the Bishops
thereof can show very good evidence when need shall require. Marry, if any of
all the Bishops that ever were in that seat, flowing thus in wealth, abused the
same to any evil purpose, or else their authority when they were become so
mighty, in any of the points which are mentioned by you: I am so far off
from justifying them therein, that rather I r^w to see it and I condemn them
therefore. But thereof we shall have occ^sion to treat more particularly in
the chapters following. Only this is it which I go about to prove and defend in
them, that because of Christ's promise, of building his Church upon that rock;
and prayer also that their faith should not fail, they never erred in
judgment or definitive sentence. And thus much I am sure the very same
autours, whose names here you bring in against me, do maintain no less then I
do, howsoever they carpe and find fault with the Popes naughty manners.
Wherefore to draw to an end, whether all that has been said hithertoo, or
shall be said hereafter touching the practice of the Popes supremacy do prove
his supreme authority or not: I refer the judgment thereof M. Rainoldes, to
your self, and to every indifferent reader. Certes I have endeavored somewhat
to do it, though nothing so well, I grant, as such a cause requires. But as I
said you shall see it proved yet furthermore by the practice thereof which the
Bishop of Rome has always used, bearing himself as supreme pastor of our
souls next under Christ: which thing was never denied him but granted of all
men without resistance. Let their speeches, and deeds be a justifying of him:
and let their behavior generally toward him be an instruction for us to
follow them in their well doing.

John Heart.





Rainoldes. If you love me the better, M. Heart, for my plain dealing in so
weighty a matter, as you say you must: I would to God you would deal as
plainly with me, that I might in like sort love you the better too. But
neither do you yield to that which I have proved by evidence of truth: and
although you cannot disprove my proofs of it, yet you seek to shift them off
by fraud and falsehood. For whereas I showed that the Pope pretending
discharge of his office in government of the Church, has gotten his temporal
dominion from Emperors by tre^son, and rebellion; and practiced vnlaw^ull
power in things spiritual to the oppressing of Christendom; and therefore
erred in office, yea, in the supremacy which he has usurped over both the
states spiritual and temporal: you, for the first point of his dominion
temporal, do go about to clear him by sophismes, and lies; for the next of
his tyranny in spiritual things, you smooth it, as a lawful authority abused;
for the last of his erring in office, you abridge it to judgment and
definitive sentence; and wrappe his supremacy up in general words as allowed
by all men, when in the particular points of the supremacy you can not
justify it by any. Act. 26 24.
Festus the Roman thought Paul to be mad: the madness was in Festus him
self, no^ in Paul. You think that I err of a wrong persuasion: the error is
your own, not mine, M. Heart. The fautes of your dealing for the maintaining of
your error, I will set before you: if perhaps the Lord will open your eyes,
and untie your tongue, that you may at length perceive and confess the Popes
supremacy to be unlawful. To begin therefore with the first point wherein you
seek to clear him from having usurped his temporal dominion* you say, that
if we weigh things with indifferency, and in equal balance, I shall well
perceive that both Emperors and other Princes adjoining unto him have rather
usurped of his, then he of theirs. Which, if you took not things at
hucksters hands without all weighing of them, you would never say. For, that
which I have laid in one scale of the balance, is the manifest truth of
records, and evidences, approved by the witness of writers very credible,
who note the times, the persons, the means, and all circumstances how the Pope
usurped. And that which you lay in the other scale, to ouerweigh mine, is
partly impertinent, and nothing to the purpose: partly untrue, and
impudentlie forged. The weightiest parcel of it, is that which comes foremost,
namely, that a good autour does write, that S. Peter's patrimony is greatly
diminished through the Popes negligent looking unto it. What is that good
autour (M. Heart) who writes so? Why do you not name him? Is it because you
fear that I should find he makes naught for you, if I knew him? or that you
would put me to the pains of seeking him? I pray use hereafter at least so
much plainness, to name me the autours, on which your proofs are grounded:
since I not only name them, but quote their places also whereon I ground mine,
that you may the better sift them, and judge of them. The autour, who writes
that which you allege, is De corrupto ecclesiae statu: or (as in Gerson it is
entitled,) De vitijs ministrorum ecclesiae.
Nicolas Clemangis, a Doctor of Paris, that lived about a ninescore years
since: in deed a good autour. Who lamenting the wretched and corrupt state of
the Church in his time, declares the Pope to have been the fi^ebrand of her
calamities and disorders, in that, cap. 4.
not contented with the fruits and profits of the Bishopric of Rome and S.
Peter's patrimony, though very great and royal, he laid his greedy hands on
other men's flocks replenished with milk and wool; and cap. 5. and 7.
usurped the right of bestowing Bishoprics, and livings ecclesiastical
throughout all Christendom; and cap. 5.
disanulled the lawful elections of pastors by his reseruations, cap. 6.
provisions, and cap. 7.
aduowsons; and cap. 8.
oppres^ed churches with first fruits of one year, of two years, of three
years, yea sometimes of ^oure years, with tithes, with exactions, with
procurations, with spoils of Prelates, and infinite other burdens; and cap. 9.
ordained collectors to seize upon these taxes and tributes throughout al
provinces, with horrible abusing of suspensions, interditements, and
excommunications, if any man refused to pay them; and used such merchandise
with cap. 10.
suites in his cap. 11.
Court, and rules of his Chauncerie, cap. 12.
that the house of God was made a den of thieves; and raised his Cardinals,
as accomplices of cap. 13.
his pomp, from Clergymen of lowest state to be the peers of Princes; and
enriched them with his dispensations cap. 14.
to have and to hold offices and benefices, not two, or three, or ten, or
twenty, but a hundred, or two hundred, yea sometimes four hundred, or five
hundred, or more, and those not small or lean ones, but even the best and
fattest; to be short, in that he filled the sanctuary of the Lord with dumme
dogs and evil beasts, cap. 19. and 20.
even from the highest Prelates cap. 7. and 24.
to the basest hedge-priestes, through his usurpations, cap. 29.
exemptions, compositions, his cap. 42.
Simonie, prosti^ution, and fornication committed with Princes of the earth;
and all, cap. 3.4.5. and ^.
to maintain the pride, lust, cap. 18.
and riot of his worldly state, which he has lifted up above kings and
Emperors.


Heart. You like and lay open the words of Clemangis, as of a good autour, in
that he reproves abuses of the Popes. But what say you to that for which I
alleged him, cap. ^.
that S. Peter's patrimony is greatly diminished through the Popes negligent
looking unto it?


Rainoldes. I say that you were abused by Chronogr. lib. 3. i^ Boni^acio tertio.
Genebrard, on whose word and credit you took that of Clemangis as making for
this purpose, to which it comes nothing nigh. For, He wrote it in the year
1402. as it seems ^y his words, De corrupto ecclesiae statu, cap. ^6. after
three and twenty years of the fiftie-yeares-schisme.
it is little above nine score years since that was written by Clemangis. And
what if the temporal dominion of the Popes (called S. Peter's patrimony) were
diminished then by the successors negligence? Might not the predecessors
therefore have usurped it of ye Emperors long before that time? How much more
probably might I allege Clemangis for proof of the contrary: in as much cap.
45.
as he says, that the church I^perij multa sibi ^ura occupa^it.
usurped many things belonging of right to the Empire? But because I love not
to build so strong conclusions upon so weak premises: it suffices me that
the good autour, on whom you build yours, discharges not the Popes from having
got their temporal dominion by treason. For, it follows not that none of them
were traitors eight hundred years ago, because before these ninescore years
some were negligent: no more, then that the father was not an usurer, because
the son is a bankerout. Wherefore, the weightiest parcel of that which you
lay in for the Popes patrimony, is as light as a feather. The next, is
somewhat lighter. For you say, that perhaps it is much lesser now at this time,
then it was in the very best times almost thirteen hundred years since:
perhaps, it is much lesser. Now, without perhaps, you presume much of some want
in us, if you think that a dout^ull and uncertain guess may win us from a
certain and undoubted truth.


Heart. Nay, you mistake my meaning, if you take my [perhaps] so. For, that
word is used oftentimes of modesty, when men do not dout of that which they
say. Neither do I of this: as you may perceive by my proofs of it.


Rainoldes. But Genebrard. Chronogr. lib. 3. in Bonif. tert.
he, whose steps you tread in, used Fortasse.
it of suttlety rather then of modesty: that if his proofs failed, yet they
might find favor because they came in with perhaps. Which help you shall
perceive that the proofs also of your [perhaps] here do stand in need off,
if you weigh them with indifferency. The donation of Constantine bears the
bell amongst them. For he (you say) resigned to S. Siluester Pope and to his
successors the city of Rome, with all his Imperial roabes and ornaments,
retiring himself to Constantinople, where he abode as in his imperial seat,
as also many other Emperors after him for many years together did, keeping
still either at Constantinople in the East, or else at Milan and Rauenna in the
West. And how do you prove that Constantine did so? Forsooth Eugubinus writes
it, you say; and proof is made of it by very many witnesses, as namely by
Ammianus Marcellinus a heathen, who was sorry to see it; by Photius
Constantinopolitanus, no favorer of the the Pope neither, and a Grecian borne;
by Nicephorus; yea by S. Damasus, who lived about the same time, and saw
Constantine him self; yea by our own men, who grant in their Centuries that
the said donation of Constantine was confirmed a hundred years after by the
Emperor Justinian, by Arithpert king of the Lombards, by king Pipine of
France, Charles the great, holy king Jews, and lastly by Otho the great at a
Council holden at Rauenna. So: your witnesses then for Constantines donation
are Eugubinus, Ammianus, Photius, Nicephorus, Damasus, and our Centuries. Are
these all? No. For you add that there are many mo besides, as I may read in
the Chronicles. In the Chronicles? In what Chronicles? You mean in the
Chronicles written by Genebrard; whom in this whole point of the Popes temporal
dominion you follow. Alas, M. Heart, give not your self over so to be abused by
that shameless man: who makes no conscience of dealing most lewdly with all
sorts of autours, to flatter those ambitious usurpers of Rome, and uphold
their vilanie.


Heart. Nay, you are abused, or rather do abuse that worthy painful man, who
seeks nothing but the maintenance of the catholic faith. But it yrketh you
that he has disclosed the lies, stains, and frauds of the Centurie-writers:
against whom his Chronicles are specially written.


Rainoldes. Whether I abuse him, or he you, neither you only but all sorts of
autours: the trial is easy. You say that the donation of Constantine is
proved by them whom you named, and many mo besides, as I may read in the
Chronicles. The many mo besides, whom I read alleged in your
Chronicle-writer, are Zosimus, Nauclerus, S. Isidore, S. Ierom, Gratian, Iuo,
Picernus, and the Jews, Rabbi Abraham, and Aben Ezra. Do you rehearse his
words, wherein he alleges both these and the rest whom your self named: and
as you shall find him to deal in this point with all sorts of autours, so
speak of him hereafter, and credit him in others.


Heart. I doubt not but he deals as a good Catholic. Genebrard. Chronograph.
lib. 3. in Sylu^stro primo.
His words (touching Constantines donation, and the witnesses by whom he
proves it) are these, if you will have them. Constantine the Emperor did give
Rome and all the Imperial roabes and ornaments to S. Syluester Pope, and to
his successors, as Eugubinus proves manifestly in two books, and Photius the
Greek Patriarch in his Nomocanon, the eighth title, the first chapter.


Rainoldes. Well. Eugubinus and Photius do prove it. But do they prove that
which Genebrard defends?


Heart. What else? For he defends the donation of Constantine.


Rainoldes. But defends he the greater donation of Constantine, or the lesser?


Heart. The greater or the lesser? What mean you by that?


Rainoldes. There are two donations of Constantine mentioned in the Canon law:
the one in Distinct. 96. c. Constantinus.
the decrees, wherein it is said that he gave the Pope both his palace, and the
city of Rome, and all the provinces, places, and cities of Italy, or the
western countries: the other in c. Fundamen^a. de elect. in Sext.
the decretals, wherein no more is said but that he gave the city of Rome.
This I call the lesser donation of Constantine, which gives Rome only: the
other, the greater, which gives Italy also with the countries of the west.
And whether of them is it, that Genebrard defends?


Heart. Whether of them, say you? Or what skilleth that?


Rainoldes. It skylleth very much. For the lesser seems somewhat to discredit
the report of the greater: as it is observed by one of the best witnesses that
Genebrard has, I mean Chronograph. volum. 2. generat. 11.
Nauclerus. Who, having showed, that Constantine left Italy and other
kingdoms of the west to his sons by testament, and therefore it is likely
that the decree which says he gave them to the Pope Paleam esse, and nihil
probare.
is chafe (as the lawiers call it) and proves nothing: whereto (says he) the
decretall makes not a little, which treating of Constantines donation speaks
only of the donation of the city of Rome, making no mention of Italy and
other provinces. But whether this report of the lesser in the decretals
discredit the greater in the decrees, or no: the greater is so brainlesse in
the eyes of all men that have sense and reason, that not your historians only
do nippe it, as Chronicorum ^ lib. 4. cap. 3.
Otho Frisingensis, De vit. Pont. in Iohann. sept.
and Platina, and Saxon. lib. 4. cap. 11. Metrop. lib. 2. cap. 1. and lib. 11.
cap. 24.
Krantzius; but also D^ctors and Divines, as De concord. cathol. lib. 3. cap. 2.
Cardinal Cusanus, and In pract. Cancellar. Apost.
Hieronymus Paulus, and De falso credita and ementita Constant. donat.
Laurentius Valla, yea Papa Pius in dialogo. Citatur ab Hier. Paul^ in Pract.
Cancel. Apost.
Pope Pius himself, have written purposely he would defend the lesser. For he
says that Constantine did give Rome to Syluester: Rome, that is the city, and
not all the western Empire of Rome.


Heart. His words indeed do seem so: and I think he meant not to defend the
greater.


Rainoldes. Think? Nay you may be sure that he meant not. For in the same
place, upon the words that you rehearsed, I (says he) have always denied
this consequence: Aliqua sunt ficta and addita ad donationem Constantini.
Somewhat is forged and added to the donation of Constantine; therefore al is
forged. For it is certain that Constantine gave many things to the Church of
Rome: but Alia, and mult^ plu^a aliunde acc^ssis^e.
more things a great deal have come unto it other whence, either by the
gifts of Princes and rich men, or by the testament of the godly, or by the
purchasing of Popes, by exchange, and so forth, and the dispensation and
providence of God. So that in Genebrards judgment Pope Syluester and his
successors have gotten a great deal more by other means, then by Constantines
donation. But they have not gotten more then the greater donation of
Constantine in the decrees does give them. For it does give them all the
provinces, places, and cities of Italy, and other countries of the west. In
Genebrards judgment therefore the greater donation of Constantine is forged:
and that which he defends must be the lesser only.


Heart. The lesser only be it. What gather you thereoff?


Rainoldes. I gather that Genebrard deals like himself, when he says that
Constantines donation is proved by Photius the Greek Patriarch, and Eugubinus
in two books. For Eugubinus writes in defense of the greater donation of
Constantine: auouching Augusti^. Steuch. ^ugubin. contr. Laurent. Vallam de
^alsa donatione Constant. lib. 1.
that he gave, not the city of Rome alone unto the Pope, no nor the country
of Italy, but the whole West, even the Western Empire; in so much that lib. 2.
he names particularly the kingdoms of England, of France, of Spain, of
Aragon, of Portugal, of Denmark, of Norway, Swethland, Boheme, Hungary,
Dacia, Rustia, Croatia, Dalmatia, Sardinia, and Corsica, and says that they
are all subject to the Pope, by right of that donation. As for the Patriarch
Photius, he speaks not a word of any donation. That which Genebrard means
is in one Theodor. Balsamon in Nomocan. Phot. u^. 8. cap. 1.
Balsamon commenting on Photius: and it is the same that Eugubinus writes for.
What think you now of him, who says that Eugubinus and Photius the Greek
Patriarch do manifestly prove that donation to be true, which himself
confesses to be false and forged?


Heart. But the next writer whom he alleges, namely Zosimus, is fitter for his
purpose: as speaking of the lesser donation precisely. For Zosim. histor. lib.
2.
Constantine (says he) departed out of Rome, and removed thence the majesty
of the Empire* to Constantinople, because he knew himself to be misliked of
the Romans for altering of religion.


Rainoldes. What? Does this prove that Constantine gave the city of Rome unto
the Pope, because he departed from Rome to Constantinople?


Heart. As Genebrard concludes of it. For Constantinus cessit Roma. Cessit,
cui^ Non ^^natui, non populo. Pontifici igitur.
he departed: to whom? Not to the Senate, not to the people: for that has no
man written. Neither did the Senate or people ever claim it. To the Pope
therefore: who since that time possesses and keeps it as his own; has old
records, and evidences, and revenues of it.


Rainoldes. The wit of a Sophister. As if a man should say: king Henry
departed from the city of London unto Windsore castle, and removed the Court
thither. He departed: to whom? Not to the Aldermen, not to the Citizens: for no
man says so. Neither did the Aldermen or Citizens ever claim it. To the
Bishop therefore: who since that time possesses and keeps it as his own;
has old records, and evidences, and revenues of it.


Heart. Nay, that is a lie, that the Bishop of London possesses the city as
his own since that time.


Rainoldes. Even so is the other. For the Emperors possessed Rome four
hundred years after the time that Constantine departed to Constantinople: as
your own De occidentali imperio: and regno Italiae.
Sigonius shows in his stories.


Heart. But king Henry governed still the city of London by the Lord Mayor: as
Princes have been wont to do.


Rainoldes. So the Emperors governed too the city of Rome De officio
praefe^^^ vibi. Dig. and Cod. lib. 1. Corn. Tacit. Annal. lib. 6. Ammian.
Marcellin. lib. 14. Notitia prouinciar. Imperii Romans
by a Lord Deputy. Yea Genebrard might easily have found in his Histor. lib.
6. de Attalo praefecto vrbis.
Zosimus ye one of those Deputies took upon him to be Emperor. If he could
show by Zosimus that a Pope had done so: what a proof were that of
Constantines donation?


Heart. The Popes enjoyed not a while the full power: yet had they right unto
it. Howbeit Ammianus Marcellinus shows they had the power too: as Genebrard
declares after. But first he confirms their right out of S. Damasus.


Rainoldes. Out of Damasus? How?


Heart. S. Damasus, who saw Constantine, has written of that donation: as even
the Centurie-writers affirm in the seventh chapter of the fourth Centurie.


Rainoldes. Two lies, with one breath. For neither has Damasus written of it:
nor do the Centurie-writers affirm that he has. Nay they affirm the
contrary. For, in Centur. 4. cap. 7. tit. de Primatu.
the very place that Genebrard alleges, they say, that neither historians
have made mention of it, such as are Eusebius, Eutropius, Rufinus, Socrates,
Theodoret, Euagrius, Paulus* Diaconus, Beda, Orosius, Zonaras, Nicephorus, and
the like: nor they who wrote the lives of Emperors, or of Popes, as Ierom and
Damasus, though yet he speaks somewhat of things given by Constantine: nor
other famous Doctors whose monuments are extant, as Athanasius, Basil, Ambrose,
Optatus, Gregory Nyssen, Gregory Nazianzene, Austin, and Chrysostom: nor the
Popes themselves when they were to prove their supremacy in Councels did
speak a word of that donation, which they would then have cast forth, as
shipmen do the sacred ancre in great peril.


Heart. The words are not so flatt and perfect in the Latin, as you do english
them. For, upon the name of Damasus, it follows: qui etsi quaedam de donis
Constantini dicit, tamen alij insignes eccl^siarum doctores-


Rainoldes. But if you read it so: the clause ensuing is imperfect, and has no
sense at all. A very manifest token that somewhat is a miss, through either
the writers, or printers, or correctours fault. And that is [qui] mistaken (as
I guess) for [neque,] and put out of his place: where it ought to follow upon
the name of Damasus, etsi quaedam de donis Constantini dicit tamen; neque alij
insignes ecclesiarum doctores- But howsoever the words are to be amended: the
sense must needs be as I said touching Damasus. For the sentence is plain so
far, that neither Ierom nor Damasus have mentioned that donation of
Constantine: as plain, as that which follows, that it is not mentioned by
other famous Doctors neither. And who can imagine that the Centurie-writers
should say that Damasus wrote of it: when it is so clear that he wrote not,
that your Practica Cancellar. Apost.
Hieronymus Paulus, and Cusanus do bring his authority for a special reason
against the donation. De concord. cathol. lib. 3. cap. 2.
The right therefore of it is not proved by Damasus. Now, is the possession
proved any better out of Ammianus?


Heart. Ammianus Marcellinus, an heathen, does closely signify some such thing,
while he complains and grudgeth at the Popes wealth and power: in the seven
and twentieth book of his story.


Rainoldes. Ammianus, (says Genebrard) does closely signify some such thing.
In deed some such thing: but so far from that thing, that better nothing
were said of it. For thus says Ammianus Marcellinus, an heathen, of Damasus
suing to be Pope. Damasus and Vr^icinus burning with immoderate ambition of
getting the Bishopric of Rome, did fall to very sharp bickrings through
parts taken: in so much that the matter grew between them to the shedding of
blood and to manslaughter. Which tumult Viuentius (who was the Lord Deputy)
being neither able to pacify, nor to redress, was forced through their outrage
to withdraw himself out of the city into the suburbs: and Damasus through
the valiant behavior of his faction got the conquest in the fray. And it is
certain that in the Church of Sicininus (where Christians make their
assembly) there were found Centum triginta septem cadauera peremptorum.
a hundred thirty and seven carcasses of men slain in one day: and the people
furiously bent a great while, was afterward hardly assuaged. Neither do I
deny, considering the bravery and pomp used in Rome, but they who aspire
thereto should strive with might and maine to obtain it: since when they have
gotten it, they shall be at such ease, enriched with Oblationibus matronarum.
the gifts and offerings of matrones, and carried abroad in wagons, and going
in gay apparel, and following so riotous fare, that their bankets are more then
princely: who might in deed be happy if they would contemn the stateliness of
the city, (which cloak they use for their vices,) and would live as certain
Bishops do in provinces: whom great moderation in use of meat and drink, and
meanenes^e of apparel, and modesty of countenance, commend, as pure, and
shamefast, to God and to the godly. Behold, this is the wealth and power of the
Pope which Ammianus Marcellinus complayneth off and grudgeth at. Some such
thing it is as Constantine donation: but it is not it. For the wealth, is the
pomp and bravery that they maintained by the offerings of matrones. The power,
is a faction of cutters, so desperate, that when they slew above a hundred in a
fray, the Lord Deputy could not help it. But the very naming of the Lord
Deputy (sent thither by ye Emperor) should have taught Genebrard that the
Emperor kept the city still as his own, and was the sovereign Lord of it.
Wherefore that which he finds in Ammianus Marcellinus touching the Popes
wealth and power, is in respect of wealth, the donation of matrones; in respect
of power, the donation of cutters; but in respect of neither the donation of
Constantine.


Heart. Nay, in that (I think) you are deceived greatly, that you say the
Emperor kept still the city as his own because he sent a Deputy thither.
For that Deputy or Lieutenant was there to keep the city, not for the
Emperors use, but for his safegarde only.


Rainoldes. Not for his use, but for his safeguard?


Heart. I: least the Pope growing daily mightier by reason of wealth, and
bordering upon him, should encroch on somewhat of his upon occasion. As Princes
now adays are wont to have their Deputies and Lieutenants resident in cities
near their territories for their own safeguard, and not to keep the cities as
theirs, which are not theirs.


Rainoldes. Ambassadors or Agents perhaps they may have in realms or cities
near them. But that the French king should have a Lieutenant or Deputy in
London, or that ye Queen of Englands Deputy in Ireland should keep it not for
her use, but for her safeguard only: Princes now a days (I hope) use not that;
sure the Emperors did not. For they had their Lieutenants in ye city of Rome,
not as Agents, but as Regents; and their Lieutenants kept it both to their
safeguard, and their use: as Epistolar. lib. 10. epist. 15.16.17.27.30.34. and
caeteris ad Valentin. Theodol. and Arcad. Impp.
Symmachus, a famous Lieutenant of the city, and Valentinianus and Theodosius.
In Cod. Theodosian. passim.
the Emperors who deputed him, do manifestly show. Yea, even Histor lib. 27.
Ammianus him self (to go no further) does import as much in the very place
alleged by Genebrard: where both the Lieutenant is called Vrbis moderator.
the ruler of the city, and his Cuius administratio.
government is namely noted. So far off was he from dreaming any such thing
as you do imagine of Constantines donation.


Heart. It is no great matter, though Ammianus Marcellinus, a heathen, do not
prove it.


Rainoldes. Not so great, as that Gilbert Genebrard, a Christian, does falsely
charge a heathen with the proof of it. But will you go forward to the rest of
his witnesses?


Heart. Justinian the Emperor Centum post annis illam donationem confirmauit.
confirmed that donation a hundred years after: and then Arithpert the king of
the Lombards, P^pine, Charles the great, Jews the godly, and last of all Otho
the great in a public council of Rauenna, as the Centurie-writers also do
report, Vt etiam Centuriatores totidem verbis referunt.
using these very words. Centur. 10. chapt. 10. page 538. in Leo the eighth
and John his successor: perhaps out of that Authentike (as they call it) or
constitution of Justinian, Vt Ecclesia Romans centum annorum gaudeat
praescriptione.
That the Church of Rome should enjoy the prescription of a hundred years.


Rainoldes. A proof of some weight, if all this be true that the
Centurie-writers report, yea and report it using these very words, that
Justinian the Emperor confirmed that donation a hundred years after, and
Arithpert, Pipine, Charles, Jews, and Otho. But what if these be not the very
words in which the Centurie-writers do report it? What if the
Centurie-writers do not report it at all? As in deed they do not. For these
are Centur. 10. cap. 10. page 538
their words: Pope Leo the eighth to show his thankfullnes to the Emperor (by
whom he had the Popedom) restored to the Empire the things which either
Constantine or Charles gave unto the Church, or Justinian confirmed before him,
or Arithpert the Lombard king bestowed on it. Now we have set down before out
of Krantzius in the tenth chapter of the fourth book of his story of Saxony
the copy of the letters by which Leo restored them. Thus far the
Centurie-writers. Wherein, first, they speak not of Constantines donation
either the greater or the lesser, but in general only of things that he
gave. Which might be other things, and not the city of Rome. Secondly, they
say not, [the things which he gave, and Charles did confirm,] but [the
things which either he or Charles gave:] that it might be Charles donation,
and not his, for any thing that they say. Thirdly, Quaevel Constantinus
donauit, aut Carolus dedit ecclesiae.
their very words are the words of Krantzius, whom they allege and Krantz.
Saxon. lib. 4. cap. 10.
quote: and Krantzius does speak them by way of a jest. For neither is
Constantine named in the letters in which he says that thankfulness is showed
by Pope Leo: and cap. 11.
upon the letters he frames a reproof of Constantines donation. So that, to
prove it by those words of Krantzius, is, as if the Pharisees should prove
their traditions by that speech of Christ: Mark. 7.^.
Well do ye reject the commandments of God, that ye may observe your own
tradition. Fourthly, the Centurie-writers do not as much as mention either
Jews, or Pipine; neither here, nor In Iohanne suceessore Leonis octaui.
after where they mention Otho. Finally, not one of all that are mentioned is
reported by them to have confirmed that donation. No not Justinian: of whom the
show is greatest as Genebrard does cite their words, that he confirmed it
after a hundred years.


Heart. Yet their own words are that Justinian confirmed things unto the
church.


Rainoldes. And so Justinian did. For Novel. consti^ 9. vt ecclesia Romana
centu^ annorum gaudeat praescriptione.
his constitution which Genebrard alleges out of his Authentikes, that the
Church of Rome should enjoy the prescription of a hundred years, has this
force, that whereas thirty years prescription did hold against the lands and
possessions of others in actions and suites of law, no less then a hundred
should hold against the lands and possessions of others in actions and suites
of law: no less then a hundred should hold against the lands and possessions
of the Church. Though the Centurie-writers meant by [confirming] the assuring
of those things that any way came from Justinian: as appears by Epistola
Leonis Papae apud Krantzium Saxon. lib. 4. cap. 10.
the letters which they refer them selves unto. But Genebrard does take the
advantage of Confirmauit.
the word, and helps it with adding [ Centum post annis.
a hundred years after,] which fitteth some what roundly the time that
Justinian reigned after Constantine: to the intent, that the term of a hundred
years in Justinians constitution might be thought to have respect to
Constantines donation. In the which dealing he does notorious injury not only
to them, but to Justinian also. To Justinian, by laying on him a lewd
sclaunder, that he did confirm, yea confirm by law, a surmised donation
devised against all law. To them, by putting words of falsehood in their
mouth; nor making them only false witnesses, but also foolish; as if they had
thought a thing to be confirmed by that constitution, whereof the constitution
has no word at all. And as it were to fill up the measure of his iniquity, he
adds that Vt etiam Cen^uriatores totidem verbis ^eferunt.
they report it using those very words: to persuade the credulous thereby (as
he has you) that Constantines donation cannot be doubted of * since it was
confirmed by the Emperor Justinian a hundred years after, as our own men in
their Centuries do grant.


Heart. Perhaps there is some other place in Justinian, that makes proof of
it. For while I perused the Tables of that book of the Authentikes which was
lent me to search out this in: I was thereby directed to a place in Justinian
where Constantines donation is proved most plainly: to weete, in gloss. sing.
secundum Bald: in l. 2.. Cum vrbem. ff. de offic. prefect. vrbis.


Rainoldes. It is not plainly proved there, but barely said; and said, not in
the text, but in the gloss only; nor in ye gloss upon Justinian, but the
Digests; and that without all ground either of any autour of the Digests, or of
Justinian.


Heart. But in the gloss upon Justinian himself, even in the Authentikes, there
is an other place where the same question is handled pro and con: and there
although he say that Constantine could make no such donation de iure, yet he
denies not but that he made it de facto.


Rainoldes. Yet he denies not: and Licet solutio facti ad nos non pertineat,
soluimus quod de ^ure non valuit (...) donatio.
he affirms not; but leaves it as he found it. Why do you trifle so with the
glose-writer? Who though he had affirmed the donation of Constantine: does
that prove the point avouched by Genebrard, that Justinian confirmed it? If I
had thought that you would make such account of the words of lawiers: I could
have alleged men skilfuller of antiquities, then all the glose-writers,
against that tale of Constantine. For not only such as Commentar. in antiqua
^dict. and Senatusconsulta. Franciae. contra abusus Paparum.
Carolus Molinaeus, whom you may perhaps suspect for his religion, do write
against it, and discredit it: but also that worthy and most learned lawier,
Parergon iuris. lib. 7. cap. 19.
Andreas Alciatus, disproueth it by Eusebius, Theodoret, Cassiodore, Ammianus
Marcellinus, and the consent of all historians; and Desension. in Molinaeum pro
Pont. Max.
Remundus Rufus (in his defense of the Pope against Molinaeus, which De visib.
Monar. Eccles. lib. 7.
Sanders prayseth greatly) does allow the same that Alciatus writes of it. But
whatsoever lawiers think of the donation, either for the fact, or for the
right of it: you see that it is not confirmed by Justinian, as you are borne in
hand.


Heart. Yes, I make no doubt but Genebrard is able to bring more for him self
herein then I have seen, or can find in Justinian.


Rainoldes. Neither make I doubt but, if he could have brought more, his
Diuturno december annorum studio. Genebrard. praefat. Chronogr. ad Pontacum.
ten-yeares study spent upon his Chronicles would have interlaced it. Inthe
mean season, whether he be able to bring more or no: you cannot deny but he
has alleged Justinian untruly, for that which he has brought.


Heart. But the rest of the writers whom he does allege, no doubt he does
allege them truly; S. Gregory, S. Isidore, Nauclerus, Photius, Nicephorus,
S. Ierom, Iuo, Gratian, Picernus, Rabbi Abraham, and Aben Ezra.


Rainoldes. He does allege them truly, I grant, the most of them. But do
they prove the point for which he does allege them?


Heart. Yea, and that directly: as by his words you shall perceive. S. Gregory
about the six hundredth year of Christ does show in his epistles that the
Church had ample lands and possessions, far and wide through the west. At
the which time S. Isidore in his story (as Nauclerus cites in the eleventh
age of his Chronicles) Constantine, says he, did yield the city to the Pope,
and the imperial ornaments, that is to say, the crown, and the white palfrey
on the which he rode. Altogether as Photius of Constantinople, though otherwise
an enemy of the Sea of Rome, avouches in his Nomocanon about the year eight
hundred and sixty.


Rainoldes. Nay: no more of Photius. For it is not he (as I have showed) who
says it, but Balsamon who commenteth on him. And Balsamon is later by three
hundred years.


Heart. Yet he was a Grecian too, and an enemy of the Sea of Rome: and
therefore not likely to vouch it, if it were not true.


Rainoldes. But Genebrard has granted that to be false which he voucheth. For
he says that Constantine did give to Pope Syluester, the provinces, and
places, and fortresses of al Italy, or of the western countries, and not the
city of Rome only. Neither does he vouch this in respect of Rome but of
Constantinople: which being to enjoy the privileges of Rome In nomoca^. ^^ot.
tit. 8. cap. 1.
by a law y^ Photius rehearses in his Nomocanon, Now if you will know the
privileges of Rome (says Balsamon) they are enrolled in the decree of
Constantines donation made to Pope Syluester. So that it was for love to the
Patriarchs See of Constantinople, not to the Popes of Rome, that he avouches
it: that as Rome might thereby claim all the West, so Constantinople might get
all the East. Wherefore, that circumstance, that Balsamon was an enemy of the Sea of Rome, does nothing help the credit of Constantines donation. Neither
does S. Isidore make much more for it, as Chronogr. volum. 2. generat. 11.
Nauclerus cites him. For, as he cites him, he gives him a touch withal to
overthrow him. There is (says Nauclerus) no mention of Constantines donation
in any autours, but in the book of decrees: and the Archbishop of Florence,
Antoninus, affirms in his chronicles, that in ancient books of the Decreees
it is not neither. Which I greatly marvel at, since Isidore reports plainly
in his story, that Constantine did yield the city of Rome unto the Pope, and
all the imperial ornaments, that is to say, the crown, the apparel, and the
white palfrey to ride upon. Nauclerus therefore cites Isidore as saying it:
but so, as though he thought all were not well in Isidore, since there is no
mention of it in any autours of credit or antiquity. I showed you Chap. ^.
Diuis. 2.
before how the writings of the ancient Fathers have been corrupted to
countenance the Popes power. The story of Isidore might be wrought in like
sort to countenance the Popes pomp, his triple crown, his robes imperial,
his Equi albi phaleris auteis cope^tisque de cremosino ornati. Sacr. ceremon.
Romans eccles. lib. 1. tit. 2.
horses of estate. Which to have been so, it is the more likely, because it is
testified by Illyricus, Wigandus, Index and Faber Histor. ecclesiast. Magdeb.
Centur. ^. cap. 7.
men who had helps to se^ch and see such ancient evidences, that in old
copies of Isidore that is not found. And perhaps if that story of Isidore were
printed, that we might have the sight of it: it were no hard matter to find
some tokens there of forgerie. At the least, it seems that Genebrard himself
suspected some weakness in that point of Isidore: and therefore neither cites
him but as out of Nauclerus, and adds that he wrote at the time that Gregory
did speak much of the Churches lands. For, if I mistake not the policy of
Genebrard, he mentions the ample lands and possessions which the church had
far and wide through the west in the time of Gregory: to the intent that men
might conceive thereof that the city of Rome was part of those lands, since
Isidore, who wrote at the same time, reports that it was given to the Pope.
But this observation which he made to stre^ghthen his autours report, does most
of all weaken it. For neither does Gregory name the city of Rome as part of
those lands which in his epistles he shows that the church had through the
west:


Heart. But he does, by your leave. For, in the fifth book, and the twelfth
epistle, we make (says he) Montanus, and Thomas, Liberos and ciues Romanos
efficimas.
freemen, and citizens of Rome. Whereby he declares that Ch^onogr. lib. 3.
in. Bonifac. tert.
Rome was of the Popes dominion and right, as Genebrard concludes of it.


Rainoldes. Genebrard obiecteth ignorance of antiquity to the
Centurie-writers. Romam Pontificii ^uisse ^uris.
But in bringing this to convince their ignorance, he bewrays his own. For
Thomas, and Montanus whom Gregory made freemen and citizens of Rome, were his
Seruitutis iugo. et* Famulos Ecclesiae.
slaves, or bondmen. Now, amongst the Romans any man might lawfully make his
bond men, free: and whom he made free, them he made citizens; as by Dionys.
Halica^n^ss. Antiquitat. Romanar. lib. 4.
their ancient law, so by Cod. de Lat. libert. tollend.
Justinians, who lived before Gregory's time, and Institutionu^ lib. 1. tit. 5.
Libertinorum.
revived it. Wherefore the enfranchising of Thomas and Montanus proves not
that Rome was of the Popes dominion more the^ of any other Romans. And so the
circumstance of Gregory's time and testimony, which Genebrard would strengthen
his tale with, does weaken it. For neither is the city of Rome named by
Gregory amongst the Churches lands, as I was about to say: and at the very
time, that Gregory was Pope, the Emperors held the city, and governed it (as
they were wont) by a Germanus praefectus vrbis. Johan. Diacon. in vit. Gregor.
lib. 1. cap. 40.
Lord Deputy. Then hitherto his witnesses of Constantines donation do bring
it small comfort. Do the rest say more for it?


Heart. Nicephorus says in the seventh book, the nine and fourtieth chapter,
Constantine did consecrate and give unto Christ the palace of Lateran. Which
thing S. Ierom also had touched before him in an epistle to Oceanus: and
experience proves it even till this day while that is the chief See of the
Bishop of Rome.


Rainoldes. I perceive it was either a fox or a ferne-bush that Genebrard
espied. He thought he had seen the whole city of Rome given by Constantine to
the Pope: and now he has found that Constantine did turn his palace into a
church that the Pope might teach there, and Christians come together, to pray
and serve God. For this is all that ^pist. 30. ad Oceanum.
Ierom and Histor. ecclesiast. lib. 7. c. 49.
Nicephorus say.


Heart. But Nicephorus says farther in the six and fortieth chapter, that
Constantine endowed all the churches of the world, and Bishoprikes, out of his
treasury, according to the state and worthiness of them. Therefore he endowed
much more the church of Rome then of Eugubium, and so forth.


Rainoldes. Nicephorus says that Constantine did give through all provinces
some part of the public revenues to the churches: but not, that he did give
according to the state and worthiness of each of them. That Genebrard does add
to keep his hands in ure* Howbeit if Nicephorus had said, that he endowed them
according to their state and worthiness, and therefore more the Church of Rome
then of Eugubium: yet is not the donation proved by Nicephorus.


Heart. But read him also in the eighth book, the third and fourth chapters;
and in the tenth book, the fifth chapter.


Rainoldes. And there shall you find as much as in the former.


Heart. Iuo in his Pannomia, about the year of Christ eleven hundred and ten,
does ^ite certain things out of the charter of the privilege of Constantines
donation. Gratian about the year eleven hundred and fifty; Bartolomaeus
Picernus, and many mo, do bring forth either all, or parts of it.


Rainoldes. Picernus? What an autour is he to prove it? A hungry companion,
who lived the last day: and, to curry favor with Julius the Pope, he
translated into Latin a little Greek book containing Constantines donation,
which he found, where? Bartolom. Picern. in praefat. donat. Constant. ad
Iulium secundum Po^t. Max.
in the Popes library. Gratian is more ancient: and the whole charter of the
donation is in Distinct. 96. c. Constantinus.
him. But neither is it extant in old copies of Gratian, as Antoninus histor.
part. 1. tit. 8. cap. 2. Illyricus in tes^ibus veritatis. tit. Donatio
Constantini.
they do witness who have seen them: neither are we sure by either old or
new in which it is extant, that Gratian did put it in. For in each sort of them,
both written, and printed, it is entitled [palea] that is to say, chafe: which
note (as Antonius Contius. c. cum enixa. Did. 5. in Annotat.
a learned and famous lawier thinks) is set to those chapters that were not
first inserted into the book by Gratian, but added after in the margent by
Gratians interpreters, as any of them thought good, and in the best and
auncientest copies they are omitted wholly for the most part. Now, if in Gratian
it crept out of the margent thus into the text: much more is it likely that
Pannom. lib. 4. cap. 1. de priuilegijs Constantini Imperatoris concessis
Syluestro Papae.
Iuo caught it so too. For if it had been of ancient time in Iuo when Gratian
compiled the book of decrees: it is not to be thought that Gratian, a man who
forgeth autours often and counterfeiteth privileges for less advantage of the
Pope, would have left him out such a Princely privilege, if he had found it in
an autour.


Heart. It is an easy matter with shifts and surmises to discredit autours, as
you do Picernus, Gratian, and Iuo. Or, if it be true that Iuo and Gratian did
not themselves record it: yet there is no cause why the Greek copy translated
into Latin by Picernus should be discredited because it was found in the Popes
library. For there are many rare books in the Popes library, that are not
else where to be found.


Rainoldes. But the Greek text of Constantines donation was else where to be
found. For it is in Balsamon translated into Latin also by Gentian Heruet. And
this does discredit the matter so much more: because the Latin charter (or
chafe) that is in Gratian does differ from the Greek in many things. Besides
that, Picernus has showed a special favor to the Pope in it: unless the
Greek which he found in the Popes library were somewhat better fyled then
that which Heruet found in Balsamon* For wherein Gratians Latin it is, that the
Emperor gave unto the Pope the places, cities, and provinces Italiae sieve occi
^a^alium ^egionum.
of Italy, or of the western countries; as it is in Italiae seu occ^dent^lium.
Heruet too: Picernus has mended it, and made it, Italiae and occi^entalium.
of Italy, and of the western countries. Which was a small token of no small
good will that Picernus showed toward the Pope against Declamat. de (...)
c^ed. and e^^ent donat. Constant.
Valla: who noted that word [or] abused for [and,] as unlikely that the
Emperor or the Emperors officers should write so in a charter of so great
importance, and in so large a deed of gift. Though this is the least of many
conjectures that Valla makes by the style to prove corruption in the deed.
Which all, for the most part, Picernus has washed away by his translation. But
if you think that th^se things which I speak of Gratian, or Iuo, or
Picernus, are shifts and surmises: then I pray remember that their textes
speak ^or the greater donation, which Genebrard confesses himself to be
forged. And therefore Picernus, Iuo, and Gratian are cited to no purpose, by
him, who defends not the greater but the lesser donation of Constantine.


Heart. Yet, what say you then to his last witnesses, who speak directly for
the lesser? They are the Iuish writers, Rabbi Abraham, and Aben Ezra. For,
Rabbi Abraham, in Zikron Dibre Romi, says that Constantine having built
Constantinople, went out of Rome, and gave it to the Priests of the Idumeans
(so they call Christians) to this day. And Aben Ezra upon the eleventh chapter
of Daniel, on these words, And he shall care for no God: the meaning is (says
he) that Constantine did beautify the place of Rome which was his seat, and
l^ft it to the iniquity (so they speak wickedly of the holy Apostles) which
is called Peter.


Rainoldes. Rabbi Abraham, and Aben Ezra, did live about the same time that
Gratian did, or rather somewat since; when the Pope had gotten fully from the
Emperor the soueraintie in Rome. They looked to the state of their own times;
and saw that the city, which Constantine had, was now possessed by the Pope.
Wherefore since the bruit of Constantines donation was set abroch then: no
marvel if they tasted of it: chiefly since they had so little skill in stories.


Heart. Great skill, Rabbi Abraham. For he wrote a Chronicle which Genebrard
has translated out of Hebrew in^o Latin, entitled Cabbala historica.


Rainoldes. Whrein he bewrays the greatness of his skill. For the Rabbi
chronicleth ^
there, that our savior (Jesus of Nazareth, as he calls him) was not borne
in the days of Augustus the Emperor, and Herod king of Jury, but a^ore that
time above a hundred years. And thereupon h^e cha^geth the stories of other
nations with error, for writing so of Christ's age: but we (says he) have
(...)
the true tradition and story out of Misna and Talmud, whose autours have not
changed any whit of things. Wherefore, if Rabbi Abraham were no better seen
in the story of the Jews, in that point, whereof he might have learned the
truth by their own Antiquita^. Iu^aicar. lib. 13 cap. 6.
^osephus: you may give him leave to be ouerseene in the Roman stories. As for
Aben Ezra, his words may be taken in a true meaning, that Rome by the occasion
that Constantine le^t it, came afterward in process of time to the iniquity
which is called Peter, that is, to the Pope. For in deed the Emperors abiding
at Constantinople made it easier for the Popes to practice those treasons which
g^t them Rome at last. But admit he meant that Constantine ga^^ Rome to the
iniquity called Peter. Will Genebrard confess th^^ the Pope (the Peter of
Rome) is an iniquity, because that Aben Ezra says so?


Heart. No. For he says that of a Jewish stomach.


Rainoldes. And he says the other of a Romish error. Wherefore if Genebrard
refuse his own witness in that he speaks of affection: I have greater
reason to except against him in that he misseth through oversight. And thus you
may see how well the donation of Constantine is proved by the witnesses
alleged either of your self, or of your Chronicle-writer. Wherein his abusing
of all sorts of autors, and thereby of you, will be the more evident, if it
be compared with the dealing of a Bishop that matcheth him in Popery, but
passes him in modesty, I mean of Loco^. Theolog. lib. 11. c. 5.
Melchior Canus. Who alleges Eusebius, Rufinus, Theodoret, Socrates, Sozomen,
Eutropius, Victor, Ammianus Marcellinus, and, in a word, Omnes historici.
all historians, with Caeteri probae fidei autores.
other approved autours, to show that the donation of Constantine is forged:
even the same donation, by which the c. Fundamenta. de elect. in Sext.
Popes claim the temporal dominion of the city of Rome, and you with your
Chronicles do sooth their falsehood in it. Beside that, if Constantine had made
this pretensed donation in deed: yet comes it short of that for proof whereof
you cite it, to weet, that the temporal dominion of the Popes is much less
now, then it was almost thirteen hundred years since. For, the city of Rome,
which in this donation is said to have been given them, is but a little corner
of their dominion now.


Heart. But if you join thereto that which I added of S. Peter's patrimony
belonging unto them within two or three hundred years after Constantine: it
comes home to the proof of that which I purposed; at least, to the disproofe
of that which your men avouch in their Centuries. For although they say that
this increase of wealth in the Church of Rome began after S. Gregory's time:
yet are they notably disproued by S. Gregory himself, in whose reign, (as it
may probably be thought,) the Churches possessions were more then they be now
at this present. And this appears by sundry of his epistles, where he
makes express mention of S. Peter's patrimony in Afric, in Naples, in
Campania, in Dalmatia, in France, in Italy, in Sicilia, in Sardinia, and in
many other countries.


Rainoldes. You have heard, M. Heart, of sir Thomas More: and perhaps you have
read the history written by him of king Richard the third.


Heart. A worthy work of a worthieman. Who, if he had gone through in like
sort with all our English history, we might compare with Greeks or Romans.
But what of that history?


Rainoldes. In it he reports, that Richard was a tyrant, and did usurp the
regal dignity upon him self, defrauding Prince Edward whose it was by right.
Does sir Thomas More say true in this of Richard, or does he misreport him?


Heart. True, out of question: as it is apparent by all our historians, who
consent therein.


Rainoldes. Yet there is a writer who says that king Richard did not usurp
the crown. And for proof thereof, he brings forth sundry old records and
evidences of the house of York: by which it is showed that Richard had lands
in Calice, in Canterbury, in Kent, in Northumberland, in Ireland, in England,
in Garnsey and in Iersey, before Prince Edwardes time wherein ^ir Thomas More
reports him to have usurped.


Heart. He might have those lands, while he was Duke of Gloucester, and not king
of England. Wherefore, the writer who brings this to prove that he usurped
not the crown, disproueth not the history of Sir Thomas More, but bewrays
his own frowardness or folly.


Rainoldes. You are the writer, M. Heart. I showed by the history of Sigonius,
and others, most worthy of credit, that the Popes usurped Rome, and the
dominion of the Roman Dukedom, defrauding the Emperor of his right by treason.
You affirm the contrary. And for proof thereof you allege sundry epistles
of S. Gregory, whereby it appears that they had possessions in Afrike, in
Naples, in Campania, in Dalmatia, in France, in Italy, in Sicilia, and in
Sardinia, before the time wherein Sigonius declares them to have usurped. But,
as your self answered, they might have these possessions while they were
Bishops, and not Princes. Wherefore in bringing this to prove that they usurped
not the Princedome (so to term it) and temporal dominion of the Papal State:
you disprove not the history of Sigonius, and the rest, but bewray your own
frowardness or folly. Nay you bewray greater fautes of evil and guilful
dealing, as you h^ndle it. For whereas Sigonius, and the rest, whom I cited to
p^oue the Popes usurping, are of y^ Popes religion, and therefore of greater
credit against the Popes: you say naught to them, but name in their steed our
autors of the Centuries. Even as if the writer (whom I told you of) being urged
with the credit of sir Thomas More and English historians, should answer that
although Funccius, a German, report in his Chronicle that Richard did usurp,
yet is he notably disproued by the evidences of the house of York. Again,
where your conclusion ought to be resolute that ye Churches poss^ssions were
more in S. Gregory's time, then they be now: you say they were more, as it may
probably be thought. To ouerbeare verity with probability; the truth, with
likelihood of truth: and leave your self a lurking hole, that, although the
thing be found to be false, yet you may escape who vouch it not as true, but
probable. Moreover, the time of Gregory's being Bishop, you term it his
reign: thereby to breed opinion that he had the temporal dominion, as they
have now. Wherein that word is used so much the more deceitfully: because it
prepares a way to the mistaking of that which you allege out of Gregory's
epistles touching S. Peter's patrimony. For. S. Peter's patrimony does signify
the temporal dominion of the Popes, in that of De corrupt. eccles. stat. cap. 4
Clemangis, which you began your answer with. And so by this [reigne] a man
would take it here. Whereas Gregory means the lands of the Church and
Bishopric of Rome by S. Peter's patrimony; not the dominion temporal, which
they had not then. But in these fautes you are the more excusable, because you
do follow the footsteps of Genebrard: whose Centuriato^es.
Centurie-writers, and Fortasse.
perhaps, and Regnum Ecclesiae.
kingdom, and Petri patrimoni^^.
sophistry might bring you to them unawares. In the next your shame can no way
be covered. For whereas your lodesman, having searched Gregory's epistles of
purpose for S. Peter's patrimony, could find it in no more places but in those
which you rehearsed by name: you thinking such flies too small for the Pope,
do add (with flat untruth) and many other countries: beside that [other
countries] is brought in so too, as if Campania, Naples, and Italy, were
sundry count^ies, where Naples is a town, Campania a shire of Italy. And yet
as though your dealing were sincere and sound, you knit it up thus, that seeing
for this which is the greatest part, so good proofs may be made: no doubt but
the Popes can show very good evidence when need shall require for sundry other
very great and large gifts which were bestowed upon their See, by diverse
Princes, many Nobles, men, and women. The question is of the temporal dominion
of the Popes. The proof you bring thereof from Constantine, is forged; from
Gregory, is fond. So that no part is proved yet, much less the greatest. The
chiefest of the rest that Popes can show for it, is Pipines donation, and the
successors of Pipine. In it I have convinced them also of usurping: who first
did beg and take the territories, and ditions, which should have been
restored to their old Lord the Emperor; and afterward did use their n^w Lord
as a vasall, and made themselves soueraines of that which was given them to
hold in fee. To be short, the vanity of this vaunt of evidence, which the
Popes can show when need shall require, may be perceived by Augustinus
S^^uchus Eugubin^s, Aposto^i^^e sedis ^iblio ^hecarius.
Eugubinus, their attorney general, and principal proctor in this cause. Who
being enflamed with a Popish devotion to say the best that he knew, and
furnished with the treasures of the Popes library to know the best that might
be said: yet, after many floorishes for Constantines donation of the largest
sise, Con^^. ^^u^ent. Vall. de (...). donat. Constantin. lib 2.
he adds in conclusion that (the Pope) Gregory the third did excommunicate
Leo (the Emperor,) and Ab eius imperijs Romana Italianique a^er^it.
caused Rome and Italy to rebel against him, Omnibus ^aramento fid^^^tatis
absolutis.
absoluing all his subjects from their oath of fealty. And so he confuteth the
lie which himself, and Genebrard do build on, that Rome after Constantine was
not the Emperors, but the Popes: and grants by consequent, that the Popes
temporal dominion in Italy was unlawfully gotten, and wrongfully usurped by
this devise of treason.


Heart. Nay, Chronogr. lib. 3. in Sylues^ p^im.
Genebrard has other reasons to defend the right of the Pope, if these do not
content men. For I (says he) answer to heretics impugning the donation of
Constantine that which Iephte did (in the eleventh of Judges) to the king of
Ammonites requiring the land of Galaad to be restored him: we will possess
that which the Lord our God has conquered and obtained. Unless perhaps thou
can show that any man did strive about it for the space of three hundred
years: ( Hic permi^^^ and amplius.
here for a thousand years and more.) Why so long time have you attempted
nothing for the recovery of it? Chiefly, since the prescription of certain
years suffices in grounds and possessions. Moreover, the consent of Italy,
and of the Church, and of the whole world is of force enough to give the Pope
that right. Finally, that Constantine removed the seat of the earthly Empire to
Constantinople through Gods special providence, to the end that the kingdom
of the Church forespoken of by Daniel the Prophet might have his seat at Rome,
it appears by this, that straight the western Emperors, Constans and the
rest, who followed for certain ages, Roma sempecesserint.
left Rome still, and placed the seat of the western Empire at Milan or
Rauenna; and also that Constantius the nephiew of Heraclius, Michael, and
certain others would have brought it in again to Rome, but could not.
Wherefore howsoever the Popes dominion temporal began, or whenever: it is
sure that he has right unto it now.


Rainoldes. The point that we reason of, is not (M. Heart) what right he has
now, but what wrong heretofore he has done the Emperor to obtain this
right. Though neither can you prove his right by these reasons. For, that which
Judge. 11.^^
Iephte spoke of gotten by the Israelites: they got by lawful war. The Pope
has gotten his by unlawful treachery. And prescription holds not in
things that are stolen, and detained by force: if you believe ^. Sequitur.
(...) a^tem. (...). Dominu^.
the law. As for the thousand years and more, which Genebrard adds that no
man strove about it: if he mean, about Constantines donation, no marvel if
they strove not about that which was not. If he mean about that which Popes
claim thereby: it has two untruths; one, that they have held it a thousand
years, and more; an other, that no man strove with them about it. For, to
pass over the Emperors In the si^th D^^^sion of this cha^ter.
before touched, and namely Friderike the first: (...) Platin. C^ement. tert.
Sigon. de regn. Ital. lib. 11.
the Romans them selves had many bickerings with them for the temporal rule
and government of the city, contending that the Pope should meddle with the
spiritual only. Whereby withal appears how vain the brag is of the
consent of Italy, the church, and the whole world. Though neither their
consent can give the Pope that right: unless the Roman Emperors (the right
owners of it) do consent also. And, how they consent, you may learn by late
Emperors; of whom, Maximilian the first. Guicciard. hist. It^l. lib. 9.
one desired to recover Rome and all the Popes dominion, as being his of right;
Charles the fifth. Onuphrius in vita Clement. sept. and Pauli ter^.
an other did more then desire i^: or rather by late Popes, Guicciard. hist.
Ital. lib. 16.
who are afraid of nothing more, then of the Emperors coming into Italy.
Now, the last reason of Gods special providence removing the seat of the
western Empire to Constantinople, to the end that the kingdom of the church
forespoken of by Daniel the Prophet might have his seat at Rome: beside that
it is seasoned (after Genebrards manner) with untruth of story, as that the
western Emperors who succeeded Constantine for certain ages, left Rome still,
Zosim. hist. (...). 5. Sigon. de Occident. imper. lib. 10.
which is disproued by Honorius; it wresteth Gods word to the maintenance of
man's pride. For the Churches kingdom, which Daniel forespake of, is Dan. 7.
verse. 18. and 21. and. 25. 1. Machab. 1.22.
the kingdom of the Jews, touching the temporal state; touching the
spiritual, Dan. 7. verse. 18. and 22. and 27. Hebr. 12.28.
the kingdom of the Saints that does endure for ever. And, if we presume upon
the secret works of the providence of God to gather what the fancy of man
does imagine, not what the wisdom of God has revealed: the Turkish impiety
may be as well proved as the Papal kingdom; because as the seat of the
western Empire is fallen to the Pope, so Constantinople, the seat of the
Eastern, is fallen to the Turk. But whatsoever right these reasons may
afforde to the Pope now: they acquit him not from having done wrong to the
Emperors heretofore, in that he got his temporal dominion from them by
treason and rebellion. And this is the first point, wherein you went about to
clear his supremacy. The next, is his tyranny in spiritual things. Wherein
your defense of him is so tempered, that although you cannot choose but
acknowledge his fault in those excesses which I laid open: yet do you smooth
them as abuses only of lawful authority, and not unlawful acts of usurped
power. For you say, that if any of the Bishops of Rome abused their wealth to
any evil purpose, or else their authority, in any of the points mentioned by
me: you are so far off from justifying them therein, that rather you rue to
see it, and you condemn them therefore. A short and sclender answer to all
their crimes that I touched. Howbeit, if you speak unfeignedly, M. Heart, as I
pray God you do: I am glad that you seek not to justify the Popes in any of
the points that I charged them with, but rue and condemn their abuses
therein. For I laid to their charge that they have oppressed both the civil
state and the ecclesiastical: the civil, in taking upon them to give Empires,
to depose Princes, to discharge subjects of their allegiance and oath; the
ecclesiastical, in making of Church Officers, ordering of Church-causes,
disposing of Church-goodes, executing of Church Censures, and establishing of
Church-lawes, to serve their own desires and lusts. In all the which points
if you condemn their doings as abuses of their authority: you condemn the
practice of their whole supremacy as nothing else in gross but an heap of
abuses.


Heart. Not of their whole supremacy. For though some of them abused their
authority in sundry points which you mentioned: yet others have not done so.
As we had experience in Queen Mary's days: wherein there were not so many
Church-liuings bestowed in England upon Italian Pastors, as you spoke of under
Gregory the ninth, or Innocentius the fourth. But howsoever they dealt with
practice of their power, which they abused I grant: the power it self must
not be therefore thought unlawful; nor was it usurped because it was abused.
For Princes abuse their power oftentimes in oppressing their subjects. Yet,
you will not say that they usurp their Princely power.


Rainoldes. Neither do I say that the Pope usurps his Bishoply power, but
the supremacy. The usurping whereof you go about to hide with the mist of
abusing; while you distinguish not between a lawful power used unlawfully,
and an unlawful power. King Edward the fourth did put to death Burdet (a
merchant of London) for saying merrily to his son, that he would make him
inheritour of the crown: misconstruing his words, as though he had meant the
crown of the realm; where he meant his house at the sign of the crown.
Herein the king abused his power, and not usurped it: because God had given him
the sword to execute justice and judgment on his subject; though he used it
unlawfully against an innocent. But if he had executed a subject of the Spanish
kings, or had excommunicated his own, yea deserving it; this were an usurped
not an abused power: because he did not bear the sword over Spain; and the
Church Censures belong to the Bishops charge, not to the Princes. In like sort
the Pope of Rome might remove the Roman Emperor from the communion: as Sozom
en. ^ist. eccles. lib. 7. cap. ^4.
Ambrose Bishop of Milan removed Theodosius, being of his charge in the Church
of Milan. Which if the Pope did unlawfully, and not as Ambrose: he abused his
power. But if he presumed to excommunicate other kings, or to depose the Roman
Emperor: the power that he practiced therein was unlawful, and he usurped it.
Which example of his dealing with the civil state, observes the tenor of the
same disorder in the ecclesiastical. For if he 1. Tim. 5.22.
laid hands rashly upon a man whom he had right to ordeine: his power was
lawful, though abused. But if he took upon him the right of making Pastors,
or of giving benefices and Bishoprics through all the world: he did usurp
unlawful power. Wherefore since the tyranny wherewith I charged him in
spiritual things was of the supremacy over all Christendom, not of Bishoply
power over his own diocese: the power of spiritual rule which he practiced
over both the states ecclesiastical and civil, is not abused, but usurped.
Neither can you salve it with laying the blame on some of the predecessors: as
if the successors now were guiltless of it. For, though they do not all
commit the same excess in the execution of their usurped power: yet they all
maintain the liberty of doing it, and do it when they list. As since Queen
Mary's days one of your best Popes, Pius the fifth, has showed: ^ulla P^j
Quinti contra ^lisabetham, Angliae Reginam.
who has excommunicated, yea, P^i^amus Elisabe^ham praetenso iure regni.
deposed also our gracious Queen Elisabeth; and Regulae Cancellariae Pi^ Papae
Quinti in ^clog. Bullar. and Motu-proprior.
reserved benefices, dignities, and Reseruauit generaliter omnes ecclesias
Patriarchales, Archiepiscopales, Episcopales,
Bishoprics to his own bestowing from them who should elect their pastors
by right. Of the which things since he took unlawful power in the one, to
depose Princes, as your self have told me that you are of opinion; in the
other, Nicolaus Clemangis d^ corrupto ecclesiae statu: cap. 5. and 7.
the autour, the good autour (whom you praised) confirms that the Popes,
bestowing the Church-liuings so, do that they ought not: your own conscience,
M. Heart, and your autours judgment should move you to confess their
supremacy in spiritual things to be usurped, no less, then I have showed it
to be in temporal. But if perhaps you will not grant so much yet, suspending
your sentence till the chapters following, whereto you refer us: the third and
last point, that they erred in office, is proved notwithstanding even by that
you grant. And therefore you say that only this is it which you go about to
defend in them, that because of Christ's promise, of building his church upon
that rock; and prayer also that their faith should not fail; they never erred
in judgment, or definitive sentence. Wherein, being driven by force of evident
truth from your maine distinction, that the Pope may err in person, not in
office; as a private man, not as Pope: you retire from all the wards of your
castle into the celler as it were, and say that in a corner of his office he
never erred; but otherwise in office and every part thereof he has.


Heart. Nay, this was my meaning by that distinction at the first. As you may
perceive by that In the 3. Diuis. of this chapter.
I spoke expressly of definitive sentence: and said, that he cannot err
iudicially.


Rainoldes. Then your meaning was to put the coat of Hercules upon a dwarfes
body. For the Popes office is a great deal larger then judgment or
definitive sentence. And when you said withal that the Evangelists, and
other penners of holy write, for the execution of that function had the
assistance of God, and so far could not err possibly: you seemed to
insinuate that the Popes have likewise the assistance of God for the execution
of their function; and can no more err in discharging of it, then could the
Evangelists in writing of the Gospel. But since you see now that in function
and office they may be as false, as the Gospel is true; which in every part
thereof I have proved: you shall see as much in this remnant also of judgment
and definitive sentence, unless you shut your eyes against ye light of
manifest proof. For what do you mean by saying that the promise and prayer
of Christ keeps them from erring in judgment or definitive sentence? Do you
not mean that they cannot teach against the truth in a matter of faith,
because the Church of Christ shall be built upon them, and their faith shall not
fail, that they may strengthen their brethren.


Heart. I mean (as I declared) that they cannot nor shall not ever iudicially
conclude or give definitive sentence for falsehood or heresy against the
Catholic faith, in their Consistories, Courts, Councels, decrees,
deliberations, or consultations kept for decision and determination of such
controversies, doutes, or questions of faith as shall be proposed unto them:
because Christ's prayer and promise protecteth them therein for confirmation of
their brethren.


Rainoldes. The issue of our conference shall try that they have erred thus in
every point of the Catholic faith, wherein they teach against us: as even in
this first of their own supremacy. But I will show presently that they have
done it in such things as your selves confess to be doctrines of falsehood or
heresy. And that will I show by the same autours (or as good as them) of whom
you vouch so boldly, that you are sure they do maintain this, of the Popes
not erring in judgment or definitive sentence, no less then you do. ^or In
Chronico.
Sigebert, Supputat. ^omanor. Pont.
Martinus Polonus, De reg^. I^al. lib. 6.
and Sigonius do witne^^^ that Pope Stephen the sixth decreed in a council,
that they who were ordained Bishops by Pope Formosus were not ordained
lawfully, because the man was wicked by whom they were ordained.


Heart. Pope Stephen did deprive them of their orders, and (as Sigebert terms
it) Exordinauit ordinatos a Formoso.
did vnordeine them who were ordained by Formosus. He erred in a matter of
fact, not of faith.


Rainoldes. He erred in a matter of fact and faith both. For he did not only
deprive and vnordeine them who were ordained by Formosus: but he Ordinationes
^^u* omnes ^irri^as esse debere decernit.
decreed too, (as Sigebert withal notes) that all the ordeinings of Formosus
ought to be void. Wherein he did follow the error of the Donatists: Aug^^tin.
cont^. epist. ^a^men. lib. 2. cap. 13. and 14. De bapt^sm. contr. Donat lib. 1.
cap. 1. and. 2.
who (as if the sacrament had his force from men that are the ministers of it,
not from God, the autour;) thought them not well baptized who were baptized by
evil ministers, and so baptized them again. Yea, that very fact of Stephens
is reproved therefore by Re^. per Europ. gestar. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Luitprandus, (a grave and learned writer that lived about the same time,)
though For he calls him Sergius: ^ut it was Stephen, as it appears by the
Council of Rauenna, under John the ninth. Sigon. de regn. Ital. lib. 6. The
humor of Sergius, which Stephen served in it, (as being set up by his faction)
occasioned be like the name to be mistaken.
mistaking his name, yet judging of the thing rightly. For after the rehersall
thereof, that depriving all them of their degree who were ordained by Formosus,
he did ordeine them again: which thing (says Luitprandus) how wickedly he did
you may perceue by this, that even they who received grace or Apostolic
blessing of Judas the betrayer of Christ before he betrayed him, were not
deprived of it after he had betrayed him and hanged himself. For the blessing
which is bestowed on the servants of Christ, is not powered on them by that
Priest which is seen, but by that Priest which is not seen. For neither he
that planteth is any thing nor he that waters, but God that gives the
increase. So manifestly carried the fact of Pope Stephen a savor of Donatisme,
that is, of a notorious error in faith: though he had not approved it by his
decree. Much more since he decreed the thing as true and lawful.


Heart. To say that holy orders given by a Bishop, be he never so wicked, are
void, and of no force: it is an error in faith, I grant. But this of
Luitprandus is denied by In Chronico.
Sigebert, that he ordained them again whom he deprived.


Rainoldes. whether he ordained them again, or no: it makes not the matter.
Though, by Council. Rauenn. ann. Do^^ 893. Sigo^. de regn. Ital. lib. 6.
the Council in which John the ninth condemned Stephen and his Council, it
seems rather he did, at the least some of them. For there Reordinationes.
new ordeininges are namely forbidden, and matched with Rebaptizationes.
new baptizinges. Which, if Stephen had not offended therein as the Donatists
did, why should it be so touched? But whether he ordained them again or no:
he decreed that which your selves acknowledge to be an error in faith; and he
decreed it in a Council.


Heart. But the Council did not approve that decree by free voice and
judgment. The Pope did extort their consent through fear: Sigon. de reg.
Ital. lib. 6.
as it appears by the Council that condemned him.


Rainoldes. This is not to prove that the Popes decreees in Counsels are good:
but to disprove rather the certainty which you gave them in Consistories,
Courts, and Councels. For not only Bishops assembled in the Council, but
also Lawiers in the Court, yea Cardinals themselves in the Consistory of ye
Pope, may agree for fear to that which they like not, as G^icciard. hist.
I^al. lib. 13.
Leo the tenth made them to do. And, if the soundnes of the Popes decrees may
be distained by this affection: it may by other causes, and impediments also.
For what if Theodoric. a Niem. de schis. (...). 1. cap 5.
the Cardinals, mislyking of the Pope for reproving their fautes, cap. 7.
leave him (as they did Urban the sixth) and cap. 10.
make a new Pope? What if they be unfaithful that he dare not trust their
counsel and advise, Iouius de vita Adrian. sext.
as Adrian the sixth durst not? What if they give him lewd and wicked
counsel, that it deceive him if he trust it? Such as was the counsel of
Cardinal La^rc^tio Pucio Cardinale, nullum omnino quaestum ponti^icibus
illicitum esse praedicante. Cuius, vt diuini iuris pericissimi, Leo fide^
obtestatus est. ne se imprudenter in errorem labi pateretur. Iouius de vita
Leon. decim. lib. 4.
Pucio: who exhorted Popes to make any gain, and said that they might do it
lawfully. Chabrias, a skillfull man of war said, Plutarch in Apophthegm. Reg.
and Imperat.
that an army of hearts is more to be feared having a lion to their captain,
then an army of lions having a heart. You bear us in hand that the Pope is a
lion, and other men are hearts. But you make him the heart (me thinks) and them
lions, when you say that himself may err and fail in faith, but he can not
do it in Consistories, Courts and Councels. As if Christ had prayed for his
brethren to strengthen him, and not for him to strengthen his brethren.


Heart. Nay, I made not mention of his brethren so, as if the assurance of truth
in his decrees did depend of them. For, though it behooue him to use their
advise, and therefore I spoke of Consistories, Courts, and Councels: yet,
whether he follow their advise or no, his decrees are true. But as for Pope
Stephen, I can not think that he decreed that error. At least, if he decreed
it, yet he set not forth a decree of it, as to teach the Church.


Rainoldes. But if he decreed it, he erred in judgment and definitive
sentence: which is the point that you denied. Howbeit to drive you from this
shelter also: Pope Caelestine the third c. Laudabilem de conuersione infideli^m.
set forth a decree, that when of married persons one falls into heresy, the
marriage is dissolved, and the catholic party is free to mary again. Flat
Mart. 19.9.
against the scripture, that whosoever dimisseth his wife, but for whooredom,
and marieth an other, does commit adultery; and whosoever marieth her that is
dimissed, does commit adultery.


Heart. This was Pope Caelestines opinion, not decree. For c. Quanto. de
^iuoitijs.
Pope Innocentius the third, who speaks of it, says not that he defined but
that he thought so.


Rainoldes. Yet Pope Innoce^tius saying that he Sensisse.
thought so, does use that word in Latin, which Sententia.
sentence comes from: th^^ ^e might note thereby the definitive sentence of
Caelestine, not the opinion. But whatsoever one Pope thought of another:
Alfonsus, a famous patron of the Papacy, does show that he defined it.
Al^ons. a Cast^o aduers haeres. lib. 1. cap. 4.
For that Pope Caelestine did err (says Alfonsus) about the marriage of the
faithful of whom one falls into heresy it is manifest to all men. Neither
was this error of Caelestin such as ought to be imputed to negligence alone,
that we may say he erred as a private man, and not as Pope, who in Definienda.
defining of any serious matter should ask counsel of learned men. For this
Definitio.
definition of Caelestine was In antiquis decretalibus.
extant in the old decretals, which I my self have seen and read. And this of
Alfonsus is confirmed farther by Cardinal Super quart^ decretalium. c. quanto
de diuo^tijs.
Hostiensis: who notes the very Idem ^iquidem.
paragraph of De conuersione infid. c. Laudabilem.
the chapter in the which it was, and speaks of it as a decretal. Wherefore
though the chapter be maimed of ye paragraph Since ye year of Christ. 1260*
since Hostiensis time: yet these records suffice to show that it was a decree
of Pope Caelestines, set forth to teach the Church.


Heart. There are Gratianus distinct. 19. c. Ita Dominus. Hoc autem. Adrianus,
in 4. se^tent. de confirmat. quaest. vlt. Gerson, and Almain, Parisie^ses
Theologi.
some of our Doctors (as Locor. Theolog. lib. 6. cap. 1.
Canus declares) who think that the Pope may err in judgment of faith.
Alfonsus and Hostiensis might have that fancy too. But if ye decree (whereof
they speak) were set forth perhaps to teach ye Church: yet not to teach the
Church that point. For in a point touched or handled by the way, Popes may
err, (as lib. ^. c. 8.
Canus and D. Princip. doc^. lib. 8. cap. 14.
Stapleton show:) but not in the conclusion, that is, the principal point which
they entend to teach.


Rainoldes. Now you may see how vainly you st^iue for ye Pope. For this, which
is your last hold when all is done, I oue^threw In the.2. Division of this
chapter.
at first by the example of Honorius. The conclusion and principal point of
whose Dogmatica scripta Honorij ad Sergium. Sext. Synod. Co^stantinop. act. 12
decrees set forth to teach the Church, was the Monothelites heresy. Whereby
he did not strengthen his brethren in the faith, but ^mp^a Sergi^ dogmata
co^firm^uit.
confirmed their wicked errors against the faith, as Sext. Synod. Constan^inop.
act. 13. Inuenimu^.
the Council pronounced of him.


Heart. Why do all the Fathers then apply this privilege of not failing and of
confirming other in faith to the Roman Church, and Peter's successors in the
same.


Rainoldes. They do not. But your In their Annotations on Luke ^2.31.
Rhemists who report that of them, do shamefully misreport them. For De
corrept. and grati^ cap. 8.
Austin, Hom. 83. in Matthaeum. and 72. in Iohanne^.
Chrysostom, De vocat. (...). cap. 24.
Prosper, and In Luc. 2^.
Theophylact do understand by [faith] a lively Christian faith, and say that
Christ prayed that Peter might continue therein unto the end. Which grace
neither they nor any Father says that all the Popes have. Nay In y^ 1. Diuis.
of this Chapt.
your self, Turrecrem. in (...). de eccles. l. 2. c. 112. Canus Loc. Theolog.
l. 6. c. 1. Bellarmin. Co^t^o^. 4. p. 2. q. 1.
your Doctors, yea In their Annot. Luke 22.31.
Rhemists do confess the contrary.


Heart. Yet Staplet. princ. doctr. l. 6. c. 15.
the rock, no doubt, whereon Christ did promise that he would build his Church
and the gates of hell should not prevail against it, is applied by the Fathers
to Peter's successors in the church of Rome. S. In Psalm. contr. partem donat.
Austin is a witness thereof against the Donatistes, whom he bids number
the Priests (that is the Popes) even from the seat of Peter, and mark their
succession: affirming it to be the rock against which the proud gates of hell
prevail not. The eighth Division.
And S. Epist. 57.
Ierom writing to Damasus the Pope, avouches as much: I am joined says he, in
communion to your holiness, that is, to Peter's chair. I know that the Church
is builded upon that rock.


Rainoldes. The poor ship of Christ has made almost shipwreck upon this
rock of yours. I have Chapt. 2. Diuis. 1.
already proved, that the word petra, which you translate a rock, does
signify in Christ's speech, a stone, not a rock. Howbeit rock, or stone, it
mak^th no difference to the sayings of the Fathers, which you allege,
concerning it. For whether they meant a stone, as it is properly; or a rock,
as it may be they did, (at least S. Who applies the rock to Christ: De verbis
Domin. Sermon. 13. Retractat. lib. 1. ^ap. 21.
Austin*) through doutfulnesse of the word: they meant not to build the
Papacy thereby. Wherefore if you think that the name of stone either has not
so great advantage for your purpose, or does not yield so fully the meaning of
the Fathers: I am content (with out prejudice to that which I have spoken
touching the right sense thereof in Christ's speech) to use your rock in
steed of it.


Heart. So you must do, if you will deal with my argument. For the majesty of
the Church of Rome is much advanced by the name of the rock: and in my
judgment the Fathers meant no less when they applied ye words of Christ to
that See.


Rainoldes. The Fathers used those words to advance the majesty of the Church
of Rome: but neither to advance the church of Rome alone, neither to import the
Popes supremacy by that majesty. And this may be gathered plainly by S.
Epist. 27. ad lapso^.
Cyprian, who although he give a Epist. 55. ad Cornelium.
special ti^le of honor and preeminence to the Church of Rome: yet does he
apply that of the rock to the Church in general. For he affirms that our Lord
took order for the office of a Bishop and the state of his Church by saying
unto Peter, Thou art Peter, and on this rock will I build my Church, and the
gates of hell shall not prevail against it: and, to thee will I give the keys
of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth shall be
bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth shall be loosed in
heaven. Thence by course of times, and successions, there flows Episcoporum
ordinatio.
the ordeining of Bishops and Ecclesiae ratio.
the state of the Church: that Ecclesia super episcopos constituatur.
upon the Bishops the Church should be set, and every action of the Church
should be governed and guided by the same rulers. In the which words S.
Cyprian (you see) accounts all Bishops the rock of the Church. That as by
the church built upon the rock, the whole Church is meant, and not the Church
of Rome, or of Carthage only: so neither the Bishop of Rome, nor of Carthage,
may be represented alone by the rock, and yet as well the Bishop of Carthage
as of Rome.


Heart. Howsoever it seemed in S. Cyprians judgment to belong to all Bishops,
and so after a sort to the Bishop of Carthage, as Epist. 27. a^ lapsos.
he applies it: yet other of the Fathers apply it in special to the Bishop of
Rome, and give it particularly to that Church, and See.


Rainoldes. They do: but in such sort, that they might have done it to any
faithful Church, even to the Church of Carthage, as S. Cyprian did. For that
which is verified of a thing in general, is verified in the special. As, for
example, the Catholic Church in general is named Heb. 10: 21.
the house of God, and Cant. 4.12.
the spouse of Christ. The Apostle applies those titles in special, Heb. 3.6.
the one to the Hebrews, 2. Cor. 11.2.
the other to the Corinthians, if they continue faithful. And so what Christ
has said of his whole Church, that the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it: that is true in every part of his Church. And if he named Peter, a
rock, (in respect of the faith that he professed,) on the which he said he
would build his Church; then al, on whom (professing the same faith of Christ)
his Church in part is builded, may, in a proportion, be called rocks also.
Wherefore since the Fathers did speak of the Church of Rome when it was holy,
and of the Roman Bishops, when they professed the faith of Peter: no marvel,
if they said the Church was built on that rock, and the gates of hell did not
prevail against it. Howbeit I deny not but that in their speeches of the
Church of Rome they give more unto it then they could have given to every
faithful Church. For whereas of the sundry Churches of Christ some were
planted by the Apostles them selves, as Act. 2.41.
Jerusalem, 11.26.
Antioche, 1^.^.
Corinth, 28.30.
Rome; some received the faith from them which the Apostles planted:
Tertullian. de praesc^ipt. adue^s. haeret. August. epist. 162. and 164. and de
doctrine. Christian. l 2 c. 8.
they had the former sort in greater reputation, and called them Apostolic
Churches; amongst which they counted the Church of Rome Cyprian. ep. 55.
a chief one, Irenae. aduers. haeres. l. 3. c. 3.
as planted by the chief Apostles Peter and Paul. And because it was famous
that Peter had preached the Gospel there, (whom as the first Apostle it seems
that the Romans did more rejoice in, then in Paul:) thence it comes that in
speaking of the Church of Rome, they mention oftentimes the seat and chair of
Peter. For they who did teach, were wont to teach fitting: as I showed In the
4. Diuis. of this Chapt.
before by Matt. 26.55. Luc. 4 20. Ioh. 8.2.
the example of Christ, and Matt. 23.2.
his words of the Scribes and Pharisees. Whereupon, as the scripture speaks
of S. Paul, that Act. 18.11. (...).
he sat at Corinth a year and six months, teaching the word of of God
amongst them, meaning that he continued there, and preached to them: in like
sort Damasus in Ponti^icali. Hiero^. de scrip^or. eccles. verbo Petrus. August.
contr. liter. Petilian. l. 2. c. 51.
the Fathers, ^o signify that Peter abode and taught in Rome, are accustomed
to say that he sat at Rome. So does Austin mention the succession of Bishops
from the seat of Peter. So does Ierom honor the Bishop of that See with the
n^me of Peter's chair. But what is this to the supremacy? For it is spoken by
Eusebius. in Chronic. Damasus in Pontificali.
the Fathers also, that Peter did sit and h^d h^s ch^ire at Antioche: yea at
Antioche (as Durand. in Rationali divine. off. l. 7. c. 8.
some say) he had in deed Excelsam ca^hedram.
a high chair, wherein he was exalted. And of his chair at Antioche, you have
an Februar. 22. Cathedra S. Petri Antiochiae. Durand. l. 7. c. 8.
old holy day; of his chair at Rome, a Ianuar. 18. Cathedra S. Petri Romae.
Onuphr. annotat. in Pla^in. vit. Petri.
new one, trimmed of late. Wherefore if the high chair of Peter at Antioche
with an old feast could not make the Bishop of Antioche supreme head: how can
the Bishop of Rome be made supreme head by Peter's chair (perhaps a lower
chair) at Rome, with a new feast? If the new feast be that which makes up
the matter: the Pope was no fool in making that feast. He may do well to make
m^e.


Heart. You make your self sport with our feasts of S. Peter's chair: as
though I had said, that because the Fathers do name the Sea of Rome the seat
and chair of Peter, therefore the Bishop of Rome must have the supremacy.
Whereas I alleged them to show that the Bishops and the succession of Bishops
in that See is the rock, on which S. Ierom says he knows the Church to be
built; against which S. Austin says, yt the proud gates of hell prevail not.


Rainoldes. But Staple^ (...) doctr^. 6 c. ^5.
you do conclude the Popes supremacy hereof: or else you stray from the
question.


Heart. Why may I not conclude it?


Rainoldes. If you list: but the feast of S. Peter's chair would prove it more
galantly. For if the testimonies, which you allege, of Ierom and Austin, be
examined: they say nothing for it. S. Ierom abiding (in his young years) among
the Arian heretics in the coasts of Syria, was required by their Bishop to
allow and approve a profession of faith touching the Trinity, wherein he
suspected there lay some privy poison hidden. Wherefore least he should yield
thereunto rashly, he sought to be directed by the advice and counsel of
Damasus Bishop of Rome: as whom both he acknowledged to be his own Bi^hop,
and knew to be a Bishop that held the catholic faith; which praise by that
title of the rock he gives him. In Afrike, they were troubled with other
heretics named Donatistes: a sect which despised the communion of Saints, and
rent them selves a sunder from the assemblies of Christians, because there were
some evil men amongst them (as they said) whose fellowship defiled them. S.
Austin wrote a Psalm for the Catholics against these: wherein, having proved
first out of the scriptures, that we must not leave the communion of the Church
for that there are some evil men in it, since Christ has declared that there
should be so, as tares with corn, in the field; as chafe with wheat in the
floor; as badde with good, in the nett; he confirms this doctrine by the
consent and judgment of the Church of Rome, whose Bishops even from Peter had
embraced it still, and constantly maintained it, the gates of hell in vain
assaulting them. So the words of Austin and Ierom do import a sincerity of
faith in the Church of Rome and the Roman Bishops against the Arians and
Donatistes: but neither of their words import the supremacy, which is a
soueraintie of power.


Heart. If they had not meant as well a soueraintie of power as sincerity of
faith: why should they mention that Church and not others? Were there no
Bishops sincere through al ye world, but the Bishops of Rome only?


Rainoldes. Yes a great many, and they mention them too. For Ierom, though he
asks the advice of Damasus, a young man of an old, Epist. 57. a me homine
Romano.
a Roman of the Bishop of Rome, whose Theodoret. hist. eccles. l. 2.^.22. and
l. 5. c. 10. Symbolum Damasi apud Hier. Tom. 9.
religion was sound, whose Th^odoret. lib. 5. cap. 2. and 3.
authority was great, and the greater with Ierom because he knew him well, as
Hier. epist. 57. and 58. Damaso.
having learned him self the faith of Christ in Rome, where he was baptized:
yet does he name S. Ambrose (the Bishop then of Milan) as sound in faith also,
and the Bishops of Egypt, yea of Theodoret. hist. eccles. l. 5. c. 6.
the west in general. Hier. epist. 57.
Now in the west (says he) the sun of righteousness arises, and the
inheritance of the Fathers is kept uncorrupted amongst you alone. In like sort
does In Psalmo contr. part. Donati.
Austin note, against the Donatistes, (whose canker had fretted but a piece of
Afrike,) that Bishops of the coasts and countries beyond sea, and Churches
through the whole world, were pure from their heresy. Howbeit, as Ierom
preferred the advice of Damasus before others to confirm himself: so did
Austin choose the Church of Rome above the rest to confirm his brethren. For
August. retractat. l. 1. c. 20.
he penned his Psalm (wherein this is written) of purpose to the capacity of
the very meanest and simplest of the people: yt they might understand and
remember the state of the controversy with the Donatistes. Wherefore he
commends the truth by the authority of the Church of Rome: Tertull. de
praescript. aduers. hae^et.
which, of all the Churches that the Apostles planted, was both nearest to
them, and best esteemed of amongst them. But how far S. Austin was from your
fancy of the Popes supremacy, when he alleged the Church of Rome to this
intent: let that be a token, that, writing for the learned who were of greater
reach, he alleges the Churches August. con^^. liter. Petil. l. 2. c. 51.
of Jerusalem, Epist. 164. ad Emeritum. De vnitate Ecc^esiae c. 11. and 12.
of Corinth, of Antioche, Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, of Asia, Bithynia,
Galatia, Cappadocia, in a word, Contr. Cres^on. gramm. l. 3. c 18. and epist.
161. ad Honoratum.
of all the rest as well as of Rome. And this may be semblably noted in S.
Ierom. Epist. 77 ad Mar^um presb^^.
Who, when the Arians charged him with heresy, did justify his faith by his
communion with the Churches of the west and of Egypt, of Damasus Bishop of
Rome, and Peter Bishop of Alexandria. According to ^ozom. histor ^^^le^ l. ^.
c. 4. (...).
the law of the Emperor Theodosius: wherein it is decreed that all they should
be named and esteemed Catholics, who believed of the Trinity as Damasus and
Peter did; the rest to be accounted and punished as heretics. A great praise
(I grant) of the faith of Damasus, that so good an Emperor did set him for a
sampler whom Christians should follow: but a praise common (...) him with Peter
Bishop of Alexandria; and Sozom. l. 7. (...).
common to them both with sundry Bishops of the East, Nectarius, Pelagius,
Diodorus, Amphilochius, Helladius, Otrein^s, Gregory Ny^^en, and mo. Of whom
the same Emperor did (...) make an other law, that none should have the ch^rge
of ^ishoprickes committed to them but such as we^^ of their faith. Whereby you
may perceive that the praise given to Damasus by Ierom, proves a sound faith
common to the Bishop of Rome with many other; not a sovereign power, peculiar
to him alone above all.


Heart. Then you grant, at least, that the Bishop of Rome cannot err in faith
by S. Ieroms judgment.


Rainoldes. Or, at least, you take it, though neither I do grant it, nor is
it proved by S. Ierom. But this is proved, and I grant it, that he did not err
in the faith of the Trinity, when Damasus was Bishop of Rome.


Heart. When Damasus was Bishop? Why do you so restrain it? S. Ieroms words be
general. I am joined in communion unto your holiness, that is to Peter's
chair. I know that the Church is builded upon that rock. Behold, to Peter's
chair. He speaks not to Damasus as in respect of Damasus, but in respect of
the chair, and so of the succession of the Bishops of Rome: that, what he
says to one, belongs to them all.


Rainoldes. If you set his words upon such tenters, they will never hold. For,
De scripto^i^bus ecclesiast. verbo Fortunatianus.
him self reports that the next Bishop of Rome before Damasus, Liberius by
name, subscribed to the Arian heresy.


Heart. S. Ierom reports so: but he might be deceived by some misreporte. For
he could say nothing more of that matter, then what he had by hearsay.


Rainoldes. But seeing that he lived so near to that time, and in the same
place, and loved the Sea of Rome, and yet does report this matter of Liberius,
and report it constantly, not only in his book of Ecclesiastical writers,
but in In adiect. ad Chronic. Eusebius*
his Chronicle also: it is more likely, that he did both know and testify the
truth, then Chron. lib. ^
Pontacus (who makes your exception against him) or any man that lives now.


Heart. Why? will not you credit a man that lives now in any thing against S.
Ierom?


Rainoldes. Yes: if he bring me good reason to disprove him.


Heart. And Pontacus does so. For he shows that Epist. 74.
Basil, De virgin. l. 3.
Ambrose, and Haeres. 75.
Epiphanius, do call Liberius a blessed man: and that In apolog. 2.
Athanasius does free him from the spot of Arianisme.


Rainoldes. Basil, Ambrose, and Epiphanius, do call Liberius a blessed man.
What? Therefore he subscribed not to the Arian heresy? Then you may say that
Peter did not deny Christ. For, Sermon. de humil^t.
Basil, De fide lib. 5. in praefat.
Ambrose, and In anchorat.
Epiphanius do call Peter a blessed man. They are blessed, who repent them
selves of their sins, as Peter did of his denial: and so might Socrat. hist.
eccles. l. 4 c. 11. Sozom. l. 6. c. 12.
Liberius do of his subscription. As for In apolog. 2.
Athanasius, though he say that Liberius condemned the heresy of the Arians,
and therefore suffered banishment: yet he says withal, that he continued
not in suffering banishment to the end, but Athanas. in epist. ad solit. vit.
agent.
through fear of death subscribed to that heresy with his hand, though with
his heart he were still against it. Thus even Athanasius, who lived at the same
time with Liberius, and knew his state well, acknowledges that he subscribed:
though judging most friendly (both for his own sake, and the causes,) that he
consented not. But, In Pontificali.
Damasus Bishop of Rome, who succeeded Liberius, and might know the matter
better then Athanasius, does write that Liberius did consent also to
Constantius the Arian.


Heart. Although this be written in the book of Damasus: yet it is not likely
that Damasus wrote it. For, Sum. Concilior. in vit. Libe^^j.
Carranza notes, that there are many who dout of that story. And Annot. in
Plat. vit. Felicis secund.
Onuphrius, a man very skillful of antiquities, chiefly of the Roman,
discrediteth both the report and the autour of it* saying, that Anastasius the
keeper of the Popes library, was (as he thinks) the first who believed it,
and thrust it into the book of Damasus, as many other things besides.


Rainoldes. What Anastasius did, I know not. But if he stuffed Damasus with any
thing of his own: it was belike in such things rather, as advance, then
empeach the Popes credit. Howbeit, if Onuphrius in that he denies Liberius was
an Arian, do mean that he subscribed not to the Arian heresy, and that this
report came first from Anastasius: what answers he then to Ierom, and
Athanasius, and Hist. eccles^^ast. lib. 4. cap. ^^.
Sozomen, (and In (...).
Marcellinus in effect too,) who wrote it all with one consent, the youngest of
them a hundred years before Anastasius was borne. As for Carranzas note, that
there are many who doubt of that story: he must show who they be, and what
grounds of dout they have. Or else, those many may be such as himself and
Onuphrius: whose doubting may not prejudice the credit of historians that wrote
a thousand years before them. Chiefly, if they have no surer grounds then
Carranza: who, to disprove the story, alleges that Liberius wrote one
epistle to Athana^ius and the Bishops of Egypt against the Arians; and another
to all Bishops, exhorting them to constancy. Which reasons are so poor, that
your own Sanction* ^^^clesiast. class* 3. in vita Liberij.
Iouerius, a Paris Doctor of Divinity, rehersing them by occasion, has
withal refuted them. But see to what miserable shifts you are driven to
uphold the pride of the man of Rome. Because it were a stain unto his
supremacy, if his predecessor Liberius subscribed against the Catholic
faith: therefore you rather choose to deny it; and how? First the authority of
Ierom is alleged affirming it in his Chronicle. Your Hierar. ecclesiast. lib.
4. c. ^.
Pighius does answer that some has interlaced those words into his
Chronicle, through ignorance or fraud. When this answer seemed hard, because
Ierom has other where affirmed it also: your Pontacus (to help it) replieth
that Ierom could say naught thereof, but what he had by hearsay. When proof
of this hearsay is made out of Damasus: your Onuphrius supposes him to be
corrupted by Anastasius the keeper of the Popes library. When Sozomen, a
Greek writer, confirms Damasus, and Ierom: Your Christophorson, who
translateth him, does make him hold his peace, or rather witness to the
contrary. For where he says in his own tongue, that the Emperor (...).
compelled Liberius to subscribe: he says, by your transl^tor, the Emperor
Tentauit co^pelle^e.
assayed to compel him. And where he says (...),
in his own tongue, that certain Arian Bishops (...),
procured him to consent: he says, by your translator, Conantur vt consentiat.
they endeavored that he should consent. When farther Marcellinus is found to
agree with Sozomens report: your Chronogr. l. 3.
Genebrard seeing Ierom approved by them both, does raze out that of Ponta^us
(that Ierom could say naught thereof but by hearsay) and does assalt him with
the Fathers. Wherein, (besides them, whom you alleged out of Pontacus,) he
cites Socrates and Theodoret: Histor. ecclesiast. lib. 4. c. 11.
Socrates, declaring that Liberius was no Arian in the time of Valens the
Emperor; as though this were a proof that he subscribed not to the Arian
heresy in the time of Constantius: Histor. ecclesiast lib. 5. cap. 6.
Theodoret, auouching that the west was always free form Arianisme; which is
less to the purpose, Theodoret speaking generally as for the most part, and in
respect of the East by way of comparison. For himself had showed Lib. 4. c. 5.
before that Auxentius, a western Bishop, was an Arian. Now for Athanasius,
who is the most ancient witness of this matter, and of such valor that your
Defens. ^id. Trident. lib. 2.
Andradius could not but yield himself unto him: yet Genebrard and Pontacus
thought it good policy to name him as gainesaying Ierom therein; where Ierom
says the same that he does, so plainly and fully yt your Contr. Brent. lib. 2.
Hosius is feign to shape one answer to them both, that they believed a false
rumor. Wherewith your Praelect. Romans Sontrou. 4. p. 2. q. 1.
Bellarmin does cast them off too. And this shift of laying the blame on false
rumors seemed so hansome to your Annot. in vitam Liber. Council. Tom. 1.
Surius, that he (belike misliking Onuphrius shift of Anastasius,) applies it
to Damasus also. For coloring whereof, he says, that very ancient historians
and writers bear witness of Liberius most constant perseverance in defense of
the Catholic faith. But being not able to name as much as one of these very
ancient historians and writers, of whom he boasts with shameless lie: he
sends his reader (a thing most ridiculous) to Nicephor. Callist. hist.
ecclesiast. l. 9. c. 37.
Nicephorus a late writer, who (says he) doubtless did draw his writings out
of the ancient. In deed that Nicephorus has of this point, he drew it out
of Sozomen: and, if the Greek were extant, the truth were easily tried, but
either he did change his autour in (...).
three words, which is not likely, since he followed him through all the chapter
foot by foot; (...).
or (which is most likely) your Langus, who (...).
translated him Christopherson with Sozomen. Suadere ten^auit.
Such follies and treacheries you wrappe your selves in, Studuere.
to keep men from opinion, that a Pope subscribed to the Arian heresy.
Conabantur.
Which, had you not hardened your faces as flint to sooth the presumption of
the Papal See, I see no cause why you should do: chiefly since your selves do
teach (as In the 2. Diuis. of this chapte^.
I have showed) that the Pope may be an heretic, and not subscribe to heresy
only. But if you be affected so tenderly to the Pope, that you will rather
grant any fault in others then such a spot in him; if you can say with out
blushing, that Damasus was corrupted, Athanasius light of credit, Marcellinus a
false Chronicler; that Sozomen is truer in Latin, then in Greek; in your
translation, then his own tongue; that ^h^on lib. ^.
Marianus Scotus, In supputat. R^man. (...)
Martinus Polonus, (...) in Chron (...)
Ado, Ch^on. lib. 1.
Rhegino, ^.
Antoninus, (...) Iebe^^ secund.
Platina, and (...). de (...)* cath^ l. ^. c 5. Al^on^
other later writers were deceived by Ierom; that Ierom was abused himself by
false rumors; to be short, that the Papists who live in our days can tell
what was done twelve hundred years ago, better then them selves who lived at
that time, andsince from age to age: yet you cannot say but that Ierom thought
that Liberius subscribed to the Arian heresy; yea, Ca^h. contr. ha r. l. ^. c.
4. Albert. K^^ntz. Metrop. l. 2. cap. 1.
that Felix (the next Bishop of Rome after Liberius) was an Arian; he thought
it. Wherefore, if he had meant ofthe whole succession of the Roman Bishops that
which he wrote to Damasus, I am joined in communion unto your holiness, that
is, to Peter's chair; I know that the Church is builded upon that rock: then
he must have meant, that* before the time that Damasus was Bishop, he ought to
have been joined in communion to the Arians, and that the Arians holiness was
the chair of Peter, and that the Church was built upon the rock of Arians.
But this abomination was far from S. Ierom. S. Ierom therefore meant not the
succession, but Damasus, who succeeded Peter, as in chair, so in doctrine; and
taught the faith which Peter did: a faith as clean contrary to the Arians
faith, as light is to darkness, as life is to death.


Heart. But questionless S. In Psalm. c^^tra pa^^. Donat.
Austin meant the whole succession of the Bishops of Rome, when he wrote
against the Donatistes, Number ye the Priests even from the very seat of
Peter, and in that rank of Fathers mark who succeeded whom: that is the rock
against which the proud gates of hell prevail not. The gates of hell (says
Austin) prevail not against the Priests, that is, the Bishops, who succeed
Peter. Then by his judgment all the Roman Bishops are free from all heresy.
For the gates of hell are heresies, and the principal autours of heresies, as
In Anchora^
Epiphanius witnesses. Wherefore ifthe gates of hell prevail not against the
succession of the Bishops of Rome: it follows (howsoever you avoid S. Ierom)
that neither Arians, nor Donatistes, nor any other heresies do prevail
against it.


Rainoldes. Did prevail against it in the time of Austin: so you should
conclude. You have a pretty policy in citing the testimonies and sayings of
the Fathers touching the Church of Rome: that what they did speak ofthe time
present then, you use it as spoken of the time present now. There was a
gentlewoman in Rome, named Fabia: Fab. Quintilia^. lib. 6. cap. 4.
who being waxed old, yet willing still to seem young, said, in Tullies
hearing, that she was thirty years of age. That must needs be true, quoth
Tullie; for I have heard it of you twenty years ago. The Church of Rome has
defiled her self with idolatry, and gone a whoring from the Lord: yet she
would seem a maid still, and so she says her self to be. I think you jest
not with her, as Tullie did with Fabia: yet you prove her maidenhead, as Tullie
did the youth of Fabia. You say that it must needs be true: for it is written
ofher twelve hundred years ago. But that you may see how small cause you have
to build so much on those words, The gates of hell prevail not against the
succession of the Bishops of Rome: consider what is meant by the gates of hell,
and your grant is past, that against some Bishops of Rome they have prevailed.
The state ofthe faithful and chosen of God in this present life, is as it were
2. Cor. 10.4.
a warfare: whereof the Church is called militant. The adversaries and enemies
whom we must fight against, our Savior speaks of them as of a strong
kingdom, which he calls hell, because it warreth all for hell, and Ephesians.
6.11.
the devil is prince of it. The gates of hell therefore do signify the (...).
holds, the fortresses and munitions, wherewith the powers of hell do fight
against us and assault us: that is, even whatsoever the devil can do by force
or fraud. All the which is meant by the name of gates, because the gates of
fortes are wont to have the best munition, and to be fensed most strongly. So
the gates of hell are not only heresies, (though heresies are of them, as In
Anchorat.
Epiphanius, and De symbol. ad Catechum. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Austin note:) but also persecutions, and specially sins, and in a word all
evils, sweet or sower, fair or foul, that seek to subdue us to everlasting
death; as In Matthaeum Tract. 1.
Origin, Contra Gen^iles, quod Christus sit Deus.
Chrysostom, In quint. Psalmum poenitent.
Gregory, In Matthew. ^6.
Theophylact, and H^eron. and Raban. comment. in Mat. 16.
others well observe. Now, ifyou apply this to the Bishops of Rome: you may see
your error. For it is confessed by your self and yours, that sins have
prevailed, and prevailed monstrously against sundry of them. Whereof it does
follow that against sundry of them who have succeeded in the seat of Peter, the
gates of hell have prevailed. As for S. Austins judgment, that heresies of the
Arians, or Donatistes, or others did not prevail against them: I know no cause
to the contrary but he might justly say so then. For though the Arian heresy
did set upon Liberius fiersly and overthrew him, Hieron. i^ Chronic. Bus^b.
when he being weeried with the tediousnes of his banishment did subscribe to
it: yet since he recovered himself from his fall, and manfully Socrat. hist.
eccles. lib. 4. c. 11. Sozomen. lib. 6. cap. 12.
withstood it afterward, it cannot be said to have prevailed against him.
Whether it prevailed or no against Felix, of whom Hieron. de script. ec^les.
verbo Acaciu^. Socrat. l. 2. c. 29
some report that he was an Arian; Theodoret. histor. eccles. l. 2. cap. 17.
Sozom. l. 4. c. 10.
some, that he communicated only with the Arians: it is no matter to S. Epist.
165.
Austin, who reckeneth him not amongst the Roman Bishops. Wherein though your
Genebrard do dissent from him, because Felix dyed a martyr, as Genebrard.
Chronogr. l. 3.
he says, and cites Sozomen to prove it (but he belyeth Sozomen) to infer on
that lie, yt Peter's chair has such a virtue, that it could rather bear a
martyr then an heretic, or a Pope that favored heretics: yet Optat. Mileuit.
contr. Donatist. lib. 2. Marcellin. Comes in Chronic.
others (not seeing belike such a mystery in ye death of Felix) are of S.
Austins mind; even your Annot. in Plat. vit. Feli. secund.
Onuph^ius also, who neither does acknowledge his Popedom, nor his martyrdom.
Now, the heresy ofthe Donatistes had less prevailed against them. For as
Eusebius. hist. ecclesiast. lib. 6. cap. 42. Cyprian* epist. ad Co^nelium, and
Lucium*
they had before withstood the Nouatians, the coosin germans to the Donatists:
so August. in breui. collat. cum Donatist. collat. diei tert. cap. ^2. and
epist. 162.
did they withstand the Donatists them selves, both by their communion with the
Catholics, and by their doctrine. And this is the point on the which S. Austin
did cast his eye chiefly, when he commended their succession. As it appears
farther by Epist. 165.
a reply that he made to a Donatists epistle: where having reckened up all the
Roman Bishops from Linus who succeeded Peter, to Anastasius living then, he
concludes with these words: In hoc ordi^^* successionis nullus Donatista
episcopus inuenitur.
in the rank of this succession there is not one Bishop found that was a
Donatist. Wherewithal ifwe consider how they maintained the truth Irenae.
aduers. haeres. l. 3. c. 3.
against the heresies of Carpocrates, Valentinus, Marcion, Theodoret. hist.
eccles. l. 50. c. 1^.
Sabellius, Macedonius, Photinus, Apollinaris, and the rest of those
miscreants, who undermined the foundation ofthe Christian faith, the doctrine
ofthe blessed Trinity: the reason will be manifest, why to move the Donatists
by ye succession of the Bishops of Rome and their authority, S. Austin gave it
this praise, that the gates of hell did not prevail against it.


Heart. The ninth Division.
Well. S^aplet. lib. 4. cap. 5. and 19. and 20.
The succession then of the Roman Bishops is used by S. Austin for a certain
mark of the Catholic religion, of the true Church, and of the right faith.
Neither only by S. Austin, but by the rest of the Fathers too. For Haeres. 27.
Epiphanius alleges it against the Carpocratians: and let no man marvel
(says he) that we rehearse al things so exactly; for, that which is manifest
in faith is thereby showed. And De praescriptionib. aduers. haeret.
Tertullian having said of them selves in Afrike that they have authority from
the Church of Rome, does teach that the succession of that Church and See is to
be set against all heretics. And Lib. 3. cap. 3.
Irenaeus reckening up all the Roman. Bishops in order from Peter to
Eleutherius of his time, does add, that it is a most ample declaration of the
Apostolic faith to be of his side against the Valentinians. And Libr. 2.
Optatus reckneth farther from Peter to Siricius of his time against the
Donatists. As likewise S. Epist. 165.
Austin farther yet from Peter to Anastasius of his time, and that (he says)
much more surely and to the souls health in deed. Wherefore the Church of
Rome, and we, who are of that Church, have an assured warrant that the faith
which we profess is the true faith. For we have the succession of the Roman
Bishops from Peter to Gregory the thirtenth of our time: which is an invincible
fort against all heretics; as the Fathers, Epiphanius, Tertullian, Irenaeus,
Optatus, and Austin testify.


Rainoldes. You will never leave to daly with the Church of Rome, as Tullie did
with Maistresse Fabia. The succession of the Roman Bishops is a proof of the
true faith: for so it was in the time of Austin, Epiphanius, Optatus,
Tertullian, and Irenaeus, twelve hundred years ago and upward. Succession was
a proof of the true faith, till Bishops, who varied from the truth succeeded:
even as Matt. 7.15.
sheep clothing was a mark of true Prophets till false Prophets came in it.
But neither are true Prophets known now by sheep clothing: nor the true
faith by succession. The succession of Bishops was a proof of true faith not
in the Church of Rome alone, but in all, while they who succeeded the Apostles
in place, succeeded them in doctrine too, and kept that which 2. Tim. 1.14.
Paul delivered to Timothee and 2. Tim. 2.2.
Timothee to others. But when ravening woolues were gotten into the rooms of
pastors, and Act. 20.30.
that was fulfilled which Paul foretold the Bishops of Ephesus, of your own
selves there shall arise men speaking perverse things to draw disciples after
them: then succession ceased to be a proof of true faith, for that it was no
longer peculiar to the truth, but common to it with error, and so a mark of
neither, because a mark of both. This difference of succession between the
later age and the former, the primitive churches time and ours, is manifest by
the Fathers them selves whom you allege. For Lib. 3. cap. 3. and lib. 4. c. 63.
Irenaeus (to begin with the most ancient of them) says, that the
succession of Bishops in all Churches through the whole world does keep and
teach that doctrine which the Apostles delivered. Now it does not so: nor has
these many ages since Irenaeus died. Has it?


Heart. Not in all Churches. But in the Church of Rome it does, and has, and
shall for ever.


Rainoldes. But if you would say as much for all Churches, you might prove it as
wisely out of Irenaens, as you do for the Church of Rome.


Heart. I deny that. For he does not fetch the succession of true doctrine but
from the Church of Rome against the Valentinians.


Rainoldes. D. Princip. doctrine. lib. 4. c. 19.
Stapleton told you so, and you believed it. I know not whether I should more
pity your credulity, or detest his impudency, who has abused you with such
lewd untruths; and that against his own knowledge, unless he knew not what
he had written himself. For Princip. doctrine. lib. 4. cap. 5.
him self had cited the words of Irenaeus which avouch the contrary: to
weete, we can reckon them who were ordained Bishops by the Apostles in the
Churches, and their successors until our time, Irenae. lib. 3. cap. 3.
who taught not any such thing, and so forth. But for as much as it would be
very long to reckon the successions of all Churches: we declare the faith of
the greatest, the most ancient and famous Church of Rome. Which faith has
continued until our time by the successions of Bishops. And again: ^ib. 4.
ca^. 63.
the true knowledge is the doctrine of the Apostles, and the ancient state of
the Church in the whole world, and the form of Christ's body according to the
successions of Bishops unto whom they did commit the Church, which is in every
place, which has continued until our time, being kept, and so forth. By the
which sentences it is plain that Irenaeus, although he reckon not the
successions of all Churches because it would be tedious: yet he fetches the
succession of true doctrine from all Churches, in every place, through the
whole world. Or if it be not plain enough by these sentences, he makes it
more plain in other: both by general speeches of Lib. 1. cap. 2. and 3. l. 3.
c. 12. l. 5. ^. 1. and 17.
the Church through al^ the world, which he repeateth often; and by the
particular names of sundry Churches, Lib. 3. c. 3.
the Churches of Smyrna, of Ephesus, of Asia, Lib. 1. cap. 3.
the Churches in Germany, in Spain, in France, in the East countries, in
Egypt, in Liby^, in the middle of the world. Wherefore the successions of
Bishops in all Churches were true and faithful witnesses of the Apostolic
doctrine in the time of Irenaeus. As Histor. ecclesiast. lib. 4. c. 21.
Eusebius also does farther prove by Hegesippus, who lived at the same time,
and travailing to Rome ward, did talk with very many Bishops: of whom, even of
them al, he heard the same doctrine, accordingly to that he wrote, that in every
succession, and in every city, the doctrine is such as the Law, and the
Prophets, and the Lord does preach.


Heart. Yet Lib. 3. cap. 3.
Irenaeus reckneth chiefly the succession of the Church of Rome, as of the
greatest Church, and the most ancient and known unto all, founded and
established by two the most excellent Apostles Peter and Paul.


Rainoldes. No marvel. For beside the credit that it had as being Apostolic,
ample, famous, ancient: it was the nearest also in place (amongst all the
Apostolic Churches) to Irenaeus Bishop of Lions in France; and so both known
better and the more dealt with. In the which respect, other of the Fathers did
chiefly name it too. As may appear by De praescriptionib. aduers. haeret.
Tertullian the next of them whom you allege. For he setting down the same
prescription against heretics, which Irenaeus had before him, does speak of
it thus. Run over the Apostolic Churches, at which the very chaires of the
Apostles are sat on yet in their places: at which their authentical letters
are recited, sounding out the voice and representing the face of every one of
them. Is Achaia next unto thee? Thou have Corinth. If thou be not far from
Macedonia, thou have Philippi, thou have the Thessalonians. If thou can go
into Asia, thou have Ephesus. If thou lie near to Italu, thou have Rome:
whence we have authority also. Whence we have authority, says Tertullian,
in Afrike: for he was of the Church of Carthage. So Optat. episcopus
Mileuitanus.
Optatus was Bishop of Mileuis in Afrike. So August episcopus Hipponensis.
Austin was Bishop of Hippon, in Afrike. Which if you consider, you may see
somewhat in it why Optatus and Austin should reckon the succes^i^on of the Roman
Church, rather then of others. Specially since Austin De vnitat. eccles. cap.
11. and 12.
does urge against the Donatists not only that, but all Churches: and Contr.
liter. Petilian. lib. 2. cap. 51.
with the chair of the Church of Rome wherein Peter sat, and Anastasius
sits now, he matcheth the chair of the Church of Jerusalem, wherein James
sat, and John sits now. As for Epiphanius, whom of the East Church you
join to them of the West, as proving the soundnes of faith in like sort by the
Roman succession: you do him injury. For neither does he mention it but to
note the time in which an heresy did budde; and this is that (...). Epiphan.
haer^ 27.
manifest that is meant by him; (it is your Stapletons art to make it
Manifestum in ^ide. Stapl^^ton lib. 4. cap. 5.
manifest in faith:) and what he says thereof, he boroweth it of Lib. 1. cap.
24. and l. 3. c. 3. and 4.
Irenaeus, and therefore reckneth few of the Bishops of Rome, whereas Epiph.
haer. 66.
he reckeneth all the Bishops of Jerusalem to like intent against the
Manichees; so that Jerusalem (if we would toy as you do) passes Rome with
him. But in a word to cut off your cavil of succession of Bishops in the Roman
Church, whereby you would prove your faith to be sound, because the Fathers
proved the faith in their time so: Irenaeus*
the eldest of the Fathers, whom you allege, proved it by the succession of
all Churches; Tertullian*
the next, by the succession of all Apostolic Churches; Augustine.
the youngest, by them all in effect, by some namely. Wherefore if the
succession of the Church of Rome do prove that the Romans have hitherto
continued in the true faith, because by that succession the Fathers proved the
true faith: then also the succession of the East Churches, of Ephesus, Smyrna,
Corinth, Philippi, and Thessalonica* do prove that they have hithertoo
continued in the true faith, because by their succession the Fathers proved the
true faith. But Alfons. a Castr. aduers. haer. lib. 5. de. Deo, lib. 6* de
Eucharistia. lib. 12. de Papa and purgatorio. Canus Locor. Theologic l. 4. c.
6. Sander. visib. monar. lib. 7. Genebrard. Chronograph. lib. 3. and 4.
your selves do write that the Greeks (of whom these East Churches are) have
failed in the faith, and yielded unto sundry heresies. The speeches therefore
of the Fathers touching the succession of the Bishops of Rome, prove not, that
the Romans do now profess the true faith.


Heart. The line of succession of the Roman Bishops has been still recorded in
stories, and continues yet. We can reckon them from Peter the Apostle to
Gregory who sits now. Not so the Greek Bishops, the Churches ofthe East.
Nay, the line of succession has been broken off in the chief of them, as the
Chronicles do witness, even in Alexandria, Antioche, and Jerusalem.


Rainoldes. What is this to the purpose; if some of their successions be not
enrolled in stories: some yt are enrolled were broken off a while by calamities
that fell upon them? For although I^ Chronico.
Eusebius recorded the successions but of four Churches, in Metropoles
prouinciarum.
the mother-cities of the provinces (as he calls them,) Rome Alexandria,
Antioche, and Jerusalem; and Niceph. epis^. Constantinop. chronolog. tripartit.
Nicephorus added Constantinople to them: yet the Churches which I named had
successions of Bishops too, as I showed out of Iren. l. 3. c. 3. Te^^* de
praeser. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 21.
the Fathers. And in them, in which you note that succession has discontinued,
the faith had failed often, while the succession lasted: which is enough for my
proof. But if you think your Church sure by this prerogative, that the Roman
Bishops succession lasts still, and you can reckon them from Peter the
Apostle to Gregory who sits now: what say you to the Church of
Constantinople? In it there have succeeded Bishops to this day: and they can
reckon them Nicephor. Chronolog. tripartit.
from Andrew the Apostle Genebrard. Chronogr. l. 4.
to Jeremy who sits now. Yet, to say nothing of the old heresies from which
the successors are free, though set abroch by their predecessors, as by Socrat.
hist. eccles. lib. 2. cap. ^5.
Macedonius, Lib. 7. cap. 33.
Nestorius, and Histor. Miscell. Pauli Diac. lib. 18.
Sergius: Leo nonus epist. ad Michael. cap. 9. Sigebert. in Chron.
the whole line of them many ages together have denied ye Roman Bishops
supreme-headship, and claimed it to them selves, In Censura ecclesiae
orientalis, cap. 13.
as Jeremy does also now. Whereby either your reason of succession is stricken
dead, or your supremacy of the Pope. For if succession be a proof of truth
and soundnes in faith: then your supremacy is condemned. If your supremacy be
lawful: then is not faith proved to be sound by succession. To which of these
yield you? To one you must of necessity.


Heart. In deed Staplet. princip. doctrine. lib. 4. cap. 9.
the succession of Bishops in place is no good argument, unless it be joined
with succession in doctrine. For Irenaeus says, Irenae lib. 4. cap. 43. and 44.
we must obey those priests who with the succession of the Bishoply charge
have received the sure gift of the truth according to the will of God.
Wherefore the succession of Constantinople, though they fetch it from the
Apostles, yet proves not the faith (which they profess) to be true, because
they have departed from the Apostles doctrine, in which they should succeed
chiefly.


Rainoldes. Now you say well. In deed the succession in place is nothing
worth: succession in doctrine is it which makes all. But what mean you then
to send us such Bristow in his Demandes. ^ishtons table commended by Bristow.
Gen^brard in his Chronicles.
bead-reales of your Bishops of Rome from Peter to Gregory, as undoubted
arguments of the Catholic faith: when we can send you as solemn a bead-roale
of Constantinople from Andrew to Jeremy, and prove nothing by it? What
trifling is this, to say first that succession of Bishops in place proves
truth of doctrine: and then to add, that it does so, if it have succession in
doctrine joined with it. In effect as if you said, that succession in place
does prove the doctrine to be true, if ye doctrine be true: and a couple of
ears do prove a creature to be a man, if they be a man's ears. The Fathers
alleged succession in place, not with condition, if it had; but with a reason,
yt it had succession in doctrine. Prove me that you have succession in
doctrine: and then allege unto me the Fathers for succession. For if as S.
Epist. 165.
Austin said against the Donatists after he had reckened the Bishops of Rome
from Peter to Anastasius, In the rank of this succession, there is not one
Bishop found that was a Donatist; so you reckning them from Peter to Gregory
might say in like sort, In the rank of this succession there is not one
Bishop found that has usurped: then were your reason as fit against us for the
supremacy of the Pope, as S. Austins was for the Church against the Donatists.


Heart. I may say so in like sort. For S. Austin meant as well of this point as
of all others, when he said of the succession of the Bishops of Rome, that the
gates of hell prevailed not against it.


Rainoldes. If this gate of hell prevailed not against them in S. Austins time:
yet many things may happen between the cup and the lip, (as the proverb
is,) much more between his time and ou^s. But S. Austin meant not to speak of
usurping in that against the Donatists: and if he had, he learned by experience
afterward, that they could usurp, and would, if they were not curbed. For
three of them, even Zosimus, Boniface, and Caelestin did usurp over the
Churches of Afrike while Austin was alive yet: who with the whole Council of
abooue two hundred Bishops of that country, withstood their attempt as much as
lay in him, and stayed their pride.


Heart. Their pride? You slander those holy Bishops in saying so.


Rainoldes. Which holy Bishops? of Afrike? Them selves Epist. Council. African.
ad Bonifacium and Caelestinum.
in their epistles to the Bishops of Rome, do note it with the same (...). In
Latin some princes have it typum, but it should be typhum.
word: and if they slandered them it was with a matter of truth. But of this,
Chapt. 9. Diuis. 3.
hereafter, more conveniently. For the point in hand, it is sufficient that S.
Austin applying that text to the Church of Rome, that the gates of hell
prevailed not against it: spoke of soundnes of doctrine, which the Donatists
did fault in; not of soueraintie of power, whereof there was no question with
them.


Heart. Staplet. princ. doctr. l. 6. c. 15.
Gregory the great speaks of soueraintie of power; and proves by that same
text Gregor. in Psalm. 5. paenitent. super ver^umillum, Tota die.
the Church of Rome to be the head of all Churches, because Christ committed
specially this Church to S. Peter, saying, to thee will I give my Church.


Rainoldes. By that same. How? Christ says not to Peter, to thee will I give
my Church. He says, upon this rock will I build my Church. And therein (if
Gregory's judgment may rule you,) In eund. psalm. super versum illum* Initio tu
Domine.
the rock is Christ him self, which Peter had his name of, and on which he
said he would build his Church: the Church is the holy Church, In Canticum
Canticor. cap. 4. and passim.
(that is to say, the company of Gods elect and chosen) which shall never fall
away from the Catholic faith in this world, and in the world to come shall
continue steadfast for ever with God. For the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it. There was some affection that troubled Gregory's mind when he did
change that text, and (as it were) appropriate it to his See of Rome: and
Stapletons heart was taken with some affection also, when he cited Gregory to
prove his purpose thence. For nether does the title of the head of all Churches
prove the Roman Papacy: neither does Gregory, although he give that title to
the Church of Rome, yet prove it by that same text. The thing which he proves,
is, In psalm. 5. paenit. supra versum illum Tota die.
that the Emperor, who received money for ecclesiastical liuinges and spoiled
the Church with s^monie, ought not so to do, chiefly in the Church of Rome.
For having touched his greediness of this filthy gain, yea he has (says
Gregory) stretched out so far the rashness of his fury, that he chalengeth
to him self the head of all Churches, even the Church of Rome, and usurps
the right of earthly power over the lady of nations. Which he did altogether
forbid to be done, who specially committed this Church to S. Peter the
Apostle, saying, To thee will I give my Church. Wherein, that which Gregory
would say, is plain enough, by the words that go before it. The manner of his
saying and proving it, is hard. For he says of the Roman Church that the
Emperor usurps the right of earthly power over it. Whereby a man would
think he meant to deny the civil rule and government of Rome to the
Emperor, as now the Popes do. Then which he meant nothing less: for Gregor.
Registr. lib. 4. epist. 31. and 32. etc. passim.
he acknowledged himself the Emperors subject, and used him accordingly. But
he meant by [the right of earthly power usurped over the Church,] the right of
dealing with Church-liuings after the manner of the world, in setting them to
sale as men do farms and leases: which is profane and detestable. Now
Gregory being grieved Anastas. bibliothecar. in vita Agathon. Sigtabert. in
Chron. ad ann. Christ. 680.
that the Emperor asked money even of the Bishop of Rome himself, Johan.
Diacon. in vit. Greg. lib. 1. cap. 40.
whose election he confirmed with his royal assent: he thought good to
amplify the heinousness of the fact as most unlawful and wicked in the
Church of Rome. And thereupon he says that Christ did forbid it, who specially
committed this Church to S. Peter, saying, To thee will I give my Church. In
the gospel we read of Peter, Luke 9.33.
that he knew not what he said, when he said to Christ whom he beheld in
glory, Master it is good for us to be here, and let us make three tabernacles.
Gregory had a loving affection to Rome. Will you give me leave to think of
him as of Peter, that he knew not what he said? For the words which he
alleges, are not the words of Christ, as you must needs grant. The thing
he gathers of them, is against the words of Christ: who generally committed
Matt. 28.19,
all Churches to Peter, (for he was an Apostle;) and, if any specially, it was
Gal. 2.8.
that of the Jews, whereas Romans 11.1^* and 1^.16,
the Roman Church was a church of the Gentiles. Wherefore neither Gregory did
purpose to prove the supremacy of the Pope by Christ's words to Peter:
neither did Christ mean the Church of Rome specially, but generally the
Catholic Church, even all the chosen, when he said of his Church that the
gates of hell should not prevail against it. And if, as Plutarch in
Apoph^hegm. Reg. and Imperat.
one appealed from king Philip to king Philip, from Philip half asleep to
Philip well awaked, so I may appeal from Gregory to Gregory, from Gregory
somewhat troubled to Gregory advised better: himself will by and by give
judgment of my side. For in the same treatise he does Super v^r^um ^^um.
I^itio tu Domine.
a little after allege the place rightly, and expound it soundly, of them
alone, and all them, who are built on Christ firmly, and faithfully, and
nothing shall remove them from him. Which to be the natural sense of Christ's
words: it is apparent to the eye. For the gates of hell prevail against them,
who are adjudged to death eternal. But Matt. 24.51.
hypocrites and evil servants are adjudged to it. The gates of hell therefore
prevail against such. Now such have been and may be the members, yea the
heads of the Church of Rome. Then our Savior meant not that privilege to them.
Only against the chosen and elect of God, the gates of hell prevail not. For
Romans 8.30.
whom he has predestinate, them has he also glorified. Wherefore it is the
Church of Gods elect and chosen to whom our Savior meant it. And them he does
call in this place my Church; as in an other afterward to like effect, Ioh.
10.28.
my sheep. So what he meant there, by saying of his sheep, to them I give
eternal life, and they shall never perish: the same he meant here, by saying of
his Church, against it the gates of hell shall not prevail. Which thing is so
clear out of all controversy, that to pass over In Matthaeum cap. 16.
Theophylact, and In Matt. tracta^^. 1.
Origin, of whom the one writes yt every man established in the faith of
Christ is meant by the Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against
him; the other, that these gates prevail against all who are not of the
Church, and he is neither the Church nor any part thereof whom they prevail
against: Nicol. Liran. in Matt. cap. 16.
Lira, the meanest of a great many, does thus expound the place, that the gates
of hell shall not prevail against the Church by subuerting it from the true
faith. Whereby (says he) it is plain that the Church consists not of men in
respect of honor, or power ecclesiastical or civil; for many Princes and
Summi Ponti^ices.
Popes have been found Apostatasse (...).
to have revolted from the faith: but the Church consists of them, in whom
there is true knowledge and profession of the faith and truth.


Heart. Howsoever Gregory did either mistake the words of the scripture, or not
apply them perhaps to the supremacy: yet is the supremacy proved by that
title which he gives the Church of Rome. For if the Church of Rome be the head
of all Churches: why not the Bishop of Rome the head of all Bishops?


Rainoldes. What force this reason has, we shall see Chapt. 8. Diuis. 5.
anon. But first I must conclude that it is not proved by the holy scriptures:
neither by these, which you have alleged out of the Fathers; nor by any other
that you can allege. And this has heretofore been ye opinion of learned men
amongst your selves: as i^ appears by your Melchior Canus Locor. Theologi^.
l. 6. c. 8.
Canus. Who having examined the point with greater judgment, then Stapletons
are wont: does grant that it is not written in the scriptures, that the Pope
succeeds Peter in the supremacy. But that which in Canus might perhaps have
seemed one Doctors private fansy, does seem to be now resolved on by more,
and is taught publicly. For your Roman reader, Robert^ Bellarmini Lectiones,
de Pontifice ( controu. 4. quaest. 5.) finitae 26. Maii, anno Dom. 1578. Romae.
the Jesuit, Father Robert, in his lectures of the Pope, which for their
excellency are set down in writing, and sent abroad as great jewels: does not
only teach the same, but also prove it. And whereas Canus thought, that to
convey Peter's right unto the Pope, the stories have sufficient ground, which
say that Peter set his chair at Rome, and there died; or, if learned men shall
not allow of that, an other ground may be, Licet Romanos episcopos Petro
succedere in sacris libris non habeatur scriptum: ab Apostolis tamen eccle^iae
quasi per manus traditum est.
that the Church received it though not by scripture, yet by tradition: Father
Robert putting the matter out of controversy, defines Romanum Pontificem esse
Petri successorem in Pontificatut otius orbis, habetu^ ex traditione apostolica
Petri.
that in deed it is a tradition, not of Christ, but of the Apostles: and least
we should doubt of which of the Apostles, he names the man, Peter, even a
tradition of Peter. Let me entreat you, M. Heart, if all that I have said,
cannot prevail with you, yet to regard the doctrine, the doctrine taught at
Rome, of your own, of the chiefest of your own Doctors. Renounce the
unlearned folies of your Stapleton, and brainsicke furies of your Rhemists: who
with desperate violence do wrest the word of Christ, to make it serve the
pride of Antichrist. Acknowledge that you have not one text through all the
scripture to prove the Popes supremacy: that when you tell men of Thou art
Peter, and on this rock, and, I have prayed for the Peter, and, Peter, feed
my sheep; you do presume of their simplicity: that in truth these places do
not import it, but policy would have somewhat said, eis not so many would
believe it: finally, that the Papacy is a devise of Popes and Papists; for
which, since the scriptures can be abused no longer, because men have espied the
fraud, therefore a new cloak is found for it now, and hereafter it shall be
counted a tradition of Peter.


The eighth chapter. The authority 1 of traditions and fathers pretended to
prove the Popes supremacy: in vain; beside the scripture, which is the only
rule of faith. The Fathers, 2 being heard with lawful exceptions that may be
justly taken against them, 3 do not prove it. As it is showed, first, in
Fathers of the Church of Rome. By the way, 4 the name of Priest, the Priestly
sacrifice of Christians, the Popish sacrifice of Masse-priestes, the proofs
brought for the Mass, the substance and ceremonies of it, are laid open. And
so it is declared that 5 neither the ancient Bishops of Rome themselves, 6 nor
any other Fathers do prove the Popes supremacy.
HEART. The first Division.
You labor in vain, if you go about to persuade me that the Popes supremacy
can not be proved by scripture. And what injurious dealing is this, to bring
our own men, Canus, and Father Robert, for the proof thereof? as though the
greatest favorers of us were against us.


Rainoldes. Matt. 10.24.
The scholar is not above his master, nor the servant above his Lord. If
Christ my Lord and master were glad to labor in vain: why should I disdain
it? Chiefly, since I may comfort my self, as he did, Esai. 49.4.
I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength in vain and for nothing:
but yet my duty is with the Lord, and my work with my God. But what injurious
dealing is it, if I, indeuouring to win you to the truth, do bring you the
confessions of your own men, who witness a truth?


Heart. A truth? Why? will you grant us that the Popes supremacy came in by
tradition: if we will grant you that it can not be proved by scripture?


Rainoldes. By tradition? I: if you mean [tradition] as S. 1. Pet. 1.18.
Peter does, where he teaches Christians, that they are redeemed from their
vain conversation Vulg. pattern traditionis.
of the tradition of their Fathers.


Heart. You are disposed to play with your own fancies. You know my meaning
well enough. Will you grant that it came in by tradition of the Apostles?


Rainoldes. I should play in deed with your own fancies, if I should grant
you that.


Heart. But they, whom you alleged, do say that it did so: as your self have
showed.


Rainoldes. But I will prove that they spoke no truer in that, then you have
done in the other.


Heart. But what an injury is this, to press me with their former words of
the scripture, whereas your self believe not the later of tradition?


Rainoldes. What think you of S. Paul? Did he believe those things which
the heathnish Poets do write of Gods and Goddesses, Bacchus, Diana, Minerua,
Mercury?


Heart. He did not. What then?


Rainoldes. Yet Act. 17.28.
he alleged them to persuade the Athenians, that in God we live, and move, and
have our being. What an injury was that to press the Athenians with Poets
words of God, whereas himself believed not their words of Gods and Goddesses?


Heart. The Poets might say well, and did, in the former: though in the later
they missed.


Rainoldes. Now, will you deal as friendly with me, as with S. Paul? His case
and mine are coosins.


Heart. Nay, you in the self same sentence of our men cull out a piece of it,
and yet an other piece of it you allow not.


Rainoldes. Even so did S. Paul. For that which he avouched out of their own
Poets, (the meaning of it is in Homer. Odyss. lib. 1. Orpheus and Callimachus
hymnis in Iouem.
sundry, the very words in In phaenom. (...).
Aratus;) they spoke it of Jupiter, who was a wicked man, but thought of them
to be God: S. Paul, allowing not their error in the person, culled out their
sentence concerning the thing, and proved a truth by it.


Heart. Well: if you may divide the sentence of Canus and (...) other sort then
I have done.


Rainoldes. That I wish. For the truth is like unto camomill: the more you
press it down, the faster it grows, and spreads fairer, and smells
sweeter.


Heart. So much of scripture then. Now to tradition: by which the Popes
supremacy may be clearly proved.


Rainoldes. By tradition? Why? Do you acknowledge then that it cannot be proved
by scripture?


Heart. I tell you no, once again. How often must I say it?


Rainoldes. Once saying will serve, if you do not unsay your saying. But here
in my judgment you seem to unsay it. For you disclaim the title pretended by
scripture, when you claim by tradition.


Heart. Why so? Might not the same thing both be written in scripture, and
delivered by word of mouth?


Rainoldes. It might, and was no dout, as 2 Thessalonians. 2.15.
the traditions show which S. Paul does mention: which signify the doctrine
that he delivered Act. 17.2.
out of the scriptures. But you mean a doctrine not written in the scriptures,
when you speak of tradition. For Council. Trident. Session. 4.
you do imagine that the gospel of Christ is partly contained In libris
scriptis and sine scripto traditionibus.
in written books that is the scriptures; partly in unwritten things, that is
traditions: as (...) cap. 1. Elias Le^^ta in T^^bi.
the Jewish Rabbines do say, that God by Moses delivered not only the law, that
is written; but also an unwritten law, which they call Cabala.


Heart. See: as the Jewish Rabbines. You have inured your mouth to such venomous
speeches^


Rainoldes. Beware: or else through my side you will wound your friend. For
Martin. Perefino de diuinis, apostolicis, and ecclesiasti^is ^raditionibus.
part. 2. assert. 1.
Bishop Peresius, your chiefest patron of traditions, does prove them solemnly
by this point of the Jewish Rabbis and the Cabala. Neither is the proof
unfit, if it be weighed. For as they pretend this ground for the Cabala, that
it opens the hidden meaning of the scriptures: so do you for traditions. And
as Mat. 15.3. Mar. 7.13.
they in process of time brought in doctrine contrary to the scriptures,
under pretense of traditions: so do you with your Cabala. And as Cabalists
among the Jews do call them (...) Elias Leuita in Tisbi.
scripture-men (by way of reproach) who cast off traditions and cleave to
scriptures only: so do traditionists among you reproach us with Scripturarij.
Albert. Pigh. eccl. hier. lib. 1. cap. 2.
the same term. Yea Dubitantij dialog. 2.
Lindan, and De vi^^s, sectis, and dogmat. hae^er. l. 17. haer. 1^.
Prateolus, do note it for a special heresy. But (to leave this venomous
speech) it is manifest that you renounce the scripture for proof of any title,
which you lay claim to by tradition. For scripture is written; tradition,
unwritten. Wherefore, if by tradition you mind to prove the Popes supremacy;
you must acknowledge first that it cannot be proved by scripture. If you be not
willing to ackonwlege that: I must debar you from tradition.


Heart. Then I will prove it by the Fathers.


Rainoldes. Nay that you shall not neither: unless you will forgo the
scripture.


Heart. And why so I pray?


Rainoldes. Because they say, forsooth, that it is held by tradition. So that
their evidences make against you, if scripture be your plea for it.


Heart. That is very false. For by the words, Thou art Peter and upon this
rock, in the sixteenth of Matthew, the first Popes of Rome, most holy martyrs,
have proved it: Epist. prima.
Anacletus, Epist. ad omnes orthodoxos.
Alexander the first, Epist ad omnes ecclesias.
Pius the first, Epist. ad Theophilum.
Victor, Epist. ad Siciliae episcopos.
Zepherinus, Epist. ad episcopos Antiochenae prouinciae.
Marcellus, Epist. ad episcopos Campaniae and Tusciae.
Eusebius, Epist. ad Hispaniarum episcopos.
Melchiades, Epist. ad orientales episcopos.
Julius, and Epist. ad trium conciliorum Africanorum episcopos.
Damasus; and likewise others by other places, as D. Princ. doctr. lib. 6. cap.
15.
Stapleton alleges farther. Wherefore that the Fathers took it (as you say)
to be held by tradition, it is a flat lie.


Rainoldes. Say you so? Then Locor. Theolog. lib. 6. cap. 8.
Canus, and Robert. Bellarmin. controue^. ^ quaest. 5.
Father Robert do lie flatly, (but that is no marvel,) who grounding it both
on tradition, the one does cite for witnesses thereof the first Popes of Rome,
most holy martyrs, Anacletus, Sixtus the first, Eleutherius, Victor, Sixtus the
second, Zepherinus, Marcellus, Melchiades, Marcus, and Julius: the other not
contenting himself with particulars, does allege in gross, f^^st, the
general Councels; next, the Popes; and last, the Fathers.


Heart. Yet more of Canus and Father Robert? I take not their defense upon me:
and why again do you tell me of them?


Rainoldes. That you may see how Judge. 7.33.
the Lord does sheath the swords of Madianites in their own sides, to the
confusion of them who pitch their camp against Israel. For the same Popes
which are alleged by Canus to prove that their supremacy is an unwritten
truth; the very same Popes are alleged by Stapleton to prove that it is
written: even Anacletus, Victor, Zepherinus, Marcellus, Melchiades, and Julius.
Yea, and that is more, the very same epistles of theirs are alleged by
Stapleton, which by Canus. If rightly by Canus: how may we trust Stapleton? If
rightly by Stapleton; how may we trust Canus? If rightly by them both: what
trim Popes are they, who with one breath do say that the same thing is both
written and unwritten? Yet Father Robert deals wiselyer, and like a Jesuit:
who seeing the danger of naming special men and places, does shroud himself
in the general of Councels, Popes, and Fathers. As if an horse-stealer being
to give account of whom and where he got his horses, should say that he bought
them of incorporations, horse-coursers, and honest men within Christendom.


Heart. Will you leave your roauing, and come unto the mark now?


Rainoldes. It is a roauing mark we shote at: and I am come nearer it, then
you would have me. But what shall be your next ba^^?


Heart. I told you, that I would prove it next by the Fathers. It agrees very
well with your spirit, that you should call this a bolt.


Rainoldes. Well enough as you shoot it. For although the Lord has planted
the writings of the Fathers, as trees; in his Church, as in a Paradise; whereof
there may be made good shaftes; blessed is the man that has his quiver full of
them, they shall not be confounded but they shall destroy their enemies in the
gate: yet not all the shaftes, which you do use of theirs, are good; Stapleton,
Torrensis, Canisius, and the rest of the Popish Rabbis.
your fletchers (at whose hands you take them upon trust) do mar them in
the making, that I may justly call them rather bolts of Papists, then shafts
of the Fathers. Who, if they were alive, might say to you in like sort, as did
a Poet to Fidentinus: This book (Sir Fidentinus) which thou do read, is
mine:
But thou, by reading it amiss, beginst to make it thine.



Heart. Will you promise then to yield unto the Popes supremacy, if I prove it
by the sayings and judgment of the Fathers alleged and applied rightly.


Rainoldes. I truly. But I must do it with a protestation, for my defense
against such quarrelers, as Bishop Jewel fell upon.


Heart. With what protestation?


Rainoldes. With this, that I promise to yield unto the Popes supremacy, if
you can prove it by the Fathers; not beca^^e I think that proof to be
sufficient of doubtful matters in religion, but because I know you are not
able so to prove it.


Heart. Whether I be able or no so to prove it, the thing it self will show.
But if you think not that a sufficient proof, why said you that the
writings of Fathers are as trees, whereof there may be made good shaftes, such
as shall destroy their enemies in the gate; yea that the man is blessed who
has his quiver full of them?


Rainoldes. It is written in the Psalms, Psalm. 127. verse. 2.
Except the Lord keep the city, the keeper watches in vain. By the which
words the Prophet seems to have thought, that the ward and watch of men is
not sufficient for the defense of cities, unless the Lord assist them with his
watch and ward. How say? is not this true?


Heart. So. What of that?


Rainoldes. That is an answer to your question. For the Prophet adding how
verse. 3.
God does bless men in giving them children, says, verse. 4.
they are as arrows in the hand of a strong man: verse. 5.9.
blessed is the man that has his quiver full of them; they shall not be
confounded, but they shall destroy their enemies in the gate. If this be truly
spoken of children well nurtured, who yet are not sufficient to defend a city
without the Lords assistance: why might it not be spoken of Fathers well used,
and yet they not suffice to decide a controversy without the word of God? For
though I acknowledge there is good wood in them to make shaftes for the Lords
wars: yet is not all their wood such; some of it is knottie, some lithy, ^ome
crooked. And the best arrows, which are made thereof, unless they have heads
of stronger metal, then them selves, out of the Lords armorie: they are not
sharp enough to pearce into the heart of the kings enemies, as are Psalm. 45.5.
the arrows of our Solomon. Wherefore as of your part, Luke 16.31.
if you hearken not to Moses and the Prophets, I have no great hope that
Fathers will persuade you, though they should rise from the dead: so for my
self I will assure you, that neither dead nor quick, Fathers nor children,
shall persuade me any thing in matters of religion, which they can not prove by
Moses and the Prophets. For, Act. 26.22.
the Apostles preached not any thing, but that, which the Prophets and Moses
said should come to pass. And if a Father, if a Saint, ^al. 1.8.
if an Angel from heaven preach beside that which the Apostles preached, let
him be accursed. This lesson I have learned of Paul the Apostle: and I
subscribe unto it. If you can like it better out of a Fathers mouth, learn it
of S. Austin. Cont. liter. Petilian. Dona^ist. lib. 3. cap. 6.
Who writing against the Donatists, which could not prove by scripture their
erroneous doctrine, does press them with the same sentence, and teach al
Christians the same lesson: whether it be of Christ, or of his Church, or of
any thing else whatsoever pertaining to our faith and life, I will not say, if
we, but if an Angel from heaven shall preach to you besides that which you have
received in the scriptures of the law and the Gospel (that is to say, the old
and new testament,) let him be accursed.


Heart. You mistake the meaning of S. Austins words. For they are thus in
Latin: Proinde, sieve de Christo, sieve de eius ecclesia, sieve d^ quacunque alia
re, quae pertinet ad fidem vitamque nostram-


Rainoldes. I have the right meaning of these words, I trow; for they are
plain of all things that do concern our faith and life.


Heart. I: but hear the rest. Non dicam, si nos, nequaquam comparandi ei qui
dixit, licet nos, sed ^mnino quod sequutus adiecit, si angelus-


Rainoldes. Neither do I mistake these. For he alludeth to the words of Paul
to the Galatians.


Heart. But you mistake the meaning of that which does follow, Si angelus de
coelo vobis annuntiauerit praeterqaum quod in scripturis legalibus and
euangelicis accepistis, anathema sit.


Rainoldes. Why? does he not mean the old and new testament (as we call them)
by the scrip^ures of the law and the gospel?


Heart. Yes: but your error is in the word praeterquam, by which he means
contra quam; not beside that, but against that. For there are sundry things
of faith and life to be preached beside them in the scriptures of the law and
the gospel, but not against them. Wherefore if it were so that the Popes
supremacy could not be proved by scriptures: yet the proof of it by the
Fathers might be good. For it were not against the scriptures; although it were
beside the scriptures.


Rainoldes. Praeterquam; id est contra quam: beside that which you have
received in the scriptures, that is, against that. This is your Annotat. in
some. 7. August. script. ^ Grauio, probat. a Molano and Theologis Louan.
Louanists gloss-


Heart. Nay, it is S. Austins: as you may perceive by his own words in an other
place, touching the same matter, Tractat. 98. ^n Ioha^n^m.
where he says thus. The Apostle did not say, If any man preach unto you more
then you have received, but, beside that you have received. For if he should
say that, he should be prejudicial to him self, who desired to come to the
Thessalonians 1 Thessalonians. 3.10.
that he might supply that which was wanting to their faith. Now he, that
supplyeth, adds that which was wanting; takes not away that which was, and
so forth. Whereby S. Austin shows that we may preach more then the scripture
has: but not beside it, that is to say, against it.


Rainoldes. He shows nothing less: as any man that reads his discourse,
may see. For, that which he speaks of more, and of wanting, is not meant of
scripture, that is, the word written; but of the word preached and delivered
by mouth. Wherein he declares that the Apostles manner of instructing men, was,
1. Cor. 3.2. Hebr. 5.12. and 6.1.
to feed them first with milk, not with strong meat. So, that which was
wanting to the Thessalonians, was stronger doctrine of the faith: that which
they had, was easier. Whereof though in the one he taught them more then in the
other: yet no more in either, then Act. 26.22.
the scripture has. And thus S. Austins more to be no more then scripture:
himself makes manifest by the example also which he gives of it. For the
doctrine of the manhead of Christ, he calls milk; of the Godhead, strong
meat. Now they who are taught to know him to be God, learn more then they had
learned when they received him as man. But they learn no more then the
scripture has, Ioh. 1.15. Romans 9.5. 1. Tim. 3.16.
which teaches him both God and man. Wherefore, that S. Austin condemning all
who preach ought beside the scriptures of the law and the gospel, meant, that
more then scriptures may be preached, but naught against them: it is not S
Austins gloss, but your Louanists, and in truth repugnant to S. Austins text.
For Contr. liter. Petilian. Donanatist. lib. 3. c. 6.
in the same place S. Austin making mention how the Donatists hated him for
preaching of the truth and confuting their heresy; Quasi no^ ma^dauerim^s
tanto ante Prophe^^* and Apostolis, vt in libris suis nulla testimonia ponerent
quib^s pars Donati ecclesia Christi esse doceatur.
as though (says he) we had commanded the Prophets and Apostles who were so
long before us, that they in their books should set down no testimonies
whereby the Donatists might be proved to be the church of Christ. Which words
do show plainly, yt as by the scriptures of the law and the gospel he
signified the books of the Prophets and Apostles: so by condemning all that
is beside the scriptures, he meant, not, all that is against, but, all that is
not in the scriptures. And that this was his meaning, he shows yet more
plainly by willing them to prove their doctrine by the testament: which your
Louan Annot in Tom. 7. Aug. Contraliter. Petilian. lib. 1. cap. 23.
Doctors (the greater shame for them to wrest S. Austins words against his
sense) do note also. For, as amongst men the testament does open the will of
the testa^or: so did S. Austin think that the controversy betwixt the
Donatists and the Church should be decided by the Scriptures, which Christ has
left to Christians as his will and testament. For, Optatus lib. ^ contra
Parmenian. Donatist.
Christ has dealt with us, as an earthly Father is wont with his children:
who, fearing least they should fall out after his decease, does set down his
will in writing under witnesses, and if there arise debate amongst the
brethren, they go to the testament. He, whose word must end our controversy,
is Christ. Let his will be sought in his testament, says Optatus. Which reason
of Optatus S. Aug. in Psalm. 31. ^xpo^it. 2.
Austin urging against ye Donatists, as he does other often: we are brethren,
(says he to them:) why do we strive? Our father died not vntestate: he made a
testament, and so died. Men do strive about the goods of the dead, till the
testament be brought forth: when that is brought, they yield to have it
opened, and read. The judge does hearken, the counselors be silent, the crier
bids peace, all the people is attentive, that the words of the dead man may
be read and heard. He lies void of life and feeling, in his grave, and his
words prevail: Christ does sit in heaven, and is his testament gainesaied?
Open it: let us read: we are brethren: why do we strive? Let our minds be
pacified. Our father has not left us without a testament. He that made the
testament is living for ever. He does hear our words: he does know his own
word. Let us read: why do we strive? Were not this a seely speech of S.
Austin, if he had meant, as you say, that all the Lords will is not declared
in his testament: that things beside his own word may be proved by men's
words? Let him be accursed who preaches any point of faith, or life beside the
scriptures. True: beside ye scriptures, yt is against the scriptures, say your
Louan Doctors. See what skill can do. If they were Doctors of ye Arches, we
should have ioly law. For a coosining merchant might claim a thousand pound of
a dead man's goods, who had bequeathed him a legacy of twenty grotes: and they
might adiudge it him with good consciences, as not against the testament,
though beside the testament. Nay, they might do this with so much better
reason, then they do the other; by how much the testament of God is more
perfect, the^ any man's can be: and that which Christ bequeathed the Pope, is
far less in comparison of the supremacy, then twenty grotes of a thousand
pounds. Wherefore, say the Doctors of Louan what they li^t, (perhaps they
speak for their fee:) S. Austin meant plainly, that, since the Donatists
claimed the inheritance of Christ to them selves, they must prove their title
by his will and testament. Which if they could not do, or rather seeing that
they could not: he pronounces of them they had no right unto* it. And
thereupon he comes to the general sentence of the heavenly judge, denouncing
them accursed, who, in any point, either of faith, or life, do preach beside
that which is delivered in the scriptures of the law and the gospel. Wherein if
[beside] do signify [against:] then all (in this respect) is against a
testament, which is beside a testament.


Heart. S. Austin, and Optatus, against the Donatists, do speak reason: that,
unless they can prove their right by Christ's testament, they may not shut the
Catholics out from his inheritance, and claim his goods unto them selves. For
it is meet that the will of the testator should be kept. But a learned lawier,
one Annot. in Optat. lib. 5.
Francis Baldwin, who has set forth Optatus, and written notes upon him, does
show that a testament may be either nuncupatiuum (as he calls it) or
scriptum; either set down in writing, or uttered by word of mouth. What say you
to testamentum nuncupatiuum?


Rainoldes. I grant that L. Heredes. Dig. Qui testamentum facere possunt.
a testament may be made without writing, so that it be done before a solemn
number of witnesses. But the testament of Christ is written, I hope: and so do
both Optatus and Austin speak of it. Wherefore your learned Lawier may keep
that law in st^re, until his client need it.


Heart. As who say the testament of Christ might not be written in part, though
not in whole. Which is Baldwins meaning, as it appears by the place, not of
Optatus, but of Austin, whereto he applies it.


Rainoldes. But if Baldwin meant so, Baldwin should have remembered that a
testament so made is not testamentum nuncupatiuum (for L. Hac consul^^sima..
per nuncupatione^. Cod. dete^tamentis.
that is unwritten, as the very In^titut. lib. 2. tit. 10.. Sed haec quidem.
rudiments of the law might teach him,) but imperfectum rather; though written,
yet imperfect. And I trust you will not say, that the testament of Christ is
imperfect. Sure Optatus would not.


Heart. Nor I sir, though you would feign imply as though I said so. For if
Christ would have his will, in part written, in part delivered by word of mouth:
join them both together, they make a perfect testament.


Rainoldes. Then the written testament of Christ is imperfect. It will be gay and
perfect with your traditions patched to it. But Optatus thought that his written
testament is perfect of it self. Which shakes all the frame of Popery in
pieces. And this is that Optatus, Contr. epist. Parm. lib. 1. De unit. eccles.
cap. 16. De doctr. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 40.
of whom S. Austin speaks as of a worthy Catholic Bishop equal to Ambrose
and Cyprian; of whom Ad Mon. l. 2.
Fulgentius speaks as of a holy faithful interpretor of Paul like to Austin
and Ambrose; of whom Edmund. Cam^pian. Rat. 5.
your great Champion does vaunt so gloriously, that he, nor he only, but the
rest of the Patres tam sunt nostri, quam Gregori^i ipse decimus tortius.
Fathers are of your religion as surely and fully as the Pope himself, Pope
Gregory the thirteenth: whereas in very truth not one of them is so. For
Gregory the thirteenth is of your religion in the Popes supremacy, ye
chiefest point of Popery: as Published in the year of Christ 1572. Reg.
cancellar. Apost.
his rules of Chancery for re^eru ations and provisions, On maunday-Thursday in
the year 1575. Liter. processus Grego. decimi tert. le^t. die Coen. Dom.
his accursing of all that appeal from Popes to Councels, Bulla confirmat.
priuileg. ord. Minor. de obseruant. Non-obstantibus etc. and in other bulls
commonly. Ecloge bullar. and motuproprior. Greg. decimit^rt.
his bulls against decrees of Councels both provincial and general, do
show. From which abomination how far the Fathers were, it shall appear when
you allege them. But Optatus is so plain against your religion, in the point
of scriptures and their sufficiency to decide all controversies: that your
chalenger (if he read him, and not believed* common-place-bookes of Canisius
and other broakers) might have blushed to boast of him. For those things, which
Edmund Campian. Ration. 5.
he cites out of Optatus, do not as much as raze the skin of our religion,
though they seem to weak eye sightes. But this, of scriptures only, does
break the neck of yours: and it is so clearly the judgment of Optatus, that
your own Annot* in Optat. lib. 5.
Baldwin, (in his Annotations) is feign to say of him, he used that comparison
of a testament not so warily.


Heart. Not so warily, as Austin does. For Austin uses it, when he will prove
out of the scriptures that the Church is catholic: which was one of the
points of their controversy with the Donatists.


Rainoldes. But in handling that point he makes it a general rule, that,
whether it be of Christ, or of his church, or of any thing else whatsoever
pertaining to our faith and life, nothing must be preached beside the
scriptures, that is, the testament.


Heart. But in an other point of their controversy, touching baptism, S. De
baptism. contra Donatist. lib. 4. cap. 6.
Austin does allege not so much the scripture, as the tradition of the
Apostles.


Rainoldes. Not so much the scripture. He does the scripture then: though he
alleges also the custom of the Church delivered by the Apostles. But what is
that against the testament?


Heart. Nay, beside the testament, which is the word written, he does commend
unwritten traditions in other places. Which proves that he thought not the
testament sufficient to decide all controversies.


Rainoldes. Now S. Austin finds favor at your hands, who make him say and
unsay the same. But where vnsaith he that of the sufficiency of scripture?


Heart. You may see in the Confess. August. lib. 1. c. 8.
Augustinian confession of Torrensis, in the chapter of Traditions.


Rainoldes. But I would see it in S. Austin. Torrensis is a Jesuit, whom we
have taken often in lies. I cannot trust him.


Heart. Why? He alleges S. Austins own words. As in De bapt. co^tr.
Donatist. lib. 5. cap. 26.
the first place, (which brings in S. Cyprian too,) Quod autem nos admonet
Cyprianus vt ad fontem rec^rramus, id est, Apostolicam traditionem, and inde
canalem in nostra tempora dirigamus, optimum est and sine dubitatione
faciendum. That is to say; whereas Cyprian warns us that we should go to the
coondit head, which is the tradition of the Apostles, and thence direct the
pipe to our own times: that is best and to be done out of all dout. These are
S. Austins own words.


Rainoldes. S. Austins own words in deed. But what does follow in S. Austin?
Traditum est ergo nobis (sicut ipse commemorat) ab Apostolis, quod sit vnus
deus, and Christus vnus, and vna spes, and fides vna, and vna ecclesia, and
baptisma vnum. That is to say: It is delivered therefore to us by the Apostles
(as Cyprian himself rehearses) that there is one God, and one Christ, and one
hope, and one faith, and one church, and one baptism. These are S. Austins
own words, and grounded on S. Epist. 74. ad ^ompeium.
Cyprian too. So that he, and Cyprian, meant by [tradition] that, which is
delivered: and that to be delivered, which is written in the scriptures. For
this self same thing, whereof they speak, is written in the epistle of ^ph.
4.4.
Paul to the Ephesians. Wherefore, their tradition is tradition written, that
is to say, scripture: and not unwritten stuff, as your Jesuit would have it.
Yea Cyprian is so plain for controversies to be decided by this tradition
only, that in the same epistle (whence Austin cites this) to the words of
Stephanus, Traditum est, it is delivered, vnde est ista traditio, faith he,
whence is this tradition? Does it come from the authority of the Lord and the
gospel, or from the commandments and epistles of the Apostles? For that we
must do those things which are written, God does witness saying to Joshua,
Ios. 1.8.
Let not this book of the law depart out of thy mouth: but meditate in it day
and night, that thou may observe to perform all things which are written
therein. And likewise the Lord sending his Apostles willed them that Matt.
28.20.
the nations should be baptized, and taught to observe all things which he had
commanded. Wherefore if this thing (of the which Stephanus says, it is
delivered,) be commanded in the gospel, or contained in the epistles or acts
of the Apostles: let this divine and holy tradition be observed. See you not
how Cyprian thought, that all, which Christ commanded to be taught, is written?
How he meant this written doctrine by tradition? How his words of this
tradition are approved by Austin? What conscience had your Jesuit to allege
that for traditions beside scriptures, which they so plainly meant of the
scriptures them selves?


Heart. I do not see this, neither in S. Austin, nor in S. Cyprian.


Rainoldes. I am the soryer that your sight serves you no better. For the
thing is so clear that your own Annota^. in epist. 74. ad Pompeium.
Pamelius declares that Cyprian meant the holy scriptures there by tradition.


Heart. Yet Pamelius adds, that, if S. Cyprian had been instructed better that
the scriptures cited by him to prove his error, are not of force thereto: S.
Austin douteth not but he would have allowed the contrary tradition.


Rainoldes. That may well be. For he should have found it proved by the
scriptures, as S. De baptism. contr. Donatist. lib. 1. cap. 7. and deincep^
passim.
Austin shows. But in the mean season you may see by Pamelius, that
Torrensis abused Cyprian, and Austin, in wresting that to his traditions.


Heart. Not so. But his next place of Sermon. de temp. 191. qui est tertius de
Trinita^^.
Austin is more pregnant: Let the rule of the Church and the holy tradition and
judgment of the Fathers continue sure and sound for ever.


Rainoldes. As pregnant as the former. For it follows straight: Now the faith
of our Fathers is this; we believe in God the father almighty, maker of all
things visible and invisible, and so he goes forward with the points of
Christian faith. Whereby it is apparent that he meant by [the tradition of the
Fathers] their faith. But their faith is written (the substance of it) in the
scriptures. Therefore your Jesuit fails in this tradition too. Moreover S.
Austin, if he wrote that sermon, whereof your In Censu^ generali To^^ 10.
operum D. August.
Louan censours dout, but he, who wrote that sermon, entreats of the
Trinity. But touching the Trinity nothing must be said beside the rule of
faith, which is set down in scriptures: as Chapt. 2. Division 2.
I have showed by S. Austin. Wherefore if S. Austin had meant of unwritten
tradition in that point: S. Austin would retract it. But indeed the Jesuit
has ouerseene S. Austins works very cunningly. Who, bearing men in hand that
he has gathered the sum of Austins doctrine out of all his works, yet
concealeth that Confess. August. lib. 1. cap. 7.
in the chapter of scriptures, which Austin says of their sufficiency: and
faceth that out cap. 8.
in the chapter of traditions, which should have been defaced by that which
Austin says of scriptures. Howbeit, were it true, that the scriptures without
traditions are imperfect and insufficient to prove the will of God: you are no
nearer your purpose, that the proof of it by Fathers is sufficient. For a
testament, that is made by word of mouth without writing, must be proved by
solemn witnesses. The solemn witnesses of Christ's testament, are the
Prophets, and Apostles. So that unless you prove by Prophets and Apostles,
that part of the testament of Christ is unwritten, and that he gave the Pope
supremacy in that part: your proof by the Fathers will never stand in law.
Notwithstanding, though it be against both law and reason, that the Pope
should take the whole inheritance of Christ's Church, and put all Bishops to
their legacies, unless he prove his right by the testament of Christ: yet, if
you can prove it (as I said) by the Fathers, I am content to yield unto it.


Heart. If I can prove it by the Fathers* I will bring them to witness for it.
But when will you count it proved? Perhaps when I have proved it, you will say
I have not.


Rainoldes. And perhaps, when you have not, you will say you have.


Heart. Who shall be judge then? And how shall it be tried?


Rainoldes. Optatus in the question of the Catholics with the Donatists,
whether one should be twice baptized: Lib. 5. conrr. ^armenian. Donatist.
you (says he) say, it is lawful: we say, it is not lawful. Between your
[it is lawful,] and our [it is not lawful,] the peoples souls do dout and
waver. Let none believe you, nor us: we are all contentious men. Judges must be
sought for. If Christians: they can not be given of both sides; for truth is
hindered by affections. A judge without must be sought for. If a Paynim: he can
not know the Christian mysteries. If a Jew: he is an enemy of Christian
baptism. No judgment therefore of this matter can be found in earth: De caelo
quae^endus est iudex.
a judge from heaven must be sought for. But why knock we at heaven: when here
we have Testamentum.
the testament of Christ in the gospel? So, by the opinion and reason of
Optatus, you and we can have no fit judge in earth: God must judge us by his
word. But if the Pope will be tried by God and the country: let him appear at
the assise; I will endite him of fe^^^ie for robbing Christians of their goods;
and I will use no witnesses to prove it but the Fathers.


Heart. Nay, we may rather endite you for entering forcibly on his land, I mean
on the supremacy, and wrongfully deteining it above these twenty years from
him. Though (to say the truth) you are past enditement: you are condemned long
ago.


Rainoldes. By Pope Pius y^ fifth in his Bull against the Queen of England.
the Pope in his Consistory. An easy matter where himself is plaintiff,
witness, and judge.


Heart. Him self is not alone judge there: for he does all things by the
common verdict-


Rainoldes. Of an enquest of Cardinals, with whom he does divide his spoils.
And shall they be judges, whether you do prove the Popes supremacy or no?


Heart. They are worthy Prelates, what count soever you make of them. But who
shall judge, if not they?


Rainoldes. When an issue is joined to be tried by the country, the jury, that
shall try it, ought to be of such as be next neighbors, most sufficient, and
jest suspicious. This is the law of England. How do you like your country
law? has it not reason?


Heart. It has. But this issue of ours must be tried by the Church, not by the
country.


Rainoldes. I grant. But the equity of our country law does hold in the
Church too.


Heart. Will you be tried then by the Catholic Bishops that are the Popes
neighbors, of France, Spain, and Italy, such as were at the Council of
Trent?


Rainoldes. Fie: they are the most unfit of all men to try any issue between
the Pope and us.


Heart. Why so?


Rainoldes. For many causes. They are not free holders. They are the Popes
tenants, his sworn vasals, our sworn enemies: c. Ego N. extra. de i^reiurando.
bound by oath to maintain the Papacy. Are these most sufficient and least
suspicious persons?


Heart. They are most sufficient. But if your suspicions shall serve to challenge
them, you may challenge any.


Rainoldes. If you deny the causes, which I alleged: I prove them. If I prove
them all: there is no bench of Justices in England, but will think my challenge
to be very lawful.


Heart. Then name your self the men whom you will admit to be of the jury.


Rainoldes. Nay, I will name none. But I am indifferent to all who are
indifferent: who have skill to judge of the evidence that is brought, and
conscience to give verdict according to the truth.


Heart. According to the truth of the evidence, you mean. For so a jury ought.
And so let all indifferent men be of the jury. For the words of the witnesses
which I will bring shall be so full, so plain in sense, so strong in proof,
that they must needs condemn you: unless they will give verdict against the
evidence and their consciences.


Rainoldes. The crow does think her own birds fairest. But I must desire the
jury to consider that the witnesses, whose words you will bring, are not alive.


Heart. Alive? What is that to the trial of our issue?


Rainoldes. Much. For if they lived and did appear before the jury, first,
they should be sworn to say the truth, and all the truth, and nothing but the
truth. Whereby they might be moved both to speak more wa^ily, and to inform
the jury more thoroughly, then they have done. Next, it would be easier to
examine them of their age, their estate, the circumstances of their persons; of
their speeches, the meaning, the occasion and cause thereof. Which all are
helps to find out the truth of things in controversy. Thirdly, if it
appeered by examination, that either for their persons, or for their speeches,
they are unworthy of credit: then it should be lawful to except against
them. A liberty, which L. Testium fides. D. de Testibus.
law does grant against witnesses, if there be cause of just exception. Yet
you perhaps (as your men are wont) would make outcrye, if I should use it
against them who are dead and absent. Wherefore unless the jury do supply
that by wisdom and equity, which wants in the course of trial, by reason
that the witnesses whom you will bring are not alive: they may be deceived by
names and shows of witnesses, and thereby give a verdict which shall prove no
verdict. For verdict is a speech of verity.


Heart. An honest man's word is as good as his oath. For as he will not
forswear: so neither lie. The Fathers must not therefore be the less
believed, because they are not sworn.


Rainoldes. Yet an honest man, when he is sworn, will speak more fully and
maturely then when he is unsworn. And he may say that sometime on conjecture,
which on his oath he would not say.


Heart. But that may be perceived by the Fathers writings, when they do
pronounce of a thing, as certain; when, as uncertain, they conjecture it. And
so may other circumstances (which you require) be known too: as well as if
them selves were present.


Rainoldes. Not so well. For their writings do not answer to many questions,
which, if they were present, I would ask of them. But I am content with that
which may be known so. Let the jury weigh it, and judge thereafter of their
credit.


Heart. What? Shall meaner men, who be alive now, judge of the credit of the
Fathers, who were so long in time, so far in gifts before them?


Rainoldes. Euagrius, a mean man, wrote unto S. Ierom, desiring his opinion
concerning Melchisedec, whether he were the holy Ghost. S. Epist. 126.2^
Euagrium.
Ierom, answering him, when he had showed the judgments of the ancient
writers Origin, Didymus, Hippolytus, Irenaeus, Eusebius Caesariensis, and
Emisesenus, Apollinarius, Eustathius, and the best learned Jews, of whom some
thought Melchisedec, an angel; some, a man: you have (says he) what I have
heard, what I have read touching Melchisedec. Meum fuit recitare testes: tu um
sit de fide testium iudicare.
To bring forth the witnesses, it was my part: let it be yours to judge of the
credit of the witnesses. It seemed reason to S. Ierom that Euagrius should
judge of of the witnesses whom he brought. What is there more in the Fathers,
then was in those witnesses? What was there more in Euagrius, then is in many
who live now?


Heart. But you perhaps will cauil, either at the persons, or at the speeches of
the Fathers, The second Division.
and think that every toy is a sufficient reason, why men should not believe
them.


Rainoldes. Whether the exceptions, that I shall take against any, be cauils
and toys: let the jury judge. Nay, I durst say almost, let mine adversary
judge. For what think you you^ self, if one allege for scripture that which
is not scripture: may not that authority be justly refused? As if, for example,
a man should write that Christ said to his disciples, that which I say to one
of you, I say to all.


Heart. In deed M. In the defense of the Apolog. part. 2.
Jewel alleged that for scripture, to prove that the words of Christ unto
Peter, feed my sheep, feed my lambs, were spoken n ot to him only but to
the rest of the Apostles. Wherein he was justly reproved by D. In his Detection
lib. 3.
Harding. For Christ did not say, what I say to one, that I say to all: but,
Mar. 13.37.
what I say to you, (meaning, the Apostles,) that I say to all (Christians,)
watch. So good is our cause, that M. Jewel could not make show of truth
against it, but by foul corruption and falsifiing of the scriptures.


Rainoldes. I pray be good to M. Jewel for M. Optatus and Fulgentius sake: who
Optat* contr. Parmen. lib. 1. Fulgent. ad Trasimundum Reg. lib. 1.
both have missealleaged the same words of Christ, yea one of them in like
sort, as Bishop Jewel did. For, to prove that the words of the Lord to Esaias,
Esai. 58.1.
Cry and cease not, were spoken not to Esaias only, but to all preachers, he
uses this reason, that Christ does say to his disciples, what I say to one of
you, I say to all. Wherein, as the doctrine of a preachers duty is true, though
the proof be false: so is in Bishop Jewel the doctrine of the Apostles duty.
And Bishop Jewels proof, from one Apostle unto all, is better grounded on the
words, then the other from Esaias the Prophet to all preachers. Moreover the
fault remains uncorrected in ^ulgentius and Optatus: Bishop Jewel has
corrected it. Wherefore if you condemn him of foully corrupting and falsifying
the scripture, because he missealleaged that sentence of Christ: what judgment
will you give of Fulgentius and Optatus?


Heart. Nay, it is likely that they ouersaw it by a slip of memory.


Rainoldes. The same would you judge of M. Jewel, if some what did not blind
your eye. But by this your judgment I see, that where the Fathers mistake the
words of scripture, they may be refused. What if they mistake, not the words
but the sense: may we refuse them also there? As In dialog. cum. Tryphon. Iud.
Justin the Martyr, Hieron. comment. in Esai. l. 18. in praefat.
Irenaeus, Eusebius. hist. ^cclesiast. lib. 3. cap. 36.
Papias, De spe fidelium: vt citatur* ab Hieronymo.
Tertullian, Hieron. de scriptor. ecclesiast. in verbo Papias.
Victorinus, Diuina^. institut. l. 7. c. 23.
Lactantius, Hieron. comment. in Esai. lib. 18. in praefat.
Apollinarius, Hieron. comment. in Ezech. lib. 11.
Seuerus, and Eusebius. hist. eccles. lib. 7. cap. 23.
Nepos, in that they thought that Christians after the resurrection should
reign a thousand years with Christ upon the earth, in a golden Jerusalem, and
there should mary wives, beget children, eat, drink, and live in corporal
delites. Which error, though repugnant flatly to 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Matt. 22.30.
the scriptures, yet they fell into; partly, by confounding Reu. 20.5.
the first and second resurrection: partly, by taking Re^. 21.10. and 22.2.
that carnally, which was mystically meant in the Revelation.


Heart. That was the heresy of the Millenaries, as they are called. Howbeit in
the Fathers, though it were an error, yet it was no heresy.


Rainoldes. I do not say it was an heresy. I say that they mistook the
meaning of the scripture: which you can not deny. Yea some times, when they
neither mistook the words, nor the meaning, yet they taught amiss out of it.
As, that Exodus 20.1^.
God created the world in six days, they understood it rightly. But to
conclude thereof that the world should last but six thousand years, because
2. Petr. 3.8.
one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one
day: this was an oversight. For if that were true, which they did gather of
those words: then might we know Act. 1.7.
the times, whereof our Savior says that it is not for man to know them. And
upon this reason S. In e^arrat. Psalm. 89. and de ciuit. Dei lib. 1^. cap. 53.
Austin does reprove that fancy of six thousand years, as rash and
presumptuous.


Heart. So do we also. For In Dubitantio. Dialog. 2.
Lindan and De vit. sect. and dogmat. haeret. lib. 9. tit. Iudaeorum haereses.
Prateolus do note it, in Luthers and Melanchthons Chronicles, as a Jewish
heresy.


Rainoldes. Good reason, when Luther and Melanchthon write it. But when Aduers.
haeres. lib. 5. cap. 23.
Irenaeus, Diuinar. institut. lib. 7. c. 14.
Hilarie, In Mattha^um can^ne 17.
Lactantius, and Hieron. epist. 139. ad C^p^ian Justin, Mart. responsion. ad
Orthod. quaestion. 71.
other Fathers write it: what do they note it then?


Heart. Suppose it were an oversight. But what needs all this? As who say you
douted that we would maintain the Fathers in those things in which they are
convicted of error by the scriptures.


Rainoldes. I have cause to dout it. For though there be no man lightly so
profane, as to profess that he will do so: yet (such is the blindness o^ men's
devotion to Saints) there have been heretofore who have so done, and are
still. There is a famous fable touching the assumption of the blessed virgin:
that, when the time of her death approached, the Apostles (then dispersed
throughout the world to preach the gospel) were taken up in clouds, and
brought miraculously to Jerusalem to be present at her funeral. This tale in
old time was written in a book which bare the name of Melito, Eusebius. histor.
ec^les. l. 4. c. 13. and 25.
an ancient learned Bishop of Asia: though he wrote it not be like. But
whosoever wrote it, he wrote a lie, (says Retractat. in Act. Apost. c. 8.
Bid,) because his words gain say the words of S. Luke in the acts of the
Apostles. Which Bid having showed in sundry points of his tale, he says,
that he reherseth these things, because he knows, that some believe that
book with unadvised rashness against S. Lukes authority. So you see there
have been who have believed a Father (yea perhaps a rascal, not a Father)
against the scriptures. And that there are such still, I see by our countrymen,
In their Annotations upon the Acts of the Apostles. 1.14.
your divines of Rhemes: who vouch the same fable, upon greater credit of
Fathers then the other, but with no greater truth.


Heart. Do you call the assumption of our Lady, a fable? What impiety is this
against the mother of our Lord, that excellent vessel of grace? whom Luke 1.41.
all generations ought to call, blessed. But you can not abide her praises and
honors. Nay, you have abolished not only her greatest feast of her
assumption, but of her conception and nativity too. So as it may be thought
the devil bears a special malice to this woman, whose seed brake his head.


Rainoldes. It may be thought that Jude verse. 9.
the devil when he did strive with Michael about the body of Moses, ( Deuteronomy.
34.6.
whom the Lord buried, the Jews knew not where,) did strive Nicol. Lir. in
Deuter. 34. and epistolum Iudae.
that his body might be revealed to the Jews, to the intent that they might
worship it and commit idolatry. But it is out of doubt, that when he moved
Act. 14.11.
the people of Lystra to sacrifice unto Paul and Barnabas, and to call them
Gods, he meant to deface the glory of God, by the too much honoring and
praising of his Saints. We can abide the praises of Barnabas and Paul: but
not to have them called Gods. We can abide their honors; but not to sacrifice
unto them. We know that the devil does bear a special malice both to the
woman and to the woman's seed. But whether he does wreake it more upon the
seed, by your sacrificing of praises and prayers to ye woman, or by our not
sacrificing: let Exodus 22.20. Matt. 4.^0. Col. 2.18. Revel. 19.10. and 22.9.
them define 2. Cor. 2.11.
who know his policies. The Christians of old time Tertullian. in Apologet.
Eusebius. hist. eccl. l. 4. c 13.
were charged with impiety, because they had no Gods but one. This is our
impiety. For whatsoever honor and praise may be given to the Saints of God
as holy creatures, but creatures: Confess. Hel^^t. cap. 5. Confess. Bohem.
Augustan. Saxoni. etc. in Harmonia confes^ionum fidei. Section. 2.
we do gladly give it. We think of them all, and namely of the blessed
virgin, reverently and honorably. We desire our selves, and wish others, to
follow her godly faith and virtuous life. We esteem her as an excellent vessel
of grace. We call her (as the scripture teaches us) Luke 1.28.
blessed: yea the most blessed of all women. But you would have her to be named
and thought not only blessed her self, but also a giver of blessedness to
others; not a vessel, but a fountain, or (as you entitle her) Maria matter
gratiae, matter misericordiae:
a mother of grace and mercy. And in your solemn prayers you do her Tu nos ab
host protege, and hora mortis suscipe. Offic. B. Mariae uirg resor. mat. and
edit. a Pio quint.
that honor, which Psalm. 31.5. Act. 7.59. Psalm. 50.15. Luke 11.4.
is only due to our creator and redeemer. For you call on her to defend you
from the enemy, and receive you in the hour of death. Thus, although in
semblance of words you deny it, yet in deed you make her equal to Christ:
Antonin. in s^^ma part. 4. Tit. 15. cap. 44. Chassanaeus in catalogo gloriae
mundi, part. 3. consid. 4.
as him our Lord, so her our Domina.
Lady: as him our God, so her our Dea.
Goddess: as him our King, so her our Regina.
Queen: as him our mediator, so her our Mediatrix.
mediatresse: as him in all things tempted like us, sin excepted, so her
Immunis ab omni corruptione peccati.
deuoide of all sin: as him the only name whereby we must be saved, so her
our Vita,
life, our Dulcedo,
joy, our Spes nostra salve.
hope, a very mother of orphans, an aid to the oppressed, a medicine to the
diseased, and (to be short) Omnibus es omnia.
all to all. Which impious worship of a Saint because you have advanced by
keeping holy days unto her, the feasts of her conception, nativity, and
assumption; therefore are they abolished by the reformed Churches justly. For
the use of holy days, is, not to worship Saints, but to worship God, the
sanctifier of Saints. As Leuit. 23.24. Neh. 8. verse. 2.6.8. and 18. Act. 20.7.
1. Cor. 16.2. Reu. 1.10.
the Lord ordained them, that men might meet together to serve him and hear
his word.


Heart. Why keep you then still the feasts of the Apostles, Evangelists, and
other Saints, and not abolish them also? As some of your reformed, or rather
your deformed Churches, have done?


Rainoldes. Our deformed Churches are glorious in his sight, who Ioh. 4.23.
requires men to worship him in spirit and truth: though you, besotted with
the hoorish beauty of your synagogues, do scorn at their simpleness, as 2.
Sam. 6.20.
the proud spirit of Mical did at David when he was vile before the Lord. The
Churches of Scotland, Flanders, France, and Confess. Heluetica, cap. 24. cui
subscripserunt ecclesiae Sabaudicae, Polonicae. Hungaricae, Scoticae, Gallicae,
and Belgicae. In harmomonia confessionum fidei.
others, allow not holy days of Saints, because no day may be kept holy but
to the honor of God. Of the same judgment is the Church of England for the
use of holy days. Wherefore, In their obseruatio^s upon ye Harmony of
co^fessio^s. Section. 16* ad ^ohemicam, obseruat. (...)
although by keeping the names of Saints days, we may seem to keep them to
the honor of Saints: yet in deed we keep them holy to God only, to praise
his name for those benefits which he has bestowed on us by the ministry of
his Saints. And so have In their observations upon the Harmony of confessio^s.
Section 16. ad Bohemicam* obser^^^. ^.
the Churches of Flanders and France expounded well our meaning, in that they
have noted that some Churches submit them selves to their weakness with whom
they are conversant, so far forth that they keep the holy days of Saints,
though in an other sort, nay in a clean contrary, then the Papists do.


Heart. But if you keep the feasts of other Saints in that sort, why not of
her also, of whom our Savior took flesh, and was brought forth into the
world?


Rainoldes. So we do: the feasts of the annuntiation of the blessed virgin,
and the purification.


Heart. Nay, the days of other Saints, which you celebrate, as namely of
Peter, Paul, and John, are the days of their death, and so are proper unto
them. Wherefore you should of reason at the least celebrate our ladies
assumption, as the day of her death. For though you believe not that her body
is assumpted, yet you will not (we trow) deny that she is dead, and her soul in
glory. But you do neither celebrate that, nor any other of her proper feasts.
For as for the days of her purification and annuntiation, they be not proper
to our Lady: but the one to Christ's conception, the other to his
presentation. So that she by this means shall have no festiuitie at all.


Rainoldes. No festiuitie at all? What a foolish fancy is this of your In
their Annot. upon the Act. 1.14.
Rhemists? As though the blessed virgin were like to Ovid. Metamorphos. lib. 8.
Superos perue^it ad omnes Ambitiosus honor. Solas sin^ thure relictas
Praeteritas cessasse ^erunt La^oidos aras Tangit and iraDeos.
Diana, and the Saints of Christ to the Paynim-gods: who every one must have
his feast, and if you forget or pass over any, their honor is attainted in
it. But by this sentence you justify the reformed Churches: both the rest, and
ours. The rest, in that you think the holy days of Saints are instituted to
their honor: which corrupt opinion, and superstition growing of it, might be a
sufficient cause to abolish them. Ours, in that you say that the annuntiation
and purification of the virgin are not proper to our Lady (as you call her,)
but to Christ. Wherein you acknowledge, that the holy days of Saints which we
keep, are kept to Christ's honor, and not to theirs. For as the annuntiation
of the blessed virgin is proper unto Luke 1.31.
Christ conceived, and the purification to Luke 2.22.
Christ presented in the temple: so the day of Peter is proper unto Matt. 16.16.
Christ professed, the day of Paul to Act. 9.20.
Christ preached, the day of John to Ioh. 21.24.
Christ published by the writing of the Gospel. And this of them is as clear,
as is the other of the virgin, by The collects, epistles, and Gospels (as they
are termed) in the book of common prayer*
the prayers which we make, and the parts of scripture which we read on
those days. Wherefore although we celebrate the memory of these things
touching the Apostles, on those days on which they dyed, perhaps, (for neither
are you sure of that, though you celebrate them in memory of their death:) yet
we do it not in respect of their death so to honor their assumption, but in
respect of those things which Christ did by them while they lived. And by the
same reason you may prove that we keep no holy day to any Saint, by the which
you gather that the annunciation and purification of the virgin are not proper
unto her. Which in deed you say, not because you think it, or have cause to
think it: but to make us odious, by bearing men in hand that we despise the
blessed virgin. For both your selves do count them and call them Festa Sanctae
Mariae: Purificationis, Annuntiationis, Visitationis, Assumptionis,
Natiuitatis, Conceptionis: and S. Mariae ad Niues. Missale Romanum in ordinario
Missae.
her feasts, as well as any other of those that bear her name: and the
common people, when they call the annuntiation day, our Lady day, (by your
corrupt custom,) think it as proper unto her, as S. Peter's is to him: and
Confes^io Heluetica cap. 24. Sect. 16. in Harmon. Confess. fid.
the reformed Churches, which disallow the feasts of Saints, have disallowe^
these amongst them, where yet they allow the feasts that do belong to Christ,
his nativity, circumcision, passion, resurrection, ascension, and sending of
the holy Ghost.


Heart. But if your reformed Churches think it dangerous to keep any feast of
the blessed virgin: why do you retain two of them in your Church, and not the
rest as we do.


Rainoldes. You may learn the reason hereof in your Portesse, reformed lately
by the Pope. In your old Portiforium seu breuiarium, ad vsum ecclesiae Sarum:
in festo S. Thomae Can^^ariensis.
Portesse there was this prayer to the Popes martyr, S. Thomas Becket of
Canterbury: Christ Jesus,
per Thomae vulnera,
Quae nos ligant.
relaxa scelera.
By Thomas wounds,
O Christ Jesus,
Loose thou the sins*
which do bind us.
Or, if you will have better ryme, with as bad reason: Tu per Thomae sanguinem
quem pro te impendit,
Fac nos Christ scandere
quo Thomas a^cendit.
By the blood of Thomas
which he for thee did spend,
Make us O Christ to clime
whether he did a^^end.



Heart. This is your common objection against our prayers to Saints: but an
objection for a Cobbler, and not for a Divine, as D. In his De^^^^. l 5. c. 10.
Harding told Jewel. For Christ, in this prayer, is used as the only mediator
of salua^ion: S. Thomas, a mediator of intercession to Christ.


Rainoldes. Good words, M. Heart. Your plaster, of mediators of intercession
and salvation, is too narrow for this soar. Your pang does make you not to see
it.


Heart. Nay: no whit to narrow. For the mediation which we give to Saints, is
so far inferior to the divine and singular mediation of Christ, that whereas
we say to them, Pray for us, we say not so to him, we do not think of him so
basely, but we desire him to have mercy upon us. Wherefore, we make him only
mediator of salvation; and them, of intercession.


Rainoldes. Yet is your plaster too narrow for the soar which you apply it
too. For the blood and wounds of Thomas are presented, in the prayers that I
spoke off. And although you think not of intercession generally, as Hebr. 7.25.
the scripture does, which makes it proper to 1. Tim. 2.5.
the only mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus: yet (I hope)
you think of that intercession by the blood and wounds, that it is his alone,
who gave him self a ransom for us, and 1. Pet. 1.1^.
redeemed us with his precious blood. But if it were so that Thomas might be
made a mediator of intercession in this preeminent sort: that can not heal
your Portesse. For it does make him ^latly a mediator of salvation: not only
to pray for us, but to have mercy upon us. Op^^ nobis
o Thoma porrige:
Rege stantes,
iacentes erige:
Mores, actus,
and vitam corrig^:
Et in paci^
nos viam dirige.
Salve Thoma,
virga iustitiae,
Mundi iubar,
robur ecclesiae,
Plebis amor,
cleri deliciae:
Salve gregis
tutor egregie,
Salua tuae
gaudentes gloriae.
This is the meaning of the Latin. But the grace thereof is half lost for lack
of ^yme: which in the Latin is very good.
O Thomas reach
thy help to us:
Stay them that stand,
raise them that lie:
Correct our manners,
deeds and life:
Guide us into
the way of peace.
All hail o Thom,
the rod of right,
The worlds light,
the churches strength,
The peoples love,
the clergies joy:
All hail brave patron
of the flock,
Save them who in
thine honor glee.
This prayer, which gives the honor of God to a creature, is not in your
Bre^iarium Roman. (...) decret. Sacrosanct council. Trid. ^estitut. and edit. a
Pio Quint.
reformed Portesse: Sabbato in hebdomada quarta Quadragesimae.
where yet there is a prayer which gives as great honor to an other creature,
even to a wooden cross. O ^rux, ^^e, ipes vnica,
Ho^ passionis tempore,
Auge piis iustitiam,
Reisque dona veniam.
All hail o cross, our only hope,
In this time of the passion,
Increase thou justice to the godly,
And give to sinners pardon.
Now since our reformed Church has thought it impious to offer any such prayers
to creatures: why have you retained this, to the cross, and not the other to
S. Thomas.


Heart. Whether that prayer to S. Thomas of Canterbury were in the Roman
Portesse, before they reformed it: I am not sure; perhaps it was not; although
it were in ours after the use of Sarum.


Rainoldes. Most likely that it was in the Roman too: since he dyed a martyr of
the Roman Papacy. But whether it were or no: there were other things In cer^a.
uncertain and Aliena.
inconvenient, which the reformers have left out, as Pope Pius the fifth.
Praefat. Roman. Breuiar. reformat.
the Pope confesses. Who Praefat. offic. Beat. Mar. virg. nuper reformat.
confesses also, that almost al Primers, yea the Latin too, Vanis
superstitionum ^rr^^^ibus referta.
were stuffed full with vain errors of superstitions, before he reformed it.
Wherefore since you have left out other superstitious and inconvenient things,
in your reformed Seruice-bookes: why have you retained this prayer to the
cross, which might have gone with the rest?


Heart. The other were a^olished justly, as unfit. But this is ^ot so. For why
should you mislike a prayer to the cross, of which S. Gal. 6* ^4.
Paul says, God forbid that I should rejoice but in the cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ?


Rainoldes. That is, in Christ crucified, as S. Paul does mean it: not in the
Regnauit a ligno De^s.
wood, the Suspensus est paribulo.
galowes, the Arbor decora and fulgid^, Or na^^ ^egis purpura. Electa digno
^^^pite (...) sancta membra tangere:
tree, Be^ta cuius brachiis Secli pependit pretium, Statera sacta corporis,
Praedam^ue tulit Tartari, O crux, ^ue spes vnica, and quae sequu^tur.
to which you make your prayer. For God forbid that we should rejoice in any
thing, saving 1. Cor. 1.31.
in the Lord: whose redeeming of us by suffering death upon the cross, because
it was a stumbling block to the Jews; S. Paul says Gal. 5.11. (...).
the cross was a stumbling block, by a (...).
figurative speech, meaning (as him self does open it) 1. Cor. 1.23. (...).
Christ crucified. And so he calls Christ's blood, Col. 1.20.
the blood of the cross; and the preaching of his gospel, 1. Cor. 1.18.
the preaching of the cross; and persecution rising of it, Gal. 6.12.
persecution for the cross: and against them who rejoiced in circumcision and
the law, he says that he rejoices not but in the cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ. But, to the purpose of my question, if they of your Church, who
reformed your Seruice-bookes, thought, that of the prayers which we do mislike
they might abolish some and retain others: what if amongst the feasts which
others do mislike, they, who reformed our ceremonies, retained the
annuntiation and purification of the virgin, though they abolished the
conception, nativity, and assumption? Chiefly seeing that in those, which they
retained, they regarded the honor of Christ conceived and presented, as your
selves acknowledge: in those, which they abolished, they removed the
superstitious worship of a creature, as the thing witnesses. For both they
were supposed to be feasts instituted to a Saints honor, as they were
indeed: neither is there any thing of them in the scriptures, that men might
be edified by that whereof the memory was celebrated in them: and they
maintain corrupt opinions, touching the virgin, with derogation to Christ's
honor. For Thom. Aquin. Sum. Theolog. part. 3. quaest. 27. art. ^. Sixtus
Papa quartus c. cum praeexcelsa. Extrauag. de reliquiis and veneratione
Sanctoru^.
you mean by the feasts of her nativity, and conception, that she was neither
borne nor conceived in sin. Which if it were so* then neither she needed
Christ to be Luke 1.47.
her Savior, who came to save sinners: and the prerogative of Christ, Heb.
7.2^.
to be severed from sinners, were common unto her with him. 1. Tim. 1.15.
A thing so absurd and contrary to the scriptures, (which show that Romans 5.12.
all have sinned, and Ephesians. 2.3.
are the children of wrath by nature,) that not Ambros. l. 2. comment. in Luc
c. 2. and in Psal^. 1.11^. Sermon. 6. August. in Psalm. 34. concion. 2. and contr.
Iu^ian. l. 5. c. 15. and De perfect. iustit. c. 21. Leo de natiuit. ^om. Sermon.
1. and 2. Fulgent. de side ad Petr. c. 26. Damascen. de orthod. fid. l. 3. cap.
2. Beda l. 1 ^^ Luc. c. 1. Anselm. Cur Deus homo. l. 2. c. ^^ 6. Bernard. ad
Canon. Lugdun. epist. 174.
the Fathers only, but your chief Thom. Aquin. part. 3. quaest. 27. art. ^.
Bonau. in 3. S^^t. did. 3. art. 1. quaest. 2. Anton. Sum. part. 1. tit. 8. c.
2.
Schoolmen, and De consecr. did. 4. c. Firmi^sun^*
Canons also, do gainesay it. Yea the feast of her conception, when it was
creeping in, was therefore Bernard. ad Canon. Lugdun. epist. 174. Beleth. in
explicat. divine. offic. c. 146. Durand. in Rationali l. 7. cap. 7.
reproved: and the very gloss of your De consecrat. ^istinct. 3. c.
pronuntiandum.
Canon Law condemned sundry countries, and England namely, for keeping it. But
the conception and nativity of the blessed virgin make her scarce equal unto
Christ: the feast of the assumption does lift her somewhat higher. For when
Christ was taken up into heaven: Luke 24.30. Act. 1.12.
the Apostles were lead forth a litleway on foot, to see it and witness it. But
to her assumption they were brought by miracle, in clouds, as in chariots,
from all the coasts of the world, through which they were dispersed. And this
is it which I called, and call again, a fable, or if you will, a lie, as
Retract. in Act. Apost. c. 8.
Bid does: though your Divines of Rhemes do vouch it as a true story.


Heart. It is a true story, as our Divines of Rhemes do ^ouch it: though, as
he reported it whom venerable Bede does touch, it was a lie. For Melito de
transitu S. Mariae.
he reported it to have been done the second year after Christ's ascension*
which Bid does prove it could not be. But our Divines refer it to the
fifteenth year after. For they take the common opinion that she lived three
score and three years in all. Now, Nicephor. hist. eccle. l. 2. c. ^
she brought forth Christ when she was fifteen year old. So that her
assumption was eight and forty years after Christ's nativity. And this
agrees with In chronico.
Eusebius, who says yt some do write it was reveled to them that she was
assumpted the eight and forteeth year of Christ: which was fifteen years
after his ascension.


Rainoldes. Then you grant that they, who say it was the second year after,
do lie.


Heart. I grant. For that circumstance can not stand with scripture: as
venerable Bede does prove.


Rainoldes. Then a Beata Elisabet. Antonin. hist part. 1. tit. 6. c. 3.
holy nun did lie, or an angel, Vincent. speculi hist. lib. 1. cap. 80.
or a devil that appeered in the likeness of the virgin, and told her that
tale.


Heart. What if some were deceived in circumstance of time. Yet the story
notwithstanding of her assumption is true, as our Divines of Rhemes report it.
For Rhem. Annot. upon Act. 1.14.
at the time of her death, (as S. Dionys. epist. ad Timotheum.
Denis first, and after him S. De dormition. Deiparae.
Damascene writes,) all the Apostles, then dispersed into diverse nations to
preach the gospel, were miraculously brought together, (saving S. Thomas who
came the third day after,) to Jerusalem, to honor her divine departure and
funeral, as the said S. Denis writes. Who says, that him self, S. Timothee,
and S. Hierotheus were present: testifying also of his own hearing, that, both
before her death and after for three days, not only the Apostles and other
holy men present, but the Angels also and powers of heaven did sing most
melodious hymns. They buried her sacred body in Gethsemani. But for S. Thomas
sake, who desired to see and to reverence it, they opened the sepucher the
third day: and finding it void of the holy body, but exceedingly fragrant,
they returned, assuredly deeming that her body was assumpted into heaven. As
the Church of God holds, being most agreeable to the singular privilege of
the mother of God: and therefore celebrateth most solemnly the day of her
assumption. And it is consonant not only to the said S. Denis, and S.
Damascene, but to S. Sermon. in Euan. de Deipara.
Athanasius also, who avouches the same. Of which assumption of her body S.
Bernard also wrote five notable sermons, extant in his works.


Rainoldes. But in all those five sermons of S. Bernard, there is not one word
of your miraculous fable. As little, in S. Athanasius: beside that, the sermon,
which you allege as his, is in In edit. Petri Nannij Louan. prae^at. ad
Episcopum Atrebat.
your own edition rejected for a bastard. In Damascene there is more: yet not
so much neither, as here Breuiar. Romanum in Festis August. quarto di^ infra
octauam assump^. Beat. Mariae.
your Portesse has. But he is About the year of Christ 740.
too late and too weak a witness, to prove a doubtful matter pretended to be
done almost five hundred years before him. The best, or rather all your
proof, is S. Denis: whom you belie notably. For where says he that which you
do father on him?


Heart. Where? Dionys. epist. ad Timotheum.
in an epistle of his to S. Timothee.


Rainoldes. He wrote no such epistle. Your Rhemistes did mistake their
Portesse, whence this stuff is borrowed. For reading there, that Denis wrote
hereof to Timothee, they thought it had been in an epistle to Timothee. The
place, which they meant, is in a Dionys. ad Timotheum de divine. nomin. cap. 3.
book entitled of the names of God: pretended to be written to Timothee by
Denis.


Heart. In a book, or an epistle; it is a great matter why you should charge
them with lying.


Rainoldes. I do not therefore charge them with it. Neither would I mention
this, but to point you the place in which they lie. For they say that S. Denis
writes these and these things: where neither the autour who writes is S.
Denis, neither writes he the things which they allege. Touching the things,
first, he says no more thereof but that amongst the Bishops inspired of the
holy Ghost Hierothe^s excelled all the rest (save the Apostles) in praising
Christ's goodness, when him self, and Timothee, and many of their holy
brethren, (...).
came together to behold the body which received God, and which the Prince of
life was in. As for the miracle of the Apostles brought together, S. Thomas
coming the third day after, the Angels singing hymns three days, the
burial of the virgins body, the desire of Thomas to see it, the sepulcher
opened for his sake, and the body assumpted into heaven: he says not one word
of these conceits, not one word. Nay he rather says against them. For he
notes namely that James was also present the brother of the Lord, and Peter
the chief and ancientest top of the Apostles. Which it is not likely he
would so note of two Apostles, if they had all been present. Much less is it
likely that he would say nothing of so great a miracle, if any such had
happened.


Heart. Perhaps it is written in some other part of S. Denis works.


Rainoldes. In no part at all of any work that bears the name of S. Denis.


Heart. Not that is extant now. But he wrote many more* as Histor. eccles. lib.
2. cap. 20.
Nicephorus shows: and De dormition. Deiparae.
Damascene makes mention of this epistle to Timothee.


Rainoldes. Nay, that which Damascene mentions is De diuinis nominibus ad
Timotheum.
the book I spoke of: whence all, that he cites, is taken word for word. Yea
Nicephorus also Histor. eccle. lib. 2. cap. 22.
does allege the same, (quoting In tertio capite ad Timotheum.
the very chapter) as the only place wherein the assumption of the blessed
virgin is proved by S. Denis. The more do I marvel what should move your
Rhemists to say that S. Denis writes and witnesses that all the Apostles were
brought miraculously together, to honor her divine departure; yea and that he
testifies of his own hearing, that both before her death and after, for three
days, the Angels did sing most melodious hymns: unless they were disposed to
lie for the whetstone. But this, of the things. The other, of the autour, is
not so great a fault: yet a fault too. For they would have men think that he
who wrote this work De diuinis nominibus.
of the names of God, and others De coelesti and ecclesiastica hierarchia.
of the heavenly and That is, the holy government of the Church.
ecclesiastical hierarchy, (as he terms it,) was Dionysius Areopagita.
the famous Denis, Act. 17.34.
the scholar of S. Paul. Whereas it was a counterfeit, who took that Denis name
upon him.


Heart. It was that famous Denis in deed As the Rhe^^^ts say in their
Annota^ions on Act. 17.^4.
who wrote those notable and divine works, and others: in which he confirms
and proves plainly almost all things that the Church now uses in the
ministration of the holy sacraments; and affirms that he learned them of the
Apostles: giving also testimony for the Catholic faith in most things now
controuersed, so plainly, that your men have no shift but to deny that Denis
to have been the autour of them, feyning that they be an others of later age.
Which is an old sleight of heretics: but most proper to you of al others. Who
seeing al antiquity against you are forced to be more bold, or rather
impudent, the^ others in that point.


Rainoldes. These flowers of your Seminary, that we are heretics, bold,
impudent; that all antiquity is against us: you may spare them, for they are
stale; they have been dipped in gall and lie. You say yt he proves plainly
almost al things that the Church now uses in the ministration of the holy
Sacraments. If you mean by the Church, not our Church, but yours: that
[almost] must have favor, or else without almost you lavish. For though he have
more things, then either the Church of the Apostles had, or ours does allow:
yet neither all that you have, and many that you have not, and some clean
contrary to yours. As namely, in the sacrament of the Lords supper, wherein you
vary from us most: ^
he neither has your stage-like gestures and toys, nor invocation of Saints,
nor adoration of creatures, nor sacrificing of Christ to God, nor praying for
the souls in Purgatory, nor sole receiving of the Priest, nor ministering
under on^ kind to them who receive, nor exhortations, lessons, prayers in a
tongue which the people does not understand. So that in things of substance,
and not of ceremony only, he differs as far from your blasphemous Mass,
as he is near to our Communion. But the things which he has, you say that he
affirms he learned them of the Apostles. He does so, I grant: as it was fit
for him, De divine. nomin. cap. 2. and 3.
who would be counted that Denis which was converted by S. Paul. But, as it
happens unto counterfeites, he has forgot himself in one place, and so
betrayed the feate. For, Ecclesiast. hierarch. cap. 7.
speaking of infants, why they are baptized: hereof (says he) we say those
things, which our divine masters (...).
being instructed by the old tradition, have brought unto us. By the which
words, the man at unawares has showed that he learned not not of the Apostles.
For Christ him self instructed the Apostles of baptism: they had it not from
old tradition.


Heart. That is a weak conjecture why he should be a counterfeit. For he might
call the tradition of the Apostles, old tradition: though it were but certain
years or months before him.


Rainoldes. Hardly: if he lived in the same time with them. But if he might;
yet could he not say that the Apostles were instructed by the old tradition of
the Apostles. Belike his masters were younger men.


Heart. Our conjectures may deceive us: we must not trust them in such matters.
The Fathers count him the right Denis. For, Orat. in Natiuitat. Christi.
Gregory Nazianzen, Homil. 2. i^ter homil. in varios locos noui Testament.
Origin, Ad Sergium Pat^iar. Consta^tinop.
Sophronius, Ad Constantin. Heracl. and Tiber. August.
Agatho, De orthod. fid. lib. 1. cap. 12. and lib. 2. cap. 18.
Damascene, In Panoplia part. 1. tit. 2.
Euthymius, and others do name him Dionysius Areopagita, when they cite
things that are in him.


Rainoldes. Gregory Nazianzen does praise a (...).
certain autour, whom he names not. It is but Budae. in co^mentar. linguae
Graec.
one man's guess, that he means Denis. An Nicet. comment in Grego. Nazianzen.
other says, (which is Gregor. Nazianz. orat. in laudem Athan.
more likely,) that he means Athanasius. Origin is ancient: if he had cited
Denis, Denis must be elder a hundred years or two, then I do judge him by his
countenance. But that work of Origin, in which you find him cited, can not
be Origens. For in it the Manichees are mentioned, and Arians: the names of
which heretics did rise a good while after Origin was dead. So that, when this
Origin is brought to clear that Denis: a thief is brought to clear a thief.
The rest, whom you allege, Sophronius, Agatho, Damascene, and Euthymius, are
of later years, and such as might easily think him to be Denis who called him
self so. Many honest men Polyd* Virgil. hist. Ang. lib. ^^
did think Perkin Warbeck to be Richard Duke of York, King Edward the
fourthes son, as he professed him self to be: though in deed he was a
counterfeite.


Heart If you may reject an autour as counterfeit, against so great consent of
writers: any ancient Father may be refused for a rascal.


Rainoldes. If you may allow a counterfeit, as lawful, because that many
think well of him: every Perkin Warbeck may be received for Duke of York.


Heart. Nay, there was sure proof that he could not be the Duke. For the Duke
was killed with the Prince his brother in the Tower ofLondon by Richard the
usurper, ten years before men heard of Perkin.


Rainoldes. There is surer proof, that he, whose cause you plead, cannot be
Dionysius Areopagita.


Heart. What? Such as Annot in c. 17. A^t Apost.
Erasmus and Annot in c. 17. A^t Apost.
Valla bring, that Ierom and others do not mention him?


Rainoldes. That, as light as you make it, did move Cardinal Annot in c. 17.
A^t Apost.
Caietan to dout of the man. But the proof that I meant, is such as yours
against Perkin: to weete that Dionysius Areopagita was dead many years, before
the works, which bear his name, could be written. For there is cited in De
divine. nomin^b. cap. 4.
them a saying of Ignatius, out of an epistle which he wrote (to the Romans) as
he was going to suffer martyrdom Eusebius in Chronico.
in the time of Traian the Emperor. Now Dionysius died Methodius in martyrio
Dionys. A^eopag.
in the time of Domitian, certain years before. And Ignat. epist. ad Ephesios.
when Ignatius wrote it, Onesimus was Bishop of Ephesus, who succeeded
Timothee. Your Dionys. Areop. episcopus Athenarum ad Timotheum episcopum Ephesi.
counterfeit alleges it to Timothee Bishop of Ephesus, either after his
decease, or before it was written. Moreover, the Christians in Dionysius time
made their assemblies to prayer, both in such places, and with such
simplicity, as Act. 1.13. and 12.12. and 20.8.
the Apostles did, and times of persecution suffered. But when your counterfeit
wrote, they had solemn temples like the temple of the Jews: and the (...).
Dionys. epist. ad Demophilum.
Chancell severed with such sanctification from the rest of the Church, that it
was not lawful for moonks to enter thereinto, much less for other laymen.
Again Dionys eccl^siast. hietarc. c. 6.
the moonkes also were risen when he wrote, and they of credit in the Churches,
and many ceremonies to hallow them. Which in the time of the Apostles, when
Dionysius lived, were not heard of yet: for any thing that can be proved by
monuments of antiquity.


Heart. What? not moonkes? Why, Philo makes mention of them, as Hist. eccles.
l. 2. c. 17.
Eusebius shows. And Eusebius in Chronico.
Philo did flourish under Caius the Emperor, even in the prime of the Apostles.


Rainoldes. That, which Philo writes, he writes not of Christian moonkes, but
Jewish Essees, as (...). De vita contemplatiu. and, Quod quisque probus, liber.
him self shows. Eusebius was deceived. And if you think that you have me
at an advantage, in that I do deny Eusebius: I shall have you at the same;
unless you will deny him of whom you make greater account, even Thomas of
Aquine. For Thom. Aquin. quodlib. 7. art. ^7. resp. ad 4. argumentum.
he says ofthe same time of which Philo wrote, that there was not then Aliqui
religio^^ determinati.
any certain sort of religious men. But, to leave the proofs which touch
other matters, or stand on men's conjectures, or you may have some color of
exception against: I will prove him a counterfeit by the same point for which
you alleged him; and that by demonstration out of the holy scriptures; and
that by the confession of your Rhemists themselves. You alleged him as a
witness of the assumption of the blessed virgin. Him self says that Timothee
came with him together, and many of their holy brethren, to behold her body.
The scriptures show that Act 9.5.
Paul was not converted to Christ, till after Christ's ascension. When he was
converted, Gal. 1.18.
he stayed three years in Damascus and Arabia, before Act. 9.26.
he came to Jerusalem. Thence Gal. 1.21.
he went into the coasts of Syria and Cilicia, Act 13.4.
and the countries there about. And Gal. 2 1.
fourteen years after he came again to Jerusalem, with Barnabas, Act. 15.4.
to the Council. From the Council Act. 16.1.
he went to Derbe, and Lystrae: where he received Timothee. And having
travailed through Phrygia, Galatia, Mysia, Macedonia, he came at last to
Athens, where Act. 17.34.
he converted Denis the Areopagite. So that it was seventeen or eighteen
years at least after Christ's ascension, before S. Denis knew Christ. New, the
blessed virgin died the fifteenth year after Christ's ascension, as your
Rhemists put: who yet take the largest time ofher life; for Marian. Scotu^
Chron. l. 2. Nicephorus hist. ecclesiast. l. 2. c. 3. ex ^uodio.
other stories make it shorter. S. Denis therefore could not be one of the
brethren who came together to be present at her death and funeral. And all
this is granted and proved by your Rhemists: though they thought not ofit.
For, in their After the Acts of the Apostles.
table of S. Paul, they show that it was the one and fiftieth year of Christ,
when he converted S. Denis the Areopagite; and in their Annot. upon the Act.
1.14.
tale of the virgin they reckon her to be assumpted the eight and fourtieth
year of Christ. Wherefore you do us great injury, to say, that we deny S.
Denis to have written those works because he gives testimony for the
Catholic faith in most things now co^trouersed. For, that which we deny, is,
in respect of the truth, because indeed he wrote them not. But, in respect of
his testimony for the Catholic faith, I wish that I might grant with a safe
conscience that he wrote them. He is so plain against the most of your
heresies: chiefly the Popes supremacy.


Heart. Neither is that an heresy, nor is he against it: nay he is plain for
it. For Dionys. de di^sin. nom. c. 3.
he says (as your self rehearsed out of him) that Peter is the chief and
ancientst top of the Apostles.


Rainoldes. But he says farther, that, Eccles. hierar. cap. 7.
for as much as the scriptures say to Peter, Whatsoever thou shall bind on
earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth shall
be loosed in heaven, (...).
therefore he, and (accordingly to him) every Bishop does admit the godly, and
disinherite the godless, by declaring the sentence and administering the word
of God. And this does pluck up the Popes supremacy by the roots. For your
Francis. Sansouin. de regnis and rebusp. l. 11. Sander. de visib. monar.
eccles. lib. 7.
masters ground it on that charge of binding and loosing given Peter: as
though after Peter it were proper to the Pope. Denis says the contrary, that
it is common to all Bishops. Whereby you may perceive beside, that if the title
which he gives Peter did prove his supremacy, though Chapt. 5. Diuis. 3.
I have showed it does not, but if it did: yet your common reason, from Peter's
supremacy to the Popes, is iointlesse. For he, who calls Peter, chief of
the Apostles, yet makes Bishops equal; and gives Rome no greater privilege,
then Antioche, or Jerusalem. But to knit up that which brought us unto this of
Denis: you see that your Rhemists tale of the assumption of the blessed virgin
is contrary to the scriptures. Yet they do believe it for the authority of
Fathers. That I might dout justly whether you would believe the Fathers in
those things, in which they are convicted of error by the scriptures.


Heart. I cannot believe that the scriptures are against it. For the Church does
hold it: I mean the Catholic Church of Rome.


Rainoldes. In that your Rhemists lavish too. For though the lying Greeks (as
your Praefat. in Censuram D. H^ssels de historiis Sanctorum.
Molanus calls them,) Simeon Metaphrastes, de vita and dormit. S. Mariae.
Nicephorus, hist. eccles. l. 2. c. 21.22. and 23. Michael Synge^us in Dionysii
en com^o.
do vouch it very boldly: yet Ado Treuir. in Martyrolog. Fulbert. Sermon. 83. in
append. D. August. Tom. 30. Beleth. in explicat. diuinor. officior. cap. 146.
the Latin writers do say it is uncertain. Yea the very Vsuard. Martyrolog.
Aug. 15.
Martyrologe of the Roman Church affirms, that the Church celebrateth the
memory of S. Mary's death: but where it has pleased God to hide her body,
Sobrietas ecclesiae.
the Churches sobriety has chosen rather to be ignorant thereof religiously,
then to hold and teach Friuolum and apocryphum.
some frivolous thing and forged. How much the more shameful is the
misdemeanor, first, of Richard Bristow. Motiu. 32.
a Papist, who says yt it is certain she was assumpted by death, not only in
soul, but in body also: then, of Pius the fifth. in praefat. Bre^^ar-Roman.
the Pope, who, setting forth his new Portesse, says that those things which
are uncertain, are put out: where this is left in, which they can not deny
themselves to be uncertain. But your Rhemists pass. Who, as though the
Por^esse were not bold enough in alleging Damascene, For Damascene says, The
Angels soong almost three days: the Portesse, three whole days. Damascen, The
rest of the Apostles would show to one of them (who was absent) the body: the
Portesse, Thomas (who was absent) would worship the body.
though it mende his tale with more then one lie: they take that which their
Portesse does tell them, lie and al, and father it upon S. Denis, that it may
have the greater credit.


Heart. Our Rhemists will render good account (I dout not) of this which they
have written, when they shall hear what is said against it. And that which you
declared out of the holy scriptures concerning the time of S. Denis conversion,
which is the greatest argument that you brought yet to disprove the story
avouched of his presence at the departure of our Lady: I must refer to them.
For I my self know not indeed how to accord it. But why do you press that
point about the Fathers, touching their ouerseeing either the words, or
meaning, or consequent of the scriptures? We are past the scriptures, and
proofs that the Fathers do gather out of them.


Rainoldes. But if they may gather amiss out of the scriptures, and ouershoote
them selves in the word of God: they may be deceived in the word of man too,
and either not conceive well, or not remember well, or not conclude well of it.
Which happened to S. Ierom in that same point, that I reproved a little rather in
Eusebius. For Hieron. de scriptorib. ecclesiast. verbo Philo.
he, reckning Philo the Jew amongst the Christian ecclesiastical writers, does
it (he says) for this reason, because Philo writing a book touching the first
Church planted by the Evangelist S. Mark in Alexandria, has praised the
Christians: reporting them to be not only there but in many countries, and
calling their dwelling places, Monasteries. Whereby it is apparent that the
Church of believers in Christ, at the first, was such as moonkes endeavor and
seek to be now, that nothing is any man's own in propriety, none is rich
amongst them, none poor, their patrimonies are distributed to the needy, they
give them selves wholly to prayer, and to singing of Psalms, and to learning,
and to continency of life: such as S. Act. 4.32.
Luke also does write, that the believers were first at Jerusalem. And this
book of Philo touching the life of our men, that is, of men Apostolic, is
entitled of the contemplative life of men that pray, because they did
contemplate (study, and meditate) heavenly things, and prayed to God always.
Thus far S. Ierom. Wherein, that the points of contemplation and prayer,
being somewhat like in them whom Philo wrote off and in the Christian Church,
did make him to mistake the one for the other, as likeness (they say) is the
mother of error: but, that they were not Christians whom Philo meant in that
book, it may appear by four circumstances, of names, of deeds, of times,
and of places. For they, of whom Philo does write, were called Essees: which
was a sect of Jews, of whom Philo in libr. quod quisque p^obus sit liber.
some lived in action, and Philo de vita contemplatiua.
some in contemplation. The Christians were never known by name of Essees,
either contemplative or active. Again, they in Philo did leave their goods and
substance to their sons, or daughters, or kinsemen, or if they had no
kinsemen, to their friends. The Christians gave them to the poor, and such as
stood in need of succor. Moreover ye solemn day, which they in Philo did
meet together publicly to hear the word of God taught, was the seventh day
of the week: which was the Sabbat of the Jews, the saturday as we call it. The
Christians were wont to meet on Act. 20.7. Cor. 16.2.
the first day of the week, that is, Justin. mart. apolog. 2. ad Antoninum.
sunday, Re^. 1.10.
the Lords day as S. John terms it. Finally, they, whom Philo discourses
of, did live in no town or city, but without, in gardens and solitary
places. The Christians lived in cities. Even they who are namely mentioned by
Ierom, I mean the Christian Church placed by S. Mark in Alexandria, were
planted (...). Eusebius. l. 2. c. 15.
in the city Alexandria it self; whereas it is precisely noted by Philo, that
his Jewish moonkes did dwell (...).
about it, and (...)
without it. Wherefore it is manifest that Ierom did mistake, or had forgot,
the words of Philo. Howbeit if he had both well conceived and remembered them:
yet he thereof inferred amiss, that the moonkes in his time were such, as S.
Luke does write that the believers were first at Jerusalem. For the believers
at Jerusalem might keep their own if they listed: as Act. 5.4.
Peter says to Ananias; while it remained, perteined it not to thee? And when
it was sold, was it not in thine own power? But Epist. 1. ad Heliodorum.
Ierom says that his moonks may not have propriety in any thing of their
own. Beside, the moonkes of Ierom did live in continency. The believers at
Jerusalem had wives, and used them: for any thing yt S. Luke shows. Though*
by the way to note ye difference between ye Jewish moonkes and the Christian,
(who else would be too like:) Athanas. in epistola ad Dracontium.
some of the Christian moonks in Ieroms time had wives and did beget children;
which I have not read that any of the Jewish did. Last of all, the moonkes
whom Ierom does mean (as he must needs by Philo) were (...). Hieron. epist.
1. ad Heliodor. and 13. ad Paulin.
moonkes according to their name, that is, Eremitae, and not coenobitae.
solitary, and not collegiate moonkes. But the believers at Jerusalem, were at
Jerusalem, in a city, and lived in fellowship together. Do you not see that
the Apostles and Apostolic men were not such as afterward the moonkes whom
Ierom means: and therefore Ierom was deceived?


Heart. I will not believe on your word, that so worthy a Father was deceived.


Rainoldes. If you will not on my word, I will bring his own word to make
you believe it. For, Epist. 13. ad Paulin. de institut. monachi.
writing to Paulinus, touching the training up of moonkes, he says that the
Apostles and Apostolic men are not paterns for them to follow: but S. Antonie,
and others, who dwelt in fields and deserts.


Heart. He says, that the Apostles and Apostolic men are set for an example to
Priests, and Bishops, not to moonkes. True: in some respects. And yet, me
thinks too. But what if the Fathers perhaps might be deceived so, through
oversight?


Rainoldes. If they might be deceived so through oversight: they might be
deceived through affection also. For they were men, and subject to it. As
Epist. 73. ad Iubaian.
Cyprian, through too much hatred of heretics, condemned the baptism of
heretics, as unlawful: wherein Council. Carthagin. episcopor. 87. sub Cypriano.
a Council erred with him. As Augustine* de ciuitat. Dei, lib. 21. cap. 17.
Origin, through too much compassion of the wicked, thought that the devils
them ^elues should be saved at length. As Hieron. in Catalog. script. eccles.
verbo* Tertullianus.
Tertullian, through spite of the Roman clergy, revolted to the Montanists:
and Tertul. de monogam. de ieiunio aduersus. Psychicos.
called the Catholics, carnal men, because they were not so precise as the
Montanists in points of marriage and fasting.


Heart. We condemn these errors in them, as well as you: and do therein
except against them.


Rainoldes. You do except also, I trow, (I am sure, Canus loco^. Theolog. lib.
11. cap. 2. D. Hessels Censur. de hist. Sanctor. cap. 3.
your Doctors do) against Sermon. de defunctis in fid*
Damascene, for his tale of Gregory the Pope and Traian the Emperor; that
Gregory, while he went over the market place of Traian, did pray for Traians
soul to God; and behold, a voice from heaven, I have heard thy prayer and I
pardon Traian: but see that thou pray no more to me for the wicked. A very
great affection to prayers for the dead, that moved Damascene to write this.
For it is against the doctrine of the Petr. Lombard. Sentent. lib. 4. dist^act.
45. Thomas, Scotus, Bonauent. and caeteri scholast. in eas distinct.
Schoolmen that prayers may help out the souls that are in hell. In
Purgatory they say they may.


Heart. In 4. Sentent. did. 45. quaest. 2.
S. Thomas does confirm the same. Yet he believes that of Damascene. But he
says that Gregory did it by special privilege, which does not break the
common law.


Rainoldes. But your Locor. Theologic. l. 11. c. 2.
Canus says that Thomas was a young man then: beside that, he was greatly
affected to Damascen. And Damascen might easily persuade a well willer: he does
affirm so lustily that (...).
all the east and west is witness that the thing is true. Which report of his
yet Canus does marvel at: since it is unknown in all the Latin story. But
Locor. Theol. lib. 11. cap 6.
Canus (as a man of better mind and sounder judgment then your Popish Doctors
are, ye most of them,) did wisely see and notes freely, that not only later
and less discreet autours (as he who made the golden legend,) but also grave,
ancient, learned, holy Fathers have ouershot them selves in writing miracles of
Saints: partly while they fetched the truth, where it is seldom, Ex dissipatis
peruagatisque rumoribus.
from common rumors and reports; partly while Indulserunt fidelium vulgo.
they sought to please the peoples humor, and thought it lawful for historians
to write things as true which commonly are counted true. Of this sort he
names Gregorius in Dialogis.
Gregory and Beda in historia Anglorum.
Bid: the one for his Dialogues, the other for his English story. He might
have named Damascene with them. Unless he meant him rather perhaps to be of
that sort which did not only take by hearsay of others, but coined lies
themselves too: and wrote those things of Saints Quae animus scribentis
dictat.
which their fancy liked, though neither true nor likely. As that S. Frauncis
Pediculos semel excussos in seipsum soli^itum esse immittere.
was wont to take lise that were shaken off, and put them on himself, it was a
lousy trick, and S. Frauncis did it not: but the writer thought it an
argument of his holiness. Likewise, that when the devil troubled S. Dominike,
S. Dominike constrained Diabolum, vt haberet lucernam in manibus
him to hold a candle in his hands, till the candle being spent did put him to
great grief, in burning his fingers. Such examples there are innumerable: but
these two may give a taste of their affection who have defiled the stories of
Saints with filthy fables. Yet out of such stories many things are read in
your Church-seruice. And Locor. Theolog. l. 11. c. 5.
Canus although he confess it, as evident: notwithstanding, (which is
strange) he thinks them unwise Bishops, who seek to reform it. For while
they cure the nailesore (says he) they hurt the head: that is, in steed of
counterfeites they bring in grave stories; but they change the service of the
Church so far, that scarce any Forma antiquae religionis.
show of the old religion is remaining in it. A thing well considered of them
by whom your Roman Portesse was reformed. For though they have removed some of
those stories, which Canus says are Incerta, apocrypha, leuia, falsa.
uncertain, forged, frivolous, and false: yet have they done it sparingly. If
they should have left out all those legend-toyes: their Portesse had been like
our book of common prayer, which heretics would have laughed at: and there had
remained no show in a manner of the old religion, save that their service is in
Latin.


Heart. These things are impertinent, but that it pleases you to play the
Hicke-scorner with the holy Portesse. For what need you mention the writer of
S. Francis life? or S. Dominikes? or the golden legend, that old moth-eaten
book (as D. In the D^^ection lib. 4.
Harding calls it,) of the lives of Saints? I mind not to press you with
things of later writers, but of old and ancient: whom Canus judges better
of, then of the younger. For Locor. Theolog. l. 11. c. ^.
he says of Vincentius Beluacensis, and Antoninus, that they cared not so much
to write things true and certain, as to let go nothing that they found written
in any papers whatsoever. But of Bid, and Gregory, he judges more softly:
and rather excuses them then reproves them. Though, judge he how he listed,
he was but one Doctor: and other learned men perhaps mislike his judgment,
both for younger and elder writers.


Rainoldes. They who deal with taming of lions (I have read) are wont, when
they find them somewhat out of order, to beat dogs before them: that in a
dog the lion may see his own desert. Even so when I rebuke the writer of S.
Francis life, or of S. Dominikes, or of the moth-eaten book as you call it,
James the Archbishop o^ Genua in Italy.
though he who wrote it was an Archbishop, and in his time a man of name, and
his book a legend, read publicly in Churches, and called golden for the
excellency; but when I rebuke that moth-eaten writer, or Antoninus (if you
will,) and Vincentius Beluacensis, who are as good as he welnigh: you must not
think I do it for the dogs sake, but for the lions rather, I mean the
ancient writers who deserve rebuke too. For, as not De divine. offic. l. 7. c.
15.
Rupertus only, but Oper. Pascal. lib. 5.
Sedulius, do write that our Savior after his resurrection appeered first to
the blessed virgin, which is false, but they thought through an affection to
her, that he should have done so: in like sort a loving affection to Saints
has transported sundry, not only later writers, but auncienter also from the
truth to fancies. Gelasius, and the seventy Bishops, who were assembled in a
Council with him, were assembled about eleven hundred years ago. Yet even then
how many stories of the Saints were set abroad with forged fables? almost a
whole bead-roale, c. Sancta Romana. distinct. 15.
condemned by the Council. Whereof that some were coined upon that affection,
as some upon others: one of them, entitled Liber Actuum Teclae and Pauli.
the acts of Paul and Tecla, may serve for an example. These acts contained
a story (supposed to be omitted in the The foureteenth chapter of the Acts.
acts of the Apostles) how that when S. Paul did preach at Iconium, Tecla a
maiden betrothed to a gentleman, hearing him preach of maidenhood, forsook her
husband by and by, and went away with him: and thereupon was persecuted, and
delivered from great dangers, and wrought many miracles, and travailed through
sundry countries with S. Paul. Which though it be a lewd tale, agreeing
neither with Act. 16.2. and 17.14. and 18.1. and so forth.
the circumstance of S. Paul's story, nor with his 1. ^or. 7.13.
doctrine and 1. Cor. 9.5.
discretion: yet was it published as true, and that in the Apostles age,
Hieron. de scriptorib. ecclesiast. verbo Lucas, ex Tertulliano.
by an Elder, or Priest, (as you would term him,) who was convicted by S.
John, and confessed that he wrote it for Amore Pauli.
good will that he bare to Paul. Such a credit (belike) he thought it would be
to S. Paul, that a maid betrothed to a man of wealth and worship, (and so
Matt. 1.20.
his wife by right,) should forsake her husband and go away with him.
Wherefore, though you mind not to press me with things of later writers, but
of old and ancient, as you say: yet was it not impertinent to mention your
Portesse and stories of the like authority. For neither do I know what number
of years you will think sufficient to prove a writer old: and though you
account none old, but such as lived many hundred years since; yet are their
fables in your Portesse (as namely Thamiride sponso relicto. In Breuiar. Roman.
edit. a Pi^ quinto. In festis Septembr.
this of Tecla) even out of them also. Yea the most of those things, not only
this of Tecla, but the most of those things which Gelasius Bishop of Rome, and
the Council, condemned for unsound: I say, the most of those things are
rehearsed in your legends, and in the most of your Portesses. Which thing I
affirm not of mine own knowledge, for I have not seen so many sorts of
Portesses that I can vouch it of the most: but Comment. in 2. epist. ad Timoth.
c. 4. Digress. 21.
Claudius Espencaeus, a Doctor of Paris, an eger enemy of Beza (, ye worthier
of credit herein,) affirms it, and he affirms it with great asseueration
that it is so Indubie.
undoubtedly. Nor does he touch them only for these so ancient lies, but for
many mo, which are of less ancientie, and that upon the judgment of sundry
learned men, and not his private fancy. For he alleges Petr. Abb. Cluniac.
l. 5. c. 29.
Peter, a venerable Abbat, (who lived four hundred years ago,) saying, that
the songs and hymns of the Church had very many toys: as namely an hymn in
the praise of S. Benet; in the which, though reading it over somewhat hastily,
and staying not to search all, yet he found Mendacia ad minus viginti quatuor.
at least four and twenty lies. He alleges an other Petr. Pictaue^sis
epist. 31.
Peter complaining likewise and reproving a false and fond hymn in the praise
of S. Mawre running upon the waters. He alleges the Petr. de Aliaco Cardinal.
d^ reformat. eccles. consideration. 3.
Cardinal of Aliacos advise to the Council of Constance, for order to be
taken that Scripturae apocryphae. In Picus they are called apocryphaenugae.
unsound writings (corrupt and peevish pamphlets) be not read in the
Church-seruice. He alleges the oration of the Johan. Francis. Pici orat. de
moribus reformandis a^ Council. Later. sub. Leone 10.
Earl of Mirandula to Pope Leo the tenth, and the Council of Lateran,
renewing the Cardinal of Aliacos advise. He alleges Comment. vrbanor. l. 16.
Raphael Volaterran, a great historian, if not a divine, bewailing the case
that in the daily prayers there are Aperta mendacia.
manifest lies read. He alleges Quodlibe^. 6.
Adrian (who afterward was Pope Adrian the sixth) misliking Superstitiosa
figmenta.
superstitious forgeries in holy matters. In a word, he says that the
Catholics may lament in the behalf of the Church, as Lament. 2.1^
Jeremy lamented in the behalf of the Synagogue, Thy prophets have seen
Falsa and stul^^ta.
false and foolish things for thee: and he adds that the grief which he does
feel and open for these ^
toys and dotages crept into the public service of the Church, is common unto
him with all good men for the most part. Wherein, as his desire and zeal of
reformation is greater then Canus, who would not have this filth swept out of
the Portesses: so deals he more freely and frankly with your churches legends
too, then Canus. For, letting go the scurffe of the golden legend, and
Antoninus, and Vincentius, he reproves the story of Saints which was
compiled of late by Petr. de Natalibus Episcopi Equilin. catalogus Sanctorum.
a Venetian, a Bishop of account, and says that no stable is ^o full of doong,
as that is of fables. Yea farther, that Simeon Metaphrastes (a great man in the
new legends of Aloys. Lipom. de Sanctor. historiis Tom. 5.6. and 7.
Lipomanus, and Laurent. Sur. de probatis Sanctorum histo riis.
Surius,) and Vsuardes Martyrologe, (which is the Church of Romes legend,)
besides the Martyrologes of certain other writers, Multis scaten^ quisquiliis.
are fraught with much baggage. Now, to this Parisian Doctor Espencaeus, and
the autours whom he alleges, you may add the kings professors and chiefest
Doctors of Louan, (if you desire more witnesses,) even Hessels, and Molanus. Of
whom, Censura Iohannis Hessels in librum qui in scribitur Passionale de Sanctis
per annum.
the one, writing a Censure on a story called the Passionall of Saints,
condemns much thereof, and enditeth more, with this verdict, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
Try al things, hold that which is good: the other, Iohann. Molanus praefat.
in ^esselii Censuram.
setting forth and commending that Censure, says it is no marvel if in that
Passionall there be corrupt stories, since the stories which the Catholics of
that country found amongst Mendaces Graecos.
the lying Greeks might easily come into it. Molanus lays the fault upon
the lying Greeks, as they deserve it best indeed. Notwithstanding it appears
by Namely by S. Ierom, Sedulius, Rupertus, ^ames the Archbi^^op of Genua, Pope
Adrian the ^^rst, and Vsuarde. In Censura Hess. and praefation. in Vsuardum.
some, whom either Hes^els or himself have censured, that not the Greeks
alone are faulty. And sundry Greeks are faulty whom he would be loath to call
lying Greeks: as namely Nicephorus, and Simeon Metaphrastes, of the newer
writers; and of the ancienter, Palladius, and Cassianus. Of all whom Praefat.
in Martyrologium Vsuardi c. 20. excus. Louan. ^ 568.
Molanus has given this note, that most learned men do judge them Non satis
probatae autoritatis.
not worthy to be greatly credited. Whereby you may see that the judgment of
Canus, touching the stories of Saints, is more a great deal then one Doctors
judgment. Howbeit, if so many were not of his mind: yet should you do him
wrong to cast him off as one Doctor. For himself alleges the testimony of a
Doctor as good as any that I have named: I mean that worthy man De tradendis
dis^iplin. l. 5.
Ludouicus Viues. Who lamenting that the stories of heathen captains and
philosophers are written so notably, that they are like to live for ever; but
the lives of Apostles, of Martyrs, of Saints, the acts of the Church both in
the spring and grouth of it, are covered with great darkness, and lie unknown in
a manner: for those things (says he) which are written of them are (a few
excepted) Multis commentis foeda^a.
defiled with many fables, while he that writes them does follow his own
affection, and tells not what a Saint has done, but what he would have had
him done, so that the writers fancy and not the truth does pen the story.
Yea, some have thought it a point of great godliness Mendaciol^ pro religione
confingere.
to coin pretty lies, that thereby men's devotion might be stirred up. Some have
thought it a point of great godliness, says Viues: but will you know of what
godliness? There is a mystery in y^, which Vi^es does not open: Canus does open
it. For Loc^r. Theolog. l. 11. c. 6.
he says that they, who feine and forge in writing ecclesiastical stories,
devise their whole matter either to error or to gain, S. Paul has forewarned
us of a kind of men, 1. Tim. 6.5.
which think that gain is godliness. Your Church, M. Heart, has had many
minions, who of a zeal to this godliness have not only written, but wrought
miracles too. You remember In the Apocrypha of Daniel. chapt. 14.
the tale of Bell and the Dragon. A Nicol. Lira (...) Dan. 14.2^.
friend of yours entreating thereof, does report, that as the Priests of
Babylon did abuse the people in the Dragons worship, so even in the Church the
people sometimes is shamefully deceived with miracles wrought either by
Priests, or by their adherents, for gain and lucres sake.


Heart. If any do so, we allow not of it: and there is order taken by Session.
25. decret. depurgator. and sequent.
the Council of Trent against such abuses. But what is this to the Portesse?
or rather to the Popes supremacy? Chiefly, since I mind not to allege any
thing out of the Portesse for it?


Rainoldes. I was afraid you would. You are a man a^ likely (for ought that I
know) to do it for the Popes supremacy, as your Rhemists to do it for the
assumption of the virgin. Though my meaning was not so much of your Portesse,
as of Portesse-like writers, by whom I fell into your Portesse. But ^f you
mind not to allege any thing out of the Portesse for it: then you will not
bring those miracles which are fathered In bre^iatri^ secundum vsu^^ Sar^m.
upon S. Thomas of Canterbury.


Aqua Thomae quinquies
varians colorem,
In las semel transijt,
quater in cr^orem.
Ad Thomae memoriam
quater lux descendit,
Et in sancti gloriam
cereos accendit.
The water of Thomas
did five times change her color,
Once it was turned into milk,
and four times into blood.
At Thomas his monument
four times there came down light,
And in the honor of the Saint
it kindled the tapers.
Heart. I pray go to the purpose, and leave these idle fancies which you bring
in to play with. There is no such thing in the Portesse now. And if it were:
what is it to the point in question?


Rainoldes. To the point in question, as direct as may be. For this Thomas died
Matt. Paris histor. Angl. in Henric. secund.
upon occasion of a quarrel about the Popes supremacy: while he maintained
appeals (against the king) to the Pope. Now, to prove that he stood in defense
of the truth, those miracles were wrought. For, that, which they preached who
had the grace of miracles, was the truth, says Motiu. 6.
Bristow: adding, that S. Thomas of Canterbury, S. Thomas of Aquine, S.
Francis, S. Dominike, and infinite others had that grace, in such sort, that no
man is able to put any difference between the miracles of Christ with his
Apostles, and of these men. Yet welfare their hearts who reformed your
Portesse. For they have put out those miracles of S. Thomas of Canterbury, and
many others: which they would not have done, (I trow,) had they not known some
difference between the miracles of these men, and the miracles of Christ. But
they have left in as worthy a miracle, as those, of an other of Bristowes
miracle-workers, even of S. Thomas of Aquine: and (I hope) you will not call
that an idle fancy; though it be as idle with me, as the former. For Breuiar.
Romans in festo S. Tho. Aquinat.
they report of him, that when he was praying earnestly at Naples before the
image of the crucifix, he heard a voice ( Antonin. hist. part. 3. tit. 23. cap.
7.
the crucifix spoke it) saying to him, Been scripfisti de me Thoma.
Thomas, thou have written well of me, Thomas. I should have thought (for my
part) that the wodden crucifix of a loving thankful heart, had commended him,
because he did honor it with the fame honor that is due to God, and Thom.
Aquin. Sum. Theolo. part. 3. quaest. 25. artic. 4.
writes solemnly that men ought to do so. But Pope In eclog* bullar. and motu
proprior. Pij. quint.
Pius the fifth, the Lorde-reformer of the Portesse, affirms, that Scripto^is
An gelici doctrina saluatoris crucifixi or ^ mirabiliter probata.
the doctrine of Thomas was approved by the mouth of the crucifix him self in
this miracle. And he knew best the meaning ofit. So yt I perceive this miracle
was rather a dogmaticall miracle (as Motiu. 5.
Bristow ^ermeth it) then personal. But whether personal, or dogma^icall: it
shall not persuade me that all is true* which is written and taught by your
dogmaticall Doctor Thomas. For (as Chapt. 5. Diuis. 2
I have showed) he forgeth and belyeth the Fathers notably, in the defense of
the Popes supremacy against the Grecians. I can hardly think, that, when the
crucifix said Thomas had written well, it meant to approve his writing in that
point. Or if the crucifix meant it, the crucifix was to blame: unless the
fault were rather in some lying knave, who spoke out of the crucifix. Such
Rufin. hist. ecclesiast. lib. ^. cap. 25.
feats there have been wrought in images ere now.


Heart. Evil minds turn all things to the worst. Pope Pius the fifth does
say of that miracle, that it Sicutipia testatur historia.
is recorded in a godly story.


Rainoldes. But, in what story, Pope Pius does not say. Belike he means
Antoninus: of whom you know what Canus judges; and his judgment therein is
good.


Heart. Yet you can not deny but that Antoninus reports many true things. And
why may not that miracle (I pray) be one of them?


Rainoldes. A lying miracle, no doubt, as Histor. part. 3. tit. 22. cap. 7. ^.
11.
Antoninus reports it. For he says that when Thomas was commanded by Pope
Gregory to come unto the Council of Lions, and to bring with him that book
which he had made by Pope Vrbanes commandment against the errors of the
Grecians, whereof in that Council they were to be convicted: before he went
thither, that voice was heard out of the crucifix, by certain who watched
Thomas, as he was praying, on a certain night, in S. Dominikes coouent-church.
I say nothing here of the suspicious circumstances, the time, the night season;
the place, the coouent-church; the witnesses, lying in wait; the cause, to
prove that which should be handled for the Pope against the Grecians in the
Council. Only this I say, that seeing in that book (against the errors of
the Grecians) Thomas does falsify the writings of S. Cyrill, and of above six
hundred Fathers, even the general Council of Chalcedon, to make them bear
witness for the Popes supremacy: the miracle pretended to have declared, as
from heaven, that Thomas did well in handling so the cause of Christ, was a
lying miracle* lying, in respect of the form, or of the end; I mean, as
either wrought by deceit, or to deceit; by deceit, ifmen did counterfeit the
voice; to deceit, if they heard it miraculously in deed. As it is written
touching the man of sin, that 2 Thessalonians. 2. v^r. ^.
his coming is according to the working of Satan with all power, and with lying
signs and wonders, and with all deceiuablenesse of unrighteousness among them
that perish, because they received not the love of truth that they might be
saved. Take heed, M. Heart, least that which follows be verified in you, ver.
11.
Therefore shall God send them strong delusion to believe lies, that al they may
be damned who believed not the truth but had pleasure in vnrighteou^nesse.


Heart. Take heed unto your self, M. Rainoldes, that you offend not in this
unrighteousness, by abusing that famous Doctor of the Church, S. Thomas of
Aquine. For Bulla Pij quinti super celebratione festi^itatis Angelici Doctoris
S. Thomae de Aquino.
the holy Father Pope Pius the fifth has honored his memory with a double
greater feast in his country, and with a double feast throughout all
Christendom, to be kept as solemnly as the holy days of the four Doctors of
the Church are kept. Wherefore you ought to think so much the more reverently
of all that he has written, and not to charge him with forging and falsifying,
if he have missed ought: but rather to suppose that if the autours have not
that which he alleges, yet he had read it alleged by some other, and of a
good affection to the Sea of Rome he thought it to be rightly alleged, and
wrote it.


Rainoldes. Of a good affection. As you will. Let it be so. He, with such
dealing of a good affection, has feasted the Pope: and the Pope again of a
good affection has double feasted him. But you grant then that Doctors of the
Church may be deceived, as through oversight, so through affection too: and
that these exceptions against them are lawful.


Heart. Lawful, if you prove that they be so deceived. For they may be, I
grant.


Rainoldes. What? And may they not be deceived also, or rather seem to be
deceived through the affection or oversight of other men?


Heart. Of other men? How?


Rainoldes. As when a Greek writer is translated into Latin, the translator
makes him sometimes to say that which he never meant. And before printing, the
scriueners, who copied out books with hand, committed sundry scapes. Which
likewise befalls unto printers now. So there may be a fault in an autour
without the autours fault, through oversight of printers, or scriueners, or
translators. For example, in the story ecclesiastical of Eusebius. histor.
eccles. l. 2. c. 1.
Eusebius translated by Rufinus, it is alleged out of Clemens that Peter,
James, and John, although Christ preferred them almost before all, yet they
took not the honor of primacie to them selves, but ordained James (who was
surnamed Just,) Episcopum Apostolorum.
Bishop of the Apostles. This had been a notable testimony for James, against
the primacie of Peter. But Chapt. 4. Division 2.
I alleged it not: because as I seek to win you to the truth, so I seek to
do it by true and right means. Whereof this were none, being an oversight (as
it appears) of Rufinus. For in the Greek Eusebius, it is, that they ordained
him (...)
Bishop of Jerusalem, not Bishop of the Apostles.


Heart. That may be the printers fault, or the scriueners perhaps, who wrote it
out: not his who translated it.


Rainoldes. But I think it rather the translators fault. For Marianus Scotus
does cite out of Methodius the same touching James, that they ordained him
Bishop of the Apostles. Chron. lib. 2.
Which (belike) was taken out of the story of Eusebius done into Latin by
Rufinus. And he has erred often in in turning Greek writers: as also his
translation of Josephus shows. Though I may not charge him with all the
faults therein. For where it is avouched by Sixth. Senen. biblioth. sanct. lib.
1.
some that Josephus holds the books of Maccabees to be holy scripture, as in
deed he seems to do In calce lib. de Maccabaeis.
in the Latin: in the Greek he says not any such thing, nay Josephus aduersus
Apion. lib. 1.
he does teach the contrary; but it is unlikely this came from Rufinus, Rufin.
exposit. Symb. Apost.
who held him self the Maccabees not to be canonical. Howbeit if you say that
the Greek copy which he translated of Eusebius, had that word amiss through
the scriueners fault: I will not strive against you. But a more certain
example of the faultiness in scriueners first, and printers after, is found in
Libr. 2.
Optatus: in that he affirms, Peter was called Cephas because he was head of
the Apostles; Apostolorum caeput Petrus, vnde and Cephas appellatus est. Upon
the which place Fran. Balduin. Annot. in Optat.
your lawier does note, that where he had thought it to be an oversight of a
man dreaming that the Syriake word, which singifieth a stone, is the Greek
(...), which signifies a head: now he ghessed rather that the words [unde and
Cephas appellatus est,] were some foolish gloss, written rashly in the margent,
and then interlaced into the text by scriueners.


Heart. Like enough. But you have no harm by this gloss. For though you blot it
out, yet Optatus says that Peter was head of the Apostles.


Rainoldes. Neither have we any harm by that text. For I have showed Chapt. 5.
Division 3.
before it makes naught for the Papacy. But we may have harm by that kind of
gloses: chiefly since (as In Augustinum de ciui^. Dei l. 22. c. 8.
Viues observes on S. Austin, upon the like occasion) some glosers have
defiled all the writings of noble autours with such unclean handling of them.


Heart. Will you make an end of excepting against the Fathers: and let us hear
at length the Fathers speak themselves?


Rainoldes. The fathers them selves? With a very good will. But look that you
bring me the Fathers them selves. For, (which is my last exception, and so an
end,) there are many books entitled to Fathers which the Fathers made not:
nay whereof sundry were made by such youths, as are not worthy to bear the
Fathers shoes. The works of S. Ierom are abroad in nine volumes: of the
which nine as good as three are none of his. And yet Vitae patrum, (a legend,
how wrongfully fathered on S. Ierom your Comment. in epist. 2. ad Tim. cap. 4.
Espencaeus and Locor. Theologic. l. 11. c. 6.
Canus show,) is not amongst them. Though there are amongst them slippes of the
same tree: Fabula insul^a aeque acbarbara.
a barbarous and sottish fable (as Canus calls it) of the nativity of S.
Marie, and Huius generis sunt ali^ multa.
many other treatises of the same kind, which Erasmus has refuted
Diligentissime and rectissime.
most diligently and rightly. The works of S. Austin have not been tampred
with, so much, in this sort. Notwithstanding there is not above one or two of
his ten volumes, that has not more or fewer such pamphlets patched to it. Not
only by the judgment and censure of Erasmus, which yet you see how Canus
esteems in S. Ierom: but also of the Louanists, whose censures are the
censures of many of your best Divines; and Censura Theologorum Louanien^^um in
appendice ^omi secundi and caeterorum Augustini.
they show that sundry things bear S. Austins name, whereof some are
unlearned, some lewd, and heretical. But what do I speak of Ierom and Austin?
when there is scarce any amongst all the Fathers that has not been abused so.
The Friar (whom Princip. doctrine. l. 9. c. 14.
Stapleton does commend greatly for diligence, and judgment,) Sixtus Senen sis
de falsa librorum inscriptione.
Sixtus Senensis has written a discourse touching the false entitling of
books, whence it comes, and how to find it out. Therein he has proved that
books are fathered falsely, not only upon Austin and Ierom, whom I named, but
also upon Ambrose, Cyprian, Athanasius, Eusebius Emisenus, Iunilius, Cyrill,
Eucherius, Arnobius, yea Thomas of Aquine too. With this discourse he closes
up the former volume of Bibliothec^ sanctae l. ^. and 4.
his holy library: in which he has showed that Clemens, Abdias, Origin,
Chrysostom, Hippolytus, and many mo have had their names defaced with the same
injury.


Heart. There are many books entitled to the Fathers falsely, we confess. I
will not bring them in, to witness against you: or if I do, you may refuse
them lawfully.


Rainoldes. Then you will not bring in Apostol hist* lib. 1.
the story of Abdias, to prove that Peter gave the whole power to Clemens
which Christ had given him. Or if you do, you license me to refuse him, as
freely as Chap. 6. Division 4.
I refused his coosin Clemens in the same point. Neither will you bring
Comment* in Psalm. 106.
Arnobius on the Psalms, to prove that who so goes out of Peter's Church, shall
perish, as does Prin^. doctr. l. 6. c. 15.
Stapleton. Or, if you do, you license me to refuse him, as not the man whom
Stapleton would have him taken for.


Heart. You may refuse Abdias. For Pope Paul the fourth rejected him amongst
the books which he condemned: as Biblioth. sanct^ lib. 2.
Sixtus records. But Arnobius is an ancient writer indeed, and more worthy
of credit.


Rainoldes. More worthy of credit then Abdias, I grant. But he is not that
Vetustissimus scriptor.
writer most ancient, whom Stapleton reports him to be. For Hieron. de
scriptorib. eccl.
the most ancient Arnobius was elder (as Biblioth. sanct. lib. 4.
Sixtus also notes) then that he might hear of Histor. tripartit. l. 5. c. 5.
the heresy of Photinus. Whereas Commentar. in Psalm. 109.
this Arnobius, who writes on the Psalms, does mention Photinus, and write by
name against his heresy.


Heart. Will you stand then to the judgment of Sixtus, which be the right and
natural graffes of the Fathers, and which be bastard slippes.


Rainoldes. No. For though Sixtus did see many things, yet he saw not all: and
others may see that which Sixtus ouersaw. As, for example, there are two books
touching the martyrdom of Peter and Paul, bearing the name of Linus, the first
Bishop of Rome. These does Bibliothe^. sanct^ lib. 2. in verbi^ Paulus, Petr^^,
Linus.
Sixtus judge to have indeed been written by that ancient Linus, as In fine
commentarior. in Paulum.
Faber also did before him. But De continenti^ l. 6. c. 2.
Claudius Espencaeus does marvel that Faber, a learned man, and witty, could be
so persuaded: since Peter in that story is made to withdraw the Roman wives and
matrones from their husbands beds under pretense of chastity. Which
unchristian doctrine, repugnant to the laws of godliness and honesty, nether
was it possible that Peter should teach, neither is it likely that Linus should
belie him with it. And thus you see an author disallowed by Espencaeus on very
sound reason, whom Sixtus has allowed of, not so discretely.


Heart. But if you thus allow and disallow whom you list: I may take pains in
vain. For when I shall allege this or that Father speaking most expressly
for the Popes supremacy: you have your answer ready, that he was ouerseene
through error, or ouerborne with affection, or if he wrote in Greek, he is
mistranslated; or, if he wrote in Latin, he was miss written, or misseprinted;
or if none of these will serve, it is a bastard falsely fathered on him. And
whether your shifts be sufficient answers, your self will be judge.


Heart. Nay, not so nether. For what soever I answer, I will give reason of it.
And whether my reasons be sufficient proofs: I will permit it (as I said) to
the judgment of the jury, that is, of all indifferent men, who have skill to
weigh the reasons that are brought, and conscience to give verdict according
unto that they find. Which trial if you like off, as you seemed to do: then
bring forth your witnesses, and let us hear now the Fathers speak themselves.


Heart. Content. And I will first begin with the Fathers of the Church of
Rome, The third Division.
even the ancient Bishops whom I alleged In the 1. Division of this Chapter.
before out of D. Princ. doctr. l. 6. c. 15.
Stapleton; namely Anacletus, Alexander the first, Pius the first, Victor,
Zepherinus, Marcellus, Eusebius, Melchiades, Julius, and Dama^us. To whom I
add also them whom you mentioned out of Locor. Theolog. l. 6. c. 8.
Melchior Canus: to weete, the two Sixti, with Eleutherius and Marcus. For
though some of them maintain it as by scripture, some as by tradition: yet all
agree in this that they maintain the Popes supremacy.


Rainoldes. In deed, though their heads be turned one from an other, yet their
tails meet together with a firebrand betwixt them, as did Judge. 15.4.
the foxes of Samson. But Samson had three hundred foxes: have you no more but
these few?


Heart. Foxes do you call those holy martyrs and Bishops? And will you still
utter such blasphemous speeches, and set your mouth against heaven?


Rainoldes. Against hell, M. Heart, and not against heaven. For I reverence the
holy martyrs whom yo^ named. But, foxes I call those beasts who wrote the
things that Stapleton and Canus quote: most lewdly and injuriously to the
martyrs and Bishops whom they are falsely fathered on, as I will prove. Which
that I may do with lesser trouble, all in one: I would you brought the rest if
you have any more of them.


Heart. More? Why, all the Bishops of Rome from them forward, even till our age,
have taught the same doctrine, as Locor. Theologicor. lib. 6. c. 4.
Canus declares. For it is confirmed by Innocentius the first, in his epistles
to the Councels of Carthage and Mileuis; by Leo in his epistles to Anastasius,
and the Bishops of the province of Vienna; by Gelasius in his epistl^ (...)
Anastasius the Emperor, and in the decrees which he made with the seventy
Bishops, and in his epistle to the Bishops of Dardania; by Vigilius in his
decrees, the last chapter of them; by Pelagius the second, to the Bishops that
were assembled in the city of Constantinople; by S. Gregory in his epistle to
Austin the Bishop of the Englishmen; and by many other Popes whose testimonies
are rehearsed in the decrees and decretals, in the twelfth distinction, and
seventeenth, and nineteenth, and twentieth, and one and twentieth and two and
twentieth, and the eightieth distinction, in the canon beginning with the word
Vrbes; and the ninety sixth distinction in the canon Been; and in the four and
twentieth cause, the first question, throughout many chapters; and in the five
and twentieth cause, the first question; and in the title of election, in the
chapter beginning with the word Significasti; and the title of privileges, the
chapter Amiqua; and the title of baptism, the chapter Maiores; and the title
of election in the sixth book of decretals, the chapter Fundamenta; and in the
Extrauagants, the constitution V^am sanctam; which extrauagant constitution was
renewe^ (...) approved by the Council of Lateran under Leo the tenth. So that
you have not only the first Bishops of Rome, but all the successors of Peter
in that See speaking with one consent for the Popes supremacy, even a cloud
of witnesses.


Rainoldes. Not a cloud of witnesses such as Heb. 12.1.
the Apostle spoke off to the Hebrews. But such a cloud rather as Rusin.
hist. eccles lib. 1. cap. 3^.
Athanasius meant: who when Julian the Emperor had sent men of arms to spoil
him of his life, and the faithful about him were sorry for it, and wept, Be
not dismayed (says he) my children; it is b^t a small cloud, and will pass
over quickly. For this host of Popes which you have armed against us, may be
sorted out into three companies. Whereof the first front, is, the names of them
who lived three hundred years and upward after Christ: but the names only.
For the writings savor as much of those Bishops, as scarcrowes do resemble the
strength of valiant men. The second front, are they who lived the next three
hundred years, or there about. And the weapons (though not all) which they
bear, are their own: but those which are their own, are not long enough to
reach the supremacy; and that which they do reach they are to weak to win
it. The third, is as it were the forlorn hope: the Popes which do follow the
first and second front, in the vawarde, as you would say. And they have best
will, but can do least. For they are troubled so with care of the carriage, and
their whole artillery of decrees, and decretals, and extrauagants is so dull,
that, if the former be discomfited, they have not power to strike a stroke. So
that you see, the witnesses, which you have brought yet, are of no valor: have
you any better?


Heart. Nay stay, I pray, a little: and look ere you leap. Soft fire makes
sweet malt. Your answer to the Popes whose autorities I cited does stand on
three points, according to three companies of them, as you sort them. The
first, you say, are counterfeites, and most unlike those Bishops whose names
they take upon them. The next avouch not the supremacy of the Pope: though
they avouch more then is true, through affection. The last, through a regard
of their own commodities, have spoken for them selves, and are unfit to
witness in their own matter. Is not this your meaning?


Rainoldes. Yes. But that which you apply to the last sort, that they are unfit
to witn^^^^ ^o their own matter: I mean it of the second too. And if I
thought that the first (which seem to have been counterfeited in the days of
the third) had been counterfeited and coined by some ambitious Pope himself:
I would use the same exception to them also. But in very truth I am not of
opinion that any Pope himself did coin them. It was some cook rather or
horse-keeper of the Popes: if I can guess ought by the style and Latin.


Heart. I perceive that all which you have to say against the writings of the
first sort, is that, which your Eccl^s. histor. Magd^burg. Centur. 2.3 and 4.
cap. 7.
Centuries of Meydenburg have said. For this is their reason and they stand
much upon it, that the style is bad, and the Latin barbarous. Which disproofe
is foolish and of no force: as Father Francis. Turrian. aduers. Magdeburg.
Centuriat. pro epist. Pontific^^ lib. 1. cap. 17. and lib. 2. cap. 1. and 2.
Turrian shows in his defense of the canons of the Apostles and of those
epistles of the Popes, against the Centuries. For in style and Latin they might
speak rudely, both to the intent that in things pertaining to the salvation
of all even the simplest might understand them: and least they should seem by
choice of words to hunt for praise and vain glory. Yea, whereas the
Centuries, in this point of style, do note the likeness of it too, as if that
were a special mark to prove them counterfeit: therein they have betrayed
most notorious folly. For the style is wont to be a certain token of the right
autour (chiefly in some men's writings,) whereby we use often to try and
discern a true book from a forged; as learned men have done in Austin, Ierom,
Ambrose, Cyprian, Tertullian, and others. But herein the trial is the
unlikeness of the style, between an autours own work and a bastard fathered
on him. Which trial can not be had in those epistles of the Popes, that are
denied by the Centuries: because we have nothing written by those Popes, but
only those epistles. Now see the blindness of heretics. When they can not
disprove them by unlikeness of style, they say that the likeness of the style
disproueth them: which is most ridiculous-


Rainoldes. As Father Turrian dreamed. And as it is wont to fall out in dreams
that sundry points of them are contrary one to another, and yet I know not
how the dreamer imagines that all do cleave together well: so fares it with
Turrian in his discourse touching the style against the Centuries. For what is
the reason on the which Pro epist. Ponti^. lib* ^. cap. 1*
he says that commonly the style is a sure token, and as it were a touchstone,
whereby we may discern true books from forg^^^*


Heart. Because that the style sometime is so peculiar to his own autour, that
his work may thereby easily be known even by a man of mean judgment: as in
Tertullian, Apuleius, Pliny, Suetonius, and other such, not to reckon up all.


Rainoldes. Why? May not an other man's style be so like to Tertullians, or any
such, that you shall not be able to discern between them.


Heart. It may be perhaps: but that is rare and hard. And therefore the learned
man (whom you mentioned) De falsa librorum inscrip. biblioth. sanct. lib. 4.
Sixtus Senensis, affirms, that of all the tokens, and conjectures, by which
the right works of autours may be known from counterfeite and forged, the
diversity of style does seem to be most sure and evident. For though it be
easy for every crafty coosiner to take upon himself the country, and
kindred, and times of any autour, and follow his points of doctrine too: yet
there is nothing harder then to counterfeit an other man's style. By the style
(says he) I mean not that outward skin of the words, but the shape of the
oration, the frame of the speech, the joining and continual order of the
parts, the form of eloquution, the figures of speaking, the art of
disposing, the method of handling, and other things which are proper to every
well spoken autour. For as every man has a peculiar feature of body to
himself, and a peculiar countenance, and a peculiar voice, and a peculiar
natural coolour, and other several marks whereby he does differ from other
men, and is unlike them: so all ecclesiastical writers have certain properties
peculiar to them selves, which never do agree or seldom to any other: such,
as is a gorgeous show in Antiochus, an exquisite diligence of speech in Basil,
a tragical loftiness in Gregory Nazianzene, a clean and unforced elegancie
in Chrysostom, a singular pure facility in Cyprian, a French-like statelines
of utterance in Hilarie, a grave and sharp copiousnesse of brief sayings in
Ambrose, in Ierom a flourishing variety of things and words, in Austin clauses
ending like, and members falling like, in Gregory a gate (as I may say) of
sentences answering one an other in measures interchaungeably, and other
things of like sort, which although a man do seek of purpose to express,
yet he cannot attain unto them. By the which words of Sixtus you may see, that
Turrian spoke reason, in saying, that the style is commonly a sure token to
discern the right works of autours from counterfeits.


Rainoldes. And by the same words of Sixtus you may see, that he, in saying
so, disproueth his own reason, and proves the reason of the Centuries. For
the epistles of ye Popes which they endi^e of bastardy, are very like in style
each of them to other: so like as though all had been spet out of one man's
mouth. Now the autours of them are said to have been, not two or three Popes,
whose children might be like; but two or three and thirty with ye advantage,
Clemens, Euaristus, Telesphorus, Hyginus, Anicetus, Soter, Calixtus, Vrbanus,
Pontianus, Anterus, Fabianus, Cornelius, Lucius, Stephanus, Dionysius, Felix,
Eutychianus, Gaius, Marcellinus, Siluester, and mo, beside the fourteen whose
names you alleged out of Stapleton and Canus. Hereupon the Centur. 2. c. ^.
Centuries infer that those epistles are falsely fathered on them: because the
whole shape and frame of their speech does openly bewray that one and the same
man was autour of them al. For it cannot be (say they) that so many Bishops
should have the same speech, no not though they had been accustomed of purpose
to likeness of style. And this is their reason of the likeness of style: which
Pro epi^^. Pont. l. 2. c. 1.
Turrian, while he strives to laugh it out as foolish, confirms as most
sound, by saying that the style is wont to be a sure token whereby men's own
works are discerned from counterfeits, as they have been in Austin, Ierom,
Ambrose, Cyprian, Tertullian, and others. Which could not be so, but that the
styles of men have their peculiar properties, wherein they differ each from
other, as their bodies do in feature, color, voice, countenance, and other
marks whereby we know them. And you shall not lightly ^^nde three men, that
have bodies like in all respects: much less three and thirty. So the
blindness, which you thought to show in the Centurie writers, as heretics, is
fallen on the heretical Jesuit who reproves them. Yea, as 2. King. 6.1^*
the Syrians, when they went about to take Elisaeus, were stricken with
blindness, and led into the mids of the city of Samaria: so the blind
Jesuit, while he sought to beat down a truth in the Centuries, has fallen
into the mids of a Samaritan quality. For to prove that they could not
disprove those epistles by unlikeness of style, he says that we have nothing
written by those Popes, whose epistles they deny, but only those epistles.
Which is an untruth. For one of the Popes, whose bastard epistles Centur. 3. c.
7.
they deny, is Cornelius. Of his there is extant one whole right epistle, and
parcels of more, in Epist. 46. and 48. edit. Pam.
Cyprian and Eccles. hist. l. 6 c. 42.
Eusebius. An other Centur. 4. c. 7.
is Julius. Of his there is extant a right epistle in In Apolog. 2.
Athanasius. Between which epistles, the right ones in Cyprian, Eusebius, and
Athanasius, and the bastard ones which are denied by the Centuries, there is as
great difference almost for the style: as there is for substance, between
gold, and copper. Now by these few you may esteem the rest: for they came all
from one smithes forge. Wherefore not only the likeness of the style, but the
unlikeness also conuinceth them of forgerie. And this is noted too by Centur. 4.
c. 7.
the writers of the Centuries: chiefly in that of Julius. The more do I
marvel at the Jesuits boldenes, who says that they neither could nor do
object unlikeness of the style against them.


Heart. Yet the former reason which they bring from the Latin, that it is rude
and barbarous, is justly challenged by Pro epist. Pont. l. 1. c. 17.
Turrian. For S. 2. Cor. 11.6.
Paul was rude in speech, but not in knowledge. And so might the Popes be.


Rainoldes. Not so. For it is one thing to be (...), set against (...), and
(...), which the false Apostles used. ^. Cor. 2. ver. ^* ^ 4.
rude in speech, and simple (as you would say) without pomp and bravery: an
other thing, to be barbarous. As it is one thing for a husbandman to wear
home-made cloth, which many honest men do: an other thing, to go (as rogues
are wont) in rags. Wherefore when Turrian says that the Popes might write
barbarously, least by choice of words they should seem to hunt for praise and
vain glory: it is, as if a man should say that godly preachers ought to go in
torn clothes and full of vermin* least by ^leanly hansomnes they should seem
to give themselves to pride and vanity. As for his other reason that they
might do it of a desire to edify, that, in things pertaining to the
salvation of all, even the simplest might understand them: the reason were some
what if the common peoples speech in those days had been of so course a
threede, as theirs is. For the speech of men is best understood when they
declare their minds in such words* and phrases, as are received commonly. But
as far as I can guess, or you prove, by the monuments of that time which are
left in writing either by heathens or by Christians: such Rigorosus, modernus,
charitatiuus, inthro^izare, a malis se cauere, vtiliter se praeuidea^, gaudeo
de vestra sospitate, leges se nocentes non suscipiunt, praetaxato modo, vt
praelibatum est, episcopus accusandus* est ad primates suos, necessarium es^ vt
vobis ab hac Apostolica sede suffragetur, with many like flowers of speech:
Salua in omnibus autoritate Apostolica. In the epistles of Telesphorus,
Vrbanus, Antorus, Fabianus, Stephanus, Eusebius, Melchiades, and the rest.
base words and phrases, as these epistles swarm with, were not received then
in the common speech. And shall we think that none of all the Doctors of that
age did write for the instruction of the simplest too? Not Tertullian? Not
Cyprian? Not Arnobius? Not Lactantius? Not Minutius Felix? Not Ierom, Ambrose,
Austin? Or could they instruct them with clean and true Latin, and could not
the Popes? Nay, did other common Christians in Rome speak congruously, and
purely, as we see by their epistles and speeches yet In Cyprian. epist.
3.26.30.31.46. and 50.
extant: and was it a privilege of the Popes alone to write barbarously? I will
not deny but that the Popes in our days may have such prerogatives: but I am
persuaded that in times of old they were as other common men. And therefore if
you have no better ground then Turrian, I shall continue my opinion that the
Latin also and not the style only is justly noted by the Centuries, to prove,
that the epistles whereof we treat are counterfeit. Howbeit neither style,
nor Latin, are the only proofs that they bring for it. They have more, and
stronger.


Heart. How strong, it may appear by that which they have put last as the
strongest; even their chiefest reason, the authority of witnesses. For therein
Centur. ^. c* 7.
they conclude that the ancient Popes were not autours of those epistles,
because nether Eusebius, nor Ierom, nor Damasus, do make mention of them, nor
any autour lightly before the time of Charles the great. Of the which argument,
the former part is fond: the later, untrue. For although Eusebius and Ierom are
wont diligently to note what things have been written by any great Doctor; yet
not all men's writings came to their hands. As for Damasus, he writes not so
much the lives of the Popes his predecessors, as brief Chronicle-notes: what
place they were born in, what kindred they came off, in what time they lived,
how often they gave orders, in what year they died, and where they were
buried. Wherefore it is no marvel that he noted not what epistles they
wrote. Though in a written copy at Rome (which Pro ep. Po^^* l. 5. c. 20*
Turrian saw) there is mention made of one of their epistles, namely of
Anacletus.


Rainoldes. In a written copy, at Rome, it may be: but in no printed copy yet.
An oversight of some, who, when Friar Su^ius set forth the Councels last, did
not inform him of it, that h^ might have mended it in Damasus. But if Damasus
thought it a matter worth the noting how often they gave orders: it is very
likely that he would have noted how they wrote sometimes too, if they had been
such writers. As for Eusebius, and Ierom, though (I grant) all writers came
not to their hands: yet were it very strange, that Eusebius l. ^. and 3. De
vi^a Constant.
the one of them being in great favor with Constantine the Roman Emperor,
Hieron. ep. 11. ad Ageruchiam.
the other attending on Damasus the Roman Bishop in ecclesiastical writings,
both of them desirous and curious to know all Christian writers monuments
Eusebius. in hist. ecclesiast. Hi^ron. de scrip^orib. ecclesiast.
purposely to speak of them; neither of them could see one of these epistles,
that such and so many Bishops of Rome had written. Chiefly, since they found
sundry epistles written Namely, by Clemens, Vic^or, and Cornelius.
by them, which they mention: and yet of all which they found, there is not one
amongst these nether.


Heart. Those, which then were common, might be lost since: and these, which now
we have, might be then unknown. Nether is it reason that all they should be
said to have written nothing, whose writings are not commonly known unto men.
For even now there are (as Pro epist. (...). l. 5. c. 20.
Turrian reports) in the Popes library many books of epistles of the later
Popes, which contain the acts and deeds of each their Popedomes, whence they
are commonly called registers: of Gregory the seventh, Innocent the third,
Honorius the third, Gregory the ninth, Innocent the fourth, Alexander the
fourth, Urban the fourth, Clemens the fourth, Nicolas the third, Honorius the
fourth, Boniface the eighth, John the two and twenteeth, Clemens the sixth,
Innocent the sixth, and Urban the fifth. And these are known of few men,
because they are in writing ^nely and not printed: besides very few which
Gregory the ninth, and Boniface the eighth have taken out of them, and
compil^d them in the Decretals to the use of Church-causes. But, if these
perhaps should be set forth hereafter: would you say that they are forged,
because there has no mention of them been made by writers, nor by the Popes
themselves; nay* which the Popes them selves perhaps never saw?


Rainoldes. The comparison is uneven when you say, that the Popes them selves
never saw books in their own library, thereby to show, that many books
might be there, which Ierom and Eusebius knew not. For it is likely that the
Popes have many books which they see not: they have other things to look on.
But Eusebius and Ierom did study through libraries, to see all the autours
which were extant in them. So that they were as likely to know the epistles of
the former Popes, as Turrian these of the later. For Turrian does not search
old monumentes more carefully to see up the Pope, then Ierom and Eusebius did
to set forth Christ. But whatsoever Ierom or Eusebius saw: think you not that
the Popes, as little as they see the books in their library, yet, if the sight
of any thereof could avail them toward the recovering of their supremacy in
England, they would find it quickly?


Heart. I think it should be forth coming to do good.


Rainoldes. Then have the Centuries in this place of witnesses a very strong
proof, that (about the time of Ierom and Eusebius) these epistles were not in
the Popes library. For there is no mention made of them at all either in
Council. Carthag. 6. and Africanum. About the year of Christ. 420.
the Council of Carthage, or of Afrike: in which the Pope endeavoring to show
that appeals might lawfully be made to him, would have all^aged them of
likelihood, had they been extant. But this probability noted by the
Centuries, Turrian passes over in silence very smoothly; where yet he makes
semblance of answering al their witnesses: belike, after Antonies precept in De
(...) lib. ^.
Tully, who wishes men, if they be troubled with a hard argument, to say
nothing to it. Howbeit all these (I grant) are but likelyhoodes.
Notwithstanding if you add to these likelyhoodes of Damasus, of Ierom, of
Eusebius, of the Popes them selves, this also that neither any other Father or
autour worthy of credit may be lightly found that has alleged them before
the time of Charles the great, about eight hundred years after Christ: it may
be well thought that there was good cause why the Centuries should suspect them.


Heart. Nay, that is the later part of their argument, which (as I said) is
untrue. Turria^. pro epist. Pont. lib. 5. cap. 2^.
For Isidore (who lived above a hundred years before Charles the great) did
gather them together at the request of fourscore Bishops. So that we have
four score Bishops in that one, to testify with us against that ly^ of the
Centuries.


Rainoldes. But how know you that, which you tell of Isidore and fourscore
Bishops, to be true?


Heart. How? By the preface of Praefat. Isidor. Concilior. ^om. ^.
Isidore him self set before the Councels. For therein, having showed how he
was moved (by the request of fourscore Bishops) to gather the canons together:
and we have enterlaced (says he) the decrees of certain epistles of the
Bishops of Rome, to weete of Clemens, Anacletus, Euaristus, and the rest, such
epistles as we could find yet, til Siluester the Pope; after the which we
have set down the Council of Nice, and after that the remnant of the Popes
decrees even until S. Gregori^. Thus far S. Isidore. And is not he a Father?
an autour worthy of credit?


Rainoldes. Admit that he is so: what do you conclude thereof against the
Centuries?


Heart. Even that which Chronograph. lib. 3.
Genebrard does, to utter it with his words: then do the Centurie-writers
err, who keep a babbling that those epistles decretall of the ancient Popes
are not alleged by any autour worthy of credit before the time of Charles the
great.


Rainoldes. Your Genebrard shows him self a cunning man still against the
Centurie-writers. Ne^ ^atil^ reperia^.
For, whereas they say^^ you shall not lightly find it;] he clippeth off the
word [lightly,] that, ye thing being found in a preface of Isidores, he may
charge them with Errant e^go Centuriatores.
error, to discredit the heretics. But what if S. Isidore did not write that
preface? What if he be a counterfeit too?


Heart. Marry now you have the way, if you can hold it. Deny all the writers
that do make against you, and say they be counterfeit. So shameless a cause
you undertake as shameless patrones, that but by s^ameles means you are not
able to maintain it.


Rainoldes. Nay patience, I pray. Me thought you were agreed that I might
lawfully e^cept against a Father, if he were counterfeit.


Heart. True: if he were so. But it is no good exception in law, to say this or
that against a man: you must prove it.


Rainoldes. So I mind to do. And that by demonstration out of the sa^e book
of Chronograph. ^ib. 3.
Genebrard himself, in which he ^indeth this fault with the Centurie-writers.
For about what year of Christ did Isidore dye? How does Genebrard reckon?


Heart. In the year six hundred thirty and seven: as he proves out of Vasaeus.


Rainoldes. When was the general Council of Constantinople under Agatho kept?
What says he of that?


Heart. In the year six hundred four score and one, or two, or there about.


Rainoldes. Then Isidore was dead above forty years before that general
Council.


Heart. He was: but what of that?


Rainoldes. Of that it does follow that the preface written in Isidores name and
set before the Councels to purchase credit to those epistles, is a counterfeit,
and not Isidores. For in that preface there is mention made of the general
Council of Constantinople held against Bishop Macarius, and Stephanus, in the
time of Pope Agatho, and Constantine the Emperor. Which, seeing it was held
above forty years after Isidore was dead by Genebrards own confession: by
his own confession Isidore could not tell the four score Bishops of it. And
so the four score Bishops which Turrian has found out in one Isidore, are
dissolved all into one counterfeit, abusing both the name of Isidore and four
score Bishops.


Heart. Libr. de (...) capit. eccles. cap. 27.
Igmarus who was Archbishop of Rhemes in the time of Jews son to Charles,
about seven hundred years since, did think that work to be S. Isidores, and
so he cites it.


Rainoldes. Why mention you that? Are you disposed to prove that some have
been deceived, and thought him Isidore who was not?


Heart. No: But to prove that the work is Isidores (as Father Pro epist. Pont.
lib. 5. c. 25.
Turrian does) by the testimony of Igmarus.


Rainoldes. Ignarus can not prove that. He must be content to be deceived in
some what as well as his ancestors. For it is too clear by the Council.
Toletan. 4. and 6. in subscription. episcopor.
Councels them selves that Isidore did dye about the time that we agreed of:
and therefore no help, but it must be an other who wrote that preface in his
name. Which makes me so much the more to suspect that the epistles are
counterfeit, since I find that a Father was counterfeited to get them credit.
And sure it is likely that about the time of Charles the great, when the
western Churches did commonly-fetch books from the Roman library, some
groom of the Popes (that had an eye to ye almes-box) conveyed this pamphlet in
amongst them: and well meaning men (in France, and other countries) received it
as a worthy work, compiled by S. Isidore, and coming from the Sea Apostolic.
But say what may be said for the silence of old witnesses, which is urged,
(and justly,) as a probable conjecture, that those epistles were not extant in
their days, the matters that are handled and debated in them, the scriptures
alleged, the stories recorded, the ceremonies mentioned, the times and dates
assigned, are, not conjectures probable, but most certain proofs, that they
could not be written by those ancient Bishops of Rome, whose names they bear.
There is a book entitled to the Poet Ouidij Nasonis Pelignensis de vetula.
Printed by John of Lubecke, a citize^ of Coolein in the year of Christ. 1479.
Ovid, touching an old woman: have you ever seen it?


Heart. What is that to the purpose? Does he speak of the Popes epistles?


Rainoldes. No: but their epistles are like to that book in sundry respects.
It is ancient: it was printed above a hundred years ago. And he, who set it
forth, says that Ovid wrote it in his old age, and willed it to be laid up
in his grave with him: in the which grave it was found at length by the
inhabitants of the country who sent it to Constantinople, and the Emperor
gave it to Leo his principal notarie, who did publish it. A smooth tale, to
make men believe that it is Ouids. Of whom though it savor no more, then these
epistles of the Bishops of Rome: yet if your Divines could find some antike
verse there that were an evidence for the Popes supremacy, I see my former
reasons would not dissuade you from believing but Ovid wrote the book. For, to
the barbarousnes and baseness of the Latin and style, if I should urge it, you
might answer that Ovid wrote so for two causes: that he might not seem to be
vain gloriously given, and that his repentance might be known even to the
simplest. To the silence of witnesses, that no man makes mention of it amongst
his works, you might answer that it lay hidden in his grave. And this you
might answer with greater show of likelihood, then that the Popes epistles lay
hidden in the Popes library. But unto the matters of which the book
entreats, and things that it discourses on, no shadow of defense can be
made with any reason. For De ve^ula, (...). 3.
it speaks in the praise of the virgin Marie, that Hanc mediatricem dabit
humano generi rex Largitor veniae.
God shall give her to be our mediatresse, and Non opus est vt^am velit
exaltare gradatim* Sed simul assumet, simul and sibi concathedrabit.
shall assumpt her into heaven, and place her in a throne with him: yea, the
autour Illic esto tui memorum memor optima virgo.
prays to her. Which are points of doctrine that were not heard of (I trow)
in Ouids time. Neither is it likely that Ovid was so well read in the
scriptures, that he could De vetula l. 2.
cite the Imbenedicibilem lex innuit illa spadonem Exemplo quodam famoso: nam
spado, cum sit Voce Jacob, manibus non est Esau.
law of Moses, and speak of Jacob and Esau, and allude to Ecclesiast. 12. l.
3. de vetula.
Solomon in Ecclesiastes. Even so for those epistles of the Bishops of Rome,
although you have gloses to shift of other reasons: yet I am persuaded that you
can lay no color on the contents and substance of them. For the scriptures are
so alleged; and such points are taught about the government of the Church,
about religion, about rites, about stories ecclesiastical, that it is not
possible they should be written by those Bishops.


Heart. Why? Do you think it as unlikely a matter, that they should allege
the scriptures, as that Ovid should?


Rainoldes. Nay, I do think it, or rather I do know it to be more unlikely,
that they should so allege the scriptures as they do, then that Ovid should
allude to Solomon, or cite Moses. For Joseph. antiquit. Iud. lib. 12. c. 2.
the books of Moses ( Epiphan. lib. de mensur. and ponder.
perhaps of Solomon too) were translated into Greek by the Seventy
interpreters many a year before Ovid: and he might have read them. But your
common Latin translation of the old testament, made (a great part of it) by S.
Ierom out of the Hebrewe, (whence it is called S. Ieroms,) could not be seen
by Anacletus and other ancient Bishops of Rome. For they were deceased before
he was borne. And yet all their epistles do allege the scriptures after that
translation. An evident token, that the writer of them did live after S. Ierom:
yea, a great while after him, as may be deemed probably. For the common Latin
translation, which the ancient Latin Fathers used, was made out of the Greek
of the Seventy interpreters. Tertullian, Cyprian, Hilarie, Ambrose, and other
of the same ages, show it in all their writings. Nether was that old
translation forsaken straight ways, as soon as Ierom had set forth his new.
For De ciuit. Dei l. 18. c. 43.
Austin, who saw Ieroms, preferred still the old translation before it. Epist.
ad Leandrum in exposition. Job. cap. 5.
Gregory, who lived about two hundred years after, does use them both
indifferently (because the Church of Rome did so,) Exposit. Job. ^^. c. ^^.
but likes better of the new. And so in process of time the new translation
did prevail, and the old was wholly left: save in the Psalms only, which
being soong in Churches had taken deeper root then could be plucked up by
Ierom. Now, since those epistles of the Bishops of Rome do allege the
scriptures after that translation which the Fathers called the new, Council.
Trident. Session. 4.
you call the old, and it was so long after Ieroms time before that
translation was grown to such credit that it had shut the other out: it is
probable that they were written long after, but whether long or short, it is
certain that they were written after Ieroms time.


Heart. It is true that Anacletus and the rest of those Bishops, who lived
before S. Ieroms time, must needs use that translation which the Fathers call
the old. And so does Pro epist. Pont. l. 5. c. 21.
Turrian answer they did in these epistles.


Rainoldes. The contrary is plain by the epistles themselves, in every one
of them.


Heart. I: but Turrian says that when these epistles were first set abroad to
the use of the Church that they might come to all men's knowledge, then was it
thought good (because S. Ieroms translation was in all men's hands) that many
places, which were cited according to the other, should be changed and cited
according to S. Ieroms translation.


Rainoldes. But how does Turrian prove that they were cited first according to
the other?


Heart. Because sundry sentences, which in them are cited out of the Prophets,
would better fit the purpose if they had been cited according to the other
which was out of the Greek, then according to S. Ieroms which is out of the
Hebrewe. For example, in the first epistle of Pope Alexand. prim. ep. 1. ad
omnes orthodoxos.
Alexander, that text is alleged out of the Prophet Zach. 2.8.
Zachary, He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye, as it is in
Ierom. But the other translation out of the Greek should be, He that touches
you, touches the apple of his eye: that is, of his own eye, and not of Gods.
In the which sort it had been more fit for Alexander to cite it, as Turrian
does prove by the circumstances of the text. And the like he shows in two or
three examples mo.


Rainoldes. And thereof he concludes that the Pope did cite it so. As who say
the Pope must needs do that which was most fit.


Heart. Nay, it does not well agree to his purpose, unless he did cite it so.


Rainoldes. Whether it do, or no: it is plain that the autour meant not so to
cite it. For in the same epistle he says that Priests and Bishops (to whom he
applies it) are called the eyes of the Lord. Which since he says on those
words, He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye: it seems that
he meant [eye] not of his eye who touches, but of Gods. Neither had he meant
otherwise if he had cited the words after the Greek translation, and not
Ieroms. For though it be in Greek, He that touches you, touches the apple of
his eye, (as it is in Hebrewe, and in the In Bibliis Complutensib* and Regi^s
Antuerp. and variis manuscript. Hontenii. and Francisci Luc. and text. excus.
cum. Hieron. commentar. in Zachar. 2.
best copies of Ieroms Latin too:) yet the word [ his, (...)] is referred to
[the Lord of hostes] whose care of his people the Prophet notes by that
speech, in like sort as Deuteronomy. 32.10.
Moses had also done before him. Wherefore if it agree not well in that sense
to the purpose and drift of the Popes epistle, in which it is alleged, as
Turrian says it does not: then himself confesses that not all the scriptures
are there alleged fitly. Which Pro epist. Pont. l. 3. c. 13. and other where
often.
he cannot abide the Centuries should say. But if this answer be good and
allowable, that when those epistles of the Popes were published, the textes,
which could not be alleged so by them, were changed: then is it impossible to
bring any reason, but you may shield them from it easily. For if there be a
point of order in discipline, or doctrine in faith, or the state of times, or
circumstances of persons and things whatsoever, that is disproued by writers
and witnesses of that age, as there are infinite: you may say that it was not
so in the epistles, but they who set them forth did alter that point. For
example, in one of them which is fathered on Epist. 2. ad Rufum aut Rusticum.
Cornelius, appeals unto the Sea of Rome are approved. But Epist 55. ad
Cornelium. Statutum est omnibus nobis.
Cyprian does show that Cornelius agreed with him and other Bishops, that
causes should be ended where they began, without appeals.


Heart. We shall never make an end if we stand on every particular that may be
cauilled at. It suffices me that all which you can say is set down in the
Centuries, and that which they have said is answered by Turrian. This is
Princip. doctrine. l. 6. c. 15.
Stapletons defense of those epistles: and I content my self with it.


Rainoldes. Not all which they have said is answered by Turrian: perhaps not
this very point about Cornelius. But if you like so well of Stapletons policy
to lay all on Turrian: let us leave his dealing therein against the Centuries
to be considered by the jury. Whom I must request withal to consider of one
reason more* which they shall neither find in Turrian, nor in the Centuries.


Heart. What reason is that?


Rainoldes. The judgment of three learned men of your own side, Cusanus, the
Cardinal; Bellarmin, the Jesuit; and Contius, the famous Lawier. For Cardinal
De concordant. Cathol. l. 3. c. 2.
Cusanus, saying, that peradventure those epistles of Clemens and Ana^letus are
counterfeit, upon the which they, who would exalt the Sea of Rome more then is
expedient and seemly for the holy Church, do ground them selves: adds for
proof thereof, that if a man first did read them over diligently, applying
the state of their times to those epistles, and then were perfect in the works
of all the holy Fathers who lived until Austin, Ierom, and Ambrose, and in the
acts of Councels where true and authentical writings are alleged; he should
find this true, that neither are the said epistles mentioned in any of those
writings, yea, and the epistles being applied to the time of those holy men do
betray them selves.


Heart. Cusanus, when he wrote these things, was not Cardinal: neither does he
affirm it, but says, [peraduenture:] and he mentions the epistles of
Clemens and Anacletus only, not of all.


Rainoldes. But his reasons, of the contents and witnesses, do touch them all:
as does his drift also. Nor says he [peraduenture] of douting* but of
modesty: for he adds farther that Ex allegatis etiam in ipsis epistolis, ac
a liis innumeris, ista pat^re possent, ^uae hic superuacue pouerentur.
things a great number do prove it manifestly. And though he were not
Cardinal then, yet he was Doctor of the Canon law, and Deane of a Cathedral
Church, and fit to be made Cardinal within a few years after. Neither spoke
he of hatred to the Sea of Rome, which he calls the divine, Omni laud
su^erexcellen^^^simam.
the most excellent in all praise, yea most superexcellent, the first, the
chief See; and says that she needs not to help her self with these
doutfull arguments, which are drawn out of those epistles and put in the
decrees of Gratian. But if he were not Cardinal when he gave that judgment:
yet Bellarmin was Jesuit when he confirmed it. For when he read at Rome of the
Popes supremacy, and came to that argument of these epistles of the Popes: he
said that Father Turrian a learned man had defended them to be their own, but
he thought the contrary opinion to be truer.


Heart. How know you that he said so, when he read at Rome?


Rainoldes. One of your own friends and fellows, M. Rishton.
who was present, told me he heard him say so. And I do the rather believe his
report, because, whereas In Romani^ praelectionib. controuer. 4. quaest. 5.
Bellarmin him self has set in writing the sum of those lectures, he says
though not altogether so much, yet in effect. For I will not deny (says he)
but there are some errors crept into them.


Heart. But he adds that certes he thinks nevertheless that they are very
ancient.


Rainoldes. And why? because Isidore makes mention of them. Which reason, that
he therefore does think them very ancient because there is mention made of
them by Isidore, is as much in softer words, as if he said, he thinks them
ancient, howbeit not so ancient as they are pretended. It may be that
Bellarmin, if he were advertised that Isidore is forged too, would think them
less ancient by one degree then yet he thought. But that which the Jesuit was
loath to deal with over roughly: the Lawier, a man of better mind, and bolder
spirit, does plainly avouch. For he affirms it to be clear and evident,
that those epistles of the Popes, who were before Siluester, are all false and
counterfeit. Now Siluester was Pope at the time of the Nicen Council, above
three hundred years after Christ. And so the exception which I made against
your first band of Popes, who lived three hundred years after Christ, and
upward: you see it is confirmed by a famous Lawier, a man of great judgment,
and of your own religion.


Heart. What famous Lawier is it? Or how does he confirm it?


Rainoldes. It is Antonius Contius, the kings professor of the law in the
university of Burges: with whose notes (allowed and approved by the privileges
of the Spanish and French kings) your Canon Law was In the year of^ Christ.
1570.
printed at Anwerpe by Plantin. In Distinct. 16. c. Septuaginta. In Annot. Cont.
one of those notes, he says, that he has brought Multas rations.
many reasons in his preface, by which he has proved and Manifest ostendi.
showed manifestly, that Omnes Pontificum qui Siluestrum praecesserunt
decretales falsas esse.
the epistles of the Popes who were before Siluester, are all false and
counterfeit. Behold, he has showed it, not by one or two ghesses, but by many
reasons; and that, manifestly.


Heart. But what are the reasons, which he has showed it so by?


Rainoldes. Nay, I am bound to keep counsel in that. For In praefatione
^dduxi.
the preface (wherein he brought those reasons) is not printed. Though I must
clear Plantin the printer from the fault. For I caused a friend of mine to
ask of him, why it was not printed, and what became of it, whether a man might
see it or no. To whom he made answer, that the Censour, appointed to ouersee
books to be allowed to the print, would not suffer it to pass; but what
became of it, he remembered not, nor knew how to procure it. They that do
evil, hate the light. There was somewhat in that preface, which the Censour
would not that all men should see. But Cic. pro Clu^ent.
the truth (says Tully) which is pressed down by many lewd men, does rise up
often times by this one means: that either they, who are crafty to deceive,
are not bold to enterprise so much as they devise; or they, who are bold enough
to do any thing, have not wit and subtlety to convey their practices. Which
consideration of a wise Orator, the folly of your Censour has proved to be
true. For though he were bold enough to leave out the preface of Contius: yet
he had not craft enough to raze out that note which mentions the preface. And
yet a little after, (to see the mischief of it how that should escape his
hands,) he has put in a note under Contius his name, which would have helped
well if he had razed out the other. For, Distinct. 21. c. cleros. In Annot.
Cont.
upon a text of Pope Anacletus he has made him say: I know that Quosdam
istorum Pontificum a Petro proxime seque^tium decretales falsi insimulare.
some affirm those epistles of the Popes who next succceded Peter to be false
and counterfeit; but I would desire them to bring Maiorem probationem.
better proof: specially since they are found in all the courses of canons that
are extant, collected Ab Isidoro.
by Isidore out of the book of Damasus which was Bishop of Rome. This note was
iuggled in well by the Censour, with this subscription, [Contius.] Pity, that
he took not away the other note, where [Contius] is subscribed too.


Heart. Why suspect you the Censour that he should make that note, and not
Contius him self write it? You have a lesson in S. 1. Cor. 13.7.
Paul, that charity is not suspicious.


Rainoldes. Charity is not sottish neither: I learn that lesson of him too.
For as it is a vice to suspect unjustly: so it is no virtue to believe
unwisely. And S. Paul, who says that charity believes all things: yet
believed not that Act. 23.16.
they meant him well, of whom he understood by his sisters son that they
would lie in wait to kill him. Charity believes all things, which a wise
and godly man should believe. But to believe that Contius wrote that note him
self, were greater folly to the believer, then charity to the Censour. For
how could it be that a learned man, the kings professor of the law, should say
concerning the same epistles, first, I have showed manifestly by many reasons
that they are counterfeit: and anon, I know that some affirm them to be
counterfeit; but I would desire them to bring better proof. Chiefly since the
cause, that is added there why he desires better proof, is Isidores
authority: Isidorus multa apocrypha and dubiae fidei inseruit.
whom In praefat. Qui aut quot ante Gratianum canones ecclesiasticos
collegerint.
Contius (in that respect) does discredit; which note is printed too. And
afterward again, on 6. q. 1. c. Beatus. 8. q. 1. c. Vnde. 30. q. 5. c.
Iudicantem. In Annot.
other textes of those epistles, he notes sundry points whereby it is
manifest (he says) that they are forged: and yet again, on 30. q. 5. c.
Aliter.
other, he mentions the proof thereof made in his preface: yea, and that is
more, upon the same epistle of the same Anacletus, on which that counterfeit
note was coined, Distinct. 99. c. Prouinciae.
Contius again notes, this epistle is falsely fathered on Anacletus, Vt in
praefatione monui.
as I advertised in my preface. See you not how rightly Tully did observe, that
if, either suttletie were bold, or boldness crafty, it would go hard with the
truth? The truth which is oppugned by those epistles of the Popes should have
had one patron less to speak for her, if your Censour had been as politic
to blot out the notes touching the preface, as he was hardy to leave the
preface out, and coin a new note against it. And yet perhaps he blotted out
some notes too. But men, who deal with much, shall ouersee somewhat.


Heart. You still suspect the worst. It might be the correctors fault and not
the Censours. Or if the Censour did it, he did it of a good mind, because he
thought that Contius was deceived in it.


Rainoldes. The likelihood and presumption is not so much of the correctour,
who vewing all the notes might have left out the rest too, if he had been the
dooer: as it is of the Censour, who suffering not the preface to pass to the
print for the Popes sake, may justly be suspected that he would strain an ynch
farther to help the Pope. But, you say, he did it of a good mind. But good
minds must learn to use good means also. At least, he should have done as
Friar Surius did: who, whereas in the old edition of the Councels there were
certain things noted out of Cassiodore, Marianus Scotus, and Gregory
Haloander, touching the years of the Consuls who are named in the dates of
those epistles of the Popes: Surius (in his new edition thereof) has left out
all those notes, Praefat. ad sectorem. Conciliorum Tom. 1.
yielding this reason why he left them out, because both the thing is dark of
it self, and it is made more dark and intricate by their variance; in so much
that Calvin seems on that occasion to have rejected those epistles. In deed
the Centurie-writers (whom Surius meant perhaps when he named Calvin) do set
down that circumstance, of the year of the Consuls assigned in their dates,
for a proof that they be forged: and they confirm that proof by those very
notes that were set forth with the epistles. For Cent. 3. cap. 7.
many of the epistles have the names of such Consuls, as never were Consuls
together, or lived not then: Cent. 4. cap. 7.
as appears by Marianus Scotus and others, yea, even by the notes added to
those epistles in the Tome of Councels. Which words might work discredit to
the Centurie-writers with them who see the Councels in no edition but the last:
for there are no such notes. And Surius, in leaving them out, has answered
well that reason of the Centurie-writers. Though he should have answered it a
great deal better, if he had left out also the epistles them selves. For as
long as they are extant: we shall not need the notes upon their dates to
control them. Yet as he dealt wisely in leaving out the notes, so he showed
honesty in telling men of it: that they may know there were notes before,
which impaired the credit of the epistles; and if they list to see them, they
may seek and find them too. But the Censour, who fell upon the notes of
Contius, has showed no such honesty. For neither has he given any
signification that he caused the preface to be left out; neither has he told
us of an other edition where it might be found; and, that which is the worst,
he has made Contius to speak in maintenance of that which him self knew and
had declared to be forged. All the which points it behooves the jury to
consider off; and not to weigh only the judgment of Contius, or Bellarmin, or
Cusanus, for the disproofe of those counterfeits on which you ground the Popes
supremacy: but to think with them selves how many more of likelihood even in
the midst of Popery have spoken against them; yea, sundry peradventure, who,
(as their writings are printed now,) speak for them. For if in these days
when men do sift their doings, Surius durst adventure to leave out notes
already printed, and the Censour to suppress things in printers hands that
they may never come to light, yea, to write notes in the names of autours flat
contrary to their judgment, and print them as their own too: what is it to be
feared they did in former times, when there were few that would epsy them? Or,
if epsy them, yet who so hardy to bewray them?


Heart. The judgment of Cusanus, and Bellarmin, and Contius, and the rest of
our side, (if there were more who thought so,) may not disprove those epistles:
seeing that themselves allow the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome.


Rainoldes. So much the greater force they have to disprove them: since it is
not likely that they would leave this hold of that, which they favor, if
manifest truth and reason did not compel them thereunto.


Heart. But why do you bring the judgment of our Cardinals, or Jesuits, or
Lawiers herein against (...): when, in as weighty a point against your self,
you will not receive them.


Rainoldes. I gave you the reason In the 1. Diuis. of this Chapt.
before out ofthe scriptures, which cite the Poets so. But if you will have it
confirmed by the Fathers, you know that Divine. institut.
Lactantius, De praepa ratione euangelica.
Eusebius, Adue^sus gentes.
Arnobius, and Clemens Alexandrinus, Justinius Martyr, Tertullianus, Tatianus,
and Augustinus.
many more of them do bring the writings of Sibylla, and Orpheus, and Hermes,
and other Gentiles against the Gentiles, whose judgments they would not
receive against them selves. For, if Sibylla (says* Contra Faustum Manich^. l.
^3. c. ^5.
Austin) and Orpheus, and Hermes, and other either Prophets, or Divines, or wise
men, or Philosophers of the Gentiles have said true things touching god: that
is of some force, not for us to embrace the authority of them, but to convince
by them the vanity of Gentiles when we show that we do worship that God of
whom even they have spoken, who partly did teach, partly durst not for bid
their fellow Gentiles to worship idols. And it is written in your 2. q. 7. c. Si
haeteticus.
law, that if a Catholic be in suite against an heretic, the testimony of an
heretic is of force for the Catholic: but against the Catholic no testimony
is of force, saving the testimony of a Catholic only. The testimonies
therefore of Cardinals, and Jesuits, and what soever Papists, are of force
against you, but not for you against us* Nether is there caus^ why you should
ask rather why I bring their judgments against the Popes epistles, and yet
allow them not in the Popes supremacy: then why Exodus 3.22. and 12.35.
the Israelites took jewels and furniture of gold and silver of the Egyptians,
when yet they forsook their idols and heavy burdens* And thus you see what
malte the soft fire has made for the first band of Popes, whom either you named
out of Stapleton, and Canus; or wrapped up without names in the decrees of
Gratian. Have you any hope of better success in the remnant of them: or will
you muster new soldiers?


Heart. You shall find more valor in these then you look for, as hotly as you
call for new. For, the exceptions which you made against the second sort
ofPopes are naught doutlesse: to say nothing ofthe third.


Rainoldes. You do well to say nothing ofthe third sort. But what mislike you
in my exceptions to the other?


Heart. You should ask me rather what I mislike not. For I mislike all that you
have said therein. First, that they avouch not the Popes supremacy. Which who
would say, but you? For it is too clear that Innocentius the first, Leo the
first, Gelasius, Vigilius, Pelagius, and S. Gregory, (whom all you comprehend
in the second sort of Popes,) avouch it as fully and in as ample manner, as any
Popes since them have done.


Rainoldes. It is too clear they do not. And that will I prove by the third
sort ofPopes, in the same places, that your self alleged out ofthe c.
Significasti. de electione. c. Antiqua. de priuilegiis. c. Fundamenta. de
electione. In Sexto.
decretals, and Ex^ra. c. Vnam sanctam. de maioritate and obedientia.
extrauagants, and the Sub Leon. decimo. Ses^i^n. 11.
Council of Lateran. For Paschal the second, Innocentius the third, Nicolas
the third, Boniface the eighth, and Leo the tenth, (the autours ofthe chapters
and textes which you quoted,) do claim much therein, that nether Innocentius
the first, nor Leo the first, nor Gelasius, nor Vigilius, nor Pelagius, nor
Gregory, nor any of that sort claimed.


Heart. What one point, that touches the substance of the Popes supremacy?


Rainoldes. First, their sovereign power over all Princes, that they may depose
them: and that themselves are subject to none, not to the Emperor. For c.
Fundamenta. de election. in Sexto.
Nicolas the third says, that the monarchy of both powers (he means
ecclesiastical and civil) belongs in the city of Rome to the Pope by the
donation of Constantine: who thought it unmeet that an earthly Emperor should
have dominion there, where God had set the Prince of Priests. And Extra. c.
Vnam* sanctam. de maioritate and obedientia.
Boniface the eighth proclaims himself to be set ofGod over nations, and
kingdoms, to pluck up, and to root out, and so forth, even to judge the
Princes of the earth. Which ordinance of Boniface (renewed, and approved by In
Council. Lateran. Session. 11.
Leo the tenth,) has been put in practice accordingly by sundry ofthem. Many
kings, and Emperors deposed by their sentence (as Steuch. Eugus bin. de falsa
donat. Constantin. lib. 2. Sixth. Senens. biblioth. sanct. l. 6. annot. 72.
your own writers boast) have felt the proof thereof: and we have seen
lately their will in our Queen, and King Henry the eighth deposed by Pope
Paul the third: as he Majesty by Pius the fifth* Onuphr. de vitis Pont. in
Paulotert. Genebrard. Chronograph. lib. 4.
her father of famous memory, though God has blessed where they cursed, and
held them up whom they deposed. But the second sort of Popes were so far from
claiming this power over al Princes, that they claimed it not over any.
Neither were they monarchs of the civil power in Rome, (as I Chapt. 7.
Division 7.
have proved,) by Constantines donation: but subject to the Emperor, to whom
that soueraintie belonged, as they acknowledged. For Leo epist. 47. and 48. ad
Martianum Aug. Tom. 1. Concilior.
Leo the first, when the Emperor Martianus had summoned the general Council of
Chalcedon, and sent out his writs for him and other Bishops (as Eusebius. de vit.
Constantin. l. 3. c. 6. Socrat. hist. ecclesiast. l. 5. c. 8. and l. 7. c. 33.
Leo epist. 12.16. and 23. ad Theodosium August.
Emperors used) to come thither: although he nether liked the place, nor the
time, appointed by the Emperor; yet did he according as he was commanded.
The obedience of the rest I need not show in particular. The dutiful
submission of Registr. lib. 2. epist. 61. lib. 4. epist. 31. lib. 5. ep. 6^.
lib. 6. ep. 6. and caet
Gregory to the Emperor Mauricius, his Lord, as still he calls him* may be
a general token of it. But when the third sort of Popes bore the sway, the
state was turned vpside-downe. In so much that whereas the Pope said before,
Piisaimus Dominus noster. Grego. Regist. lib. 4. ep. 32.
our most godly Lord the Emperor: now must the Emperor say, yea, and be
sworn Sanctissimo Domino nostro Domino Nicolao diuina prouidenti^ Papae quinto
ego Fridericus rex Romanorum promitto and iuro. Cerem. Romans eccles. lib. 1.
tit. ^.
to our most holy Lord the Pope. And whereas the Emperor before did summon
Councils, and called the Pope unto them: now the Pope denies y^ he may deal
therewith; and neither him self obeys, nor suffers others to obey him.
When Li^^r. Pauli tert. Pont. Max. ad Carolum quint. Whereof the sum is in
slei^dan, lib. 16 ye whole copy, in Calvin, Opusculor. part. 2. class. 1.
Charles the fifth (in the assembly of Spier) had mentioned a general Council,
and a national, and order to be taken for matters of religion in the Imperial
assembly: he was reproved by Paul the third for touching those things without
naming the Pope, to whom the sovereign power (he said) of gathering Councels,
and ordering affairs of the Church, is given. Nay, when Onuphr. de ruis Pon^.
in Paulo t^rt.
the same Charles requested most earnestly that the Council, called by the
Pope to Trent, might be kept there, and not at Bononia, whither the Pope (of
policy) had removed it: the same Paul rejected his earnest request, and would
by no means yield thereto. So plainly in sight, so greatly in weight, do
the later Popes differ from the former, in the chiefest point of their
supremacy over all, and being subject unto no man.


Heart. It may be that the Popes of the second sort would not, of modesty; or
could not, for occasions, claim their full supremacy.


Rainoldes. You should speak more truly and Christianly of them, if you said,
they thought it not to be their right. But would not, or could not, your own
answer grants that they did not claim it. Wherefore since their supremacy
implies sovereign power over kings and Emperors, as it is defined by the last
sort of Popes: the second, who were subject to the civil powers, and claimed
no such soueraintie, avouched not the Popes supremacy.


Heart. Yet over the spiritual powers they avouched it, that is, over Bishops.
And that is more then you will yield too.


Rainoldes. Though less then you lay claim too. But nether over Bishops did
they avouch that which your last sort of Popes does, and touches their
supremacy most. For ^. Significasti. de electione.
Paschal requires Archbishops to be sworn, that they shall be faithful and
obedient to him. Yea the same oath of fealty and obedience c. Antiqua. de
priuilegiis.
Innocentius the third exacteth of the Patriarchs of Constantinople,
Alexandria, Antioche, and Jerusalem. Where the second sort of Popes, as namely
Registr. l. 4. epist. 36. and l. 7. i^dict. 1. ep. 30.
Gregory, acknowledged the Patriarchs to be his equals, not his subjects* And
they were so far from offering that violence, and injury to them, that they
required not any such oath, no, not of the meanest Pastor in their diocese.


Heart. Yes, that they did: as you may see by Pelagius. Who decreed and
ordained, that if any Metropolitan did not send to Rome within three months
of his consecrtion to take his oath, and receive the pall, he should be
deprived of his place and dignity.


Rainoldes. Pelagius? Where is that decree?


Heart. In the Canon Law: whence it is alleged by De episcoporum iurisdict. and
Pont. Max. autoritate responsu^. Proposition. 5.
Franciscus Vargas, a notable learned man, king Philips counselor and
ambassador to Pope Pius the fourth. He, Paul. Manut. prae^at. ad responsum Fr.
Vargas.
when the question of the jurisdiction of Bishops and the Popes authority could
not be well agreed on in the Council of Trent, was called by the Pope to a
consultation with the chiefest Cardinals. Where he spoke his judgment of the
point so wisely, that it was thought fit his answer should be set in print.
Therein, amongst many reasons and autorities for the Popes supremacy, he says
that Pelagius declared it by this decree, in that he would have all
Metropolitans sworn to him.


Rainoldes. This decree was made by a Popish Lawier, not by Pope Pelagius. For
Distinct. 100. c. Quoniam.
Pelagius, least that he should rashly give consent to the allowing of any
Metropolitan who were not sound in faith, required them Exponere fidem suam.
to make profession of their faith, and so to send for the pall, that is to
say, for his consent, whereof the pall was a token. A Lawier of Paris, one
Defens. in Molinaeum pro Pontifice Ma^imo.
Remundus Rufus, to frame hereof a stronger weapon for ye Pope, (in whose
defense he wrote,) has changed the words [ad exponendam fidem suam,] into
these words, [dandae fidei causa:] and so by dare fidem, in steed of fidem
exponere, he proves that Pelagius would have their oaths to the Pope, whereas
he required profession of their faith in Christ. Now, Franciscus Vargas,
alleging (as I guess) this text on Rufus credit, (though he name him not,)
did mistake the matter; the rather, through a prejudice conceived of the later
times. For, that Metropolitans should profess Christ, it was a thing required
then. But, that c. Ego N. extra. de iur^iu^ando.
they should be sworn to maintain the Papacy, it is a weed that grew ^^^e or
six hundred years after.


Heart. That they should be sworn to maintain the Papacy, it is though a newer
yet a needful order: least men should fall away from unity and obedience of
the Sea of Rome. But thus much yet Pelagius decreed, as you grant, that they
should al make profession of their faith to him, and be allowed by his consent.


Rainoldes. All, within his diocese: not all, throughout the world.


Heart. Nay he says, if any, if any Metropolitan send not unto the Sea of Rome,
to show his faith, and receive the pall: let him be deprived. Behold, he
speaks generally.


Rainoldes. So the States of England make their acts of Parliament: if any man
do this or that. Which yet they mean not of men in Rome and Turkey; but of
all men within the Queens dominion.


Heart But the whole world is the Popes diocese. And that he meant of al
Metropolitans therein, it is the more likely, because that all Bishops were
then confirmed by the Pope, and it was thought necessary that they should be
so. Whereof there are evident and notable examples, (as D Princip. doctrine.
lib. 4. cap. 20.
Stapleton shows,) in Epist. 33. and 34. and 40. and 54. and 55.
Leo the great, about the election of Anatolius the Patriarch of
Constantinople, and Epist. 68.
Proterius the Patriarch of Alexandria: in Lib. 7. cap. 8.
Sozomen, and Lib. 5. cap. 9.
Theodoret, about Nectarius also elected by the whole Council, and yet to be
confirmed by Damasus: in Lib. 4. epist. 34.
Gregory the great about the Bishop of Salonae, who was confirmed by the
Emperors, he being not made privy to it; a thing that never happened under
any Christian Prince before, says Gregory. Yea Bishops newly chosen were wont
to send letters (called synodicall) to the Pope: in which they made profession
of the faith they held, and so declared their agreement with the Church of
Rome. Such letters Leo epist. 68.
Proterius, the Patriarch before named of Alexandria, sent to Leo; Huius epist.
meminit Photius in sua bibliotheca.
Sophronius, the Patriarch of Jerusalem, to Pope Honorius; Turrian. pro ^pist.
Pont lib. 2. cap. 4.
Nicephorus, the Patriarch of Constantinople, to Leo the third; and Peter after
him, to Leo the ninth.


Rainoldes. But, as other Patriarchs did send unto the Popes such letters of
conference, whereby they made profession of their faith to him, and showed
their agreement with the Church of Rome: in like sort the Pope was wont to make
profession of his faith to them, and show his consent in religion with their
Churches. For Registr. lib. 1. ep. 4 and 24. and 25.
Gregory the great wrote so to John the Patriarch of Constantinople, to
Eulogius the Patriarch of Alexandria, to Gregory and Anastasius the Patriarchs
of Antioche, to John the Patriarch of Jerusalem: and Johan. Di^^ in vita
Gregor. lib. 2. cap. 3. and 5.
this he did according to the ancient custom of his predecessors, amongst
whom was Leo. Wherefore the preeminence of Leo was no greater in confirming
Patriarchs of Constantinople, and Alexandria: then was their preeminence in
confirming him. For as he allowed not them for lawful Bishops, Leo epist. 3^.
and 38. de Anastasio, ep. 67. de Proterio.
until by their letters of conference he knew them to be sound in faith: so
Greg. lib. 5. ep. 64. and lib. 7. ep. 53. and Io. Diacon^s, in vita Gregor. l.
4. c. 23
neither were they wont to allow of any, of whose faith they were not informed
in the same manner. As for the example in Sozomen and Theodoret, that Nectarius
elected by the whole Council was yet to be confirmed by Damasus: therein your
Doctor plays with Sozomen and Theodoret. For Lib. 7. cap. 8.
Sozomen neither says it, nor makes any show of saying it, not as much as by
naming Damasus. Lib. 5. cap. ^.
Theodoret sets down the letters written by the Council to Damasus,
Ambrose, Britto, and other Bishops of the west: but they disprove that
privilege of the Popes prerogative, which Stapleton would prove by them. For he
alleges them to show that the Pope had T^ndem. A^hibita tandem est
episcoporu^ omnium per Romanum Pontificem necessaria confirmatio. Staplet. lib.
4. cap. 20.
at length (at that time) a necessary consent in the confirming of all Bishops
more then other Bishops, yea then him self before had. Whereas the letters
mention the consent of Ambrose, Britto, and the rest, no less then the consent
of Damasus: and they crave their common consent in like sort to the confirming
of Nectarius, as in former time Synod. Africana apud Cyprian. ep. 68. ad
eccles. Legion. Astur. and Emer. Cyprian. ep. 69. ad Florentium. Ambros. ep. 82.
all Bishops were confirmed (yea, Corne^^u^, in Cyprian. ep. 45. ad Cornelium,
and ep. 52. ad Antonianum.
the Pope too) by the consent each of others, for better keeping of the faith,
and fostering of love amongst them. So the rest of your proofs import an
equality between all Bishops at the first, and afterward between all
Patriarchs. The only example that has any kin with the decree of Pope
Pelagius for his superiority ever Metropolitans, is that out of Gregory
touching the Bishop of Salonae, Gregor. lib. 2. indict. 11. ep. 8
a Metropolitan city in the country of Dalmatia. For Epist. 22.
he was accustomed in deed to be confirmed by the consent of the Pope, as of
his Archbishop, and Lib. 7. iudict. 2. epist. 81.
to receive a pall from him. But thereof to conclude that all Metropolitans
throughout the whole world were likewise subject to the Pope; it has as much
reason, as if you should conclude that the Queen of England appoints
Lieutenants throughout all Christendom, because she appoints a Lord Deputy
in Ireland. You are deceived, M. Heart, if you think the Pope was swollen so
big in the time of Pelagius. His dropsy had made him to drink up much, but
not all. He was become Archbishop of a Princely diocese, but he was yet but an
Archbishop. He was not universal Pope, and Patriarch of ye whole world.


Heart. Your speech is absurd, and does confute it self, in seeking to confute
the Pope. For if he had but a diocese, how was he an Archbishop? Since a diocese
is ye charge committed to a Bishop: an Archbishop, has a province. And if he
were but an Archbishop how had he Metropolitans under him? Whereas a
Metropolitan, and an Archbishop, is all one. Beside that, you granted him to
be a Patriarch: for else the other Patriarchs must be his superiors, to whom
you made him equal. So while you strive against him, and go about to bring him
under, to bereue him of the supremacy: you speak as though you were bereft of
sense and reason, and knew not what to say of him.


Rainoldes. In deed, as the names of [Archbishop] and [diocese] are used in our
days, and have been of some writers in ancient times also: my speech may
seem absurd, who say that the Pope was but Archbishop of a diocese, when he
was Patriarch as I grant. But after the language that was then received when
the second sort of Popes were at the best, I speak the words of sense and
reason. For Justinian the Emperor, who (as it is requisite in penning of
laws) is wont to keep the proper and usual speech of his time, (and It began
in the year of Christ 527. and continued til ^65 Sigebert. in Chron.
his reign did fall into the time we treat off,) Novel. 137. ^. Non solum.
ordained, that if an Elder or Deacon were accused, his Bishop should have the
hearing of the matter; if a Bishop, his Metropolitan; if a Metropolitan, his
Archbishop. And (...). C. de episcopali a^dientia.
again he provided for the ecclesiastical causes of clergy men, that first
they should be brought to the Bishop of the city; from the Bishop of the
city, to the Metropolitan; from the Metropolitan, to the Synod of the
province; from the Synod of the province, to the Patriarch of the diocese: and
a Patriarch is all one with an Archbishop, Novel. 123. ^. Si quis autem..
Interdi ^it.. Si qui. vero. (...) pas^im*
in him. Whereby you may perceive, both that an Archbishop had Metropolitans
under him: and that a diocese was more then a province. In which respect I
called it a Princely diocese, to distinguish it from a Lordly, that you might
know I meant a diocese of a larger sise, then as the word is taken for a
Bishops circuit. But that you may have the cleerer light to see the truth of
mine answer, and thereby to perceue how the Pope encroched on Bishops by
degrees, until of an equal he became a sovereign, first over a few, next over
many, at last over all: I must fetch the matter of Bishops, Metropolitans, and
Archbishops somewhat higher, and show how Christian cities provinces, and
dioceses, were allotted to them. First therefore, when Act. 14.23.
Elders were ordained by the Apostles in every Church, Tit. 1.5.
through every city, Act. 20.28.
to (...), that is* to do the duty of a pastor to it.
feed the flock of Christ, whereof the holy Ghost had made them overseers:
they, to the intent they might the better do it by common counsel and
consent, did use to assemble themselves and meet together. In the which
meetings, for the more orderly handling and concluding of things pertaining to
their charge: they those one amongst them to be the President of their
company, and moderatour of their actions. As in the Church of Ephesus, though
it had Act. 20.17.
sundry Elders and Pastors to guide it: yet amongst those sundry was there
one chief, whom our Savior calls Reu. 2.1.
the Angel of the Church, and writes that to him which by him the rest should
know. And this is he whom afterward in the primitive Church the Fathers called
Bishop. For as the name of 1. Cor. 4.1.
Ministers, common to all them who serve Christ in Luke 12.42.
the stewardship of the mysteries of God, that is, in preaching of the gospel,
is now by the custom of our English speech restrained to Elders who are under
a Bishop: so the name of 1. Tim. 3.2. Tit. 1.7. Act. 20.28.
Bishop common to all Elders and Pastors of the Church, was then by the usual
language of the Fathers appropriated to him who had the Presidentship over
Elders. Thus are certain Elders reproved by Epist. 13. Presbyteris and
Diaconis.
Cyprian; for receiving to the communion them who had fallen (in time of
persecution,) before the Bishops had advised of it with them and others. And
Eusebius. hist. eccles. l. 6. c. 42.
Cornelius writes that the Catholic Church committed to his charge had six
and forty Elders, and ought to have but one Bishop. And both of them being
Bishops, the one of Rome, the other of Carthage, Cornelius Cypriano. Ep. 46.
Cyprianus Presbyteris and diaconis. Ep. 6.
do witness of them selves that they dealt in matters of their Churches
Cyprian. ep. 35 Cornelius ep. 46. apud Cyprianum.
government by the consent and counsel of the company of Elders, or the
Eldership, as they both (after S. 1. Tim. 4.14.
Paul) do call it.


Heart. Elders, and Eldership: you mean presbyteros, and presbyterium, The
fourth Division.
that is to say Priests, and Priesthood. But these new fangled names came in
by your English translations of the new testament: which (as In the Annotations
of the Rhemish Testament. Act. 14.22.
our translation does justly note them for it) have changed Priests into
Elders of falsehood and corruption, and that of farther purpose then the simple
can see. Which is, to take away the office of sacrificing, and other functions
of Priests, proper in the new testament to such as the Apostles often, and the
posterity in manner altogether do call Priests, presbyteros. Which word does
so certainly imply the authority of sacrificing, that it is by use made also
the only English of sacerdos, your selves as well as we so translating it in
all the old and new testament: though you cannot be ignorant that Priest
comes of presbyter, and not of sacerdos: and, that antiquity for no other
cause applied the signification of presbyter to sacerdos, but to show that
presbyter is in the new law, that which sacerdos was in the old: the Apostles
abstaining from this and other like old names at the first, and rather using
the words Bishops, Pastors, and Priests, because they might be distinguished
from the governors and sacrificers of Aarons order, who as yet in the Apostles
time did their old functions still in the temple. And this to be true, and
that to be a Priest is to be a man appointed to sacrifice: your selves calling
sacerdos always a Priest must needs be driven to confess. Albeit your folly
is therein notorious, to apply willingly the word Priest to sacerdos, and to
take it from presbyter, whereof it is derived properly not only in English but
in other languages, Presbyter. Priest. ^rebstre. ^rete.
both French, and Italian: which is to take away the name that the Apostles and
Fathers gave to the Priests of the Church, and to give it wholly and only to
the order of Aaron.


Rainoldes. Wholly and only to the order of Aaron? Nay, then I can abide your
Rhemists no longer, if their mouths do so run over. For we give it also to
the order of Melchisedec, ^s. 110.4. Heb. 7.11.
after the which our Savior is is a Priest for ever. And they who charge us
with falsehood and corruption in that we call the Ministers of the gospel,
Elders: are guilty themselves of heresy and blasphemy in that they call them
Priests. For they do not call them Priests in respect of the 1. Pet. (...).
spiritual sacrifices of Heb. 13.15. Reu. 5.8.
prayers and Heb. 13.16.
good works, which Christians of al sorts are bound to offer unto God, and
thence are called Phil. 4..8. 1. Pet. 2.5. Reu. 1.6. and 5.10.
Priests in scripture: but they call them Priests in respect of the carnal
and external sacrifice of the cursed Mass, wherein they pretend that they
offer Christ under the forms of bread and wine to God his Father, a sacrifice
propiciatorie, that is, of force to pacify God, and reconcile him unto men.
So, whereas the scripture does teach that Heb. 7.23.
one Priest, by Heb. 10.12.
one sacrifice, Heb. 7.27. and 9.28.
once offered, that is, our Savior Christ, by giving himself to death upon the
cross has reconciled God unto us, and sanctified us for ever: the doctrine of
Rhemes ordeineth many Priests, to offer up often, whether The same, as they
say in their Annotations on Heb. 10.11. An other. as they handle it, on Heb.
9.12. Which may be further perceived by D. Allen, de Eucharist. sacrific. cap.
10. and 23. whence the faltering speeches of the Rhemists flow.
the same sacrifice that Christ, or an other, they speak staggeringly, but to
offer it often. As though there were yet left Heb. 10. ver. 18.
an offering for sin after the death of Christ: or his precious blood were of
no greater value then ver. 4.
the blood of bulls and goats, ver. 2.
which were offered often, because they could not purge sins. And this
^bomination they seek to maintain by the name of Priests, since Priests are
men (they say) appointed to sacrifice, and that name was given to them by the
Apostles. In saying whereof they do play the Sophisters: and that with greater
art then the simple can see. Which is, in that they use our English word
[Priest] after a dooble sort: the one, as it is derived from presbyter; the
other, as it signifies the same that sacerdos. For Priest, as it signifies a
man appointed to sacrifice, is (...).
sacerdos, and not presbyter. The name which the Apostles give a Minister of
the gospel, is (...).
presbyter, and not sacerdos. Which difference of words, necessary to be
observed for the distinction of things between the Ministers of the old and
the new testament, as the Apostles kept it in the tongue in which the new
testament is written, so they who translated the testament into English were to
keep it also. Wherefore it was not of falsehood and corruption, but of
religious zeal of truth, that they called presbyter, an Elder, not a Priest.
For since the custom of our English speech has made the name of Priest proper
to a man appointed to sacrifice, such as were the (...).
Priests after the order of Aaron in the old testament, the Priest after the
order of Melchisedec in the new: the Ministers of the gospel, ordained, not
(as Christ) to sacrifice to God, but to feed Gods people with his word and
sacraments, must have an other name (...).
according to the scripture: and our English word, expressing that in
scripture, is the name of Elders. But you by confusion of these sundry names
do seek confusion of the things: and as thieves are wont to change the marks
of things which they have stolen; so you, to make the Priesthood of Christ
seem your own, do change names, as marks of things which they signify.
For in steed of that which we call [an Elder] you would have [a Priest,] that
your Massing Priests may be accounted So the Rhemists speak of them: in their
Annotat. Heb. ^.12.
Priests after the order of Melchisedec, as Christ is a Priest: and so your
sacrifice of the Mass be thought the sovereign sacrifice, (as D. Allen, in his
Apology of the English Seminar. chap. 1.
your Master calls it,) wherein Christ is offered unto God his father. In
the which conueiance, if you painted it with naught but colors of your own:
the matter were less. For, (...). Arist. in repre^en^. Sophist.
the abusing of one name applied unto sundry things was a common shift of
sophisters among the heathens. And you are to be borne with, if, having no
better cause then they had, sometimes you adventure on the shifts that they
did. But to abuse the credit of the Apostles to this sophistry, and say that
they gave the name of Priests to Pastors of the Church of Christ: that is a
fault that cannot be excused. For seeing our language does mean by [Priests]
sacrificers, which in their language are called (...) and they never gave the
name of (...) to Pastors of the Christian Church: it follows that they gave
them not the name of Priests. Or if you reply, they gave them that name
because they called the^ (...), whence our English name of Priests is derived:
yet you cannot say they called them Priests, as the name of Priest has a
relation to sacrifice: and therefore that name is nothing to the Mass, which
you would prove by it. For so the word [Priest] must yet have two meaninges:
the one of (...), the other of (...). Whereof the one is given by the Apostles:
but does not implie authority to sacrifice. The other does imply authority to
sacrifice: but is not given by the Apostles,


Heart. But since the name of Priest is properly derived from the word presbyter,
(...). Presb^^er. Priest. Prebstre. (...).
or (as it is in Greek) (...), not only in English, but in other languages,
both French, and Italian: why did not your translatours keep this according to
the Greek, and devise an other for (...), that is sacerdos, if they would
needs distinguish them by different names. For it is (as I said) a notorious
folly to apply willingly the word Priest to sacerdos, and to take it from
presbyter whereof it is derived properly.


Rainoldes. If our translatours had been Lords of words, and might have
forced men to take them in what sense they would: then had you spoken reason.
For Tyndal, in the obedience of a Christian man.
he, whom others folowe^ in our English translations, did note that if
Antichrist had not deceived us with unknown and strange terms, to bring us
into confusion and superstitious blindness, a Priest, that is, a sacrificer
as Aaron was a Priest and sacrificed for the people, should have had some other
name in English then Priest. Which he spoke in respect that the name of Priest,
as it came from presbyter, betokening a Minister of the new testament, should
not have been given to the Ministers of the old, who differ, as in function,
so in name, by scripture. But you, in whose eyes our folly is notorious, for
that we give the name of Priest to sacerdos, and take it from presbyter whereof
it is derived properly: what say you (I pray) for your own translation in the
fourth of the Acts, The Rhe^i^^ translation, Act. 4.13.
where it is said of Peter and John the Apostles, that they were men
unlettered and of the vulgar sort.


Heart. Why? What fault find you with our translation in that?


Rainoldes. I find not any fault; but I would know of you why you call them
[men of the vulgar sort,] and not rather [idiotes:] since in the Greek text the
word is (...), in Latin idiotae.


Heart. That were a profane term for the Apostles, who were endued with
heavenly wisdom.


Rainoldes. It were so in deed. But if the deriuation of words must be
followed in translating autours: that term should have been given them. For
the name of idiot is properly derived from the (...).
Greek or Idiota.
Latin, not only in English but in other languages, both Idiot.
French and Idiota.
Italian, and (if that help) the Ydiota.
Spanish, I dio^.
Dutch, and (...)
Syriake too. Yea it comes nearer in every one of these to the Latin word of
the old translation (which you pretend to follow,) then the name of Priest in
any of them does to presbyter.


Heart. But the word in English has not the same meaning that it has in
Latin; and in translating things the sense must ^e kept. Nor is it to be
marked so much whence a word is properly derived, as what it does signify.
Now it does signify that which usually men understand by it. For the consent of
men taking a word for this or that, does make it to signify that for which
they take it, as De interpret.
Aristotle shows. Who frames thereupon a rule, Topico^. l. 2.
that we must call things by those names, by which the common people calls
them. Wherefore since the name of idiot in English is taken for a fool, or sot,
and the Latin idiota where it is used in scripture does signify the unlearned,
such as the vulgar sort of men: we have translated it the vulgar, and not
idiot, according to the meaning not the deriuing of it. Neither may you
therefore charge us with varying from the Latin text: which, as we pretend, so
we do follow faithfully. For whereas S. 1. Cor. 14.16.
Paul says to the Corinthians, If thou bless in the spirit, how shall he that
supplyeth the place of the vulgar, say Amen upon thy blessing? in Latin, for
the vulgar, it is idiotae. Which word if we should have translated, the idiot:
we should have done injury to the common sort of rude unlearned men, whom it
does betoken, as you must needs acknowledge, who translate it the unlearned,
as we do the vulgar.


Rainoldes. True. But you may see then how wise your Rhemists are, who charge
us with notorious folly because we give the name of Priest to sacerdos, and not
to presbyter. For as the name of idiot, does come from idiota, but is taken for
a fool: so the name of Priest is derived from presbyter, but signifies a
sacrificer by custom of our English speech. Wherefore if your reason do prove
that all Pastors of the Christian Church must be called Priests, and have
authority to sacrifice; because they are presbyter^: it will prove as well that
all unlearned Christians must be called idiotes, and may be begged for fools,
because they are idiotae. Which if you dare not say of unlearned Christians,
though in very truth you deal with them as idiotes when you make such reasons
to approve your Mass and Massing Priests unto them: learn, by discharging
your selves in the one, to clear us of notorious folly in the other. For since
in translating things (as you confess) the sense must be kept, and the sense
of words is that which usually men understand by them, and by the word Priest
men understand sacerdos, that is to say, a man appointed to sacrifice: it
follows thereof that our translatours did their duty, in giving the name of
Priests to them only, to whom the Priestly function in scripture does
appropriate it. As for your Rhemists who still do translate sacerdos a Priest,
as granting that we have no other English wo^d for it, and yet translate
presbyter by the same word too: they do join together that which God has
severed; and the words, which the holy Ghost has distinguished, they wittingly
confound. Wherein they do lewdly abuse the simple Christians, who are
unskillful in the tongues, to make them in love with the whorish sacrifice of
the idolatrous Mass; and alienate their minds from the true religion
professed in the Church of England. For the name of Priest, as it has relation
to sacrifice, is sacerdos: which word your Con cil. Trident. session. 2* cap.
1.2.3.6. and 7. can. 2. and 8.
Trent-fathers do therefore use in handling the sacrifice of the Mass. Now
because the name of (...).
sacerdos is not given to the Ministers of the gospel in the new testament:
your Rhemists make (...).
the name, that is given them, the same in Priest.
English with sacerdos. To the intent, that the simple, not seeing the slight,
may conceive thereby that ministers of the gospel are Priests ordained to
sacrifice: and so may loath our Ministers, who neither do sacrifice, nor list
to be called Priests; and may embrace your Priests, who profess them selves
to be Priests, yea Mass priests, and are sent to sacrifice, as it is showed
in The Apolog. of the English Semin. chapt. 6.
your Apology of the English Seminaries.


Heart. That learned Apology, which D. Allen wrote in the defense of our
Seminaries, does justly blame your new pulpits, (the very chaires of the
scorneful,) for calling us by that term merrily or mockingly. Psalm. 1.
For the Church of God knows no other Priests, neither has Christ instituted
any other order of Priests, but of these* whom contemptuously you do call
Mass Priests.


Rainoldes. So D. Allen says. But he proves neither Priests nor Mass, by
scripture: unless the Mass be the chair; and the Priests be the scornful.


Heart. Though he allege not the scripture there to prove them, yet has he
done it other where: as in his Latin treatise of the sacrifice of the Mass,
and in our Annotations on the testament in English, wherein his hand was
chiefest. The Rhemis^^ Annotations on Heb. 7.23.
For Esaias does specially prophecy of the Priests of the new testament (as S.
Ierom declares upon the same place) in these words: Esai. 61.6.
You shall be called the (...).
Priests of God, the (...).
Ministers of our God shall it be said unto you. And as here the Ministers of
God are called Priests, in that very term which your self confess has a
relation to sacrifice: so, that they did sacrifice, you may perceive too by the
Act. 13.2.
Acts of the Apostles, where it is written of Prophets and Doctors in the
Church at Antioche, that they were ministering to our Lord. For (...).
the Greek signifies that they were sacrificing: and so Erasmus translated.
Whereby it is meant that they did say Mass: and the Greek Fathers hereof had
their name Liturgy, which Era^mus translateth Mass, saying Missa Chrysostomi.
Howbeit we translate it, ministering, and not sacrificing, or saying Mass,
though we might: if we would (as you do) boldly turn what text we list, and
flee from one language to another for the advantage of our cause. But we keep
our text: as the translatours of the scriptures should do most religiously.


Rainoldes. Your Vulga^. translat. ministrantibus.
text then does say, that the Prophets and Doctors at Antioche were ministering*
but you, to prove the Mass, do reprove your text. For if the Greek signify
that they were sacrificing, and your text translated the Greek into Latin: how
did your text keep his text, when he translated it, not sacrificing but
ministering? Will you say that the autour of your old translation ( Council.
Tridentin. session. 4.
which only is approved by your men as authentical) did not perform that
duty which the translators of the scriptures ought most religiously? You do
so for advantage. But in this point you do him injury. For though the word
may (by consequent) import to sacrifice, when sacrifice is a service pertaining
unto them whose ministry it betokens, as where it is spoken of (...). Number.
18.6.
Levites and (...). Heb. 10.11.
Priests: yet does it properly signify to minister, either in public
function (after Of (...), and (...).
the original thereof) or in any; as magistrates are called (...). Romans 13.6.
the ministers of God, and Angels are said to be (...). Hebr. 1.14.
ministering spirits, and the Gentiles are willed (...). Romans 15.27.
to minister unto the Jews in relieuing of their necessity. In so much that
the learned of your own translators, Isidorus Clarius, and Arias Montanus,
who both have turned the new testament out of Greek into Latin, Isidor. Clar.
1564. Venet.
the one approved by the Deputies of the Trent-councel, Tom. 8. Regior.
Biblior. 1572. Antuerp.
the other by the Doctors of Louan, do both of them translate it in this very
place of the Acts of the Apostles not sacrificing, but ministering; which their
affection to the Mass would have been loath to do, unless the truth had
forced them to it. How much the more shameful is the demeanor of your
Rhemists, who, where they carp us, as leaving the Greek for the advantage of
our cause, them selves for the advantage of their own cause do clip the
meaning of the Greek: against, I say not, the judgment of Etymolog. in (...).
Sui^as, in (...). Bud. Henr. St.
Grammarians, even Lexic. Graec. Tom. 6. Regior. Biblior.
such as seek to help them most, but against the common use of it in
scripture, against their old text, against their new translations, yea,
against their own conscience, as that which you alleged out of the Prophet
Esaias, (where they have Englished it, (...).
the Ministers,) does show. And herein their dealing is so much the worse,
because they set it out with the name of Erasmus; as if he meant by
[sacrificing] the saying of Mass: which is far from him. For although by
reason Era^m. annotat. in Act. Apost. 13.2. and epist. ad Heb. 8.2.
he thought that the word does properly signify, not simply to minister, but
to minister in holy things, as they who serve in the Priesthood, therefore he
did translate it that the Prophets and Doctors in the Church at Antioche were
sacrificing to the Lord: yet he says Paraphr. and Annot. in Acta Apost. 13.2.
that hereby is meant that they employed their gifts to Gods glory, and the
salvation of the Church, the Prophets in propheciing, the Doctors in teaching
the doctrine of the Gospel. So he understands nothing else by sacrificing,
then others do by ministering, or rather then the scripture does: as it is
observed out of the circumstances of the text by Ar. Montanus in Elucidation.
Card. Caietanus, and ^o. Ferus, in Comment. in Acta Apost.
the best of your own interpreters. Who seeing that the men were Prophets, and
Doctors, which are said to have been ministering to the Lord, thereupon do
gather that they served him in executing their own ministry, that is to say,
the ministry of prophesying, and teaching. In which sort Oecumenius and
Theophylactus in expo^it. in Acta Apost^e Chrysostom. and Gracis Patrib.
the Greek fathers do expound it also: (...).
what means the word ministering? (say they,) it means preaching. Wherefore
if the name of Liturgy were taken hereof, by the Greek fathers, as your
Rhemists add: it is a good hearing, but so much the less will it prove your
Mas^e. For if they understood preaching, by ministering, when the word is
spoken of Prophets, and Doctors: it is the more likely that when they applied
it to the ministry of the Pastors, ^ service of the Church, they meant the
public prayers and other holy functions which we do call Divine service. As
in truth they did. For that which we call evening prayer, they called (...).
Theodoret. hist. eccles. l. 4. c. 14.
the evening Liturgy, as you would say the service done to God at evening: and
in the very Liturgy, that is called Chrysostomes, because he made some part
of it belike, not all, for himself Chrysostom. li^urg. Graec. excas. Paris. 1560.
therein is prayed too; but in that very Liturgy the word is applied to (...).
the Churches service in the same manner as it is to the service which (...).
Angels Esai. 6.3. Reu. 4.8. and 5.12.
do to God. And I hope you will not affirm that the Angels do say Mass in
heaven. Wherefore howsoever Erasmus did translate it after the phrase of his
time, wherein the Churches service was commonly called Missa: the ministry
mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles does not prove that sacrifice of which
you would infer your Priesthood. As for the place of Esaias, in which it is
written, you shall be called the Priests of God, the Ministers of our God shall
it be said unto you: the course of the text does seem to mean by Priests all
the servants of God, whom 1. Pet. 2.5.
Peter calls an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable
to God by Jesus Christ. For Esai. 61. uer. 1.
the words are spoken as in Christ's person to ver. 2.
all the faithful and repentant, ver. 3.
who should be trees of righteousness, ver. 4.
to build up the Church: and thereupon are promised that ver. 5.
their enemies shall serve them, and ver. 6.
they shall serve God. But in an other place of Esaias, (I grant,) the name of
Priest is given to Pastors and Elders: Esai. 66.21.
where speaking of the calling and conversion of the Gentiles, And of them
(says he) will I take for Priests, for Levites, says the Lord.


Heart. S. Ierom does expound the former place of them also. But all is one to
my purpose. For seeing that Pastors and Elders (as you term them) are called
Priests in scripture, and the name of Priest implies (you confess) authority
to sacrifice: it follows that Pastors and Elders are Priests autorized to
sacrifice. Now the Priest that has authority to sacrifice, is he, whom you do
call a Mass Priest. Wherefore both Mass and Priests are proved by the
scripture.


Rainoldes. Why? Think you that every Christian man and woman is a
Mass Priest, because the name of Reu. 1 5. and 5.10.
Priests is given them by scripture in respect of 1. Pe^. 2* 5.
spiritual sacrifices which they must offer unto God?


Heart. No. Because the sacrifices that they must offer, are spiritual: and are
called sacrifices by a borrowed kind of speech, and not properly. But the
sacrifice which is offered to God in the Mass, is an external, visible, true,
and proper sacrifice, as it is declared by Session. 22. c. 1. visibile
sacrificium. c. 2. vere propitiatorium. can. 1. verum and proprium sacrificium.
the Council of Trent. So that the Priests ordained to offer this sacrifice
are properly called Priests: whereas other Christians are called so improperly,
according to the nature of the sacrifices which they offer.


Rainoldes. Then the name of Priests alleged out of Esaias does not prove your
Masse-priestes. For he does call the Ministers of the gospel Priests, in
respect of the spiritual sacrifices which they must offer. And that appears
by Esai. 66.20.
the words going next before: in which the Lord declaring (even by S. Ieroms
judgment too) that he would call the Jews to the same honor, that by the
name of Priests is signified: and they (says he) shall bring the Gentiles for
an offering to the Lord, as the children of Israel offer in a clean vessel in
the house of the Lord. So to bring the Gentiles as an offering to the Lord, is
that, for which they, who do bring such offerings, are named Priests and
Levites. Comment. in ea verba Esaiae, Quomodo si inferant filii Israel munus.
But the offering up of the Gentiles unto him, is a spiritual sacrifice: made
by the Ministers of Christ (as Romans 15.16. (...).
Paul shows) when they convert the Gentiles through the preaching of the
gospel. The sacrifice therefore, in respect whereof the Ministers of the
gospel are called Priests by Esaias, is a spiritual sacrifice. And as every
faithful person is a Priest, because we must offer, each his own body, Romans
12.1.
a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God: so that name is given to
Ministers of the gospel, because they are called to offer up the bodies of
other men in like sort. Wherefore if private Christians are not Masse-priestes,
because their sacrifices are spiritual: then since the Ministers must offer up
the like sacrifices, it follows by your answer that nether they are
Masse-priestes.


Heart. The Ministers of the gospel must offer up the like sacrifices: I deny
it not. And in that respect it is true, that nether they, nor private
Christians are proved to be Masse-priestes. But there is an other, an
external sacrifice, that Ministers must offer also: even that which our Lord
in the prophet Malachie does call Mal. 1.11.
a clean oblation, and says that in every place it is sacrificed and offered
to his name, because his name is great among the Gentiles. And that is the
sacrifice, in respect whereof the Ministers of the gospel are called Priests
properly, and are indeed Mass Priests. For the clean oblation is the
sacrifice of the Mass, wherein the body and blood of Christ is offered up unto
God his father, as Council. Trid. Sess. 22. cap. 1.
the Council shows, an oblation that cannot be defiled by the unworthiness or
wickedness of them who offer it.


Rainoldes. What? And be your Priests of the tribe of Leui, who offer up this
sacrifice?


Heart. No sir, nor of the Jews: but they are Christian Priests.


Rainoldes. But they, who must offer the sacrifice that is spoken of in the
prophet Malachie, are of the tribe of Leui. For afterward Mal. 3.3.
entreating of (...)
ye same oblation, or offering (as we call it,) that shall be offered unto God
in the time of the gospel, he says that the Lord shall fine the sons of
Leui, and purify them as gold, and silver, that they may offer an offering
unto God in righteousness. Wherefore if the offering that Malachie does speak
of, be the sacrifice of the Mass, that is, a sacrifice properly: then the
proper Priests, by whom it is offered, are the Jewish Priests after the order
of Aaron, even the sons of Leui. But if the sons of Leui betoken (by a
figure) the spiritual Leuits, that is, all the faithful, whom Christ in the
new testament has made 1. Pet. 2.9.
a royal Priesthood, Reu. 1.6.
even Kings and Priests to God his father, as your Arias Montanus comment. in
Malach. c. 3.
Montanus well expounds it: then must the offering (by a figure) signify the
spiritual sacrifice, which Christians of all sorts are bound to offer unto
God. And in truth, as Matt. 11.14.
Christ said of John Baptist, If you will receive it, this is Elias which was
to come, meaning, that Mal. 4.5.
the Prophet did signify John Baptist by the name of Elias: so I may say to
you touching the spiritual sacrifices of Christians, If you will receive it,
this is the clean offering which should in every place be offered to the Lord.
For the Prophets, when they spoke of the gospel of Christ, and the religious
worship of God Ioh. 4.23.
in spirit and truth, (which Gentiles converted by the preaching of the gospel
should serve him in, through all the world:) are wont to describe it by
figurative speeches drawn from the external and carnal worship of God in the
ceremonies of the law. So they say that Esai. 19.19.
there shall be an altar of the Lord in the mids of the land of Egypt; that
Esai. 56.7.
God will accept the burnt offerings and sacrifices of strangers upon his
altar; that Esai. 60.^.
all the sheeepe of Kedar shall be offefered on it, and the rams of Nebaioth;
that Zac. 14. ver. 16
the Gentiles shall go up to keep the feast of tabernacles from year to year
ver. 17.
unto Jerusalem, and ver. 21.
every pot in Jerusalem and Judah shall be holy to the Lord of hosts, and all
they who sacrifice shall come and take of them and sees therein; finally, that
Mal. 3.4.
the offering of Judah and Jerusalem shall be sweet unto the Lord, as in the
days of old and in the years before. Wherefore, as the Prophets do mention an
offering which the Christian Church shall offer unto God in the time of the
gospel: so do they mention burnt offeringes, and sacrifices, the sheep of
Kedar, the rams of Nebaioth, to be offered on an altar; they mention
Jerusalem to be gone unto, the feast of tabernacles to be kept, the flesh of
beasts sacrificed to be sodde in pottes, the Levites to be the Ministers who
shall make the offering in righteousness to God. But neither does Heb. 7.1^.
the Priesthood of the Levites continue, neither is Ioh. 4.21.
Jerusalem the place to worship God, neither are Gal. 4.10.
the Jewish feasts the times to do it, nor will he be served Heb. 10.^.
with sacrifice, and offering, if they be taken properly. The Prophets
therefore meant by an allegory (as we term it) to show that all Christians
should, as Priests, and Levites; offer up them selves, and theirs, as
sacrifices; at all times, as solemn feasts; in all places, as in Jerusalem.
And so the clean offering, whereof the Prophet Malachie says it shall be
offered in every place unto the Lord, does signify not a sacrifice to be made
upon an altar, as your Council. Trident. Sess. 22. cap. 1.
Council would have it, but the spiritual sacrifice which S. 1. Tim. 2.8.
Paul exhorts the faithful to offer, when he wills men to pray in every
place, lifting up pure hands without wrath and douting.


Heart. The Prophets speak much in deed of things to come not properly, and
simply, but figuratively, by obscure speeches, and allegories, and parables,
that must be understood otherwise then they are written as Aduers. Marcion. lib.
3.
Tertullian notes. But the name of altar is used properly for a material
altar by the Apostle to the Hebrews, saying, Heb. 13.10.
we have an altar whereof they have not power to eat which serve the
tabernacle. For he puts them in mind by these words, that in following too
much their old Jewish rites they deprived themselves of an other manner and a
more excellent sacrifice and meat: meaning, of the holy altar, and Christ's
own blessed body offered and eaten there. Of which they that continue in the
figures of the old law could not be partakers. This altar (says In Leuitic^^
lib. 6. cap. 21.
Isychius) is the altar of Christ's body, which the Jews for their
incredulity must not behold. And the (...)
Greek word (as also the (...)
Hebrew answering thereunto in the old testament) signifies properly an altar
to sacrifice on, and not a metaphorical and spiritual altar. Wherefore seeing
that we have a very altar in the proper sense, and the name of altar does
import a sacrifice that is offered on it: it follows that the body of Christ
upon the altar is a very sacrifice in the proper sense. And that out of doubt
is the clean offering which the Prophet speaks of: according as the Council
of Trent has defined.


Rainoldes. And are you out of doubt that by the words, we have an altar, the
Apostle means a material altar, such as your altars Durand. ration. divine.
offic. lib. 1. cap. 7.
made of stone.


Heart. What else? a very altar.


Rainoldes. And they who have not power to eat of this altar are the stubberne
Jews, who keep the ceremonies of the law.


Heart. The Jews, and such profane men.


Rainoldes. Then your Masse-priestes may and do use to ^ate of this altar.


Heart. They do. And what then?


Rainoldes. Their teeth be good and strong, if they eat of an altar that is
made of stone. Are ye sure that they eat of it?


Heart. Eat of an altar? As though ye knew not, that, by the altar, the
sacrifice which is offered upon the altar is signified. They eat of Christ's
body, which thereby is meant.


Rainoldes. Is it so? Then the word [altar] is not taken for a very altar in
the proper sense, but figuratively for the body of Christ the which was
sacrificed and offered. Neither is it taken for the body of Christ, in that
respect that Christ is offered in the sacrament, in the which sort he is That
is to say, not in the truth of the thing, but in a mystery betokening it, as
it is n^ted out of S. Austin. c Hoc est. de consecr. distinct. 2.
mystically offered as often as the faithful do eat of that bread, and
drink of that cup, wherein the breaking of his body and shedding of his
blood is represented to them: but in that respect that Christ was offered on
the cross, in the which sort he was truly offered not often, but Heb. 9.28.
once, to take away the sins of many, and Heb. 10. ver. ^0.
to sanctify them ver. 14.
for ever who believe in him.


Heart. Nay, the ancient Father Isychius expounds it of the body of Christ
in the sacrament, (as I showed) which the Jews must not behold. They might
behold his body upon the cross, and did so.


Rainoldes. But the holy Apostle him self does understand it of the body of
Christ as it was offered on the cross. And that is manifest by the words he
adds to show his meaning touching the Jews and the altar. Hebr. 13.11.
For (says he) the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the
holy place by the high Priest for sin, are burnt without the camp. Therefore
even Jesus, that he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered
without the gate. Which words are somewhat dark, but they will be plain, if
we consider both the thing that the Apostle would prove, and the reason by
which he proves it. The thing that he would prove, is, that the Jews can not
be partakers of the fruit of Christ's death and the redemption which he
purchased with his precious blood, if they still retain the ceremonial
worship of the law of Moses. The reason by which he proves it, is an ordinance
of God in a kind of sacrifices appointed by the law to be offered for sin,
which sacrifices shadowed Christ, and taught this doctrine. For whereas Leu.
6.16. and 7.6.
the Priests who served the tabernacle in the ceremonies of the law, had a
part of other sacrifices and offeringes and did eat of them: Leu. 4.3. and
16.15.
there were certain beasts commanded to be offered for sin in special
sort, and their blood to be brought into the holy place, Leu. 6.30.
whose bodies might not be eaten, but must be burnt without the camp. Now, by
these sacrifices offered so for sin, our only sovereign sacrifice Jesus
Christ was figured: who Heb. 9.12.
entered by his blood into the holy place, 1. Ioh. 1.7. and 2.2.
to cleanse us from all sin; and Ioh. 19.20.
his body was crucified without the gate, that is, the gate of the city of
Jerusalem; and they who keep the Priestly rites of Moses law, can not Ioh.
6.51.
eat of him, that by his death they may live: for none shall live by him who
seek to be saved by the law, as it is written, Gal. 5.1.
if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. The Apostle therefore
exhorting the Hebrews Heb. 13. ver. ^
to stablish their hearts with grace, that teaches them to serve the Lord in
spirit and truth after the doctrine of the gospel, not with meats, that is to
say, with the ceremonies of the law, a part whereof was the difference between
unclean and clean in meats: does move them to it with this reason, that ver.
10.
if they serve the tabernacle, and stick unto the rites of the Jewish
Priesthood, their souls shall have no part of the food of our sacrifice, no
fruit of Christ's death. For, ver. 11.
as the bodies of those beasts which were offered for sin, and their blood
brought into the holy place by the hye Priest, might not be eaten by the
Priests, but were burnt without the camp: ver. 12.
so neither may the keepers of the Priestly ceremonies have life by feeding
upon Christ, who (to show this mystery) did suffer death without the gate, when
he shed his blood to cleanse the people from their sin. And thus it appears
by the text it self that the name of altar betokens the sacrifice, that is
to say, Christ crucified: not as his death is showed forth in the sacrament,
but as he did suffer death without the gate. Whereby you may perceive, first,
the folly of your Rhemists about the Greek word, (as also the Hebrew) that it
signifies properly an altar to sacrifice on: as though it might not therefore
be used figuratively; where yet them selves must needs acknowledge it to be so
too. Next, the weakness of your reason, who thereof do gather, that, by the
sacrifice, which that word imports in the Apostle, is meant the clean
offering of which the Prophet speaks. For, the clean offering, of which the
Prophet speaks, is offered Mal. 1.11.
in every place: the sacrifice meant by the Apostle, in one place only, Heb.
13.12.
without the gate. Wherefore the name of altar in the epistle to the Hebrews
does neither signify a Massing-altar, nor prove the sacrifice of
Massing-priests.


Heart. That which you touch, as foolishly noted by our In their Annot. on Heb.
13.10.
Rhemists, about the Greek and Hebrew word, is noted very truly. For you can
not deny your self, but that it signifies properly an altar, a material
altar to sacrifice upon, and not a metaphorical and spiritual altar. Whereby
as they conclude that we have not a common table, or profane communion board
to eat mere bread upon, but a very altar in the proper sense to sacrifice
Christ's body upon: so for proof hereof they add, that, in respect of the
said body sacrificed, it is also called an altar of the Fathers, even of In
ora^. de sorore Gorgonia.
Gregory Nazianzene, Demonst. quod Christus sit Deus.
Chrysostom, Histor. eccles. lib. 1. cap. 20. and 25.
Socrates, Epist. 86. De ^iuit. Dei. lib. 8. cap. 27. and lib. 22. cap. 30.
Co^^ess. lib. 9. cap. 11. and ^3. Contr. Fau^^um Manich. lib. 20. cap. 21.
Augustine, and (...) ^3. Matt.
Theophylact. And when it is called a table, it is in respect of the heavenly
food of Christ's body and blood received.


Rainoldes. The note of your Rhemists, about the Greek and Hebrew word, is
true (I grant,) yet foolish too: though true in the thing, yet foolish in the
drift. For to the intent that where the Apostle says, we have an altar, it may
be thought he meant not that word spiritually, or in a figurative sense, as we
expound it of Christ, but materially of a very altar such as is used in their
Masses: they say that the (...)
Greek word (as also the (...)
Hebrew answering thereunto in the old testament) signifies properly an altar
to sacrifice on, and not a metaphorical and spiritual altar. Which speech how
dull it is in respect of the point to which they apply it: I will make you see
by an example of their own. Our Savior in the gospel teaches of himself
that he is Ioh. 6. ver. 32.
the true bread, ver. 33.
which gives life unto the world; ver. 50.
the bread which came down from heaven, that whosoever eats of it should not
die: ver. 51.
if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever. Your In their
Annotations on Ioh. 6.32.
Rhemists do note hereon, that the person of Christ incarnate is meant under
the metaphore of bread, and our belief in him is signified by eating. Wherein
they say well. But if a man should tell them that the (...).
Greek word (as also the (...)
Hebrew answering thereunto in the old testament) does properly signify bread
which we eat bodily, and not a metaphorical or spiritual bread: were not
this as true a speech as their own? Yet how wise to the purpose, who is so
blind that sees not? Yea, to go no farther then the very word, whereof by
their Hebrew and Greek they seek advantage: them selves, upon that place of
Reu. 6.9.
John that he saw under the altar the souls of them who were killed for the
word of God, do affirm expressly that Christ is this altar. Christ (say
they) as man, no dout is this altar. They mean it (I hope) in a metaphorical,
or other figurative speech. For they will not make him by transsubstantiation
to be an altar properly. Yet here it is as true that the (...)
Greek word (as also the (...)
Hebrewe answering thereunto in the old testament) signifies properly an
altar to sacrifice on, and not a metaphorical or spiritual altar. And if it
were as much for the advantage of their cause to prove that Mass is said in
heaven, as that in earth; and, that Christ is properly bread without a figure,
as that bread is properly Christ in the sacrament: the text of the scripture
where Christ is called bread, yea the true bread, would prove the one clearly,
as they could fit it with this note; and the word altar, would put the other
out of controversy, chiefly if that were noted withal, that Reu. 8.3.
an Angel stood before the altar having a golden censer, though Are^has in
collect. exposit. in Apocalyp. cap. 8. Rupert. comment. in Acalyps. lib. 5.
others there also affirm the altar to be Christ. But it fares with your
Rhemists, as it is wont with Ezekiel. 13.10
false prophets: Allen, in his treatise of the sacrifice of the Mass.
one builds up a muddy wall, and The Rhemists in their Annotations on the new
Testament.
others daube it over with a rotten plaster, and when a storm comes, the
wall falls and plaster with it. For though, as they lay it on, it seems
hansom, that words signify properly the natural things which they are used
to signify, and not metaphoric^ll or spiritual things: yet if it be opened
that hereby is meant that words may not be used (by metaphores, or other
figures) to signify those things which properly they do not signify, the
boys in grammar schools, who know what a metaphore is, will laugh at it.
Wherefore this plaster will not help the weakness of your muddy wall, I mean
of the conclusion which you would prove by it and do infer upon it, that we
have an altar in the proper sense to sacrifice Christ's body upon. In the
daubing up whereof yet your plaisterers do show a piece of greater art: partly,
by drawing us into hatred who have not Popish altars, but communion tables;
partly, by winding the names of Fathers in, as if they made for you against us.
Both, with skill and cunning: but more of sophistry, then divinity. For that
which the scripture does call 1. Cor. 10.21.
the Lords table, because it is ordained for 1. Cor. 11.20.
the Lords supper in the administration of the blessed sacrament of his body
and blood: Gregor. Nazianzen. orat. in la^d. Basilii. Chrysostom. demonstr. quod
Christus sit Deus. Homil. in Matt. 16. and 83. in prior. ep. ad Corinth. 24.
and 27. ad populum Antioch. 60. and 61* Sermon. de Eucharist. and de B.
Philogonio. Socrat. hist. eccles. lib. 1. cap. 20. and 25. Augustine. epist. 59.
ad Paulin. Tract. in Iohann. 26. de verbis Domini Sermon. 46. Theophylact. in
prior. epist. ad Corinth. cap. 11.
the Fathers also call it a table in respect of the heavenly banquet that is
served upon it. And this in proper sense. Marry, by a figure of speech, by
which the names of things that are like one an other in some quality, are
given one unto an other, as Ezekiel. 34.23.
Christ is called David; Mal. 4.5.
John Baptist, Elias; Reu. 17.5.
the city of Rome, Babylon; Esai. 62.9.
the Church of God, Jerusalem: the Fathers for resemblance of the Ministers and
sacraments in the new testament to them in the old, are wont to give the name,
as of Pruden^ius hymn. de S. Lau^ent. Conc. Carth. 2. can. ^. ^sidor.
etymo^ogiar. lib. 7. cap. 1^^.
Priests, and Levites, to Pastors, and Deacons; so of a sacrifice, to the
Lords supper; and of an altar, to the Lords table. For these things are lynked
by nature in relation, and mutual dependence (as I may say) one of an other:
(...)
the altar, (...).
the sacrifice, and (...).
the sacrificers who serve the altar, that is, Priests and Levites. Wherefore
if the Fathers meant a very altar in the proper sense to sacrifice Christ's
body upon: then must they mean also Ambros. de officiis lib. 1. c. 50. Leo
epist. 79. ad Dioscorum.
the Leuitical Priesthood to serve in sacrificing of it. But Heb. 7.11.
the Leuiticall Priesthood is gone, and they knew it: nether did they call the
ministry of the Gospel so, but by a figure. Your Rhemists therefore do
abuse them, in proving, as by them, that the communion table is called an altar
properly. But us of the other side they do abuse more, by setting an altar
against a common table in such sort of speech, as if we, whose Churches have
not a very altar to kill our Savior Christ and sacrifice him upon it, had but
a common table and profane communion board to eat mere bread upon. A feate to
make us odious in the eyes of men, whom you would persuade that we discern not
the body of the Lord. Which your privy sclander does us open injury. For we
have not a common, but a holy table, as both The book o^ common prayer, in the
communion.
we call it, and esteem it; not a profane communion boorde, but a sanctified;
to eat, not mere bread, but the Lords supper; wherein we receive the bread of
thanksgiving and the cup of blessing, as 1. Cor. 10.16. and 11.23.
the Apostles doctrine and practice of Justin. Mart. in Apolog. 2. Irenae. lib.
4. cap. 34. and lib. 5. cap. 4. Cyprian. epist. 63. ad Caecilium. Ambros. de
sacrament. lib. 4. and 5. Leo Sermon. 4. de quadrages.
the Fathers teach us. Your selves are guilty rather of feeding men with mere
bread, Council. Constantiens. Sess. 13. and Trident. Sess. 21. cap. ^. can. 2.
who do take away the cup of the new testament in the blood of Christ from
the Christian people; and in steed of the blessed bread of the sacrament do
give in your Masses mere bread in deed by your own confession, Durand. in
Rational. diuinor. offic lib. 4. cap. 53.
the common bread that goes under the name of Panis benedictus sanctae
communioni^ vicarius.
holy-bread. I would to God, M. Heart, you would think with your self, even in
your bed, (as Psalm. 4.4.
the Prophet speaks,) and consider more deeply both the wicked abuses
wherewith the holy sacrament of the Lords supper is profaned in your unholy
sacrifice of the Mass; and the treacherous means whereby your Master and
Fellows of the College of Rhemes do seek to maintain it. Who being not able
to prove it by the scriptures either of the altar, or of the clean offering,
the principal places whereon their show stands: they go about to breed a
good opinion of it in the hearts of the simple, partly, by discrediting us
with false reproaches; partly, by abusing the credit of the Fathers. Which two
kinds of proof do bear the greatest sway through all your Rhemish Annotations.


Heart. We do not abuse the credit of the Fathers to persuade an error: but as
we endeavor to follow them in truth, so allege we them to prove the truth by
them. And howsoever you avoid the place of S. Paul, where it is said, we have
an altar: the prophecy of Malachie, that in every place there is sacrificed
and offered a clean offering to God, must needs belong to the very and
outward sacrifice of the Mass, not to spiritual sacrifices. Which because
that reverend man, D* Allen, whose treatise of the Mass is such a moate in
your eye, Alan. de Eucharist. sacrific. cap. 5.
does prove by six reasons, Argumenta valida, and pla^e bona.
the pith whereof he greatly praises: I will bring them forth in his own
words, that you may yield the rather to them. First therefore, the word to
sacrifice and to offer, being used by it self Sine termino d^minuente.
without a term abridging it, is taken in the scripture always properly for
the act of outward sacrifice. But when it is said, the sacrifice of praise, the
sacrifice of crying, the sacrifice of contrition, and the like: it is perceived
easily by the words annexed that they be taken improperly. Secondly, this
sacrifice, of the which the Prophet speaks, is one: but spiritual sacrifices
there are so many as there are good works of Christian religion. Thirdly, this
is the proper and peculiar sacrifice of the new law, and the Gentiles, not of
the Jews. But spiritual sacrifices of prayers and works are common to the
Jews with us. Fourthly, this that Malachie means does succeed the
sacrifices of the Jews, and is offered in their steed: but prayer, fasting,
and the works of charity do not succeed any, but are joined and coopled to
every kind of sacrifices. Fifthly, our works (chiefly in the judgment of
heretics) are defiled, howsoever they seem beautiful: but this Prophetical
offering is Per^se munda est, and ita per se m^nda.
clean of it self, and so clean of it self in comparison of the old
sacrifices, that it cannot be polluted any way by us or by the woorst Priests.
For here, in our testament, they cannot choose all the best to them selves, and
offer to the Lord for sacrifice the feeble, the lame, and the sick, as before
in the old: because there is now one sacrifice so appointed, that it cannot be
changed; so clean, that no work of ours can distaine it. Finally, the
Fathers, and all that ever have expounded this place of purpose catholikely,
have expounded it of the sacrifice of the Mass: yea then, when they speak of
the sacrifice of prayer, yea or of spiritual sacrifice. Wherein the heretics
deceive and are deceived. For the Fathers call our sacrifice some times an
offering of prayer, and a spiritual sacrifice, because it is made with
blessing and with prayer mystical: because Victima hic existens.
the victime that is here, has not a gross, carnal, and bloody consecration
or sacrification, as had the victimes of the Jews. See Tertullian in the third
book against Marcion, in the end; Justin, in Trypho; Irenaeus, in the fourth
book, the two and thirtieth chapter; Ierom, on the eighth of Zachary; Austin,
in the first book against the adversary of the law, and the eightenth
chapter; albeit in the second book against the letters of Petilian he does
expound it of the sacrifice of praise: Cyprian also, in the first book the
sixtenth chapter against the Jews; Cyrill, in the book of worshipping in
spirit and truth; Eusebius, in the first book of preparation of the gospel;
Damascen, in the fourth book of the Catholic faith, and the fourtenth
chapter; Theodoret, upon the first chapter of Malachie. Thus far D. Allen. By
whom you may perceive, that we bring the right opinion of the Fathers, with
many other reasons out of the circumstances of the text it self, to prove that
the clean offering in the Prophet Malachie does signify the sacrifice of the
blessed Mass.


Rainoldes. Nay, I may perceive that D. Allen brings the names of the
Fathers, though Damascen a child in respect of the rest, far in years
beneth them, and farther in judgment; but their names he brings, he brings
not their right opinion. For if their opinion be searched and examined, it
makes nothing for him. And therefore he does only name them and quote them.
Which point of his wisdom your Rhemists follow much. Many other reasons he
brings, I grant, besides the names of Fathers: but it had been better for
him not to bring them. For Tertullian, Justin, Irenaeus, Ierom, Austin,
Cyprian, Cyrill, Eusebius, Damascen, and Theodoret, would make a fair show
with their names alone, if the other reasons and they were set a sunder. Now,
being matched in a band together, and agreeing no better then Esai 9.21.
Ephraim with Manasses, and Manasses with Ephraim, who did eat up one another,
they mar the matter with their discord. That, as the Emperor Adrian said,
Dio Nicaeus: i^ Adriano.
when he was dying, The multitude of physicians has cast away the Emperor: so
may you complain, the multitude of reasons has cast away the proof, which
your Mass did hope to procure by Malachie.


Heart. Not so. But their multitude helps one an other. For many things,
which singled by them selves are weak, are strong if they be joined: and
Eccles. 4.12.
a three fold coard is not easily broken.


Rainoldes. This is a roape of sand rather, then a coard: it will not hang
together. For whereas D. Allen does thus allege Mal. ^.11.
Malachie after your In omni loco sacrificatur and offertur nomini meo oblatio
munda.
old translation, in every place there is sacrificed and offered a clean
offering to my name, says the Lord of hosts: the Hebrew text, and after the
Hebrew the Greek of the seventy interpreters (which the Fathers follow) do
set it down thus; in every place there is Heb. (...) Gr. (...). Latin,
incensum offertur nomini meo and oblatio munda.
incense offered to my name, and a clean offering. Now the word [incense] is
used in the scripture simply for prayers, in the fifth chapter of the
Revelation: where Revel. 5.8.
the golden vials of the four and twenty Elders are full of (...).
odours, or incenses (to keep the word,) which are the prayers of the
Saints. And so do Iren. lib. 4. cap. 33. Eusebius. de praeparat. Euang. lib. 1.
Hieron. in Zachar cap. 8. August. contr. aduers. legis. lib. 1. cap. 20.
the Fathers expound the same in Malachie. Wherefore the first reason which you
rehearsed of D. Allens, that the word [to sacrifice] being used by it self
without a term abridging it, is taken in the scripture always properly for
the act of outward sacrifice, is false, both in it self, and by the judgment
of the Fathers. For that word of his, is incense in the Fathers according to
the scripture. But incense in the scripture is taken for prayers figuratively.
By the judgment therefore and exposition of the Fathers, that word does not
infer the sacrifice of the Mass, but our spiritual sacrifices.


Heart. In deed S. John expounds in the Apocalypse those odours to be the
prayers of the Saints. But thereby it is plain (as In the Rhemish Annot. on
the Apocalyp. 5.8.
we note upon it) that the Saints in heaven offer up ye prayers of faithful
and holy persons in earth (called here Saints, and in the scripture often)
unto Christ. And among so many divine and unsearchable mysteries set down
without exposition, it pleased God yet, that the Apostle him self should open
this one point unto us, that these odours be That is to say, the praises.
the lauds and prayers of the faithful, ascending and offered up to God as
incense, by the Saints in heaven. That so you may have no excuse of your
error, that the Saints have no knowledge of our affairs or desires.


Rainoldes. You are too too flitting on every occasion from the present point
in question to others. And yet, if we should enter into that controversy about
the worship of Saints: that honor which you give them would find no succor
here. For neither does it follow that we must pray to them though they did
offer up our prayers; neither is it certain, that the Saints in heaven only
are represented in the four and twenty Elders; neither, if they be, can you
prove that the prayers of Saints, which they offer, are other men's prayers,
they may be their own. And for my part I do rather think that the four and
twenty Elders represent all the Saints and faithful both in heaven and
earth, who offer up their own prayers as incense to God. For after that S.
John had said that Reu. 5. ver. ^.
the odours are the prayers of the Saints: he adds, that ver. 9.
they sang a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open
the seals thereof, because thou wast killed and have redeemed us to God by thy
blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation, and have made us
Kings and Priests unto our God, and we shall reign upon the earth. By the
which words it seems that he opens what the prayers are which they offer
to Christ. And since they, who offer them, do say of them selves that Christ
has made them Kings and Priests, which S. John Reu. 1.6.
before affirms of the Saints on earth: it may be that they also, and not
the Saints in heaven only, are represented by the four and twenty Elders.


Heart. Nay: Reu. 4.4.
the four and twenty Elders are described with golden crowns upon their
heads. And the crown is given to Saints in heaven, as it is written: Reu. 2.10.
Be thou faithful until death, and I will give thee the crown of life.


Rainoldes. The reward of life, given to the Saints in heaven 2. Tim. 2.5.
when they have striued as they ought to do, and gotten the victory, is called
(...)
a crown, or (as we speak) a garland, by allusion to a custom that was among
the Grecians. For such as got the masterie in their games of wrestling, or
running, or the like, were Herodotus (...) Urania.
crowned with a garland in token of victory. Whereupon the scripture (by a
figure of speech) does call life eternal, wherewith God rewards the
conquerours, the crown of life: 1. Cor. 9.2^.
not a corruptible crown, as those of the Grecians were, but incorruptible, 1.
Pet. 5.4.
a crown that can not wither, even a crown of glory. And as the crown is
taken in this sense for a garland, to signify the bliss of endless life and
joy: it is given only to the Saints in heaven, who Reu. 14.13.
rest from their labors. But the four and twenty Elders had golden crowns
set upon their heads; and Psalm. 23.3.
a crown of gold betokens a kingdom. Wherefore since the Saints on earth
are kings also, and not the Saints in heaven only: the four and twenty
Elders may signify them both. As it is both their duties Reu. 4. ver. 10
to cast their crowns before the throne, and say to him who sits on it,
Thou art worthy O Lord to receive glory, and honor, and power: for thou have
created all things, and for thy wills sake they are, and were created.


Heart. But they are said also to be ver. 4.
clothed in white raiment. And the white raiment is used to betoken the
brightness of glory, wherewith the Saints in heaven are clad. For Reu. 3.4.
Christ does pronounce of the godly in Sardis, that they shall walk with him
in white: and when upon the mountain Luke 9.29.
his clothes were white glistering, it was a token of his glory.


Rainoldes. But as white raiment does betoken glory, so does it grace too. For
Reu. 3.18.
our Savior advises the Church of the Laodiceans to buy of him white
raiment, that she may be clothed, and that her filthy nakedness do not
appear. And Reu. 7.14.
the scripture shows touching the faithful of al tongues, and peoples, and
kinreds, and nations, that they had washed their robes and made their robes
white in the blood of the Lamb. Wherefore since no more is said of the Elders
but that they were in white raiment: it may as well agree to the Saints on
earth, who are in white of grace; as to the Saints in heaven, who are in white
of glory.


Heart. But Reu. 4. ver. 4.
they were sitting on four and twenty seats about the throne of God: and
ver. 2.
the throne is said to have been set in heaven. Wherefore it can not be that
the Saints on earth should be meant thereby.


Rainoldes. Why? Was not S. Paul on earth when he said Phil. 3.20.
our (...).
conversation is in heaven? Or, does he not mean the same of all the
faithful, who live after the laws of the heavenly city, that is, the Church
of God, and are not earthly minded? Does not S. John him self in the
Revelation say that ^eu. 12.1.
a great wonder appeered in heaven: a woman clothed with the sun, and the
moon was under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars, and
she was with child, and cried travailing in birth, and was pained ready to be
delivered? And is not the Church on earth hereby meant, clad as it were with
Christ, who is Mal. 4.^.
the sun of righteousness; treading down 1. Ioh. 2.^5.
things worldly, which change as the moon; adorned with the doctrine of the
Apostles, as of Dan. 12.3.
stars; and bringing forth the faithful, Esai. 54. ver. 1. and 5. and 13.
Gal. 4.27.
as children, unto God? Does not he say farther that Reu. 12.7.
there was a battle in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the
dragon, and the dragon fought and his angels, but they prevailed not, nether
was their place found any more in heaven? And is not this also meant of the
militant Church: in which Dan. 10.21. and 12.1.
the Prince of the faithful, (...) that is to say, who is as God, or equal to
God. Phil. 2.6.
Michael, that is Christ, with his Heb. 1.14.
angels and Mal. 2.7. and 3.1. Reu. 1.20.
servants, does fight against the dragon, that is, Reu. 12.9.
the devil, with his angels, even all his powers and ministers, and does
prevail against them? Then if the Church militant on earth be represented both
in this battle and in that woman, as The Rhemis^ Anno^at. on Reu. 12.7.
your selves confess, and yet S. John describes the one to have appeered, the
other to be done in heaven: the four and twenty Elders might have their
seats in heaven by S. John's vision, and notwithstanding signify the faithful
on the earth also. Which yet I say not, as defining it to be so; for I had
rather learn then teach the Revelation, wherein I do acknowledge there are
many mysteries that God has not revealed to me: but only to show that you
have no ground in the holy scripture why you should restrain it to the Saints
in heaven. And if I could satisfy my self with such advantage to pluck down
your fancies, as you content your selves with to set them up: I might as well
restrain it to the Saints on earth, since the Elders say, Reu. 5.^0.
we shall reign upon the earth; perhaps, as Christ said, that Matt. 5.5.
the meek are blessed, for they shall inherit the earth. But you and your
Rhemists should have done well (before you meddled with the scriptures) to
learn S. Austins lesson given to the Donatists: who when they alleged as fit
a place of scripture out of Cant. 1.7. vbi pa^cis, vbi cubas in meridie.
Augustine. de vnitat* eccles. cap. 16.
the song of Solomon to prove that the Church was in Afrike alone, as you to
prove that Saints in heaven know our desires, out of the Revelation: S. Epist.
48. ad Vincentium.
Austin tells them that he were very impudent who would expound an allegory
or dark speech of scripture for his own advantage, unless he have also
plain and manifest testimonies, by the light whereof the dark may be made
evident. Which point in this place does touch you the nearer, because, though
it be granted that the Elders signify the Saints in heaven alone: yet Reu. 5.
ver. 8.
the prayers, which are spoken off, may be their own prayers, to show that
ver. 9. and 10.
they serve God, as it is showed after that ver. 11. and 12.
the Angels do, and ver. 13.
all the creatures in heaven, and on the earth, and in the sea, and under the
earth, and ver. 14.
the four beasts, and finally them selves again. For, there are manifest
testimonies of scripture that all the Saints offer up their own prayers, in
which respect they all are Priests. But no manifest testimony, that their
prayers are offered in heaven unto God by any other person then Heb. 13.15.
by Christ Jesus, Heb. 3.1.
the hye Priest of our profession, Mal. 3.1.
the Angel of the covenant, 1. Tim. 2.5.
the only mediator between God and man. And this does seem to be that Angel,
that other Angel, of whom it is written in the Revelation, Reu. 8.3.
An other Angel came and stood before the altar having a golden censer, and
there was much odours given unto him that he should put them into the prayers
of all the Saints on the golden altar which is before the throne: and the
smoke of the odours, which were put into the prayers of the Saints, went up
before God out of the Angels hand. For although the Angels be Heb. 1.14.
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for the Saints on earth, who shall
inherit salvation, and therefore as Act. 10.4.
they serve to certify them that their prayers are come up before God, so they
might rather offer their prayers to God, then the Saints in heaven, who have
no such ministry to serve the Saints on earth: yet because this Angel
standing with a censer at the altar of incense to burn perfume before God, is
set forth as doing that duty, Exodus 30.7. Leu. 16.12.
which the hie Priest did figure in the law; and Heb. 7.27.
our hye Priest is, no created Angel, but he Col. 1.16.
by whom the Angels were created, even Christ; it follows that Christ is meant
by the Angel. To whom this name is given oftentimes in Genesis 48.16. Exodus
14.19. Esai. 63.9. Mal. 3.1.
scripture, because he is an Angel, that is to say, a messenger, sent by God
his father to open his will unto his servants, and work their salvation by his
covenant. And it may be, that, as God the father Exodus 23. ver. 20.
having said of him, Behold I send an Angel, ver. 21.
does add, my name is in him, to show that he is (...) as he is also called
Exodus 13.21.
God: so, to distinguish him from the created Angels, who are often mentioned
in the Revelation, S. John does call him an other Angel, as differing from the
rest, not only in number, but also in nature, authority, and dignity. For
those things which are written of the Angel, who Reu. 7.2.
had the seal of the living God; who Reu. 8.5.
casting fire into the earth the Angels blew their trumpets, and powered out the
plagues of God: who Reu. 10.1.
coming down from heaven, clothed with a cloud, and the rainebow upon his
head, and his face was as the sun, and his feet as pillars of fire, had in
his hand a little book, and set his right foot on the sea, and his left foot
on the land; which are namely written of an other Angel, an other mighty
Angel, as he is also called: do (if the circumstances of the text be weighed)
best agree to Christ. But whether it be so, or no: it is certain that Christ
is the Angel who puts odours of most sweet perfume into the prayers of all
the Saints, as our hye Priest, and offreth them to God his father, to whom
Heb. 7.25.
he makes always intercession for us, and is not only for our prayers but
for our selves also Ephesians. 5.5.
an odor of a sweet smelling savor before him. Wherefore since the scripture
manifestly shows that our Savior Christ offreth the prayers of all the
Saints, and not that the Saints in heaven offer the prayers of the Saints on
earth: you might have been contented to leave this honor unto Christ, and have
suffered me to go forward with your reasons about the offering in Malachie. For
you see how we are fallen from the Pope to Priests, from Priests to the Mass,
from Mass to the Saints. And if I should follow the same vein on that which
you have said of Saints, and touch your abuse, who confessing that the
scriptures give that name to faithful and holy persons in earth, yet (to
maintain your solemn invocation of dead men) do make it proper, not to
Saints in heaven, but to them whom it shall please Extra. De reliquiis et
venerat. Sanctorum.
the Pope to Sacrar. ceremon. Romans eccles. lib. 1. tit. 6. De canonizatione
Sanctorum.
canonize, or That is ^o say, admit in to the number of the Gods. As the
heathenish Romans, before they would worship their Emperors, as Gods, did use
to deifie them. Herodian. lib. 4. (...).
deifie, (as Diuorum nostrorum apoth^oses. Praefat. lib. 2. Sacr. ceremon. Romans
ecclesiae.
the Master of his sacred ceremonies terms it,) wherein notwithstanding Thom.
Aquin. quodlibet. ^. at. 16. Antonin. Sum. Theol. part. 3. tit. 12. cap. 8.
Cai^tan. opusc. de indulgenti^s ad Cardin. Medicem. cap. 8. Canus Locor.
Theolog. l. 5. c. 5. Pellarmin. in praelectionib. Romans cont^ouer. 4. qu^st. ^.
your Doctors also teach that the Pope may err, and canonize a wicked person
for a Saint, so that it may be (even by your own doctrine) that in your
Church-seruice you worship them, as Saints, whose spirits are in hell with the
devil and his Angels: I say, if I should flit thus from point to point on
every occasion that your speech does offer, we should confound our conference,
and never make an end of the point in question. Wherefore let other questions I
pray be reserved to their due place touching the faith of the Church. And now,
to finish this touching the head of the Church, let us go forward with your
Masse-priestes, that so we may return to the Popes supremacy. Of the six
reasons therefore which you alleged out of D. Allen, to prove, that the clean
offering which Malachie does write of is the sacrifice of the Mass, and not
spiritual sacrifices: the first is convinced clearly to be false, and that by
the consent of all the same Fathers whom he would prove it by. For Sacrificatur.
the word, which notes an outward sacrifice with him, with all them is (...)
(...) the Greek Fathers, in the Latin, a word answering thereto: as incensum,
August. contr. aduers. leg. l. 1. cap. 20. or odores incensi, Cypr. contr.
Iudaeos l. 1. c. 16.
incense of sweet perfumes and odours. But incense in the scripture is taken
for the prayers of the Saints as you grant. The word then which he does build
the Mass upon, is not always taken properly in scripture for the act of
outward sacrifice.


Heart. But he does not only urge the word, to sacrifice, for which indeed the
Fathers and the Hebrewe text have incense: but the word, to offer. And if that
be always taken properly for the act of outward sacrifice: his reason is of
force still.


Rainoldes. But the force of his reason does lie upon the word, to sacrifice,
not to offer. For Alan. de Euchar. sacrific. cap. 16.
him self grants that lay men, yea women too, are said to offer properly and
truly: when, as in Deuteronomy. 12.17. and 14.23. and 26.10.
the old law the tithes and first fruits commanded to be given to the Levites
and the poor were presented before God; so they present bread and wine for the
communion, or alms for the relief of the poor and needy, or any earthly
gifts and offerings for holy uses, as Irenae. lib. 4. cap. 32. and 3^. August.
epist. 59. ad Paulin. Justin. Mart. apolog. 2. and in Tryphon. Cyprian. de
opere and ^l^^mo^ynis.
the Fathers show. Wherefore though the word, to offer, were always taken
properly for the act of outward offering: it proves not the offering of your
outward sacrifice: since Matt. 2.11.
the wise men offered gifts unto Christ, Matt. 5.24.
the faithful Jews at the altar, c. Omnis Christianus. de consecration.
distinct. 1.
lay men and women at the Mass; and yet nether any of them were
Massing-priests, nor their offerings, Massing-hosts. Much less does it prove
it, as Malachie applies it to the offering of incense. For, as incense
signifies the prayers of the Saints: so to offer incense must be to sacrifice
those prayers. But the sacrifice of prayers is a spiritual sacrifice. Wherefore
the word to offer, does not prove your outward sacrifice of the Mass. And so
the first reason is gone. The second follows: which is no sounder then the
former. For why does Allen say, that the sacrifice spoken of in Malachie is
one: and therefore betokens not spiritual sacrifices, the which are as many
as there are Christian good works?


Heart. Why? Because the text of the Prophet Malachie says that there is
offered a clean oblation, or offering, as you call it. And offering is spoken
of one, not of many. For else he should have said, offerings, not offering.


Rainoldes. So. And do you think that he who said to God, Psalm. 40.7. Heb.
10.5.
sacrifice and offering thou art not delited with, or (as you translate it)
host and oblation thou would not: did mean the Mass by that host?


Heart. The Mass? No. He meant the hosts and oblations of the old law. For
they are the words of the Prophet David, spoken of the legal and carnal
sacrifices of the Jews.


Rainoldes. The Jews? Nay: the text of the Prophet David says that God
mislyked host and oblation; it says not, hosts and oblations. Wherefore since
he speaks of one, not of many; and the carnal sacrifices of the Jews were
many, but the sacrifice of the Mass is one, as you say: it seems he should
mean that. A point some what dangerous for the host, which your Priests lift
up to be adored. More dangerous for them, who live by lifting it up.


Heart. Our adoration of the host is good, in spite of all heretics, and not
reproved by the Prophet. For, although he says, host and oblation thou
would not: yet is it plain he means the sacrifices of the Jews by
Synecdoche.
a figure of speech, in which a part is used for the whole, and one for many;
as host, and oblation, for hosts, and oblations.


Rainoldes. Then Allens second reason is not worth a shoobuckle to prove that
the sacrifice of ye Mass is meant by the oblation in Malachie. For the word
(...)
oblation, or offering, which he uses in his own language, is used likewise
still, (...) only in the singular number, and never (...) in the plural.
as of one, not as of many, through all the old testament. Wherefore if the
sacrifices of the Jews were many, which nevertheless are called not
offerings, but offering: the same word applied to the sacrifices of Christians
can not enforce them to be one. Howbeit, were they one, to grant you that by a
supposall: yet might that one sacrifice be a spiritual sacrifice, and so your
Mass no whit the nearer. For as the Prophet Esai. 66.20.
Esaias says that the Gentiles shall be an offering to the Lord, using (...)
the same word that the Prophet Malachie: so the Apostle R^m. 11.1.
Paul exhorts them with Esaias to present their bodies, a living (...).
sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, speaking of their sundry sacrifices as
one; as also, in a mystery, 1. Cor. 10.17. Romans 12 5. Ephesians. 4.4.
we that are many are one body. But without supposall, the course of the text
does import rather that the Prophet, saying, there is offered an offering, does
mean not one, but many, by Synecdoche speciei.
that figure which you touched: as by Enallage temporis.
an other figure he says, it is offered, meaning, it shall be offered. For
Mal. 1. ver. 8. and 9.
the Lord declaring his detestation of the sacrifices of the Jewish Priests,
says that ver. 10.
he will not accept an offering at their hand: but ver. 11.
the Gentiles shall offer to him a clean offering, which he means of the
contrary that he will accept. And this he shows farther, where, touching it
again, he says Mal. 3. ver. 3.
it shall be offered unto him in righteousness, ver. 4.
and shall be acceptable to him. Now, the offering that is Philip. 4.18. Heb.
13.16. 1. Pet. 2.5.
acceptable to God from the Gentiles in the new testament, is all sorts of
spiritual sacrifices and good works. By the offering therefore mentioned in
Malachie there are many sacrifices meant, not one only. Which yet your old
translation makes more evident, opening the meaning of the Hebrew word by
terming it sacrifices, Mal. 3.3.
They shall offer Sacrificia.
sacrifices to the Lord in righteousenesse. Wherefore since our offering that
should please God in the time of the gospel, is sacrifices by the judgment of
your old translation, which Council. Trident. session. 4.
you in no case may refuse; and sacrifices can not be meant of the Mass, for
that is one sacrifice, but of spiritual sacrifices it may, for they are many,
as Allens second reason says: you see, we must conclude on his own
principles, that the clean offering, which Malachie writes of, does signify
the spiritual sacrifices of Christians, and not the sacrifice of the Mass.
The third and fourth reasons have greater show, but lesser weight. For, though
it be true that spiritual sacrifices of praying to God and doing good to men
are common to the Jews with us, and therefore may seem not to be the offering
spoken of in Malachie, which, beside that it is proper to the Gospel and the
Gentiles, it should succeed also the sacrifices of the Jews, and be offered in
their steed: yet if we mark the difference that the scriptures put between
the Jewish worship of God in the law, and the Christian in the gospel, that
seeming will melt as snow before the sun. For in the law of Moses, the Jews,
Heb. 8.5. and ^.9. and 10.1.
to the intent that both their redemption by the death of Christ and duty of
thankfulness which they did owe to God for it, might still be set before them
as in a figure and shadow; were willed Number* 28.3. Leu. 22.19.
to offer beasts without spot and blemish in sacrifice, with ceremonies
thereto annexed, and to offer them Deu. 12.5.
in the place that God should choose, which was Psalm. 122.^.
the city of Jerusalem, and Psalm. 78.^9. 1 King. 8.20.
the sanctuary, that is to say, the temple built therein. Now Christ, in the
gospel, when that was fulfilled which the temple of Jerusalem and sacrifices
did represent, showed that Heb. 9.10.
the time of reformation was come, and removed that worship both in respect of
the place and of the manner of it. For as it was prophesied that Dan. 9. ver. 26
he should destroy the city and the sanctuary, ver. 27
and cause the sacrifice and offering to cease: so him self taught that Ioh.
4. ver. 21
now the Father would not be worshipped in Jerusalem, nor ver. 22.
as the Jews did worship him, but ver. 23. and 24.
he would be worshipped in spirit and truth. The Christian worship therefore
that did succeed the Jewish, does differ from it in two points: one, that it
worshippeth God not in Jerusalem, but in all places; an other, that it
worshippeth him in spirit, and truth; in spirit, without Heb. 7.16 and 9.10.
the carnal ceremonies and rites; in truth, without Col. 2.17. Heb. 10.1.
the shadows of the law of Moses. The which sort of worship seeing Ioh. 4.13.
he requires of the true worshippers, that is of all the Saints, his
servants; and in the new testament Romans 1.7. 1. Cor, 1.2. Ephesians. 1.1. and ^*
11. and so forth.
the Gentiles by the Gospel are called to be Saints: the worship, that is
proper to the Gospel and the Gentiles, is the true spiritual worship of God,
the Romans 12.1.
reasonable serving of him by 1. Cor. 5.8.
godliness, and Ephesians. 2.10. and 4.25.
good works, in righteousness, and true holiness; even 1. Pet. 2.5.
the offering up of spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.
And thus you may see the weakness of those cauils which are brought to prove
that our spiritual sacrifices cannot be the offering whereof God in Malachie
says it shall be offered to him in every place. For the former of them, that
spiritual sacrifices of prayers and works are common to the Jews with us,
deceives with a fallacy: because ou^ spiritual are spiritual merely,
whereas they had carnal sacrifices with their spiritual. The later does
discover this fraud of the former, but with an other fraud. For in that it
says, that praying, fasting, and the works of charity were joined to their
sacrifices: it shows that their worship (though in part spiritual) was not
spiritual merely. But in that it gathers thereof, that these things cannot
succeed their sacrifices, there is an other fallacy: because although the
worship of God were still spiritual, as Ioh. 4.2^.
he is still a spirit, and so no worship may succeed, for how can a thing
succeed it self? yet, the same in substance came forth in sundry manners, and
so one manner of it might succeed an other. As Heb. 1.1.
the word of God, touching the salvation of men by faith in Christ, was always
the same: but uttered in sundry manners by the Prophets, and by Christ. In which
sort the worship of God was ordered also: by the Prophets, Exodus 34.33. Heb.
8.5.
covertly, under the vailes of ceremonies; by Christ, Mat. 27.51. ^. Cor. 11.3.
plainly and simply. Wherefore, as the doctrine of Christ did succeed the
doctrine of the Prophets, both the same doctrine, but taught by Christ more
clearly, more darkely by the Prophets: so the spiritual worship of God in the
Gospel succeeded his spiritual worship in the law, both the same worship, but
laden with ceremonies and shadows in the law, disburdned of them in the Gospel.


Heart. I can not see those fallacies which you charge D. Allen with. For if the
Jews did offer prayers to God and other such spiritual sacrifices, as they
did: then is it true, as he says, that spiritual sacrifices are common unto
them with us. And if they be common unto them with us, it follows, in my
judgment, that ours succeed not theirs: since to succeed, is to come after;
and how may that come after which did go before?


Rainoldes. I have showed, how. And if you see it not: 2. Cor. 3.14.
the veil may be the cause, which is very likely to be laid on your heart in
reading of the new testament, as it was on the heart of others, in reading of
the old. For the thing is plain of it self, and evident, that the spiritual
sacrifices which the Jews offered, as namely their prayers, did not discharge
their duty but they must offer carnal also; and that not every where, but in
the place that God had chosen. In so much, that albeit they might pray in all
places lawfully, as we may, yet must they come thither to worship God Exodus
23.17.
at certain times: and Daniel, though he could not because of their
captivity, yet Dan. 6.10.
had his windows open toward Jerusalem, when he prayed: and the faithful
wept by the rivers of Babylon, Psalm. 137.4.
how should we sing the lords song in a strange land? and the princely Prophet
lamented that his banishment did keep him Psalm. 42.2.
from appeering there, and longed Psalm. 6^.2.
to behold the power and glory of God, as he beheld it in the sanctuary; and
being sick as it were Psalm. 84. ver. ^.
with the love of his tabernacles, yea ver. ^.
fainting with desire of coming to his courts and ver. 3.
altars, he pronounced them ver. 4.
blessed who dwell in that house, yea, ver. 5.
who may come unto it, yea ver. 6.
though they travail hardly thereto through dry places, ver. 7.
to present themselves before God in Sion. Whereas Christians, of the other
side, Col. 2.14.
neither have those altars or offerings made thereon to join with their
spiritual Heb. 13.15.
sacrifice of praise, and they may Ephesians. 5.19.
sing the songs of the Lord 1. Tim. 2.8.
in all places. No land is strange: no ground unholy. Every coast is Iewry, and
every town Jerusalem, and every house Sion, and 2. Cor. 6.16.
every faithful company, yea 1. Cor. 6.19.
every faithful body a temple to serve God in. The Christian worship then does
differ even in prayers from that of the Jews, both in respect of the temple,
1. King. 8. ver. 30. and 33. and 42. and 44. and 48.
which they had a regard to: and of the ceremonies of the law, which they were
bound therewith to keep. Wherefore, as 2. Cor. 3.6.
the ministry of the new testament, that is, of them who taught the gospel,
came after the ministry of Priests in the old, and yet both old and new are
the Lords testament: so might and did the worship of God amongst Christians in
spirit and truth come after the worship of God amongst the Jews, though yet
they both did worship God spiritually. For the Jews before did worship in the
temple with the ceremonies of the law: as when Luke 1. ver. ^
the Priest was burning incense at the altar in the inner part thereof, ver. 10*
the multitude of the people were praying in the outter. And the Christians
after did pray without incense in any place, the people and Pastor all
together: as Act. 1.14.
the Apos^les with the disciples, and ( 1. Cor. 14. (...) 16. and 2^, and 26.
according to their instruction) Justin. Mart. in Apolog. 2. Tertullian. i^
Apologet.
the primitive Churches practice show. But these points of difference between
us and them be perhaps the harder for you to understand, because your Popish
worship is so like the Jewish, both for the temple, and the ceremonies, that
you may justly think their worship was in spirit and truth as much as yours.
For as the Priest with them was severed from the people by the division of the
sanctuary and court of the temple: Durand. in ^ationali divinor. officior.
lib. 1. cap. 1.
so with you, by the chancell and body of the church. As with them Exodus 10.7.
he burned incense at the altar: Durand. l. 4. c. 8. and l. 5. c. 9.
so with you he does. As with them Exodus 28.4.
he was clad in an Ephod, a miter, a broydered coat, a girdle, a brestplate,
and a robe, and they who served him were in their linen coats too: Durand. l.
3. ^. 1.
so with you he must have an amice, an albe, a girdle, a fanel, a chisible, and
a stole, and they who are about him have surplesses, yea copes also. Their
Priests had Exodus 30.20.
a lauer whereat they must wash before they sacrificed: Durand. l. 1. c. 1. and
l. 4. c. 3.
so have yours. Your Durand. l. 1. c. 3.
veil between the quire and the altar in lent, resembles Exodus 26.33.
theirs, that severed the holy place from the most holy. Your Durand. l. 1. c.
2. and l. 4. c. 1.
pyx with the sacrament, and their Exodus 25. ver. 10. and 17.
arc with the mercy seat; your Durand. l. 1. ^. 3.
phylacterie with Saints relikes, and their Exodus 16.33.
pot with Manna; your Or monstraus, as D. Allen calle^th it, De Eucharist.
Sacram. cap. 30. It is a vessel, like a cage, having ^^des of glass or
crystal, that through them the consecrated cake set up therein, may be showed
to men.
monstrancie with the host, and Exodus 25.30.
their table with the shewbread; your Durand. l. 6. c. 74.
holy oil of balm, and Exodus 30.23.
theirs of myrrh with spices; Number. 19.9.
their purifying water made of the ashes of an heifer, and Durand. l. 1. ^. 7.
yours of other ashes with water, wine, and salt; Leu. 9.24. ^. Chron. 7.1.
their fire sent from heaven, and Durand. l. 6. c. 80.
yours fetched From the ^unn through a crystal glass.
thence by art; their Number. 17.10.
rod of Aaron, and Durand. l. 1. c. 3.
your cross of Christ; finally, Durand. l. 1. c. 1.
your candles, or tapers, or torches, and Exodus 25.31. and 27.20.
their candlestick with lamps, do match one an other in proportion of rites:
nay, you surpass them in your candles. For Exodus 30.8. 1. Sam. 3.3.
theirs were lighted in the night: Durand. l. 4. c. ^.
yours, in the day too. Theirs, in the temple only: yours, Extra. De celebrat.
Mis^ar. c. Sane.
abroad also. Theirs, before the Lord: yours, Vaux catechism.
before images. Theirs, in one manner: yours, Durand. l. 2. c. 7 and l. 4. c. 6.
and l. 6. c. 72.73.80.89. etc. (...) eccles. l. 1. tit. 2.
with great variety. Theirs, in small number: yours, at Chiefly on
Candlemas-day, and ^enebre-wensday. Durand. l. 6. c. 72. and l. 7. c. 7.
times, and places, as many as the sand of the sea. And what should I speak of
the rest of the things in which you do not only follow their ceremonies, but
also go beyond them? Your Durand. l. 1. c. 8.
consecrating of Bishops, of churches, of altars, of patens, of chalices, and
other instruments of your Priesthood, by anointing them, Exodus 30.26.
according to the order of Aaron and the tabernacle. Your Durand. l. 2. c. 1.
shauing, as of Number. 8.7.
Levites; your Durand. l. 1. c. 3.
imagery, as from 1. King. 6.32.
Solomon; your Durand. l. ^. c. 4.
halowing of men, l. 1. c. 4.
belles, On Ash^-wensday. Durand. l. 6. c. 28.
ashes, On Palme-sunday. Durand. l. 6. c. 67.
boughs, l. 4. c. 53.
bread, l. 6. c. 86.
the paschal Lamb, cap. 80.
the paschal taper, cap. 79.
agnus-deis (and what not?) with Missale Romans reformat. a Pio quinto.
Sacerdotale Romans eccles. edit. a Samarin. part. 2.
exorcized water: wherewith almost all things are purged by your law, as Heb.
9.22.
by theirs with blood. Your purifying (as Number. 19.18.
they called it) or (as you term it) Caemeteria reconcilianda. Extra. de
consecr. eccles. c. consuluisti.
reconciling of a churchyard, or other sacred place, if it be polluted. In
conclusion, to pass over your Durand. l. 6. and 7.
festiual days, exceeding theirs in Col. 2.17.
shadows; your Durand. l. 4. c. 41. and l. 6. c. 83.
mystical devises in sacraments, to their pattern; your Innocent. mysterior.
Missae l. 1. c. 10.
pontifical robes, in figures incomparable, in number double unto theirs; and
infinite solemnities of your The Pope. Sacr. cerem. Romans eccles. l. ^.
hiest Priest, who D^rand. l. 6. c. 75.
enters On Maundy-thursday.
once a year into the place most holy, Heb. 9.7.
as did the hye Priest of the Jews: your daily sacrifice of the Mass, though
inferior to Number. 28.3.
theirs in that it is no burnt offering, wherein yet I marvel you came no
nearer them, for as Leuit. 6.13.
they kept fire on the altar always, Durand. l. 4. c. 6.
so do you require it, and what should you have fire upon your altar as they
had, unless you burn as they did? but your daily sacrifice of the Mass is
celebrated in such Leuitical sort, as if you contended to set forth a Jewish
worship more lively then the Leuiticall Priests could. In attire like them, in
mysteries above them, in Ritus celebran^ di Missam.
orders more exquisite, in Cautelae Missae*
cauteles more diligent, in furniture abundantly: in lifting up the whole
host, and not (as Exodus 29.27.
they) a part of it, in Durand. l. 4. c. 41.
ringing of the sacring bell to counteruaile Number. 10.10.
their trumpets: in washing often, in blessing and crossing, in censing often,
in soft speech and whispering, in kissing of the amice, kissing of the fanel,
kissing of the stole, kissing of the altar, kissing of the book, kissing of
the Priests hand, and kissing of the pax: in smiting and knocking, in gesturing
by rule and measure, in bowing and ducking, in spacing forward, backward, and
turning round about, and traversing of the ground: beside the sweet music of
Durand. l. 4. c. 34.
organs, and so forth, where it may be had, as in 1. C^ron. ^^.
the temple it might. I dout not, M. Heart, but you are persuaded that this kind
of service in your Church is Christian: and such, that if our selves were
present at the doing, the solemn doing of it, specially atChristmas, Easter,
and such other more festiual times, the most of our stony hearts would melt
for joy, as your Motiu. ^2.
Bristow writes. But in very truth it is more then Jewish: and his conceit
thereof is childish, and carnal. For although it might be delitefull to the
flesh, the eyes with galant sightes; the ears, with pleasant soundes; the
nose* with fragrant savors; the mind, with show of godliness, to him that does
not understand: yet 1. Cor. 2.15.
a spiritual man would be grieved at it, as Act. 17.16.
Paul was in Athenes, and lament that the people should do^te upon that by
which they are 1. Cor. 14.17. Gal. 4.9. 1. Cor. 10.7.
not edified, and weep over them as Luke 19.24.
Christ over Jerusalem, O if thou had known at least in this thy day those
things which belong unto thy peace: but now are they hidden from thine eyes.
The Lord ^. Cor. 3.16.
take away this veil from your heart, if it be his good pleasure: that you may
see at length what it is to worship him in spirit and truth, and when you see
it, do it.


Heart. There is a veil rather of presumption over your heart, who condemn the
Catholic ceremonies as Jewish: then of ignorance over ours, who embrace them
as Christian. For Sess. 7. de sacrament. in genere. can. 13.
the Council of Trent, which was gathered together and guided by the holy
Ghost, has accursed them who say that the received and approved rites of the
Catholic Church, used in the solemn ministering of sacraments, may be
despised. And those of the blessed sacrifice of the Mass, whereat your spite
is greatest, Session. 22. cap. 5.
the holy Fathers of that Council have showed to be grounded on the tradition
of the Apostles, not on the law of Moses. For as much (say they) as the nature
of men is such, that it cannot be lifted up easily to the meditation of divine
things without outward helps: therefore our holy mother the Church has
ordained certain rites, to weete, that some things should be pronounced in the
Mass with a soft voice, and some things with a louder. Moreover she has used
ceremonies too, as namely mystical blessings, lights, incense, vestiments, and
many other such things, Ex Apostolica disciplina and traditione.
by the discipline and tradition of the Apostles: to the end that both the
majesty of so great a sacrifice might be set forth, and the minds of the
faithful might be raised up by these visible signs of religion and godliness to
the contemplation of most high things which do* lie hidden in this sacrifice.
These are the Councels words. Whereby you may perceive, that the rites and
ceremonies used at the Mass, are not Jewish, but Apostolic: as (if need
were) it might be showed in particulars, of incense, by S. Dyonis. Areopagit.
ecclesiast. hierar. cap. 3.
Denis; of lights, by S. Confession. Augustinian. lib. ^. cap. 11. tit. 2. ^
council. Car^hag. 4. can. 6.
Austin; of the rest, by other Fathers.


Rainoldes. What? of the vestiments too? fanel, amice, albe, stole, and such
trinkets?


Heart. I, even of them too: as basely and scornfully as you speak of them. Nor
yet are these of ours like in all respects to those which the Priests did
wear amongst the Jews. From whom in other points our ceremonies differ
also. As for example, their Exodus 30.33.
incense was a perfume most precious: Durand. lib. 4. cap. ^.
ours, is simple frankincense. Their Exodus 27.20.
lights must be of pure oil: Durand. lib. ^. cap. 7. Sacr. cerem. eccles.
Romans l. 1. tit. 2.
ours are of wax, and may be of other stuff indifferently. Which since it is
likewise apparent in the rest, as you must needs confess, at least for
sundry of them: you are to blame greatly to reproach the ceremonies of the
Church as Jewish.


Rainoldes. Nay, you did mistake me, if you thought I meant that they are all
Jewish, or Jewish absolutely. For I must needs confess that some of them are
Heathnish rather then Jewish. As namely the shauing of your Priests crowns:
after the manner of Capillum des rasi, vertice pr^nitentes. Apulei. Au^ei Asin.
lib. 11.
Priests of Isis in Egypt. Your lighting of candels on Candlemas-day: Rhenan.
Annotat. in Tertullian. aduers. Mareion. lib. 5.
which came from the Februall ceremonies of the Romans. Your painting or
grauing of the images of men: Eusebius hist. eccles. l. 7. c. 17.
a thing that Christians took (...).
by custom of the Heathens. Your Ad eas thus, and cerei. Cic. off. lib. 3.
censing of images, and setting tapers before them: Polydor. Virgil. de
inuentor. rerum. lib. 2. c. 23. and l. 6. c. 13.
as the Romans also did, when they were Heathens. To be short, the whole
substance of your image worship, Durand. l. 6. cap. 77.
your kyssing, kneeling, and creeping to the image of the cross, like Cic. in
Verrem. lib. 4.
Sicilians to Hercules; your images borne in procession, like to the Pausanias
in Corinthiacis. Herodian. lib. 1. Apulei. Aur. Asin. lib. 11.
Grecians idols; your pilgrimage to Saints images, where they are most famous,
as Leand. Albe^t. descript. Italiae. Histor. S. Mariae Lauret. script. ab Hier.
Angelit. ad Clement. sept.
our Lady of A town in Italy, where there is a temple of the blessed Virgin,
more celebrated with lying miracles, and thereupon with resort of men: then her
temple was at Walsingham in England, of which Erasmus writes in Colloqu.
Pe^egrinat. religionis ergo.
Lauretto, like Act* 19.27.
Diana of Ephesus, with infinite such other fancies, do resemble lively the
Heathnish rites of Paganism, and grew by likelihood from the Heathens. But I*
because the temple of Solomon had images, although not of men; the Levites had
shauing, although not of crowns; the tabernacle had lights, although not in
ye day time, much less at the beginning of February more then other times:
did speak of your Popish rites herein as Jewish, to make the best of them. And
for all the difference that you find betwixt them, of wax in yours, and oil
in theirs; and their perfume, and your frankincense; though Exodus 30.34.
frankincense was mingled with their perfume also, and Leuit. 2.3.
made an incense too without it; but granting this difference betwixt them to
the uttermost: yet are yours Jewish in the kind thereof, because they are
shadows such as were the Jewish. And it is likely, that they who devised them
did fetch them out of Moses, as they who defend them do ground them upon
Moses. For the fairest color that either Bishop In Rationali diuinorum
o^^i^iorum.
Durand, or The Canonists and Popes, de consecration. di^tin^t. 1. and so
forth in the Decrees and Decretals.
others set upon them, is, that God ordained them in Moses law. As Extra. De
sacra unction. cap. vnico.
Pope Innocentius says that the Catholic Church does hold that Bishops ought
to be anointed, because the Lord commanded Moses to anoint Aaron and his
sons: and again, that temples, and altars, and chalices ought to be
anointed, because the Lord commanded Moses to anoint the tabernacle, and arc*
and table with the vessels.


Heart. But Pope Innocentius adds, that the sacrament of unction (or
anointing) does figure and work an other thing in the new testament then it
did in the old. And thereof he concludes that they lie who charge the Church
with Iudaizing (that is, with doing as the Jews did) in that it celebrateth
the sacrament of unction.


Rainoldes. Yet Pope Innocentius does not bring that difference between the
Jews and you, that your holy unction is made of oil, and balm, where theirs
was made of oil and myrrh with other spices. He knew that the difference of
this or that ingredient in the stuff of it would not clear your Church from
Iudaizing in the kind of the purgation, that is, the rite whereby you
sanctify Priests and altars. No more, then if you should sacrifice a dog,
and say that you do not therein as the Jews did, because they did sacrifice,
not dogs, but sheep and oxen. As for the difference by which the Pope
seuereth your vnctio^ from theirs, that yours does work and figure an other
thing then theirs did: first, it wrought as much in their altars, as in yours,
for any thing that I know. Secondly, it figured in their Priests the gifts of
the holy ghost: which he says it does in yours. Thirdly, were it so that it
had an other either work or meaning with you then with them, as after a sort
it has, both in respect of God by his word. Exodus 39.22.
him, who ordered theirs; and To figure and betoke^ Christ. Heb. 8.5. out of
Exodus 25.40.
the cause, why: yet might the ceremony be Jewish notwithstanding. For (I
trust) you will not maintain but it were Iudaisme for your Church to sacrifice
Exodus 29.41.
a lamb in burnt offering, though you did it to signify, not Christ that was
to come, John. 1.29.
as the Jews did, but that Christ is come, and Reu. 14.1.
has by his passion both entered in himself and brought in others to his
glory. At the least, S. Peter Gal. 2.14.
did constrain the Gentiles to Iudaize, (as you term it,) when they were
induced by his example and authority to allow the Jewish rite in Leuit. 11.47.
and 23.25.
choice of meats. Yet neither he, nor they allowed it in that meaning, which
it was given to the Jews in. For it was given them Col. 2.16.
to betoken that holiness, and Gal. 4.3.
train them up unto it, which Christ by his grace should bring to the
faithful. And Peter knew Act. 2.38.
that Christ had done this in truth, and Act. 10.15.
taken away that figure, yea, Act. 15.10.
the whole yoke of the law of Moses: which point he taught the Gentiles also.
Wherefore, although your Church do keep the Jewish rites, with an other
meaning then God ordained them for the Jews, as Pope Innocentius says, to
salve that blister: yet this of Peter shows that the thing is Jewish, and you
do Iudaize who keep them.


Heart. S. Peter did not err in faith, but in behavior, when he withdrew him
self from eating with the Gentiles. For that was a defaute in conversation not
in doctrine, as De praescriptionib. aduers. haeret.
Tertullian says. Neither does S. Epist. 9. and 19. ad Hieronymsi.
Austin think otherwise of it.


Rainoldes. I grant. For he offended not in the truth of the gospel, but Gal.
2. ver. 14.
in walking according to it, that having lived before not as the Jews, but
Gentile-like, yet ver. 12.
then he left the Gentiles for fear of the Jews, and ver. 13.
dissembled his judgment touching that point of Christian doctrine. But this
does so much more convince both your Church of Iudaizing in her ceremonies, and
your doctrine of corrupting the gospel with that leaven. For if S. Peter ver.
11.
was to be condemned, as causing them to Iudaize, whom through infirmity he
drew by example to play the Jews in one rite: what may your Church be thought
of, which of settled judgment does move and force Christians to play the Jews
in so many? And he did acknowledge the truth of the doctrine by silence, and
submission, when S. Paul reproved him. But Non Iudaiza^ ecclesia, sicut aliqui
mentiu^tur. Extra. de sacra unction.. vngitur.
Pope Innocentius says that they lie who touch your Church for it. Wherefore
the Pope, or rather the Popes and Papists all, who maintain the doctrine of
the Trent-Councell approving both Sess. 7. de sacrament. in genesis ^an. 13.
the rest of your Jewish rites, and namely Sess. 23. can. ^.
that of unction confirmed out of Moses by Pope Innocentius: they do not
offend as the true Apostle of Christ S. Peter did; but as the false Apostles,
Galat. 1.7. and 2.3. and 4.9
who troubled the Galatians, and perverted the gospel by mingling of the law
with it.


Heart. Your words should have some coolour of truth against the Church, if we
taught that Galat. 5.2.
men ought to be circumcised, as did the false Apostles.


Rainoldes. Why? Shall no heretics be counted 2. Pet. 2.1.
false teachers in the Church of Christ, unless they teach in all point^ as did
the false Prophets?


Heart. But, (as I have showed out of Sess. 22. cap. 5.
the Council of Trent,) the ceremonies which we use in the sacrifice of the
Mass, as namely mystical blessings, lights, incense, vestiments, and many
other such things, came all not from the false but from the true Apostles. And
if there be any which they ordained not: that might be ordained by Pia matter
ecclesia.
our holy mother the Church. As it was, that some things should be pronounced
in the Mass with a soft voice, and some things with a louder. For such is the
nature of men, that it can not be lifted up easily to the meditation of divine
things Sine adminic^lis exteriori^us.
without outward helps. Which reason, added by the Council, does warrant all
our rites both of the Churches ordinance, and the Apostolic tradition against
your cauils and surmises.


Rainoldes. Alas. And see you not how giddily the Council does bring in that
reason, that because our nature does need outward helps, therefore some
things should be pronounced softly, some aloude? For the very chiefest of the
outward helps, which God has ordained to raise our minds from earth to
heaven, is Matt. 13.23. Act. 13.15. 1. Cor. 14.19.
the hearing of his word. His word is rehearsed in the Epistle, the Gospel, the
Canon, and other parts of the Mass. The Mass Con. Tride^t. Sess. 22. cap. 8.
you forbid to be said in the vulgar or mother tongue of the people: so that
if all were 1. King. 18.28.
cried as loud as Baals service, the people could not understand it. Yet not
content with that, you will a part of it to be said with a soft voice, that
the poor souls may not as much as hear it. Wherefore the reason which your
Council makes for that Massing-rite, is this in effect, that because the
blindness and coldness of men does need to be lightened and warmed by Gods
word* which is rehearsed in the Mass: therefore a part of it must be
pronounced with a soft voice, that they may not hear it; part with a louder,
but in a strange tongue, that, although they hear it, they may not understand
it. And was there not a mighty spirit of giddines in the Princes of Trent,
that made them write so droonkenly? Yea, Sess. 22. ca^. ^ Anathema fit.
with a curse to seal it too?


Heart. They curse him who says that the rite of the Roman Church, whereby part
of the Canon and the words of consecration are uttered with a soft voice, is to
be condemned: or that the Mass ought to be celebrated only in the vulgar
tongue. And great reason why.


Rainoldes. No dout. For as Ioh. 9.22.
the Jews, when they could not justify their wilful withstanding of the Son
of God, agreeed, that if any man confessed him to be Christ, he should be
excommunicated: so by like reason your Iudaizers of Rome do banne and curse
us, when they cannot justify their impudent customs and corruptions against
us.


Heart. The customs are Catholic and religious rites, which they do establish
with the severity of the curse.


Rainoldes. Catholic, and religious, to keep the Saints of God from hearing
of Gods word? Catholic, and religious, to have the Church-seruice in a tongue
which the Church, the faithful people, understand not?


Heart. Yea, Catholic, and religious, if you mark the reasons which they give
thereof. For of Sess. 22. ca^. 5.
the one, they show, that the Church has ordained it: of cap. 8.
the other, that the Fathers thought it not expedient it should be had in the
vulgar tongue.


Rainoldes. Not the ancient Fathers? Why, Justin. Mart. apolog. 2. Tertullian.
in apologet. Cyprian. de orat. Dom. Eusebius. hist. eccles. l. 7. c. 8. Augustine.
de catechizand. rudib. cap. 9.
they are clear for it: and Isidor. de of^ic. eccles. l. 1. c. 10. Cyrillus,
Aen. Silu. hist. Bohem. cap. 13. Io. Beleth de divine. of^ic. in prooem. Lyra in
1. Cor. 14. Caietan. opusculor. Tom. 3. tractat. 15.
younger Fathers too. Yea, Fathers both, and children, I mean the whole
Churches, of al nations, in the old time; of many, even till this day: as
namely of the Liturg. Basil. ex version. Sir. quam vocant Anaphoram.
Syrians, Bellon. obseruat. l. 3. c. 12.
Armenians, Auentin. annal. Boior. lib. 4.
Slauonians, Sigismund. Lib. in comm^nt^rer. Moscouit.
Moscouites, and F^an. Aluar. in descript. A^thiop. cap. 11.
Ethiopians.


Heart. What so ever Churches or Fathers do, or have done: it seemed not
expedient to the Fathers assembled in the Council of Trent. And they, being
Bishops and Pastors of the Church, might take order for rites and ceremonies
of the Church by Confess. Augu^t. art. 7. Wirt^mberg. art. 35.
your own confessions.


Rainoldes. They might. But our confessions withal should have taught them,
that as they may provide for 1. Cor. ^4. ve^. ^0.
things to be done with comelines and in order: so their rites and ceremonies
must be ver. 26.
all to edify. Which the Trent-fathers observed not in this rite, of having
the service in a strange tongue, as themselves acknowledge. For Sess. 22. cap.
8.
they write expressly, that ^^tsi: non tamen.
although the Mass contain great instruction of the faithful people, yet the
Fathers have not thought it expedient Vt vulgari passim lingua celebraretur.
that it should be soong or said every where in the vulgar tongue. Whereof
this is the meaning, to open it in plainer words, that the corrupt custom of
the Church of Rome, praying, and reading the scriptures in a strange tongue,
in deed does not edify: yet must stand for policy, to keep their Churches
credit. For if they should yield that they have erred in one thing, men would
dout perhaps that they might err in more. And this do they farther bewray by
the other point of uttering the words of consecration Secret profer^ verba
consecrationis, Ho^ est corpus meum. In Canon. Missae.
secretly, that the faithful may not hear them. For in saying that Council.
Tride^t. Sess. 22. c. 5.
the Church has ordained that rite, they do closely grant that Christ
ordained it not. Nay, Thom. Aquin. Sum. Theolog. part. 3. quaest. 7^. art. 1.
D. Harding in his answer to the 16. art. of B. Jewels challenge.
their own men teach that Luke 22.19.
the example of Christ, and Clem. constitut. Apost. lib. 8.
the order of his Apostles, with Ambros. de sacrament. lib. 4. c. 5. Leo Sermon.
6. de ^eiun^o 7. men^is. Justinian. in Authent. 137.. Ad haec iubemus.
the Fathers too, is manifest against it. Beside that, in calling it Council.
Tride^t. Sess. 22. can. 9.
a rite of the Church of Rome, they signify that other Churches do not use it,
no not Chrysostom. Li^urgia. Bessario de sacrament. ^ucharist.
the Greek Church. And yet against the practice of Churches, of Fathers, of
Apostles, and of Christ, they say that a dumb show (which As Pope In^ocentius
the third says in his treatise of the Mysteries of the Mass. lib. 3. cap. 1.
crept in by custom) was ordained by our holy mother the Church: and, as men
resolved to wallow in their own vomit, they curse him whosoever he be that
shall condemn it.


Heart. Although Christ (we grant) did utter the words of consecration openly;
and the Apostles, and Fathers, and other Churches also have kept the same rite:
yet the Church of Rome is not to be condemned for taking order to the
contrary. For rites may be changed as it shall seem best to them who govern
the Church: and there was great reason why they should change this, to weete,
The reason, that Pope Innocentius the third (in the same place) giu^th of it.
least those words so holy and sacred should grow into contempt, whiles all in
a manner knowing them, through common use, would sing them in the streets and
other places not convenient. In the which respect perhaps they thought good
also that the Mass and Mattins, and all the Church-seruice should rather be in
Latin, then in the vulgar tongue. For of familiar use there grows contempt:
and men are wont to wonder at things which they know not; things common are
despised.


Rainoldes. A great oversight of our Savior Christ, who willed his Apostles
Matt. 10.27.
to speak that in the light, which he had told them in darkness; and, what they
heard in the ear, that to preach on the howses. For men would despise his
gospel, if they knew it: as they do meat who have it. And what meant S. Paul
to disclose 1. Cor. 11. ver. 24.
the words of consecration to the Corinthians? Yea, in their vulgar tongue too?
And that with instruction, ver. 26.
to show forth the Lords death until he came, as often as they received the
sacrament? Did he go about to bring the words of consecration, and death of
Christ, into contempt? Or was not Innocentius the Pope borne yet, of whom he
might have learned that they must be uttered not only in a strange tongue, but
also closely and in silence, least men, if they hear them, do know them
through use, and sing them in the streets? But will you see? Your Se^s. 22.
cap* 8.
Fathers of the Trent-councel were ouershot a little, when they ordained that
Pastors and all who have cure of souls should Frequenter.
often times expound (by them selves, or by others,) somewhat of those things
which are read in the Mass: and Sess. 24. cap. 7.
explane the scripture to the faithful people Vernacula lingua.
in their mother tongue. In the Latin tongue if they had willed them to to do
it, the order had agreed better with your doctrine: the people would have
wondered at it. Now the knowledge of it is like to breed contempt. Beside there
is danger, least, by hearing of it often times expounded, men become to wise,
and smell out your abuses. The less they do know: the fitter to be Papists.
For Romans 10.3.
ignorance is the mother of Popish devotion: as 2. Pet. 1.5.
knowledge is the nurse of Christian religion.


Heart. We acknowledge that Did. 38. c^. Ignorantia.
ignorance is the mother of all errors: neither do we seek to noosell
Christians in it, but to weane them from it, as those decrees of the Council
do sufficiently show.


Rainoldes. They show sufficiently that you profess so: but how well you seek
it, the former decrees of the rites, by which the people is nooseled in
ignorance, do more sufficiently show. Nether is it likely that all Pastors and
Curates shall have skill and leisure to expound the scripture to the people
often. It may be that the service, read, and heard in a known tongue, would
teach them more in a day, then some of them will in a moonth. Or if every
Church had as good a Pastor, as Paul wishes Timothee to be, that would 2.
Tim. 2.15.
divide the word of truth a right: yet they, being used Act. 13. ver. 15.
to hear the scripture read, should understand him better, as ver. 17.
the Jews did Paul, and be (through Gods grace) Act. 17. ver. 11.
the readier ver. 12.
to believe him. And since Sess. 22. cap. 8.
the Trent-fathers declare this expounding therefore to be needful, least
Christ's sheep be famished, or Lament. 4.4.
the young children ask bread and no man break it to them: it had been their
duty withal to consider that God would have the table of his children
furnished with this bread Col. 3.17.
plenteously, and as Psalm. 23.5.
David's table with a cup running over, to keep them in good liking, not only
that they be not famished. At least, howsoever they smooth their practice in
this point, it is sure that their reason is beside all reason, when Council.
Triden. Sess. 22. c. 4.
they say that because the nature of men does need outward helps for raising
of it up to think upon the things of God, therefore has the Church ordained
those rites, that some things in the Mass should be pronounced with a soft
voice, and some things with a louder: the one, not to be heard; the other, not
to be understood. And yet herein their dealing is the more plain, that they
do acknowledge the Church to have ordained these rites. For if they would have
hardened their faces, and said, that they received them from the Apostles by
tradition: they might as well have said it, and proved it as soundly, as they
do of others, lights, incense, vestiments, and all the rest of their beggerie.


Heart. Beggerie call you that, which sets forth the blessed sacrifice of
the Mass with so comely ceremonies, to the consolation and instruction of the
faithful?


Rainoldes. Nay, the name of beggerie is to good for it. For if S. Paul called
the ceremonies of the Jews Gal. 4.9.
weak and beggarly rudiments, when they were matched with the gospel: what
name deserve yours, ordained not of God, as theirs, but of men?


Heart. You do us great injury to apply S. Paul's words, spoken of the Jewish
ceremonies which should cease, to ours which should continue. Much more, in
that you say that God ordained not ours, as he did theirs. For he ordained
theirs by Moses, and ours by S. Paul.


Rainoldes. By S. Paul? Fie? And who told you so?


Heart. S. Epist ^^8. ad I^nuar. cap. 6.
Austin says that all that order of doing which the whole Church observes
through the world in consecrating, offering, and distributing of the Eucharist
(which order of doing we do call the Mass) was ordained by S. Paul.


Rainoldes. Your Torrensis in confession. Augustinian, lib. 1. cap. 8. tit. 6.
Jesuit in deed makes that note upon S. Austin. And if his meaning be thereby
to prove only so much of that order, as the whole Church observed through the
world in S. Austins time: then does he disprove your ceremonies quite, yea some
what more then ceremonies. For behold he mentions the distributing of the
Eucharist, that is of the bread and cup of thanksgiving: both the which you
distribute not in any Mass; in private Masses, neither. But if he meant as
Motiu. 9.
Bristow did, and you would have him, that S. Paul ordained all that order of
doing which your Church observes and calls it the Mass: your Council does
disprove him. For they confess that the Church of Rome has certain rites,
Council. Tri^dent. Sess. 22. cap. 5.
neither ordained by S. Paul, ^ap. 8. and can. 9*
nor observed through the whole Church. And S. Austin speaks of nothing but
that which the whole Church observed, as namely the receiving of the Sacrament
fasting: which custom being kept alike of all Christians, he gathers on S.
Paul's words to the Corinthians ( 10 Cor. 11.34
other things will I set in order when I come) that he ordained it.


Heart. It is true, S. Austin does speak of those rites, which the whole Church
observed through the world without any change or diversity of manners. But so
much the more does he prove the doctrine of the Council of Trent. For the
rites, which Sess. 22. cap. 5.
they say, the Church has received from the Apostles by tradition, are namely
mystical Benedictione^.
blessings, lights, incense, vestiments, and many other such things. And for
these S. Austins witness is of force that S. Paul ordeinedal that order of
doing which we call the Mass. For the proof whereof you may see a cleerer
testimony of his in Epist. 59. ^d Paulinsi quaest. 5.
an epistle to Paulinus, quoted by Torrensis, upon the same place of S. Austins
confession.


Rainoldes. And in that also Torrensis does (...) you. For S. Austin there,
writing to a Bishop who had inquired of him how those words differ one from an
other in S. 1. Tim. 2.^.
Paul, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, does tell
him that he thinks thereby is understood that, which all the church, or in a
manner all practices, to weete, that supplications are those which are made in
celebrating of the sacraments before that which is upon the Lords table
begin to be blessed; prayers, when it is blessed, and sanctified, and
prepared to be distributed, and divided; intercessions, when the people is
blessed and offered to God by their Pastors as it were by advocates; which
things being done, and the sacrament received, the giving of thanks does knit
up all, which S. Paul in those words remmbreth also last. Now, what is there
here more for your Mass, then for our Communion? Or if our Communion, which
differs from your Mass no less then light from darkness, yet has all
these things which S. Austin touches as meant by S. Paul: what face has
Torrensis, who says that S. Paul is avouched by S. Austin to have ordained all
that order of doing which you call the Mass? Is this your Jesuits dealing
with the ancient Fathers to make them fetch your Massing rites from the
Apostles?


Heart Yet even there S. Austin does mention blessing twice* and that out of S.
Paul. Whereby the first point, which the Council of Trent names, is approved,
to weete, of mystical blessings.


Rainoldes. True, if the Council had meant by Ble^^ing, and to bless. Gr.
(...), and (...). Lat. benedictio, and benedicere.
that word, as the scripture does, either Mat. 26.26.
the giving of thanks unto God, or 1. Cor. 10.16.
the sanctifying of creatures unto holy uses, or Number. 6.23.
praying for the people, that the Lord will bless them. But if they meant the
making of the sign of the cross, as it is plain they did, both by the matter
which that* chapter handles touching visible signs, and by their intent to
confirm the ceremonies which Protestants condemn, and by the Canon of the
Mass which is as full of crosses as Erasm. collo. in Exorcism.
a coniurers circle, and the word [ Been dixit ^n Can. Missae.
he blessed] is taken so there with a cross in the midst of it: then your
mystical blessings of the Trent-fathers were neither meant by S. Paul, nor
mentioned by S. Austin.


Heart. Yes: S. Austin seems to mean^ there by [blessing] ^he (...) of the
sign of the cross on the sacrament. For in a ^^rmon of his touching the same
matter, he says that the body of Christ is consecrated with the sign of the
cross.


Rainoldes. In what sermon is that?


Heart. Amongst his sermons de tempore, Sermon^ 181. de tempore.
the hundred eightieth and one.


Rainoldes. That is amongst his sermons, but none of his sermons. For it uses
the words of Gregory, a Bishop of Rome who lived long after: and mo things
it has by which it is certain (as Censur. sermon. 59. in append. de diuersis.
Tom. 10.
your Divines of Louan note) that it is not S. Austins. Howbeit neither he that
did compile that sermon, whosoever it were, says that the ceremony of the
cross in consecrating was of S. Paul's ordinance, or a tradition of the
Apostles: which is the point that you had to prove by S. Austin; and, if you
prove it not, you do not clear the Trent-councell. For I grant that
Augustine. in Euang. Iohan^. Tract. 11^.
in S. Austins time, yea Chrysostom. demonstrat. quod Christus fit Deus.
before it, the Christians, as they used to sign their forhead with the
cross, in token that they were not ashamed of Christ crucified, whom the Jews
and Gentiles reproched for the death which he suffered on the cross: so they
brought the rite thereof into the sacraments, and used both the figure of the
cross^ and crossing in other things of God also. But it does not follow because
the Christians did it, therefore the Apostles ordained it to be done.


Heart. But it is likely that they did. And certainly De coron^ militis.
Tertullian, a very ancient writer, does expressly say that Christians had it by
tradition.


Rainoldes. To sign their forhead with a cross, but not to sign the
sacraments. Tertullian was so ancient, that he wrote (it seems) before that
custom grew. Besides, you mistake him if you think he meant by the name of
[tradition] a tradition of the Apostles. For what soever custom not written in
the scripture was kept by the faithful, that, because it was delivered by some
body from whom the use thereof was taken, he says it came in by tradition. In
so much that he affirms it both of Apud Iudaeo^.
Jewish customs before the Apostles, as that their women covered their faces
with vailes: and of Christian after, which yet are not Apostolic, as, Ter
mergitamur: lactis and mellis concordiam praegustamus.
the dipping thri^e of them who are baptized, and feeding them with milk and
honey. And, (which plainly shows he meant not the Apostles in it,) Omni
fideli.
every faithful man may (by his judgment) devise such rites upon reason:
neither must we respect the autours, but the authority; and Saluo traditionis
respectu, quocunque trad^tore censetur*
regard the thing delivered, whosoever did deliver it. Wherefore the tradition,
that Tertullian speaks of, is against the doctrine of your Trent-councell.
For neither does he mention the sign of the cross to have been used in
consecration, which he would of likelihood if then it had been used: nor says
he that it came by tradition from the Apostles in that sort as it was used, but
he knows not from whom.


Heart. Though none of the Fathers perhaps bear witness of it: yet if the
Council meant it by mystical blessings, they knew that the Church had it
from the Apostles. For else they would not vouch it.


Rainoldes. Then you were best to say that they learned it from heaven by
revelation: Sleidan. comment. l. 6. and 10.
as the Anabaptists are wont to do their mysteries. For else they could not
know it.


Heart. You confess your self that S. In euang. Iohann. Tract. 118.
Austin and others of the ancient Fathers did use it in celebrating of the
holy sacraments. I marvel why you like it not in our Mass, since we do
therein but as the Fathers did.


Rainoldes. Nay, I confess not that. For your Massing-priest does trick i^ as
a Wierus de praestigijs demon (...). ^. cap. 4. and 10.
sorcerer, all in mathematical or rather magical numbers: In Canone Missae,
and communione.
by crossing thrice the bread, and wine, both together, and thrice again both;
then once each in several, and once again each: and again thri^e, and once;
and again once, and thrice, with a cross on him self betwixt: hitherto with
his hand: after with the host he crosses thrice the chalice; and twice (to
make up five) between his breast and the chalice* next with the pa^en he
^^osseth once himself, and the chalice thri^e witha piece of the host, and once
himself again with the host over the paten, and lastly once him self again
with the chalice; all these in the Canon and Communion of the Mass, besid^
Ritus celebrandi Mis^am.
a number mo before he comes to the Canon. But the ancient Fathers and namely
S. Austin were far from such mystical toyi^ges with the sacrament. Pope
Hildebrandes magi^e, that so many cros^es, though yet not so many as you are
grown to now, but Microlog. de eccle^iast. obseruationib. cap. 14.
the tradition of Pope Hildebrand that crossinges must come in by one, or
three, or five, Imparem numerum semper obseruamus.
still in an odd number, after Numero Deus impare gaudet.
the rule of Virgil. in Pharmaceutria. Eclog. 8.
old sorcerers, was a profounder rite of mystical blessings, then either S.
Austin, or other ancient Fathers used.


Heart. Pope Gregory the seventh (named Hildebrand before his Popedom, kept
not those odd numbers for any magical fancy, though Benno Cardinalis in
histor. de vita Hildebrandi.
Benno charge him falsely with that devilish art: but to note a mystery. For
Microlog. de obseruat. ecclesiast. cap. 14.
he said that one, or three, or five crosses must therefore still be made,
because by one, and three, we signify one God in trinity; by five, the five
parts of the passion of Christ*


Rainoldes. As who say Cornel. Agrippa de occulta Philosophia l. 2. c. 4. and
6. and 8. De vanitate scientiar. c. 47. and 48.
magicians had not the like mysteries in their odd numbers too. And if Pope
Hildebrand would have had Element. magica Petr. de Aban. in prae^at.
a circle made about the Priest to keep the devil from him while he is saying
Mass: there were a mystery for that also, to weete, that it signifies God,
who nether has beginning, nor end.


Heart. Nay, the circle is a ceremony proper to coniurers: and he would never
have admitted it. But, in that he kept an odd number always in making of
crosses upon the oblation: he did as he had learned in Rome, where he was
brought up under ten of his predecessors. And that, which he learned there, was
the tradition of the Apostles.


Rainoldes. So The auto^^ of the treatise entitled Micrologus de ec^lesiast.
obse ru. cap. 14.
his scholar says; and he says truly, for sundry points of that he learned:
as namely, that ^ap. 18. and 19.
the people did, and must receive the sacrament with the Priest, and that,
under both kinds. Which shows (by the way) that your private Mass, and
Communion under one kind, was against the tradition and order of the Apostles,
by the judgment of the Church of Rome and Popes them selves For Hildebrand was
Pope in the year of Christ 1084.
above a thousand years after Christ. But the making of crosses on the
sacrament still in an odd number was so far from being a thing delivered by
the Apostles, that the Church of Rome had then begoon it lately, if yet the
Church began it, and not Pope Hildebrand were rather the father and first
inuentour of that mystery. For Bishop Amalar. Fortumat. episcopus Treuirens.
de ecclesiast. offic. lib. 3. cap. 24.
Amalarius, who lived two hundred years or thereabout before Hildebrand, and
did both know and reverence the order of the Church of Rome, having said that
it suffices to make a cross once upon the bread and wine, because Christ was
once crucified, adds, that it is not amiss to make it twice, because he was
crucified for two kinds of people, that is, the Jews and the Gentiles.
Whereto cap. 26.
he notes farther, that the Priest made two crosses with the host near unto
the chalice, to signify that Christ was taken down from the cross being
crucified for two peoples. And this which he reports of two, was Ordo Romans de
officiis diuinis. cap. de ^fficio Missae.
the order of the Church of Rome before Hildebrand came: who controlled it (as
appears by Microlog. de obseruat. ecclesiast. ca. 17.
his scholar) upon this reason, that Christ had no wound in his side but one,
and therefore but one cross must be made beside the chalice. Which reason is
so good, that it may seem strange why the reformers of your Missale Romanum
ex decret^ sacros. council. Trident. restitutum, in Rit. celebrandi Missam, and
Canone Missae.
Masse-booke have kept the former order against the rule of Pope Hildebrand:
unless perhaps they thought that Hildebrand misliked it not so much for that
reason as for the number of two; Cornel. Agrippa de occult. philosoph. l. 2. c.
5.
which number, the soothsayers and sorcerers hol^ to be naught. But hereby
them selves have opened their judgment, that not all which Hildebrand is said
to have learned under ten of his predecessors was the tradition of the
Apostles. And it is worth the noting how these mystical blessings, which at
Trent were fathered on the Apostolic tradition, have lately got that parentage
by the help of such as was Hildebrands scholar, when before they seem not to
have been accounted so. For De ecclesiast. offic. l. 3. c. 24.
Amalarius, (whom I named,) a man that was likely for zeal to speak the best,
for skill to know the most that might be said of the service and ceremonies of
the Church; he had read so much and travailed so far even to Rome, and that
in embassage from the Emperor to confer with the Pope about them: yet this
Amalarius, speaking of the sign of the cross which they used to make in
consecration, leaves it in dout whether Christ made any when he did bless the
bread, or rather thinks he made none, because the cross at that time was not
yet set up; but now (says he) we know that it must be made, for S. Austin
says so. Where it is not probable that he would have grounded it on man's
authority, if he could have said that either Christ had used it, or, though
Christ used it not, yet the Apostles had ordained it. No more, then that after
the testimony of S. Austin he would have judged it sufficient to cross the
bread and wine once, if he had thought that so many crosses, as you make, were
to be required by S. Austins judgment.


Heart. Thus you reprove us as varying from S. Austin, because we make so many.
What may we say of you who make none at all? Who nether use it in consecration
of the holy sacraments, nor sign your forheads with it, nor set it in your
Churches, nor allow it in the sanctifying of meats and other creatures. Though
all these things were done by the ancient Fathers, in remembrance of him who
dyed for us on the cross: yea, though Christ himself have commended to us the
sign thereof by miracles, as the story of Constantine the Emperor does
witness; Eusebius. de vita Constantin. lib. 1. cap. 22.
who saw it in the element with these words written by it, In hoc signo vince.
Alan. Cop. dialog. 4. cap. 3.
In this sign overcome; and was charged in a dream to make the form and
likeness of that which he had seen, and use it as a defense against his enemies
assaults; which he did accordingly, and mightily subdued them by it. But
nether the vision of Christ unto Constantine, nor that and other miracles which
have been wrought by it, nor the practice of the primitive Church and ancient
Fathers can prevail with your men, but that they must seek to raze out from
among Christians so worthy and notable a monument of Christ's passion. And yet
you will bear the simple people in hand that you are of the same religion that
they were, when you pluck down that which they did set up, and do clean
contrary unto them.


Rainoldes. The sign that appeered to Constantine in the element, was a sign
of the name of Christ, not of his cross: howsoever the coiners and Martials
^^^tise of the Cross, art. 2. Harpsfieldes Cope, dialog. 4.
crosse-maintainers of your Church do falsely paint it out. For, as De vit.
Constantin. l. 1. c. 25.
Eusebius writes, (unto whom Constantine did report the thing, and showed him
that ensign which he had caused to be made in the likeness thereof,) it was
the form of (...)
a spear standing straight upright, with (...)
a crown at the top of it, and as it were (...)
a horn which (...). which words, translated amiss by interprete^^, (erat
litera ^ inserta in medio literae ^) have occasioned ^ome to make the sign
otherwise then Eusebius describes it.
did cross the midst of the spear a slope. So that it represented two of
the Greek letters, (...) and (...): which being the first letters of the name
of Christ, the name of Christ was signified by that sign to Constantine. Thus
he describes it, who saw it.


Heart. But out of dout De vit. Constantin. lib. 1. cap. 22.
he calls it the sign, or the monument of the cross q also.


Rainoldes. But cap. 25.
him self shows that he called it so, because it resembled some what (...).
the sign of a cross. For nether was it like the cross of Christ fully,
which had The figure of the letter T. Tertullian. aduers. Marci^^. lib. 3.
Hiero. lib. 3. commentar* in Ezech. cap. 9.
an other figure: and, where he describes it, he says in plain terms that
it was (...).
a sign of the name of Christ. Nether were those words that you rehearsed
written by it, In this sign overcome, as your D. Harpsfield in his Cope.
Dialog. 4. c. 3.
Doctor says, (belike because he read it coined in ye cruseado so, or in the
por^igue:) but, (...). Eusebius. de vit. Constan. lib. 1. c. 22.
By this overcome; as if God, showing him the name of Christ, should have said
unto him, that Act. 4.12.
there is given no other name under heaven whereby he must be saved. In the
which meaning it seems that Constantine did understand it also: because
Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 1. cap. 25.
he used afterward to carry in his helmet, not the sign of the cross, but
those two letters by which the name of Christ was represented to him. Howbeit,
if it were so, that not the name only of Christ but his cross too were meant
by that sign, as cap. 26.
the Bishops took it, who thereupon taught Constantine the mystery of Christ
crucified; yet nether that vision, nor Constantines victories, nor other
miracles wrought thereby, nor practice of the faithful in the primitive Church
does prove that we have done amiss in plucking down the sign of the cross,
wherewith you en^^ite us; or that we are not of the same religion that they
were who did set it up. For tell me, what think you of the brazen serpent,
Number. 2^.8.
which God commanded Moses to set up in the wilderness? Was it not Ioh. 3.14.
a figure of the passion of Christ?


Heart. Yes. But what of that?


Rainoldes. And there were many miracles also wrought by it. For, when the
Jews were stoong by the fyerie serpents, Number. 21.9.
they looked on the serpent of brass, and were healed.


Heart. If they were: what then?


Rainoldes. Yet 2. King. 18.4.
king Ezekias, a man of the same religion that Moses was, did break it in
pieces: and he did well in it.


Heart. He brake the brazen serpent in pieces I grant: but that was because the
children of Israel did burn incense to it.


Rainoldes. So have we plucked down the sign of the cross, because you burn
incense to it, M. Heart.


Heart. Nay, that we do not.


Rainoldes. It is written in your Tit. ^itus^ celebrandi Missam.
Masse-booke, that in solemn Masses the Priest Facta eruci ^euerentia (...) in
censat.
having made obeisance to the cross does incense it thrice.


Heart. But that is not to burn incense as the Jews did. For they had a
superstitions estimation of the serpent, putting trust and affiance in it.


Rainoldes. So have you a superstitious estimation of the cross. For you
think it a special defense against the devil; and (by your common phrase)
they do bless them selves who sign their breasts with it; and you carry about
you crosses made of metal, with an opinion that you are the safer thereby, as
Superstitios^ mulierculae.
superstitious women in S. Hieron. comment. in Matt. cap. 23. Super phylacteria
Ph^risaeorum.
Ieroms time did the wood of the cross.


Heart. If any do it of superstition, as those women did: we reprove them with
S. Ierom. But the Jews did worship the brasent serpent as God: and we do not
the cross so.


Rainoldes. If any do it as those women, which your crossecariers do: they do
it of superstition. But how did the Jews worship the serpent, as God?


Heart. S. De ciuit. Dei. lib. 10. cap. 8.
Austin says that they did worship it as an idol: which is to make a God of
it. And Ezekias showed the same in effect, by that 2. King. 18.4.
he called it nechushtan, that is, brasen-stuffe: as if he should have said,
that it had no divine power, which they by error thought it had.


Rainoldes. The Jews gave Exodus 30.8.
the honor of God to a creature, in that they burned incense to it. And
therefore Ezekias did call it brasen-stuffe; as if we should call your roodes
wooden-stuffe, your Agnus-deis waxen stuff, your crucifixes and crosses made
of copper, copper-stuffe, because you impart the honor of God to them, by
putting trust and hope in them. And if Ephesians. 5.^.
the covetous man be called an idolater, because he makes money his God, not as
though he thought the coin to be God, but because he trusts to live and
prosper by it, Ier. 17.7.
which confidence and hope he should repose in God only: then worship you the
sign of the cross as an idol, because you trust to be saved by it, as in
your Breuiar. Roman. Sabbat. in hebd. quarta quadrag.
Church-seruice you profess notoriously, and so Thomas A^^quin. Sum. Theolog.
part. 3. quaest* 2^. art. 4. Andrad. orthod. explicat. lib. 9.
your selves confess you worship it as God. Wherefore if 2. King. 18. ver. 3.
and 5.
Ezekias be praised by God, for breaking in pieces the serpent of brass,
because the children of Israel did burn incense to it: we who have removed the
sign of the cross because you put the hope of salvation in it, may content
our selves to be dispraysed by men. But if you say therefore, that we be
against the ancient Fathers in religion, because we pluck down that which
they did set up: take heed least your speech do touch the holy Ghost, who
says that Ezekias ver. 6.
did keep Gods commandments, which he commanded Moses, and yet withal says
that ver. 4.
he brake in pieces the serpent of brass which Moses had made. And if you will
not learn this lesson of me, yet learn it of Did. 63. c. Q^^a.. verum.
the Canon law, that, if our predecessors have done some things which at that
time might be without fault and afterward be turned to error, and
superstition: we are taught by Ezekias breaking the brazen serpent that the
posterity may destroy them without any delay, and with great authority.


Heart. The divine worship with the which we honor the image of the cross, is
proved by S. Thom. Aquin. Sum. Theolog. part. 3. qu^st. 25. art. 3. and 4.
Thomas to be due thereto. For, the honor of an image is referred to that
which the image resembles: and the motion of our mind is the same to the
image of a thing, as an image, and to the thing it self. Wherefore, since the
cross does represent Christ, who died upon a cross, and Christ is to be
worshipped with divine honor: it follows that the cross is to be worshipped
so too. Yet you and your men are still obiecting to us our honoring of the
cross, as though we committed idolatry therein. In good sooth, Masters, ye
are too young to control the Church of Rome in her doings.


Rainoldes. So M. Confutat. of the Apolog. part. 4.
Harding tells us of the city of Rome, when we control her stews. And in
deed you have almost as much reason to speak for the maintenance of this
spiritual whooredome, which you commit with the cross: as he for the carnal,
which they commit with Courtisans. Now well had it fared with the brazen
serpent, if Thomas had been schoolemaister to king Ezekias. For he would have
taught him, that since the brazen serpent did represent Christ, and Christ was
to be worshipped with divine honor: therefore the brazen serpent was to be
worshipped so too. You are angry when we say that you worship the Pope, 2.
These. 2.4.
as God. Me thinks you should grant it. Sure you might defend it by this
Schoolediuinitie. For, though he bear one way Reu. 13.14.
the image of the beast: yet in that he is a man, he is 1. Cor. 11.7.
an image of God, whom he resembles more lively then any cross or crucifix
does represent Christ. But to return to the mystical blessings of the Mass,
which you went about to fetch by S. Austin from the Apostolic tradition: you
see that neither they, nor incense, nor lights, nor vestiments, nor the rest
of that suite of ceremonies are mentioned at all, much less avouched to be
Apostolic, in that of S. Austin which your Jesuit groundeth on.


Heart. I know that S. Austin does entreat rather of the substance of the
Mass, then of the ceremonies, in that place. But Epist. 118.2^ Ianuarium.
in the other which I cited he does entreat of customs: and so, that he
proves the ceremonies of the Mass to have come from the Apostles. For of the
things (says he) which we keep by tradition, it is to be thought that such
as are observed through the whole world were either ordained by the Apostles
them selves, or by general Councels. Wherefore since the ceremonies of incense,
lights, vestiments, and other of the like sort were not ordained by general
Councels: it follows by S. Austin, that the Apostles did ordeine them.


Rainoldes. That rule of S. Austin, is probable, not necessary. For though it
be likely that there was no custom observed by the Church through the whole
world, which it had not from the Apostles, chiefly, seeing Socrat. histo^*
eccles. lib. 5. cap. 21.
Christians did vary then so much in rites of all sorts: yet they might either
have taken up, or kept of that they had before, some thing which the Apostles
delivered not unto them. But admit his rule as an undoubted principle to your
most advantage: and yet are you no nearer the proof of those ceremonies. For
how can you prove that incense, lights, vestiments, and the rest of your
baggage were used at that time through the whole world?


Heart. Incense to have been used, Eccles. ^ierat^chiae cap. 3.
I have proved by S. Denis Areopagita: lights, by S. Austin.


Rainoldes. But you have not proved that they were used through the whole
world, either by S. Austin, or by S. Denis. In Council. Carthag. 4. c^n* 6.
Nay, that Denis (who so ever he were,) does prove the contrary. For in his
description of the Mass (as you call it) there are neither lights, nor
vestiments, nor crossinges, nor all the other ceremonies: whereby it is
manifest that they were not used through the whole world when that Denis wrote.
As for incense, howsoever it crept into that Church in the which he lived: it
appears by the writings of In apolog^* cap. 42.
Tertullian, and Aduers. ge^tes lib. 7*
Arnobius, that the Church used it not in their days. Neither is the censing,
which Denis speaks of, liker to yours: then (I showed) your blessings are
like to S. Austins. For Dionys. Areopag. hierar. eccles. cap. 3.
he has it only once about the Church. But in Vit. celebrandi Missam.
your solemn Mass it is used often, and to sundry things: to the cross, to
relikes, to images, to candlestickes, to the altar, the lower part of it, and
the higher, to the Priests, to the book, to the bread and wine, thrice above
the chalice, and the host, and thrice about them, to the altar, and the Priest
again and again, to the quire, to the deacon, to the subdeacon, to the
people; and, in Masses for the dead, to the sacrament also at the time of the
elevation. So that, if the words of the Sess. 22. cap. 5.
Trent-councell be weighed with your practice: you will leese the countenance
of that which Denis shows to. For with him it is incense in the singular
number. Your Masses and the Council hau^ Thymiamata.
incenses in the plural. By the which word if the Council meant to note all
the censinges that are used in Massing, as they did of likelihood: then neither
Denis makes for your Massing-incense. Though, whatsoever he make, he makes
naught for your reason: because he proves not that it was used through the
whole world. Now the lights, which your Jesuit has found in S. Confession.
Augustine. lib. 3. cap. 11. tit. 2.
Austin, make less a great deal for it. For S. De tempore. In Natali ^om.
Sermon. 3. ^ Luminaria noctis.
Austin calls the lights which they used, 1 lights of the night: because
they did use them in the night time when they met at prayers, Act. 20.8.
as Christians were wont. But your Massing-lights are used in the day time,
when the sun shines: a thing perhaps observed through the whole world, but
Tertullian. de idololatri^.
of idolatrous Heathens, not of the Church of Christ.


Heart. Yes, that Christian Churches had also lights burning in the bright
sunshine while the gospel was reading, S. Cont. Vigilant.
Ierom is a witness; and, before S. Ierom, his Master Orat. in Pas^ha.
Nazianzen makes mention of it; and In exhortat. ad ^rthodox^s.
Athanasius before them both. Wherefore out of dout it is an ancient custom,
and that very general.


Rainoldes. As you say: if it be witnessed by these three Doctors, S. Ierom of
Europe, Nazianzen of Asia, and Athanasius of Afrike. But he who says they
witness it, has not read them, I think.


Heart. But I think he has: or rather I am sure of it. For D. Quaestion.
quodlibe^ic. 2.
Stapleton says it, in his comparison of the Catholic and Roman Churches
Mass with the Lords supper of the Protestants. Wherein as he allegeth these
Doctors for this point: so he proves all things, which your Supper wants and
our Mass has, to be Apostolic.


Rainoldes. He proves? Nay he promises to prove them Apostolic. For in very
truth he proves not one: not one of all those things wherein your Mass
differs from our Lords supper. No more then he proves this of lights
burning in the bright sunshine: in ye which he notably abuses their names
whom he does cite to prove it. For in Epist. ad Orthodoxos in persequut.
Athanasius the tapers of the Church are mentioned only: but that they were
lighted in the daytime while the gospel was reading, there is no such word.
Orat. in sanctum Pascha.
Nazianzene speaks of lights that were burning upon Easter-euen: but (...).
to lighten the night, he says, not the day.


Heart. But speaks he there of those night-lightes alone, and of no other
light?


Rainoldes. He speaks of an other light, but spiritual For he says that the
most bright shining light follows the candle that did go before it.


Heart. Why, that is it that shows the ceremony which we talk off. For they
were wont to carry candles before the gospel when they did read it.


Rainoldes. They were wont afterward. But we speak of Nazianzene. And he meant
nothing less. For by [the light] he signified Christ, Ioh. 8.11.
the light of the world: and by [ Ioh. 5.35.
the candle] John Baptist* Luke 1.76.
who went before Christ to prepare his ways. The light (says he) shining most
excellently bright follows the candle that did go before it; and Ioh. 1. ver.
1.
the word, ver. 23.
the voice; and Ioh. 3.29.
the bridegroom, (...).
the bride man, or friend who brings the bride to him. Is this D. Stapletons
proof out of Nazianzene for burning tapers in the day time?


Heart. Of Nazianzene I know not. But certainly S. Ierom is a witness of it
against Vigilanti^s*


Rainoldes. Yet these are S. Ieroms own words in Contr. Vigilant.
that treatise: We do light Cereos non clara luce accendimus.
tapers not in the bright^day-time, as thou do vainly sclaunder us, but by
this comfort to ease the darkness of the night.


Heart. But he adds that Churches of the east had lights burning in the
daytime, while the gospel was reading, thereby to show their joy.


Rainoldes. But nether this usage of the eastern Churches was the same that
yours is. For they did keep lights, while the gospel was reading, and put
them out after: which rite Ordo Roman. de divine. offic. cap. de officio Missae.
Durand. in Ration. divine. offic. lib. 4. cap. 24.
you had also, and some where have perhaps yet. But the general rite which you
have gotten now of burning tapers still, before the gospel, and after: that in
S. Ieroms time not only was unborn in the we^^, but in the ^ast too. Though
if the east had used it: yet nether were it proved so (by your reason) that the
Apostles did ordeine it, because it was not used in the western Churches, and
therefore not through the whole world. Howbeit I deny not but there is good
reason why your Church should use it. For De idololatr.
Tertullian says: let them light candels daily who have no light; Illis
competut ^estimonia tenebrarum.
the testimonies of darkness do well beseem them.


Heart. You may bring Tertullians werdes, when you have proved that we have no
light: which you shall never do.


Rainoldes. Not while you are able to say with Ioh. 9.40.
the Pharisees, Are we blind also? But since there were so ancient Churches
which lighted candels in the bright sunshine: that may be some color for
your Massing-lights. For your Massing-vestiments not so much can be found. Yet
Council. Trident. Sess. 22. cap. 5.
they are also fathered on the tradition of the Apostles.


Heart. And D. Quaestion. quod libetic. 2.
Stapleton says that if we list to run through every one of them, we shall
find that the primitive Church did use them all.


Rainoldes. Belike you will never list then. For sure you will never find that.


Heart. No? Why say you so? When himself has found it, and proves it
particularly. For hitherto belongs the plate, or Bishoply miter*


Rainoldes. The miter? That is none of your Massing-vestiments.


Heart. Though it be none of them which simple Priests wear, yet it is a
vestiment that Bishops wear at Mass.


Rainoldes. O, that Bishops wear. Then I perceive your Doctor means to prove
not only the six vestiments, common to all Priests, in token that they are
perfect, because the sixth day the Lord did perfect heaven and earth: but also
the nine which Bishops have beyond them, in token that they are spiritual like
the nine orders of Angels, as Pope Mysterior. Missae lib. 1. cap. 10.
Innocentius and Bishop In Ration. divine. offic. lib. 3. cap. 1.
Durand open.


Heart. If he prove them both: your shame is the greater, who nether use the
Priestly vestiments, nor the Bishoply.


Rainoldes. But they both together do make fifteen vestiments: which Bishops
must put on, when they say Mass, As Innocentius and Durand say* in the places
quoted.
to signify the fifteen degrees of virtues (according to the fifteen psalms
of degrees) wherewith they must be clad. And, I may tell you, it will be as
hard to prove that any Bishop did wear those fifteen vestiments in the
primitive Church: as, that every Bishop, who wears them in yours, has the
the fifteen degrees of virtues which they signify.


Heart. Well, if you will hearken unto D. Stapleton: hehath proved more, then
may be with your liking. For hitherto belongs the plate, or Bishoply miter,
which John the Evangelist did wear, as Polycrates the Bishop of Ephesus says
in the story of Lib. 3. cap. 2^.
Eusebius. Hitherto the Priestly attire of the head, mentioned by In. lib^, de
monogamia.
Tertullian. Hitherto the stole mentioned by S. In Orat. suneb. de obit. fratr.
Satyr.
Ambrose, and by the Council. Bra car. 1. can. 32. and Tolet. 4. can. 39.
Councels of Braga and Toledo. Hitherto the copes, which Haeres. 15. and 16.
Epiphanius calls (...). Hitherto the Deacons albe, as it is named in the
Council. Car. thag. 4* can. 4^.
Council of Carthage: In Liturg.
Chrysostom names it (...). Hitherto the robes, or hangings, with the which
the altar is beautified, in the story of Lib. 1. cap. 31.
Theodoret. Hitherto the linen clothes, and the couerings, wherewith (as Lib.
6. contr. Parmenianum.
Optatus does expressly mention) altars in old time were covered, as they are
now. Hitherto the holy robe that reached down to the feet, in Lib. 10. cap. 4*
Eusebius. To conclude, hitherto belongs the amice, the girdle, the chisible,
the fanel, and the corporace: which the Greek Fathers In Liturgii^ suis.
Chrysostom, and Basil, note also by their names, (...). Which all to have
been holy, and consecrated to this function, the same Fathers testify. There
is in Lib. 2. cap. 27.
Theodoret a notable example of an enterlude-plaier, who wearing on a stage a
holy garment, that he had bought, fell suddenly down and dyed. Of the like
vengeance of God there are examples in De p^rsequut. Vandal. lib. 1.
Victor, and Histor. Angli^. l. 1. cap. 29.
Bid. And Lib. 1. con^^a Parmenian^m*
Optatus also, more ancient then they both, does sharply touch the Dona^ists
for spoiling and profaning the o^naments of the Church.


Rainoldes. Here is a fair tale for them, whose eyes are dim, and cannot judge
of colors. But they who can discern between words, and proofs, do see
that never less was said with greater show. For, the point whereof proof
should be made, is that the vestiments which are worn of Bishops and Priests
saying Mass, were used all of them by the primitive Church. The words which
D. Stapleton speaks of this point, are so far from proving it, that the
most of them do not as much as touch it. For the copes, which Haeres. 15. and
16.
Epiphanius (he says) calls (...), are the garments which the Scribes and
Pharisees did wear with Matt. 23.5.
phylacteries, and fri^ges. And the Scribes and Pharisees (I trow) said not
Mass. Lib. 1. cap. 31.
The robes or hangings of the altar in Theodoret, are (...).
couerings. The couerings and linen clothes, in Lib. 6. contra Parmenia^um.
Optatus, are ornaments of the Communion table, such as we also use. Is our
communion Mass too?


Heart. ^ay, he calls it an altar.


Rainoldes. By a figure, as Before in this Division. page 552.
I have showed. For by the name of [altar] he means a table, as these his
words declare: who of the faithful knows not that Ipsa lig^a li^teamine
cooperiti?
the boordes them selves are covered with a linen cloth in celebrating of the
sacrament? Of this kind is also the cloth called (...), which word imports
not so much as your Durand. in Ration. l. 4. c. 29.
corporace: but though it did, of this kind it is in the counterfeit In the
Liturgies that bear their names.
Chrysostom and Basil. As for the examples of the vengeance of God on them who
profanely did abuse garments appointed unto holy uses: the first, in Lib. 2.
cap. 27
Theodoret, is not of a Massing but a baptizing garment, (a peculiar solemnity
more then your selves use:) to omit that the matter of the enterlude-player was
devised to spite a Bishop* whose harm was sought as having sold it. The
second, in Persequu^. Va^^d. lib. 1.
U^^^or, is of the linen clothes and couerings of the altar, such as I spoke of
in Optatus. The third, in Histor. Anglican. lib. 1. cap. 29.
Bid, is added to make up the tale: for there is no such s^orie. Finally, the
Church-ornamentes, which Lib. 1. co^tr. Parmenian.
Optatus shows that co^etous men would have spoiled, were of gold and silver:
vessels belike, and plate, wherewith S. Epist. 2. ad Nepotian. de vita
clericorum cap. 12.
Ierom notes that many (though he reprove it as Jewish and superstitious) did
deck up Christistian Churches after the example of the temple in Jury. But
whether they were vessels, as dishes and cups for bread and wine at the
Communion, or whatsoever other instruments, or jewels: Optatus neither says,
nor seems to say, that they were Massing-vestiments. There remains the
miter, the stole, the albe, the amice, the girdle, the chisible, and the fanel.
Which first are far beneth the number of fifteen; and so they reach not to
all your Massing-vestiments. Then, for sundry of them, it appears not that
they were such as yours; or rather it is plain that they were not such.
Lastly, if they were such: yet how does it follow that they came from the
Apostles? Which is the point that Stapleton would and ought to prove; or else
farewell the Trent-councell.


Heart. Came not the Bishoply miter from the Apostles, which S. John, an Apostle
and Evangelist did wear, as you may see in Hist. eccles. lib. 3. cap. 25.
Eusebius?


Rainoldes. Polycrates, whom Eusebius alleges, does not mention a miter, but
(...), that is to say, a thin plate, such as was Exodus 28.36.
the plate of gold set in the front of the miter of Aaron, the high Priest of
the Jews, that it might be upon his his forhead.


Heart. But Polycrates signified a miter by that [plate,] after a figure of
speech, wherein a part is used to signify the whole.


Rainoldes. Nay, if you come to figures, it is more likely that Polycrates, in
saying, S. John was (...).
a Priest that did bear the plate, meant (by an allusion to the law of Moses)
that he entered as it were into the sanctuary with prerogative, and had the
very mysteries of God Reu. 1.1.
reveled to him. Whereto S. Descriptor. ecclesiast. verbo Polycrates.
Ierom seems somewhat to incline: who translating the same of Polycrates
touching John, says, that he was a high Priest bearing the plate of gold upon
his head. For if he had used to bear a plate of gold in deed, upon his
forhead: sure, when Act. 3.2.
Peter said, silver and gold have I none, to the creple who desired an alms
of Peter and him, that plate would not have saved his forhead from blushing.
Neither is it nothing that Polycrates mentioned (...), not (...)* or (...).
the plate, and not a miter: since Exodus 28.40.
other of the Jewish Priests did wear (...).
miters; none, but the high Priest, the plate. Howbeit, if the word were meant
as you would have it, and S. John had worn a miter like to Aaron: yet his
example proves not that all Apostles, much less that all Bishops wore it.
Nay, the special note thereof in S. John does rather prove the contrary: as,
when we read that Mat. 3.4.
John Baptist had his garment of camels hear, and a girdle of skin, we gather
that all preachers wore not such apparel.


Heart. But infulae, that is a Priestly attire of the head, which De monogam.
Tertullian speaks of, was common to them all: and the miter seems to be
the same with us, that infulae with him.


Rainoldes. I grant that the attire, which Tertullian speaks of, does touch
your miter nearer: but it does not prove it. For Cic. in Verr. lib. 4. Virg.
Aeneid. lib. 2
infulae were miters, which the heathnish Priests, as namely the Sacerdotes
Cereris c^m infulis.
Priests of Ceres, and Apollinis infula.
Apollo did wear in their solemnities. Of the which ceremony Tertullian
deriuing a prouerbiall phrase (after the manner of his style) does say touching
Christians, who refuse to be counted Priests, that Deponimus insulas.
they lay down the miters. In deed it is likely the miters of your Bishops
came from that heathnish rite: although they draw some what from the Jewish
custom, as Comment. reip. Roman. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Wolfgangus Lazius, your friend, has well observed. But it is neither true,
nor fit for you to hold, that it was a miter worn by Christian Priests which
Tertullian meant. Not fit for you to hold: least all Priests be proved to have
as good right to the miter, as your Bishops; which doctrine they will never
account of, as catholic. Not true: because your Bishoply miters were not used
in many hundred years after Tertullian.


Heart. No? Is it not written in Did. 96. c. ^onstantimus.
the donation of Constantine, that when he offered Pope Siluester a golden
crown beset with gemmes, the Pope refused it, and only took a white miter?


Rainoldes. What tell you me again of that foolish forgery? Which yet does
make the first original of the miter younger then Tertullian: But the true
records and monuments of antiquity do show that it was not bredde a great
while after. For De eccles. offic. lib. 2 cap. 22.
Amalarius Fortunatus, and De institut. elericorum lib. 1. c. 14. and deinceps.
Rabanus Maurus, and De exord. and increm. ^erum eccles. cap. 24.
Walafridus Strabo who lived above eight hundred years after Christ, and wrote
of the vestiments which Bishops wore in their days, make no mention of it. And
De divine. offitijs. cap. de singulis vestibus.
Alcuinus, the Master of Charles the great, who lived and wrote not long
before them, treating of Priestly vestiments, and therein of the miter of the
Jewish Priests: Huius cemodi vestis no^ habetur in Romana ecclesia, vel in
nostris regionibus.
we have not (says he) such a vestiment in the Church of Rome, or in our
countries. Yea Sermon. in ^ynod. de significat. indumentorum sacerdot.
Iuo Carnotensis, who lived three hundred years after Alcuinus, does show that
in his days it was not yet come in: and, with express mention of the plate of
gold, he says that no Priests of the new Testament do wear it. Wherefore
the first and highest of your Massing-vestiments is nether confirmed by the
plate in Eusebius, nor by the miters in Tertullian. The next is the stole:
whereof you have no better proof in S. In oration. funebr. de obit. fratr.
Satyr.
Ambrose. For that, which he mentions, was either a towell, (as it may
seem,) or a napkin, wherein his brother Satyrus caused the sacrament to be
wrapped up, and laid it to his neck. At least, seeing Satyrus was nether
Priest, nor perfect Christian: what show have you of likelihood that it was a
Massing-vestiment?


Heart. S. Ambrose calls it orarium. And orarium is used in the Council. Tolet.
4. can. 39.
Council of Toledo for the same that stola, that is, a stole, as we call it.


Rainoldes. But if S. Ambrose meant a stole by orarium, because the Council
meant so: then stol^ in Aleuin. de divine. offic. cap. de vestibus. Amalar. de
eccles. offic. lib. 2. cap. 20.
the later writers of those matters must be a woman's garment, because it is so
in Etymologiar. lib. 19. cap. 25.
Isidore, who lived nearer to them, then did S. Ambrose to the Council. And as
for that Council, and the other of Braga: no marvel if the stole be
mentioned in them. For they were kept at Above six hundred years after Christ.
that time when rites did steal in upon religion very fast. Though nether was
it then half settled in the Mass yet: as by a later Council. Bracarens. 3. cap.
3.
Council of Braga may be gathered. Howbeit, if it had been: your proof
fails still. For you may not say that because a Spanish Council speaks of
it, therefore the Church had it by tradition of the Apostles. Unless you will
say also, that your shaven crowns ought to be great circles about the whole
head by the tradition of the Apostles, and not such little circles on the top
of the head only, as now a days are made: because Council. Tolet. 4. cap. 40.
a Spanish Council condemns In sol^ capitis apice modicum circulum tondent.
the shauing of those little circles as Ritus haereticorum.
a rite of heretics, and allows none, but great ones. So far of the stole.
There follows the albe. For which the Deacons albe, so named in the Council.
Carthag. 4. can. 41.
Council of Carthage, makes nothing. For though the name of albe be derived
from alba, by which word the Council does note a white garment, as it were a
surplisse, forbidding the Deaco^s to wear it all the service time: yet the
thing differs from your Massing-albe which is peculiar to Priests, as Did.
93. cap. Diaconus in conuentu. in glossa. Durand. in Ration divine. offic. lib.
3. cap. 1.
the Canonists also declare on the same word of the Council of Carthage.
Which difference remoueth your proof, out of In Liturg.
Chrysostom, touching (...) too. For what soever kind of garment that were: it
was common to the Deacons, not proper to the Priests; and therefore not your
Massing-albe. Hitherto the holy robe (in Lib. 10. cap. 4.
Eusebius,) that reached down to the feet, should be referred by Amalar. de
ec^les. offic. lib. 2. cap. 18. Durand. in Rati. on. divine. offic. l. 3. c. 3.
their judgment, who compare the garments of Aaron with yours. But Stapleton,
who found that holy robe in Eusebius, might have found withal an other meaning
of it by the words following. For he, whose oration Eusebius does report,
tells Bishops that they are clad with (...).
the holy robe that reached down to the feet, and with the heavenly crown of
glory, and with the unction of God, and with the Priestly garment of the holy
Ghost. Wherein, as the garment, and unction, and crown do signify spiritual
gifts, not things corporal: so the holy robe that reached down to the feet
betokens that function, which (...). Exodus 28. ver. 31.
that robe ver. 35.
in Aaron did represent and shadow.


Heart. You persuade not me that he alluded so to the robe of Aaron: but that
he meant in deed a robe which Christian Bishops wore.


Rainoldes. And what gain you by it, if so much were granted? For you cannot
prove by any circumstance of the place, that it must be a Massing-robe. The
only show of any such is in your last proof out of the Greek Fathers,
Chrysostom, and Basil; or rather, out of the Liturgies, which falsely bear
their names; or rather, out of some copies ofthose Liturgies, wherein are
mentioned the amice, the girdle, the chisible, and the fanel. Howbeit, if a man
should sift the Greek words, out of the which you pick these, and confer
your amice with their (...), your biggin of the head with their shoulder
garment, your one coard or fanel with their mo (...), your chisible with their
(...): perhaps he should leave the girdle post alone to bind your proof with.
And doutlesse, in that which is most maske-like, and least beseems Christian
Pastors at public service, I mean that which the Priest at Mass wears
uppermost, the chisible you call it (I trow) or upper vestiment: the Greek
word declares that you do wrong to the Grecians in matching that of theirs
with yours. For the word Derived from (...), (which word S. Paul uses 2.
Tim. 4.13.) the same with (...) answering t^ the Latin, pan^l^.
(...), by the which their upper vestiment is noted, does signify a cloak: a
garment worn much ( Tertullia^. lib. de pallio.
as single, and ready) by Christians in old time, chiefly by the Grecians,
whose Bishops kept it thence belike in solemnities, when other wise they left
it off* But your upper vestiment is far from that singlenes: nor is it like
to that common garment, but to a little cottage, (whence it is named A
diminuti^^ ^t casa* a cottage. The English word, chisible came (as it seems)
from that Latin casula, but does not expre^ the force of it.
casula,) closing the Priest round as it were with walls, and having a hole
for him to put out his head at, as it were a loouer-hole to let out the smoke
at.


Heart. The high Priest of the Jews had the like robe.


Rainoldes. Like your cottage-vestiment? Which robe was that?


Heart. If not like our upper vestiment altogether, yet like in that respect
that it was close about, Exodus 2^.3^.
with a hole for his head in the ^^ddes of it. And therefore you need not to
scoff in such sort at that kind of vestiment.


Rainoldes. If you take the little cottage to be a scoff, it is not my scoff,
but your own Durand. in r^t^on. divine. offic. lib. 3. cap. 7.
Doctors, whose Casula dicitu^ quasi parua casa.
words I do but open. Your self are rather faulty, who compare your
cottage-ragge patched by man's brain, with a Priestly robe made by Gods
commandment. And yet, in that you match your vestiment with the Jewish for the
form of it, I reprove you not. For though there be difference between theirs,
and yours, in sundry respects: yet yours were taken up after the example, and
made in likeness of theirs. Which is plainly showed by those ancient autours
whom I named before, Alcuinus, Amalarius, and Walafridus Strabo. Of whom the
Alcuin. de divine. offic. cap. de singulis ves^ibus.
first treating of Massing-vestiments, says, that the Church received them Ad
instar sacerdotum Mosaicae legis.
after the facion of the Priests of Moses law. The Amalar. de ecclesiastic.
offic. lib 2. c. 22.
next, that our hye Priest (he means every Bishop) has them Ad normam
Aaronis.
after the rule of Aaron. The Walafrid. St^abo de exord. and incrementis rerum
eccles. cap. 24.
last, that they came in by little and little: for at the first (says he) men
celebrated Masses in common apparel, as certain of the east Church are said to
do till this day. And so he goes forward showing in particular, how Stephen,
and Siluester, and other Popes, and Prelates did softly bring them in, and some
devised this, some that, either to resemble the roabes of the Jewish Priests,
or to note a mystery. To be short, it is showed plainly by them all, that the
Massing-vestiments of Bishops at that time (which was eight hundred years
after Christ) were but eight in number: just as many as Aarons. Whereof the
former seven, (for the eighth was proper to Archbishops only) are grown now
to be fifteen, more then twice as many. And do you not perceive hereby, M.
Heart, how lewdly D. Stapleton alleges the Fathers, to prove your
Massing-vestimentes all to have been used by the primitive Church? How falsely
the Council of Trent does father them, nor only them but also lights,
incense, crossinges, and other ceremonies of the Mass on the tradition of the
Apostles? And saw I not truly that if you see not how the Christian worship
of God in spirit and truth does differ from the Jewish, and so might succeed
it: the cause thereof (by likelihood) is the veil of Popery, which having
brought in a Jewish kind of worship does hide it from your eyes? For is it not
evident that the Jewish Heb. 1^* ^. Col. 2.17.
shadows, that is, the dark lineaments of Christ, as of a picture, which he
abolished by his coming as being the image it self and body of them, are
drawn out again by the painters of your religion? Or may not he, that has
but half an eye, see, that you surpass the Jews in sundry shows of
outward service, and go beyond the priesthood of Aaron in carnal rites? For
the most whereof though you have meanings mystical* or spiritual matters which
they are said to figure in other significations then the Jewish did: yet they
set the Church to school with new Gal. 4.3. and 5.1.
rudiments after a Jewish manner, and press it with that bondage from which the
Lord has made it free. Wherefore, were they taken from the Jews, or not: yet
in respect of us, on whom God has not laid them, they are of Col. 2.22.
the commandments and doctrines of men. And we may justly say of them, now
being bredde, the same, that S^ Epist. 119. ad D^ua^. cap. 1^.
Austin said, when they were breeding: Although it can not be found in what
sense they are against the faith, yet religion it self which God of his mercy
would have to be free under P^^^issimis and m^^itostis. ic^^ celebration^^
s^cramen^^.
very few and most manifest ceremonies of divine service, is by them o^pressed
so with servile burdens, that the case and state of the Jews is more
tolerable; who although they have not acknowledged the time of liberty, yet
are they (...) with the packes of Gods law, not with the devises and
presumptions of men.


Heart. It is a calumnious speech that our ceremonies are shadows, or
rudiments, or keep the Church in bondage as the Jewish did. For theirs were
very many, combersome, and dark: ours are v^ry few, easy, and significant. As
S. De doctrine Christ. lib. 3. cap. 9.
Austin says, that since that our liberty has shined most brightly by
Christ's resurrection, we are not laden with a heavy charge of signs, as were
the Jews: but our Lord himself and the Apostolic discipline has delivered
to us Quaedam p^uca pro multis, eadem^ue factu facillima.
some few in steed of many, and them most easy to be done, most honorable for
signification, most clean and pure to be observed. But you would have (me
thinks) no ceremonies at all: for you said that the worship of God amongst
Christians is spiritual merely.


Rainoldes. I spoke in comparison of the Jewish worship: or rather Christ, not
I. For they are his words, that Job. 4. ver. 23.
God will be worshipped now in spirit and truth. Which must needs be meant of
mere spiritual worship: since the reason following, that ver. 24.
God is a spirit, does show that the Jews did worship him in spirit too. And
yet is that spoken in comparison, as I said. For Christ him self ordained two
principal ceremonies, which we call the sacraments, his Luke 2^.19.
Supper, and his Matt. 28.1^*
Baptism. And the Church Assemblies, Act. 2.42.
which are helps most necessary for us to learn and practice that spiritual
worship, must have their time, when; their place, where; their manner, how;
things to be directed 1. Cor. 14. ver. 40.
with coomelinesse and order, in rites fit ver. 26*
to edify. But these are few in number and clear in signification. So few,
that they are nothing in comparison of the Jewish: so clear, that they do
lively represent Christ, and are no dark shadows. Now whether that your
Popish ceremonies have kept this fewnes, and cleerenes.


Heart. Perhaps you mean because we have seven sacraments, and not two only.
But the Fathers, as namely S. Austin (though Apolog. e^cles. Anglic.
your men allege him to the contrary,) do name other sacraments beside the
Lords Supper (as you call it) and Baptism.


Rainoldes. But S. Austin names not your seven sacraments, as you may see by
his Confession. Augustine. lib. ^. cap. 1. tit. 5.
Confession.


Heart. Yet he names more then your two sacraments. And the rest of ours are
proved by other Fathers. Whereupon the Sess. 7. de Sacrament. in genere can. 1.
Council of Trent has defined that there are seven sacraments of the new law,
neither more, nor fewer: and they all are sacraments truly and properly.


Rainoldes. The Tertullian. aduers. Iudae. and contr. Marcion. lib. 5. Hilar.
in Matthae. can. 12. and 13. Leo epist. 10.11.12.13. and passim.
Fathers do commonly use the word [sacrament] for a mystery or sign of a holy
thing. And so you may prove seven and twenty sacraments by them, as well as
seven. Which is manifest by S. Epist. 5. ad Marcellin. De ciuit. Dei lib. 10.
cap. 5. Contr. aduers. leg. and Prophetarum lib. 2. cap. 9.
Austin, whom you pretend herein most. For as he gives the name of sacrament
to August. de bono coniug. c. 18.
marriage, to Contr. epist. Parmenian. lib. 2. cap. 13.
the ordering of ministers, to De baptism. contr. Donatist. lib. 5. cap. 20.
laying on of hands, and De adulteri^. coniug. cap. 26. and 28.
reconci^^ng of the repentant: so he gives it to Epist. 23. ad Bonifacium.
Easter, and to the Lords day, De peccat. merit. and remission. l. 2. cap. 26.
to the sanctifying and De symb. ad ca^echumen. lib. 4. cap. 1.
instructing of nouices in the faith, the feeding, the signing, the catechizing
of them, the making of prayers, the singing of Psalms, and so forth to other
holy rites and actions. But as the word [sacrament] is taken in a straiter
signification, to note the visible signs inistuted by Christ for the assurance
and increase of grace in the faithful, which is the sense of it both with
Council. Trident. Sess. 7. in pro^m. and de Sacrament. in genesis can. 1.
you, and Articuli religion. eccles. Anglican. cap. de Sacramentis.
us, when we speak of sacraments: so does De doctrine. Christian. l. 3. c. 9.
Epist. 11^. ad Ianuar* cap. 1.
he name those two, as principal ones, by an excellency; and, when Ioh. 19.34.
there issued blood and water out of Christ's side, Augustine. de s^mb. ad
catechum^nos lib. 2. cap. ^.
these are Gemina sacramenta ecclesiae.
the two sacraments (says he) of the Church, meaning the Lords supper by
blood, by water baptism. Yea, the Schoolmen them selves, who were the first
autours that did raise them up to the precise number of seven, no more, nor
fewer; for you ^^nde it not in any of the Fathers or other writers whatsoever
before a thousand years after Christ: but the Schoolmen them selves have
showed that the seven are not all sacraments, if the name of sacrament be taken
properly and straightly. For neither can marriage so be of the number, as Durand.
de S. P^rtian. in 4. Sent. distinct. 26. quaest. 3.
Durand proves well: neither confirmation (the chrisme of oil and balm) as
In 4. Sentent. did. 7. art. ^. quaest. 2.
Bonauenture teaches. And, to be short, their captain Sum. Theologic. part.
4. quaest. 5. membr. ^. art 2. and membr. 3. art. 2.
Alexander of Ales does avouch expressly, that there are Sola duo principalia.
only two principal sacraments, A Domino in^^ituta per se ipsum.
which Christ himself did institute: so that (by his confession) as we speak
of sacraments, there are two only. But my meaning was not to blame you for
seven. I spoke of all your ceremonies, which are (I may say boldly) seventy
times seven. Which whether that they be so few, and so clear in comparison of
the Jewish, as I have declared and you confess that Christian ceremonies
should be: let the learned judge by comparing of your Church-bookes, chiefly
the Sacrarum ceremoniarum Romanae ecclesiae libri tres.
Ceremonial, Pontificale Romanum in tres distinctum parts.
Pontifical, and Missale Romanum, in rubricis Missalis, ritibus celebra^di
Missam, and defectibus circa Missam occurrent^bus.
Missall, with Exodus, Leuiticus, and Numbers.
the books of Moses. Let the unlearned guess by the store and strangeness of
sacrificing vestiments: whereof Exodus 28.40.
their common Priests had three, yours have six; their high Priest had eight,
your Bishops have fifteen at least, and some sixteen, beside Innocent.
Mysterior. Missae. lib. 1. cap. 53. and l. 2. c. 7.
the Popes prerogatiue-robes. And so, to leave this matter to their
consideration: your own confession, yeldeth enough for my purpose touching the
place of Malachie. For if the spiritual worshipping of God, wherewith the Jews
did serve him, had ceremonies in number more, in signification darker, then it
has amongst the Gentiles: this kind of serving him with fewer ceremonies and
cleerer is proper to the Gentiles, and might succeed that which was amongst the
Jews. Wherefore D. Allens third, and fourth reasons, whereby he would prove
that the offering spoken of in Malachie the Prophet must signify the outward
sacrifice of the Mass, and not spiritual sacrifices, can take no hold
against us. No more then ours could take against you of the contrary, if we
should conclude that it must betoken a spiritual worship not outward
offeringes on an altar, because outward offeringes are common to the Jews with
us, and this is proper to the Gentiles: and this should succeed the Jewish
worship of God, and come in steed of it, which no outward offeringes and
sacrifices can do, since they are coopled always to Gods spiritual worship.
Would you allow these reasons?


Heart. They are not like to D. Allens. But the fifth reason does put the matter
out of doubt. For, (in the judgment chiefly of heretics,) Nostra opera sunt
inquinata, vtcunque speciosa vide antur.
our works are defiled, howsoever they seem bewtifull: but that Prophetica
oblatio per se munda est.
Prophetical offering is clean of it self, and so clean of it self in
comparison of the old sacrifices, that it cannot be polluted any way by us or
by the worst Priests. For here in our testament, they can not choose all the
best to them selves, and offer to the Lord for sacrifice the feeble, the lame,
and the sick, as before in the old: because there is now one sacrifice so
appointed, that it can not be changed; so clean, that no work of ours can
distaine it.


Rainoldes. And think you M. Heart, that the works of Christians can not be
the offering which the Prophet speaks of, because they are defiled, howsoever
they seem bewtifull? Think you thus in deed? Then you consent yet in the
chiefest point of Christian religion (which God grant you do) with heretics,
as you term us. For, if our works be defiled, howsoever they seem bewtifull,
chiefly as heretics judge: then are men justified by faith, not by works. If
our works be defiled, howsoever they seem bewtifull: then fulfill we not the
law of God perfitly, much less super-erogate. If our works be defiled,
howsoever they seem bewtifull: then are they meritorious of everlasting death,
but everlasting life it is impossible they should merit.


Heart. Nay, I meant not so. For though they be defiled, as they are of our
selves: yet as they are of Christ, whose grace works in us, they are pure and
perfect.


Rainoldes. Then, as they are wrought by the grace of Christ, so they may be
the offering which the Prophet speaks of. For they are pure and perfect so,
and therefore clean by your own opinion.


Heart. But the Prophetical offering is clean of it self. Our works are not
clean of them selves, but of Christ: and therefore can not be that offering.


Rainoldes. Now may you feel the falsehood of D. Allens dealing. For himself
adds those words [ Per se.
of it self,] to make his reason serve: the Prophet says no more but that
Mal. 1.11.
the offering is clean. Wherefore since our works are clean and undefiled;
chiefly as Papists judge: our works might be meant by the Prophetical
offering, howsoever they be imperfect and impure of them selves.


Heart. What? And do you think, M. Rainoldes, that our works, though unclean
of them selves, yet as they are wrought by the grace of Christ, are clean and
undefiled? And see you not then, that of the other side you consent in the
chiefest point of Catholic faith with Papists, as you term us? For if you
think in deed that our works be clean, as they are wrought by grace: then
must you needs think that we may so fulfill the law, and merit life, and be
justified by works, not by faith only.


Rainoldes. I meant not so, M. Heart. But according to the proverb, that for a
hard knot a hard wedge must be sought, I thought good to cleave a Popish dream
in sunder with a Popish fansy. For otherwise, I know, that, although our works
be wrought by Christ's grace: yet is man's nature and flesh in us who work
them, and therefore do they carry a stain of uncleanness. It was of grace, that
the children of Israel did consecrate their holy things and gifts to God. Yet
that work of theirs was not free from spot: in so much that Exodus 2^. ver. 36.
Aaron must bear on his forhead a plate of pure gold, wherein was engraven,
Holiness of the Lord, (a monument of Christ) ver. 38.
that he might take away the iniquity of (...)
the holy things which they consecrated, of all the gifts of their holy
things; and he should bear it always to make them acceptable before the
Lord. It is of grace, that the Saints of God do pray to him. Yet, Reu. 8.3.
the other Angel, that stood before the altar with a golden censer, had much
odours given him (...).
that he might put them into the prayers of all the Saints upon the golden
altar which is before the throne, and the smoke of the odours put into the
prayers went up before God out of the Angels hand. Which is a token that the
prayers of Saints have their infirmity: and yield no sweet smelling favor
unto God, without favor in Christ. To be short, in all the gracious and good
works of men, Phil. 2.13.
God does work in us both to will, and to do. But Romans 8. ver. 21.
evil is so present with us, that ver. 18.
the good which we would do, we can not: we would, through Gods grace; we can
not, through our frailty. Yea, when we do good, it is a will rather of
doing, then a doing; we are so far from perfect doing it. For we ought to
Luke 20.^7.
love God with all our heart, and with all our soul, and with all our
strength, and with all our thought: and our neighbors, as our selves. But as
long as Gal. 5.17.
the flesh does lust against the spirit, and Romans 7. ver, 23.
a law in our members does rebel against the law of our mind; which is as
long as we are in ver. 24.
this body of death: we love him not with all our heart, soul, strength, and
thought, but with part; and therefore in lesser measure, then we ought. Now,
whatsoever is less, then it should be, is fautie: for it transgresses Deuteronomy.
4.^. and 12.^2.
his commandment. Wherefore since our works should be done with perfect love
of God and men, and that perfect love we have not in this life: it follows that
our works in this life are fautie; yea, though they (...) wrought by the grace
of Christ. Not as though his grace had any blemish, (God forbid;) but because
our selves, in whom it works, are corrupt: as water, though it flow from a
fountain most clear, yet, if it do run through a muddy channel, it
becomes muddy. So nether fulfill we the law in any work, much less in all
our works, which they must do, who will fulfill it; for Iam. ^.10.
he that offends in one, is guilty of all: nether can we merit ought at Gods
hands, much less eternal life; for Luke 17. ver. 9.
he owes us no thanks ver. 10.
though we did all things which are commanded us, because we ought to do
them; and what is our desert then, who do not all things? nether may we
possibly be justified by works before the judgment seat of God; for Gal. 3.10.
cursed is every man that continues not in all things, which are written in
the book of the law, to do them, and Iam. ^.2.
we all offend in many things.


Heart. But if all our works be muddy, as you say, and stained with
uncleanness: then is it much surer that the clean offering, which the Prophet
speaks off, cannot betoken them. For the Lord reproves the Jewish Priests
there for Mal. 1.7.
offering unclean bread, and sacrificing the blind, the lame, and the sick.
Wherefore since of the contrary he says that the offering made among the
Gentiles shall be a clean offering: it follows that he meant not the
spiritual sacrifices, that is, the works of Christians; and what then, but
the outward sacrifice of the Mass?


Rainoldes. In deed if clean things stained with uncleanness were the very
same that unclean things: you might justly think that our spiritual
sacrifices could not be allowed, no more then the carnal of those Jewish
Priests. But the only sacrifice that is clean perfitly, and has no stain at
all, is 1. Pet. 1.19. and 2.22.
Christ, the undefiled and unspotted Lamb, Heb. 9.25. and ^3.12.
offered on the cross to sanctify us with his blood. The sacrifices of the
faithful are clean, but vnperfitly: and therefore need his favor, with
pardon, (as I showed,) that they may be 1. Pet. 2.5.
acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. The sacrifices of the wicked, and
hypocrites, are unclean: as being either unlawful, such as were Leu. 22.22.
the blind, and lame, and sick among the Jews; or offered unlawfully, with
Tit. 1.15.
minds and consciences defiled. So the sacrifices of those Jewish Priests,
which God reproves, were absolutely unclean. Our spiritual sacrifices are
vnperfitly clean: clean in comparison, and clean by acceptance. Clean in
comparison and respect of men: as Habacuk complaining that Hab. 1.13.
the wicked man deuouteth the righteous, says, (...)
him that is righteous in respect of him self; praising not the righteous man
as simply righteous, but in comparison of the wicked. Clean by acceptance in
the sight of God: who dealing as a loving father with his children, takes in
good part that which they do willingly, though they do it weakly. For as
Leu. 22.20.
he accepted the sacrifices of the Jews, when they offered the best and
soundest that they had: so when Esai. 66.20.
the Gentiles were brought him for an offering, in like sort as the Israelites
do offer an offering in a clean vessel, Romans 15.16.
the offering up of them was acceptable to him. And thus might the spiritual
sacrifices of Christians be meant by the clean offering, whereof the Lord
says in the Prophet Malachie that it shall be offered to him in every place.
According to the scripture, that instructs us 1. Tim. 2.8.
to pray in every place, lifting up pure hands without wrath, and douting. For
though nether our prayers be so intier and fervent, nor our hands so pure, and
unspotted of the world, nor our minds so settled in love of our neighbor, nor
our faith so constant, and steadfast toward God, but that they be stained with
remnants of uncleanness, and have less perfitnes then they should: yet are they
all clean in respect of Mal. 1. ver. 8. and 13.
the sacrifices of those Jewish hypocrites, which God in the Prophet rejects
as ver. 7. and 12.
unclean; and so, where he ver. 10. and 13.
refuses to accept theirs, he Mal. 3.4.
promises to accept ours, and shows that Romans 12.1. Phil. 4.18. Heb. 1^.16.
they please him well. Wherefore the Mass finds no footing in Malachie by D.
Allens fifth reason. Now the sixth, and last, which he concludes with, as it
were to set the Mass in full possession of the clean offering mentioned by
Malachie: does dispossess it clean and casts out the reasons which he
brought to strengthen it. For the Fathers expound it of our Tertullian. aduers.
Iudaeos.
spiritual sacrifices, of Contr. Marcion. l. 3. and 4.
prayers, of Augustine. contr. aduersar. leg. lib. 1. cap. 18. and contr. lit.
Pe^ilian. lib. 2. cap. 86.
thanks giving, of Hieron. in Zachar. cap. 8.
holiness, of Eusebius. demonstrat. Euang. lib. 1.
godly works, of Tertullian. aduers. Iudaeos.
repentant hearts, of Eusebius. demonstrat. Euang. lib. 1.
cleansed minds, and bodies sanctified, of Irenae. lib. 4. cap. 32.33. and 34.
Justin. Mart. in Tryphon.
the gifts offered in Christian Church Assemblies, and of Theodoret. in
Malach. cap. 1. Cyrill. de adorat. in spirit. and verit.
the whole worship wherewith we honor him in spirit and truth. Wherein to say
that they mean the sacrifice of the Mass by the sacrifice of prayer, and the
spiritual sacrifice, as he ^aith they do, and that they call it so because
Vic^^ma hic existens. Victima is a live thing killed to be sacrificed. Which
word he applies to the sacrifice of the Mass, because he maintains that
Christ there is killed and sacrificed to God his father. Alan. de ^^charist.
sacrific. cap. 11. ver^ mactatur, ac immolatur.
the victime, that is here, has not a gross, carnal, and bloody consecration
or sacrification, as had the victimes of the Jews: it is gross, and carnal.
For the victime, (as you term it) which they mean, and speak of, is either
Eusebius. demonstrat. Euang. lib. 1.
our selves, purified by faith; o^ Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34. Tertullian. contra
Maccion. lib. 4.
our fruits, accepted as pure from persons purified: not Christ, killed, and
sacrificed unto God his Father, which is your Massing-uictime, pure of it
self, and purifying others, as you fancy. Yea, since it is granted by D. In
that he says of Austin, licet libro secundo contra literas Petiliani de
sacrificio laudis exponat.
Allens own words, that Austin, expounding it of the sacrifice of praise,
means not the sacrifice of the Mass thereby: let Contr. liter. Petiliani
lib. ^. cap. ^6.
that place of Austin he weighed with the rest of Contr. aduersar. leg. lib. 1.
cap. 18. and 20.
his and Chrysostom. contr. Iudaeos orat. 2. Hic^o^. in Malach. cap. 1, Cyprian.
lib. 1. cap. 16. contr. Iudaeos, and the rest alleged.
other Fathers, and it shall be found that Malachie touches not the Mass in
their judgment, by D. Allens own grant. The six reasons therefore which he
sets forth, as Argumenta valida and plane bona.
strong, and very good, for the proof thereof, prove it no better out of the
Prophets in the old testament: then do his bare words out of the Apostles in
the new. In deed there is no letter through all the scriptures for it. And
thus much perhaps him self has espied, since he wrote his treatise of the
sacrifice of the Mass. For in his Apology of the English Seminaries, (where
he would of likelihood make the strongest proof of it, that he could, for the
defense of Mass Priests, and the Mass Priests Nourseries,) The Apology of
the English Seminaries chapt. 6.
he cites not the scriptures, but the Fathers only. Which, unless he
thought that the scriptures fail him, I see not why he should. Chiefly, since
he knows, that they, whose good liking of Mass Priests, and the Mass he
seeks specially to win by his Apology, do give greater credit to five
words of God then to ten thousand words of men.


Heart. Nay, you are deceued much in D. Allen, if you think his judgment
changed any whit from that it was in this point. But in his Apology he cites
the Fathers only, not the scriptures, because you have colors of spiritual
sacrifices to shift the scriptures off; but you cannot the Fathers so. For they
all were Masse-priestes themselves, and said Mass.


Rainoldes. What one of them, M. Heart? If you speak indeed to the point of
the Mass, and daly not, as D. Allen: who makes Masse-priestes of the
Apostles, because they did consecrate the body and blood of Christ, and offer
it. For if to consecrate and offer, as 1. Cor. 10.16. and 11.24.
they did, be to say Mass: then we say Mass in our Communion, and our
Ministers are Mass Priests Which (I think) you mean not.


Heart. I mean that all the Fathers said Mass, as we do; and were, as we be,
Mass Priests. Which he means also, and proves by the most of them. For so
was S. Ambrose, Lib 5. epist. 33
testifying of him self that he offered sacrifice, and said Mass, even in that
plain term.


Rainoldes. In that plain term? Why? S. Ambose spoke not English, I trust.


Heart. No. But he says in Latin, Missam facere.


Rainoldes. That is not to say Mass, but to do mass, or rather to dimisse.
Paulinam coniunxit sibi breuique missam fecit.
Missam fecit, in In Caligula cap. 25.
Suetonius, would prove the Mass as well as that. Which I dare not say that
perhaps him self espied since he wrote it, least again you tell me that I am
much deceived in him. But in Concertat. eccles. Cathol. in Angl. aduer.
Caluinop. and Purit.
his Apology turned into Latin, S. Ambroses missam facere is changed into
missam dixisse. And so the words are fitter to prove he said Mass.


Heart. Dixisse, or facere: the matter stands not in that, but in the word
missa. From which since the name of Mass does come in English: it follows
that S. Ambrose did celebrate Mass, that is, say Mass, as we term it.


Rainoldes. Must I tell you again, that idiot comes from idiota? And will you
say that all the simple, idiotae, who hear Mass, are idiotes?


Heart. That is a jest: you may not so put off my reason. For the name opens
the nature of the thing, as De interpret.
Aristotle shows. Wherefore since the name of Mass is in S. Ambrose: how can
you deny but that he did celebrate the thing, that is, the Mass it self, as
we do, whom you call Mass Priests?


Rainoldes. And think you in earnest that S. Paul did celebrate the communion
of the body and blood of Christ, as we do, who are called Ministers?


Heart. As you do? who says so?


Rainoldes. You: if your reason be of any value. For the name opens the
nature of the thing, as Aristotle shows. Wherefore since the name of communion
is in S. Cor. 10.16*
Paul: how can you deny but that he did celebrate the thing, even the communion
it self, as we do, who are called Ministers?


Heart. Yes. For though you keep the name with S. Paul: yet you keep not the
thing. As Act. 8.9. and 13.6.
sorcerers are called magi, like Mat. 2.1.
the Sages of the East: yet is their wisdom wicked, not like that of the Sages.


Rainoldes. That is false M. Heart, as you refer it to our Communion. For as
we keep the name, so we keep the meaning of the name too: and therefore the
thing it self with S. Paul. But turn it to your Mass: and it is very true.
For in S. Ambroses time the Christian people, having public prayers in many
Churches daily, Ambr. de sacram l. 4. c. 6. and l. 5. c. 4. Hieron. ep^st. ad
Lucin. and apolog. ad Pammach. pro libris contr. Iouinianum.
did therewithal daily receive the holy sacrament of Christ's body, and blood.
Now, because sundry were at other parts of divine service, for whom it was not
lawful to receive the sacrament, as Ca^echumeni. In Liturg. Ba^il. and Chryso^t.
nouices in the faith who were not yet baptized, and Abstenti. Cyprian. de
Oration. Domin.
such as Church discipline removed from the communion: therefore they were wont
(after prayers made, and scriptures read, and taught,) Council. Carthag. 4. c^n.
84. vsque ad missam catechumenorum. August. sermon. de temp. 237. Ecce post
sermonem fit missa catechumenis* manebunt fideles.
to dimisse the rest who might not communicate, the faithful only staying to
receue together. And this dimission of them was noted by the word Isidor. orig.
lib. 6. cap. 18.
missa, As the word, remissa, is used for remissio. Tertullian. contr. Marcion.
lib. 4. Cyprian. de bono patient. Augustine. de baptism. contr. Donatist. lib.
3. cap. 18.
used for missio, that is a sending away, or licensing to depart. Whence it
came to pass that the very name of missa was given to that part of the
service: and they were said missam facere, who celebrated the communion as S.
Ambrose did. Wherefore though your sacrifice keeps the name of Mass, that S.
Ambrose used: yet does it not keep the thing meant thereby. For nether send
you them away, who receive not: and many a Mass is said that has no
communicants.


Heart. But we wish (as Sess. 22. cap. 6.
the Council of Trent has declared) that Fideles adstantes.
the faithful, who stand by at Mass, would communicate. Wherefore if they do
not: it is through their own default, and not through ours.


Rainoldes. But it is your fault that you send not them away from the communion
who communicate not. And herein your Council does vary from S. Ambrose, and
other ancient Fathers, that it allows non-communicants to be standers by. For
in the primitive Church, yea, in S. Gregory's time, (who for Registr. l. 2. ep.
9. and 93. Ad. 3. interrogat. August.
naming Mass too is made a Mass Priest by your Doctor,) Gregor. Dialogor.
lib. 2. cap. 2^.
the Deacon was accustomed to bid them Si quis non communicate, det locum, and,
Non communican^es ab ecclesia exibant.
depart, who did not communicate. Wherefore seeing that they meant the
Communion by the name of Mass, and termed it so, because they sent away the
non-communicants from it: you, who do not so, may see how fond a reason D.
Allen makes for your Mass, and Masse-priestes, when he shows Ambrose,
Gregory, and When Leo the great (ep ^1. cap. 2.) took order for laying ^ao
M^sses the^ one, in a day, in one Church: were they not Mass priests, that
said those Ma^sse^^ sait^ Allen in the margent of his Apolog^^ in English. The
last of which words are thus in his Latin. Number sort erant sacerdotes
Missificante^^ that is to say, were they Mass priests* An error of the Latin,
but speaking truer then the English, and very happily gainesaying it. For the
Masses, spoken of by Leo, were communions celebrated by Ministers: at whose
hands the people received the sacrament both of the body and blood of Christ*
which they be not at the hands of Mass Priests. Leo sermon. 4. de quadragesima.
Leo to have used that name. Then which there can be nothing in deed more
against him. For if the name open the nature of the thing as Aristotle shows:
then is not your Mass, the mass of the Fathers, because it is not missa, that
is, a dimissing, and sending away of them who receive not.


Heart. Nay, it is not only the name of the Mass, whereon he relieth, but the
thing it self. For who knows not (says he) that S. Greg. lib. 2. ep. 9. and
93. lib. 7. ep. 63. ind. 2. lib. 11. ep. 56. Ad 3. interrog. August.
Gregory the great was a Mass Priest, who has the very word, the manner, and
the parts thereof so expressly in his Epistles: who Bed. histor. lib. 1. cap.
29.
sent all holy furniture and ornaments for the same to our Blessed Apostle.


Rainoldes. What? to S. Paul, Romans 11.13.
the Apostle of the Gentiles?


Heart. I mean, to S. Austin the Apostle of the Englishmen.


Rainoldes. I know no such Apostle: if you mean of that sort* of which Ephesians.
4.11. 1. Cor. 9.1. Gal. 1.1.
Christ gave Apostles; as the majesty of the words [our Blessed Apostle]
should import. But the ornaments, and furniture which S. Gregory sent to
Austin the Moonke, were not Massing-vestiments: no more then the vessels and
clothes (that you mentioned before out of Optatus, and other ancient Fathers,)
which served for the Communion. As for the manner and parts of the Mass, which
he has (you say) in his Epistles so expressly: all that which he has* is, Lib.
7. i^dict. 2. epist. 63.
that there was said, Halleluia.
praise ye the Lord; and, the clergy saying, Kyrie eleeson.
Lord have mercy upon us, the people answered them with the same words; and
Christ eleeson.
Christ have mercy upon us was said in like sort; and Orationem Dominicam post
(...) lib. 11. ep. 56.
the Lords prayer, with the prayer (called the Canon,) was said over the
offering; and Simia quam similis turpissima ^esti^ nobis?
after consecration the Communion was ministered. Now compare the manner and
parts of your Mass with this of S. Gregory: and they are as like it, as is
an * ape unto a man. For in outward gestures, and shape of face and body, that
is, in show of actions, and form of words and prayers, yours resemble it. But
the soul, and reason as it were of it, which is, that the people did pray with
the Pastor, nor only pray together, but communicate too: that your Mass has
not.


Heart. They pray, and communicate both in affection, though they receive not
always the communion bodily, nor understand the prayers.


Rainoldes. But, to communicate, is to Matt. 26. ver. 26.
eat, and ver. 27. 1. Cor. 11.2^.
drink; which the people did in S. Gregory's time: and they understood the
prayers which were made, that they might 1. Cor. 14.16.
say Amen thereto. Now the Priest has swalowed up their right, in the one; and
the Clerk, in the other.


Heart. But the Canon of the Mass, which is the chiefest part, we have in like
sort as S. Gregory had. And therein, Gegor. in libro Sacramentor.
the worship of Saints, and prayers for the dead: where of there is no shadow
at all in your Communion, neither can you abide them. The greater wrong you do
both to him, and us, to make as though you followed that which he practiced; and
to say, that our Mass is no lyker his, then is an ape unto a man.


Rainoldes. We follow him in that, wherein he followed Christ, 1. Cor. 11.1.
and the folowers of Christ. Gregor. lib. 7. ind. 2. ep. 63.
Himself bears witness that Mos Apostolorum fuit, vt ad ipsam solummodo
oratione^ Dominicam oblationis hostiam consecrarent.
the Apostles neither used nor Precem quam Scholasticus co^. posuerat.
made that Canon, but I know not what Scholar. Wherefore, though a Scholar
presents Quorum meritis precibusque concedas.
the merits and prayers of the Saints before the throne of God, desiring help
for their sakes; and prays for the faithful, who do rest in Christ, that they
may have Locum refrigeri^, lucis, and pacis.
a place of cooling, peace, and light: yet because our Matt. 23.10.
Master teaches that Matt. 3.15. Ioh. 8.46. and 19.30.
himself alone wrought all righteousness, Heb. 4.16. and 7.25. and 9.12.
that we might find favor through his desert and intercession; and shows
that Reu. 14.13.
the dead who dye in him, are blessed, and rest from their labors, Col. 1.12.
in light, Esai. 57.2.
peace, and Luke 16.1^.
comfort; we follow not S. Gregory's Canon in those points, but answer him
with Christ, Matt. 19.8
from the beginning it was not so. And you, who think your Mass better then
an ape in respect of his, because it resembles his in the Canon, the chiefest
part of it: may know that it resembles his therein no better then does an ape
a man, when he swears by the cross of his ten bones. For the Canon also,
beside that ye people did hear, and understand it, records Quotquot ex hac
altaris participatione sacrosanctum filij ^ui corpus and sanguine^ sumpserimus.
their receiving of the body and blood: Amalat. For^unat. de e^clesiast. offic.
praefat. al^. Walafrid. Strabo de rebus ^ccles. cap. 22. Microlog. de eccles.
obseruat. c. 19.
as do the other prayers too after the communion. Which being as it were the
soul and reason of it: your Mass, which has it not, is but an apish
counterfeit of his, for all the Canon. Nay, it is in deed so much the more
apish; because it has his words, and not the meaning of them.


Heart. You grate on the Communion still, as if the Canon and all S. Gregory's
Mass did aim at that. Which is not so. For the principal point thereof is
the sacrifice, even the sovereign sacrifice, that is, our Savior Christ
offered to God his father. And since this is that which the Canon speaks of,
and S. Gregory offered, and the Mass imports with us, whom you call
Mass Priests: it follows that S. Gregory celebrated the sacrifice of the
Mass, as we do; and therefore was a Mass Priest, not a Minister of the
Communion.


Rainoldes. Then the men and women of Rome were Masse-priestes too in S.
Gregory's time, and celebrated the sacrifice of the Mass, as you do. For the
sacrifice which he offered, and the Canon speaks of, is Offeruntur a populo
o^ lationes and vinum: e quibus in altari pon unt^r vt sacrent^r. Greg. in lib.
sacrament. Of the which it is said in the Canon of the Mass, haec dona, haec
munera, haec sacrificia illibata.
the bread and wine, offered by the men and women for the Communion; and
Sacrificium laudis. Whereof the Canon says, memento Domine omnium circum
adstantium qui tibi offerunt hoc sacrificium laudis pro se suisque omnibus.
the sacrifice of praise, which they did offer all to God.


Heart. Nay, it is the very body and blood of Christ.


Rainoldes. The words of the Canon are plain to the contrary. For it
desires God Quam oblationem tu Deus benedictam acceptabilemque facere
digneris, vt nobis corpus and sanguis ^iat Jesus Christi.
to accept and bless their offering, that it may be made the body and blood of
Christ to them. It was not the body, and blood of Christ therefore, but very
bread and wine, which the faithful people offered to be ^^nctified to the use
of the Communion.


Heart. It was bread and wine before consecration: as it is declared by those
words of the Canon. But after consecration the Canon says of it, Hostiam
puram, hostiam sanctam, hostiam immaculatam, that is, the pure, holy, and
undefiled host.


Rainoldes. But upon those words it follows in the Canon: Panem san, ctum
vitae aeternae, and calicem salutis perp^tuae.
the holy bread of eternal life, and the cup of salvation. Wherefore the
bread, and the cup, that is, the wine, though holy now, and sanctified to be
the bread of life, and cup of salvation, that is, the body and blood of Christ
in a mystery, but the bread, and wine are the pure, holy and undefiled
sacrifice, or host (as you term it,) not only before but after consecration
too.


Heart. Nay, the real body, and blood of Christ are meant by the bread, and the
cup, in a figurative speech: and so Christ himself, is the pure, holy, and
undefiled host.


Rainoldes. Where a figurative speech is used in Luke. 22. ver. 19. and 20.
scripture: you will none of it. Here, where your Canon uses none, you fansy
it. For it follows straight touching that bread, and that cup: Super qe^^
^^opitio ac se^eno vultu respicere digne^^^: and accepta habere, sicuti accepta
habere dignatus es mu^era pueri tui iusti Abel.
upon the which things vouchsafe o Lord to look down with a merciful and
cheerful countenance, and to accept them as thou did vouchsafe to accept
the offerings of thy righteous servant Abel. So that, if Christ him self were
meant really by the bread, and the cup, in a figurative speech: then the
Priest desires God to look on Christ with a merciful and cheerful
countenance, and to accept of him at the Priests request, as he did accept Heb.
11.4.
the gifts, which Abel offered. There has been heretofore a saying amongst
you, (which I hope you like not,) that Sacerdos est creator creatoris sui.
a Priest is the creator of his creator. But by this means the Priest is
lifted higher to be the mediator of his mediator. And so will you vouch in
earnest of Mass Priests, that, which In Apologe^.
Tertullian did jest at in the Heathens: Homo iam Deo propitius esse debebit.
man must be merciful unto God now; unless it please the Priest, Christ shall
not find favor in his fathers sight.


Heart. The prayer of the Priest that God will look upon his offerings, and
accept them, has a very good meaning, whereof I do not dout. But the former
words, touching the host, must needs betoken Christ. For how can the name of
a pure, holy, and undefiled host be given to the bread, and wine?


Rainoldes. How are they called Haec dona, haec munera, haec sacrificia
illibata.
pure, or undefiled gifts, offeringes, and sacrifices in the Canon it self
before consecration?


Heart. They may be called pure by acceptance there, as your self expounded.
Which the Canon seems to imports also, in that it prays God Vti accepta
habeas, and bene^icas.
to accept them and bless them.


Rainoldes. Even so they may be called here a pure, holy, and undefiled
sacrifice. For the Canon also likewise prays God to accept them, in express
terms; and, in effect, Iube haec por^erri per manus sancti Angeli tui in
sublime altar tuum, v^ quotquot ex hac altaris participatione sacrosanctum
filij tui corpus and sanguinem sumpserimus, omni benedictione caelesti and
gratia replea^^^r.
to bless them. Whereof it has a farther and plainer proof too, in that it
says they offer to God that pure sacrifice, the bread of life, and cup of
salvation, De tuis donis ac datis.
of his gifts. For in saying that they offer it of the gifts of God, it
shows that the very bread and wine is meant. Which the people being used then
to offer, (as now we offer money:) the rest there of was given after to the
poor; a part was taken first for the use of the communicants, that they might
be partakers of the bread of life and cup of salvation, that is, the holy
sacrament of the body and blood of Christ.


Heart. I know that the name of sacrifice is given to the peoples offerings, and
other things often. But I am persuaded that, by the pure, holy, and undefiled
sacrifice, S. Gregory meant Christ: and so did offer him up to God his Father,
in the Mass, as we do. Which I think the rather, because they were
Mass Priests (as our Apology shows,) who lived in the function of
Priesthood before him. For the holy Cap. 14.
Council of Nice knew none but such offerers, or sacrificing, that is,
Massing-priests. S. Epist. 5.
Cyprian acknowledges the Priests of his time, to have offered, or sacrificed,
yea even in prisons. He was a Mass Priest, that S. De ciuit. Dei l. 22. c. 8.
Austin sent to do sacrifice in a house infested with evil spirits. They were
Mass Priests of whom In vit. Constantin. l. 4 c. 45.
Eusebius writes, that they pacified the divine majesty with unbloody
sacrifices and mystical consecrations. The dignity of Priesthood set forth in
the work of the same title by S. Chrysostom. de sacerdotio.
Chrysostom, is specially commended there for the power of doing the unbloody
sacrifice upon the altar. To be short, he, and all the other Fathers both
Greek and Latin were Mass Priests, none being ever made but for that purpose
principally: S. in 1. Tim. 4.
Ambrose testifying that to take the order of Priesthood, which he calls with
the Apostle, Imposition of hands, is to receive authority to offer sacrifice
to God in our Lords steed.


Rainoldes. These testimonies, M. Heart, of Greek, and Latin Fathers, with the
rest quoted by your Apologie-writer either at In his treat^se of the sacrifice
of the mass, ( cap. 14.) out of his lectures read at Doway.
Doway, or at In his Apology: and the Annotations on the Rhemish Testament,
Heb. 10.11.
Rhemes: do some of them mention offering, and not sacrificing; some speak of
sacrificing, but not the sacrificing of Christ. Between the which points what
difference there is: for the one, Alan. d^ eucharist. sacrif. cap. 16.
himself is a sufficient witness, in that he declares that sundry things are
offered which are not sacrificed; for the other, they, who show that the
faithful did offer sundry sacrifices, as namely, of Cyprian. de opere and
eleem.
alms, of August. contr. aduersa^. leg. l. 1. c. 18. and 20.
praise, of De ciuitat. Dei lib. 10. cap. 6. and l. 22. c. ^^
them selves, even at the celebration of the Lords supper. But admit they meant
by offering, and sacrificing, the sacrificing of Christ, as some of them did:
yet nether was their sacrificing, that, which your Massing is; nor they who
sacrificed, Mass Priests. For you will have Council. Trid. Sess. 22. in
praefat. and Can. 1.
the sacrifice offered in the Mass to be a Verum and singular sacrificium.
very, sovereign, Verum and pro prium sac^ificium.
true, and proper sacrifice: whereby you mean Alan. de Euchar. sacrif. c.
10.11. and 12.
that Christ is killed there indeed, and sacrificed to God. But the Fathers
named their offering, a sacrifice, not properly, but by a figure: meaning the
death of Christ (our only very, sovereign, true, and proper sacrifice,) to be
represented there, in a mystery, not exequuted in deed. For as in the
Scripture sacraments are noted by the names of things whereof they are
sacraments, that men may lift their eyes from the outward signs to the things
signified: so because we are willed 1. Cor. 11. ver. 2^. and 25.
to celebrate the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ in his remembrance,
and ver. 26.
to show his death; that showing of his death, and remembering of his sacrifice,
is called by the Fathers his sacrifice, and death. So does Epist. 63. ad
Caecilium.
Cyprian treat of the offering of Christ. For teaching that Passionis eius
mentionem in sacrificijs omnibus facimus.
we mention his death in all sacrifices, he gives this as a reason of it,
Passio est enim Domini sacrificium quod offerimus.
for the death of Christ is the sacrifice which we offer. So does Chrysostom
open his meaning of the sacrifice. For he affirms it to be Homil. 83. in
Matthaeum.
a sign of Christ's death: and having said that Homil. 17. in epist. ad Hebr.
we offer the very sacrifice that Christ did, he corrects his speech thus,
(...).
or rather we work a remembrance of that sacrifice. So the same In epist. ad
Heb. cap. 10.
Ambrose who speaks of sacrificing to God in Christ's steed, does expound
it too, Magis autem recordationem sacrificij operamur.
even with Chrysostomes words. So Epist. 23. ad Bonifacium.
Austin says that Christ, although he were sacrificed but once in himself,
Omni die populis immolatur in sacramento.
is sacrificed every day to Christian folk in a sacrament or mystery: nether
is he falsely said to be sacrificed. For sacraments have Quandam similitudinem.
a certain resemblance of those things whereof they are sacraments; and for
that resemblance they take the names commonly of the things themselves: as the
sacrament of the body of Christ is Christ's body Secundum quendam modum.
after a certain sort, and the sacrament of the blood of Christ is Christ's
blood. Finally, Eusebius (who may serve also to declare the judgment of the
Council of Nice, whereof he was a part) does by the very name of vnblooddy
sacrifices witness his agreement therein with the rest. For he calls our
remembrances and representations of the death of Christ in celebrating the
sacrament of his body and blood, though sacrifices, for the lykenes; yet
unbloody, for the difference: to show that Christ is not sacrificed in them
truly, and properly, (for then must his blood be shed, as it was, when he
suffered death,) but only by the way of a sacrament, and mystery, wherein the
true sacrifice is set forth before us, and remembered by us. And this he makes
plainer Demonstrat. Euang. lib. 1.
other where by saying, that Christ having offered him self for a sovereign
sacrifice unto his ^ather, ordained that we should (...)
offer a remembrance thereof unto God in steed of a sacrifice. Which
remembrance we celebrate (...).
by the signs of his body and blood, upon his table: and, pleasing God well,
we offer unbloody sacrifices, and reasonable, and acceptable to him.


Heart. Nay, Eusebius calls our sacrifices, unbloody, in respect of the manner,
and not of the thing. For they are true sacrifices of Christ, and therefore
bloody: but Christ who was offered upon the cross blooddily, is offered in the
Mass vnblooddily.


Rainoldes. That is your Council. Trid^t. Sess. 22. cap. 2.
Trent-doctrine: but it will not cleave with the words of Eusebius. For he
calls them (...). De vit. Constantin. lib. 4. cap. 45. (...). Demonstrat.
Euang. lib. 1.
vnblooddy sacrifices: not bloody sacrifices offered vnblooddily, but unbloody
sacrifices. And adding that we celebrate the remembrance therein of the
sacrifice of Christ by the signs of his body, and blood: he shows that they
are not in deed bloody sacrifices, but mysteries of the bloody.


Heart. Nay, the blood of Christ, the very sacrificall blood (as In the Rhemish
Annot. Heb. 9.20.
we term it) which Christ did shed upon the cross, is in the blessed chalice
of the altar at the sacrifice of the Mass. For De sacerdotio lib. 3.
Chrysostom (in that notable work of the Priesthood) says that Christ is
seen there by all the faithful, and mentions his blood too.


Rainoldes. Yea, and (that is more) he says that Christ is held there in all
their hands, and all are (...), made red like crimse^ or sc^rlet.
made red with that precious blood. The Fathers delight much in such
effectual speeches: which need wiser readers, then many be who light on
them. But if your self know that the whole people which comes to your Mass,
is not made red with the sacrificall blood: you may learn thereby that
Chrysostom, speaking of blood in the sacrifice, does consider of it as bloody
in a mystery, but in deed unbloody.


Heart. Nay: it is called unbloody by the Fathers, as D. De Euchar^t. ^acis^.
c^p. 1^.
Allen notes, not because the blood in deed is not in it, but to distinguish
it from the same sacrifice of Christ upon the cross, which was made and
offered Non sine fu^o ^ruore.
not without blood shed.


Rainoldes. The blood is not shed then in this sacrifice. And therefore it is
neither propiciatorie; for Heb. 9.22.
sins are not remitted without shedding of blood: nor the true and sovereign
sacrifice of Christ; for Singulari and ^olo vero sac^ificio pro nobis Christi
sanguis eff^sus est. August. contr. aduersar. leg. l. 1. c. 18.
that is the only true, and sovereign sacrifice, wherein his blood was shed
for us.


Heart. Yes: the blood is shed in the sacrifice of the Mass, but it is shed
vnblooddily.


Rainoldes. Blood, vnblooddily shed? You speak monsters, M. Heart, unless
you mean by [vnblooddily] not truly, and in deed, but sacramentally. For then
you say well, that his blood is shed, when we show his death, and remember
the shedding of it. But as S. Cont. Faust. Manich. l. 20. cap. 21.
Austin writes, that the flesh and blood of the sacrifice of Christ was
promised by sacrifices of resemblance before he came, was performed Per ipsam
verit^tem reddebatur.
in truth and in deed when he suffered, is celebrated Pe^ sacramentum memo^iae
celebratur.
by a sacrament of remembrance since he ascended: so, when the blood of Christ
is shed in this sort by the sacrament of remembrance, it is not shed in
deed, for that was done at his death only. And this is the most that you can
make of the Fathers, although it be granted that they called their celebrating
of the Lords supper an unbloody sacrifice in respect of the blooddy sacrifice
of Christ which he offered on the cross. Much less make they for you, if
they called it not so in respect of his sacrifice, but of the sacrifices of the
Jews. Which it is the more likely that they did, because they called their
Cyril. lib. de t^cta fid. ad Reginas. Oecumen. in epist. ad Hebr. c. 13.
prayers and their very Council. Ephesin. epist. ad Nestor. Liturg. Ba^il. and
Chrysostom.
worship of God vnblooddy too: no doubt to distinguish it from the Jewish
worship, which offered bloody sacrifices. For as S. Romans 1^.1.
Paul, treating of our serving of God, calls it (...).
reasonable, because we do sacrifice our selves spiritually; not brute beasts
and senseless things with carnal ceremonies, as the Jews did* so Liturg.
Basil. and Chrysostom.
the Fathers called it (...).
reasonable, and vnblooddy, to the same effect. And Demonstrat. Euang lib. 1.
Eusebius namely says that we offer (...).
vnblooddy and reasonable sacrifices to God as long as we live, meaning all 1.
Pet. 2.3.
spiritual sacrifices thereby, which every Christian offers as a Priest to
God. Yea, even in De vit. Constantin. l. 4. c. 45.
that place which D. Allen chose as making most for his Apology, the prayers,
which (...).
the Ministers (for so Eusebius terms them) did offer unto God, may well be
understood by those sacrifices too. But if he meant only their offerings of
the remembrance of Christ's death in the sacrament, as that which ensues of
mystical consecrations may seem to import: yet himself declares by the word
[vnblooddy] that he called them sacrifices, not properly, but by a figure; as
meaning not that Christ is put to death there in deed, but in a mystery. To
be short, he, and all the other Fathers, both Greek, and Latin, are so fully
and plainly of one mind in this point: that the Lib. 4. did. 12.
Master of the Sentences (in his abridgement of Divinity gathered out of them)
proposing this question, Si, quod. gerit sacerdos, proprie^ dicatursacrisicium
vel immolatio.
whether that which the Priest does exequute be called a sacrifice properly,
resolves that it is not. But that which is offered and consecrated by the
Priest is called a sacrifice (says he) and an offering, Quia memoria est and
representatio ver^ sacrificij and sanctae immolationis fact^m ara crucis.
because it is a remembrance and representation of the true sacrifice and the
holy offering made on the altar of the cross, as he proves by the Fathers.
Wherefore since the sacrifice offered in the Mass is Verum and proprium
sacrificium.
a true and proper sacrifice, as you define it; and that of the Fathers is not
a true sacrifice, but called so improperly: it remains to be concluded that
the Fathers nether said Mass, Council. Trident. S^ss. 22. can. 1.
nor were Mass Priests. And so, to make an end with that which you began with,
the cause is just, and holy, why we call presbyteros, not Priests, but Elders.
For since the name of Priest has relation to sacrifice, and men by the
sacrifice understand your Mass, and your Mass is a monster of abomination,
profaning the blood of Christ, condemned by the Scriptures, unknown to the
Fathers, detestable in the sight of God and of the godly: the charge of the
Lord, Leu. 19.14.
not to lay a stumbling block before the blind, might have removed As the name
of my Baal. H^s. 2.16.
that name from Ministers of the gospel, yea, although they had been ordained
to sacrifice, much more since they are not, but as other Christians. The name of
Elders therefore expressing that word whereby the Scripture calls them, as it
is confessed by The vulga^ Latintrans^a^tion. 1. Pet. ^. Seniore.
your own authentical, translating it so: we could not but allow it. Chiefly
since the very necessity of opening our meaning unto others (which is the end
of languages) required different words for the different things of presbyter,
and sacerdos. For how will you translate that saying of S. De ciu. Dei l. 20.
c. 10.
Austin, that S. John's words [ Reu. 20.6.
they shall be Priests of God, and of Christ] are meant of all Christians; non de
solis episcopis, and presbyteris, qui proprie iam vocantur in ecclesia
sacerdotes; that is, as we translate, not of Bishops and Elders only, which now
are called peculiarly Priests in the Church. But how would you translate it?


Heart. There is a defect in our English tongue, that we can not translate it so
perspicuously as it is in Latin, because we have but one word for presbyter,
and sacerdos.


Rainoldes. Then you should not play the dog in the manger, nether your selves
mending the defectes of our tongue, nor suffering us to mend them. For if a man
translate it as your In their Annot. Reu. 20.6*
Rhemists do, not of Bishops and Priests only, which are So they translate the
wor^ propri^ deceitfully: for advantage of their error, that Ministers of the
gospel are properly called Priests. Whereas S. Austin means that generally,
by Scripture, all Christians have that name: though peculiarly Bishop^ and
Priests, by the Church, in his time: both called so improperly, and by a
figure: not as the Leuiticall Priests, and Christ, properly.
properly now in the Church called Priests: how shall the English reader
understand his meaning which Priests be called Priests, and whether Bishops be
Priests too? Nay, to come to that which must needs enforce you to translate
sacerdos otherwise, then presbyter: S. Contr. Julian. Pelag. l. 1. c. 7. and l.
2. c. 10.
Austin having brought (against Julian, an heretic,) the testimonies of the
Fathers, Irenaeus, Cyprian, Reticius, Olympius, Hilarie, Ambrose, Innocentius,
Nazianzene, Basil, and Chrysostom, does name them sacerdotes, that is (as you
translate it) Priests: is it not?


Heart. Yes: We have no other English for sacerdos.


Rainoldes. Where S. Austin adds then touching Ierom, that nether he must be
contemned because he was presbyter: what here shall presbyter be? Will you make
S. Austins speech so unsavory, as to tell the heretic, that he ought to
reverence Irenaeus, Cyprian, Ambrose, and the rest, because they were Priests;
and not contemn Ierom because he was a Priest?


Heart. Nay, I would translate here, presbyter, a Priest: but, for sacerdotes, I
would say Bishops. For that is S. Austins meaning in these places where he does
name them sacerdotes.


Rainoldes. So Greg. Martin. in his Discover. chap. 6.
your translatour does. But the word Bishop is our English of episcopus. And
what if episcopus chance to come in too, with sacerdos, and presbyter? How
will you express them? As where in De ordine celebrand. Council. Canones a
sanct. patribus constit. and ab Isidoro in vnum corpus collecti. Council. Tom. 1.
the Canons collected by Isidore touching the order of keeping Councels, he
says that sacerdotes first must enter in, and after them presbyteri: your
Antonius Contius, in append. decretor. Gratiani, de ord celebr. Conc.
Lawier notes on it, Vide vt sacerdotes vocet episcopos veteri more, quem
ignorantes plerique presbyteros sacerdotes appellari promiscue stulie
opinantur. Wherein, if you translate sacerdotes, Bishops, and presbyteros,
Priests: then your Lawier says (which were a wise speech) that Isidore calls
Bishops Bishops, after the old manner, which many not knowing do folishly think
that Priests are called Bishops indifferently.


Heart. Such sentences cannot be well expressed in English* but the Latin words
must be kept in them.


Rainoldes. But it is behoofefull for our English men to have them in English,
that they may know your Latin abuses of Rome. For this is meant thereby, that
the ancient writers are wont to note Bishops by the name of Priests: which many
not knowing do foolishly think that the name of Priests is used indifferently
for the same that Elders. A lesson for your Rhemists, who make them all one,
although not of foolishnes so much as of fraud: to the intent that Presbyteri.
Elders, that is to say, Ministers of the new testament, may be thought
Sacerdotes.
Priests, that is to say, Ministers ordained Sacrifica^e.
to sacrifice, as your Sacrificium Missae.
Mass Priests be. For color and maintenance of the which error, the
countenance of proof that you pretend out of the Fathers is the less by thus
much, that Cyprian. ep. 55. Ambros. e^ 33. Council. Afrie. in ^pist* ad
Celestin. and the rest of the Fathers commonly. which the Emperors used in
their laws too: as Antonius Contius. (L. nec honor. C. de episcopis.) notes
with these words, Obserua sacerdotem semper in his legibus poni pro episcopo.
they were accustomed to give the name of Priests, not generally to Elders, but
to Bishops only. Wherefore to avoid confusion of things, which the confusion
of words might engender, in that we are to treat off: I will (by your leave)
call presbyter an Elder, as our translations do; that I may distinguish it
from the name of Priest, both as it is used by you for a Mass Priest, and as
it is used by the Fathers for a Bishop. So to come at length back again to
that which I was in hand with, of the second sort of the Bishops of Rome, The
fifth Division.
that, when they were grown to their fattest plight, they were but Archbishops
of a Princely diocese, not universal Popes and Patriarchs of the whole world:
the Elders (as I said) ordained by the Apostles in every Church, through every
city, chose one amongst themselves whom they called Bishop, to be the
President of their company, for the better handling and ordering of things in
their assemblies and meetings, wherein they provided by common counsel and
consent for the guiding of the flock of Christ committed to them. Which point
of care and wisdom the Bishops following also, knowing that Prou. ^1.1^.
where counsels want the people falls, but in the amplenes of counselors
there is health, had their meetings likewise for conference together when
things of greater weight required more advise: and they chose to be their
President therein the Bishop of the chiefest city in the province, whom they
called the Metropolitan. For Notit. prouinciar. Imperij Romani.
a province, as they termed it, was the same with them, that a shire is with
us: and the shire-towne as you would say of the province was called L.
obseruare. D. de officio Proconsulis. Dio in Adriano.
metropolis, that is the mother-citie. In which, as the Judges and Justices
with us do hear at certain times the causes of the whole shire: so the ruler
of the province with them did minister justice, and made his abode there
ordinarily. Whereupon by reason that men for their business made great concourse
thither: the church was wont to furnish it (of godly policy) with the
worthyest Bishop, endued with gifts above his brethren. And they reposed in him
such affiance, that they did not only commit the Council. Antioch. can. 20.
Chalced ca^ 19
Presidentship of their assemblies to him: but agreed also that Council. Nicen.
can. 4. and 6.
none through all the province should be made Bishop without his consent,
Council. Antiochen. can. 9.
nor any waightyer matter be done by them without him. Now the Roman Empire
was governed in such sort, that as the Queens Majesty appoints Lieutenants
over sundry greater parts of her dominion, a Lord Deputy of Ireland, and the
Lord Presidents of Wales, and of the North: so the Emperor divided his to
sundry officers, Comes Orientis.
the Earl of the East, Praefectus Augustalis* or Aegypti.
the Lord Presidents of Egypt, Praefectus Praetorio Italiae.
of Italy, and so forth, whose circuites had many provinces within them, and
were called As dioecesis Aegyptiaca. L. omnia. C. De offic. prefect. Aug. So
dioecesis Orientis, and the (...), in Cod. Theod and Justinian. passim.
dioceses. Through occasion whereof the Bishops of those cities in which these
Lieutenants of the Emperor were resiant, ( Wolfgang. Laz. comment. reip. Romans
lib. 2. cap. 2.
the state ecclesiastical following the civil,) did grow in power too. Nether
were they only named Archbishops and Patriarchs of the diocese, that is, the
chiefest Bishops and Fathers of that circuit which the Lieutenant ruled: but
also they obtained that the Metropolitans of the provinces in their diocese
should be likewise subject and obedient to them, as Bishops were to
Metropolitans. So the Archbishop and Patriarch of Antioche had Council.
Constantinop. 1. can 2.
prerogatives given him through the diocese of the East, Council. Antioch. in
exord.
wherein were seven provinces. So Council. Chalced. action. 4.
nothing could be done in the diocese of Egypt, ( Theodos. and Valentin.
epist. ad Dioscor. in Council. Chalced. Action. 1.
which under the Archbishop had ten Metropolitans) without the consent of the
Archbishop and Patriarch of Alexandria. So Council. Chalced. Act. 16.
it was granted to the Archbishop and Patriarch of Constantinople, that the
Metropolitanes of the dioceses of Pontus, Asia, and Thracia, ( As appe^reth by
Theodoret* Histor. eccles. l. 5. c. 2^. Though the book entitled Notitia
prouinciarum imperij Romani numbreth but six and twenty, ten in Pontus, ten in
Asia, and six in Thracia.
within the which there were eight and twenty provinces) should be ordained by
him. Finally, so was it Council. Chalced. can. 9. and 17.
decreed that if a Bishop had any matter of controversy with the Metropolitan
of his own province, (...), as the Council calls him. But thereby is meant
the Patriarch, as appears by Justinians constitution, Nouel. 123. cap. 22.
the Patriarch of the diocese should be judge thereof: as also if any man did
receive injury of his own Bishop, or Metropolitan. Thus were the Roman Popes
(as they are called now) first Bishops over Elders within their own city;
next, Metropolitans over Bishops within their own province; then Archbishops,
and Patriarchs over Metropolitans within their own diocese. And this is the
Princely diocese, which I meant, when I said that the Pope in the time of
Pelagius was become Archbishop of a Princely diocese; but he was yet but an
Archbishop: he was not universal Pope and Patriarch of the whole world. For
although the Patriarch of Constantinople, being puffed up because in his city
not the Emperors Lieutenants were resiant, as in the rest, but the Emperor
himself, aspired to be therefore Sovereign of the rest, and as the Emperor
counted himself (...). D. ad lege^ ^hodiam deiactu.
Lord of the world, so would he be called (...). Gregor. Regist* lib. 4. epist.
39.
Patriarch of the world: yet the Roman Patriarchs In epist. ad episcopos qui
conuenerant Constantinopoli. Did. 9^ c. Nullus.
Pelagius, and Registr. lib. 4 ep. 32. and 34. and 36. and 38. lib. 7. indict.
^* epist. 30. Distinct. 99. c. Ecce.
Gregory, did withstand his pride, Archiepiscopi and Patriarcha senioris Rom^,
Constantinopol^os, Alexandriae, Theopolcos (that is* of Antioche,) and
Ierosolymorum. Nouel. 123. cap. 3.
and neither would themselves take so much upon them, nor agree that any
Patriarch should do it. Wherefore when Pelagius ordained that if any
Metropolitan sent not to the sea of Rome to show his faith, and receive the
pall, he should be deprived: Pelagius must be thought to have made that
ordinance for all Metropolitans within his own diocese, not throughout the
world. The testimony of Registr. lib. 4. ep. 34.
Gregory which your self alleged touching the Bishop of Salonae is a proof
thereof. For, that Episcopi m^i.
my Bishops (says he) should despise me, I impute it to my sins: and, if the
causes of Bishops committed to me be dealt with thus, alas what shall I do?


Heart. Nay, although he say, Bishops committed to me, and, my Bishops: yet is
that no proof that only certain Bishops were of his diocese. Episcoporum
mihi commissorum.
For he might signify all Bishops by those words, as being all his subjects.


Rainoldes. The Patriarchs of Antioche, and Alexandria will deny that; or
rather Gregory him self. For Registr. lib. 4. epist. 36.
him self exhorting them to withstand the pride of the Patriarch of
Constantinople, who would be universal Patriarch: stand ye strong (says he)
and keep all Episcopos curae vestrae sub^ectos.
the Bishops subject to your charge from defiling them selves with consent to
this pride. Where by it is manifest that only certain Bishops were subject to
his charge: whom he termed his Bishops, and, Bishops committed to him. And this
appears further by that which Johan. Diac^^. vit. Gregor. lib. 3. c. 1^.
Diaconus writes in his life: that, when there were Bishoprikes void in his
diocese, Vacantes episcopos in suae dioeces^os episcopatus inuitab^t.
he desired Bishops of an other diocese (who were destitute) to take them; as
the Bishop of A city of Asia, in the di^cese of the Patriarch of
Constantinople.
Smyrna to take a Bishoprike in Sicilia. Howbeit, if Gregory and Pelagius both
had meant generally of all Metropolitans through the whole world, that they
should be allowed by the Popes consent: yet neither wou^d that prove the Popes
of the second sort to have avouched that soueraintie of power over Bishops
which your last sort of Popes does, and touches their supremacy most. For Leo
epist. 82. and 87. c. Metropolitano. c. Vota ciuium. did 63. Gregor. Regist.
lib. 1. epist. 56. and 58. and 78. lib. 2. ind. 11. epist. 22. and 29. and 30.
and caet. passim.
they of the second taught that all Bishops ought to be chosen by the people
and clergy: them selves requiring only the confirming of Metropolitans by
their consent, if that be granted. Where Council. Lateran. sub. Leon. decim.
Sess. 11. abrogat* pragmaticae sanctionis, and Concilij Basiliensis.
these of the last do claim to them selves the right not of confirming alone,
but of choosing too, both Metropolitans and Bishops: and bind them by Forma
iuramenti praestandi ab episcopo e^^ecto. In Pontiti^icali Romans part. 1.
oath (for more assurance of their State) Reseruationes, prouisiones, mandata
Apostolica totis viribus obseruabo, and faciam ab alijs obserua^i.
to observe and cause to be observed by others, the Papal reseruations,
provisions, and mandates, by which they work this tyranny.


Heart. It is more requisite that the Popes in our time should reserve
Bishoprikes to their own bestowing, that they may provide good Pastors for the
Church, then it was of old. And therefore less marvel if they choose them
selves such as they know fit, and will have the confirming of such as other
choose: though their predecessors (when the days were better) did neither
choose any, nor confirm all. But the Popes supremacy stands not so much in
making Church Officers, as in judging Church-causes. And therein the second
sort of Popes avouched as much as the last. For Epist. 93. inter epist.
Augustine.
Innocentius the first answering the letters of the Council of Mileuis, who
had written to him about the error of the Pelagians, does praise them for
referring the matter unto him: and I think (says he) that Quotiesfid o^ ratio
ventilatur.
as often as a matter of faith is called in question, all our brethren and
felow-bishops ought not but to refer it unto Peter, that is, the autour of
their name and honor, as now your charity has done.


Rainoldes. Th^se words of Innocentius may prove (M. Heart) that he claimed a
preeminence of knowledge for your Peter, not a soueraintie of power: a
preeminence of knowledge, Super anx^^s rebus quae sit tenenda sententia.
to resolve the Church-questions; not a soueraintie of power, to decide the
Church-causes. For matters of faith are to be defined by the rule of faith,
that is, by the scriptures: and the right opening of the scriptures lies not
in power, but in knowledge. Which you may learn by c. Decretale ^. distinct.
20*
Gratian in the Canon law, saying, that the Fathers are preferred before the
Popes in expounding of scriptures, because they pass them in knowledge: the
Popes before the Fathers in deciding of causes, because they pass them in
power.


Heart. That distinction of causes and questions of the Church is but a shift of
sophstrie to cast a mist upon ye truth. For though the Church-causes, as
Gratian speaks of them, do concern persons, the innocent to be acquitted, or
offenders to be condemned: yet questions of faith (which you call
Church-questions) are Church-causes too in a general sense. As c. Maiore^. de
baptismo.
one of the third sort of Popes says, that greater causes of the Church,
chiefly such as touch the articles of faith, are to be referred to the Sea of
Peter. And this was the meaning of Innocentius the first. For, in Epist. 91.
inter epist. Augustine.
his letters to the Council of Carthage written to like effect on the same
occasion, he says, that the Fathers decreed by the sentence not of man, but of
God, that whatsoever was done in provinces far of, they thought that it ought
not to be concluded before it came to the notice of the Sea of Rome.


Rainoldes. It is true that questions of matters touching faith are causes of
the Church: but they are not such causes as quicken the Papacy. The causes
touching persons, which Zosimus, Boniface, and Caelestine did deal for, when
they would have it lawful for Bishops and Elders to appeal to Rome, are those
which Popes must live by. And the same Councels of Carthage and Mileuis, whom
Innocentius wrote too, did know, and show this difference, when they desired
the Popes consent in that of faith, but Council. Carthag. Graec. can. ^8. Council
Mileuit. can. 22.
forbadde the causes of Bishops and Elders to come unto him by appeals.
Wherefore that distinction of the Church-causes, and the Church-questions, is
not a shift of sophistry to cast a mist upon the truth, but a point of truth
to clear ye mist of your sophistry. For your Torrensis confess. August. lib.
1. cap. 9. tit. ^
Jesuit cites those textes of Innocentius to prove the Popes supremacy.
Whereas he claims judgment, to resolve the douts; or (that is less,)
authority, to approve the doctrine; not a sovereign power to hear and determine
the causes of the Church.


Heart. Nay, his words are general to the Council of Carthage, that
whatsoever was done in provinces far off, it should come to the notice of the Sea of Rome before it were concluded.


Rainoldes. But if you do rack that word [whatsoeuer] so far beyond his
drift: you make him more greedy then the last sort of Popes, who claim Maiores
ecclesiae causas. c. Maiores. de baptismo.
the greater causes of the Church only. Wherefore, as when S. 1. Cor. 6.12.
Paul says, all things are lawful for me, he means not all thing^s
absolutely, and simply, but all indifferent things, according to the point
which he treats of: so must you apply the words of Innocentius not to
whatsoever touching Church-causes, but to matters of faith called into
question; which, the Popes being learned then and Catholic, (...), as S. Cyril
says in his epistle to C^lestin. Epist. ^8.
the Christian Churches used to refer to them, that the truth approved by
their consent and judgment might for their authority find the greater credit
and freer passage against heretics.


Heart. What say you then to Leo the great, or rather to S. Gregory: who had
the Church-causes, even such as touched persons, referred to their See, and
willed them to be so, as their epistles show.


Rainoldes. In deed Leo, and Gregory are somewhat large that way. Though Leo,
as Wolfgang. Laz. commen^ar. reip. Roman. l. 2. c. 2.
the diocese of the Roman Patriarch was lesser in his time, then afterward in
Gregory's: so had fewer of them. Gregory had more: yet he had not all.


Heart. Not all: but all the greater. And that is as much as the last sort of
Popes claim.


Rainoldes* But they claim all the greater, through the whole world, which
Gregory neither had nor claimed.


Heart. No? Is it not manifest by all his Epistles that he dealt with the
causes of Bishops in Italy, Spain, France, Afrike, Corsica, Sardinia,
Sicilia, Dalmatia, and many countries mo?


Rainoldes. Yet he dealt neither with all the greater causes, nor through the
whole world. And this very show of the names of countries, by which D.
Saunders, de visib. Monar. eccles. lib. 7.
your Irish champion does think the Popes supremacy to be clearly proved, is
a demonstration in truth to disprove it. For, rehersing only those which you
have named, with England, Ireland, Corcyra, and Graecia, and saying yt Gregory
did practice the supremacy over their Bishops, and Churches, though neither
proving so much, but admit he proved it: yet, in bringing only the names and
proofs of these, he shows that Gregory did not practice it over the Bishops
and Churches of Thracia, Mysia, Scythia, Galatia, Bithynia, Cappadocia,
Armenia, Pamphylia, Lydia, Pisidia, Lycaonia, Phrygia, Lycia, Caria,
Hellespontus, Egypt, Jury, Phoenicia, Syria, Cilicia, Cyprus, Arabia,
Mesopotania, Isauria, with the rest of the countries subject to the Patriarchs
of Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioche, and Jerusalem.


Heart. Though S. Gregory speak not of these particularly: yet he shows in
general his supremacy over them. For whereas the Patriarch (says Registr.
lib. 7. ind. 2. epist. 64.
he) does confess himself to be subject to the Sea Apostolic: if any fault
be found in Bishops, I know not what Bishop is not subject to it. Behold, not
only Bishops, but the Patriarchs also subject to the Pope, by S. Gregory's
judgment: yea by their own confession.


Rainoldes. Nay, it was not a Patriarch but P^imas Byzacenus.
a Primate, who confessed that. And a Primate is but Primae sedis episcopus.
Council. Carthag. can. 17.18. and 19. Distinct. 99. c. Primae sedis.
a Bishop of the first and cheifest See in a Province; that is, a Metropolitan.


Heart. It was Primas Byzancenus, that is to say, the Patriarch of
Constantinople: as it is expounded in c. De Constantinopolit. did. 22. in
glossa. Byzancenus, id est, Constantinopolitanus. Primo enim Constantinopolis
dicta fuit Byzantium.
the gloss on Gratian. For Constantinople was called Byzantium first.


Rainoldes. Gratian and his gloss were deceived both. For primas Byzacenus (or
Byzancenus, if you read it so) is Primate of Byzacium ( Notitia prouinciarum
imper. Romans
called Byzantium too) which was Conc. A^ric. can. 57. and 94. and in
subscriptionibus, Prouincia Byzacena.
a province of Afrike, and therefore Council. Carthag. can. 17. and African.
passim.
had a Primate, as Councels of that country show. Whom, and not the Patriarch
of Constantinople, to have been meant by Gregory: it is now declared in your
Gratian By Antonius Contius. In whose notes on G^atian* primas By ^^cenus is
expounded, Bizacij q^ae erat vna ex prouincijs Afric^e.
too. The Patriarch was too lofty to confess himself subject to the Pope: he
sought to make the Pope his subject.


Heart. Perhaps he had sought it before, but not then. For certainly S.
Registr. lib. 7. ind. 2. epist. 63.
Gregory, saying, that the Church of Constantinople is subject to the Sea of
Rome, adds, that Eusebius the Bishop of the same city does confess it still.


Rainoldes. There was Nicephor. Chronolog. tripartit. Ge nebrard. chronog. lib.
3. and caet. Chron. Constable.
no Eusebius Bishop of that city in all Gregory's time. And they who were
Bishops, Registr. lib. 4. epist 36. and 38.
first John, Lib. 6. epist. 31. and lib. 7. ind. 2. epist. 69.
then Cyriacus, did usurp the title of universal Patriarch, as Gregory
himself declares. Wherefore either Gregory wrote more then was true, to
cheer up his subjects: or some has chopped into him that which he wrote not, to
advance the credit of the Sea of Rome. But howsoever he thought all Bishops
subject to it if any fault be found in them, perhaps as S. Gal. 2.11.
Peter was subject to S. Paul, and 1. These. 5.11. Leu. 19.^7.
Christians are one to an other, to be reproved by their brethren when they do
offend; but if he meant more, as perhaps he did of a good will to his See: yet
he meant not that which touches the point of the Popes supremacy, given you
to prove, to weete, that Bishops causes through the whole world must be
referred to him. And hereof himself is a sufficient witness, in that Grego.
Regist. lib. 11. ep. 54.
he ouerruleth the case by No^ella tradirio, as Grego^ie calls (...) means
Novel. 123. cap. 2^.
the law of Justinian the Emperor. For, if any man (says he) accuse a Bishop
for whatsoever cause: let the cause be judged by his Metropolitan. If any man
gainsay the Metropolitans judgment, let it be referred to the Archbishop and
Patriarch of that diocese, and let him end it according to the canons and laws.


Heart. The causes of Bishops (I grant) must first be heard of their
Metropolitans; and next, of their Patriarchs. Yet if the Patriarchs judgment
be misliked too: then may the party grieved appeal to the Pope, and so they
come to him last.


Rainoldes. Gregory meant not so, but that the last judge thereof should be
the Patriarch: as did Justinian also. Which they show plainly, by saying, Let
him P^aebeat fine^.
end it Secundum (...) and lege^.
according to the canons and laws. For both Council. Chalcedon. can. 9. and 17.
the canons of that Council which referred the causes of Bishops to the
Patriarchs, did mention the^ as the last Judges: and (...). C. de episcopali
a^dientia.
the laws of Emperors which granted appeals from Metropolitans to them,
(...).
granted no appeal from them to any other; nay, for bad expressly al
appealing from them.


Heart. Yet even there S. Gregory gives a special privilege and preeminence
to the Pope above other Patriarchs. For he adds, that if a Bishop have no
Metropolitan nor Patriarch at all: then is his cause to be heard and determined
by the Sea Apostolic, which is the head of all Churches.


Rainoldes. True: he adds that beyond the canons of Councels, and the laws
of Emperors. But in the mean season, he yields that the causes of Bishops,
who were subject to any other Patriarch, must not be referred to the Popes
See. Whereby it is evident that not all their causes through the whole world
were claimed by S. Gregory. And herewithal by this place it may be noted too,
that when he names the Sea and Church of Rome the head of all Churches, he
means it of excellency for sundry gifts above them, not of the supremacy
for power to govern them. Which answers the question that you made before
Chapt. 7. Division 9.
upon the same title: If the Church of Rome be the head of all Churches, why
not the Bishop of Rome the head of all Bishops? For the name of head is given
to that Church in respect of others: as if the city of London should be
called in England* the head of all cities. The Lord Mayor of London might
chance to have a favorer, who would ask thereon: If the city of London be
the head of all cities, why not the Mayor of London the head of all Mayors? But
I know no Mayor so simple in England, that upon this sophisme would yield
himself a subject to the Lord Mayor of London.


Heart. Yet your selves grant, y^ In Concilio Africano.
Zosimus, Boniface, and Caelestinus, did claim the right of appeals to be
made to the^ in the causes of Bishops through the whole world. Who being Popes
before Gregory, almost two hundred years: it follows that they of the
second sort did avouch as much for the Popes supremacy in judging
Church-causes, as their successors of the last do, which you denied.


Rainoldes. And I deny it still: neither does that prove it. For the last sort
claims Cap. Maiores. de baptismo.
all the greater causes of the church. Wherein c. Etsi dominici: De poenit. and
remission. in extrauag. commun. Bulla, quae publicatur per Papam in die Coenae
Domini: inscript. Literae processus. In eclog. Bullar. and motu proprior. Greg.
decimitert.
they comprehend not only the causes of Bishops and the Clergy, but of all
estates, as many as do fall within the Casus reseruati Apostolicae se^ di. De
quibus Council. Trident. Sess. 14. cap. 7.
reserved cases, as they call them. And because these cases by the ancient
Council. Nicaen. can. 5. Antioc^en. can. 2. Constantinop. prim. can. 2.
Councels should be all determined within their own^ Provinces, not referred to
Rome: therefore c. Significasti, De election.
no Council may prescribe a law (they say) to bind them. But the other, whom
you named of the second sort, did neither take upon them such power over
Councels, nor claim appeals in causes of any, but of Bishops, or Clergy at
the most. As for ye cases which Popes reserve now from ordinary Judges to
their own Eschequer: the second sort of Popes was so far from doing it,
that they were in their graves many hundred years before the sent thereof was
felt. Wherefore you ouerreach^d your self, M. Heart, when you said that Chapt.
7. Diuisi. 7.
the Bishop of Rome has always used the practice of the supremacy. For it is
apparent by this which I have showed, that not one of them for the space of
six hundred years after Christ did ever either use it, or claim it as his
right.


Heart. Yes: they heard the causes of Clergymen appealing to them, and held
that they might do so. Wherefore they claimed the supremacy, and used it too.


Rainoldes. Which reason is as good, as if a Kentish Gentleman should say that
all the County of Kent is his own, because he has a Lordship in the Weald of
Kent.


Heart. What? do you accounte it so small a matter, that Clergymen, yea
Bishops should appeal to them out of all provinces through the whole world?


Rainoldes. A goodly Lordship and large. But nothing so large as the Weald of
Kent, much less as all Kent. There are many Lordships mo within the County,
which the ancient Popes neither had, nor claimed. One Lordship of being
subject to no man, no not to the Emperor. An other, of having power over
Princes to excommunicate and depose them. An other, of binding Bishops,
Metropolitanes, and Patriarchs with an oath to be their faithful subjects. An
other, of giving Church-liuings and offices unto whom they list. An other, of
breaking the bands of al Councels with dispensations and decrees. An other, of
reserving cases to their See. Whereof (to pass the rest, which you may find
recorded in their Decretales epistolae.
Rolls, and Regulae cancellariae Apostolicae.
Chancerie) since they neither challenged nor possessed any: they bore not
themselves as Lords of the whole County; I mean, they neither claimed nor
used the supremacy.


Heart. But will you grant that so much then of the suprepremacie as they
claimed or used, belongs to their See, and is theirs of right.


Rainoldes. No. For the exception In the third Division of this Chapter.
which I made against them was of two branches: one, that they avouch not the
supremacy of the Pope; the other, that they avouch more, through affection,
then is true and right. And this is very manifest not only by the dealinges of
them whom I named: but also by the writings of them whom you alleged.


Heart. Of the third sort of Popes if you mean: they may be refused perhaps
with greater show of reason. But they, whom I alleged, of the second sort,
were holy men, and Saints.


Rainoldes, The Apostles of Christ (I hope) were Saints too. Yet has the
spirit of God set down for our instruction that Mat. 20.20. Luke. 9.46. and
22.24.
they did not only desire superiority, but also strive about it. Innocentius,
Leo, Gelasius, Vigilius, Pelagius, and Gregory, the men who^ you alleged,
were not greater then the Apostles. And the praise which they give to their See
of Rome, does so exceed the truth: that it bears evident marks of their
affection. You might have perceived it in that which you cited out of Ep^st.
91. inte^ epist. Aug.
Innocentius concerning the Fathers and the sentence of God: by which (he
says) they decreed, that, whatsoever was done in provinces far off, it
should not be concluded before it came to the notice of the Sea of Rome. For
what were the Fathers who decreed that? where is the sentence of God, by which
they did it? Though this is the least of many friendly speeches, which not
Innocentius only, but the rest too (as Chapt. 1. Diuis. 2.
I have showed in Leo,) do lend their Church and Peter. Yea, some flat
repugnant to the holy scripture: and that, confessed by your selves. For they
say that Vigilius in decretis suis* cap. vlt.
all Churches took their beginning from the Roman. The holy Esai. 2.3. Act.
1.4. and 2.5. and 8.4^
scripture makes Which therefore is called the mother of all Churches by ye
Fathers of the Council (the second general Counsel) of Constantinople.
Theodoret. l. 5. c. 9. Although the Popes now and their Trent-councell do
belie the Church of Rome with that title. Council. Trid. Sess. 7. De baptism.
can 3. Ses. 14. de Sacrament. extrem. unction. cap. 3. Sess. 22. cap. 8. Sess.
25. Decret. de delectu ciborum.
Jerusalem the spring of them. They say that Innocent. ep. 93. inter Epist. Aug.
all Bishops had their honor and name from Peter. The holy Act. 14.23. and
20.28. Tit. 1. ver. 5. and 7.
scripture teaches, that many had it from other Apostles, not from him. They
say Gelasius in decret. cum 70. episcopis.
that the Church of Rome has neither spot, norwrinckle, nor any such thing.
The holy Ephesians 9 ^7
scripture shows yt the Church is san^ctified, and framed to be hereafter not
having spot, or wrinckle or any such thing, when Christ shall make it glorious
and triumphant in heaven: not, but that it has such, while it is militant on
the earth. Hieron. in Ierem. cap. 31, August. Retract. l. 2. c. 18.
Which is so apparent, that not the Fathers only, but Sum. Theolog. part. 3.
q. 8. art. 3.
Thomas of Aquine also, and D Princip. doct. l. 1. c. 2. and 8.
Stapleton confess it. Wherefore howsoever holy men they were of the second
sort of Popes which you alleged: it cannot be denied but they had affections,
and yielded thereunto as men. Howbeit the third sort (I grant) are best
worthy to be excepted against for this fault. For it is a small thing with them
to use speeches repugnant to the Scripture: but they must abuse, yea, coin
scripture too, for maintenance of their Papal port. They can teach the Church
that c. Significasti. de electione.
the Pope may offer to confirm Archbishops Tali condition, si sacramentum
exhiberes.
upon this condition, if they will be sworn to him: because when Christ
committed his sheep unto Peter, he Conditionem posuit.
did condition with him, saying, Ioh. 21.16.
if thou love me, feed my sheep. They can teach the Church that c. Vna^
sancta^ extra. de maiorit. and obed.
the Pope has power over all powers, and Princes of the earth, and none has
power over him, because 1, Cor. 2.15.
the spiritual man judges all things, yet he himself is judged of no man.
They can teach the Church that In council. Lateran. sub Leon. decim. Sess. 11.
Christ ordained Peter and Peter's successors to be his vicars, who, (by Ex
libri Regu^ testimonio.
the testimony of the book of kings) must needs be so obeyed, that he who
obeieth them not, must die the death: and, as it is read Where is that read?
otherwhere, He that forsakes the Bishop of Romes chair cannot be in the
Church.


Heart. That which is cyted out of the book of kings, is in the book of
Deuteronomie. The text is true scripture, though the place mistaken. And,
though it belong not to the Pope immediately.


Rainoldes. Nay, never go about to salve it, M. Heart. That of Deuteronomie we
have Chap. 6. Diuis. 1.
already handled. Pope Leo ye tenth and his Council of Laterane had a strong
affection to make the Popes Kings, when they alleged the book of kings for
Deuteronomie, and Deuteronomie for the Papacy. But what soever you think of
the third, or second, or any sort of Popes: it is against all law both of God,
and man, that they should be witnesses in their own matter. And therefore if
your proof of their supremacy be no better: the jury will cast you, out of
all controversy. For Ioh. 5.31.
if I should bear witness of my self (says Christ) my witness were not
true. L. nullus D. de testibus. L. omnibus. C. eo. 4.9.2. and 3. c. Si testes.
None are fit witnesses in their own causes: Cicer. pro Roscio.
no not though they were as worthy me^ as Scipio was amongst ye Romans. It were
a bad plea in Westminster Hall: John a Noke must have this land; for John a
Noke says so. The 9. q. 3. c. pater. in glossa. C^em. vnica de iureiurando. In
glossa Iohannis Andreae.
Canonistes themselves, when Popes allege Popes for proof of certain points
touching their supremacy, do note, that Familiaris est haec probatio quum
Papa alium Papam adducit in testem.
it is a familiar kind of proof: meaning such belike, as that in the common
proverb, Ask my fellow if I be a thief. Which they might note the better,
because it is evident that Summi Pontifices suas fimbrias nimis exte^dentes.
Spoken by allusion to ye Scribes and Pharisees, who enlarged the Phylacteries
and frindges of their garments. Mat. 13.5.
the Popes have stretched out their own frindges in laying claim to large
power, as Aen. Silu. de gestis Basilien^sis council. l. 1. Iacobus Almain de
author. ecclesiae cap. 8. The sixth Division.
great Divines among you, have written in these very terms.


Heart. The power, which they claimed, has seemed over large to envious and
malicious men. But it was no more then their right and due. Which because you
think not sufficiently proved by the Popes themselves: I will prove it
farther by the words and testimonies of other ancient Fathers.


Rainoldes. Of whom?


Heart. Of the cheifest of them, both Greek and Latin. For it was the
prerogative of the Popes office that made S. Bernarde seek to Innocentius the
third, Epist. 190. S. Austin and the Bishops of Afrike to Innocentius the
first, and to Caelestinus, Epist. 90.92.95. S. Chrysostom to the said
Innocentius, Epist. 1. and 2. S. Basil, to the Pope in his time, Epist. 52. S.
Ierom, to Damasus, Epist. 57.58. tom. 2. and other likewise to others: that by
them they might be confirmed in faith and ecclesiastical regiment.


Rainoldes. If you bring such witnesses to prove the Popes supremacy: I must
request the jury to have an eye to the issue. For some of these Fathers desired
to be helped by their advise, and counsel; some by their authority, and
credit; some by both. By their advise, and counsel* as Ierom, of Damasus. By
their authority and credit: as Chrysostom, of Innocentius. By both: as Basil,
Austin, and the Bishops of Afrike, of the Popes in their time. Bernard somewhat
more. But he lived yesterday, in comparison of the rest: and therefore not to be
numbered amongst the ancient Fathers. Though neither he by this point proves
the Papacy. And what his judgment was thereof Chap. 6. Division, 4.
I have declared. Now for them, first, who asked the advice and counsel of the
Pope: I will tell you a story, which (I pray) consider of. Socrat. hist.
ecclesiast. l. 5. cap. 10.
Theodosius the Emperor desirous to procure the peace of ye Church, consulted
with Nectarius the Patriarch of Constantinople, what way might best be taken
for ending controversies of religion. The Patriarch imparted the matter to
Agelius a Nouatian Bishop. The Bishop to Sisinius, a reader in his church. The
reader gave advise and counsel to the Patriarch. Which the Patriarch liked of,
and showed it to the Emperor: the Emperor embraced it, and dealt according
thereunto.


Heart. You would infer hereof that the ancient Fathers might ask the Popes
counsel, and yet not acknowledge him to be their supreme head.


Rainoldes. True: as the Emperor might of the Patriarch; the Patriarch, of the
Bishop; the Bishop of the reader.


Heart. The case is not like. For it was the personal wisdom, virtue, lerning,
or faith of these men, which made them to be sought to. But that, which made
the Fathers seek to the Popes, was the prerogative of their office:


Rainoldes. Wherein they could not err, as you heard say at The Rhemish Annot.
on Luke 22.31.
Rhemes. But you who distinguish the office of the Popes from their personal
faith and gifts in this sort, must be put in mind that by the same reason
Sext Synod. Constantinopolit. act. 12.
Sergius the Patriarch of Constantinople sought to Pope Honorius, in respect
not of his personal wisdom, virtue, learning or faith, but of his office
too. And so shall your self be forced to confess, that either the Pope may
err in consultations, which he deals with by reason of his office, as Pope
Honorius did: or, the Fathers seeking to the Popes for counsel, did seek in
respect of their personal gifts, that they were learned and godly Pastors;
as August. epist. ^om. 2.
many sought to Austin then, Caluini epistolae and resposa.
to Calvin lately, though neither of them were Pope.


Heart. Nay: it is certain that S. Ierom sought to Damasus for his office sake.
For Epist. 57.
he speaks namely of the chair of Peter: that is, the Sea Apostolic
committed to Damasus.


Rainoldes. But withal he speaks of the inheritance of the Fathers, that is,
the Christian faith, which Damasus kept uncorrupted. And therefore he sought to
him as a godly learned, not as a Pastor only: not for his office sake alone,
but for his person, succeeding as in place, so in doctrine to Peter. Though in
whatsoever respect and consideration Ierom sought to Damasus: his seeking to be
resolved in a point of faith, does not import soueraintie of power, Chapt. 7.
Division 8.
as I have showed. Much les does the counsel that Basil asked, import it,
Epist. 52.
about asswaging of their troubles. Least of all, that Austin, and the Bishop
of Afrike: who, under show of asking counsel of Innocentius, Possid. de vit.
August. cap. 18.
in truth gave him counsel, for fear least the Pelagians should have seduced
him to their error. Wherefore the ancient Fathers, who sought advise of
Popes, prove not the Popes supremacy. No more do they in deed who sought to
further others, or relieve themselves, by the Popes authority. For authority
and power differ: that such, as are their brethrens superiors in the one, may
be their inferiors or equals in the other. As Chap. ^. Division 3.
we agreed, if you remember.


Heart. It may be so, I grant. But they, whom I named, sought to Innocentius
the first and other Popes, as to supreme heads of all the Church in power, not
as to their superiors in authority only.


Rainoldes. Their own words and deeds argue the contrary. For Socrat. hist.
ecclesiast. lib. 6. cap. 14. Sozomen. l^b. 8. c. 17.
Chrysostom 14. being called into judgment by his enemies, namely, by the
Bishop of Alexandria and others assembled in a Council, did appeal from them
to a general Council, and (as Epist. 1. ad Innocentium,
himself speaks thereof) to just judgment. Whereby he declares that the
lawful power of judging his cause belonged to the Council, and not to the
Pope.


Heart. But when he was deprived and cast out of his Bishoprike, notwithstanding
his appealing to the general Council, he requested the Pope to write that
those things being wrongfully done were of no force, as in deed they were not,
and that they who did him such wrong, might be punished.


Rainoldes. But in this request he dealt with the Pope as with a member only
of the general Council, to which he had appealed: a member, in power; a
principal member, in authority. For in praying him above the rest to write: he
showed that he thought him to be of greater credit then other of his brethren.
But, in appealing to them all jointly, not to him alone: he showed that the
right of judging the matter belonged, not to him, but to them in common. Which
is playner yet by that he says farther of Bishops in several, that they are
forbidden by ^e means canons of Councils cheefely Council. Constantinopolit.
can. 2.
laws of the Fathers to take on the^ His words in Latin are tr^smo^tanos ad
nostra iudicia. non trahendos. But ye Greek canon has (...) Which word being
used by Chrysostom here* (as I gheste by the circumstances, for the Greek I
have not seen) was mistaken by the translator, as if it had come from (...)
mons, not (...) terminus.
the judging of such as are without the limits of their diocese. Wherefore the
preeminence which Chrysostom gave the Pope, was of authority, not of power.
The same I say of Basil, or rather Epist. 52,
himself says it, desiring, that the Pope would use his own authority in
sending men to succor them.


Heart. You do us great injury, by this new distinction of authority and
power. For Basil meant power, when he named authority.


Rainoldes. You will not say so, if you weigh the ground and circumstances of
his speech. For Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 2.1^.21. and 30.
the Eastern Churches being pestered with the Arian heresy by means of the
Emperor Valens, an Arian, who persecuted the Catholics: the Churches of the
West (under Valentinian, a Catholic Emperor) did flourish with sincerity of
faith and faithful Bishops. Whereupon S. Epis^. 48.
Basil conferring with Athanasius (both Bishops of the East) about their
Churches state, says, that the consent of the Western Bishops is the only
way and means to help it, in his judgment. For if they would show that
zeal for our Churches, which they did for one or two being taken among them
selves in error: it is likely (says he) that they should do us good, by
reason that the rulers would regard and reverence (...).
the credit of their multitude: and the people every where would follow them
without gainsaying. Now this, whereto he wished a multitude of Bishops first,
is the same that afterward he sought to the Pope for. Whom Epist. 2.
he prayed to deal (...)*
himself in the matter, and use his own authority in choosing and sending fit
men to that purpose, because the Western Bishops could not do it easily
Epist. 52.
by a common conference and decree of Council. So that he desired a Councels
aid chiefly, because their consent and multitude had greater credit: as in
Epist. 47.
his epistle to the Western Bishops themselves he says again. It was not
power therefore, but credit, and reputation that S. Basil meant in suing to be
succored by the authority of the Pope. Which you must needs grant, unless
you will say that he thought the Council to be above the Pope in power,
against your Council. Trid. Sess. 14, cap. 7.
Trent-doctrine of the Popes supreme power over the whole Church. As for S.
Austin and the Bishops of Afrike: it is too manifest that they kept this new
distinction, as you term it. For of the two Popes whom you say they sought to:
Epist. 90^92. et 96. apud Aug.
they desired the one to assist them with Statutis nostrae mediocritatis
Apostolicae sedis adhibeatur autoritas* and. Autoritati sanctitatis tu^^
facilius eos ces^uros speramus. and. damnet ea Pelagius paterna exhortatione
and autoritate ^anctitatis tuae.
his authority; Epist. Conc. Af^ican. de Caelestin. in Council. Afric. cep. 105.
the other, not to challenge Either by hearing their causes at Rome, or by
se^ding Legates a latere unto them.
power in their Church causes. A great fault of yours: to say, that S. Austin
and the Bishops of Afrike sought to Caelestinus for the prerogative of his
office, when they dealt against Quasi ecclesiae Romanae priuilegia, avouched by
Faustinus ye Legate of the Pope reproved by S. Austin and the Bishop of Afrike,
in epist. conc. African* ad Caelestin.
his usurped prerogative. Greater, if you did it wittingly and willingly.
Whereof The ^hemish An^^otat. in Luke 22.31.
your Annotations do give strong suspicion, in that having quoted all the other
places, they l^^ue this vnquoted, least the reader should find the fraud.


Heart. I was not at the finishing of our Annotations. They who set them down,
knew their own meaning: and will (I warrant you) maintain it. But what a
souerainty ye Fathers yielded to the Pope it may appear by this, (as D. Princ.
doctr. lib. 7. cap. 10.
Stapleton shows,) that they thought no Council to be of any force unless he
confirmed it. For Epist. Synod. Nicen. ad Syluestr. Tom. 11 conciliot.
the Fathers assembled in the Council of Nice, (the first general Council)
sent their epistle to Pope Siluester, beseeching him to ratify and confyrme
with his consent whatsoever they had ordained.


Rainoldes. The Council of Nice had no such fancy of the Pope. Their epistle
is forged: and he, who forged it, was not his craftes-master. For one of the
Hosius episcopus Cordubae, and Macarius episcopus ecclesiae
Constantinopolitanae.
Fathers pretended to have written it is Macarius Bishop of Constantinople.
Whereas Cassiodor. in chronico. Sigon. de occident. imper. lib. 4.
Constantinople had not that name yet in certain years after the Paulino and
Iuliano consulibus.
date of this epistle, but was called Bizantium: Episcopos totius vaestrae
Apostolicae vrbis.
neither was Macarius Bishop of Bizantium at that time, but Alexander.
Moreover, they are made to request the Pope that Socrat. hist. eccle. lib. 1.
ca. 25. and l. 2. c. 4. Nicephor. chronolog. tripartit. Genebr. chron. lib. 3.
he will assemble the Bishops of his whole city. Which is a droonken, speech,
since the Bishops of his whole city were but one; and that one was himself.
Unless they used ye word [citie] as the Pope (answering them in like sort)
that he Cum episcopis totius vrbis Italiae. Praemonit. ad lectorem pro epist.
Synodi Nisenae and Syluestri.
conferred with the Bishops of the whole city of Italy. And so it is more
sober, but no more seemly for the Council of Nice. Finally, neither Eusebius,
(who was at the Council) nor Rufinus, nor Socrates, nor Theodoret, nor
Sozomen, nor other ancient writers do mention any such thing. Only Hosius
episcopus Cordubae, and Macarius episcopus ecclesiae Constantinopolitanae.
Peter Crabbe (the setter forth of it) had it out of a library of Friars at
Coolein. But whence had the Friars it?


Heart. The Fathers of the Council of Constantinople (the second general
Council) wrote to Pope Damasus for his consent to their decrees. And that is
witnessed by Hist. ecclesi^^t. lib. 4. cap. 9.
Theodoret.


Rainoldes. It is, and so witnessed, that it overthrows the Popes
soueraintie, which D. Stapleton would prove by it. For they wrote jointly to
Damasus, Ambrose, Britto, Valerian, Ascholius, Anemie, Basil, and the rest of
the Western Bishops assembled in a Council at Rome. Nor only to them, but to
the Emperor Theodosius. Yea, to Theodosius in several, and more forcibly. For
Epist. Council. Constantinopo. lit. ad Theodosium imperat. in Graec. decret. and
Libell. Sinodicar. constit. lat.
they requested him to confirm and ratify their decrees and ordinances.
Wherefore if the Pope have such a supremacy, whose (...), and (...)
consent and liking thereof they desired* what supremacy has the Emperor, whom
they besought to (...)
ratify them, and to confirm them?


Heart. Nay: your own distinction of power and authority, does serve well and
fitly to this of the Emperor. For their decrees and ordinances of doctrine,
were true; and of discipline, good; though he had not confirmed them. But more
would accept of them as good and true, through his word and countenance. As we
see that many do frame themselves to Princes judgments. Wherefore it was the
Emperors authority and credit, for which they desired his confirmation of
their decrees: not for any soueraintie of power that he had in matters of
religion.


Rainoldes. Not for any soueraintie of power that he had to make matters true,
of false; or good, of evil: but to make his subjects use them as good, and
true, being so in deed. Which perhaps the Fathers of the Council meant too.
But your own answer may teach you to mend your imagination of that they wrote
to Pope Damasus. For the doctrine of Christ, which they decreed, was true; and
the discipline, good; though he had not consented to it. But more would accept
of it as good, and true, through his agreement and allowance. As we see that
many do follow the minds of Bishops. Wherefore it was the Popes authority
and credit, for which they desired his consent to their decrees: not for any
soueraintie of power that he had in matters of religion. Which is plain by
their craving not of him alone, but of other Bishops to like thereof also, that
the Christian faith being agreed upon, and love confirmed amongst them, they
might keep the Church from schisms and dissensions.


Heart. All Bishops might allow the decrees of Councels by consenting to them.
But the Pope confirmed them in special sort. For S. Epist. 29 tom. 4. oper.
Cyrill.
Cyrill says of the third general Council of Ephesus, that Pope Caelestinus
wrote agreeably to the Council, and confirmed all things that were done
therein.


Rainoldes. S. Cyrill says not that of Caelestinus, but of Sixtus. Howbeit, if
he had: yet this would prove authority still, and not power. As In chronico.
Prosper notes well that the Nestorian heresy was specially withstood by the
industry of Cyril, and the authority of Caelestinus. But these very words of
Cyrill, touching Sixtus, do overthrow your fancy conceived on the Popes
confirming of Councels. For, the Council of Ephesus was of force and strength
in Caelestinus time by your own confession. Notwithstanding Sixtus, who
succeeded him, did confirm it afterward. In deed ye truth depends neither of
Counsel, nor of Pope: though, when Popes and Councels were good and godly
minded, they were chosen vessels and instruments of God to set forth the truth.
For as Joshua said to ^os. 24. ver. 1.
all the tribes of Israel, even to the Priests also assembled in a Council,
ver. 15.
If it seem evil to you to serve the Lord, choose you whom you will serve,
whether the Gods which your Fathers served, or the Gods of the Amorites; but I
and my house will serve the Lord* so the right faith and religion of Christ is
firm of it self, and ought to be embraced of every Christian with his
household, whether it please the tribes, that is, the Church, or no. But the
Church is named 1. Tim. 3.15.
the pillar and ground of truth in respect of men, because it bears up the
truth, and confirms it, through preaching of the word, by the ministry of
Mal. 2.7.
Priests in the old testament, and Act 20 ^8.
Bishops in the new, whom therefore Epist. 70.
Basil terms the pillars and ground of truth. Now, the more there be of these
who maintain it, and the greater credit they have amongst men: the stronger
and surer the truth does seem to be, and many yield the sooner to it. For
which cause Gal. 2. v. 1. and 2
the doctrine of Barnabas and Paul, though assuredly ver. ^.
true, yet v. 6. and 9.
was confirmed by James, Peter, and John, who were counted to be pillars; yea,
by the Council of the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem: and being so confirmed
was ver. 31.
received more redily and gladly both at Antioche, and Act. 16. ver. 4.
in other cities; in so much that ver. ^.
the Churches were stablished in the faith, and increased in number daily. The
men of God therefore, who in ancient time were assembled together to uphold the
truth, desired the consent, some time of all Bishops, as in Athanas. in Apolog.
2. Theodoret. hist eccles. l. 2. cap. 8.
the Council of Sardica; sometime of the Pope, as in Epist. 90. inter epist.
August.
the Council of Carthage: not for that they thought that else their decrees
should be of no force, but because they knew that the consent of such would
add the greater credit to them. And, that general Councels, if they had
desired the Pope to confirm them, which all of them did not, but if they had
done so, yet must have done it in this consideration: you may see by a pillar
and ground of your Council of Trent, even Defens. fid. Tride^t. lib. 1.
Andradius. Who not only voucheth that Doctissimi viri s^pientissime existimant.
most learned me^ do most wisely think it, as Alfonsus Alfonsu^ a Castro de
iusta haereticorum pu^itione, l. 1. c. 6.
namely: but alleges also Cardinal Turrecremata, the cheifest patron of the
Pope, for proof of the same, or rather of a farther point. For if there
should happen such a case (says Johan* ruriecrem. de Pont. Max. gener. que
Council. autoritate ad Basil^e^sium oratorem respon. nu. 67. and 6^.
the Cardinal) that all the Fathers assembled in a general Council should make
a decree touching any matter of faith with one accord, and the Pope alone
gainesaied that decree: men ought (in my judgment) to obey the Council
therein, and not the Pope. And why? Because the judgment of so many Fathers of
a general Council seems to be justly and worthily preferred before the
judgment of one man in a matter of faith. Whereupon he adds that the
Council then is above the Pope, Non potestate iurisdictionis.
not in power of jurisdiction, Sed autoritate discretiui iudicij, or
maioritate, as Turrecremata calls it, in Sum. de eccles. l. 3. c. 64.
but in authority of judgment to discern things, and in amplenesse of
knowledge. Thus it is apparent by your own Doctors, that, to confirm Councels
imports an authority the Pope had, not power: and that he was not sovereign
in authority neither, no not as much as equal, but inferior to them. So far
is it off from proving his supremacy.


Heart. Though Councels be above the Pope in authority, after the opinion of
Cardinal Turrecremata: yet you see he sets the Pope above them in power of
jurisdiction, wherein his supremacy does principally stand. And that did the
Fathers acknowledge by their deeds too. For Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria,
Paul of Constantinople, Asclepas of Gaza, Marcellus of Ancyra, Lucian of
Adrianople, and very many other Bishops of the East, being driven out of their
Churches by the Arians, did appeal to the Pope, as Hist. tripart. l. 4. c. 15.
Socrat. l. 2. c. 15. Sozomen. l. 3. c. 8.
ecclesiastical stories show.


Rainoldes. The stories show it not: but D. Stapleton* Princip. doctr. lib. 4.
cap. 19.
he, who says they show it, shows that he deals with them in this point,
as in lib. 7. c. 10.
the former with S. Cyrill. Has he abused you so often, and will you never
cease to credit him?


Heart. The stories show that they came to Rome to Pope Julius, and he for the
prerogative and dignity of his See restored them to their Churches, perceiving
that the Arians had deprived them wrongfully.


Rainoldes. The dignity and prerogative of the Sea of Rome, in restoring them,
was but of authority, and honor, not of power. For the power of hearing and
judging their cause did rest in the Council assembled then at Rome. Which
Julius himself, and Athanasius both do testify. Athanasius, who speaking
thereof Apologia. 2.
ascribes it plainly to the Council. Julius, who being reproved by the Arians
for ouerthwarting that which they had done in their Council, In epist. ad
episcopos Antiochiae congregatos. Apud Athan. apol. 2.
answers that the doings of a former Council may lawfully be sifted and
examined in an other; that themselves had offered to have the cause debated so
in just judgment, and thereto had requested a Council to be called; that
Athanasius and the rest appeered at the Council, and they who should have also
appeered made defaute; that hereupon the Council finding their iniquity,
relieved the parties wrongfully oppressed; to be short, that whatsoever he
dealt or wrote therein, he did it on the Councils judgment, and consent, not
on his own head. Wherefore it was not the Pope, but the Council, that heard
and determined the causes of Bishops, whether at first, or on appeals. Such
power of jurisdiction nether did Julius claim, nor Athanasius give him.


Heart. Yes: there is an other epistle of Julius, Rescrip^. Iulij Papae c^^tra
orientales. Conc. Tom. 1.
wherein he claimed such power, and that upon the canons of the Council of
Nice.


Rainoldes. I told you of In the 3. Division of this Chapter.
epistles which seemed to be written by some of the Popes horse-keepers or
cooks. This is one of them. It should be the very same, that I alleged,
extant in Athanasius. But it is no liker it, then black is to white. The
canons, which it coineth with the image and superscription of the Nicen
Fathers, bewray the lewdness of it. The more, because Julius in the same
epistle (as Athanasius has it) cites their authority for the Council above
the Pope, who in this are cited for the Pope above the Council. Wherefore since
Athanasius has his right epistle, as it is confessed: you must be content to
let the other go for a counterfeit.


Heart. Yet Hist. eccle. l. 2. cap. 17.
Socrates and lib. 3 cap. 10.
Sozome^ report, that Julius wrote in his epistle to the Arians, that whereas
they called not him unto the Council, therein they did unlawfully: because it
was provided by a law of the Church, that things which were decreede and done
without the Popes consent should be void.


Rainoldes. If Julius had written so to the Arians: Julius had written a manifest
untruth. For by Conci. Nicaen. ca^. 5.
the Nicen Canons (which were the chiefest laws of the Church at that time) it
was ordered, that Councels should be kept yearly twice in every province. To
all which it were ridiculous to say that they must call the Pope: or that they
might do nothing there but what he liked of. But Socrates and Sozomen did
mistake Julius, as Princ. doctr. lib. 7. ca. 10.
Stapleton does now. And whereas Julius in epi. ad episcopos An^io^h.
congregat. Apud Athan. apolog. 2.
he had said, know ye not that this is the manner and custom Vt p^imum nobis
scribatur.
that ye should write to us first, that hence might be decreed the thing which
is just? they thought that he had spoken of himself, belike, and had meant the
Pope by the word [vs,] by which he meant the Council. For he wrote that
epistle in the Councels name, as Athanasius notes: and himself shows it by
saying straight before, Oportuit scribere omnibus nobis.
ye ought to have written unto all us, that so that which is just might be
decreed by all.


Heart. Whatsoever you conceue ofthe doings and writings of Athanasius and
Julius: yet can you not deny but Flauianus Bishop of Constantinople appealed
to Pope Leo from the Council of Ephesus deposing him unjustly. And so did
Theodoret Bishop of Cyrus too* For Epist. ad Theodosiam.
the Emperor Valentinian witnesses the one; and Epist. ad Leonem.
Theodoret himself, the other.


Rainoldes. Flauianus appealed from the Council of Ephesus: but to a greater
and a more lawful Council, not to Pope Leo. Which appears by an epistle of
Epist. 13.
Leo himself, complaining to the Emperor Theodosius of the fewness and
oppression of the Bishops in the Council of Ephesus; and desiring that a
general Council might be kept, because Flauianus had appealed. You must add
therefore the Empress Placidia to the Emperor Valentinian: and with the ones
words of Flauianus (...) appellauit.
appealing to Leo, take that Epist. Gallae Placidiae ad Theodosium.
the other says, to Leo (...) ad omnes episcapos haiu partium.
and to all the Bishops of these parts. So Leo, and the Bishops being joined
together, will make the Council of Chalcedon: by the which Council Council.
Chalc. act. 1.
the cause of Flauianus and his appeal was judged. The same Council also act.
8.
did judge Theodorets cause; and finding him guiltless restored him to his
See. Wherefore since the Council was judge of the appeal: if he appealed to
Leo, and not to the Council, it was an oversight. Unless perhaps he did not
appeal as to a higher judge* that might restore him; but as to a man of
learning and authority, whose credit and judgment might help to prove him not
guilty. And this does the tenor of Theodoret. epist. ad Leon.
his request pretend. Though asking wi^hall the advice of Leo, whether he shall
bear that wrongful deprivation, or seek to be restored: he seems to have
thought of a further matter. Which yet he touches so, in speaking of troubling
men, and craving Leos prayers: that it is evident it lay not in Leo alone to
restore him. Wherefore, the most that you may well imagine of an appeal made
by Theodoret to Leo for remedy of the wrong done him, is, that Leo took his
bill of appeal to prefer it to the Council whereof he was President. As
with us in England the bills are put up to the Speaker of the Parliament, that
he may inform the Parliament thereof, not as though himself had sovereign
power to pass them.


Heart. Then you grant that Leo was President of the Council, as in deed he
was, and head of the Bishops therein, as ^elat Synod. Chalce^on. ad Leon. act.
3.
themselves say. Which shows that they counted the Pope their supreme head.


Rainoldes. You will find more heads, then the Popes shoulders will be content
to bear, if you make such reasons. First, the Bishop of Corduba. For Athan. in
ep. ad solitar. vitam agent. Apolog. de ^uga ^ua: and Apolog. 2.
Hosius was President of the Council of Nice: nor of Nice only, but also of
Sardica, and of many others. Next, the Bishop of Antioche, or whosoever he were
that had the room in the Council of Constantinople. For As it appears by
their epistle to Damasus, in Theodo^et. Hist. eccles. lib. 5. c. 9.
the Pope had it not. Thirdly, the Bishop of Alexandria.


Heart. Nay, Cyrill, who had it in the third general Council, was Deputy
therein to Pope Caelestinus, as H^^tor. eccle. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Euagrius writes.


Rainoldes. Caelestinus joined his authority to Cyrils. But Cyrill was
President, as well as Caelestinus, in Valentinian and Martian. ep. ad Pallad.
Council. Chalcedon. act. 3. and Episcopi variarum p^o^^nciaru^* act. 4.
more men's judgment then Euagrius. Howbeit, if he were not: yet Alexandria
will have a head still. For Acta Ephesians. Synod. 2. in council. Chalc. act. 1.
Dioscorus was President in the next of Ephesus: neither he alone but also the
Bishops of Jerusalem and Caesarea. Wherefore if the Presidentship of a general
Council do make a supreme head: then Corauba in Spain, Alexandria in Egypt,
Jerusalem in Iewrie, and other cities of the East may claim the supreme
headship as well as Rome in Italy. The Pope will be loath to have so many
partners. But to deliver him from that fear, or rather the Church from his
tyranny, and the truth from your sophisme: there is a distinction in Summa de
ecclesia lib. 3. cap. 23.
Cardinal Turrecremata which is worth the noting upon this very point. The
Preside^tship of Councels (he says) is two-folde: one, Praesidentiae honoraria:
of honor; an other, Autoritatiua, as Turrecrema to calls it. But he uses
that word to note potestate^, and not (...) reputationis, as h^ dis^inguisheth
it, lib. 3. cap. 18.
of power. Presidentship of honor, is, to have preemine^ce in place, to propose
things, to direct the actions, to give definitive sentence according to the
voices and judgment of the Council* Presidentship of power is to have the
right, not only of directing, but of ruling their doings also, and to conclude
of matters after his own judgment, though the greater part of the Council
like it not, yea, though no part like it. Now the Popes supremacy chalengeth
this Presidentship of power in Councels, as though he alone were soue^aine
judge there: which appears by his practice in ^s ye Cleme^tines show: and
Johan. Andr. in p^inc^p. Cleme^tin.
the Council of Vienna, and by the Summa de eccles. lib. 3. ca. 22.23. and 25.
Cardinals doctrine with the Canus Iocor. Theolog. l. 5. c. 5. Sander. de
visib. monarc. eccles. lib. 2. cap. 5. and (...). passim.
chiefest Papists. But that, which the general Council of Chalcedon gave unto
Leo in naming him their head, was the Presidentship of honor: as himself
showed in his Legates and Deputies, Conc. Chalc. act. 3. and 8.
who used all the Bishops as their fellow-iudges, and concluded nothing but
what they agreed of. Wherefore the Presidentship, which they gave to Leo, was
no Papal soueraintie: neither did they acknowledge him in that particular,
much less the Pope in general, to be their supreme head.


Heart. The Fathers did in general acknowledge the Pope, and taught us to
acknowledge him, our act. 3.
universal Patriarch and Cyprian lib. ^. epist. 11.
Bishop of the Catholic Church: nay (to use yet more the words of the most
ancient Fathers) Optatus. lib. 2.
our Prince, Victor de persequut Va^^dal. lib. 2.
the head of al Churches, Chrysos. hom. 87. in Johan.
the top and the chief of the Apostolic company, or (as In Anchorat.
Epiphanius speaks) the chiefest, Hom. 87. in Johan.
the teacher of the whole world, Ambros. com. in 1. Tim. 3.
the ruler of the house of God, August. quaest. ex nou. Testam. quaest. 75.
an other father of the household, and Chrysostom. hom. 59. in Mat.
the first begotten; whose seat (as the most excellent Divine, S. Lib. 1. cap.
1. ad Bonifacium.
Austin says) has the preeminence of a higher room in the pastoral
watchtower which is common to all Bishops. And will any man desire greater
proofs of the Popes supremacy?


Rainoldes. If any man do: he must take the pains to seek them somewhere
else. Sure he is not like to find them in your Stapleton. For these are the
chiefest of all in his treasury. Which therefore he culled out, and sent them
for Epistola dedicato^ia Pontifici optimo Maximo, Gregorio decimo tertio, ad
hum^llima pedum oscula.
a present to Gregory the thirteenth: to show what good words they give of
his Holiness for his liberality toward the English Seminaries. But he
presents him with one title more, which you have omitted: and yet does it
advance him above all the rest.


Heart. None of the titles which the Fathers give him. Belike you mean that of
Martianus in epist. ad Leon.
the Emperor.


Rainoldes. No: I mean that of his own, Which is as much to say, as, Great is
Diana of the Ephesians. Act. 19.28.
Supremum in terris Numen. In deed it has no Fathers testimony to prove it.
But as in this title he plays the notable flatterer with the Pope: so, in the
rest, the notable sophister with you. For the titles of our Prince, the top,
the chief and chiefest of the Apostolic company, the teacher of the whole
world, an other father of the household, and the first begotten: are given by
Optatus, Chrysostom, Epiphanius, and a So Alfonsus proves him, aduers.
haeres. lib. 10. in Melchisedec: and the Divines of Loua^, Censura in lib.
quaest. ver. and nou. Test. in append. Tom. 4. oper. Augustine.
bastard Austin, to Peter, not to the Pope. Stapleton alleging them says that
he uses the words of the Fathers. That is cunningly spoken. For it is true he
uses their words, though not their meaning. As for the title of universal
Patriarch: the Council of Chalcedon (which he quoteth for it) gave it not to
the Pope neither.


Heart. No? did not Council. chalc act. 3.
Theodore and certain others there give it to Pope Leo.


Rainoldes. A few poor suitors, in their supplications to him and the
Council, did seek his favor with it. But neither the Council nor any one
Bishop of the Council gave it him.


Heart. They gave it him, at least by their consent, and judgment. For they
would have reproved it when they heard it read in the supplications, if they
had not allowed of it.


Rainoldes. Say you so? what think you then of Council. Lateran. sub Leone
decim. sess. 10.
ye Counsel of Lateran? where the Pope is told (and that, in a Stephan.
archiepisc. Patrac. and episc. Torcellan.
Sermon) that Tibi data est omnis potestas in c^elo and in terra. Spoken to
Pope Leo the tenth.
to him is given all power in heaven and in earth; yea, which is more, that In
quo erat omnis potestas supra omnes potestates tam coeli quam terrae. Spoken of
Pope Eugeniu^ the third.
he has all power above all powers both of heaven and of earth. Did the
Council allow of these blasphemous speeches? They did not reprove them.


Heart. But the Council of Chalcedon did offer themselves the title of
universal Patriarch to Pope Leo, as S. Registr. lib. 4. epist. 32. and 36.
Gregory writes: they did not only hear it given him by others.


Rainoldes. S. Gregory affirms it to be epist. 32.
a new, a proud a pompous, a profane, epist. 38.
a rash, perverse, foolish, abominable, epist. 39.
wicked, and l. 6. ep. 24.
superstitious title: l. 4. ep. 32. and 38.
a name of singularity, of arrogancy, of blasphemy. The Council of
Chalcedon was a company of six hundred Bishops and thirty, sound in religion,
and zealous of the glory of God. You must pardon me, if I discredit rather the
word of one Gregory: then think that six hundred and thirty such Bishops
did offer to commit so great iniquity and folly. For neither is there any
proof of that offer in any part of the Council, which is wholly extant: and
that which made Regist. lib. 7. ind. 2. ep. 63. as I have showed in the former
Division.
Gregory to misreport the Bishop of Constantinople, might induce him likewise
to misreport these Bishops too. Wherein his affection may be the more
suspected, because lib. 7. ind. 1. epist. 30.
he says farther, that it was offered to his predecessors not only by the
Council, but also by the Fathers following. The names (it is likely) of these
Fathers following should have been forth coming, if they had been at hand,
the matter being so important. Howbeit if they, and the Council both, had not
only offered it, but given it also: yet might they have given it in respect of
lesser preeminence then the Papacy. Which it must needs be the Council
should have done: for else they had contraried Council. Chalced. ^an. 9 and 17.
and ^8. and in the Sessions throughout.
their own decrees and actions. And Adrian the (...). Synod. (...) 2. act. 2.
the Pope himself gave it to the Patriarch of Constantinople, as a title of
honor (I trow) and not of power. Wherefore the first title, put upon the
Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon, infers not the Popes supremacy. Much
less does the next, alleged out of Cyprian. For although Cornelius, a godly
Bishop of Rome, be there named Bishop of the Catholic Church: yet is he so
named, not as the word [Catholike] signi^^eth universal, but as it signif^eth
right believing, holding the Catholic faith. Wherefore it makes no more for
his supremacy, then for Epist. Arsen. Athanas. apol. 2
Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, and Epist. concil^ Nicaeni, Socrat. l. 1. c.
6. and concilii Sardicensis Theodoret. li. 2. ca. 8. Quint. council.
Constantinop. co^fess. 8. in subscript.
other Catholic Bishops, who all are named Bishops of the Catholic Church.


Heart. A particular Church may be called Catholic in respect of the Catholic
faith which it professes. And so was Athanasius Bishop of the Catholic Church
of Alexandria.


Rainoldes. And Cornelius Bishop of the Catholic church of Rome.


Heart. Nay: he was Bishop of the Catholic Church of the whole world, not of
the city of Rome only. For it follows Lib. 3. ep. 11. Epist. 46. edit. Pam.
Corneliu^ Cypriano.
in the same place, that there ought to be one Bishop in the Catholic Church.


Rainoldes* That is, in the Catholic Church of the city of Rome. For
Cornelius himself, in whose epistle that is written, says other where
(entreating Epist. ad Fabium Antioch. e^piscopum.
of the same matter) that there ought to be one Bishop in the Catholic Church,
wherein there are six and forty Elders and seven Deacons. Now Eusebius. hist.
eccles. lib. 6. c. 42.
in a Synod which then was held at Rome, there were above threescore Elders
and Deacons: how many hundred more through the whole world? Wherefore since six
and forty Elders and seven Deacons, were not all the Elders and Deacons of
the world, but of the city of Rome: it follows that the Catholic Church
wherein he says there ought to be one Bishop, was the Catholic Church of the
city of Rome, not of the whole world. And, that this was meant in that of
Cornelius, it is very plain by the occasion of his speech: as also by the
canon of the Council of Nice made on that occasion. For the Church As it is
showed before, Ch^pt. 5. (...). 2.
being troubled at that time with the schism and heresy of Nouatus: the
Nouatians refusing the communion of the Catholics, ordained new Bishops for
their heretical synagogues and schismatic conuenticles. Whereby it came to
pass that in one city there were two Bishops, a Catholic, and an heretic:
as in Cyprian. epist. 52. ad An^on.
Rome, Cornelius and Nouatianus; in Epist. 5^ ad Corneliu^.
Carthage, Cyprian, and Fortunatus. The Catholics therefore, communicating in
faith and love with Cornelius, E^ist 46. Cornelij ad Cyp^.
called him Bishop of the Catholic Church: condemning the Nouatians as
heretics, and schismatikes, with their Bishop Nouatianus. And as they said
farther, that there ought to be one Bishop in a Catholic Church, according to
the ancient order as I In the third Division of this Chapter.
showed: so was it decreed by the Can. 8.
Nicen Council touching the Nouatians who became Catholics, that, if a Bishop
of theirs were converted Socrat* hist. eccl. l. 6. c. 20.
the Catholic Church having a Bishop; he should not enjoy a Bishops room, but
an Elders, least that there should be two Bishops in a city. Wherefore the
Bishopric of the Catholic Church, in the time of Cornelius, was the charge
that every Catholic Bishop had. Neither meant they more who said that there
ought to be but one Bishop in a Catholic Church, then S. Chrysostom did,
saying to Sisinius Bishop of the Nouatians in Constantinople, A city may not
have two Bishops.


Heart. But S. Epist. 55. ad Cornelium.
Cyprian writes, that neither heresies nor schisms have sproong of any other
fountain, then of this, that the Priest of God is not obeyed: and that one
Priest for the time in the Church, and one judge for the time in steed of
Christ is not regarded. To whom, if the whole brotherhoode would be obedient
according to Gods teachings: then no man would make any thing ado against the
company of Priests. Wherein, by one Priest, he means one Bishop; and, by one
Bishop, Cornelius the Pope, to whom he writes those words. So that he
confesses the Pope to be the Bishop of the whole Church, and teaches men to
think of him, as one judge for the time in Christ's steed.


Rainoldes. You err still in the same point. The Church wherein Cyprian
requires obedience unto one Bishop and judge in Christ's steed, is the
particular Church of every city, not the universal. For he speaks it on
occasion of injury offered to himself by the Nouatians in Carthage: who there
had ordained a new Bishop against him, as their fellows did in Rome, against
Cornelius. And as the words Sacerdotum hosts and co^tra ecclesia catholicam
rebels.
before, and Sacerdotes, id est, dispensatores Dei.
after, do show that he means it of all Catholic Bishops, each in his own
charge: so the whole discourse and circumstances argue that he applies it to
himself, not to Cornelius. Chiefly, that, of Episcopus plebi suae in
episcopatu quadriennio iam probatus.
a Bishop approved to his people in the Bishopric four years. Which can by
no means agree to Cornelius, who was Eusebius in chron. Damasus in
Pontificali. Platin. de vit. Pontificum. Ge^^brard. Cronogr. lib. 3. O^uphr. in
Chro^. Pont. Romans
not three years Bishop. Or if, because Cyprian does write it to the Pope, you
have such a prejudice that it is the Popes peculiar: you may know that he
writes the same Epist. 69. ad Florentium.
to an other expressly of himself; Thence have schisms and heresies sproong,
and do spring, that the Bishop, which is one, and rules the church, is
despised by the proud presumption of certain men. Wherefore though your
Annotat. in Luke 12.31.
Rhemists and Polus Ca^d. pro eccles. vnitat. defens. lib. 2. Remundus Rufus,
duplicat. in patronum Molin^i propont. Maximo. Canisius Catechism. de
praeceptis ecclesiae tit. 9. Lindanus Panopliae Euangelicae lib. 4. cap. 86.
Pamelius Annotat. in Cyprian epi. 55. Copus dialog. 1 cap. 18. and 21. Ha^ding
and Dorma^ against Bishop Jewel. Though Dor^man (being taught the truth by M.
Nowell acknowledged that S. Cyprian meant it of all Bishops. As Stapleton (in
Hardings behalf) confessed also* whose example should have moved ye Rhemists
to have spared S. Cyprian in that point.
other of the Popes friends do plie the box with that saying of one Priest and
one judge for the time in Christ's steed: yet in very truth it makes as much
for the Bishop of Rochester, as for the Bishop of Rome. The more is Stapletons
blame: who knowing and confessing the same not only In his Return of untruths
on M. Jewels repli^. Artic. 4..
otherwhere, but in Princip. doct. lib. 7. cap. 1.
this very work of his principles too; yet in In conclusione totius operis and
admonit. ad lectorem.
the end thereof abridgeth it to the Pope. Marvel, that in his preface to
Gregory he past it. He might have alleged it better then he has The head of
all Churches. Which title is given in Depersequut. Vandal. lib. 2.
Victor to the Church of Rome, not to the Bishop: and touches less the
Papacy there, then in S. Gregory; in whom it does not prove it, as In the
fifth Division of this Chapter.
I have declared. Marry, that which follows is of greater show, out of
Ambroses commentary on S. Paul to Timothee: where Damasus (the Bishop of Rome
in his time) is called ruler of the Church. But, first, whatsoever he were who
wrote that, it was not S. Ambrose the famous Bishop of Milan: on whom are
falsely fathered the commentaries on S. Paul, as your Praefat. in Biblia excusa
Antuerp. a Plantino. and Censur. in lib. quaest. vet. and nou. Test. Tom. 4. in
append. operum August.
Divines of Louan do observe and testify. Next, the words themselves which
are in that autour on mention of the house of God, [the ruler whereof at this
day is Damasus,] are not (in my judgment) the autours own words, but a gloss
crept in amongst them. For whereas S. Paul, writing unto Timothee, declared
why he did so, to weete, that thou may know how thou ought to behave thy
self in the house of God, which is the Church of the living God: Commentaria
quae Ambrosij titulum ferunt. in 1. Tim. 3.
the commentary thereon does expound it thus, I write unto thee that thou
may know how to govern the Church, which is the house of God; that whereas
all the world is Gods, yet the Church is called his house. [the ruler whereof
at this day is Damasus,] For the world is naught, troubled with sundry
errors. Therefore the house of God and truth must of nece^sitie be said to be
there, where he is feared according to his will. In the which words, if that
of [Damasus] were omitted, the l^ter clawse containing a reason of the former
would cleave thereunto more suantly and fitly. Which makes me to think that
it was not pitched in thetext by the autour, but found a ^hinke and so came in;
as Damaso Siriciu, ^odie.
an other gloss of [Damasus successour] has done into Lib ^. As Bald^^n^.
shows Annot. in (...) lib. 1. and 2.
Optatus. And I think it the rather, because some are persuaded by manifold
conference, (as your Cen^^r. in lib. (...) 4.
Louanists note,) that the book of questions of the old and new testament
entitled to S. Austin, and this to S. Ambrose are the same autours. For (...)
Pope until about 370. ^ieron. in Chron.
he, who wrote that book, was not alive (of lykelihoode) when Damasus was
Pope. Howbeit, if he were too, and of a kind ^ffection to Rome, Lib. quaest.
vet. and nou. testam. quaest. 115.
where he lived, thought good to mention him: the words which he uses in
Latin, [cuius hodie rector est Damasus.] might mean that Damasus was [a ruler
of the Church] not, as The Rhemists in the^r Annot. (...) 1. Tim. 3.15.
you english it [the ruler.] Which to have been so, it appears farther by the
word [at this day,] spoken with a relation to the days of Timothee: that as
he did govern the Church in Paul's time, so at that present was Damasus ruler
of it. Wherefore since Timothee was 1. Tim. 1.3.
placed at Ephesus to set that Church in order, not to rule the whole: Damasus
might be called a ruler of the Church, in that he was Roman ecclesiae sacerdos.
Bishop of the Church of Rome, as S. Epist. ad Vale^ti^ian. Impetat. contra
Symmachum.
Ambrose terms him, though he were not the ruler of the universal. S. Austin
is the last o^ them whose testimonies you cited* And, the preeminence of a
higher room, whereof Contra d^as ep^st. Pelag an^t. ad Bonifa^^u^ li^ 1. c. ^.
he made mention to Boniface ye first, imports a prerogative of honor over
others, not soueraintie of power. A prerogative of honor; according to the
canon of Can. 3.
the first Council of Constantinople: which (...).
gave that prerogative to the Sea of Rome, (...), as ^he coun^^l o^ Chalced^
i^^erpreteth their fact, c^n. 2^.
because that city reigned. Not soueraintie of power; as it is evident by the
Council of Afrike: where Ep. (...) Afric. ad Bonifacium, and C^lestinum.
he denied that to the same Boniface, to whom he granted this preeminence. It
was therefore only the dignity of place, which S. Austin meant by the higher
room. As Cont. Julian. P^lag^. l. 1. c. 4.
else where, having named Cyprian, Olympius, and other ancient writers, he
says that Innocentius was (...) tempore, prior loco.
after them in time, before them in place: because they were Bishops of
inferior cities; and he of the Roman.


Heart. Nay: but S. Epist. 16^.
Austin says in plain terms, that the principality of the Apostolic (...)
Chapt. 7. Diui^. ^.
See had floorished in that Church still.


Rainoldes. But S. Austin adds in as plain terms, that Bishops may reserve
their cases to the judgment of their fellow-bishops, chiefly of the Apostolic
Church: and that a general Council is above the Pope in judging of those
causes too. Which is a clear proof that by the principality of the
Apostolic See he meant the Church of Rome to be chief of other Churches (as I
said) in honor, not in power. For in power, al others, at least the
Apostolic, (that is, in which the faith of Christ had been taught by the
Apostles themselves) are made equal with it. But amongst all, in which the
Apostles themselves had taught the faith, the Roman for honor and credit had
the chiefty. And thus have I discharged my self of my promise: which was, that
I would yield unto the Popes supremacy, if you proved it by the sayings and
judgment of the Fathers, alleged and applied rightly. For none of all the^
which you have alleged, neither of any other church, nor of the Roman it self,
does avouch it. Whereby the shameless vanity of Motiu. 14.
Bristow may be seen: who, being not contented to say of all the Fathers, that
they were Papists; adds that in familiar talk among our selves we are not
afeard plainly to confess it. The Lord, who is witness of our thoughts, and
speeches, knows that we are lewdly sclaundered herein. And for mine own
part, I am so far off from confessing plainly that they were all Papists:
that I have plainly declared and confirmed not one of them to have been. For
the very being and essence of a Papist consists in opinion of the Popes
supremacy. But the Popes supremacy was not allowed by any of the Fathers. Not
one then of all the Fathers was a Papist. Wherefore, if you have the Fathers in
such reverent regard and estimation, as you pretend, M. Heart: let, if not the
Scriptures, yet the Fathers move you to forsake Papistrie; and give to every
pastor and church their own right, whereof Christ has possessed them, and the
Pope has robbed them.


The ninth Chapter. 1 The Church is the pillar and ground of the truth. The
common consent and practice of the Church before the Nicen Council, 2 the
Council of Nice, 3 of Antioche, of Sardica, of Constantinople, Mileuis,
Carthage, Afrike, 4 of Ephesus, of Chalcedon, of Constantinople est soones, and
of Nice, of Constance, and of Basil; with the judgments of Universities, and
several Churches throughout Christendom: condemning all the Popes supremacy.
HEART. The first Division.
The Church does acknowledge the doctrine of the Popes supremacy to be
catholic. Wherefore you do evil to touch it with the name of Papistrie. For
1. Tim. 3.15.
the Church is the pillar and ground of the truth.


Rainoldes. The Church is the pillar and ground of the truth, in office, and
duty: and Mal. 2. ver. 7.
the Priest is the messenger of the Lord of hosts. But as ver. 8.
there were Priests, who did not their message in showing Gods will: so there
may be Churches, which shall not uphold and mainetayne the truth.


Heart. Nay, that is true still, which the Church teaches. For S. Paul says
not that it ought to be the pillar and ground of the truth, but that it is so.


Rainoldes. Neither does Malachie say, that the Priest ought to be the
messenger of the Lord of hosts, but that he is so. And what is the occasion
whereupon S. Paul says that? and to whom?


Heart. To Timothee: that he might know how he ought to converse in the house of
God, which is the Church of the living God.


Rainoldes. The Church then, which Timothee was conversant in, and must behave
himself according to his charge in government thereof, is called (by S. Paul)
the pillar and ground of the truth.


Heart. It is: and what then?


Rainoldes. But 1. Tim. 1.3.
the Church which Timothee was conversant in, was the Church of Ephesus. The
Church of Ephesus then is called the pillar and ground of the truth. Now
Council. Flor. Session. vlt. Laon. Chalcocondylas de rebus Turc. lib. 6.
the Church of Ephesus has condemned the doctrine of the Popes supremacy: nor
only that Church, but other of the East too. Wherefore, if that be true still
which the Church teaches, because S. Paul calls it the pillar and ground of
the truth: the doctrine of the Popes supremacy is wicked, and Papistrie is
heresy.


Heart. The Churches of the East have erred therein. But the West allows it
for catholic doctrine. And all the ancient Churches both of East and West did
subscribe to it, until schism and heresy had severed them one from the other.


Rainoldes. That speech is as true as was the former of the Fathers. For,
except the crew of the Italian faction, who have advanced the Pope that they
might reign with him, all Christian Churches have condemned his usurped
soueraintie, and do till this day.


Heart. All Christian Churches? who did ever say so before you? or what one
witness have you of it?


Rainoldes. The Pastors and Doctors, in Synodes and Councels, wherein they
took order for their Church-gouernment, each in their several ages. For, to
begin with the ancientst, and so come down to our own: it was (in Ep. 55. ad
Cornelium.
Cyprians time) Statutum est omnibus nobis,
ordained by them all that every man's cause should be heard there, where the
fault was committed.


Heart. That must be understood of the first handling of causes, not the last.
For they might be heard at Rome upon appeals, if, being heard at home first,
the parties were not satisfied.


Rainoldes. The cause of the parties mentioned in Cyprian, Iam causa eo^rum
cognita cit.
was heard at home already by the Bishops of Afrike, who excommunicated them.
Yet he reproves them for running to Rome. Wherefore the ordinance, that he
groundeth on, did provide for hearing and determining of causes both first,
last, and all; against such as appealed (if you so term it) to Rome. Which he
makes plainer yet, in that he calls Sciunt quo r^uertantur.
those Rome-appealers home, if upon repentance they seek to be restored; and
says, that they ought to plead their cause there where they may have accusers
and witnesses of their fault, and that other Bishops ought not to retract
things done by them of Afrike: ^isi paucis desperatis and perciti ^^uinor
videtur (...).
unless a few lewd and desperate persons think the Bishops of Afrike to have
less authority, by whom they were judged already, and condemned.


Heart. When Cyprian denies that the Bishops of Afrike are of less authority:
you must not imagine that he compares them with the Bishop of Rome, but with
the Bishops of France, Spain, Greece or Asia, and chiefly of Num^dia.


Rainoldes. You were better say, as The Discouerer (...)
a Jesuit does, that Cyprian has no such thing: then It is Sanders answer, De
vi (...) lib. ^.
answer so absurdly. For it is too manifest that he compares them with such,
as the parties, whom they* had condemned, did run to for remedy. And that was
Cornelius Bishop then of Rome. It was ordained therefore by all the Bishops of
Afrike, Italy, and others in the primitive Church that the Pope should not be
the supreme judge of ecclesiastical causes.


Heart. Why does S. Lib. ^ epist. 3. ad Step (...) Epi^t. 67. Pa^.
Cyprian then desire Pope Stephen to depose Martian, a Nouatian heretic,
Bishop of Arle in France: and to substitute an other in his room, a Catholic?


Rainoldes. Nay, Staplet. p^^n^. doctrine. l. 6. c. 17 ^he discou. of (...). 3.
why do your men say that S. Cyprian does so, whereas he does not? For he
desires Stephen to write Ad coepiscopos no^^ros in Ga^^^s.
to the Bishops of France to depose him: and E^p ouinciam and ad p^^ebem ^
rel^ate cond^entem.
to the province and people of Arle, to choose a new. Both which things are
disproofes of the Popes supremacy. Who neither could depose Bishops at that
time; as also De reforma^. eccle. consid. 3.
the Cardinal of Aliaco notes, misliking that the Pope alone does now depose
them, which then a Synod did: neither, when a Bishop was orderly deposed,
could he create an other; but the people of the city and Bishops of the
province chose him. Yea, a Bishop chosen by them, was lawful Bishop, though
the Pope confirmed him not; yea, though he disallowed him: as it is declared by
a Epist. Synod. African. ad cler. and pleb in Hispan. Cyprian. Ep. 68.
Council of Afrike against the same Pope Stephen. Wherefore Epist. 67. ad
Stephanum.
Cyprian meant not that he might depose and substitute a Bishop: but ought to
give his neighbors counsel to do it, for Ide^rco ^aim ^^p^osum corpu^ est
s^cer^otum, concor^iae (...) glut^no a^que vnitatis vinculo c^pulas tum, vt si
quis ex collegio nostro (...) facere, and greg^m Chri^^^^e (...) and (...)
bueniant cateri, quasi pa^^ores vtiles and misericordes, quioue. Domigicas in
gregem colligant.
the common duty that every pastor owes to all the sheep of Christ, to
help them when they are in danger. And thus since the ordinances of the
primitive Church deharred the Pope from the sovereign power of judging,
deposing, and creating Bishops, nor from this only but other ecclesiastical
causes, as I showed: it follows that the primitive Church did deny the
supremacy of ye Pope; or, to say it with the words of Aen. Siluius Card. ep.
288.
Cardinal Siluius, Before the Council of Nice men lived each to himself, and
there was small regard had to the Church of Rome.


Heart. Yet there was a Counc^l Bella^min. (...). ^om. controuer. 4. quaest. 5.
holden at Sinuessa ( Sigon. de occident. imper. lib. 1.
or Suessa, as some say) before the Council of Nice. And there, Marcellini
Papae condemna^^o* Tom. 1. Cancilior.
when Marcellinus the Pope was accused for offering incense unto idols: the
Bishops said that he might be judged of no man. Which is a manifest token of
their allowing his supremacy.


Rainoldes. That Council is a counterfeit. As you may perceive by that it
reports that Diocletian the Emperor did talk at Rome with Marcellinus, and
brought him to idolatry. Whereas As Sigonius shows: de occident. imperio.
lib. 1.
Diocletian was then at Nicomedia, about a thousand miles off. Besides that,
Diocletians war against the Persians was ended certain years before the
time of that Council. Yet the Council says that Diocletian, being in that
war, heard of it. There is an other Council of the same stamp, holden under
Pope Siluester at Rome, Synod. Roma. sub Siluest. Pap. act. 1. cap. 1.
about the time that Constantine was cleansed of his lepros^e: Platin de vi^.
^otit. in Marco. (...) chronogr. volum. 2, generat. 11. Viues de caul, corrupt.
a^^. lib. 2. A^^^at. parerg. iur. lib. 7. ca. 19.
that is to say, never. Amongst the canons whereof, ( Synod. ^om. sub. ^iluest.
^ap. act. 2.
those which begin with That is to say, For no man, with ye which worces almost
all the canons of the secon^ action begin, most (...).
Nemo enim,) there is one Nemo enim dii^ dicet primam sedem. cap. 20
Nemo enim to that effect, that yours of Sinuessa. But what the true Bishops of
the primitive church thought of judging him, they showed by their judgment of
his fellow at Antioche, Paulus Samosatenus: Eusebius. histor. eccles. lib. 7. cap.
28. and 29.
whom the Bishops and Elders of his own province did excommunicate and depose;
against your Councels lie, that Nemo vnquam iudicauit Pontificem, nec prae^^l
sacerdotem suum.
No man ever judged his bishop. Wherefore to return to the primitive Churches
ordinances and rules from these devises Papal of Councels never holden: the
first general Council assembled at Nice did keep the Pope under in his
former state. For they ordained that Council. Niscaen. can. 4.
Bishops should be made by Bishops of their own province, requiring no consent
of his thereunto: neither did they give the hearing and determining of causes
unto him, but can. 5.
unto the Bishops of the province too; The second Division.
commanding the ancient canon to be kept, that none should receive them to the
communion who were excommunicated and condemned by others.


Heart. True: if they were justly condemned and excommunicate. But if their own
Bishop had dealt unjustly with them upon some displeasure, and removed them
from the communion wrongfully; which you cannot deny but that he might do:
then reason requires that they should have remedy. Now the remedy thereof is
by appeal to the Pope.


Rainoldes. This remedy was devised by new Physicians, that lacked work: it
increases diseases. The Nicen Physicians foreseeing the danger, provided an
other and better remedy for them.


Heart. Better? what is that?


Rainoldes. The cause to be heard in a Synod of Bishops, so to be decided by
their common judgment. For let it be examined (say they) whether the Bishop
have excommunicated them upon a way wardnesse, or grudge, or too much rigor.
Whereof that there may be due examination, we have thought good that in every
province two synods should be kept yearly: to the intent, that in common (all
Bishops of the province being gathered together) such things may be examined.
And so, whosoever shall be found in fault, and to have been dealt with justly
by the Bishop: let them be holden of all for excommunicate; till it shall
seem good to the Synod of Bishops to give more gentle sentence of them.


Heart. I grant, the Council of Nice does bring matters first from the Bishop
to the Synod. But if the Synod also do give unjust sentence: then is the
Pope left for the last refuge.


Rainoldes. The Council meant not so: but that the last refuge should be the
Synod still. For they do not say, till it shall seem good to the Bishop of
Rome, but, to the Synod of Bishops, to give more gentle sentence of them. Yea,
even the particular honor and preeminence of his, which they mention, is a
plain token that they dreamed not of such a general power. For it follows
straight in Can. 6.
the next canon, Let old customs be kept, they that are in Egypt, and Lybia,
and Pentapolis, that the Bishop of Alexandria have the preeminence of all
these: because such is the custom of the Bishop of Rome too. Likewise also in
Antioche, and in other provinces, let the Churches enjoy their dignities and
prerogatives. Which words of the Council grounding on the custom of the
Bishop of Rome, that as he had preeminence of all the Bishops about him, so
Alexandria and Antioche should have of all about the^, and likewise other
churches, (as the Metropolitan,) each in their own provinces: do show, that
the Pope neither had preeminence of all through the world before the Nicen
Council, nor ought to have greater preeminence (by their judgment) then he
before time had.


Heart. Nay, the Council did not limit the preeminence and power of the Church
of Rome by those words: but they followed rather it as a pattern, in advancing
others. For the Nicen Council, (says Epist. ad Michael. Imperatorem.
Concilior. Tom. 3. Sur.
Nicolas the first) durst not make any decree of that Church: as knowing that
nothing could be given her above her desert; yea, that she had al things by the
grant of Christ. And if the Councels canons be diligently marked, you shall
find doubtless, that they gave no increase to the church of Rome: but rather
took example of the form thereof for that which they would give to the church
of Alexandria.


Rainoldes. Pope Nicolas, endeavoring to prove his supremacy by records of
Councels, some impudently forged, as the Council of Sinuessa; some lewdly
misexpounded, as Can. 9. In the which, Nicolas says the Pope is m^ant. and
none but the Pope, ^y primas dia ce^^os ^. whereas in very truth the Council
meant every Patriarch thereby, as I have showed, Chapt. 8. Division 5.
the Council of Chalcedon: not knowing what to say well of the Council of
Nice, does shape this answer to it, for lack of a better. But as a dronken man
that has a giddie head, ente^ding to go one way sometimes, does reele an
other: so fares it with him. For, in saying that they took example of the
form of the Church of Rome for that which they would give to the Church of
Alexandria: he grants that as the Bishop of Alexandria had but the
preeminence of all thereabout, no more had the Bishop of Rome. And seeing that
example is allowed therein, and made a pattern of the rest: it follows that
the Council thereby did decree that the Bishop of Rome should keep within
those limits. Which to be the purport of that Nicen canon: not only singular
autors, Hist. eccle. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Rufinus, and De concord. cathol. l. 2. c. 13.
Cusanus, but a Synod. actau. gener. Constan^. can. 17.
general Council also has declared. In deed the very sticking of your own
men in it, like birds in the lyme, may show that in the sight of sense and
common reason it makes directly against the Popes supremacy. For Distinct 65.
c^ mos antiq^us.
Gratian having set it down, as he found it, Let the old custom hold in
Egypt, Libya, and Pentapolis, that the bishop of Alexandria have rule of all
these; Quando quide^ and ^omano ^piscopo parilis (...).
because the Bishop of Rome too has the like custom: the gloss on him
expounds it, like, Id (...), si nilis in q^^o a^dam, quo ^^am vterque
deponitepisc^^^s.
that is, like in some things, because they both depose Bishops; Vel dic,
Romano, id est, Constantinopolitano.
or say, the Bishop of Rome, that is, of Co^sta^tinople. Of which expositions,
the former being dangerous, that any may depose Bishops, beside the Pope: a
gloss upon that gloss allows the later of Constantinople, and says it is
Me^ius and planius secundum Hug.
the better in the judgment of Hue. But Hue was deceived. For though
Constantinople were called new Rome within a few years after: yet Sigon. de
occi. Imper. lib. 3. and 4.
nether was it called Rome, nor Constantinople, at the time that ye canon,
whereof we speak, was made. In summa Conciliorum.
Carranza therefore helps it with an old edition, showed him by a Cardinal:
which in steed of these words, the Bishop of Rome, had, Metropolita^^ episcopo.
the Metropolita^. And this would serve fitly to take away the scruple (as
Carranz. annot. in 6. can. Conc. Ni^aen.
he says it does) of them who have thought that the Bishop of Rome is made
equal with other Metropolitans by that canon. But because it goes against the
consent of In Council. Chalced. act. 16.
most ancient copies of the Popes own and others, D^^en. sid. Trident. l. 2.
Andradius reproves it: and, keeping the name of the Bishop of Rome, says,
that by his custom, his judgment is meant. A hard interpretation, and flat
against the text: which, authorizing and approving the custom of the Bishop of
Alexandria, because the Bishop of Rome has (...).
that custom too, does ground them both upon (...),and(...)
old customs, not one upon the others judgment. Wherefore Bellarmin. in
praelect. Romans contr. 4. quae^t. 5. The abridgement of controversies, Controu.
3. quaest. 4.
the Jesuits (the perfiters of Popery) have concluded now, that the beginning
of the canon wants: what? this, Ecclesia Romana semper habuit primatu^.
The Church of Rome has still had the primacie.


Heart. And good reason why. For it is cited so in the Action. 16.
Council of Chalcedon.


Rainoldes. So they say: but falsely. And that with a pretty shift of
legi^rdemaine. For whereas Paschasinus (the Popes Legate there) bringing forth
that canon to the Popes behoof, had set this title over it, [ Quod ecclesia
Romana semper ^abuit primatu^.
That the Church of Rome has still had the primacie:] the Jesuits suppressing
quite the word [That] do allege the rest as a part of the canon.


Heart. Perhaps they thought the word [That] to be superfluous.


Rainoldes. They might have thought the whole title to be so, if they had
marked that which follows in the Council. For the same canon being recited
straight out of an other copy by Constantine the Secretary, has no word
thereof. But to leave the dealing of the Popes legate with the beginning of the
canon: the Jesuits cannot escape out of the midst of it, no more then their
accomplices. For the Roman reader is entangled in it as fast as Pope Nicolas,
whose form he relieth on. The A book so entitled, touching the controversies
of our time: compiled by Robert Persons, out of the Dictates of the Jesuits,
for ou^ English Students, and used to be written out by the hearers thereof in
the seminaries. Wherein (because such libels go in writing only among their
own Nouices,) they co^ and lie more boldly the^ commonly they dare in print.
As any man that has it, if he compare their tractate of the Popes supremacy
with this our con^erence, shall perceive.
abridgement of controversies does lie by his side too, with brauer show, but
lesser strength.


Heart. Whether that title were added to the canon by the Popes Legate, or were
a part thereof, it makes no matter. The primacie named in it was given to the
Pope by the Council of Nice. For though in the common volumes of Councels there
be but twenty canons of theirs extant now: yet they made fourscore. By many
of the which the Pope is autorised to judge all greater causes, as Rescript.
Iul. Pap. contra Orient. Council. Tom. 1.
Julius declares. Yea, the fourscore canons whole were found of late at
Alexandria in the Arabian tongue: and turned into Latin out of the Arabian by a
learned Jesuit. Therein are Patriarchs said to rule all their subjects, as
the Pope is head of all Patriarchs, like Peter: to whom all power is given over
all Christian Princes, and over all their peoples, as being Christ's vicar over
all nations of the earth.


Rainoldes. That of Pope Council. Nicen. edit. ab Alfonso Pisano, can. 39.
Julius I have already showed to be a bastard ympe. The canons cited in it,
are ^att after kind. Annot. in Did. 16. c. septuaginta.
Contius, your lawyer, says Chapt. 8. Diuis. 6.
that their bastardie is proved even by this, that no man, no not Gratian
himself durst allege them. No dout, if the Pope had laid them up In sacro
nostrae ecclesiae sedis scrinio.
so, as the counterfeite Julius Testis est diuinitas.
swears that he did: Pope Zosimus, and the rest, In Council. Carthag. 6. and
African.
who made such add with the Bishops of Afrike about the Nicen Council, would
have found and showed them. But the Arabian canons which the Jesuit brought
from Alexandria, may suffice to give or take a deaths wound of them. For those
which Julius cites, are not in the Arabian. That which the Arabian has, is
not in Julius.


Heart. Though Julius cite not that of the Popes supremacy, which the Arabian
has: yet might it be true. And certes the credit of the Arabian copy must
needs be very great. Chi^fly since it agrees in the perfect number of the Nicen
canons. For they were fourscore: as Epist. Egypt. episcopor. ad Mar^um Pap.
Con^^rom. 1.
Athanasius writes. Who sent to Pope Marcus for the full copies of them, when
the Arians had burnt them at Alexandria.


Rainoldes. And Rescript. Mar^i P^p. Athanasi^ and omnibus Egypt. episcop.
Pope Marcus sent the^ him. Whereby is disclosed the forgerie of both their
writings. For the books which the Arians burnt at Alexandria, were burnt in
the time of Constantius the Emperor: as appears by the complaint of the
right Epist. ad orthodoxos i^ pe^^equ^t.
Athanasius, being driven out thence. Now Marcus the Pope was dead about an
eight or nine years before, in the time of Constantine: as In Chronico.
Ierom records.


Heart. But other Fathers speak of sundry things decreed by the Nicen
Council, (as you may see in Alan. Cop. dialog. 1. cap. 7.
Cope,) whereof there is no mention in the twenty canons that are extant now.


Rainoldes. Neither in the fourscore canons of the Arabian. Wherefore if the
sundry things, which they speak of, do prove all sundry canons: the
Arabian canon, which cap. 12.
Harpsfields Cope alleges for the Popes supremacy, may chance to prove a
counterfeit. Nay, it must prove so, because it is a canon: if you believe the
Fathers. For they had only twenty: even the same that we have. S Conc. Cart.
6. and Africanum.
Austin and above two hundred Bishops of Afrike acknowledged no mo. Conc.
Catthag. 6. c. 9.
Caecilian, the Bishop of Carthage brought no mo from the Council it self,
whereat he was present. S. Conc. African. c. 102.
Cyril the Bishop of Alexandria, and c. 103.
Atticus the Bishop of Constantinople, affirm there were no mo. Hist. eccle.
l. 1. c. 6. Though he reckon two and twenty* by dividing some of them as can.
6. and 3.
Rufinus, who has registered them in his story, delivers no mo. Finally, S.
In princip. Concilior. de s^nodis princip.
Isidore, a curious sercher of them, says, they were just so many. As for
other Fathers, if they show any thing to have been decreed by the Nicen
Council, which is not in these canons, as Co^c. Antioch. can. 1. Theod^ret.
hist. eccles. l. 1 c. 9.
they do certain: the Canones and decre^a Council. Trid^^ti^i.
canons and decrees of the council of Trent may teach you that some things
might be decreed besides, and yet the canons be but twenty.


Heart. What say you then to that which Zosimus alleged in Conc. Carthag. 6 c.
3.
the Council of Carthage, touching appeals of Bishops to the Bishop of Rome?
For that is called a canon of the Nicen Council, and not a decree.


Rainoldes. I say, that it was neither decree nor canon of it: as Epist.
Council. Africa 1. ad Boni^ac. and Caelest. c. 101. and 105.
the Bishops of Afrike answered, and proved. Yea Bellarmin. in praelect Romans
Contr. 4. q. 5.
the Roman reader, the chief of your Jesuits, is of the same opinion: adding
that he thinks that Zosimus did call it a canon of the Nicen Council,
because it is a canon of the Council of Sardica, and those two Councels were
esteemed as one, and bound up together in the Popes library. Wherefore since the
Council of Nice made no canons but the common twenty, and they speak against
the supremacy of the Pope, even by Council. Nic^e. edit. ab Al^on. Pisan. can.
8.
the Arabians own interpretation: whatsoever either Arabian or Roman has
coined to the contrary, that must needs be counterfeit; The third Division.
and the Pope is guilty of theft and oppression by verdit of that famous
Council. Whereto the Council of Antioche does join their verdit too. For
they say, as the Nicen, not only concerning Conc. Antioch. can. 19.
the making of Bishops, but also can. 6. and 12. and 20.
the determining of causes of the Church. In so much, that can. 14.
if a Bishop being accused, the Bishops of the province agree not about him,
some judging with him, some against: yet refer they not the matter to the
Pope, but will the Metropolitan to call some other Bishops out of the next
province, that they may judge together, and decide the controversy. But can.
1^*
if all the Bishops of the province agree and give one sentence of him: then may
he be judged no more by any other, (no not by the Pope,) but that must stand
which they have said.


Heart. Yet the Council of Sardica can not be denied to have made with us. For
there it was ordained, that, Conc. Sardic. can. 5.
if a Bishop, deprived by the Bishops of his own province, appealed to the
Pope: the Pope, if he thought good, might write to the Bishops who were near
that province, that they should examine the matter diligently, and give right
judgment of it; or send him self also some That is of his Clergy of the
Church of Rome: whence the name of Legates a latere is taken.
from his own side, to judge together with them.


Rainoldes. When this was alleged by the Popes legate, in his behalf, at
Carthage: Epist. ad Caelestin. Council. African. c. 10^.
the Bishops of Afrike said (after long search) that they found it not ordained
by any Council. Which moved Cusan. de concordant. cath^l. l. 2. c. 25.
a Doctor of your own to write, that it may be douted whether the Council of
Sardica ordained it or no. And since Athan. in Apolog. 2.
at that Council there were not many less than forty Bishops of Afrike, who
brought home the canons thereof, as it is likely: his dout has reason for it
Unless peradventure, because in Conc. Sa^dic. can. 3.
the fountain and spring of that canon Julius is named, in whom Theodoret.
hist. eccle. l. ^ cap. 8.
the Council had a special affiance for his dealing against the Arians:
therefore the Bishops of Afrike thought it to have been given personally to
Julius, not to Popes in general; and so Priuilegium personale extinguitur cum
persona. De regulis Iur. in sext.
to have died with him, not lived with them. But if it were ordained indeed by
the Council, in respect of him, as Pope, not as Julius: yet Sander. de vi^ib.
Monar. eccles. lib. 7. Alan. Cop. dialog. 1. cap. 6.
they, who avouch it to prove the Popes supremacy, do make as good a reason,
as if a man should claim the whole city of London, because he has the lease
of a house in Hogsdon. For Conc. Sardic. can. 3. and 5.
the Council of Sardica tieth him in all points, (save only in this,) to his
own province, as well as other Bishops; and in this, it shows that he had it
not of right before time, but now by that grant; neither does it grant him to
judge of the causes, but to commend the judgment thereof to the Synod, or (at
the most) to be a fellow-iudge with the^; and they, in whose causes it grants
him so much, are Bishops, can. 23. and 14.
none else. Howbeit, even this too, that he should send some from his own side
to judge of their causes together with the Synod, was repealed afterward, and
the whole committed to Synodes of the province, or diocese, if the province
served not. Belike, upon experience of some harm ensuing: as Plini. hist. not.
l. 17. c. 4.
a husband man (in Sicilie) having rid stones out of his ground, was troubled
so with mire, that he lost his corn till he had laid them in again. For
Conc. Consta^^inop. can. 2.
the general Council of Constantinople did forbid the Bishops of a diocese
(such as Egypt, containing many provinces) to meddle with the Churches without
their own limits: and command that things in every province should be ordered
by the Synod of the province, according to the canons of the Nicen Council.


Heart. But they gave (...). 3.
the primacie of honor to the Bishop of Constantinople after the Bishop of
Rome. Which shows that the Bishop of Rome in their judgment was over all in
primacie.


Rainoldes. In primacie of honor, M. Heart, not of power: as I have often said.
For in power they made him equal with his brethren, enclosing them all within
their own limits* and appointing can. 6.
the causes of Bishops to be judged each by his own Synod, first, of the
province; then, of the diocese; without mention of the Pope. (...)
Yet in (...)
honor, they set him highest; Constantinople, next: as the very words of the
Council show. It is true, that this height and preeminence of honor was a
cause that moved him to lust for greater power too, and means that lift him up
unto it. For as Masi^s in Iosuam cap. 20.
murderers in Italy are wont to fly to sanctuaries to escape punishment, and
Liui. lib. 1.
Romulus received runagates at Rome to advance his state: so ^onc. Afric. cap.
101.
disorderly persons not able to maintain their faults against justice in
their own province, did run to the Pope; and cap. 105.
ambitious heads, whether of Popes themselves, or of some about the^, aspired
to greater rule under pretense of privileges of the Church of Rome. But as
general Councels had provided general salues against such evils: so the
Councels of provinces and dioceses applied them to this particular sore for
safety of their Churches. For it was decreed by the Council of Mileuis, that,
Conc. Mile^itan. can. 22.
if any Elder, or Deacon, or clergie-man of inferior state appealed Ad
^ransmarina iudicia they term it, whereby the Pope is meant: though Gratian
fondly do except him, 2. q. 6. c. placuit vt presbyteri.
to the Pope: no man in Afrike should communicate with him. The Council of
Carthage shows that Conc. Carth. Grac. can. 28.
they had often decreed the same of Bishops. And when yet they could not avoid
the shameless shifts of tumultuous brains, who made Rome their refuge; and
Zosimus in the quarrel of Apiarius an Elder would have his Bishop Urban to be
excommunicated, or appear at Rome: the Bishops of all the provinces of Afrike
did debate the matter with him and his successors, Boniface, and Caelestine,
for the space of four or five years together. In fine, when the true and
authentical copies of the Nicen Council, whereon the Pope grounded, were
gotten out of the East; and thereby the falshoode of his plea appeered: Epist.
Council. African. ad C^lestin. cap. 105.
the Council of Afrike told him, that he should not meddle with the causes of
men in their provinces; nor receive any such to the communion as they had
excommunicate. For the Council of Nice (said they) did consider wisely and
uprightly that all matters ought to be determined in the places in which they
began: as being persuaded that the grace of the holy ghost would not be wanting
to any province, whereby the Christian Bishops might both wisely see, and
constantly maintain the right. Chiefly, since it is lawful for any, if he like
not the sentence of his judges, to appeal to the Synodes of his own province:
yea, or farther also to a Vniue^sale, meaning a Synod of the diocese, not, of
the whole world. Council. Cons^antinop. can. 6.
general Synod. Unless there be any perhaps who will imagine, that our God
can inspire the trial of right into one man, and deny it to a great number of
Bishops assembled in a Synod. And so going forward with proof that the Pope
ought not to judge their causes, either at Rome, himself; or by his Legates
sent from Rome: they touched his attempt in modest sort, but at the quick,
condemning it of Fumosum typhum saeculi.
pride, and smokie stateliness of the world.


Heart. I marvel if the Council of Afrike wrote thus, as you report of it. For
Confess. Aug. l. 1. c. 9. tit 6.
Torrensis cites an epistle of theirs to prove the Popes supremacy.


Rainoldes. Torrensis cites it with as much sincerity, as an other Campian.
Ra^ione 4.
Jesuit does the four general Councels: both fowly abusing the show of some
words against the drift and meaning of their whole sentences. For the Council
of Afrike, though bearing a while with the Popes claim till the Nicen canons
(whereby he claimed) were serched, yet at length condemned it, as I have
showed: The fourth Division.
and of the four general Councels, as the former two did enclose the Pope
within his own province, or diocese at the most; so did the two later, of In
sentent. super petitione episcopor. Cypr.
Eph^sus and Can. 1. and ^^.
Chalcedon, confirming the decrees and canons of the former.


Heart. Nay, doubtless at Actio^. 16.
Chalcedon, the Judges, having heard the former canons read, said that they
perceived al primacie and principal honor to be due to the Pope thereby.


Rainoldes. But they added that the Patriarch of Constantinople ought to be
vouchsafed of the same prerogatives and primacie of honor. As Council Chalced.
can. 28.
the C^uncell also it self allotted equal prerogatives to them both:
ordeining thereupon, that Constantinople should be magnified in ecclesiastical
matters as well as Rome, and be next unto it. Wherein it is manifest that they
meant preeminence of honor, not of power. For can. 9. and 17.
themselves decreed that the highest judge of ecclesiastical persons should be
the Patriarch of the diocese, or of Constantinople. Whereby they gave greater
power to the Patriarch of Constantinople, whom they authorized to deal in
every diocese; then to the Roman Patriarch, whom they tied to his own. In so
much that Ann. Comne^a Alexiad. l. 1.
ye Greeks say that all dioceses of the whole world were subject to their
Patriarch by the Council of Chalcedon. At least if the Council ha^ an eye to
power, and not to honor only, in willing them to be magnified: yet that is a
disproofe still of ye Popes supremacy. As you may learn by Did. 22. c.
Reno^antes.
Gratian. Who seeking to prove it by the same canon renewed in Sext. Synod.
Constantinopolit. in Tr^ll. can 36.
the Council of Constantinople, has helped it with a negative: and where the
Council said, Let Constantinople (...).
be magnified as well as Rome; he alleges it, let Non ^ame^ magnificetur.
not Constantinople be magnified as well as Rome.


Heart. The Council, which that canon was renewed in, Cop. dialog. 1. cap. 5.
is untruly called ye sixth general Council. For they made no canons.


Rainoldes. Yet a Council made them in Constantinople, Praefat. synod. in
Trullo ad Justinian.
with credit of a general. And Synod. Nicaen. ^ecund. can. 1.
the next general Council did confirm them. Which thereby disproued the
Popes supremacy too. Yea, again Synod. octau. gener. Constantinopolit. can.
17.
the next defined of the Pope, as of other Patriarchs: and that upon the ground
of the famous Nicen. To be short, the visible Monarchy of the Church was never
allowed to him by any Council, general, or provincial: until the East
Churches were rent from the West, and the Italian faction did bear the sway in
Councels.


Heart. What mean you to say so? whereas Council Later. sub Innocent. tert. cap.
5.
the Council of Lateran under Innoce^tius did approve it flatly: the Patriarks
of the Churches of Constantinople and Jerusalem being present.


Rainoldes. Not the right Patriarchs, The Pope mad^ Latin Prelates Patria^kes
of Constantinople, against the r^^ht Greek ones. Council. Florent. Sess. vlt.
I trow. Though if they had been: yet might the Italians make decrees in
Lateran at Rome without them. But nether did that Council approve the Popes
Monarchy. For the Popes Monarchy is a full and absolute soueraintie of power
over the whole Church. Whereupon Pope Paschal the second. c. Significasti. de
electione. Pope Pius the second. Epist. 400. Turrecremata. Sum. de eccle. l.
3. c. 46. Sander. de visib. Monarch. eccle. lib. 7. ^o^rensis de autorit. sum.
Pont. supra Concilia. Stapleton. Princip doctr. lib. 13. cap. 15. The
Schoolmen commonly, in 4. sentent. did. 19. And almost all the Cano^istes* in
c. Significas^i. de elect. c. Si Papa. Did 40.
the principal proctours of it teach, that not a general Council is above
the Pope, but the Pope above the Counsel. For Gersen and Almain tractat. de
po^est. ecclesiae. Cusan us de concordant. cathol. lib. 2. cap. vlt. (...) in
c. sig^i^icasti de elect.
they (says Father Bellarmin. prael^ct. Romans con^rouer. 3. part. 3. quast. 4.
Robert) who hold that the Council is above the Pope; do make him like a Duke
of Venice: above every magistrate and senator in several, not above the whole
Senate. But he is above the whole Church absolutely, and above the general
Council: so that he acknowledges no judge on earth above him. Now, the
soueraintie of ordinary power given to the Pope over all Churches by the
Council of Lateran under Innocentius, was but as it were a Dukedom of Venice:
over every Church and Bishop in several, not over the whole Church. A signorie
of great state: but not a Popes Monarchy. His Monarchy was neither allowed by
that Council, nor by any other for many ages after: nay, it was condemned
expressly by the Council of ^
Constance, and of Session. 2. and 26. and 1^.
Basil. The first, that allowed it, was the Session. 11.
Council of Lateran under Leo the tenth: a thousand five hundred and syxteene
years after Christ.


Heart. Nay, the Session. vlt.
Council of Florence had allowed it a fourscore years before: the Greek and
Latin Bishops subscribing both thereto.


Rainoldes. But in such sort, that Bell^rmin. praelect. Romans contr. 3. p. 3. q.
4.
your Roman reader, though making the most thereof for the Popes credit, was
fain^ yet to say, that the Council of Florence did not define it so expressly.
In truth Council. Florent. Sess. vlt.
the Greek Bishops answered of themselves, for they might not treat thereof
without consent (they said) of their whole Church, but of themselves they
answered, that the Pope ought to have the same prerogatives, that he had before
the time of their dissension. Which is a great presumption, that when they
subscribed to more then the same, it was not of themselves. Chiefly since Upon
their Emperors importun^tie* and danger of t^eir S^ate.
they came besides so constrainedly to that which they did, and Both presently
there, in choosing a new Patriarch: and after when they were returned into
their countr^y.
refused to obey the Pope when they had done it. But Leo the tenth with his
Italian faction in Lateran defined it. From whom Appellat. Vniuersit.
Parisien^is a Leone decimo ad futuru^ Concilium. In f^scic. rerum expetend. and
fugicad.
the University of Parise appealed straight to a Council; and condemned his
Lateran doctrine and decree: as Aen. Silu de g^stis Basil. Co^^il. lib 1.
the Uniuersities of L^uan, of Coolein, ^i^tor. de Europa, cap. 22.
of Vienna, and of ^^omer. de (...) Polonor. lib. 21.
Cracouia had done before also. The consent therefore of Pastors and Doctors
throughout all Christendom has disallowed the Popes Monarchy. And that which
the Pastors and Doctors delivered was the religion of their Churches. Whereby
you may see the truth of that I said, that, except the crew of the Italian
faction, all Christian Churches have condemned his usurped soueraintie.


Heart. Truly (I must confess) I see more probability on your side then I did.
But in that you said that all Christian Churches have condemned it, and do
till this day, you forgot your self, who granted Chapt. 8. (...). 6.
before, that by the Trent-doctrine the Pope is above the Council. For the
doctrine agreed on by the Council of Trent (which you call the of
Trent-doctrine) is held by Catholic Christians through the whole Church at
this day.


Rainoldes. I said, that all Christian Churches have condemned it, and do,
except the crew of the Italian faction. Which speech agrees well with that I
said before of the Council Trent. For the ^ess. 7. de reformat. In pro^mio.
and Sess. 14 cap. 7. and Sess. 25. de re^rm. ^. cap. vlt.
Trent-doctrine of the Popes supremacy, is that which the Italian faction at
Trent did ouerbea^e the rest in. As Commentar. in Epist. ad litum ca^. ^.
Claudius Espencaeus, a Divine of Parise, a Doctor of your own witnesses:
saying, that Ludouicus the Cardinal of Arle did complain justly at the
Council of Basil, that look what (...) Italicae
the Italian nation likes of, that is decreed in Councels; and (...) est illa
Helena quae (...) n^per obtinuit.
this is that Helena which did prevail of late at Trent. Now, that which the
Cardinal Ludouicus spoke of, was, Aen. Silu. de gestis Basil. Council. lib. 1.
that in Councels not only Bishops but Elders too should have voices, as of old
Act. 15.22. and 16.4. Eusebius. h^st. eccles. lib. 6. cap. 42. and lib. 7. cap.
28. and 29.
time they had: for Si soli episcopi vocem habeant, id demum fiet quod nationi
placebit Italicae, quae so^a n^tiones alias in numero episcoporum a^t superat
aut aequat.
if Bishops only have voices, (says the Cardinal) then shall that be done that
shall seem good to the Italian nation, which alone has either mo Bishops, or
as many, as al other nations have. For every baggage-towne has a Bishop there.
And these buggage-Bishops, There were almost two hundred Italia^ Prelates
there: of all other nations not a hundred. Council. Trident. excus* a Plantin.
in numer. P^^lator. qui ad Trident. Synod. conuene^u^^.
of whom there were more at the Council of Trent then of all other nations,
did allow that doctrine. Though neither they perhaps allowed it in heart, but
were induced by Papal means to yield unto it. For Responsum Franci^^^ Vargas
de episcoporum iurisdict. and Pont Max. autorit.
the answer of Vargas touching the Popes supremacy, (made at Rome, and
published, for instruction of the Council assembled then at Trent) does show
that Pauli Manut. praes. ad Respo^ sum Fr. Vargas
there was some sticking at the matter. And your Gui^^iardin. hist. Ital. lib.
9. and 20. Iouius. hist. sui temporis lib. 2.
stories note, that the Pope is fowly afraid of general Councels, leaft they
should hurt his State: and comes like a bear to the stake (as they say) when
he is drawn to summon them. What As Espencaeus shows, Comment. in epist. ad
Titum. cap. 1.
a do was made before he could be brought to grant that the Council of Trent
should go forward? And As Onuphrius says, Vita Pij quart. in vit. Pont.
adiect. ad Platin.
while the Council lasted, he kept good rule at Rome: but brake loose when it
was ended. Besides, it being ended twenty years ago, there has been none
since: nether (I believe) is like to be in have. Where yet there should be one
De decennio in decennium perpetuo.
every ten years, by Council. Constantiens. Sess. 39. c. Frequens.
their own decree. All evident tokens, that the Pope himself does think that
Bishops under him like not his supremacy: and would cut it shorter if they
might have power and authority to do it. Which if they would do, though being
Formaiuram. praestand. ab episcopo elect. in Pontificali Romans part. 1.
sworn to maintain it; yea, and to maintain the reseruations, the
provisions, and other excesses of it: is it not manifest that they disallow it,
or detest it rather?


Heart. Our ancestors allowed it ever since the time that by S. Gregory's
means they were first converted to the faith of Christ, till King Harries
days, when heresy did root it out.


Rainoldes. Our ancestors had a reverent opinion of the Pope, long after S.
Gregory, for S. Gregory's sake: and honored him above all Bishops. But when
he began to reach out the paws of his supremacy over the^, in giving
Church-liuings* and handling Church-causes, and executing Church Censures: they
were so far from liking it, that Polydor. virg. (...). Ang. lib. 19. and 20.
in Edouardo te^t. and Ricardo secu^d.
they made laws against it two hundred years ago. Even in Queen Mary's time,
when they restored that stoompe of his usurped power which they had rooted out
under King Henry the eigth: 1. and 2. Philip. and Mariae cap. 8.
they provided that he should have no more but that stoompe, and kept the
former laws in force against him still. Wherefore though our ancestors gave
him great preeminence of honor, some of power too: yet the most they gave him
was but a Venice-Dukedome; his Monarchy they never allowed to this day. Which
may be said likewise of other Christian Churches that honored him on like
occcasio^: as our neighbors of Ad Zudouicu^ vndecim. pro libe^t. eccles. Gall
aduers. Romans aulam defensio Parisiensis curiae.
France, and Gra^^mina nationis German. and sacri Ro^an. Imperij dece^:
exhibi^a Maximiliano primo.
Germany. For each of them showed their mislike and hatred of the Popes
supremacy, by supplications and complaints offered to their Princes. Yea, In
conuentu Litu^ice^si.
France made laws against it: which might have continued; had not Council.
Lateran. sub Leon. decim. Sess. 11. Concordata cum Rege Franciae.
the Gentiles raged and broken the bands a sunder. And these, of whose
judgments I have spoken hitherto, are such as your selves do hold for
Catholic Christians. The rest, Christians also, though you call them heretics,
and schismatikes, yet Christians, the Churches of Chalcocond. de reb. ^ure.
lib. 1. and 6.
Greece and Asia, in the East; in the North, of Iouius in Moscoui^.
Moscouie; in the South of Aluarez in descript. A^th^op. cap. 77. and ^3.
Aethiopia; in the West, of Aen. Syl^ hist. Bohem^^ 35.
Boheme, Sleidan. comm^ntar. lib. 16.
Province, ^. Fox, in the Act. and Mo^u^n lib. 7.
Piemont heretofore, and Har^onia confes^ion^m file^, ^ect. 10. and 11.
the reformed Churches that are at this day in England, Scotland, France,
Germany, Flaunders, Suitzerland, and so forth throughout Europe, set less by
the Pope then the former did. That I might say justly, that, except the crew of
the Italian faction, (wherein I comprehend the Jesuits, and their accomplices,
men Italianate,) al Christian Churches have condemned the Popes supremacy, and
do till this day. Wherefore if the matter were to be tried by the will of men:
so many thousands of them, Pastors and Doctors, Synodes and Councils,
Uniuersities and Churches, through all ages, in all countries, of al sorts, and
states, might suffice to put the Pope from his supremacy. At least they might
make you to blush, M. Heart, who have said in Chapt. 7. Diuis. 7.
writing, that all men did grant it him without resistance, and it was never
denied him. But since it must be tried by the word of God, and it is not written
in the book of life. I conclude, that it is not a citizen of Jerusalem, but a
child of Babylon, which they shall be blessed who dash against the stones. And
thus have I showed that the former point, on which you refuse to communicate
with us in prayers and religion, ought to bring you rather to us, then draw you
from us. It remains now that we sift the later: of the faith professed in the
Church of England. Which if it be found to be the Catholic faith, as in truth
it will: then is there no cause but you must needs yield, that we may go
together into the house of the Lord.


The tenth Chapter. 1 Princes are supreme governors of their subjects in
things spiritual, and temporal: and so is the oath of their supremacy
lawful. 2 The breaking of the conference off, M. Heart refusing to proceed
farther in it.
HEART. Nay, first, The first Division.
why do you take the supremacy from the Pope, and give it to the Prince who
is less capable of it?


Rainoldes. The supremacy, which we take from the Pope, M. Heart, we give to no
mortal creature, Prince, nor other. But the Pope having seized on part of
Christ's right, part of Princes, part of Bishops, part of peoples and Churches;
as the chough (in Aesope) did trick up himself with the feathers of other
birds: the feather, which the Romish chough had of our Princes, we have taken
from him, and given it to her Majesty to whom it belonged; according to the
lesson of our heavenly Master, Mat. 22.21.
Give to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and to God the things which are
Gods.


Heart. It is not Caesar's right to be the supreme governor of all his dominions
in things spiritual and temporal. But this is the supremacy which you give
our sovereign Lady Queen Elisabeth. Therefore you give the Prince more the^ i^
the Princes.


Rainoldes. To have the preeminence over all rulers in government of matters
touching God and man within his own dominions, is to be supreme governor of
all his dominions in things spiritual and temporal. But 1. Pet. 2.13.
it is (...).
Caesar's right (...)
to have the preeminence over all rulers in government of matters touching God
and man within his own dominions. Therefore that is the Princes which we give
the Prince.


Heart. The Prince has preeminence over al rulers within his own dominions in
government of matters touching man, not God. For nether he nor any of the
rulers under him may deal in them both.


Rainoldes. They may. For Romans 13.3. ^. Pet. 2.14.
the civil magistrate is ordained to punish them that do evil, and praise
them that do well. But the evil to be punished, and the good to be praised,
compriseth all duties, not only toward man, but toward God also. Therefore
the civil magistrate is ordained to govern in duties touching God and man.


Heart. The good that we must follow, and evil that we must fly, compriseth
duties to them both. But that which the civil magistrate must deal with, is
good and evil in things of men, not of God; in civil cases, not religion.


Rainoldes. The scripture says the contrary. For it shows that offenders in
cases of religion, Exodus 22.20.
idolaters, Leu. 24.16.
blasphemers, Dea^. 13.5. and 18.20.
false prophets, and Numb. 15.35.
profaners of holy things, are to be punished. But the punishment of these is
committed to him Romans 13.4.
who bears not the sword in vain. Then is the civil magistrate to punish
evil doers in things concerning God. Now, wherein he has to punish, and
reward, therein he has to govern. He has to govern therefore in things
concerning God and man.


Heart. Why says the scripture then, that Heb. ^.1.
the high Priest, (the Priest, not the Prince) is ordained for me^ in those
things that pertain to God.


Rainoldes. To do them, M. Heart: as it follows in the text, that he may offer
gifts and sacrifices for sins. For this is the peculiar duty of the Priests.
Which if the Prince meddle with, as 2. Chron. 26. ver. 16.
Ozias did, who would have burnt incense, upon the altar of incense, ver. 18.
a thing enjoined to Priests only: then transgresses he the bounds of his
office, ver. 19.
and provoke vengeance of the Lord upon him. But to provide by civil
punishments, and orders, that Priests do their duty in things concerning God,
nor only Priests, but people too: it is the Princes charge; and so is he
ordained to deal in things of God. For, Judge. 17. v. 5.
when Michah had an idols chapel in his house, with a vestiment, and images:
ve^. 6.
in those days (says the scripture) there was no King in Israel, but every
man did that which was good in his own eyes. And again, Judge. 18. ver. 1.
In those days there was no King in Israel, when ver 17.
the men of Dan got that idolatrous stuff, with an ver. 1^*
idolatrous Priest, ver. 30.
and went a whooring after it. Which being said Judge. 19. ver. 1.
in like sort ver. 2.
when adultery was committed, and ver. 25.
with adultery, ver. ^6.
murder: does show, that as the subjects should have been restrained from
murder, and adultery, so from idolatry too by the Princes sword; since all
these sins reigned, Judge. 10.28.
not for want of a Priest, but of a King in Israel. And this appears farther
by the examples of the Kings: of whom 1. King. 15.^4* and 22 44. and 2. King.
12.3. and 14.4. and 15.35.
some are touched for that they took not away the hie places; 2. King. 18.4.
and 23. ver. 8.13. and 19.
and some are commended for taking them away. Yea, King Ezekias 2. Chron. 29.
v. 5.21.27. and 30*
commanding first the Levites and Priests to do their duty, 2. Chron. 30.
ver. 1.6 and 12.
afterward the people to come and serve the Lord; 2. Chron. 30. ver. 2. and 4.
finally, the^ both to reform themselves for maintenance of religion: is said
2. King. ^8.6*
to have cleaued to the Lord therein, and kept his commandments which lie
commanded Moses. A manifest proof, that whereas Deuteronomy. 17.19.
the King is willed (by Moses) to keep all the words of the law to do them: the
Lord meant thereby, that he ought to keep them, not only as a private man,
but as a King, by seeking and providing that all his subjects did their duties,
both to God and man. Wherefore, since ye supremacy which The Article^ agreed
upon in the convocation holden at London, a^t. 37.
we give our Prince in things ecclesiastical, is to deal therein as Ezekias,
not Ozias; not to preach the word, minister the sacraments, celebrate the
prayers, or practice discipline of the Church, but to provide that these
things be done, as they ought, by them whem God has called thereto: we give
to Caesar no more then is Caesar's. The greater is your Allen in the Apology of
the English Seminaries. Chapt. 1. and 4.
Masters fault, and his Sander. d^ visib. Monar. eccles. l. 5. c. 4.
Stapleton. princip doctr. lib. 5. cap. 17.
co^federates, who reprove the oath of the Queens supremacy, as wicked and
ungodly. For every lawful Prince is the supreme governor of his own
subjects in things spiritual and temporal. Wherefore to be sworn to this of
her Majesty, is but to acknowledge her the lawful Prince. And 1. Elisab. 1.
the Parliament might take an oath of English men for Elisabeth our Queen,
against the Pope usurping part of her right: as well ^. King. ^1.^
as Iehoiada of the men of Judah for Ioas their King, against Athalia yt usurped
his State.


Heart. My Allen in his Apology. chapt. 4.
Master lays open the weakness of ye grounds which you pretend for Princes
right out of the Scriptures. For Caesar was an Heathen when Mat. 22.21.
Christ and his Romans 13.1. ^. Pet. 2.13.
Apostles did teach the faithful to obey him. So that, if he were supreme
governor of his subjects in things spiritual and temporal: then must he be
obeyed as in temporal matters, so in spiritual too.


Rainoldes. True. And therefore Act. 25.11*
Paul appealed to him, as knowing that the Jews ought to have obeyed him, if
he had judged with the truth.


Heart. The Jews Act. 24.5.
had accused Paul of sedition, as well as of heresy. And therefore his case
was not spiritual merely. But if the Heathen Emperor were to be obeyed in
spiritual matters: then must the Christians have sacrificed to idols. For so
he did command them.


Rainoldes. Why? If the heathen Emperor had commanded them to bear false
witness against their neighbor, or to condemn the innocent thereby, 1. King.
21.10.
as Iezabel did: must Christians have obeyed him?


Heart. No: because, in things forbidden by God, that is a general rule, that
Act. 5.29.
we must rather obey God then men.


Rainoldes. Then as the Heathen Emperor must not be obeyed if he commanded
things unjust, and yet was supreme governor (you grant) in temporal matters:
so in spiritual matters might he have that soueraintie; yet not to be obeyed,
if he commanded things ungodly.


Heart. But Princes are so mighty that if they command them, men will obey them
commonly. As when Dan. 3. ver. 5.
the King of Babylon commanded men to worship the image of gold, ver. 12.
there were but three who disobeyed him.


Rainoldes. The better were those three tried: and through their trial ver. 28.
God glorified. Wherefore though Princes co^man^ not things godly, as nether
honest, always: we must not therefore rob them of soueraintie therein; but
help them with our 1. Tim. 2.2.
prayers, that they may govern us in godliness and honesty.


Heart. Yet experience shows, that, if they have this soueraintie, religion
will be changed often with change of rulers. As if is the ^urpitude of our
nation through the whole world, that of four Princes who have succeeded one an
other, the first kept the ancient faith, though not the Papacy: the next
abolished both; the third restored both again; and both again are now
abolished, by her Majesty: al within the compass of about thirty years*


Rainoldes. So in the realm of Judah, though not in so ^ew years, the father, 2
King. 16.4.
King Achaz, burnt incense in y^ hi^ places; the son, 18.4.
Ezekias, did abolish them; the nephew, 21.3.
Manasses, restored them again; and 23.8.
Josias, his nephew, abolished the^ again. Yet the Prophets were not moved by
these changes to deny their soueraintie in matters of religion. And better it
is for us to have changed so, by means of our godly Josias, and Ezekias, that
noble child her Majesty's brother, and her Majesty: then to have continued
unchanged, as our ancestors; under the Pope, as Judge. 18.30.
Jonathan. Nor was it such turpitude for the nation of the Jews to have had
religion reformed by two Kings, though in a few years it caused sundry
alterations: as for the nation of the Romans to have kept idolatry without
alteration, Liu^. lib. 1. Dionys. Halicarn. li^. 2.
under high Priests, Symmach. ep. lib. 10. ep. 5^.
for a thousand years together.


Heart. Well. Whatsoever opinion you have of the Princes supremacy: your own
Magdeburg. in p^^fat. Centur. 7*
Centurie-writers co^trol it in general; and In Amos. c. 7.
Calvin, in particular, the grant thereof to King Harrie. For they both reprove
the title of head. And it is al one to be head of the Church, and to be chief
governor of causes ecclesiastical.


Rainoldes. Calvin reproves not the title of head as ye Protestants granted
it, but that sense thereof which Popish Prelates gave, namely Episcopus
Vint^mensis, says Calvin, meaning Ga^diner: whose leuitie and inconstancy
(flattering the ^ing) in the (...) of the supremacy the king himself
reproved: as it is in Cardinal Poole, pro ecclesiast. vn^t. de^fens. lib. 4.
Steven Gardener: who did urge it so, as if they had meant thereby, that
P^^^stas penes Regem, vt statuat p^o s^o arbitrio quicquid voluerit. Which
Calvin opens farther by these of Gardiners words: licere Regi inte^^ice^re
populo vsum calicis in Caena* Quare* Potestas enim summa est penes^egem.
the king might do things in religion according to his own will, and not ^ee
the^ d^on according to Gods will. In like sort is the headship of the Church
controlled by the Centurie-writers. For they say that Princes ought not to be
heads, to Non habent po^estatem cudendi formulas religionum.
coin forms of religion, and Non gignan^ nouos fidei articulos.
frame new points of faith, as 1. King. 12.28.
Jeroboam did Nouos vitulos Jeroboam.
his calves. So what they mislike, y^ we grant not to Princes. What we grant to
Princes, that they mislike not. Nay, Centur 4. praesat. ad Reginam Elisabetham.
the Centurie-writers do give the same supremacy to our Prince that we do: nor
only to ours, Cap. 7. through every Centurie: yea, in that very place which the
Papists cite, or rather quote, against us, Praefat. Cent. 7.
but to al in general. Which To ours, in ep. ad Regem Eduardum, and Reginam
Elisabetham, prefix. comment. in Esaiam prophetam. To all, in Institut relig.
Christ. lib. 4. cap. 20.
Calvin also does. Nor only he, or they: but Harmonia confess. fidei sect. 19.
the reformed Churches whole with one consent. I might say, even Andreas
Masius, co^me^t. in Iosuam. praefat. etc. 3. Fra^ciscus Duarenus de sacr.
eccles. minist. acben. l. 1. c. 5.
your own men too. Yea, even your self too, M. Heart. For when, upon occasion
of speech that I had with you touching this point (before we did enter into
conference by writing,) I brought you M. (...) reproof (...). Do^^an hi^
proof of certa^^e Art^cles in religion, (...) co^tinue^ by Alexander Nowell.
Nowels answer to Dorman, wherein he has confuted pithily and plainly the
cauils which your Al^en in his Apology. chapt 4.
Master blancheth out of Calvin and Athanasius, Hosias, Ambrose, Gregory
Nazianzene: answered al by M. Nowell, and in them, the rest.
the ancient Fathers against the Queens supremacy, requesting you to read it
over: you told me (having read it) that you had mistaken our doctrine of that
point; and that, if we gave the Prince no greater soueraintie, then M. Nowell
does, you did agree with us.


Heart. Indeed I had thought (and so Abused by such as Allen, and Stapleton,
Princip. doct. l. 5. c. 17. and 18.
do many take it) that you meant to give as much to ye Prince by ye title of ye
supremacy, as we do to the Pope. Where you give no more me thinks by M.
Nowel, the^ S. Cont. Crescon. grammat. lib. 3. cap. 15.
Austin does, who says that Kings do serve God in this, as Kings, if in their
own realm they co^mau^nd good things, and forbid evil; not only co^cerni^g the
civil state of me^, but the religion of God also. And thus much I subscribe too.


Rainoldes. The second Division.
Will you proceed then to ye later point, wherein you would prove (you said)
that the faith which we pro^esse in England is not the Catholic faith.


Heart. I have proved it already in part. For ye Catholic faith is ye which we
profess in ye Church of Rome. You profess not ye. As ye points yt you have
touched by ye way, of scriptures, of traditions, of merits, of sacraments, of
Priesthood, of the Mass, the real presence, the worship of Saints, and sundry
others show. But I will co^fer no farther hereof, unless I have greter assurance of
my life.


Rainoldes. Assurance of your life to proceed in co^fere^ce (by Gods grace)
you have. At least, as great assurance as hitherto you have had. But you should
rather say, you will confer no farther unless you had better assurance of your
cause. For that is the catholic faith which the Apostles did preach to al
nations. The Apostles preached that which is written in the holy scriptures.
Therefore, that, which is written, is the catholic faith. But the faith, which
we profess, is all written. The faith which we profess then, is the Catholic
faith. And this should appeer^ as well in other points, as in those already
touched, if you would sift them. The Lord grant you grace to consider of it:
that whatsoever become of your life temporal, you may have assurance of
eternal life, through knowledge of his holy truth.


SIX CONCLVSIONS touching THE HOLY SCRIPTVRE AND THE CHVRCH.
Proposed, expounded, and defended, in public disputations at Oxford, by John
Rainoldes.
1 The holy scripture teaches the Church all things necessary to salvation.

2 The militant Church may err, both in manners, and in doctrine.

3 The authority of the holy scripture is greater, then the authority of the
Church.

4 The holy Catholic Church, which we believe, is the whole company of Gods
elect and chosen.

5 The Church of Rome is not the Catholic Church, nor a sound member of the
Catholic Church.

6 The reformed Churches in England, Scotland, France, Germany, and other
kingdoms and commonweals, have severed themselves lawfully from the Church
of Rome.

Ierem. 51.9. We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed: forsake her
(o children of God,) and let us go every one into his own country.


TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL and reverend in Christ, the heads of Colleges, and
company of students, of the University of Oxford, John Rainoldes wishes
grace and peace from God the father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
WHen Anna the mother of Samuel had brought up her child, whom she had obtained
of God with earnest prayers to put from her self the reproach of barennesse:
she consecrated him to God before Eli the Priest, 1. Sam. 1.28. and 2.18.
that he might live and serve in the temple of the Lord. In like manner I
desiring to consecrate to the temple of the Lord my Samuel, as it were, and the
first child of travail that God has given to my barrennes, have thought good
to present him to God before you, fathers, and brethren, well-beloved in Christ,
who either are already or shall be put in trust with the charge of the temple,
to serve (if it may any way) 2. Cor. 6.16.
the temple of the living God. Perhaps a rash enterprise, and undertaken
somewhat more boldly, then advisedly: chiefly seeing that it is so far inferior
to the ripenes of Samuel. And truly I have hitherto been still of ye mind,
that I had leiffer the things which I had brought forth (rather as untimely
fruits, then perfect children) should be kept within, then come abroad into the
light; and stay in the court of the temple, then press into the temple. For I
have been dealt with both often, and earnestly, by my very friends, that I would
suffer to be printed and published, as other sclender exercises made rather for
the fence-schoole (as you would say) then for the field: so chiefly my
Orations, which, when I read the Greek lecture in our College. I made to mine
audience concerning the studies of humanity and philosophy. Which yet I have
refrained to do, not of envy, for I have addicted my self to wish well unto
the Church and common wealth; neither of unkindness, as though I were not
willing to gratif^e them whom I was greatly bound too: but partly through
bashfulnes, least any man should think me to hunt after glory, which young men
are too greedy of; partly through the knowledge of mine own weakness, who
neither in respect of wit, nor age, nor learning, was ripe enough to bring
forth fruits which might be set before all men to be tasted off. For though I
desire to benefitte all whom I may, having learned of Epist. 9. ad Archyt.
Tarent.
Plato that I am not borne for my self alone, but for my country; neither can
I benefitte my country more by any means, then by teaching the ways how to
attain to good arts, as De diuinat. lib. 2.
Tully thought well: yet I feared least I should offend in a common fault, an
itching lust to write, which Epist. lib. 2. ^p. 1. ad August.
Horace did term madness in his days, what would he have done if he had lived
in ours? in which there is such plenty both of passing wits, and of works
excellent, that wise men may justly think it unmeet to publish any thing,
that is not wrought with cunning, filed with judgment, poolished with labor,
fruitful for commodity, and for use necessary. Howbeit, after that I was
discharged of that profession of arts of humanity, that I might the better
apply the study of divinity: what before of bashfulnes and judgment I had
still refrained to do in things of less importance, least I should do it
more rawly then I thought meet; the duty which I owe to God and his Church
has moved me now to do that in a weighty matter, though not so ripely as I
would. Which thing, undertaken both by the advice and the request of the godly,
I was occasioned to think off by one Richard Bristow, an Englishman borne,
abiding at Doway, professing the Romish faith: who has set forth a poisoned
work against the faith and Church of Jesus Christ, the faith which we
profess, the Church of which we be. That work, entitled Motives to the
catholic faith, when first he set it forth, he has abridged since into a
pamphlet of Demaundes to be proponed of catholics to heretics, and printed it
again: setting before us the same unsavory Coleworts, twice sodden by
himself, a thousand times by Popish cooks, to the great anoyance of guestes,
if they feed on it; great loathing, if they feed not. What a grievous injury
therein be has done to the Church of England, nor only to the whole body
thereof, but to the several parts also, by raising up untrue and wicked
surmises, by casting out reproachful speeches, by laying heresies to our
charge: it shall be declared (as I hear) shortly; in the mean season let the
godly judge: whiles, to begin with our most gracious Queen, the daughter of
godliness, the defender of the faith* the mainteiner of peace, the nurse of
the Church, the preserver of the weal publik^, the mother of our country* he
does not only Motiu. 47.
note her by the name of Pharao, but also Mot. 15. and 40.
puts secretly into men's heads that she is not a lawful, but a pretensed
Queen, (as Bulla Pij quinti contr. Regin. Angl. Nicol. Sander. de visib.
Monarch. eccles. lib. 7. Laurent. Sur. in comment. ^er. ge^^.
the Papists terms her:) of her Majesty's faithful and obedient subjects he
says that they Motiu. 40.
obey her for common humanity, not of duty: to traitors, who suffered for
taking arms against her, he gives the title of Motiu. 15
holy and most glorious Martyrs: he sclaunderously reports that Demand. 48.
the wiser sort and principal of the Realm have proved by experience of our
doings that our religion is no religion at all: that our Motiu. 39.
Bishops and Ministers are most ill and wicked, and Motiu. 31.
very few who preach, and they scarce ever preach upon the mysteries of faith:
that our people Demand. 41.
the nearer they come to the preachers doctrine, the more they fall away from
order and godliness, assuring yet themselves to be saved by faith only be they
never so wicked: that in our Motiu. 31.
Universities, either nothing is studied; or the art of speaking only, not
Divinity; or if Divinity, not all, but a few points of it: that Demand. 41.
and Motiu. 31.
our country is full not of men, but of monsters, of Atheistes, of Achrists,
of them who believe not that a man's soul does live more then a beasts when it
is gone out of the body: finally, (not to rake out of those caves of brimstone
the rest of the Psalm. 120.4..
coals of juniper which he does throw both generally upon whole estates, and
upon many learned and godly men particularly,) that our Church, the very body
of our Church, does not foster an heresy or two, but Demand. 38.
has revived many old heresies, Demand. 51.
besides at least a thousand more of their own invention; that it commits
not a sin or two, but Motiu. 39.
holds a common school of sin, wherein the scholars be most lewd, and the
masters lewder; that it Demand. 4^
thinks verily there is no salvation at all, no religion, a thing which I
tremble to mention, but this cockatrice with venomous mouth has said, has
said? nay he has written it, and he has written it with a pen of iron, he
has written it to last as a monument of his sclaunder, that we think verily
there is no salvation at all, none at all, and that our religion indeed is no
religion. Now, these false and sclaunderous speeches against our Church,
wherewith he has besette his work in sundry places as with precious stones,
are vnderlaide with reasons against our Churches faith, begotten of the same
father, and sisters german to the sclaunders: loose, and dull, in truth; yet
in appearance sharp, and sound: which although the skillful might crush in
pieces without harm, yet might they do harm by stinging the unskillful: even
as a scorpion if he sting a man, does hurt him with his sting; but if you
bruise him straight and with his body bruised anoint the part stoong, he does
you no hurt. Wherefore to the intent that this scorpion of Bristow, pricking
with two stings, (as the worst kind of scorpions is wont,) the one of
sclaunders, the other of cauilles, might do no hurt to our men, whom in the
universities or other parts of the realm he is thought to have stoong: many
godly men have wished him to be bruised, that, if not all the parts, yet at
least so many as the grace of God (which only heals) would recure, might
therewith be anointed. And this do they seem to have wished so much the more,
because some men having little skill in physiche do think that this scorpions
stingings are uncurable. For both Bristow himself, as Thraso (...) Terence,
praising his own speeches, Terent in Eunucho.
And now they were all afraid of me, does proudly ask Demand. 34.
whether any of our great Masters will answer his Demaundes; as though we had
neither shield in the Church to quench the fiery darts of Satan, nor
physician in Israel to heal such as are wounded: and I know not what Gnatho,
which has cast abroad of late infamous verses in our university, has
insolently boasted that A sclaunderous libell, scatered in Oxford. 1577.
the Captains tremble amazed with Bristowes lightning, as though he had
astonished the Coronells of our army, and not the soldiers only. But let
Bristow know that nether all do fear him, howsoever he has touched the
youths in his Pasquines: nor poor men have cause to stand in doubt of him,
though he threaten (being armed with a leauer and a dish-clout) that a will quel
all who stand in his way, and crush the^ in pieces. And if the Parasites of ye
Pope think that to be lightning, which he has ^^asht to burn England: sure it
is such lightning as was (after the Virgil. Acn^id. lib. 6.
Poet) the lightning of Salmoneus, who shaking often a torch, did counterfeit the
thundering soundes and lightning flames of heaven. But such kinds of lightning,
although they daunt the wavering Greeks and town of Elis, whose king is
Salmoneus: yet they daunt not the invincible Christians and city of the living
God, whose king is the Lord. And let him who flasht it take heed, if he be
wise, least his foolish lightning (as Apoll odor. de orig. Deor. lib. 1.
they say it happened to the lightner Salmoneus) be revenged with true
lightning of almighty God, to the utter ruin of him self, his town, and
citizens. For the Church which is Ioh. 16.13.
lead by the holy Ghost into all truth, has been already taught by him out
of the scriptures, and shall be taught farther (through the grace of God,) what
difference there is between the lightning of Bristow, and the light of Jesus
Christ: the lightning of Bristow, the heat whereof does hurt the bodies which
it strikes; the light of Jesus Christ, the beams whereof delight the men to
whom it shines: the lightning, evil and pestilent, which blinds them who
see, and kills them who live; the light, good and healthful, which gives
sight unto the blind, and life unto the dead. Neither are we without many
godly men of excellent authority, learning, and judgment, even amongst them
whom D^maund. 34.
this Tertullus names reprochef^lly M. Nowel in his confut. of Dormans
disproofe chapt. 3^*
great Mai^ters, who could have showed this long ago. ^^wbeit they have stayed
hitherto from doing it, either because they thought his folies were refuted
before they were written, for that (after the manner of the Popish writers) he
brings no new matter, but scowreth up old rustie stuff, as M. Nowel in his
confut. of Dormans disproofe chapt. 3^*
one of them did note long since: or because they purposed first to encounter
with such as had written before, and more pithily, entending to deal after with
the rest in due time, as D. Fulke in the preface of his answer to Heskins,
Sanders, and Rastell.
an other signified of late that he meant: or because, the controversies being
sufficiently traueled in by many, they thought that they might well cease from
this labor, though the Papists ceased not from their impudency; as Ier.
28.11.
Jeremy having answered Hananiah once, gave him no answer when he repeated
his error: or because perhaps some had no leisure from their weightier charge
of feeding the Church; some listed not to strive with such a railing person;
some, while they think that others have taken it in hand, do let it alone; al,
either remember the counsel of the wise man, that Prou. 26. ver. 4.
thou must not always answer a fool, least thou become like him, or if it
were requisite to verse. 5.
answer him now least he seem wise in his own conceit, they strain courtesy
who should do it. For my part, least the Philistines should vaunt any longer,
as if their were no man amongst the Israelites that durst fight with Goliath,
or 1. Sam. 17.10.
the Israelites be grieved with hearing the host of the living God to be so
defied of an uncircumcised Philistin: I purposed through gods grace, though
perhaps Goliath would have disdained me as a child, yet I purposed to set upon
him in the name of the Lord of hosts, the God of the host of Israel. But when
I had prepared my self to the battle, and chosen smooth stones out of the
brook of Gods word, 2. Cor. 10.4.
which are mighty through God to cast down holds, and every high thing that
is exalted against the knowledge of God: I heard that the matter was dispatched
already by D. Fulkes Retentiue against Bristowes Motives
a stout and faithful soldier of Christ, by whom many Philistines had before
been conquered. Whose work (as I understood since) is at the press too, and
shall be shortly published. Wherefore laying now aside my former purpose, I
thought on that demand and promise of Bristow touching the scripture and the
Church, wherein he does challenge and offer us the combat. For whereas a
country man of ours, under the title of an unlearned Christian, (concealing
his own name,) had set forth a book touching the authority of Gods word and
(...) Church: Demand. 34.
Bristow wills him to set out his book, and put his name to it, with
approbation of our Rabbines, and with privilege, and promises that he shall
quickly see it answered. This book have I sought for, but could not fall upon
it, all the copies of it (as I guess) being sold. Neither knew I how to speak
with the author, who had co^cealed his name, I dout not but for good cause. But
to satisfy, (if not wholly, yet as far as I might) the challenge of Bristow: I
have set out this little treatise of the same point, with ye autours name
thereto, and approbation, not of Rabbines, (whom we leave to that Synagogue
whose Matt. 2^.7.
rulers love to be called Rabbi, Rabbi, Masters, and Doctors,) but of grave
and learned men whom it concerns. Which thing I hope will like him so much
the better, because it compriseth not only that question touching the
scripture and the Church that he desires to be set out, but certain other
also of the same kind, chiefly touching the Church, whereof he has only the
bare name to boast of. And I look for an answer so much the sooner, because
there are now four years past, since In the title of his book of Demaundes.
he promised a Latin book: to which whether it be come abroad already, or to
come shortly, he may join (if it please him) an answer to these Conclusions.
Wherein if he think it meet for him to deal, there are three things both
easy to be done, and reasonable (in my judgment) which I will request him. One
is, that he will set down the text of my Conclusions wholly with his answer,
(as I had determined to do with his Demaundes,) that the readers may see, what
he confuteth, and how. An other, that he will not kick against the pricks:
that he will yield to the truth and not go about to darken the clear light of
the sun of righteousness with cauils and sclanders. The third, that if he be
ashamed to say, the truth preuails against me: yet in reproving such things as
he assayeth to reprove, he will deal more soundly and sincerely then D.
Stapleton has done in his Doctrinall Principles of faith, a work more full of
words then truth. For to confute our doctrine, Princ. fid. doctr. lib. 1. cap.
4.
that the Church is the company of Gods elect and chosen, which we teach of the
Catholic Church, and it is true: he teaches cap. 5.
that evil men are mingled in the Church with good, the reprobate with the
elect, which thing is also true in the militant Church. But true things agree
with true things; ne^^her does one truth overthrow an other. We hold* that the
Catholic Church, which is commended to us in the Creed, is the whole company
of Gods elect and chosen. He answers, that the militant Church, which is
mentioned in the scriptures too, contains neither all the elect, nor them
only. And by this answer he says he has confuted the error and heresy of
the So he calls us of John Husse, a godly man, and holy martyr, who taught as
we do concerning the Church.
Hussites. But therein he deals like them of whom the proverb is, I asked
for hooks, and they say they have no mattokes. But (to return to my purpose)
I have thought good to publish my Conclusions, even in the same sort as they
were set down in verses, and opened with suppositions, according to the order
of public disputations of our University; the rather for this cause, that
strangers might perceive the kind of our disputations; which and all things
else of our University are so debased by Mo^iu. 3^.
Bristow, as if wisdom had been borne with them alone, and should dye with
them. Now these six Conclusions contain the chief fountains, The ^tat^ and
argument of the Conclusions.
and as it were the very foundations of the controversies, which we have with
the Church of Rome. That the light thereof will be some help, I trust, to such
as are not wilfully blind, to scatter Bristowes mistes, The first conclusion
and all the mistie cauils of Bristowes mates and accomplices.

For where it is certain by manifest proof, as In catechismo Council. Trid.
the Church of Rome it self does acknowledge, that the whole doctrine of
religion and faith (which leads the faithful to salvation and life by the
true and right worship of God) is contained in Gods word: the Papists, to
establish their superstitions and errors that are against the scripture, Ibid.
in exord. catechism.
divide the word of God into scripture and traditions; that what they can not
find in Gods written word, they may cavil that is was ordered by Gods
traditionarie word, so to term it. An old slight and policy of the ympes of
Satan, wherewith first the Scribes and Pharisees of the Jews did craftily assay
to beguyle our Savior Christ, as the Matt. 15.2. Mark. 7.5.
Evangelists have written: afterward the heretics Hieron. comment. in Aggae.
cap. 1.
Tatian, Iren. cont. haeres. lib. 3. c. 2.
Valentinus, Marcion, and their fellows assayed in like sort to beguyle
Christians, as Ierom and Irenaeus show. And these are the parents of that
corrupt opinion concerning traditions, which are called Apostolic as by Maxim
de Tatiani radice crescentibus. Hieron. in Agg. cap. 1.
old heretics, so by Brist. Demand. 29. Motiu. 9.
new. The Roman Church embraces the opinion as her own child: little
considering that it is a bastard, not conceived by Christ, but got by theft
from old heretics. Unless perhaps she had it rather by adoption from Marcus
Antonius: who Cic. in Anton. Philip. 2.
when the Senate had ratified the acts of Caesar, he added to Caesar's acts
what he listed, and would have it to stand as sure as if Caesar him self had
enacted it. But that the opinion it self is a bastard (whosoever begot it, an
heretic or an Heathen) and therefore to be shut out of Deu. 23.2.
the Lords assembly, which bastardes are forbidden to enter into, my first
Conclusion shows: wherein I have declared that the holy scripture teaches
the Church all things necessary to salvation.

Now, the Papists, being cast down from this bulwark, retire unto the Church,
The second conclusion.
and say thereof 24. q. 1. c. a recta. in glossa Catechis. Trid. in expos. Symb.
it can not err: that although their traditions, that is, their errors, did
not spring from Christ, yet can they have no fault, because the Church does
hold them. In Thalia.
Herodotus reports, that Cambyses king of Persia, burning with wicked love of
his own sister, asked the Persian judges whether he might mary her by the law
of the realm. Whereto they made answer after consultation, that they found no
law which permits a brother to mary his sister: but an other law they had
found yet, which permits the king of Persians to do what he list. The
Persian judges offended, if they fained this law: the Persians, if they made
it. But upon that answer Cambyses did join him self inces^uously in marriage
with his sister. The Heathens have reproved this fact of his, as wicked: and is
not the Papists ^act most like unto it? The Roman Church, the Queen of
Ba^ylon, has burned with a cursed desire, not of her brother, as Cambyses of
his sister, but of idols and superstitions. The advice of Bishops, the Roman
judges, has been asked, whether she might mary superstitions and idols by the
law of Christ. The Bishops have caused the scriptures to be serched, and they
find no law whereby the worship of idols and superstitions is permitted: but
an other law they have found yet which provides that the Church can not err
in decreeing any thing. The Roman judges offended who fained this law: the
Romanists, who allow it. But upon this sentence their Church pretends
marriage, commits adultery, with superstitions and idols in most abominable
sort. Yet Demand. 1. and 34.
Bristow lays it in the foundation of his house, and makes mention of it as
if it were the law of Austin, yea of Christ: but impudently, and fasly; that it
may well appear he neither knew what Christ said, nor what Austin meant.
Wherefore to overthrow the ruinous walls both of the house, and the
foundation, I have set the second Conclusion against it: which proves
manifestly that the militant Church may err not in manners only, but in
doctrine too.

And that being settled does seem withal to settle and strengthen the third:
wherein it is avouched, The third conclusion.
that the holy scripture is of greater credit and authority then the Church.
Truly, I should marvel, that it could ever come into the mind of any man to
think otherwise: had not S. 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
Paul foretold that the man of sin, the son of perdition, should sit in the
temple of God, and exalt him self above God. Which prophecy has been
fulfilled in their eyes, who have seen Antichrist preferred before Christ: and
they have seen Antichrist preferred before Christ, who have seen the Church
advanced above the scripture. For what is detracted from the scripture, the
word of Christ; that is in deed detracted from Christ, the autour of the
word. And that, which in show is yielded to the Church; is attributed in truth
to the Pope of Rome. Both these things are evident by Ecclesia^^. hierar. lib.
1. and 4*
Albertus Pighius: whose sayings, concerning the scripture and the Church,
although they be very insolent and ungodly: yet there were amongst them who
lived before Pighius even of the chiefetaines of the Romish Church, as namely
Council. Constant. Sess. 13. Hoc non obstance.
the Fathers of the Council of Constance, and Cardinal Epist. 2. and 3. ad
Bohemos.
Cusanus, who spoke more insolently. They who lived since, have kept the sense
and substance of Cusanus, and Pighius, in that they give a Princely or rather a
tyrannical authority to the Church for expounding the scripture, as Cardinal
Lib. de express. Dei verbo
Hosius does. But they have put fresh colors on it, and qualified as it were
the rigor of the speeches: in so much that Demand. 24.
Bristow (treading the steps of In confess. Petricou. cap. 15. and 16. and 19.
Hosius,) requires not greater authority for the Church, but seems well
content to make it equal with the scripture. Howbeit, he speaks so, I know
not how, that I dare not avouch he is of that mind. For though he do challenge
like obedience to them both, like truth, like privilege to be free from error:
yet in that he adds, that we believe the scripture because of the Church, if
he come as near to the meaning of Epist. 3. ad Bohemos.
Cusanus as he does to his words, that he think the scriptures credit and
authority depends of the Church, and the Church imparteth authority
canonical (as Ecclesiast. hi^rarch. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Pighius expressly says) unto the scripture: he has a harder forhead then I
thought he had. Yet Defens. fid. Trident. lib. 3.
Andradius, the expounder and patron of the faith of Trent, speaks much more
modestly and religiously (to give him his due praise) of the authority of the
scriptures. Which first he acknowledges that they have not from men, but from
God; not from the Church, but from the holy Ghost: and then he concludes
thereof, that it is detestable to teach that either profane books may be made
canonical by the Church and Bishops, or such as are certainly canonical may
be refused. Of the which things to affirm the one (he says) it is a point of
notorious impudency: the other, of madness and impiety not to be suffered. O
that Andradius had likewise detested the Reu. 17.4.
cup of the whoores abominations in other things? Or, (since he is dead,) I
would to God that all Christians, who of godly mind mislike somewhat in her,
(and who does not mislike somewhat?) would mislike the rest of all her
filthiness too: nor only be Christians almost, as Agrippa, but like both
almost and altogether to Paul, The fourth conclusion
as Act. 26.29.
Paul did wish to him.

To the which end that I might help them forward, as much as lay in me: I have
done the best I can to heal the dangerous humors of opinions, which do so
anoy the taste of seely souls, that they think the heavenly bread to be
poison, and abhor the sweetest food of life as woormwood. These humors,
that I speak off, are perverse errors, which seduce them from the truth in
that article of our Creed, I believe the holy catholic Church. For some are
persuaded, that the name of holy Church belongs not to the whole company of
the Christian people, but to the Ministers only and Bishops of the Church: no
not to the Ministers of every Church neither, but of the Church of Rome, even
the Pope and Cardinals. Whom to have gotten by a certain custom to be called
the church, and that the church had done, received, and ordained, that which
was do on, received, and ordained by them: In defensore pacis. part. 2. cap. 2.
Marsilius Patauinus did note in Above two hundred years ago.
his age, and it is too well known unto men of years. Other some, and they of
the lernedder sort, acknowledge that the Church does signify the company of
faithful men, and believers, but they will have that company to be Francise.
Turrian. de eccles. and ord. min. lib. 1. cap. 2.
a people assembled by their own Bishop, and cleaving to the head, that is, to
the Pope, least the Papal State be any way impaired. They comprehend
therefore all such within that company as do profess the faith, both the good
and badde, holy and profane, godly and hypocrites. There are some also who
think that by this point [to believe the holy church] the churches authority
is commended to us: that we should trust, credit, and obey the church, which
Catechism. Conc. Trident. in exposit. Symb.
the Council of Trent (it seems) would insinuate, though somewhat darkely
and distrustfully. But Demand. 44.
Bristow therein does bear the bell away. For he (the more easily to deceive
English men, at least the simpler, if not all) works treachery with the
dooble signification of words; expounding this article, (...). Credo ecclesiam.
I believe the Church, as if the meaning of it were, (...). Credo ecclesiae*
I trust the Church: between the which things there is great difference, and
that very manifest, in the Greek and Latin, though in our mother tongue not
so. Yet this man was created Doctor at D^way: and some do account him a man of
much value. O wretched professors of the Doway-schoole, that created such a
Doctor: but more wretched Papists, if they give credit to such a Doctor: who
whether he be sophister or sclaunderer more notable, it is hard to say. A
learned man among the Heathens (if I remember well) said, that physicians can
not find a medicine against the biting of a sclaunderer. But, because Luke
18.27.
the things are possible with God which are impossible with men: therefore upon
confidence of his gracious goodness I have assayed to make one against the
biting of this sclaunderer, and of the like, in the fourth Conclusion: wherein
I have declared, (setting apart the Prelates of the Church of Rome, and goats
mingled with sheep) that the holy Catholic Church which we believe, is the
whole company of Gods elect and chosen.

The fifth conclusion
Moreover, least the painting of the Romish Church should make unskillful young
men to be enamored of her, when they should hear many commend her as
Catholic, Apostolic, and sound in faith: to take this visard also away from
her face, and wash away her painting with water of the holy Ghost, I have added
ye fifth Conclusion, that the Church of Rome is not the Catholic Church, nor a
sound member of the Catholic church. A matter, clear in truth, but hard to be
persuaded: specially to lovers: for Cupide is blind. And as he says in In
Bucolia^t.
Theocritus, The things that are not fair, seem fair to him that is in love.
Daphnis in the Poet says so to Polyphemus: we by experience have found it true
in Bristow. For he, being besotted with the love of the whore, is not content
to say that she alone is Catholic: that error were more tolerable; at least
it were an error common to him with many. But Demand. 44.
he affirms farther, that the Church might be and was called Apostolic, for
this cause only, that we might be directed thereby as by a mark to the Church
of Rome, founded by the Apostles Peter and Paul, the only Church now left of
all the Churches Apostolic. Which flattering speech of this lover ^atechism.
Council. Trident. in exposit. Symb.
the Pope of Rome himself, the bridegroom of his Church, though doting on
his bride too, yet refuses: acknowledging that the Church was called
Apostolic (by In Symbolo Council. Constantinopolit.
the Fathers in the Creed) to note the beginning of the Church which it has
from the Apostles, because they delivered once the Churches doctrine, and
spread it abroad through all the world. As for them Bristow Motiu. 12.
that give the title of Catholic to the Church of Rome: they must take
aduisement how to clear their boldness from attaint of sacrilege, who deck
an adulteress with the spoils of the spouse of Christ; or, (to think the
best of the Church of Rome,) who spoil the mother to deck the daughter, and
her not the best, with great wrong and injury to the rest of the sisters. For
the name of Catholic does not appertain to this or that Church, but to the
Church universal, continued through all nations, ages, and provinces, from
Adam unto us and to our posterity: as the Catechism. Trid. in expo. Symb.
Council of Trent and the Andrad. defens. fid. Trid, lib. 2. Petr. a Soto*
contr. confess. Wirtenb. cap. de ecclesia.
expounders of the Council (such is the force of truth) do confess plainly.
But the chiefest error that is to be abated, is theirs, who are persuaded that
the Church of Rome is of right opinion and sound in points of faith: yea, so
sound and right, that they think no pestilent disease may attache her, no
contagion infect her, no spot of unfaithfulness any way defile her. Of the which
assertion they allege the Fathers, (to omit the residue, men of baser
credit,) for principal patrones. And therein Defens. fid. Trident. lib. 2.
Andradius deals somewhat wisely. For he does heap together witnesses
without testimonies, the geuers of evidence without evidence, Austins, Ieroms,
Basils, Athanases, and Chrysostoms. But De vi^ib. Monar. eccle. lib. 7.
Sanders much more gloriously. For he has laid on such a l^ade of
testimonies, that, if the sayings should be numbered and not weighed, we must
leese our suite, no remedy. But all the Fathers (whom this pety-lawier
produces as speakers for the Popes monarchy,) do either deny that the Church
of Rome did err, or that it may err: did err, as Aduers. haeres. lib. 3.
cap. 3. Sander argumento 20,
Irenaeus, In the Church of Rome that doctrine has been kept still which was
delivered by the Apostles: may err, as Lib. 1. epist 3. aut epist. 55* edit.
Pam. Sander. argum. 42.
Cyprian, that the Romans are they whose faith is commended and praised by the
Apostle, unto whom unfaithfulness can not have access. The former, who deny
that the Church of Rome did err, speak not against us. For we do not say
that it did err in Irenaeus time, but that it does err now. He denies that
it did err: we say that it does err: do we gainesay one another? Jerusalem
is called Ps. 48. ver. 1.
the city of God by the Psalmist, and ver. 9.
he is said there to be served: Esaias. 1, 21.
Esaias terms it an harlot. The temple of the Lord is named 1. King. 8.20.
the house of God, the house of prayer, by Solomon: by Christ it is reported to
be Mat. 21.13.
a den of thieves. Does Esaias speak against the Psalmist, or Christ against
Solomon? No, but the Psalmist shows what Jerusalem was, in his time: Esaias,
what in his. Esai. 1.21.
The faithful city is become an harlot: it was a faithful city, but it is
become an harlot. Solomon teaches what the house of God ought to be: Christ,
what it is made. Matt. 21.13.
You have made it a den of thieves: it was not to Solomon, but you have made
it. So Rome was likewise sound in the time of the Fathers, but the faithful
city is become an harlot: the soundnes it has lost, it has got a leprousie:
it was the house of God, it is a den of thieves: it held Romans 1.8.
the faith of Christ, but it is fallen from it. It had kept the doctrine still
which was delivered by the Apostles, until the time of Irenaeus: but that it
has kept still until our time the doctrine which was delivered by the Apostles,
does it thereof follow? Unless perhaps the Popes Courtiers will prove, that the
whoores, the Courtisans which keep their stews, are virgins, because they
were virgins when they were little babes. The former Fathers then, who deny that
ye church of Rome did err, do not gainsay us. The later, who deny that it may
err, gainsay us in deed: but they gainesay ye holy Ghost too. By whose
inspiration the blessed Apostle exhorting the Roman church not to lift up it
self against the Jews: Romans 11.20.
Be not high minded (says he) but fear. For if God spared not the natural
branches, take heed least he also spare not thee. Behold there fore the
bountifulnes and severity of God: severity toward the^ which have fallen; but
toward thee, bountifulnes, if thou continue in his bountifulnes: or else thou
shall also be cut off. The church of Rome therefore may be cut of: if cut of,
then err: if err, then unfaithfulness may have access unto it. What? and was
Cyprian of an other mind? Pardon me O Cyprian: I would believe thee gladly,
but that believing thee I should not believe the word of God. But whether we
should rather believe, God, or man: let the Papists judge. At least, if they
believe rather man then God: let them believe the reason and judgment of their
own men. For Pet^. a Soto contr. confess. Wirtenb. cap. de concilijs.
Sotus, Alfons. a Castr. aduers. haeres. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Alfonsus, Confess. Petric. cap. 24. and contr. Brent. lib. 2.
Hosius, Disputatio number aduersus Lutheranos Tom. 6. de authorit. and potest.
vniuer. eccles. cap. 5.
Verratus, the lights of the Papists, do witness that any particular church
may err. But that the church of Rome is a particular church, the same Ibid.
cap. 1.
Verratus affirms, nor can the rest deny it. Wherefore if Cyprian did think
that the church of Rome can not err: in that he must him self be condemned of
error by the Papists judgment. And so, whereas all the testimonies of the
Fathers are of two sorts, the one of them true, but clean beside the purpose;
the other to the purpose enough, but untrue: it follows that the sickness of
the Church of Rome can find no help in any medicines of the Fathers. What
have we then to do with them by whom old Rome is praised and reported Iren.
lib. 3. cap. 3. Sander. argument. 4.
to gather together Christians to peace, and repair their faith, Dionys.
epist. ad Soter. apud. Eusebius. l. 4 c. 22. Sander. arg. 15.
to minister relief unto the brethren and the Churches, Episcop. Orient. in
ep. ad Iul. apud Sozomen. lib. 3. cap. 7. Sander. arg. 109.
to be a school of the Apostles, a mother-citie of godliness, Ignat. in
inscri. ep. ad Romans Sander. arg. 5.
a sanctified Church, and such like things a number? We have to do with new
Rome, whom Platin. Onuphr. Sabellic. Guicciardin. Theodoric. a Niem. Abbas
Vrsperg. etc.
her own stories, acts, and monuments do convince to be a nurse of wars, a
parent of unfaithfulness, a spoyler of the brethren, a worshipper of idols, a
seat of covetousness, a lady of pride, a cherisher and inflamer of lusts,
of outrages, of abominations: whose most loving A famous Friar ad Diuin^,
Baptista Mantuanus.
son complains of his mother, that Ecloga. 9.
her old fame continues, but her goodness is gone; that her Pastors are
turned into the shape of woolues, the nearer you come the filthier all things
be; that Ecloga. 5.
trifles are given, gold is received, and only money reigns there; that De
calamitat. tempor. lib. 3.
the Church-goods are made to serve for scoffers, the altars for wantons, the
temples for boys abused by unnatural monsters; that Syluar. lib. 1. Ode. vl^.
the laws divine and humane are denied, men and God deceived, holiness put to
flight, godliness despised, renounced, and afflicted: Yet that a holy life
would lead, from Rome see that ye flee:
Though al things else be lawful there, yet good ye may not be.


And these may seem (I hope) both weighty causes, and just, The sixth
conclusion.
why the reformed Churches (to come to the last Conclusion) in England,
Scotland, France, Germany, and other kingdoms and common wealths, have
severed them selves from the corruption of Rome. Though if this were al, that
it were not lawful to lead a holy life at Rome, yt we might not be good, as
Mantuan affirms: we would have departed from ye city of Rome as Mantuan
advises us, but we would not have gone from the Church of Rome. If only small
infirmities had cra^ed the health of Rome in points of faith, such as certain
did in ye time of the Fathers: we would have lamented* but tolerated it; and,
taking compassion of Gal. 6.2.
men being unwarily fallen into a fault, we would have born their burdens. But
since in the fellowship of ye Church of Rome it was not lawful for us, either to
serve God with a holy worship, or to believe God with a holy faith, as God has
commanded; since the Church of Rome being taken with contagious diseases and a
frensy, did put her counselors to the fire, friends to the sword, brethren to
cruel death, and stained the faith of Christ with reproaches, creatures with
the Lords honor, Gods service with idolatry: we went away from Papists, not
willingly, as from men; not unwillingly, as from heretics; and reforming our
Churches by the rule of Gods word, we severed them from the contagion of the
Church of Rome. Wherein because nothing was done by our brethren, but that which
the Apostle S. Paul, a chosen instrument of the holy Ghost, both Act. 19.9.
did, and 1. Tim. 6.5. 1. Cor. 6.17.
taught to be done, as I have proved in the Conclusion: the Lord shall judge
beweene our Churches and Demand. 1.
Bristow, who condemns them of the same schism, of which the Donatists were
guilty; and he will give sentence in the last day that we have been severed
from the Church of Rome by the prescript of his word, that is, lawfully. But,
some man will say, you ought not to leave the fellowship of the Romans, of Romans
1.7.
them which are at Rome, beloved of God, Saints by calling, whose faith is
spoken of throughout the whole world. But, I answer, that the Romans, which
now are there, be not Romans: they be carkases of Romans. It is an other Milo:
his lusty arms are dead. It is an other Hector: how greatly changed from
him? But you ought to obey and not resist the Pope of Rome, Optimus
most good in grace, Maximus as ye Papists call him.
most great in power, the vicar of Christ, 1. Pe^. 5.3.
the successor of Peter. But, that Andrad. defen. fid. ^rid. lib. 1.
we must resist him, if he command things unjust and pernicious yea, that
Gent. ^eruet. de reparand. eccles. d^sciplin.
it is the duty of Princes to resist him in unlawful things: the Papists
them selves teach. But Christians ought to Ephesians. 4.3.
keep unity of spirit in the bond of peace: and Cicer. Philip. 13.
the name of peace is sweeete, the thing it self both pleasant and healthful.
But through unity of spirit we ought to grow together Ephesians. 4.13.
into the unity of of faith: and to Philip. 4.2.
be all of one mind, but in the Lord. If peace should be made with the Pope
and Papists, it would be like Cicer. Philipp. 12.
the peace with Antonie and his adherents; that is, not a peace, Eurip. Iphig^.
in Aul^d.
but an agreement of slavery to them, nay, of impiety. Wherefore, as Agamemnon
(in a Greek Poet) did answer his brother Menelaus of whom he was requested to
show him self a brother by giving his consent to a wicked act: so do I
answer my brother requesting me to join with him in fellowship of the Church
of Rome, whose faith is unholy, whose service is ungodly; (...).
My wits I would enjoy with thee:
But mad with thee I would not be.


And here an end of my preface. Only this remains, that I desire heartily
and beseech all Christians, who shall take pains in reading hereof, that they
will read, weigh, and interpret all things with a Christian mind; lay aside
the prejudice of their own opinions; 1. Ioh. 4.1.
examine the spirits, whether they be of God or no; seek to find the truth,
and love it being found; advertise me if they think I have missed in any
thing; bear with my briefenes, because I was constrained to shut up much in
few words: look how faithful and diligent I have been in opening and
proving the Conclusions, whereof God is my witness who will reu^ale the secrets
of thoughts; so moderate and indifferent let them show them selves in
censuring and judging of that which they shall read, as before the Lord who
shall be judge of judges. Finally, let them follow the godly people of Beroea,
who (when Paul Act. 17.11.
preached) received the word with all readiness of mind, and daily serched the
scriptures whether those things were so: and not the froward Luciferians,
Hieron. in dialog. aduersus Lucif. c. 9.
of whom he confesses who best knew the manners of his own companions, that
they might be convinced more easily then persuaded. As for you, my fathers and
brethren well-beloved, with remembrance of whom I have consecrated my labor
(such as it is) to the Church of God: I pray you and beseech you by our Lord
Jesus Christ, who has redeemed us with his precious blood and sanctified us to
him self, that you will strive by all means to advance the glory of God, to
cherish the seeds of godliness, to help forward the Churches safety, to
nourish fruitful plants, to make the Uniuersities praise to be increased, I
mean Romans 2.29.
the praise which is, not of men, but of God. Confute you the ill speeches of
Bristow, by your deeds: and show, by your works, that the crimes wherewith
he charge us are sclanders. Bestow ye well the good opportunity of time in
study of good arts, by hearing, reading, disputing, meditating, speaking, and
writing. Do ye the work of the Lord with joint desire, and will, and
travail: Ephesians. 4.4.
one body, one spirit, Ier. 32.39.
one heart, one way. Stir up exercise of learning, decayed (I had almost
said,) but I hope better. Destroy those wanton lusts that draw men from study;
idleness, a sweet evil; delicacie, the bait of Venus; the ryote of feasts,
the vanity of apparel, dishonest pastimes, unseasonable drinkinges, the
plagues of stageplayers, the sights and shows of Theaters. Last of all, to
conclude with the Apostles words, Phil. 4.8.
whatsoever things are true, what soever things are honest, whatsoever things
are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are worthy love,
whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be
any praise, think ye on these things. If there be any virtue, and if there be
any praise, brethren, think ye on these things. The God of might and mercy
lighten us all with the grace of his holy spirit: that the heads of Colleges
may be present to govern, and govern to benefit the company committed to
them, 1. Sam. 19. ver. 20.
as Samuel was wont: that the members of Colleges may learn under Samuel to
prophecy, by speaking of, and setting forth the praise of God, as the
prophets did: that young men, who study the arts of humanity, may in other
things be unlike to Saul, yet like to ver. 2^.
Saul among the prophets: that Colleges themselves and all our companies may be
assemblies, not of prophets only, but of such as prophecy and follow the
lessons of the prophets, to the honor of God, the comfort of the godly, and our
own salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Fare ye well. From Corpus Christi
College. The 2. of February. 1580.

Yours in Christ Jesus, John Rainoldes.

CONCLVSIONS HANDLED AT THE ACT* IN S. MARY'S CHVRCH. THE XIII. O^ IVLY. 1579.
1 The holy scripture teaches the Church all things necessary to salvation.
WHen Moses went by Sinai mount toward the holy land:
From Gods own mouth the law he wrote, ye Lord did guide his hand.
The Prophets next with sacred ^en did bold that heavenly ^^ce:
Whom the almighty from above endued with his grace*
The wisdom of his father high, the son of virgin pure,
Anointed with the spirit of God men's sinful souls to cure,
The word of the eternal Lord, with flesh of man yclad,
Brought them the treasures rich of life, of peace the tidings glad.
The Apostles with this doctrine sweet of Christ their master fed,
By preaching first by writing then to nations all if spread.
And these books has the holy Ghost set forth for mortal wights.
That we in course of faith and life might follow them as lights.
Auant all ye, who brainsick toies and fancies vain defend:
Who on humane traditions and Fathers sawes depend.
The holy written word of God does show the perfect way,
Whereby from death to life arise, from curse to bliss we may.
2 The militant Church may err, both in manners, and in doctrine.
TO warfare every one does go that serves Christ in field:
To warfare all their names are billed who do Gods armor weelde.
And do thou man in warfare serve, and art thou free from blows?
And may no dart thy body pearce, assaulted by the foes?
The city of Jerusalem with holy Church was dight:
That holy Church kept not her course at all assaies aright.
Corinthus godly was, and pure; Philippi shone full bright:
The faith of Thessalonians was spread in glorious plight.
Corinthus pure is stained now; Philippi lies defaced:
Your praise, O Thessalonians, is by the Turk disgraced.
And thou O Rome, the Q^eene of pride, which swell'st on mountains seven
Thy heart is pearst with deadly wound, thou fall'st to hell from heaven.
While that the Church does make abode on earth in seats of clay,
Am I deceived? or may she feel the dint of errors sway?
3 The holy scripture is of greater authority then the Church.
THe godless rowt inflamed with lust of holding scepter hie,
Does lift the stately throne of Rome unto the golden sky*
Unto the sky* that pride were ^inall, nay fa^re above the sky:
Subduing Christ his scepter great to Romish royalty.
Men say that Giants did attempt the heavenly powers to quell.
What? do they raise new wars again from grisly gulf of hell?
The holy church may for it self claim worthy gifts of right.
It Is great, I grant: but less, I trust, then is the Lord of might.
Let mortal things give place to God, let men to Christ accord,
The wife to man, the earth to heaven, the subject to the Lord.
ALthough I am not ignorant (right worshipful audience) that Cato the grave
Censour reproved a certain Roman* who taking upon him to write a story in
Greek had rather crave pardon of his fault in doing it, then keep himself
clear from committing that fault: yet so it has happened to me at this present,
yelding shall I say thereto, or refusing it, surely some what against my will,
but so it has happened, that I who could not choose but commit a faut, am forced
to request you to pardon my faut. For both the weakness of my voice, because it
is not able to fill the largeness of this place, will discontent perhaps them
who hear me not: and the vnripenesse of my abiliti^, which I fear me will not
answer the solemnity of this assembly in handling those things that are to
be debated, will of likelihoode be reproved by them who hear me. How much the
more earnestly I am to request, by word, you that hear me; by will, the rest
who hear me not: that either you will be no Censours at all, or else be more
favorable Censours then Cato; least either you judge me to have dealt unwisely
who did not keep my self from fault; or impudent, who first commit it* and
then request you not to blame it. Neither do I dout but I shall find defense,
for the weakness of my voice, in your friendly curtesi^ before whom I speak:
for the vnripenes of my ability, in the goodness of the cause which I have to
speak off. For, that your courtesy will condemn me of that fault, which I
could not eschew, I need not to fear. And the goodness of the cause has in it
such evident and clear light of truth, that (I do not dout) it will defend
it self though no man plead for it. Wherein I hope also that you even your
selves either do already or will agree with me: if you shall hear me open as
briefly as I may the meaning of the three Conclusions that I h^ld, the
perfection of the scripture, the infirmity of the Church, the authority of
them both. For, as for the praise and commendation of Divinity, whereof the
beginning is from heaven; the majesty, divine; the office, to be an instrument
of salvation to mankind; which was ordained by God the father, reveled by
Jesus Christ, registered in writing by the holy Ghost: I cannot speak thereof
as I would, according to the woorthines of the thing; as I may, according to my
power, I ought not. In the one, I hope, you approve my good will: in the other,
I beseech you, take my judgment in good part. For I do^ not say, by way of
amplification colourably, that I refrain therefore from the praising of it,
because my woundering at it does dasell (like the brightness of the
sunbeams) the eyes of my mind: as Cic. pro Dei^tar.
Tully faineth of Caesar that the people showed not their good will toward him
by joyful clapping of their hands, because that they being amazed with
woondring at him could not stir themselves. But as Esaias. 6.^.
the prophet Esaias witnesses of God, that, when he beheld his majesty, he was
dismayed, because he was a man of polluted lips, unworthy to behold the king
and Lord of hosts: so may I protes^ from my heart in truth, that, when I
consider the highness of Gods word, I hold my peace as amazed, because I am a
man of polluted lips, unfit to touch the nobleness of a thing so worthy.
Wherefore I willingly leave these Iuy-garlands to be hanged up by them, who
vent the wine of Philosophy, Physike, and Law: which arts very profitable,
but for the life that fades; excellent, but human; commendable, but
transitory; beutifull, but brittle, I dout not but already the learning and
eloquence of men well seen therein has made you well to like of in this
exercise of disputations. Now I take a greater enterprise in hand, for the
valor of the thing which I am to deal with: though nether with better wit,
nor deeper judgment then they whom I follow in the course of dealing. Liu. lib.
21.
Liuie reports that Annibal, having purposed to fight^with the Romans, did
cause certain couples of captives to fight one with an other hand to hand,
before he set his soldiers in battle array: that his Carthaginians might, by
that pastime of the captives combat, address them selves with better
consideration and courage to the serious and set battle. In like sort there
have been brought before you (gentle audience) to the combat sundry opinions
of sundry arts, as it were cooples of captives: which whether they live or
dye, be so or not so, it skilleth not greatly; the state of the realm is not
ventured upon it. But now from that sporting conflict of light matters there
comes to the battle for earnest trial of things of weight, host against
host, truth against falsehood, religion against error: wherein if we swerve out
of the right way, it is the death not of captives, but of Carthaginians; not
opinions of men, but the truth of God is hazarded; not life, not health, not
wealth and possessions, but the inheritance of heaven and salvation comes into
controversy. Lend me therefore (I pray you) the presence of your minds, and
patience of your ears, to that which shall be spoken: remembering that we have,
not toys, as on a stage, but serious things in hand. And because we handle
the matters of the Lord, I pray him to sanctify with his holy spirit our
tongues, and your ears, and the minds of all: that neither we dispute to any
other end then to bring forth the truth into light by conference of reasons;
neither you in hearing have any other mind then to believe the truth when it
shall be brought forth, and proved.

To begin therefore with the first Conclusion, The first conclusion.
and so run over the rest briefly: the holy scripture teaches the Church all
things necessary to salvation. God the father of eternal goodness and mercy
did choose of his free and singular favor (before the foundations of the world
were laid) a great number of men, whom he would indue with everlasting life,
and make them heirs of heavenly glory. Now, that the chosen might come to this
inheritance: they were to be made the children of God by adoption through Jesus
Christ. For this has ever been the only way to salvation. In consideration
whereof, the holy ghost, speaking of the company of such as God has chosen,
terms them Romans 8. ver. 16.
sometime the children of God, by adoption, not by nature, yet ver. 17.
fellow heirs with Christ; sometime Reu. 19.7.
the wife of the Lamb, which is endowed with all the wealth of her husband;
some time Ephesians. 5.23.
the body of Christ, by the power and virtue of whom as of a head they are
governed, and moved; sometime Reu. 22.2.
the citizens of heaven, appointed to be inhabitants of the new Jerusalem;
finally, Christ him self (to omit the rest) does call them his Church, Mat.
16.1^.
which the gates of hell shall not prevail against. This Church then, even the
company of the elect and chosen, the children of God, the wife of the Lamb,
the body of Christ, the citizens of heaven, that is to say, the holy Catholic
Church; as it is chosen and ordained by God to life everlasting: so has it
been always taught by his word the way of salvation, whereby it might come
to the possession of that life. His word being uttered in old time sundry
ways, was published at length in writing. And so it came to pass that the
holy writings of God did teach the Church such things as must be known for
the obteining of salvation. For who could reveal the way to obtain the
inheritance of the kingdom of God, but God alone? And he reveled it to his
Church, as first without writing, in such sort as seemed best to his wisdom;
so afterward in writing, by the hand of his servants inspired with the holy
Ghost: without writing, to Adam, and from Adams time till Moses; in writing, to
Moses and from Moses forward till the end of the world. Wherefore in these
writings given out by the holy Ghost, and penned by the servants of God, which
writings S. 2. Tim. 3.26.
Paul calls scripture, by an excellency, as you would say the writings which
surpass all others: the way of salvation whereby we come to heaven, the light
of our souls which shines in this worlds darkness, the food of life which
nourishes us to grow in Christ, is delivered to the Church. For cleerer proof
whereof, let us divide the Church into the old and the new: the old, before
Christ; the new, since Christ was borne. The Prophets taught the old Church the
way of salvation: the Apostles with the Prophets together teach the new more
plenteously and fully. The doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles is comprised
in the holy scripture. The scripture therefore teaches the Church whatsoever
is behoofefull to salvation. For the Church is the company of the elect and
chosen. Now they who are elect, are Ephesians. 2. ver. 19
of the household of God: and they of his household ver. 20.
are built on the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief corner stone. But, this foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets is the doctrine touching Christ which they preached to the Church.
And that doctrine which they preached is enrolled in scripture. Wherefore the
scripture teaches the Church all things that for salvation are requisite to
be known. Moses (to begin with the first of the Prophets) having published
the law of God to the Israelites: Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.32.
Give ear (says he) O Israel to the ordinances which I teach. Ye shall not
add to the word which I command you, nor shall you take from it: but
whatsoever I command you, that shall ye observe to do, that ye may keep the
commandments of the Lord your God. Now the Israelites were to labor for the
obtaining of salvation. But they might do nothing which was not prescribed by
the law of God. Therefore the written law of God did deliver whatsoever was
needful for the salvation of the Israelites. And there is no dout but the
Israelites were the Church. The law then did teach whatsoever was needful for
the salvation of the Church. The Prophets, who followed, were expounders of the
law: that as they were inspired with the same spirit by which Moses wrote, so
they neither added any thing to his law, nor took from it; only they unfolded
it to the edifying of the Church, as it seemed best to the holy ghost. I let
pass David: in whom there are not many mo Ch^e^ly the 19. and 119. Psalm.
Psalms then there are testimonies of the sufficiency of the law. Esaias
examineth both the faith and life of the Priests and people, by Esai 1.22. and
8.20.
the law and testimony. Idolaters are condemned by the Lord in Jeremy, for
doing in their sacrifices Ier. 19.5.
things which he commanded not. In Malachie the last Prophet God wills his
people to Mal. 4 4.
remember the law of Moses: that he as a schoolemaister may lead them to
Christ, whose forerunner should be Elias. But these things could not have
been spoken by God or the servants of God, unless the law of Moses had showed
the whole and perfect way of salvation. The law of Moses therefore did wholly and
perfitly instru^^ the Church therein. Which if the law of Moses did perform
alone: much more all the Prophets together with Moses. How may it then be
douted, but the old Church was taught out of the scriptures the way of
salvation wholly and perfitly? S. John (to pass over from the Prophets to the
Apostles) after that the sun of righteousness was risen, not to abolish the
law, but to fulfill it, and to bring a brighter and cleerer light into the
world, declares in the gospel how Jesus Christ our Savior, doing the office
of our sovereign Prophet, Priest, and King, accomplished our salvation, by
teaching, by dying, by rising from the dead. Our salvation then is fully
wrought by Christ. But is it fully written by S. John? Let us hear him self
speak. John 20.31.
These things (says he) are written, that ye may believe that Jesus is the
Christ, the son of God, and that in believing ye may have life through his
name. In which words the sum and end of the gospel is set down by John:
the sum, that we may believe that Jesus is the Christ, (...).
the Christ, that is, the sovereign Priest, Prophet, and King, the Savior of
men: the end, that we believing in Christ, the son of God, may through him
have life, even that which alone is called life rightly, to wit, eternal life.
Which things being so, as the Evangelist him self teaches: it must needs be
granted, that those things which are written in the gospel are sufficient for
us, both to the way of life, and to life. As much then as suffices to faith
and salvation, so much is written in the gospel. For if the things which are
written had not been sufficient to faith, and salvation, there were Ioh. ^0.30.
and 1^.25.
mo things, which might have been written, so many as the world could not have
contained. But these were omitted by the spirit of God, because the other were
enough for his purpose. For he gives this reason why mo were not written: these
things are written that ye may believe, and in believing may have life. There
is contained therefore in S. John's gospel so much as is sufficient to faith
and salvation. Then if S. John's gospel alone have sufficient: how plentifully
has Christ provided for his Church, as a most bountiful Lord for his
household, to which he has given so many Apostles, and Evangelists, witnesses
and expounders of the same doctrine? Wherefore the scripture does not only
teach the Church, but also amply and plentifully teach it, all things behoofull
to salvation. For although the substance of the Christian faith be single and
the same, wherewith as with meat the servants of God are fed to life
eternal: yet, as the ages of the servants differ, and in ages different their
cases differ too; so was it meet there should be sundry sorts and ways to
divide that meat, and as it were to season it, for each one his part as it
might best agree with him. Whereof that we might have a true and lively pattern
set forth by Christ's own spirit in the word of life for the feeding of the
faithful: therefore he gave sundry woorkemen (so to term them) and writers
of his faith, that although they delivered all the same food, yet they did not
dress it all in one sort. And so it comes to pass, that, in those writers of
the faith of Christ, both the unity of doctrine in the diversity of
delivering yeldeth a sweet taste in the spiritual mouth of the godly mind;
and the manifold use ministers wholesome nourishment to every man's stomach; and
the evident plainness in the grounds of faith makes that even they who are
of deintiest mouths can not refuse it for the toughnes; and the hidden
wisdom in the secrets of scripture both tries the strongest, and satisfies
them who are sharpest set; and (to say that in a word which no words can
express enough) the infinite treasures bring infinite fruits to the faithful,
to procure them a blessedness that is exceeding great and infinite. Wherefore it
is a thing so clear, and so sure, that those secretaries of the holy Ghost
(joined together) do open to the Church in the holy scriptures all things
behoofefull to salvation: that he, who knows it not, may be justly counted
ignorant; he who acknowledges it not, lewd; he who dissembleth it,
unthankful; he who denies it, more then wicked. For what can there be in
cleerenesse more evident, or in peise more weighty, or in strength more sound,
or in truth more certain, then that general principle which S. Paul
delivers, not as Moses, of the law; not as John, of the gospel; but of the
whole scripture and holy writ, to Timothee: 2. Tim. 3.16.
The whole scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to
teach, to improve, to correct, to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God
may be furnished, thoroughly furnished to every good work. Thus, if you
demand of what authority scripture is, it came from God by inspiration; if you
regard what use it has, it teaches, improueth, corrects, instructs; if
you would see to what end, it is, that the man of God may be furnished. Our
duty in Christ Jesus, is Gal. 5.^.
faith woorking by love. Faith embraces sound doctrine: love requires a godly
life. Soundnes of doctrine is held, if true things be taught, and false
refuted. Godliness of life is kept, if we fly from evil, and follow good. But
the holy scripture teaches the truth; improueth error; corrects iniquity;
instructs to righteousness: as it appears by the Apostles words. Therefore
it sets forth a man's whole duty in Christ Jesus: that is, (as I suppose,)
so much as suffices to salvation. For it is not only profitable to these
things, (as some do mince the matter,) but sufficient too: in so much that it
is 2. Tim. 3.15.
able to make a man wise to salvation through faith, and to furnish him. Yea,
to furnish what manner of man? the man of God: that is, the Lords interpreter,
the Minister of the word, the teacher of the Church, the Pastor of the
flock, even 1. Tim. 6.1^.
Timothee himself: much more the flock of the faithful, in whom so great
furniture of wisdom is not necessary. Howbeit the Apostle neither so contented
with saying, that the man of God may be furnished: adds (to beat the absolute
perfection of the scripture into our minds and memories, (with as many
reasons, as he uses words,) that the man of God may be (...).
furnished, (...).
thoroughly furnished, to every good work. Whereupon it follows that there is
nothing at all that can be wished for, either to soundnes and sincerity of
faith, or to integrity and godliness of life, that is, to man's perfection, and
the way of salvation: which the scripture given by inspiration of God does not
teach the faithful servants of Christ. It is the judgment therefore of the
holy Ghost, whose sentence I defend, as I am bound by duty: that the holy
scripture teaches the Church all things necessary to salvation. Here, if some
perhaps desire the testimonies of the Fathers, though, to what purpose, since ye
have heard the Father of Fathers? notwithstanding, if any would hear the
scholars judgment when he has heard the masters, he shall hear the judgment
not of this or that man of whom he might dout, but of the whole Church and of
all the Saints. For they, with one agreement and general consent, have termed
the books of scripture, Canonical, of the word Canon, which signifies a
rule: because they contain a worthy rule and squire of religion, faith, and
godliness, according whereunto the building of the house of God must be fitted.
Which opinion touching the Canon of the scripture, (allowed by Defens. ^id.
Tilden. lib. 3.
Andradius himself the chiefest patron of the Popish faith) has been so
well liked of the ancient Doctors: that De doctr. Chri^tian. lib. 2. c. 9.
Austin says, that all things concerning faith and manners are contained in
those, I say not which are, but which are plain in scripture: In 2. ad
Thessalon. hom. 3.
Chrysostom avouches in the like manner, that every thing is clear and
evident by the scriptures; and whatsoever things are necessary, they are
manifest: Contr. Hermogen.
Tertullian pronounces that himself honors the fulness of the scriptures;
and denounces a woe to Hermogenes the heretic, if he take ought from those
things which are written, or add to them: Contr. Heluidium.
Ierom, in the controversy which he had with Heluidius, does turn the reason
in and out, we believe it because we read it, we believe it not because we
read it not: In euang. Ioh. lib. 12. cap. 68.
Cyrill observes, that such of the things done by Christ are written, as the
writers thought to be sufficient for manners and doctrine: Sermon. de Fid.
Basil affirms, that it is a manifest reuolting from the faith, either to
disallow any thing that is written, or to bring in any thing that is not written:
to be short, all the Fathers (unless it were when some human infirmity
ouertooke them) agree with one mind, and say with one voice, that all things
which God has willed us to believe and do, are comprehended in the
scriptures. For, as touching that some of them sometimes, as De sanc. spir. cap
29.
Basil and Contr. ^aer. lib. 2. tom. 1. haer. 61.
Epiphanius, assaying all sorts of helps against heretics, will have
certain things to be contained in traditions, whereto by the judgment of
scripture it self there must no less credit be given then to scripture: I
take not upon me to control them, but let the Church judge, whether they
considered with advise enough those sayings of S. Paul, by which they were
induced perhaps to this opinion, at least they seek to prove it. For
Epiphanius groundeth upon these words of his to the Corinthians: 1. Cor 11.2.
as I delivered to you; and, I have delivered so in the Churches; and, 1. Cor.
15.1.
if ye keep it, except ye have believed in vain. And Basil gathers it to be
Apostolic doctrine, (that we must hold fast unwritten traditions,) by his
words to the Thessalonians: 2. These. 2.15.
hold the traditions which ye have been taught either by word or by our
epistle. Now if S. Paul meant in both these places by [deliuered] and
[traditions] his doctrine, delivered to them by word of mouth, yet comprised in
scripture too: then must it be granted that they were deceived who thought that
unwritten traditions were approved by S. Paul's traditions. But the former point
is true, that he meant so. Therefore the later also is true which follows of
it. For he does expound it himself, to the Corinthians, considering that 1.
Cor. ^.23. (...) 2.13. and 7.17. and 11.23. and 14.40.* and so forth in the
rest of the epistle.
he writes the sum of those things which he had delivered; and, what 1. Cor.
11.2^.
he delivered, that he received (he says) of the Lord; and Luke 22.19.
that which he received of the Lord, is written; and in plain terms 1. Cor.
15.3.
he witnesses himself to have delivered that unto them, which he had received
according to the scriptures, to weet, that Christ died for our sins according
to the scriptures, and that he was buried and that he rose the third day
according to the scriptures. As for the Thessalonians, what the things were,
which he delivered unto them by word, it is showed in the Act. 17.2.
acts of the Apostles: where we read that Paul being come to Thessalonica,
taught the Jews out of the scriptures, that it behooued Christ to suffer, and
to rise again from the dead, and that this Jesus whom (said he) I preach to
you, is the Christ. In which words it is opened both what Paul delivered to the
Thessalonians by word, and from whence: from whence? out of the scriptures:
what? that it behooued Christ to suffer, and rise again, and that Jesus is As
before, Ioh. 20.31.
the Christ. The tradition therefore, which Paul does exhort the Thessalonians
to hold, is the tradition of the gospel, as Amb. in 2. ad These. cap. 2.
Ambrose calls it very well. Which the reason also does prove, that Ambrose
notes, that Paul does there gather: 2 Thessalonians. 2. ver. 14.
God has raised you to salvation by our gospel; ver. 15.
therefore stand ye fast, and hold the traditions which ye have been taught
either by word or by our epistle: as if he should say, see therefore that ye
stand steadfast in the gospel, which I, as well by word of mouth as by writing,
have delivered to you. Thus S. Paul's traditions are the gospel delivered. And
the gospel (I hope) is written. Therefore S. Paul's traditions are written. But the
salvation of ye Thessalonians was contained in the traditions which S. Paul had
taught them by word and by epistle. The scripture then informs the Church of
so much as is necessary to salvation. Wherefore auant heretics out of ye
school of Christ, ye Valentinians, Marcionites, and Gnostikes: who (as Aduers.
haer. lib. 3. c. 2.
Irenaeus reports) did deny that the truth may be learned out of the holy
scriptures by them who know not tradition. Auant Jews, by whom the Cabala of
the Rabbis; auant Montanists by whom the new Comforter; auant Anabaptists, by
whom revelations; auant ye Council. ^rid. Sess. 4. Decr. 1.
Trent-councell-fathers and ye Papist^, by whom traditions beside scripture are
falsely reputed to be necessary to salvation. Our salvation is Christ; the way
to salvation, faith; the guide of the way, scripture: whereof the light and
lantern directs our steps, the food nourishes our souls, the preservative
keeps us from diseases, the sword kills our enemies, the plaster heals
our wounds, in a word the safe conduit does bring us unto eternal life.

The second conclusion.
The second Conclusion, which I am next to treat of, does undertake to show
that the militant Church may err both in manners and in doctrine. In manners,
against the Puritans: Aug^st. de haeres. ad Quod^ultd. cap. 33.
who, chalenging to them selves a singular kind of holiness, denied
repentance to such as had fallen. In doctrine, against the Papists: Catechis.
Council. Trid. in (...).
who for a defense and shield of their errors hold forth this bugge to fright
us out of our wits, The Church can not err. Here, that the truth may be the
better opened, the name of Church must be distinguished. For, as Thrasylaus, (a
frantike man amongst the Greeks) Athenaeus Dipnosophist. lib. 12.
whenever he saw any ships ariue into the haven at Athens, thought them all
his own, and took an inuentory of their wares, and met them with great joy:
after the like manner certain frantike Romanists, Albert. Pigh. in eccles.
hierar. Bristow in his Motives and Demands.
wheresoever they see the name of the Church in the holy scripture, they take
it to be theirs, and book the treasures of it, and boast thereof as of their
own, crying, the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. But to remove
these frantike men out of the haven, and deliver the merchants each their own
ships, and set the Church it self in possession of the Church, the name of the
(...), of (...).
Church in Greek (the native language of the new testament) comes from a
verb which signifies to call out, thereby to note a company called out, as
you would say. So that the Church of Christ be tokeneth a company called out
from amongst the multitude of other men to life everlasting through faith in
Christ Jesus. But they who are called out of the refuse and filth of mankind
to this state and honor, are not of one sort all. For same of them are called
effectually, and do come: some, that are called, do not yield them selves
obedient to the calling. They whom God has chosen, are called, and do come:
they, who being called come not, are not chosen. That speech of our Savior
Christ does touch them both: Mat. 20.16.
many are called, but few are chosen. The many, that are called, are named the
Church: but (to speak distinctly for instructions sake) the visible Church:
because we see the companies of men which are called to the faith of Christ,
which profess that they would enjoy eternal life. The few, that are chosen,
are named the church also, but the church invisible: not for that we see not
those whom God has chosen, but because we can not discern by sight who be the
chosen; only the Lord knows who are his. Now, of this Church which we call
invisible, part is in present possession of heavenly glory, part not having
yet attained thereunto abides on the earth. That part which is entered into the
joy of their Lord, is commonly termed the triumphant Church: the other which
lies in camp and wayteth for the victory, is called the Church militant. But
as it falls out in camps of worldly warfare, that either for covetousness, or
fear, or favor, there are with faithful soldiers such as are unfaithful,
some who never mind to come into the field, some who will betray their fellows
to their foes, some ready to stir up the soldiers to mutinies, some perhaps
that traitorously will set upon their own captain: so the militant church,
which has none but faithful soldiers of Christ in that respect that it is
matched with the Church triumphant, yet, while it abides in the camp of
warfare, there hang about it slipp^ry merchants; who pretend that they also are
of Christ's soldiers, but under soldiers coats they bear the hearts of
enemies, being such, as they of whom In Cantic. ^ermon. 33.
Bernard says, They are in Christ's livery, but they do service unto
Antichrist. Since therefore to discern the faithful soldiers from unfaithful
it belongs to him alone who shall one day sever the sheep from the goats: we,
measuring a soldier by the profession that he makes, and oath that binds
him to warfare, call that the militant Church which is enrolled and billed to
serve under Christ, part whereof does faithfully sight the Lords battles, part
making show to serve him do fight the battles of the devil. And this is the
militant Church which I mean in the point proposed: the militant Church may
err both in manners and in doctrine. To the ripping up whereof we must observe,
that it is proper to God alone by nature, to be holy, true, perfect, and free
from errors: as contrari-wise man by nature is unclean, a liar, imperfect,
prone to deceive and be deceived. For Romans 3.4.
every man is a liar: God alone is true. And Mark. 10.18.
none is good but God: he is naught therefore that is a mere man. But of grace
God bestows upon man the gift of perfection, holiness, and truth, as it were a
beam of the sun shining into a house of clay, to give us light and warmth.
Howbeit this beam, though the more the sun of righteousness asce^deth and
comes daily nearer us, the greater light and warmth it yeldeth: nevertheless
it shall not ouershine us with full light of truth, and warmth of holiness,
until we be taken out of our houses of clay, and go into the open heaven unto
God. The militant Church has the beams of the sun, but as in a house, not
in the open heaven: sometimes it is shadowed and made dim with darkness,
sometimes it waxes faint through cold. The triumphant Church has the sun it
self, not within doors, but a broad; not on earth, but in heaven: where
neither any darkness does hinder the light, nor any cold abate the warmth. Thus
it is made proper to the Church triumphant, to be without all spot: as the
spowse is told (in the song of Solomon) by her well-beloved, speaking thus unto
her; Cant. 4.7.
thou being all fair, my love, and no spot in thee, shall come with me from
Lebanon, O spouse, with me from Lebanon. For thereby we learn that as soon
as the Church being fully cleansed from spot of all errors shall have attained
that excellent fairness and perfection, whereto she is fined by little and
little in this life: she is taken out of Lebanon, (as you would say, the forest)
of this world, and joined to her bridegroom in that blessed marriage, to enjoy
eternal glory with God. But that excellent fairness she atteineth not, while
she warfareth on the earth. The militant Church therefore is not fully clean
from spot of all errors. She shall be Ephesians. 5.2.7.
a Church not having spot or wrincle when she shall be glorious: as Paul
declares to the Ephesians. Wherefore since to promise that gloriousness in
this life, is, to sound the triumph before the conquest be gotten: it follows
that the Church shall have spot and wrincle so long as she does live in
warfare. But, over and besides all this, because the Church, while it is in
warfare, has unfaithful soldiers in it amongst the faithful, who as they
are unlike either to other, so is their case unlike too: therefore as the men
that are in the Church, so the kinds of errors must be discerned and
distinguished, that it may the better appear to what errors what part of the
Church is subject. To err then is to swerve and turn out of the way, which
God by the word of life (the holy scripture) has willed us to walk in. Which
way since it contains soundnes of doctrine, and godliness of manners, as I have
showed before: thereupon it follows that they who offend, either in manners, or
in doctrine, do err and go out of the way. We err in manners therefore, when
we do ill: we err in doctrine, when we judge falsely. Now these errors of
the mind are of like condition in comparison of life eternal, as are diseases
of the body in comparison of life temporal. So that as amongst diseases of the
body some are curable, some are deadly; curable I call them whereof we recover,
deadly, whereof we dye: in like sort amongst the errors of the mind some are
curable, which do not bereue us of salvation; some deadly, which bring us to
everlasting death. In the Church militant they whom God has chosen may err in
manners and doctrine: but their error is curable, they can not err to death.
But they who are called only, and not chosen, may err in manners and doctrine,
even with a deadly error, which never shall be cured. That the chosen may err
in manners and doctrine: it is evident by the Apostles. For they did err in
manners, when Matt. 26.56.
they forsook Christ, at the time that Judas the renegate betrayed him. They
did err in doctrine, when Act. 1.6.
they thought the kingdom of Christ to be not heavenly, but earthly: not
spiritual, but like the kingdoms of this world; presently to come, not after
to be looked for: proper to Israel, not common to all nations by virtue of the
promises. Yea, that more is, when they had received the holy Ghost in greater
measure from heaven, Gal. 2.14.
Peter went not rightly to the truth of the Gospel: Reu. 19.10. and 22.8.
John would have worshipped an Angel once or twice: Act. 11.2.
the Apostles and brethren who were in Iudaea thought that the word of God was
not to be preached to the Gentiles. But yet al these errors of the Apostles
were curable. For both they returned to Christ when he was risen again from
death to life: and first them selves acknowledged, then they taught others the
state of his kingdom: and Peter being reproved by Paul, did yield unto him:
and John stayed himself upon the Angels admonition, and the Apostles with the
brethren being taught the truth, were glad yt God had granted to the Gentiles
also repentance unto life. Wherein that is performed which was promised by
Christ, when Peter having made that worthy profession of faith, he said unto
him: Mat. 16.18.
Thou art Peter, and on this stone will I build my church, and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it. The gates of hell (...).
shall not prevail against the church: they shall not prevail. They (...) as
ye Apostle mentions. (...) which he preuail^th against ^. Cor. 10.4.
shall be of strength then against the Church: but they shall not prevail by
strength. For the elect and chosen of God may take a fall: but fall a way they
can not. Perhaps they build stubble: but they build on the foundation. And the
foundation is Christ Jesus, from whom they shall never be plucked away. For, as
Fabius says in Liu. lib. 22.
Liuie, that right does faint often, as being not able well to prove the truth,
but it never dies: so men, who cleave to right and truth, are often assaulted,
but they are never conquered. The Luke 15.4.
sheep of Christ may go astray in the wilderness: but Ioh. 10.28.
they can not perish. The Luke 15.12.
prodigal son may go away from his father: but he shall come again. The
Luke 22.32.
faith of Peter him self did sown, as you would say: but it failed not. He
was turned away a while from the Lord, whom he denied too: but he was turned
again unto him. To conclude, the faithful are sorely pressed often, by many
enemies, and mighty: but they shall never be suppressed. Psalm. 12^.1.
Often have they assaulted me from my youth up, may Israel now say, often have
they assaulted me from my youth up: but they have not prevailed against me. It
is certain therefore that the elect and chosen, though they be made the
children of God by adoption, yet are subject to error. Howbeit, of the other
side, they are subject so, that they are freed from the gilt of error by
Christ, and are accepted as holy of God, because they are in part holy. Cant.
1. ver. 4
I am black, o ye daughters of Jerusalem, says the spowse, yet I am comely:
as the tents of Kedar, yet as the hangings of Solomon. Yea farther the
bridegroom says, that ver. 14.
she is fair, nay (that is more) ver. 7.
the Fairest, but the fairest of women: not simply the fairest, (as Bernard
well notes) but in comparison of women, but in respect of earthly creatures.
To teach the Church thereby, least she wax proud, that, Bernard. in Cant.
sermon. 38.
as long as she lives in the tabernacle of the body, she goes on toward,
but is not yet come to the perfection of fairenes: and therefore that she is
Non pul^ra om^imodo.
not (I use S. Bernardes words) fair altogether, though she be therefore
commended for her fairness because she walks after the spirit not after
the flesh. But here peradventure some man will object (an argument which
Papists are ever hammering on) that Ioh. 14.16. and 15.26. and 16.1^*
the holy Ghost is promised and given by Christ to the elect; and the holy
Ghost is the Ghost or spirit of holiness and truth: whereof it may seem to be
well gathered that they can neither err in doctrine, nor in manners. To this,
(if it be objected) thus I answer: that the holy Ghost has filled with the
unmeasurable abundance of his grace none but Christ only, Ioh. 1.1^.
of whose fulness we all receive: Christ in deed has given the holy ghost to
the elect, but he has given it Ioh. ^.34.
by measure, (as I may say with John;) not to this effect that they may not
err, but that they may not err to death. For it is a sentence not only
proved by Philosophers, but also known to simple men by common experience,
that whatsoever thing is received of an other, it is received according to the
capacity of that which receives it. We receive therefore the gifts of the
holy Ghost, according to the simple capacity of man's weakness, not to the
majesty of Gods spirit. There is water enough in the maine sea to quench the
raging flames that waste a whole town: but a small dish can not contain
enough to assuage the fire that burketh one house. Men, who are begotten Genesis
5.3.
in the image and likeness of their father Adam, do flame, and burn as the
Psalm. 57 4.
Prophet speaks. Though they be Ioh 3.5.
borne anew of water and of the spirit: yet the water of the spirit d^^th not
quite put out all sparks of faults and ouersights. For there remains Romans
7.22. Gal. 5.17.
a strife between the spirit and the flesh even in the godly; and the remnants
of the flesh stick in the heart and mind both; and 1. Cor. 13.12.
now (while we live) we know but in part, and 2. Cor. 12.9.
the power of God is perfitted in weakness; and Jeremy prays, Ier. 17.14.
heal me O Lord and I shall be healed; and Paul acknowledges of himself that
Phil. 3.12.
he is not yet perfitte, though laboring hard toward the mark; and James
says generally concerning the faithful, Iam. 3.2.
In many things we all offend, and our Savior witnesses that Ioh. 13.10.
he which is washed has need to wash his feet. Wherefore though the chosen
and elect of God be renewed by the holy Ghost: yet they are not cleansed so in
this life from all peruersenes of heart, and blindness of mind, that they can
neither swarne from doing their duty, nor be deeeiued in judgment. For Ioh.
13.16.
the holy Ghost, no dout, (as Christ promised,) does lead the^ into all
truth, yea I say farther into all holiness: but so, as S. Paul professes to the
Ephesians, that Act. 20. vea. 27.
he showed them all the counsel of God. Now, he showed them all the counsel
of God, not absolutely and simply, but ver. 20.
so far as was profitable for them. The holy Ghost therefore does lighten the
minds and sancti^^e the hearts of the elect and chosen so far, as is
expedient for their salvation. But it is expedient for us to err in some
things: that we may give all 1. Tim. 1.17.
glory unto God alone; that, knowing what we are, Romans 11.20.
we be not high minded; that we may be taught to Gal. 6.2.
bear each others burdens; that we may Phil. 2.12.
work forth our own salvation with fear; that we may learn with Paul, that 2.
Cor. 12.9.
the grace of God is sufficient for us; that we may Mark. 9.24.
sharpen our trust in him, Luke 7.47.
stir up our love toward him, and pray unto him heartily, Luke 17.5.
increase our faith, Luke 11.4.
forgive our sins; in a word, that we may run the whole race of our life
with greater stedfastnes and constancy. Then since these things are thus, it is
to be concluded, that the godly are lead by the holy Ghost into all truth and
holiness, even to salvation: but to this salvation they are so lead, that they
are not free from all spot and wrincle, either of manners or of doctrine.
Touching which point, on the one side in respect of manners De perfect. obed.
leg. Dei.
Sebastian Castellio has erred very shamefully, holding this heretical
opinion (amongst others) that the regenerate are able to perform the law of
God perfitly: which thing it is blasphemous to affirm of any but of Christ
only. On the other side in respect of doctrine, Contr. B^^ntium lib. 3.
Hosius the Cardinal has ouershot him self as fowly, saying that every one
of the elect may err, as by S. Cyprians example he shows: but, that all the
faithful gathered together in one, cannot err; which is a fansy of a man that
would build castles in the air. It is a matter therefore most sure and out of
dout, that the elect and chosen may err, as in manners, so in doctrine too:
though in such sort that they shall not die, but live notwithstanding, and be
cured of their errors. Marry, that they who are not chosen, but only called,
may err even to death, as well in doctrine as in manners: in manners, it
appears by the example of Matt. 26.15.
Judas, who was brought through covetousness to betray Christ; in doctrine, we
may see by those monstrous heretics, of whom S. John says, 1. Ioh. 2.1^.
they went out from us but they were not of us. Wherefore since both the chosen
and the called may err, the one, to their trial; the other to their
destruction; and the church militant consists of none but of the called and
the chosen: that which I proposed is proved sufficiently, that the militant
church may err not only in manners but in doctrine also. If any man for proof
thereof require examples: he has the churches of Gal. 1.6.
Galatia, of 1. Cor. 11.18. and 15.12.
Corinth, of Reu. 2. ver. 15.
Pergamus, of ver. 20.
Thyatira, of Reu. 3. ver. 2.
Sardis, and of ver. 15.
La^dicea. All the which (to omit examples of our own time) the scripture
witnesses to have erred, some of them in manners, some in doctrine, some in
both. Yea, the very church of Reu. 1.12.
Ephesus it self, which Christ showed to John in the figure of 1. Tim. 3.15.
a candlestick, because it held the light of life: which Timothee abode in,
when Paul wrote unto him, that 1. Tim. 3.15.
the church is the pillar and ground of the truth: even this church of Ephesus
was impaired so greatly by Reu. 2. ver. 4.
leaving of her first love, that Christ did therefore threaten her ^^r. 5.
he would remove her candlestick out of his place unless she repented. She
repented not, but by little and little became worse and worse, and heaped faut
upon faut, yea many fautes upon one, both in manners, and doctrine. Therefore
Christ removed her candlestick out of his place: the chosen, who shined with
the light of faith, he gathered to himself; the called, who hated the light,
he gave over to darkness and the shadow of death; the godly Reu. ^.^^.
he made pillars in the temple of his God: the hypocrites (the filth of the
temple) he cast out to the dunghill of the ungodly; and he left the city of
Ephesus desolate to wicked Mahomets impiety. Now, that may befall to every one
(as they say) which may befall to any one. Then look what has befallen to the
Church of Ephesus, that may to every Church. But the Church of Ephesus was
shaken first and crased, afterward quite overthrown: and being hereft of the
light of Christ is now a Church no longer. Then is there no Church upon the
face of the earth, howsoever it flatter it self with those titles of the
candlestick of Christ, and pillar of the truth: there is no Church (I say,)
whose body, that is the chosen, may not be overtaken with faintness and
darkness: whose dregs, that is the hypocrites, may not be consumed with
rottenness and destruction: finally whose whole frame and constitution may not
be deprived both of strength and beauty. I know that the Papists answer
hereunto, that the militant Church may err for the flocks, the people, that
are in it: but the guides and Pastors (whose assembly is called the Church by
Christ, saying, Matt. 18.1^.
tell the Church,) can not. Which is false and fond. For, as there are sheep
and goats in the flocks: so the Pastors of them are good, hirelinges, or
thieves. The good ones do slumber sometimes, as the Apostles: the Ioh. 10. ver.
12.
hirelinges fly as soon as the woolfe comes: the ver. 10.
thieves come to steal, to kill and to destroy. Wherefore no Pastor is exempt
from danger of erring more or less. And, for the former point that they may
err in manners, what need I bring Apostles or Prophets to prove it? The
complaint of Bernard is fresh, I would to God it were not too fresh: Bernard.
in ^antic. Ser. 33.
there creeps an owgly rot at this present through the whole body of the
Church. Which words being spoken in reproof of the life and conversation of
the Prelates, that is, of the Bishops and Pastors of the Church, do show,
that not a common disease, but a rot; and that not small, but ougly; and that
creeping on, not keeping at a stay; may infect, not only this or that member,
but the whole body of Pastors for their manners. Now, that they may also be
ouerseene in doctrine, and err in points of faith: it is plainly proved by
those Corinthian Pastors, 1. Cor. 3.10.
who built hay and stubble upon the foundation that S. Paul had laid: by them
of whom S. Peter foretells, that 2. Pet. 2.1.
there should be false teachers in the new Church, as in the old there were
false prophets: by Eusebius. hist. eccles. l. 7. c. 22.
Samosatenus, Theodoret. hist. eccles. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Arius, and Socrat. hist. ecc. l. 7. c. 29. and 32.
Nestorius, Pastors of famous Churches, and autors of most heinous heresies:
yea, by Theodoret. hist. eccles. lib. 2. cap. 16.
the Bishops of the whole world, who all were Arians in a manner, when there
were scarce left a few Catholics, when Hieron. dial. cont. Lucifer. cap. 7. and
in Chronico. Athanas. epist. de synod. Arim. and Seleuciae.
the whole world did groan and wonder at it self, that it was become an Arian.
But the Papists will reply, that when they say the Church cannot err, they
mean the Church in that sense in which the Schoolmen call it representative,
that is, Bishops and Prelates representing the whole church in a general
Council. What? And has that Church (I mean, a general Council) this
privilege that it can not err? They hold so in deed. But what will they say
of so many Councels of the Arians? which caused In epist. ad Procopium.
Gregory Nazianzene to despair that any good would be done by Councels. But
they deny these to have been lawful Councels. What will they answer then to
those which them selves confess to have been lawful. The Council of Can. 59.
Laodicea (though a provincial Council, yet allowed by Constantinop. in Trul.
can. 2. Council. Nicen. secund. can. 1.
a general) did set down the same Canon of the scriptures which both the old
Church had, and our Church does hold. The third Council of Can. 47.
Carthage (which therein the Council of Session. 4.
Trent subscribeth to) did add the books of Maccabes and the rest of the
apocrypha to the old Canon. The Can. 6.
Council of Nice appointed bounds and limits, as well for the Bishop of Romes
jurisdiction, as for other Bishops. The Council of Capit. 5. apud Innocen^.
tert.
Lateran gave the soueraintie of ordinary power to the Church of Rome over al
other Churches. The Council of Sess. 4. and 5.
Constance decreed that the Council is above the Pope, and made the Papal
power subject to general Councels. Which thing did so highly displease the
Council of Florence, that Aene. Silu. de Council. Basil. Council Flor. and
Ferrar. in Co^cilij indict.
it undermined the Council of Basil, and guilefully surprised it, for putting
that in ^re against Pope Eugenius. Upon the which points it must needs be
granted that one side of these general Councels did err: unless we will say
that things which are contrary may be true both. Wherefore, to make an end,
since it is apparent by most clear proofs, that both the chosen and the
called, both the flocks, and the Pastors, both in several by them selves and
assembled together in general Councels, may err: I am to conclude, with the
good liking (I hope) of such as love the truth, that the militant Church may
err in manners and doctrine. In the one point whereof, concerning manners, I
defend our selves against ye malicious sclanders of the Bristow Motiu. 3 and
Demand. 8.
Papists: who charge the Church of England with the heresy of Puritans,
impudently, and falsely. In the other, concerning doctrine, I do not touch the
walls of Babylon with a light finger, but raze from the very ground the whole
mount of the Romish Synagogue.

The third conclusion.
Whose intolerable presumption is reproved by the third Conclusion too: wherein
it rests to be showed, that the holy scripture is of greater credit and
authority then the Church. And although this be so manifestly true, that to
have proposed it only, is, to have proved it: yet give me leave I pray to
prove it briefly with one reason, I will not trouble you with many. All the
words of scripture be the words of truth: some words of the Church be the
words of error. But he that tells the truth always, is more to be credited,
then he that lies sometimes. Therefore the holy scripture is to be credited
more, then is the Church. That all the words of scripture be the words of
truth: it is out of controversy. For 2. Tim. 3.16.
the whole scripture is inspired of God: and Tit. 1.2.
God can neither deceive nor be deceived. That some words of the Church be the
words of error: if any be not persuaded perhaps by the reasons which I have
brought already, let him hear the sharpese and most earnest Patron of the
Church confessing it. De^ens. ^id. ^ri^. lib. 1.
Andrad^us Payua, a Doctor of Portugal, the best learned man (in my opinion)
of all the papists, reherseth certain points wherein Councels also may err,
even general Councels: in so much that he says that the very general Council
of Chalcedon, one of those four first which Registr.. lib. 2. and. 11. ep. 10.
Gregory professes him self to receive as the four books of the holy
Gospel, yet Andradius says, that this Council erred, in that it did Temer^,
and nulla ratione.
rashly and without reason (these are his own words) ordeine, that the Church
of Constantinople should be above the Churches of Alexandria and Anti^^he.
Neither does he only say that the Council of Chalcedon erred, and contraried
the decrees of the Nicen Cuncell: but he adds also a reason why Councels may
err in such cases, to weete, because they follow Non afflatu^ sancti spiritus.
not the secret motion of the holy ghost, but Rumoris auram inanem.
idle Blastes of vain reports, and Hominum opiniones sallaces.
men's opinions which deceive often. A Council then may follow some times the
deceitful opinions of men, and not the secret motion of the holy ghost. Let
the Councels then give place to the holy scriptures: whereof no part is uttered
by the spirit of man, but all by the spirit of God. For if some cauiller (to
shift of this reason) shall say that we must not account of that error as
though it were the judgment of the general Council, because the Bishop of
Rome did not allow it and approve it: I would request him, first of all, to
weigh, that a general Council and assembly of Bishops must needs be
distinguished from this and that particular Bishop; so that, what the greater
part of them ordeineth, that is ordained by the Council: next, to consider,
that the name of Church may be given to an assemblis of Bishops and a Council,
but it can not be given to the Bishop of Rome: lastly, to remember, that the
Bishop of Rome, Honorius the first, was condemned of heresy by Council. 6.
^^^nor. Constan^inop. action. 13.
the general Council of Constantinople allowed and approved by Agatho Bishop
of Rome. Wherefore, take the name of Church in what sense soever you list, be
it for the company either of Gods chosen, or of the called too, or of the
guides and Pastors, or be it for the Bishop of Rome his own person, though to
take it so it seems very absurd: the Bishop of Rome him self, if he were to
be my judge, shall not be able to deny (unless his forhead be of adamant) but
that some of the Churches words are words of error. Now if the Bishop of Rome
and Romanistes them selves be forced to confess, both that the Church says
some things which are erroneous, and that the scripture says nothing but
clear truth: shall there yet be found any man, either so blockishly
unskillful, or so frowardly past shame, as that he dare affirm that the Church
is of greater credit and authority then the holy scripture? Ecclesiast.
hi^^rar. l. ^. c. ^.
Pighius has done it, in his treatise of the holy government of the church.
Where though he in (...) ^^llify with gallant salues his cursed speech: yet, to
build the tower of his Church, and Antichrist, with the ruins of Christ and of
the holy scripture: first he says: touching the writings of the Apostles, that
they were given to the church, Non vt praeessent sed vt subcisent.
not that they should rule our faith and religion, but that they should be
ruled rather: and then he concludes that the authority of the church is not
only not inferior, not only equal, nay, it is superior also after a sort
to the authority of the scriptures. Histor. nature. lib. 36. cap. 10.
Pliny reports that there was at Rome a certain dial set in the field of
Flora to note the shadows of the sun: the notes and marks of which dial
had not agreed with the sun for the space of thirty years. And the cause
thereof was this, as Pliny says, that either the course of the sun was
disordered and changed by some means of heaven, or else the whole earth was
slipped away from her center. The Church of Rome seems to be very like this
dial in the field of Flora. For she was placed in the Roman territory to show
the shadows of the sun, even of Mal. 4.2.
the sun of righteousness, that is, of Christ: but her notes and marks have
not agreed with Christ these many years together. Not that there is any fault
in the dial, I mean in the Church, (for that can not be, as Pighius proves
pretily:) but because perhaps either Christ him self has took an other
course, and is altered I know not by what changeablenes of God, or else the
whole scripture is slipped from the point in the which it stood. But let us
(right woorshipfull) who know that the dials and clockes do mysse often, but
the course of the sun is certain and constant, let us make more account of
the sun, then of a dial; of heaven, then of Pliny; of the Zodiake circle,
then of the field of Flora; of God, then of men; of Christ, then of Pighius; of
the holy scripture, then of the church. For God forbid there should be any
(amongst us) so beastly a monster in the shape of man, as to set up Antichrist
in the temple of God above God: and to attribute more to any, either man, or
multitude of men, then to the Lord of majesty. But so do they, no dout, who
have the Church in greater regard then the scripture. For the voice of the
scripture is the voice of God: the voice of the Church is the voice of men.
Then if it be impious to set up men above God: doubtless, to set up the Church
above the scripture, it is Antichristian. Nor yet do I deny that the Churches
voice is sometimes the voice of God. For, in appeasing the offenses and
reproving the sins of brethren, Mat. 18.17.
if thy brother (says Christ) refuse to hear the church, let him be to thee
as a heathen man, and a Publican. But the holy spirit, that is the spirit of
truth, does speak, both alone, and always, in the scripture. An human
spirit, that is a spirit of error, has a part sometimes in the speech of the
Church. Both which points I have proved by the word of God, the evidence of
the thing, and the confessions of our adversaries. Why do we not then
acknowledge that the royal prerogative of this privilege, to be altogether
exempt from all error, is due to scripture only; and confess, as De bapt.
conc. Donatist. lib. 2. c. 3.
Austin does against the Donatistes, that it is peculiar and proper to the holy
canonical scripture, that all things which are written therein be true, and
right: but the letters and writings of Bishops, as of Cyprian, yea the very
Councels, not provincial only, but also full and general, have often times
somewhat that may be amended. I, for my part, do gladly both allow this
sentence of Austin, and judge it worthy to be allowed, as agreeable to the
truth. And therefore I conclude the point which I proposed, that the holy
scripture is of greater credit and authority then the church. Thus you have my
judgment (right learned Inceptors) touching the Conclusions which are to be
disputed of; opened in more words perhaps, then your wisdom; in fewer, then
the weight of the things required. But I have waded so far in the opening of
them, as I thought the Proctors might well give me leave by the straitnes of
time. As for that which needs to be discussed farther: I will assay to open
it, as well as I can (if occasion serve,) when the adversary arguments shall
be proposed in disputation.

CONCLVSIONS HANDLED IN DIVINITY SCHOOL, THE III. OF NOVEMBER 1579.
1 The holy Catholic Church, which we believe, is the whole company of Gods
elect and chosen.
HE, who the sea, the earth, the skies made by his word of naught,
Who by eternal power does guide and rule all things he wrought:
Did choose from out the sons of men before the world was pight,
Such as with blessed angels aye should joy his blisfull sight.
The Jews are not the only men that make this holy band,
But they are soldiers chosen out of every tongue, and land:
Where on the south the mighty prince of Abissines does reign;
Where on the north the coasts do lie that look to Charles waine;
Where Phoebus with his glistring beams does raise the dawning light,
And sinking in the western seas does bring the darksome night.
The fle^h can not by natures light such hidden truths pursue:
But Christian faith by light of grace this Catholic Church does view.
2 The Church of Rome is not the Catholic Church, nor a sound member of the
catholic Church.
THey do not well who shut the world within the Roman bounds:
Christ's Church is spread through al ye earth without restraint of mounds*
Rome was (I grant) a faithful branch of this renowned vine:
Rome was a myrrour that in grace, in zeal, in love, did shine:
Rome was commended far and wide for faith in Christ his name:
For Peter's doctrine taught and kept Rome was of worthy fame.
But where Rome was, now ruins are. The Capitol is s^ooried:
The ground is bathde in Christians blood, who^ Romish woolues have wooried.
Her Churches are with idols stained, her guides with manners vile,
Whom lustful trains, and wicked hearts, and beds unchaste defile.
O thrice unhappy Babylon, that Sions spoil do work,
Under the noble name and hue of Sion would thou lurk?
3 The reformed churches in England, Scotland, France, Germany, and other
kingdoms and common wealths have severed them selves lawfully from the church
of Rome.
A Place of haunt for devils and sprits is Babylon waxt, says John.
Art thou desirous to be saved? from Babylon be gone.
The names and tricks of Babylon Rome on it self does take.
Then, if ye seek eternal life, see that ye Rome forsake.
This have the noble Germans done bidding the Pope a dieu:
England has followed Germany, Romes thraldom to eschew.
Behold the Lord has called on the Flemish, French, and Dane:
And Scotland has escaped eke the Papal deadly bane.
O that the remnant of the world by faith to Christ were knit,
And Princes to the Prince of all their scepters would submit.
Build up O Lord, O father dear, the church and Sions fort:
That unto thee from Babylon thy people may resort.
AMongst many singular benefits of God bestowed upon our University, (fathers,
and brethren,) which may be very fruitful to the advancing of Gods glory and
salvation of the Church, if they be well husbanded: there is scarce any more
excellent (in my judgment,) then that it is ordered, that the truth given by
inspiration of God, and registered in the Scripture, should be not expounded
only by public lectures, but also proved by disputations. A worthy and
profitable ordinance, no doubt: and most meet for schools which serve to
train up Christians, that is, for schools of God. For what can there be more
precious then the truth, which teaches us the knowledge of God, the way to
life? And what more convenient to strengthen the truth, then to have it proved
by discussing the reasons brought of both parts. For as gold, being dug
out of the veins of the earth, is severed from earthy substance (mixed
therewith) by the mettall-workemen knocking it together; and as husbandmen are
wont to sift wheat from the chafe by winowing, that it may be fit to nourish
the body: so the golden treasure of truth by striking reasons as it were
together is parted from the dregs, which it has not gotten from the holy
veins whence it is dug, but from men's vessels wherein it is received; and
the corn that is sown for the food of the soul, is winowed (with the wind
that blows from the holy Ghost) by the husbandmen of heaven, that it may be
cleaner from the chafe of errors. The cheerful undertaking, and faithful
performing of the which duty the common wealth may challenge at our hands of
right: specially for that it has endowed and furnished this noble University
and place of exercise of good learning with privileges, with houses, with lands
in ample sort, to this intent chiefly that it might be a nurserie for Pastors
of the Church. For both it is meet that Pastors of the Church should be not
only able to edify the faithful with sound and wholesome doctrine, but also
(...) 1.^.
to convince them who gainesay it, as S. Paul witnesses: and we shall be able
to convince gainesayers so much the more easily, fitly, and effectually, if
first we practice that in a warlike exercise, which we may do after when we
shall make war with enemies in deed. Now, it there be any thing wherein it
is very convenient and behoofefull, both for Christian soldiers to be well
practiced, against the mischievous attempts of their enemies; and the gold of
Christian truth to be thoroughly cleansed from the dross, the wheat from the
cha^^e, by the pains of husbandmen and workmen of the church: doubtless,
th^s, which I have chosen to debate of, is so profitable, being known; so
perilous, unknown; that we have great cause to bend all our wits unto the
search and knowledge of it. For there have assailed the Church now this great
while, and scatteredly there range, they, of whom Matt. 7.19.
Christ has warned us to beware, whom 2. Pet. 2.1.
Peter did foretell of that they should be in the Church, I mean false
teachers, and false prophets: who coming to us in the clothing of sheep, yet
being ravening woolues in their hearts and deeds, naming them selves the
Church as if they were the only sheep of Christ, do teach damnable heresies,
and blaspheme the way of truth. To spread the infection of the which pestilence
farther amongst the faithful: as Rabsakeh the Assyrian, 2. King. 18.^^
when he did solicit Jerusalem to fall from God, did use the name of God
against the people of God: so that Romish Rabsakeh the enemy of the new
Jerusalem, does use the Churches name against the children of the Church. He
says that Christians ought to believe the Catholic Church: and that no Church
is Catholic at all but the church of Rome: and that we therefore who have
forsaken it, have fallen away from the communion of the catholic Church:
moreover, that there can not be any hope of salvation out of the Church: and
therefore that all, who either leave the Church of Rome, or join them selves
to any of our reformed Churches, must needs be lost for ever. This fair but
false visard of the catholic Church, does lead many simple men out of the
way: who shun the catholic faith, while they are afraid least they should
fall from the faith; and dare not join them selves with the Church of Christ,
least they should be severed from the communion of the Church. So that we may
justly say to the Bishops of Rome at this day, that which Leo. epist. 8^* ad
episcopos Palaest.
a Roman Bishop did write long ago to the Bishops of Iewry: Ye think your
selves to deal for the faith (O ye Romans) and ye go against the faith; ye do
arm your selves with the name of the church, and ye fight against the church.
Wherefore, being persuaded that ye handling hereof would avail much to ease the
ignorance of the unskillful, and quail the stubbornness of our adversaries,
and further (which is the chief point) the salvation of the elect: I, for the
duty, or rather more then duty which I owe to the church of Christ, resolved
with my self (having such opportunity of disputation offered) to treat of
the state of the Catholic, of the Roman, and of our own Church. The rather,
for that the foundations of this work are already laid in our former
disputation: wherein it was showed out of the word of truth, that the scripture
teaches all things needful to salvation; that the church may err while it
is militant on the earth; that the authority of the church is subject to the
scripture. Which things being settled, it will be the easier to build thereupon
that which I have purposed: I mean, to lay open the nature and condition of
the catholic church, the corruption of the Roman, and the soundnes of ours.
But before I enter into the opening of these points, which I will do (by Gods
grace) briefly, as the time; sincerely, as the charge requires: first I must
desire and crave of you all, my hearers, most earnestly, not that you will give
me an attentive ear, which of your own accord ye do: but that with your
ear you will bring a mind desirous to embrace the truth. In Athenes there
were judges called Areopagites, whose order was such (as (...). Rhe^or. 1.
Demosthen. contr. A^^stocrat. Lucian. in Anachar.
the Heathens write, and commend them for it) that they bid the pleader plead
without preambles, and made him to be sworn that he should tell them no
untruth: them selves did hear the cause with great silence while it was
pleading, and judged of it with great vprightnes when they had heard it. Such
Areopagites would I have you, brethren, in this our Christian Athenes, show
your selves to me ward. I will declare the matter (as a pleader ought) simply,
and sincerely, without preambles, though unbidden: and without untruths,
though unsworn. Give you (as judges should do) favorable audience, without a
partial prejudice of foreconceiued errors: and sentence with the truth,
without corrupt affections, according unto right and reason. And I would to God
you would hear me, in such sort as Ac^. 1^.35.
Denis the Areopagite heard Paul the Apostle: whose words of the unknown God
he believed, persuaded by ye light of truth, though against that opinion which
he had foreconceiued. God, the father of lights, and autour of truth, who
gave Paul a fiery tongue, to lighten and kindle the minds of his hearers; who
moved the heart of Denis to see the light of godliness and to be set on fire with
it: vouchsafe with the direction of his holy spirit both to guide my tongue,
that it may serve to open the mysteries of his word; and to soften your hearts,
that the seed of life may fall upon a fruitful ground. Open our eyes* O Lord,
and we shall see; give us fleshy hearts, and we shall assent. Let thy spirit
lead us into all truth, and let thy word be a lantern to our feet: that we
may believe the things which thou teach, and do the things which thou
commaundest, to the everlasting glory of thy goodness and our own salvation.
Amen.

In the treaty of the matter, that I set in hand with, of the state of the
Church both in general, and particular, The fourth Conclusion.
the Roman, and the reformed Churches of sundry nations: it comes first to be
declared what is the holy catholic church, whereof we profess in our Creed
that we believe it. And hereof I say, the holy catholic church is the whole
company of Gods elect and chosen. Which is termed a Church, that is, a company
ofmen and an assembly of people called together; holy, because God has chosen
this company, and sanctified it to him self; Catholic, for that it consists
not of one nation, but of all, spread through the whole world. For God, to the
intent that he might impart the riches of his glorious grace unto mankind,
Ephesians. 1.4^.
did choose from everlasting a certain number of men, as a 1. Pet. 2.^.
peculiar people, Matt. 2^.34.
who should possess with him the kingdom of heaven prepared for them from the
foundations of the world. And although this people be sundred by the distance
of places, and times, for the several persons and members thereof: yet has
he joined and knit them all together by the bond of his holy spirit, into the
fellowship of one body, and a civil or rather a spiritual communion, as it
were into one city. The name of which city, is, Hebr. 12.22. Reu. 2^.2.
the heavenly, new, and holy Jerusalem, the city of the living God: the king,
is Psalm. 87.1.
God almighty, who founded, establishes, and rules the city: the laws, are
Gods word, which the citizens hear and follow, as Ioh. 10.1^*
sheep the voice of the shepherd: the citizens, are the Saints, even all and
singular holy men, who therefore are called Ephesians. ^.19*
felow-citizens of the Saints, and men of Gods household: the register, wherein
their names are enrolled, is called Reu. 20, 1^*
the book of life: finally the liberties and commo^ities, which they enjoy,
are most ample benefits both of this life and of the life to come, to wit, the
grace of God, the fountain of goodness; the treasures of Christ, who is heir
of all things; the forgiveness of sins, the peace of conscience, the gifts of
righteousness, of godliness, of holiness; one spirit, one faith, one hope of our
calling, and sacraments which are the seals of our hope; in a word all
things which are expedient for us to the necessary maintenance of our earthly
life, and after this life the inheritance of life eternal in heaven with
endless bliss and glory. But because the citizens of this city of God having
disobeyed and rebelled against him had lost their freedom through their
treason, and being put thereby from everlasting life were to suffer death in the
chains of darkness: God the father of infinite mercy and compassion, did
send his only begotten son into the world, that he being appointed king of
Gods city should redeem ye citizens from the powerof darkness out of the
thraldom of the devil, and translating them a fresh into his kingdom should
bless them and endow them with all the privileges and liberties of the
citizens of God. And so it pleased him, though we had played the traitors in
reuolting from him to his and our enemy, yet of his free favor to make a
league with us, and enter into covenant. Which covenant being one and the same
in substance, yet diversely considered, and (by reason of this diversity)
divided into two, the one called old, grounded on Christ being promised to
come; the other, new, on Christ being come into the world: God has set it
down in the instruments of his c^uenant, wherein he has said, Genesis 17.7. Leu.
^6.12. ^er. 3^.^3. ^eb. 8.10.
I will be your God, and ye shall be my people. What is the tenor, how great
the use, how unspeakable the benefit of this holy covenant, made with the
Patriarchs, the Prophets, the Apostles, and all the Saints of God: it is
recorded in the sacred instruments of the old and new testament, or covenant.
An abridgement whereof, containing the summeof the Apostles doctrine, is
delivered in ye articles of our Christian faith, or Creed, as we term it,
gathered out of Gods word. Wherefore as the covenant consists of two
branches: so the Creed expressing it contains two parts. One of them
instructs our faith touching God, who said to his servants, I will be your
God: the other, touching the people of God, that is the Church, to whom God
said, you shall be my people. Touching God, it teaches us to believe in him,
who is one God in nature, distinct in three persons; the Father the creator,
the Son the redeemer, the holy Ghost the sanctifier. Touching the people of
God, it teaches us to believe, that they are a Church, holy, and Catholic,
which has communion of the Saints, to whom their sins are forgiven, whose
bodies shall be raised up again from death, and being joined with their souls
shall live everlastingly. Now, to make the matter more evident and plain that
this city of God and company of the chosen is the holy Catholic Church:
first, it is certain that the people of God is called effectually out of the
filth of other men, to know, and serve him, by Christ who does lighten their
minds, and move their hearts, through the power of the holy Ghost and
ministry of the word. And the whole company of them, who are so called, is
named the Church, by an excellency; not a common one, but a passing, eminent,
and most noble Church: as wherein the faithful all are comprehended that
either be, or have been, or shall be to the end from the beginning ofthe world.
Which is termed in Heb. 12.23.
scripture the Church of the first borne, who are written in heaven. Which
Ephesians. 1 5.
God did predestinate to be adopted in him self, according to the good pleasure
of his will. Which Ephesians. 4.16. and 5.23.
Christ being given to it by his Father, as a head to the body, loved as his
spouse, redeemed it from Satan, and quickneth it with his Spirit, having
suffered death him self to deliver us from the gulf of death. Moreover as it
is clear that this Church is called out of the rascal sort of the world, to
be partaker of the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven: so is it clear too
that it ought to be holy. For Esai. 1.4.
the holy one of Israel Ma^t. 7.23.
can not abide them who are workers of iniquity: Zach. 14.21.
neither shall any Cananite be in the house of the Lord of hosts: and Reu.
21.^7.
into the heavenly city there shall enter no unclean thing, nor whatsoever
works abomination, or lie. Christ therefore, the Savior of the Church his
body, who Romans 8.30.
as he called them who^ he predestinate, so justified them whom he called: Ephesians.
5.26.
having cleansed the Church from her sins by his blood, renueth her from the
filth of the flesh unto holiness; which he begins in this life, and
perfitteth in the life to come, when he shall present her without spot and
wrincle Reu. ^9.8.
a glorious spouse unto him self. So that, both the Church may well be termed
holy, and the communion of Saints the Churches communion: which militant on
earth is holy in affection, triumphant in heaven is holier in perfection, both
militant and triumphant is in Christ most holy. Finally, since God has called
the holy church not out of this or that country, not out of this or that
people, but out of all nations spread through the whole world: for that cause
the church is entitled Catholic, that is, universal: not Jewish, not Roman,
not English, not of one people or province, but universal and Catholic,
co^pacted as it were into one body out of all sorts of estates, sexes, ages,
and nations; Jews, and Heathens; Greeks, and Barbarians; bond, and free; men,
and women; old, and young; rich, and poor. For both the old Church (before the
birth of Christ) which saw the day of Christ to come, and was saved, did gather
children of God unto her self at first out of any people; afterward when the
grace of God shined chiefly among the people of Israel, she did join Which are
named prosel^tes. Mat. 23.^5. Act ^.10. and 13.4^.
conuertes to Israel out of the rest: and much more the new Church (called
since Christ was borne) has Esai. 5^.2.
enlarged her tabernacle (as Esaias the Prophet speaks) Mat. 28.19.
to all nations, beginning at Jerusalem, Iudaea, Samaria, and going forward
thence even to the uttermost ends of the earth. For God has not called the
circumcised Jews alone, Act. 1.8.
to be his Church, as the time was when Act. 10.28. and 11.2.
the Apostles thought through a little oversight, Galatin. de a^^an. cathol.
ver. lib. 9. c. 12.
the Jews in our days have too presumptuously weened: but Ephesians. 2. ver. 14.
Christ being crucified has broken the stop of the partition wall, ver. ^0.
and is become the chief stone of the corner, on which a dooble wall arises;
and as Psalm. 87.4.
David prophesied, the Egyptian, the Babylonian, the Tyrian, the Ethiopian,
the Philistine are borne in Sion; and, as Reu. 5.9.
the Elders (in whom is represented the company of the faithful) do sing unto
Christ, Thou have redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred, and
tongue, and people, and nation, and have made us kings and priests to our God,
and we shall reign upon the earth. Wherefore since the church, which the holy
scriptures do commend unto us, betokens the company and assembly of the
faithful, whom God has chosen, Christ has sanctified, and called out of all
nations to the inheritance of his own kingdom: the holy Ghost, who spoke by
the Prophets and Apostles, does warrantise me to resolve on my Conclusion, that
the holy catholic church which we believe is the whole company of Gods
elect^and chosen. You marvel perhaps why I propose this article of the
Christian faith to be discussed by disputation: as though either any man stood
in dout of it, or things not douted of were to be handled as doutfull. But if
you consider that the true meaning thereof, which I have opened, most agreeable
to the scripture, most comfortable to the faithful, is condemned and accursed
by the standerd-bearers of the church of Rome: you will cease to marvel. For
in Council. Constant. Sess. 15.
the Council of Constance, in which they condemned John Husse for an heretic,
they condemned these two sayings, as heretical, to be burned with him: Artic.
^.
that there is one holy universal Church which is the whole company of them
that are predestinate; and, Artic. 6.
that the Church, as it is taken in this sense for the company of them that are
predestinate, is the article of our faith. Which sayings of his to be counted
ungodly it seemed strange to me: and so much the more, because I perceived that
the Fathers (whose words the Papists will seem to make great account of when
they serve their purpose) did use the same squire to measure out the Catholic
church by. For Strom. lib. 7.
Clemens Alexandrinus does expressly call it the company of the elect, into
which are gathered the faithful and just, whom God did predestinate before the
creation of the world. Likewise In epist ad Ephesians. cap. 3.
Ambrose, having said that the honor of God the father is in Christ and in the
church, defines the church to be a people which God has vouchsafed to adopt
to him self. Furthermore Moral. in Job. lib. 28. cap. 9.
Gregory the Bishop of Rome affirms that all the elect are contained within
the compass and circuit of the church, all the reprobate are without it. And
In Cantic. sermon. 78.
Bernard declaring the church to be the company of all the elect, which company
was predestinate before the world began, does touch it as a mystery which he
had learned of Paul, and says that he will boldly utter it. As for Austin, a
man of sharpest judgment of them all, he neither acknowledges Throughout all
his books De ciuitate Dei.
any city of God, but this elect church, in his most learned work touching the
city of God; and in another touching the catechizing of the unskillful, De
rudib. catechiz. cap. 20.
he says that all the holy and sanctified men, which are, which have been,
which shall be, are citizens of this heavenly Jerusalem; and in another, touching
baptism against the Donatists (against whom he urges the Catholic church
most) De bapt. cont. Donatist. l. 5. cap. 27.
he confesses that those things in the song of songs, the garden enclosed, the
fountain sealed up, the lilie, the sister, the spouse of Jesus Christ, are
meant of the holy and righteous alone, who are Jews inwardly by circumcision
of the heart, of which holy men the number is certain, praedestinate before the
foundation of the world. Wherefore, if the Prelates of the Romish Church had
had any reverence, I say not of the scriptu^es, over which they play the Lords
as they list; but of the Fathers, of whom as of orphans they bear men in hand
that they have undertook the wardship: they would never have wounded, or
rather burnt in Husses person, Clemens Alexandrinus, Ambrose, Gregory,
Bernard, and Austin, who taught the same point that is condemned in Husse,
namely, that the holy universal Church is the whole company of the elect of
God. But it is (I see) an undoubted truth which Fran. Duar. de ^acr. eccles.
minist. l. 5. c. 11.
a learned man, liking the Popes religion, but not the Popes presumption, has
set down in writing: that amongst the Popes and men like to Popes it is a sure
principle, If wrong he to be done, it is to be done when thou may get a
kingdom by it. For they wrest the holy catholic Church (taught us in the
Creed) from the right meaning, to the intent they may be kings, and hoyse up
the sails of their own ambition: in as much as they apply it, like unskillful
men, if they do it ignorantly; impious, if wittingly; they apply it (I say)
not to the Catholic Church, but to ye militant; nor to that, as it is chose^,
but as it is visible, mingled with hypocrites and ungodly persons. The cause,
why they do so, is, that all Christians, by reason they believe the holy
Catholic Church, may be induced to think that the visible Church must be held
for Catholic, and a visible monarchy must be in the visible Church, and the
Pope is Prince of the visible monarchy, and all Christians must be subject to
him as Prince. For, this to be the mark whereat the Popes shoot, it is as
clear as the light by the very Extrauagants (as they are termed) of the Canon
law, in that royal decree of Extra. c. vnam sanctam. De maioritat. and
obedient.
Boniface the eighth, beginning with these words, One holy Catholic Church.
Where from one Catholic Church, without the which there is no salvation, nor
forgiveness of sins, he creeps up to the head of the Church eue^ Jesus
Christ, and from Christ the head he slippeth down by stealth unto Christ's
vicar, one and the same head (as he says) with Christ, even the Pope of Rome:
whom yet to be the head of the Catholic Church not him self would say,
(unless perhaps in a dream,) for the^ he should be head of the triumphant
church, which is a part of the Catholic: but he would be head of the visible
church, which he names Catholic, thereby the more easily to deceive the
simple: who being astonished and snared with that name, the fowler shuts up
the net, and concludes, that every earthly creature if he will be saved must
of necessity be subject to the Pope. Thus says Pope Boniface. But unless the
Pope him self and the Fathers of his Council of Trent, being thereto forced
by the truth of scripture, confess against them selves, that the holy
Catholic Church does not signify the visible company of the Church militant,
consisting of the good and badde mixed together; which sense the Papists give it
with their Pope Boniface to the intent they may be kings: I will not request
you to believe me in it. For, in the Catechism which was set forth by Pope
Pius the fifth according to the decree of the Council of Trent, Catechism.
Council Trid. in exposit. symb.
having said that the Church (in the Creed) does chiefly signify the company
of the good and bad together, they add, that Christ is head of the Church as
of his body, so that, as bodily members have life from the soul, in like sort
the faithful have from Christ's spirit: and therefore it is holy because it
has received the grace of holiness and forgiveness of sins from Christ, who
sanctifies and washes it with his blood: and it is called Catholic, because
it is spread in the light of one faith from the east to the west, receiving men
of all sorts, be they Scythians or Barbarians, bond or free, male or female;
containing all the faithful which have been from Adam even till this day, or
shall be hereafter till the end of the world, pro^essing the true faith, and
being built upon Christ, upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets. Pope
Pius therefore and the Fathers of the Council of Trent affirm that the
Church, which is specified in the Creed, is the body of Christ. Now, the
scripture teaches that Ephesians. 4.^6.
all the body of Christ is quickened and increased by the holy Ghost, as if he
were the soul of it. But the bad and wicked are neither quickened, nor
increased. Then are they no part of the body of Christ: and therefore neither of
the Church. Pope Pius and the Fathers of the Council of Trent affirm that the
Church is holy, being washed by the blood of Christ, endued with grace of
holiness, and with forgiveness of sins. Now, Romans 4.7.
blessed are they whose sins are forgiven: Matt. 5.8.
blessed are the clean in heart, for they shall see God. But the bad and
wicked shall neither see God, nor are blessed. Therefore neither have they
forgiveness of sins, nor are their hearts clean. Then are they no part of the
church. Pope Pius and the Fathers of the Council of Trent affirm that the
church is called Catholic, in respect that it contains all the faithful
from the first to the last, professing the true faith, and being built upon
Christ. But the wicked and hypocrites either are not faithful; or, if they may
be called so, yet they profess not the true faith; or, if they profess it,
yet they are not built on Christ. For they who are built on Christ, are Mat. 7.
ver. 24.
built on a rock, ver. 25.
and shall never be removed. But the wicked shall be removed. Then are they no
part of the church. Yet they must needs be a part of the church if the name of
church did signify the visible church (as we call it) consisting of the good
and bad. Wherefore it follows thereof that the church mentioned in ye Creed,
betokens not the visible church, that is, the company of good and bad
together: which it is imagined to do by the builders of the Popes monarchy.
Thus, as Caiaphas in the Gospel although he spoke many things amiss against
Christ, yet, Ioh. 11. ver. 49
being the high Priest that same year, he said well in this speech, though
ill meant too, ver. 50.
that it was expedient for them that one man should dye for the people: so the
Pope and the Fathers of the Council of Trent, being the high Priests that
same year, though they meant ill, in saying that the holy catholic church,
which we believe, is the company of good and bad mixed together: yet, being lead
and moved by some divine force to speak better then they meant, they added
such an exposition, that their own doctrine is overthrown by it, the error
of the Council of Constance is discovered, and the truth of the scripture
confirmed and established. Wherefore I may justly conclude against the Papists
out of the Pope him self and the Council of Trent, that all the good and holy
men, and none but they, do make the holy Catholic church. But seeing our faith
must have a better ground then humane decrees either of Popes or Councels,
whose breath is in their nosethrils, whose houses are of clay, and their
foundation is sand: therefore let us stay our selves on that conclusion which
I made before on warrant of the holy Ghost, who has spoken to us by the
Apostles and Prophets; The holy Catholic Church, which we believe, is the whole
company of Gods elect and chosen. And let this suffice for the first Conclusion.

The second does follow: The fifth conclusion.
The church of Rome is not the catholic church, nor a sound member of the
catholic church. Of the which position that we may the better perceive the
drift and truth: we must search somewhat deeper, and fetch the beginnings of
particular churches out of the fountain whence they flow. God, having chosen
in his eternal purpose the holy catholic church, that is, all his children,
to be the heirs of his kingdom, and to triumph in heavenly glory with him and
his elect Angels: does first of all send them abroad into the earth, as it
were into a camp, there to serve him in war against the flesh, the world,
the devil, and all the powers of darkness under the banner of Christ, that
they may come conquerours out of warfare to the triumph, and may strive
lawfully before they be crowned. Whereto that they may be the stronger made and
better furnished, to endure the labor and hardness of warfare: God 1. Pet. 1.23.
begets them a new by his word, (the word working effectually through the
holy Ghost,) as it were by seed; and 1. Cor. 3.2.
with the same word he nourishes them, as with milk; Heb. 5.14.
strengthens them, as with meat; armeth them, Ephesians. 6. ver. 17.
as with a sword of the Spirit; and frames them ver. 16.
a shield of faith, wherewith they may quench the fiery darts of the wicked
one. Yea, the more to harten them against all dangers and deceites of enemies
with the skill of warfare and sure hope of victory: he binds them with
sacraments, as with bonds of obedience, and pledges of his grace; he wills
them to Psalm. 50.^5.
call for his help in distresses, and promises it if they call for it, he
appoints them warlike discipline, to keep them selves in order, and guard
them safer from their enemies: to be short, be delivers them the whole trade
of warfare, opened by himself the General of the army, and written in his
word. To the intent then, that all the soldiers of God, who be sent at diverse
times into diverse countries to serve him in this warfare, might learn it, and
practice it: he has ordained, as civil assemblies and societies, for ye
mainteinance of this life; so likewise, for the next, ecclesiastical. In which
ecclesiastical societies and assemblies it is his will and pleasure that there
should be captains to teach, and soldiers to learn, both of them warriors
faithfully to practice and wage the war of the Lord. And these are called
churches, but particular churches to distinguish them from the catholic:
because they are diverse parts of the catholic, that is, the whole church;
diverse members, of one body, diverse bands, of one army. Which, for the diverse
regard of place, and time, wherein they go to warfare, are specified by diverse
names. In regard of place: the church, which served God at Jerusalem, is called
the church of Jerusalem: that which at Samaria, the church of Samaria: that
which at Ephesus, the church of Ephesus; that which at Rome, the church of
Rome; they which in England, in France, in Germany, are called the English, the
French, the Dutch churches. In regard of time: we say the Jewish church in the
days of Moses, of David, of Ezekias; the Roman under Nero, Constantine,
Boniface; the English in King Henry's reign, King Edwardes, Queen Mary's: or
how soever else the difference of times be noted. Now, the rule of reason and
honesty would that every one of these churches, ordained by God to that end,
should bring forth the children of God, as a mother; yield dutiful honor to
God, as a spouse; and fight the spiritual battles of God, as a valiant and
faithful army. But Reu. 12. ver. 9.
the devil, the enemy of the chosen woman, in nature That is to say, an
adversary.
a Satan, in subtletie a serpent, in fiercenes a dragon, ver. 13. and 17.
which furiously pursues the woman and her seed, Mat. 13.25.
sows rares among the wheat in the field of the Lord, that is to say, he
mingleth his soldiers with the soldiers of God in the camp, and amongst the
godly he foysteth in hypocrites, that they, being felow-souldiors in show, but
traitors in deed, may corrupt the army. And him self provoke the faithful
to revolt from God, by all his practices, open, and secret; force, and fraud:
some time by fire and sword of tyrants, some time by baits of pleasures, and
wealth, some time by the pretense of religion, and charity. By the which
means he procures often, partly through the craft and cunning of hypocrites,
chiefly when they are made captains of some band, partly through the frailty
and infirmity of the elect, whom flesh and blood do weaken: that the church,
which is billed to the warfare of Christ, knows not or cares not for the
trade of warfare, and serves perhaps under her captains banner, but
retchlessely, and loosely, perhaps is betrayed to the enemy by her watchmen,
while either they do fall a sleep, or deal falsely. And so comes that to
pass at the length, which Esai. 1.21. Eze. 16.15. Hof. 2.2. and the rest in
many places.
the Prophets lament in the church of the Jews, and too many churches since
Christ's time have felt. that ye church, which should be a mother, is a
stepmother; and she, whose faith is plight to Christ, becomes an adulteress;
and bands of soldiers breaking their promise, yea their oath, do rebel
against the Highest. So Gal. 1. ver. ^.
the churches of Galatia when they had believed the Gospel of Christ, and
their names were billed by their own consent to serve in his wars, ver. 6.
and 7
were removed away (by such as troubled them) to an other Gospel. So 2. Cor.
11.^.
S. Paul fears for the Church of Corinth, least, as the serpent beguiled Eve
through his suttletie, so their minds should be corrupted and seduced from the
simplicity that is in Christ. So Christ him self teaches us, that Reu. ^.^5.
the church of Pergamus was stained with the filth of the Nicolaitans: that
Reu. 3. ver. 13.
the church of Laodicea was blind, naked, lukewarm, neither hot nor cold:
that the church of Sardis was in part, ver. 1.
dead; in part, ver. 2.
ready to dye; though alive, in part. The assemblies therefore of the churches
militant, called visible churches, ver. 4.
which do contain the good together with the bad, the chosen with the
reprobate, the faithful with the treacherous, the holy with the hypocrites,
Matt. 3.1^.
chafe with corn, Matt. 13.27.
tares with wheat, 2. Tim. 2.20.
wooden and earthen vessels, with vessels of gold and silver, some of them for
honor, and some unto dishonor: I say, these visible churches may do their
duty faintly, may leave it altogether undone, may be discharged of their oath,
and dismissed from soldiers service; they may be sick of lesser diseases and
infirmities, they may be of a deadly pestilence, they may lose the spirit of
Christ, and so dye. Furthermore, to make it easier to be seen what churches
ought to be accounted dead, what churches sick, what churches whole, and
sound: we have to consider the causes of death, of sickness, and of health.
The causes of these things do come in men's bodies, (as Galen. de sanit. tuend.
lib 1. cap. 2.
Physicians teach,) partly, from the seed that we are begotten of: partly,
from the food wherewith we are nourished. Whereof the one appears in
sickness and diseases that come by inheritance; such as are derived from the
parents to the children: the other, as it has a great force in all men, so
experience shows that it has greatest force in armies. For Appian. de bell.
Parth.
the soldiers who served Marcus Antonius, being feign to eat roots for want
of corn, fell upon an herb which brought them first to madness, and afterward
to death: and De re militar. l* 3. c. 2.
Vegetius (a writer of the trade of warfare) giving charge that soldiers
drink not of marish waters, says that naughty water is like unto poison, and
does breed the plague in them who drink of it. Not unlike is the case of
spiritual death, diseases, and health, in the bodies of Churches. For they do
either live in p^rfit good health, or fall into sickness, or come to their
death, according to the nature of their seed, and food. Now, the seed
whereof, and food with the which they are wont and ought to be begotten anew,
and nourished, is the word of God (as S. 1. Pet. 1 23. ^ 2.2.
Peter witnesses) preached by the servants and ministers of Christ. Therefore
in what Churches the ministers do preach the word of God pure, sincere, and
vncorrupt, that it may breed good juice and blood in them through the inward
woorking of the holy Ghost: those churches must we count to be ^ound, and
whole: some of them indeed more sound, then other some, according as the word
is more purely prea^^ed, and the spirit works more effectually, but all of
them, sound. But where the word of God, either is not preached, so that there
grows a famine; or is preached corruptly, mixed with man's word as it were with
leaven, or darnell, or poison: as they who receive no food are like to dye
through hunger, and Wier. de praest^g. Daem^n. l. 3. c. 17.
such as eat bread made of corn and ^^rnel do fall into a light fren^^^; so
must we needs judge that churches, whose food is either none, or naught, are
apt to diseases, and near to their death. For Amos declares that men are
cast away through want of the word, in that he tells Israel, that Amos 8.11.
God will send a famine and a thirst of hearing the word of the Lord: which
when they shall seek for to and fro, and find no where, it shall come to
pass that virgins and young men shall faint with thirst, and fall, and never
rise again. Now, that the corruption of the word does hurt too, the Apostle
notes in aduertising Timothee, that 1. Tim. 6. ver. 3.
they, who teach other doctrine, and consent not to the wholesome words of
Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness, ver. 4.
are (...).
sick, and do dote about noisome folies, which edify not to godly faith: in so
much that ^. Tim. 2.17*
their word does fret as a kind of canker, which having taken hold of one part
of the body, does eat out the next parts by little and little, until the whole
body at last be clean consumed. Which if it come to pass, as it must of
necessity unless the better remedy be speedily provided for healing of the
body: that which was a body, does become a carcass, and is no longer a church:
it is left destitute of the spirit of God, which is the soul thereof, and of
the souls instrument, that is, the word of God. And this death is threatened by
Christ to the Jews (in the old church) refusing him their Messiah; Mat. 21.^^.
therefore shall the kingdom of God be taken from you, and given to a nation
which shall bring forth the fruits of it: and (in the new church) to the
Ephesia^s having left their first love; Reu. 2.5.
I will come against thee shortly, and will remove thy candlestick out of his
place except thou amend. Which two things foretold by our savior Christ were
fulfilled in the destruction of the two churches: of the church of ye Jews,
within a few years, when the gospel was removed from them to the Gentiles; of
the church of Ephesus, many ages after, when having been sick first of sundry
heresies, it died a while ago of the plague of Mahomet. Thus I have declared,
as briefly as I could, how particular churches are called members of the
catholic: how they are ordained to learn and practice Go^s service: how the
good in them are intermingled with the bad, the godly with hypocrites: finally,
what their health is, what their diseases be, and when they must be counted
sound, when unsound. Which points being marked, my pains will be the lesser in
opening the Conclusion: the two stemmes whereof on what roots they grow you
perceive already. The church of Rome is not the catholic church: it is no
sound member of the catholic church. The church of Rome is not the catholic
church. What can be more clear? For the catholic church is the church
universal: the church of Rome is particular. So that (in my judgment) the
Papists speak monstrously, when As Bristow Moriu. 12. with this special note
in the m^rgent of his book, Note* the Roman church the catholic church.
they call the Roman church, the catholic church, and make them all one. Some
will say perhaps, that when they call it catholic, they mean it to be sound
and of a right belief, such as does hold the catholic faith: as the Cod. de
s^mma Trin. and ^ide cathol.
civil law does term the right believers, catholic Christians, and the church
of Afrike is named catholic by Epist. 55. ad Co^nelium
Cyprian. Yet that is false too. For they give the title of catholic church of
Rome, that (...) by ^he epistle of Cardinal Cusanus written to the Bohemians.
Cochlaeus hi^^or. Mussitar. lib. 11.
they may put into the heads of the unskillful that that is the church out of
which there is no salvation. But out of the church of Rome there have been
saved innumerable, and shall be: out of the catholic church, not one. But let
it be granted that they mean by [catholike] a church holding the right faith.
I deny that the church of Rome does hold the right faith: and that is the other
part of my Conclusion; it is no ^ound member of the catholic church. Now when
I deny it to be a sound member of the catholic church: I mean not that it
languisheth of a little sickness or disease not dangerous, which may seem rather
to have abated somewhat of exquisite health, then have bereft her of all
health. For, as De sa^it. tu^nd. lib. 1. cap. ^. and 5.
Galen teaches of the health of the body, that it has a reasonable breadth as
you would say, and certain degrees as it were of perfitnes, that they who are
able to go about their business and do affairs of life are to be counted
whole, though they enjoy not a most perfect health: so in the health of churches
I deem there are certain degrees of sincerity, that they who do the
functions of spiritual life reasonably well are to be counted ^ound, although
they attain not to a most absolute soundness. And for that cause, as we judge
our own churches to be sound, although Appendix Apolog. eccles. Angl.
there remain some distemper in them by the relikes of those diseases
wherewith the contagion of the church of Rome had cast them down so, that they
could not yet be recovered fully: in like sort Apologia ^ccles. Angli^a^
we judge of the churches of Germany, which are troubled with the error of
consubstantiation as it were with the grudging of a little ague, if other wise
they hold Christian faith, and love, soundly, and sincerely. But the church of
Rome is not distempered with a little ague, such as hinders not the functions
of life greatly: but is sick of a canker, or rather of a leprosy, or rather of
a pestilence, in so much that she is past hope of recovery, unless our Savior
Christ the heavenly physician do give her wholesome medicines to purge her of
pernicious humors. And therefore I pronounce that the church of Rome is no
sound member of the catholic church. Which I will prove by two reasons, the
one, of the causes; the other, of the effects: whereof from the one, diseases
do arise; in the other, they show them selves; by them both they are surely
proved. I would to God I might discourse hereof at large, according as the
weightines of the things requires. But we must be content to do, as time will
license us. You will pardon me therefore, I trust, if I run them over somewhat
hastily, and (as they say) touch and go. I will hold out my finger toward the
well head: guess you the lion by his paws. Concerning the causes which do
breed diseases and sickness in the church, it is (as I have touched already)
clear and certain, that they are either the want of food of Gods word, or the
having of it corrupted. In the which respect, Christ, who gives charge that
Ioh. 21.16.
his sheep be fed, charge that Matt. 28.20.
they be taught to observe those things which he commanded his Apostles. And
Peter, having showed that 1. Pet. 1.23.
the faithful are begotten a new by Gods word, exhorts them to 1. Pet. 2.2.
desire the milk of the word, the sincere milk, and (...).
not corrupt with any trumperie, that they may grow thereby. And they who are
warned Matt. 23.^.
to hear the Pharisees sitting in the chair of Moses, are warned Matt. 16.6.
to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees. Wherefore a church, that will be
whole and sound, must neither be famished with want of Gods word, nor have it
corrupted. But the church of Rome does bring in both corruption, and want of
the word: nor only bring them in, but also maintain them obstinatly, as
wholesome. The church of Rome therefore is not whole and sound: nay she seems
rather to be mad and frantike. For she brings in corruption of the word,
(to begin with that,) by mingling and adulterating the word of God with man's
word, not one way but sundry. First, in that she gives Council. Trident. Sess.
4.
authority canonical, that is divine authority, to the books called
apocrypha, which are humane. Against the truth of the holy scripture, which is
gainsaid flatly by 3. ^sdr. 4.43. and 5.73. Ecclesiastic. 46.23 and 48.10. 2.
Mac. cap. 1.19. and 2.1.
certain points in the apocrypha: against the clear evidence of things
therein recorded, 4. Esdr. 10.20. and 2. Maccab. 2.4. 1. Maccab. 1.16. and 9.5.
touching Antiochus. Se^ the Annotations of Franciscus Iunius on the Apocrypha.
which by their repugnancie one unto another do show that men were autours of
them against the consent and judgment of the church, of the The Church of the
Jews. Hier. praefat. in Judith and caet. lib. apocr. Josephus c^nti. Apion. l.
1. Andrad. desens. fid. Trid. lib. 3.
old church wholly, and of the ^oncil. L^^d. can. 59. Athana. in synopsi sacra^
scripturae. Nazianzen. in carminib Epiphan. lib. de mensur. and ponder. Hieron.
praesat. in libr. Sol^m.
best part of the new. Secondly, in that she receives Council. Trid. Sess. 4.
traditions of men with equal reverence and religious affection, as she does
the scripture. As though 2. Tim. 3.16. See the first Conclusion.
the holy scripture, the most exact and perfect squire of Gods will, and rule
of righteousness and wisdom, sufficed not for faith and manners: or the
spirit of God could gainsay him self, which must be imported by this of
traditions, some whereof do fight one against another, some against the
scripture. In sooth this point is handled with a dutiful care and regard of
scripture, which has no greater reverence at Rome, then traditions: and that
all traditions are not observed there, it is plain by Ba^il. de spir. sanc^.
cap. 27. Epiph. haer. 7^.
the Fathers whom Bristow Mo^. 9. and 46. and Andr. ^^fen. fid. Trid. lib. 2.
them selves allege. Thirdly, in that she wills Council. Trid. Sess. 4.
the Latin translation of the Bible (commonly called S. Ieroms) to be received
throughout as sacred and canonical, and not to be refused on any pretense.
Whereas yet (to let go the judgment of S. Comment. in prophet. and nou. ^estam.
Ierom, and other August. de doctr. Christian. l. 16.2. cap. 15. Hilar. in
Psalm. 2. and the rest who prefer the translation of the Seventy
in^erpreters. See August. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 18. cap. 43.
ancient Fathers,) the Papists them selves, such as are most expert in the
toungs amongst them, acknowledge that translation to have missed sometimes the
meaning of the holy Ghost, and not the words only. Even In epist. ad Clement.
sept.
Pagninus namely in the old testament; Annot. prior. in Pandect.
Budaeus in the new: Defens. fid. Trid. lib. 4.
Andradius, and Tom. 8. Bibli. Reg. in praefat.
Arias Montanus in them both. Fourthly, in that ( Council. Trid. ^ess. 4.
about expounding of the scripture) she condemns all senses and meanings
thereof which are against the sense that her self holds, or against the
Fathers consenting all in one. Whereby it falls out that the sense and
meaning of the holy Ghost shall be refused often; but meanings and senses
devised by men, though crossing one an other, yet if they be current for the
time, and practiced, (as a Cusan. ad Bohemos ep. 2.
Cardinal says,) shall go for authentical: the baggage, which the School
men have s^iled Divinity with, out of the Philosophers puddles and their own,
shall be accounted holy: the things which some Fathers have handled more
soundly, shall be set aside as humane inventions though they agree with Gods
word; but other, in the which they were ouerseene through weakness of natural
affection or reason, shall be approved as Gods word, though they proceed from
man's fancy. Fifthly, in that she coopleth Council. Trid. ^ess. 6. cap. 10.
with the commandments of God, the commandments of the church, that is to
say, of men: and (that is more) she coopleth therewith these commandments, not
as things indifferent, but as necessary to salvation. So what soever filth,
devotion, as it is named, indeed superstition, has brought or shall bring in,
that must be deemed to be pure religion: and in vain shall the Lord be
worshipped of us, Matt. 15.9.
as of the Jews in old time, with the commandments of men: and good intentes
(as they call them) 1. Sam. 15.23.
which are abominable to God, shall be preferred before obedience: and
voluntary religion condemned by Col. 2.23.
the scriptures, shall be taken up as a most holy service of the Lord. Last of
all, in that she appoints Council. T^id. Sess. 25.
images to be had in churches, for the instruction of the people, as books (so
Greg. registr lib. 9. ep. 9.
one supposes) which By the word, idiotae, (which Gregory uses in this point)
he means the unlearned that can not read things written. Of whom he says,
that painting has the same use for idiotes, which writing has for them that
read.
idiotes may read in. O miserable idiotes, the instructing of whom is
committed to a stock, Iere. 10.8.
which instructs to vanities; whose teacher is an image, that is, Hab. 2.18.
a teacher of lies, if we believe the Prophets. And is it any marvel if they
be naughty scholars, whose masters are dumb idols, the doctors of errors?
The church of Rome therefore has brought in such corruption of the word of
God, what by the apocrypha, what by traditions, what by faults of the
translation, what by the sense of her holding, what by commandments of the
church, what by the teachers of idiotes: that she seems to have mingled the
sustenance of life not with filth, but with poison; and the wine of God not
with water, but with venoome; and the bread of Christ not with leaven, but with
ratsbane, or rather (if I might speak so) mens-bane. As for want of Gods word,
(which is the other cause of sickness) how wretchedly she has pined her
children therewith: our ancestors felt by long experience, and aged men may
remember, and histories of the church do witness, and they who are under the
Popish yoke know. For though she permitted, sometimes, in some places, perhaps,
a small parcel, of the word of God, (if I may call that Gods word which
sauoured more of men's devises then of God) to be touched, in the presence and
assembly of the people, by common cryers, preachers, such as they were: yet she
has not only not permitted to Christians, but also has hindered, with no
less impiety then inhumanitie, yea, and hinders still that abundance and
plenty which they ought to have, as it is written, Col. 3.16.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously with all wisdom. For
whereas this plenty is gotten and obtained by two special means, to weete, by
hearing, and by reading; the one commanded all in Church Assemblies publicly,
ye other allowed privately to every man at home, both used and approved by the
rules of Deu. 6.9. and 11.18. and 31.11. Luke. 11.28. Reu. 1.3.
the holy Ghost, and the practice of Nehem. 8 9. Luke 4.17. Act. 8.30. and
13.15. and 17.11.
holy companies, and the judgment of All the ancient Churches: as appears by
Ierom, Epist. ad Laetam. de institut. filiae. ad Demetr. de virgin. ad Fur. de
viduit. seruand. By Chrysostom. In Joan. homil. 16. Prooemio in epist. ad Romans In
epist. ad Col. hom. 9. and the rest of the Fathers.
holy churches: our Romanists pretending that horrible confusion will ensue
thereof, and the church of Christ shall be like to Babylon, not to Jerusalem,
(as Cardinal Dialog. de sacr. vern. legend.
Hosius says), if the holy scriptures be read in mother toongs, do keep them
sealed up in a strange tongue, and sound them out so in their
Church Assemblies, that the people may have eyes, and not read them; ears,
and not hear them. In the which fact whither they show them selves more
disobedient to God, or injurious to the people; it is hard to say: since God
has expressly commanded that 1 Cor. 14.26.
all things must be done to edify, that is, to build up; and things not
understood (I trow) build not up, Genesis 11.7.
no not the tower of Babylon. But by this means the people can not hear the
word of God publicly, because he speaks to them in an outlandish tongue, and
a strange language. Which thing Esai. 28.11.
the Lord laid on the Jews for a punishment: the Roman Church does thrust it
on Christians for a benefit. Much less are they able privately to read it:
because they neither have the scriptures translated into their mother toongs;
and many (in the time of our predecessors) were condemned as heretics, for
reading part thereof which they had translated. Wherefore since the plenty of
the word of God, which it is a point of very heinous wickedness not to procure
for Christians, more heinous not to allow it them, most heinous not to permit
it them, is not only not permitted but hindered by the Church of Rome, and
hindered not only by laws but by fire too: I will not use sharper words
against her tyranny; only this I say, that he must be impudent needs who
would deny that she has brought in a famine of the word. The causes then of
sickness, are manifestly found in the Church of Rome, both for the corruption
and scarcity of the food of life. Now, such as the cause is, such is the
effect: and out of bitter fountains there issue bitter waters. The less
marvel is it that her effects and functions bewray sore diseases, such as
must of likelihood proceed from such causes. For a sound and whole Church, the
faculties and powers whereof are not impaired, has four special functions,
as Chiefly the Acts of the Apostles, and the epistles to the Corinthians, and
Timothee. Act. 2.^^. and 10.33. and 20.7. 1. Cor. 5.4. and 11.^0. and 14.26.
and 15.2. and 16.2. 1. Tim. 2.1. and 3.15. and so forth through the ^est.
the scriptures show: namely, to teach the faith, to minister the sacraments,
to pray, and practice discipline according to the word of God. But neither is
the faith of Christ purely taught, nor sacraments rightly ministered, nor
prayers made religiously, nor discipline duly practiced by the Church of Rome.
The Church of Rome therefore is not whole and sound: no more then was his
daughter who said unto Christ, Mark. 5.23.
my daughter is at the point of death. For, to say a little of each of these in
order, the sum of the doctrine of the Christian faith is the salvation of the
faithful by Jesus Christ the lamb of God. Of the which salvation Ephesians. 2.4.
the beginning comes from the grace of God, Romans 3.2^.
the substance consists in the righteousness of God, Ephesians. ^.^.
the end is referred to the glory of God by the holy scriptures. This holy
religion which makes God all in all for our salvation, giving the whole to him
and taking it from men, that we may trust not in flesh but in the Lord only,
does savor of Christian modesty too much, it contenteth not the Roman pride
and arrogance. And therefore as Prometheus (in He^od. in Theogonia.
the Greek fables) is said to have allotted part of a sacrifice to Jupiter,
part to him self: even so the Prometheus of the Popish Church (in the Roman
faith) assigns and refers the beginning of our salvation in part to Gods
grace, in part to the power of nature; the substance of our salvation in part
to Gods righteousness, in part to man's merits; the end of our salvation in part
to Gods glory, in part to the honor and woorship of creatures. Neither is this
done by some one Prometheus, or Epimetheus rather: but by ye whole company of
the Epimetheans, even the Council of Trent, though closely sometimes to cover
their deceit with darkness, yet so, that Catechism. e. dit ex (...). Council.
Triden. Andrad in orthod. explicat. Ruard. Tapp. in artic. Theolog. Louan.
Card. Hosius in confess. Petricou. Ius canonicum.
their expositours bring their hidden meanings out into the light. For, first
and foremost, Council* Trid. Sess. 6. cap. ^.
they will have the natural power and ability of their own will ( free will
they term it) to be concurrent (as they speak) with the grace of God, that
is, a party-worker with it: as if God did only relieve the will being weak,
and raise it up being faint, not renew it being corrupted, and repair it being
perished. Besides, cap. 6. Hos. confes^. Petricou. c. 73. See Ke^^nicij examen
concilij T^ident.
they imagine that infidels and faithless men do certain works (they call
them works of preparation) in which, though being done without faith, they
sin not; nay, they procure the grace of God thereby. So they bring to pass
as much as lies in them, at least they endeavor, what by the power of
free will, what by their works of preparation: that all be not attributed to
(...).
the grace of God, which grace is with them, as 1. Cor. 15.^0.
Paul says of himself, but to Gratia Dei mecum.
the grace of God with them, (as those words of Paul are ill expressed in In
the Latin translation commonly named S. Jerome. Though in this point S. Ierom
vari^th from it. For he translateth it well, not grat^a Dei me^u^* but g^^tia
Dei quae ^ecu^ est. Con^. Pel^gia^ ^. ^. c. 3.
their translation,) that is, some what to Gods grace, and somewhat to their
own merit, at least as to (...) by the (...)* Meritum co^grui.
a merit of meetenes and conueniency. As for the righteousness of God, which is
given us in Christ, while we are cleansed from our sins and acquitted as
righteous before Gods iudgement-seate by the sacrifice of Christ offered for
the faithful, and the obedience of Christ imputed to the faithful: (...).
Trid. (...). c^p. 7. and (...).
they contemn this righteousness, yea and condemn it as heretical. In the
steed whereof as of a vain righteousness, or at least to it as to a
righteousness imperfect, they put the righteousness of men, consisting of their
own woorks and merits of woorthines: works and merits, wrought by the grace
of Christ, they will say, I grant; yet of their own works, and (...).
merits of woorthines, (as the Schoolmen name them,) that is to say, the
woorthines whereof does deserve and merit everlasting life. That so they may
enjoy it, (...) elec. no^ynam. Malto na^que g^oriosia, e^t i^^os quasi victores
and t^^^mphatores c^m pol^^dere, ^anquam pal^^^ suis sudo^^bas debitam.
not of gift, but of duty; by their own merit, not by Christ's; as
triumphers, not as suitors; not as beggars, but as conquerors: after the
glorious vant of the In explicat. (...). Theol. (...) ^^pper. some. 2. Artic. 9.
Louan-diuinitie. To yt which purpose they do not extenuate only the
worthiness of the merits of Christ, in so much that they supply the weakness
thereof Council. Trid. Sess. 14 cap. 8. and 9. Sess. 21. cap. 9. Sess. 22. cap.
2. and 6. Sess. 25. Decr. de Purgat. and de indulgent.
with their own merits, and other men's; with due works, and undue; with
Masses, Trentals, Pardons, Pilgrimages, with treasures of the church, with
prayers of the Saints, finally, wit satisfactions while they are alive, and
after death with pains to be endured in Purgatory: but also they extol and
lift up to the sky the woorthines of their own merits, professing most proudly
that Sess. 6. cap. 11.
they are able to do the law of God perfitly, and cap. 16.
truly to merit everlasting life: yea, Sess. 21. cap. 9. Hos. confess. Petric.
cap. 48. Extra. c. Vnigenitus. de paenit. and remiss.
to do more then they are bound by Gods law, even works (as they term them)
of supererogation, thereby to help Mat. 25.8.
foolish virgins with their oil. And hence it comes too, that they do no
less extenuate their own sins, then they extol their own virtues: neither
make they only Conc. Trid. Sess. 14. cap. 5.
venial sins of mortal, and change Sess. 25. de reg. cap. 1. See Clementin.
can. Exiui. de verb. significat.
the commandementes of God into counsels: but also deny Sess. 5. de peccat.
original. artic. 5.
concupiscence to be sin, acquitting fleshly lusts (wherewith we being
pricked do rebel against the Lord) from gilt of transgression. By the which
doctrine, how much so ever they add to their own merits, or take away from
their own sins, while they go about to be justified by works: yet gain
they nothing else but that with a wonderful tormenting of conscience they
mistrust still, and stand in dout of their salvation. Which thing themselves
deny not: Sess. 6. cap. 9. ca. 13. and 16.
nay, they teach that they ought to dout, and mistrust, because they know not
whether they have merits enough. So that we may justly say that their doctrine
is not a doctrine of faith, and belief, but of mistrust, and dout rather. And
what marvel is it, that they, who pluck away so much from the grace and
righteousness of God, do abate no less of the glory of God? whose woorship and
honor they communicate and impart, I say not Sess. 2 5 in^^cat. and venerat.
Sanctor.
with Saints, with elect Angels, with the blessed Virgin, Sess. 5. art. 5. and
6. can. 23.
whom they make equal to Christ in being free from all sins: but (which is
more shameful) Sess. 25. l^^ reliq. sanctor. and sacris imag.
with relics, with images, with scurfe of all scurfe, and things most vile
and contemptible, against the Lords commandment Mat. 4.10.
God only shall thou serve. The Schoolmen upon the Master of the sentences.
lib. 3. distinct. 9.
They make a distinction (I grant) that to these things they give a lesser
honor, called Dulia: but the greater honor called Latria, they give to God
only. Which is vain and false. For they give the greater honor, even Latria,
not only to Council. Trident. Sess. ^3. cap. 5.
the sacrament of the body of Christ, the consecrated bread, wherein they will
excuse themselves because As Bristow calls it, My Lord and my God. Motiu. 16.
And D. Allen, Dominum nostrum and De^m nostrum. De ^acrific. Eucharist. cap 41.
they hold it to be their Lord and God: but also to the cross of Christ, the
wodden cross, nay to the image thereof, as In Sum. Theol. part. 3. quaest.
25. art. 4.
Thomas of Aquine their Angelical Doctor teaches and confirms by the
practice of the church, and Comment. in Sum. Thom* Aquinat.
Cardinal Caietan likes it, nor does In orthodox. explicat. lib 9.
Andradius deny it, but defend it stoutly. Wherefore since the doctrine of the
faith of Christ does set forth unto us our wretchedness, and Gods goodness; our
naughtines, and Gods mercy; that we, through the knowledge of God and of our
selves, thinking of him religiously, and of our selves modestly, may conceive
assured trust, that salvation is given us in Christ, by the grace of God,
through the righteousness of God, to the glory of God: can there be any
fellowship and communion between this doctrine and the doctrine of the faith of
Rome, which planteth superstition, in steed of religion; pride, in steed of
modestly; douting, in steed of trusting; a Pharisaicall vanity, in steed of
Christian piety, that is (at one word) unfaithfulness, in steed of faith? Now,
what shall I say touching the sacraments? how Council. T^id. Sess. 7. de sac^am.
in genesis can. 1. and ^. and 11. and 1^.
those holy rites delivered us by Christ to seal the grace of God unto us,
have been increased in number, impaired in virtue, depraved with errors,
polluted with ceremonies, defiled with men's inventions, and spoiled of their
fruit by reason they were ministered in a strange tongue. With the which
anoyances to let pass in silence how greatly and grievously the Romanistes
have hurt baptism, whereof the substance yet and as it were the life has
been preserved whole and sound through Gods mercy: they have corrupted the
supper of the Lord so fowly, with so great and many errors and abuses, that
there is almost no token of his supper to be found in it. For they have made of
a sacrament, Se^s. 12. cap. 1. and 2.
a sacrifice; not a sacrifice of thanks giving, but propitiatory; nor
propitiatory as representing Christ, but truly and properly propitiatory; to
be offered by a Mass Priest, as by a new Priest after the order of Melchisedec;
and offered not only for the quick, but for the dead too; nor for the quick
and dead only to save them, but also to rid To which use they have a (...)
called ^^e Mass of S. Antonie.
their pigges from diseases, and to serve their turn for As if a poor woman's
hen ^e sick or lost, ^e may procure
whatsoever other chares. Mass to be said for it. A^an. de sacrific.
Eucharist. c. 32.
They offer up anew that Heb. 7.27. and 9.28. and 10.12.
one and only sacrifice, which being once offered has sanctified us for ever,
and make the death of Christ to be of no effect. They take away the humane
nature of Christ by the Council. Trident. Sess. 13. cap. 1.
real presence. They take away the holy sign, that is the sacrament, by cap.
4.
transubstantiation. They take away the right use of the communion by their
Sess. 22. cap. 6.
private Masses. They take away the ordinance of our Lord and Savior, they
take away the singular comfort of the faithful, they take away a most sweet
pledge of salvation, by their maimed Sess. 21. cap. 2.
communion under one kind. They take away almost religion it self, at least
they profane it with a cursed custom of superstition more then heathnish, in
that they carry a cake ( the body of Christ they call it) about Sess. 13. cap. 8.
in processions, to be worshipped as God: and before the Pope Ceremoniar. Romans
eccles. lib. 1. sect 2.5. and 12.
they mount it on a horse, with Which are carried before: as when Judas toake
Christ. Ioh. 19.3.
lanterns, and Hanging and sounding about the horses neck, as they use on
bel-weachers.
a bell, in a manner as Xenoph. Cyr. paed. lib. 8. Q. Curt. lib. 3.
the Persians did carry fire (their God) before the king of Persians. As for
public prayers, ordained to this end, that the people of God banding them
selves together (as Tertullian speaks) might do their suite and service to
God with joined force: the Romanistes not contented to rob God of his honor
by praying to creatures, yea to dumme creatures (which is more abominable)
oil, In Apologet.
stones, Council. Trid. Sess. 25. De inuocat. and ve^erat. sanctor. Andr^d.
orthod. expl. lib. 9.
crosses, images, saying to a stock, thou art my father, and to a stone, thou
have brought me forth, like m the idolaters in Jeremy; Council. Trid. Sess.
22. cap. 8.
they rob the people of God both of a duty, and of an aid, by praying in a
strange tongue; wherein neither can they pray together with them, nor be
stirred up thereby to true devotion. For it is a small fault in these men, to
Sess. 25. Decr. de purgator.
pray for the dead, that they may be rid out of the pains of Purgatory: and
(...). Matt. 6.7.
to babble in praying with vain repetitions, The book entitled Jesus* Psalter
printed at Anwerpe by Fowler.
as if God were served By Qui ^ilo insertis nu^era^t sua (...) baccis. Bapt^^t.
Man^uan. Alfonsi lib. 4.
reckening up their mutteringes upon a pair of beads. Though these things
are also beside the word of God: and Romans 10.17.
therefore not of faith: and Romans 14.23.
therefore of sin. Yet in these men they are small fautes: at least they have
some coolour either of old custom, or of man's reason, or of zeal without
knowledge. But to pray to God in words not understood, like popiniayes, or
parrats, it is so absurd a matter in reason, so wicked in religion, so contrary
to the express 1. Cor. 14. ver. 37.
commandment of the Lord, and ver. 19.
judgment of the Apostle, and ver. 16. Justin. and Tertul in apolog. History
ecclesiast.
practice of the church, I say not of the church of the Jews, or of the
Syrians, or of the Greeks, or of the Latins, but the church generally, even of
all churches from the beginning of the world till the dark ages in which the
Barbarians of late did ouerflow them: that such as do use it, may be thought
to doat; such as defend it, seem to have a lust to be madd with reason. It
remains for me to entreat of discipline: whereof this is the order set down
in the scripture, that the church should be governed Number. 3.10. Heb. 5.4.
by the ministers of God, Exodus 25.30. Matt. 28.20.
according to the laws of God, 1. Cor. 12.7. Ephesians. 4.12.
to the salvation of Gods people. And what one of these points is kept in the
church of Rome? In the which the ministers of God are removed from governance
by the Pope: who, being not a voluntary Senator (as Philippie 13.
Tully iesteth at Asinius) himself chosen by him self, but a voluntary
tyrant, does take upon him self the rule of ye whole church. Who to get the
soueraintie that he aspireth to, does cast off the folly of Romans 13.1.
Paul, and of 1. Pet. 2.13.
Peter: and c. significasti. c. si diligenti. de ^oro compet.
neither will him self, nor suffers his to be subject unto higher powers.
Who c. ad Apostolicae. de re iudic. in sexto. ^lement. c. Pastoralis. de re
iudic. Franc. Gomar. in hist. occident. Ind. cap. 101.
autoriseth him self to give and take away the dominions and kingdoms of the
whole world, as if that all Princes held their right of him. Who chalengeth
Extra. c. vnam sanctam. de maiorit. and obedient.
the two swords (as he terms them,) the spiritual and temporal, and that
by the gospel, because it was said (for sooth) by the Apostles, Luke 22.38.
Behold, her^ are two swords. Who, having committed the temporal sword in
part to civil magistrates, and reserved it in part to him self; Did. 1^.
amp; 21* and 22. c. sign ficasti. de elect.
has put up the spiritual sword of all Pastors into his own sheath. Who of
church-ministers has made him self Onuphr. de orig. Cardin.
Cardinals, Cerem. eccl. Romans lib. 1. and 3.
fellows of kings, gardians of Princes, Protectors of nations, a Senate meet
for such a ^arquin. Who exacteth an oath of Clement. c. Romani. de iureiurand.
Emperors, of ^^o N. episco^^^. de iu^e^iur.
Bishops, of Conc^l Trid. Se^s. 25. de relo^^. c. 2. and Bulla Pij quart. de
iuram. form. in oppen. Council. T^id.
Christian common wealths, Uniuersities, and Churches to be obedient unto him.
Who Ceremon. Rom* e^cles. l. 1. sect. 5.
admits, I say not Act. 10.26.
Cornelius the Centurion, (which Peter yet would never have done,) but the
Lords of Centurions, even Kings and Keisars, Emperors and Empresses, to
kiss his blessed feet. Finally, who Ceremon. Romans eccl. and Platin. de vit.
Pont.
being in Princely attire, and accompanied with Princely train; served not by
common, but by noble men; wearing, not a single, but a tripl^ Crown; Canonist.
extra. Johan. vigefim. secund. cap. ^um inter. In Glossa.
called by his Parasites Dominus Deus noster Papa.
our Lord God the Pope, Thom. Stapleton. in Princip. ^^d. doctr. Praef. ad
Greg. decimum tert. Marian. Victor. in Tom. 4. operum Hi^ron. Praef. ad Pium
quint.
by discreet Doctors, Optimus. Maximus: that is, (as Tully expounds it)
Optimus boni^ate, potestate Maximus. ^ title, which was given to none of old
time, but to God only: no not amo^^ the Heathens. Now the Papists give it to
the (...). Alphonsi (...) de consid* ad Eugen. lib. 4.
most good in grace, most great in power; Platin. (...) it. Pont^in Pagl.
secund.
as full of riotous pomp, and pride, as ever were the Persian kings; z His
clothes bedeckt with precious stones, ^his gorgeous miter dight
With jewels rare, Bapt. Mantuan. ad Inn^cent. octau.
with glistring gold, and with A precious stone, called a Carbuncle. Of the
which kind one that tell out of the Popes miter (by a mischaunce at his
coronation) was worth six thousand crowns. Platin. in vit. Clement. quint.
Pyropus bright,
O very Trojan truls, not Trojans:
has taken the state ecclesiastical of Christ, appointed in noble order as an
army set in array, and has transformed it as it were with an enchauntment of
the whore of Babylon into a As Sanders te^meth it in his books of the (...).
visisible monarchy, and As it is named by Turrian the Jesuit, De ecclesia and
ordinat. ministr. l. 1. c. 2.
kingdom of the Romans. And that the old saying might be fulfilled, new
Lords, new laws; such lips, such lettise, (as one said of an ass that was
eating thistles:) this new Prince the Pope has brought in new laws to govern
his kingdom, in steed of Gods laws which Christ would have to rule his
Church; and in steed of the Canon of the holy scriptures he has ordained his
Canon law. Touching the unrighteousness of the which law, (least any man should
think me perhaps to find fault with that I have no skill in, as the shoemaker
did, whom Apelles warned not to presume beyond his shoe:) I had leiffer you
should hear the judgment of a learned Doctor and professor of the law, then
mine. Francis Duaren, a man of great skill in both the laws, civil, and
canon, and named amongst lawiers the chiefest lawier of our time, has written a
learned treatise touching the holy functions and livings of the Church, as it
were an abridgement of the canon law: allowed by the judgment of the Parliament
of Paris^, and set forth with the privilege of the French king, that no man
can iust^y (...) either the author, or the work, as heretical. In Praesat.
Franc. ^^aren. in lib. de facris ecclesiae ministerijs a^ beneficijs.
(...) then of the said treatise, declaring that the body of the Canon law
consists of two parts, to weete, Decrees, and (...) Decrees, which were
gathered together by Gratian; (...), epistles written by sundry Popes: he says,
that in the ^ir^t volume of Decretales, containing five books set out in the
name of Gregory the ninth, there are many things that do much degenerate and
grow out of kind from that old discipline comprised in the former book of
Decrees. And hence arose that saying, which is common and famous amongst our
countriemen, (he means the Frenchmen:) Things have gone ill with men, In
Latin it is, ex quo decretis alae aecesserunt: that is, word forword* since
winge; were added to decrees. But to express in English the allusion which the
Latin saying has (in decretis and alae) to decretales: I have changed the
word. Yet keeping just the sense. For those wings are tales, devises of
ambitious Popes, and foolish fancies of their Parasites.
since tales were added to Decrees, that is, since ye time that in steed of ye
Decrees the Decretales did bear sway. For the Church-causes had lost their
old simplicity, when Decrees were patched out with those tales: as the world
is wont to grow worse and worse, So destenies do provide That all things fall
unto decay, and back efisoones they slide. As for the other volume, the sixth
book of Decretales, which Bo^iface the eighth added, it has not been received
in the kingdom of France, because the constitutions and ordinances thereof are
thought to have been purposely made (the most part of them) in hatred and
despite of Philip the French king, and for the game of the court of Rome. No
not the Clementines neither, nor Extrauagants, the last part of the Decretales,
are void of like faults: nay, the later laws of the Popes be commonly worse
then the former. And this is the body of the Canon Law, these are the Popes
statutes, by the which, though very unmeet for the church (in Duarens
judgment) yet is the church of Rome governed: and it is so governed, that
Lancelot. in comment. instit. Iur. Can. lib. 3.
the Decrees (which are the better part) have less authority; the Decretales
(which are worse) have greater force in Church-causes, and are more
authentical Yea, the matter came to that pass, that Distinct. 19. in canoni.
is.
Gratian the principal author of the Canon law, would have had Inter canonicas
scriptura^ decretales epistolae connumerantur.
the Decretall epistles of the Popes to be accounted holy, and reckened in the
number of the Canonical scriptures. For the better compassing and credit
whereof he did most shamefully corrupt a saying of De doctr. Christian. l. 2.
c. 8.
S. Austins. But it would not ^ay. In so much that the Papists, Aduers. haer.
lib. 1. cap. 2.
Alfonsus, and Defens. ^id. Trid. l. 3.
Andradius, are them selves ashamed of that his, either wilful fault, or
oversight. The Decretales therefore remain, not in the number of the
Canonical scriptures, which hope the Giants failed of through the division of
their toungs: yet equal in authority to the canonical scriptures, yea, above
them, in deciding Church-causes at Rome. For that which S. De consid. ad ^ugen.
lib. 1.
Bernard complained off to Pope Eugenius long since, he might complain off to
any Pope in our time, if he were alive: the laws keep a great stir daily in
your Palace, Leges, sed Iustiniani, non Domini.
but the laws of Justinian, not the laws of the Lord. Whether justly or no:
look you to that. For doutlesse the law of the Lord is undefiled, and
conuerteth souls. But these are Non tam leges quam lites, and cauillationes.
not so much laws as law-quarels, and strifes subuerting judgment. Besides
that, the manner of dealing which is used in debating causes is Execrabilis
plane.
too too abominable, and such as is marvelous unseemly for the church: nay it
were not seemly for the common place, where civil matters are handled. He
means that manner, which Practic^ Cancellar. Apost.
the Popes Court of Chauncerie at Rome had bred long before, Lud. Gom^s.
proaem. regular. Cancel. Apost.
though it were not grown yet to that bigness to which it shot up afterward:
even that manner of dealing, which is practiced Bernard. de consid. ad Eugen.
lib. 1. and 3.
in the brabbles and cauils of advocates, fitter to subvert then to find the
truth; in the pleas of lawiers, who bring in sleights of falshode and fraud
against innocence, stop up the ways of judgment, beat down the simplicity
of truth; in dilatory shifts, and other such instruments of making gain by
suites, which came from the laws, but from the laws of Justinian (as Bernard
says) not of the Lord. These are the laws then which the Pope uses, and
uses, to what end? which is the last point. He uses them, not to further the
salvation of Gods people, but to satisfy (if yet Prou. 30.15. ^eue, give.
a horseleach might be satisfied) his own and his Courtiers insatiable
covetousness, ambition, and lust. For what has the outrageous tyranny of the
beast respected else but that, in the Church-offices, Church Censures, and
Church-causes? Why has he withdrawn suites from other places to the Court of
Rome? Why has he reserved cases to him self? Why has he dispensed with laws
at his pleasure? why has he made and unmade them? He has taken into his own
hands Cancellariae Apostolicae regula 2. and the rest which follow.
the elections of Bishops from them whom they belonged to. The Christian
ministers, magistrates, and people he has robbed and spoiled of their due and
right. He has committed the feeding and guiding of the flock of Christ to
brute and beastly creatures. He has let and set the charge, or the commodity
rather, of churches, as he would himself, and to whom he would, For the
particulars hereof, and their grounds: see Institut. iuris canon. and Franc.
Duar. de sacr. eccles. minist. acben. and Gentian. Heruet. de reparand.
ecclesiast. discipline.
by presentations, preuentions, provisions, reseruations, translatio^s,
permutations, aduousons, and commendaes. He has ordained Pastors without a
room of Pastorship, Ministers without a function: benefices without cure,
sacrileges without punishment. The goods of the church, that is the living of
the Pastors, and maintenance of the poor, he has impaired with pensions,
embesilled with first fruits, made away with appropriations, seized on with
sundry wrongs, and spent them wastfully with lusts, to the common outcries of
men reproving him for Ammian. Marcel lib. 27.
pride, for Bapt. Mant. Fastor. lib 5. in Urban.
riot, for Bernard. epist. 42. ad Archiep. Senon.
extortion, and for Conc. Basileens. Sess. 21.
simony. He has not permitted the causes of the church to be debated and
decided there where they arose, as equity, as reason, as peace, as the
judgment of Council. Nicaen, can. 5. Mileuit. can. 9. and 22. African. can. 92.
and 105 Basil. can. 27.
Councels and Cyprian. epist. 35. Chrysostom. ad Innocent. epist. 1. Bernard.
de consid. ad Eugen. lib. 3.
Fathers would he should have done: but he has removed them thence to be heard
and determined at Rome, what by Council. Trid. Sess. 14. cap. 7. Extra. c. etsi
dominici. de panit. and remiss.
reserving of cases to him self, what by Council. Trid. Sess. 24. cap. 20. Per
speciale rescriptu^ signaturae Sanctitatis Sua.
fetching matters Sub anulo piscatoris. The Popes privy seal called the
fishers signet, that is, S. Peter's: though belike S. Peter did not fish with
such.
with the fishers signet, what by Bernard. de confid. ad Eugen. lib. 3.
exempting men from their Ordinaries, what by allowing 2. q. 6. c. ad Romanam.
c. placuit vt presbyteri. Council. Trid. Sess. 24. cap. ^0.
appeals from all coasts to the Lord Apostolic. The censures of the church
in excommunication ordained 1. Cor. 5.7.
to cut the wicked off (as rotten members) from the company of Christians, he
has used and exercised, not against the wicked, Bernard. de consid. ad Eugen.
lib. ^. and 3.
of whom a sink has flowed of old time to Rome, and Bapt. Mantuan. Siluar.
lib. 2. Roma, quid insanis toties?
ouerfloweth it still; not against thieves, of whom (a Aen. Siluius (called in
his Popedom Pius the second) hist. de Asia. min. cap. 77.
Pope witnesses) Rome is made a den; not against murderers, As the same Pope
witnesses in the same place. And the Braui (in Italy) are famous with their
sanctuaries. Andr. Masius in Iosuam cap. 20.
for whom there is a sanctuary in the very houses of Cardinals at Rome; not
against adulterers, whose offense was punished with death by the Lege Iulia, de
adulterijs: and before, by the law of Romulus.
old Romans, Council. Trid. Sess. 24. can. 12. Did. 83. c. Presbyter. 26. q. 7.
c. tempora. 33. q. 2. c. hoc ipsum. 27. q. 1. c. Siquis episcopus. in glossa.
c. At s^ clerici. deiudicijs.
now they are toyed with; not against whoores, Council. delectorum Card. Surius
in commentar. rer. gestar. de ^^for^at. Pij. qui^^.
which set themselves to open sale under the Pope, who plays the baude and
gains by it; not against whooremongers, c. quia circa. de bigamis.
whom he prefers somewhere before married persons, and leacherie before
chastity, which With these words (in the gloss upon that text of the Canon
law:) Nota mirabile, quod pl^s habet hic luxuria, quam castitas.
the Canonist notes as a wonderful case: but he has exercised it c. ad
Apostolicae. in sexto, touching the Emperor: of the rest, the stories of
several countries show it.
against Emperors, Princes, States, and nations, that would not serve him at a
beck; against any c. Si vero alicuius. de sentent. excom.
magistrate that did but lay hands upon a clergyman; against any c. peruenit.
e. nuntios. de decimis.
Christian, that denied his parish priest a little tithe; against whole
assemblies and companies of the faithful, c. ad abolendam* de haereticis.
who worshipped (as Act. 24.14.
Paul) the God of their fathers after that way, (which Papists call heresy,)
believing all things which are written in the law and the Prophets. Whom he with
most vilanous cruelty and treachery, as if they had been sheep appointed to
the slaughter, The stories of the Church of England, France, Italy, and the
Spanish inquisition.
has rid away by torments, by fire, by sword; not himself, for Ioh. 19.28.
he came not into the judgment hall least he should be defiled, but c.
excommunicamus. de ^aereticis.
he has delivered them to Pilate to be crucified: and when the streams of
water did flow with blood at Paris, old men and maidens and babes being
murdered without all respect of sex, or age, or state, Comment. de stat. relig.
and re^p. in Gallia, lib. 10.
he sang a song of joy for the French marriage, and celebrated with bonfyres and
processions at Rome a most outrageous act of more then Scythian barbarousnes.
What should I reckon up his tyrannical laws, wherewith he has oppressed the
Church intolerably? Of Pope Syricius ( epist. 4.) out of S. Paul, Romans 8.8.
Council. Trident. Sess. 24. can. 9.
single life imposed on ministers of the word, of Council. Lateran. sub
Innocent. tert. cap. 11. Council. Trid. Sess. 14. cap. 5.
auricular confession, of council. Trid. sess. ^5. Deer. de delect ^ib. de dieb.
fest de regular. cap. 1. Clement. cap. exiui.
the choice of meats, apparel, and days, of c. audiuimus. de reliq. and
vener. sanct. Cerem. Romans eccle. lib. 1. sect. 6. Bodin. method. histor. cap. 4.
the new and strange canonizing of Saints, of c. ex multa.. in tanta. de voto
and voti redempt.
pilgrimages to holy land, of Con. Trid. sess. 25. Decr. de regularibus and
monialibus.
the vows of Moonkes and Nuns, of sess. 24. can. 3.4.11. and 12.
the state and rites of marriage, of Durand. Ration. divine. officior. Ceremon.
Roman. eccle. lib. 1. sect. 7 tit. Agnus Dei etc.
innumerable ceremonies, partly unfruitful, partly foolish, partly impious,
Polydor. Virgil. de inuentor. rerum. lib. 5. cap. 1. and so forth to the end.
whereof some sprang from heathens, some from the Jews, and some from
heretics. What should I say of his wicked dispensations, if yet they deserve
the name of dispensations, and not (as De consid: ad Eugen. lib. 3.
Bernard rather does call them) dissipations; wherewith there is nothing so holy
and religious which he has not polluted, nothing so profane which he has not
permitted: that King Henry the eight.
a brother may mary his own brothers wife, Philip king of Spain.
an uncle his sisters daughter; that Church-offices and livings may be given
Bernard. epist. 42. ad archiep. sen. and de consid. ad Eugen. lib. 1. and 3.
Practica cancellar* Apost. Pauli Barchin^^.
to boys, to Simoniacall marchantes, to unlearned persons, and such as are
unfit for them; that Distinct. 70. c. sanctorum. c. de multa. de praebendis.
one man may have a plurality of benefices; that c. relatum. de clericis non
resident. c. licet canon. de ele^^. in sexto.
he who has the benefice, need not attend the office, the steward not provide
meat for Gods household, the servant and minister not do the work of God, the
angel and messenger not show the will of God, the shepherd and pastor not
feed the flock committed to him; that c. ad Apostolicae. in sexto. De sentent.
and re iud. Bulla Pij quinti contr. Regin. Angl.
subjects may be discharged of their oath and fealty, and licensed to withdraw
allegiance from their Prince, yea, take arms against him, yea lay violent
hands on the anointed of the Lord; that Conc. Constantien. Session. 19. c. Non
obstantibus s^luis conductibus. Pope Martin the fifth: epist. ad Regem Lituan.
Cochlaeus histor. Hussi^ar. lib. 5.
promise may be broken with God and with men; that abominations most horrible
may be committed; that all things divine and humane may be perverted; right and
wrong, heaven and earth, lawful and unlawful, may be confounded together. And
can it be douted but that this so monstrous, so pestilent, so misshapen
foulness and corruption of laws and of discipline, was instituted and
inducted by this king of Rome, not to set forward the salvation of the Church,
but to fill his greedy appetite of gold and lust of dominion? Do not his own
Baptist. Man^tuan. de calamit. tempor. l* 3.
Friars witness that all things Priests, Churches, altars, sacraments, and
crowns, (in Peter's fold,)
Fire, incense, prayers, C^lum est venale Deusque.
heaven, and God, are set out to be sold?
Do not his Platina de vit. Pont. in Paulo secundo. A^n. Siluius Cardin.
epist. de moribus Germaniae.
Courtiers allow of their judgment who say that the pomp of the church would
be abated, which he sought to increase with anoyance of religion? Do not q
Cardinals acknowledge that Christians are wyped of their goods and substance by
first fruits, and other policies of the Popes, Mat. 26.15.
to the end that he and his Courtly train may be more rich in wealth, In the
defense of the Apology, part. ^.
more galant in bravery, more high in Princely state? Ad Ludouicum vndecimum,
pro libertat^ ecclesiae Gallicae aduersus Romans aulam defensio Parisiensis
cutiae. It is pri^^ted with Duaren. de sacr. eccle. minist.
Has not all Christendom borne to their grief the yoke of the ambition and
covetousness of Rome, which cries out like Judas, what will ye give me? There is
extant in print the defense and Apology of the Church of England, showing
fresh marks of the Roman tyranny, wherewith our country has been seared as
with a hot burning iron. There is extant a supplication of the parliament of
Paris, wherein the Frenchmen request their king to ease them of the cursed
extortions, injuries, and guiles of the Court of Rome. There are extant C^ntum
grauamina nationis Germanic^.
the hundred greeuances of Germany, whose complaints (written as it were with
their own blood) do show with what outrage the Sea of Rome has thrown down,
oppressed, bruised, and spoiled that most noble nation. There are extant
Bernard. in Cant. In epist. De consid. ad Eugen. and passim. Franc. Petrarch.
in cant. and epist. Bapt. Man^. in Fast. Silu. ^^log. de calam. temp. and caet.
Marsil. Patauin. in Defens. pacis. See Illyricus in his book entitled restes
veritatis superiorum temporum contra Papam.
infinite books of lamentations, written by learned men of al coasts and
quarters in the midst of the Papacy: confessing all with one consent that the
discipline of the church is greatly decayed. The Council. Trid. Sess. 6. de
reformat. cap. 1. In these very terms, collapsam admodum ecclesiasticam
disciplina^.
Papists themselves in the Council of Trent do not confess it only, but
also witness it by public writing to the world. There was gathered together a
Council at Constance, about an eight score years since, Conc. Constant. Ses.
4. and 5.
that the church might be reformed, both in the head and in the members. The
matter, not being accomplished at Constance, was Conc. Basil. Sess. 2. and 3.
enterprised again at Basil. But Eugenius the fourth (who was Pope then)
could not abide the reformation, and therefore Platin. and Onuphr. de vit.
Pont. in Eugen. quart.
revoked the Council of Basil by messages and bulls: which since they
disobeied, he brake it up by force of arms. And whereas there was made an
Which is called Pragmatica sanctio.
act by the French king with his States, that sundry decrees and ordinances of
that Council should be of force in France: Franc. Dua^en. de sacr. eccles.
minist l. 5. c. 11. Pius secund. epist. 375. ad regem Franciae. Conc. Latecan.
sub Leon. decim.
the Popes who succeeded Eugenius never rested, till they had gotten that act
repealed. The last hope remained in the Council of Trent: and truly many
things were decreed Sess. 5. cap. 1. and ^1. c. 2. and 22. c. 11. and 23. c.
16.23* and ^. c. 17.18.19. and 25. cap. 3.
there for points of reformation wisely, and worthily. But three spots of
mischiefs, touched by Gentian. Heruet. de reparanda ecclesiastica disciplina.
Heruetus (a Papist, of so much the greater weight his testimony is against
Papists,) do renew the old corruptions: one, that the decrees, although they
were made, were not observed yet; another, that although they should be
observed, yet they are not such as might restore fully the ancient good orders;
the last, that although they restored the ancient orders, yet do they little
good, because the Pope is not bound to laws him self, and he dispenses with
whom he list: so that medicines heal not the wounds, but make them worse, as
long as the Pope may repeal, alter, pervert, and break through the decrees of
the Council, with his dispensations. And, out of all dout, that detestable
clause Council. Trid. de reform. Sess. 9. in proaem. and Sess. 25. de reform.
cap. vlt.
annexed to decrees of reformation in the Council, Salua semper in omnibus
autoritate sedis Apostolicae.
provided always that the Popes authority be safe, and no way prejudiced:
does show the Roman Church to be not only sick, but also past hope of
recovering her health. For as in men's bodies the greater the spleen waxes, ye
lesser wax the rest of the members, they say: so the more safe the Popes
authority is, the less safe will all parts of the Church be.

As Frie^ Mantuan tells Pope Leo the tenth Pastor. lib. 4.
The Court of Rome with poison strong infected to destroy, With the contagion
of her sores does countries all anoy. Wherefore to knitte up the sum of my
reason, seeing it is manifest by the very evidence of the things themselves,
that nether the faith of Christ is taught purely, nor the sacraments rightly
ministered, nor prayers made religiously, nor discipline duly practiced in ye
Church of Rome: if the former reason of causes seem too weak, yet is it fully
proved (I hope) by the effects, that the Church of Rome is no sound member of
the Catholic church. How much more absurd were it to count her the Catholic
Church. The Church of Rome therefore is neither the Catholic, nor a sound
member of the Catholic Church.

I have stayed longer in opening this Conclusion, The sixth Conclusion.
then I had purposed: but I may run over the last so much the more speedily.
For knowing how the Church of Rome is infected with pestilent diseases, the
contagion whereof, as Leu. 13. ver. 44.
the lepers sore, because it is dangerous to them who dwell near it, must
therefore ver. 46.
be removed out of the camp of the faithful: we may be assured that the
reformed Churches in England, Scotland, France, Germany, and other kingdoms
and commonweals, have severed themselves lawfully from the Church of Rome.
For that is done lawfully which is done by the warrant of the word of God:
Psalm. 119, 17^
all whose commandments are righteousness, says the Prophet. But the
reformed Churches obeyed his commandment in seuering themselves from the
Church of Rome. Therefore they severed themselves from the Church of Rome
lawfully. For as ecclesiastical societies and Church Assemblies were ordained
by God, that 1. Chron. 1^. ^ 13.
his elect and chosen should ver. 11. and 12.
seek him and ^er. 8. and 29.
praise him, that is, Nehem. 8.1. Act. 2.42.
learn to know him, and Nehem. ^.6. Act. 1.14. and 2, 42.
worship him being known: so where his right faith and knowledge is not taught,
or he is not served and worshipped aright, thence does he command his servants
to depart. To depart, first, from that Church-assemblie, where his right faith,
and knowledge is not taught: the charge is given to Timothee. Whom S. Paul 1.
Tim. 6. ver. 3
aduertising of such as taught other doctrine, then he did, and not the
wholesome words of Christ and godly doctrine, ver. ^.
declares the qualities and fruits of those Matt. 7.15.
woolues, and 1. (...). 6.5.
bids him depart from them: from such (says Paul) (...).
depart thou: depart thou from their assembly, and Church. For so must such
teachers be departed from: as himself declared by his example at Ephesus.
Where A^t. 19. ver. 8.
he frequented the synagogue of ye Jews for the space of three months. But
ver. 9.
when certain obstinate and disobedient persons spoke evil of the way of God
before the multitude, he (...).
departed from them, and separated the disciples. So that he severed, not
himself only, but others also from that Church, wherein the way of God was
evil spoken of, and men were not taught to know and believe in him aright.
Now, that we must likewise depart from that Church, wherein God is not served
and worshipped aright: it is written to the Corinthians. Who being admonished 1.
Cor. 10.1^.
to flee from idolatry, and from al communion with idolatrous worship, are
charged 2. Cor. 6. v. 14.
not to yoke themselves with idolaters in their assemblies and meetinges. For
what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? light with
darkness? ver. 15.
Christ with Belial? the faithful with the infidel? ver. 16.
the temple of God with idols? ver. 17.
Wherefore come out from among them, and separate your selves, says the Lord.
Separate your selves from them, says the Lord: the Lord says, not I. The Lord
says to the Jews, Hos. 4.15.
go ye not up to Beth-auen: not Hosea, but the Lord says. It is called That
is, the house of God. Hos. 10.^5.
Beth-el, but it is That is, the house of vanity, or of an i^^ol: Hos. 10.5
Beth-auen: Hos. 10.8.
the That is, the chapels of Bethel, in the which the Isra^elites did commit
idolatry. ^. King. 12.32.
hie places of Auen are the sin of Israel. Therefore go ye not up to
Beth-auen, says the Lord. Thus we are expressly commanded by God to depart and
separate our selves from those Churches, wherein the right ways, either of his
knowledge, or of his worship, are perverted. Much more, from those Churches,
wherein they are perverted both. But they are both perverted in the Church of
Rome most notoriously: as I have declared. It remains then that the reformed
Churches have severed themselves from the Church of Rome most lawfully and
justly. And therefore our Bristow, Demand. 1. Motiu. ^0. Stapleton. Princip.
fid. doctrine. l. 4. c. 10* Sander. de vi^^b. Monarc. eccles. prae^. ad Lect.
English Papists and the Annot. in tom. ^. Augustine. co^^tra Dona^istas.
Louanists deal, shall I say, of ignorance, or of malice? but of whether
soever, they deal very l^wd^ly: who to make us odious for seuering our selves
from the Church of Rome, as if we had played the schismatikes therein, do
report of us that we rent our selves from the Catholic Church as the
Donatistes did. Truly, or falsely: let the faithful judge. Chiefly, since it is
manifest, that the As it appee^eth by S. Au^^in, (...) his ^reatises against
(...) Donatists.
Donatists found not any fault with Catholics, either for ye service wherewith
they worshipped God, or for ye doctrine of God which they preached: but As the
Apologies and Co^fessions of the reformed Churches show.
we have convicted ye Romanists of impiety, both for their idolatrous
profaning of his service, and for their ungodly corrupting of his doctrine:
and these men, who blame us, do themselves teach, that no man ought to join
and communicate with that Church, whose service is idolatrous, whose doctrine
is ungodly: in so much that the Louanists Annot. in August. Breui^. collat. cum
Donatist collat. di^i. 3. cap 9.
reprove (and that worthily) the Catholic Bishops of Afrike, Annot. in August.
post col^^tion* ad Donatist. c. 2^.
yea S. Austin too, for saying that the Prophets Elias, and Elisaeus, resorted
to the Church, and service of the Israelites when it was stained with
idola^trie: and Bristow Motiu. 32.
an English Papist condemns (though unjustly) them who hear our sermons,
because it is horrible sin to give patient hearing to blasphemies, such as
(he says) we preach. Wherefore if the Romish doctors themselves should sit in
judgment upon us for trial of the schism and Donatisme (so to term it)
whereof they indite us: no doubt (unless their minds were ouercast in like
sort as were Act. ^3.11.
the eyes of Elymas) they would acquit us of it; and pronounce of Christians,
as Ioh. 19.6.
Pilate did of Christ, I find no fault in him. For what have we done in
forsaking their synagogue, yt may deserve the check of a severe Censour, much
less the condemnation of an indifferent judge? Save in this (perhaps) that,
Cicer. pro S^x. Roscio.
as mad Fimbria complained of Scaeuola, we received not the whole weapon into
our body. The Ministers of Christ were bound to 2. Tim. 4.2.
preach the word of God. they preached it. To Tit. 1.13.
reprove the peoples sins. they reproved the^. To 2 Timothy 2.3.
suffer afflictions eue^ unto the shedding of their blood. they suffered. The
people of Christ were bound to Ioh. 10.27.
hear the pastors voice. they heard it. To Mat. 4.10.
worship God and serve him only. they did it. To Luke 12.8.
profess their faith before men. they professed it. If against the will of
Princes and Magistrates, as it fell out in France: Act. 5.29.
they ought to obey rather God then men, as the Apostles told the rulers of
Israel. If by the commandment of Princes and Magistrates, which befell to
England through Gods most gracious goodness, and we beseech him it may for
ever: they were to obey their Princes in the Lord, as 2. King. 23.2.
the Priests, and Prophets, and people of the Jews did obey Josias. Wherefore
seeing all the reformed Churches (not to rehearse them in particular) following
the same rule which England did and France, have severed themselves from the
church of Rome, in such sort as they ought by the law of God: they are not
seditious because they have done, but they were sacrilegious unless they had
done so; nether have we dealt as schismatikes in forsaking, but others deal as
heretics in following the whore: whose hearts I would to God that might
pearce into, which our Savior says to his, touching Babylon, (...). 18.4.
Go out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receue not of her plagues. And thus have I declared to you (reverend Sir) my
judgment of the Conclusions which you proposed. In opening whereof although I
have been longer, partly being moved with the weightinesse of the points, and
partly presuming of the patience of the hearers, then in this place is usual:
yet have I purposely omitted many things which adversaries may object, because
I thought they might be produced and answered in the disputation it self more
conveniently.

Psalm. 51.18. Be favorable (O God) to Sion for thy good pleasure: build the
walls of Jerusalem.


John Rainoldes to the Christian Reader.
IT is now five years almost, (gentle reader) since being occasioned by order
of our University to handle and defend these Conclusions in disputation: I was
moved to make them common unto many, that through the instruction and
consolation of the scripture the church might reap some fruit of them.
Howbeit as Apelles was wont to set forth his pictures at his stall, that, if
any fault were found, he might amend it, before they were delivered to such as
they were drawn for: the like have I done with mine, (though not like his,) by
keeping the^ in Latin at home as it were, that, if any thing were justly blamed
in them, it might be corrected, before I sent them abroad to English men. In
the which respect, though I could hardly resist the importunate desire of
sundry friends, of whom some had translated them, requesting that I would
translate them my self or suffer theirs to be printed: yet I resisted it, and
hope they took it in good part. But now being otherwise enforced to publish my
conference with M. Heart: I have co^descended unto their request, to do them
into English, and publish them withal. The rather, because I have proved
herein, that the faith professed by the Church of Rome is not the Catholic
faith. The contrary whereof was the last point that M. Heart avouched. So that,
seeing he brake off conference thereon, and would not put the faith of his
church to that trial, to which he had put the Pope, the head of it: the godly,
who will wish that also had been handled to the confusion of all Popery, may
for want of larger repast take this sclenderer, as better half a loaf (men
say) then no bread. And I am the bolder to set it before them: because Doctor
Stapleton and Licentiate Martin, who, as evil physicians to get themselves
work, do praise unwholesome baggage above wholesome food, have disco^mended
it. Chiefly, since their dealing therein has been such, that they have showed
greater stomach the^ wisdom, as physicians of no value. For of four points
that I find reproved by the former of them, in Thom. Stapleton. princip. fidei
doctrine. excus. Paris. 1582.
the last editio^ of his doctrinall principles: one is, Lib. 1. cap. 6.
that I distinguish the militant and visible church from the Catholic, after a
new sort, unskillfully, and fondly. The distinction thereof In the second,
fourth, and fifth Conclusions.
I grounded on the scripture: 1. Cor. 2.1^.
fond and Act. 17.1^.
new (it may be) to others, not to us. But the Doctor saw that Babylon would
fall if the distinction stood. Wherefore if he had no stronger shot then this
to discharge against it: I will bear with him; as in the rest of his tauntes
also. Loosers must have their words. An other point In the fourth Conclusion.
he carpeth at, is mine exposition of holy catholic church. Which I having
proved by the Papists themselves, that it must needs signify the company of
the chosen alone, not mixed with wicked ones, because (by their Catechism.
Council. Trident. in exposit. Symboli.
catechism) it is the body of Christ, and Ephesians. 4.16.
all the body of Christ is quickened by his spirit, which the wicked are not: he
Stapleton. princ. doctrine. lib. 1. cap. 11.
replieth that the church is said in the scripture to be the body of Christ
quickened by his spirit, because some parts of it are so, not all the body. An
answer somewhat strange: considering that the scripture, which I had
alleged, says that (...).
all the body of Christ is quickened so. As for that Staplet princ. doctrine. l.
4. c. 14.
he notes of the word [Catholike,] that I and Philip Mornay expound it not in
one sort: Trea^ise of the Church, chap. 2.
Philip Mornayes excellent gifts, and fruitful labors, I reverence and love.
And both of us having aimed at the truth: whether has come nearer it, 1. Cor.
14. ver. 29.
let the Prophets judge. But if, among Prophets in the church of Christ, ver.
30.
somewhat be reueiled to one, that is not to an other: this justifies not
them, Reu. 2.^.
who say they are Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan. Yet this
is the soundest reason that he has against my Conclusion; that the holy
Catholic church which we believe is the whole company of Gods elect and chosen.
For touching that he adds that he has disproued it, by showing that the
church is distinguished from heretical assemblies by the name of Catholic: he
has disproued it as soundly thereby, as if he should say, that the Epistola
catholica Iacobi and Petri.
Catholic epistles in the new Testament, were not so called, as general, and
written to no certain persons, because that other writings are named catholic
also to distinguish them from heretical. The third point he takes upon him to
confute, is an argument that I made to prove my third Conclusion. Staplet
princ* doctrine. lib. 12* cap. 16.
All the words of scripture be the words of truth: some words of the Church
be the words of error. But he that tells the truth always, is more to be
credited, the^ he that lies sometimes. Therefore the holy scripture is to be
credited more the^ is the Church. And to this argument (says he) I answer
briefly, that no words of the Church are the words of error, that is, that no
erroneus thing is ever taught, defined, or approved, by the Church in her
Bishops and Pastors teaching uniformly; in the decrees of Councels, chiefly of
general Councels; in that which the Fathers teach with one consent; in her
head, the Pope, defining, and delivering any thing publicly; and finally in
the rule of faith which all the Church holds: though ^euerally some Bishops
may privately err in teaching; and one or more Fathers may write some untrue
thing, or be in some er^or; and somewhat even in Councils, without the decree
it self, may be said or reasoned inconueniently; and (to conclude) the Pope may
be ouerseene privately in somewhat. But this must be certes imputed to the
frailty of men, not to the Church her self. Which speech of D. Stapletons if
it be an answer unto my argument: then can I tell him a very brief way to
answer my Conclusions all with one word. How? By granting them all to be
true. For though it were so, that nether Bishops teaching uniformly might
err, nor Fathers consenting, nor Councels in decrees, nor the Pope in public
and definitive sentence, which I both In the third Co^cl^sion.
there, and In the Confe^ence. Chapt. 2. Diuis 2. and Chapt 7. Di^is. ^. and 7.
else where have showed to be otherwise, but if it were so: yet seeing that
Bishops and Fathers, and Councels, and the Pope himself may err (as he
confesses) in this or that point, and this or that manner; he grants that
which I said, that some words of the Church are the words of error. But
those words must certes (says he) be imputed to the frailty of men, not to
the Church her self. Now certes M Doctor is a merry man: who can shift an
argument off with such a jest. As though the Church her self consisted not of
men: and therefore must needs offend so through frailty, the men offending
so. The fourth and last point wherewith Staplet. princ. doct. l. 13. c. 9.
he finds fault, is, that amongst In the fifth Conclusion.
the reasons why the Church of Rome is no sound member of the Catholic Church,
I bring this, that, touching expounding of the Scripture, she condemns all
senses and meanings thereof, which are against the sense that her self
holds, or against the Fathers co^senting all in one. Whereof in that he
gathers that I allow not the expositions of the Fathers, yea, that I affirm
that it is a mark and token of a false Church to admit the ioint-consent of
the Fathers in expounding of the scripture: he does me great wrong. For,
though by following too much brevity in Latin, I fell into obscurity, and said
not so plainly that which I would, and should, as in the English now I have:
yet that which I said, does clear me of his sclaunder, as D. De success.
ecclesiast. resp. ad Thom. Staplet. cap. 9.
Fulke has showed; whom I can better thank for his defending of me, then
deserve the praise that he has given me therein. Nay, I was so far from noting
that as faulty in the Church of Rome, that the fault which I noted was her
vile abusing the name of the Fathers against their judgment in that point. For
I declared straight in the words ensuing, that first she autoriseth thereby
her own practice, as the right sense and meaning of the Scripture, though
contrary to it self: next, she allows the puddles of the Schoolmen, and
will have the^ taken for waters of life: lastly, when some Fathers gainsay her,
she rejects them, because they all consent not and admits them who do
make for her, as having hit the mark. Of the which branches the last imports
not that I refuse the Fathers consenting all in one. The former two import that
I condemn the frenzy of the Church of Rome, mainteining her Dunses and deeds
against the Fathers. But Conci^. Trid. Sess. 4.
the serpents assembled in the Council of Trent, have set down that I spoke
of (touching the expounding of the scripture) so suttilly: that a simple man
would think they allow such senses and meanings of the Scripture only, as the
Fathers give all with one consent. Whereas in very truth they do nothing
less: they disallow them rather. For whether by Vnanimem consensum pat^um.
the Fathers consenting all in one, they mean the Fathers all, simply, none
excepted; that consent is a Phoenix, and never will be found: or whether they
mean a good number of them, as In the Conference. Chapt. 2* Diuis. 2.
M. Heart expounds it* they dissent from senses agreed on by that number. For
example, the scripture says, Ioh. 10.16.
There shall be one flock, one Pastor. The Fathers, In Johan. tract^t. 47. and
de verb. Dom. sermon. 49.
Austin, In Iohann. homil. 49.
Chrysostom, In euang. Iohann. l. 7. c. 6.
Cyrill, Epi^t ad Eua^gri^m.
Jerome, and Registr. lib. 4. epist. 36.
Gregory, expound this of Christ. The church of Romes Pope Boniface the
eyghth. c. vnam fanctam. extra. de maiorit. and obed. As his schooleman also
Thomas of Aquin does, cont. errores Gr^^or.
mouth expounds it of the Pope. The Council then of Trent condemning all
senses and meaninges of the scripture which are against the sense that their
Church holds, or against the Fathers consenting all in one: does it not
condemn this sense of the scripture given by the Fathers, because it is
against the sense of their Church? Sure it binds not the Papists to
maintain it. Or else D. Princip. doctr. (...). cap. 1^.
Stapleton (I trust) should be censured, for placing the Pope in the one
Pastors seat. Wherefore if they, who hold not the senses that the Fathers
give of the scriptures, be the false Church, as lib. 13. cap. 9.
he teaches us: the false Church and the Church of Rome may claim kindred. And
thus much of the Doctor.

The Greg. Martin. in the preface of his discovery.
Licentiate follows him in the same steps, reproving a speech of mine,
touching Cyprian. Whose praise of the Romans, that unfaithfulness cannot have
access to the^, being stretched by Sanders to prove that the Church of Rome
cannot err: In my preface to the Conclusions.
I, having showed the contrary by scripture, did add, What? and was Cyprian
of an other mind? Pardon me o Cyprian: I would believe thee gladly, but that
believing thee I should not believe the word of God. Hereon, M. Martin, to
advantage his cause, first abuses Epist. 55. ad Co^^elium.
Cyprian, saying, that he affirms that the Church of Rome cannot err in
faith. Which he affirms not. But whereas the Nouatian heretics at Carthage
had made themselves there a Bishop in schism, and to get him credit with the
Church of Rome had written thither falsely, that he was allowed by five and
twenty Bishops: Cyprian, to meet with their falsehood and treachery, says
that it could not find credit with the Romans, who being faithful men would
not give ear to faithless liars. Neither spoke he this as though the Romans
could not in deed be deceived by false reports of wicked ympes; (for even
there he notes they might be Mendacia non diu fa^^unt.
a while, as he did try both then and Basilides fesellit Stephanum. Cyprian.
^^ist. 68.
after:) but to stir them up to beware of heretics, by praising them as
wary. Wherefore he affirms not that the Church of Rome cannot err in faith:
as M. Martin threapeth on him. Yet because he might be supposed to have thought
it, at least by a consequent; for if they could not err Wherein all men grant
that the Pope may ^rie: even they who stay him most from erring in faith. A^n.
Sil^ius Card. in ep. de mo^ibus Ger^. ^urreciemata, Sanders, ^ellarmin,
Torrensis, and the whole nation of the Jesuits.
in that, much less in faith: therefore I, contenting my self with a
peremptory exception against it, said, that if he thought it, he must pardon
me for not believing him, the word of God gainsaying it. And this does M.
Martin reprove, both for that whereupon I spoke it, and for my kind of speech.
That, whereupon I spoke it, is (he says) that every youth among us, upon
confidence of his spirit, will control not only one but all the Fathers
consenting together, if it be against that which we imagine to be the truth. In
which words, by mentioning so all the Fathers consenting together, he
bewrays the canker that consumed him. For I touched the credit of no more of
them, then Io. Picus Mirand. in Apol. Alfonsus a Castr. aduer. haer. l. 1. c.
7. Canus locor. Theolog. l. 7. c. 3. Andrad. defe ns. ^id. T^^d. l. 2. Sixtus
Sen. biblioth. sanct. lib. 5. and 6. and cae^passim.
the Papists grant themselves may be touched. Nor controlled I ought upon
confidence of my spirit, but of Romans 11.22.
the spirit of God: because it was against, not that which I imagined, but
knew to be the truth. My kind of speech he notes, for being very fine and
figurative, as I thought. As I thought? did M. Martin see my heart? If not: he
might have kept that thought within himself. For in truth, (to open it,
because he presses me so far,) I thought in that figure Da veniam Cypriane.
[Paerdon me o Cyprian] to imitate a like kind of speech in S. Austin, Da
veniam Apostole. Aug. libr. homiliar. quinquagint. homil. 14.
[Pardon me o Paul.] What M. Martin thought, when hereupon he matched me with
vain and foolish youths: himself has declared. But it would better have
beseemed his age, to have acknowledged rather the truth which I proved, then
have reproved my kind of speech. For although I be a vain and foolish youth,
who spoke so of Cyprian: yet S. Paul was not a vain and foolish Apostle,
whose doctrine I maintained in it. These are (good Christian reader) the faults
of my Conclusions: al, that are noted by Stapleton and Martin, as far as I
know. If they or any other have touched ought else, which I have not lighted
on: I will not be ashamed (upon notice of it) to bring it forth my self, and
answer it in judgment. For I have been so careful of true and faithful
dealing, as well in the Conclusions, as in the Conference with M. Heart, God is
my record: that, Job. 31.35.
if mine adversaries should write a book against me, I would bear it upon my
shoulder, and bind it as a crown unto me. The bolder I am to commend them both
to thy upright judgment: beseeching the Father of lights, for his mercies sake
in Jesus Christ, to bless thee with the grace of his holy spirit, that thou
may grow in knowledge, in faith, in hope, in love, and enjoy the blessings
prepared for the chosen, who seek and serve him.

Psalm. 119.18. Open mine eyes, (O Lord,) that I may see wonderful things out
of thy law.


LONDON* Printed by John Wolf, for George Bishop. 1584.


