THE DESCRIPTION OF FLESHLY LVSTS.

OR A PROFITABLE AND FRVITFVLL SERMON Upon the first Epistle of Saint Peter,
Chap. 2. verse. 11.12. Preached and Penned by that famous, learned, judicious,
Orthodoxall, holy, wise, and skillful Preacher and servant of God, now
deceased, and with his God triumphing in Heaven, JOHN RANDALL, Batchelour of
Divinity, Pastor of St Andrews Hubbart in little East-cheape LONDON,
Sometimes Fellow of Lincoln College in OXFORD.

And now published, to the glory of God, the edification of his Church, and the
honorable Memorial of the Author, by WILLIAM HOLBROOKE, Preacher of the Word
of God in the Church aforesaid.

LONDON Printed by I. D. for Nathaniel Newbery and William Sheffard, and are to
be sold at their Shops in Pope's Head Alley. 1622.

TO THE WORTHY AND TRVLY RELIGIOUS LADY, THE LADY WELD, ALL BLESSINGS
internal, and external, spiritual and bodily in this life, and eternal
Glory in the world to come, be multiplied.
WORTHY LADY,
IT is the promise and word of the Almighty, 1 Samuel 2.30.
that he will honor them that honor him, which extends it self not only to
the time of this life, but to the time of death and after also: this promise it
is our part and duty to verify and make good to, and upon the heads of all the
people of God, both in the time of their life, death, and afterward, that so
God may be found true in his promise, and to do what he has said; This is
done of us, as by many ways, so by keeping and being means of preserving an
honorable memorial of them, that therein they may for ever be blessed and
honorable, according to that of Solomon, Pro. 10.7.
The memorial of the just shall be blessed, Psalm. 112.6.
and that of the Prophet David, The righteous shall be had in everlasting
remembrance, The consideration whereof moved me to think and consider with
my self, how I might perform this duty to the Author of this following
Sermon, which whilst I thought upon, I saw no better means to perform it by,
then by publishing some of his worthy labors, that so (by, Heb. 11.4.
and in them) he might live and speak, though he be dead, as it is said of
Abell, and be had in everlasting and honorable remembrance to the end of the
world. For which end, next to Gods glory, and the good of his Church, I have
published (for the present) two Sermons given me, by his Executors, which I
found in his Study, perfected, and written with his own hand fair and legible,
above any thing which yet I find of his, as if he had purposed them for the
Press, and had fitted them thereunto: one of which Sermons is this following,
which I make bold to offer to the view of the World, under the protection of
your Ladyship. It needs not a Letter or Epistle of Recommendation from me or
any other, it is able enough, and will speak for it self, both for Method and
Matter, wherein, I dare say, as the Text is Methodically, genuinely, and
naturally handled, so the matter is worthy and excellent, and diverse passages
therein not ordinary, and no wonder, seeing it is the work of a skillful
Workman, who was more then ordinarily gifted from God, and fitted for the
Work of the Ministry, which the Lord appointed him unto. The reason why I
attempt the performance of this Duty first to him, is this, because he was one
that loved me dearly in his life time, yea, honored me much by his high
esteem, and reverent speech to all, of me, and his countenancing and
encouraging me in the work of my Ministry, for the space of nine years last
past; during all which time, I exercised my Ministry in his charge, with great
approbation from him, and comfort to him, as he often confessed; so that I had
reason to be first in this work, and (lege talionis) to honor him that
honored me I have made bold, and been moved to Dedicate this Sermon to your
Ladyship for two reasons especially, first, because of that honorable esteem
and respect, which, I know, is seated in your religious heart, to all the
faithful Ministers of God, and was to the Author of this Sermon in particular
and special, whereupon I persuade my self, that you will esteem and respect
a Fatherles child of his, now tendered unto you, by me, (a friend to the dead
and the living) and afford it all the countenance you can, by kind receiving
of it, and other ways, as you would have done to the Author of it, whom you
often desired to have bin familiarly acquainted with, and to have entertained, as
you long have done, and still do, many of Gods faithful Ministers and
Servants. The second reason is, that I might take occasion hereby, publicly
to acknowledge my unfeigned thankfulness to your Ladyship, for all the
kindnesses, you have showed and done to me and mine.

This I thought to have acknowledged long before this time, by publishing some
work of my own, and dedicating it to your Ladyship, but have hitherto kept
back, for diverse reasons known to my self, notwithstanding, continuing my
resolution so to do, if God will and permit life and opportunity. Having thus
rendered my reasons why I dedicate this little work to your Ladyship, I beseech
you accept them for excuse of my boldness in so doing, and accept this work as
the labor, yea the child of a faithful servant of God, and one that put up
many a hearty prayer to God for you, especially considering, it will requite
all the countenance you can show it, by the good which (through Gods blessing)
it will do to your Soul, which I heartily wish to your Ladyship, and all that
shall read it, from him that is able with the showers of his grace to make it
fruitful to you and them. Pro. 10.22.
His blessing only makes rich both for Soul and Body; without his blessing
we Preach, and Print, and the people hear and read, in vain. To him that is
the only true God, one in Essence, three in Person, I do, and daily will,
commend your Ladyship, in my daily prayers, for attaynement of all needful
blessings for Soul and body in this life, and eternal Glory in the world to
come, through our Lord Jesus Christ; In whom

I am, and ever will be at Your Ladyships Command in the work of the Lord,
WILLIAM HOLBROOKE.

THE DESCRIPTION OF FLESHLY LVSTS.
1 PETER, CHAP. 2. ver. 11. and 12. Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as
Strangers and Pilgrims, to abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against
the Soul: And have your conversation honest, etc.


THe Church of God, having suffered a great Eclipse of her glory, having been
exceedingly diminished by the falling away of the whole Nation of the Jews, a
people which the LORD had chosen peculiar to himself, was soon after
supplied, partly, through the preaching of John the Baptist, and partly,
through the teaching and miracles of Christ himself, and partly, through the
ministry of his Apostles and Disciples, together with the happy success that
God gave thereunto; was, (I say) soon after supplied, and her breaches
repaired and filled up again, by the conversion and calling of the Gentiles.
And because the Gentiles should not fall away as the Jews had done before,
(for it is the Apostles reason, Romans 11.21. If God spared not the natural
branches, much less will he spare the wild;) therefore the Apostles used all
diligence to confirm them in that faith which they had subscribed unto. For so
it behooved the Lords husbandmen, not only to plant, and so give over, but
also to water that which they had planted; not only to sow the seed of the
Word in the hearts of men, and so leave off, but also to carry a watchful eye
over it, still cherishing it up, and preserving it from being over-runne with
weeds, or pestered with other annoyances.

Hence it was, that Paul having taken pains in preaching to many particular
Churches, did not so leave them, but in a godly jealousy over them writes
Epistle after Epistle, sometimes to the Romans, sometimes to the Corinthians,
sometimes to the Thessalonians, etc. earnestly soliciting them to stand fast
in that faith which they had received. Hence it was that James having
instructed the remnant of the twelve Tribes in the faith of Christ, did not so
leave them, but seconds his preaching with an Epistle written to them for their
confirmation in the faith. And hence it was that our Apostle Peter, being the
minister of the Circumcision, as we read, Galathians 2.7. having preached
Christ to those Gentiles that first had been converted to the profession of
the Jews, and afterward from the Jews profession to the faith of Christ, did
not so leave them; but writes this and his other Epistle general to them all,
as they were dispersed in diverse places of the world; exhorting them hereby to
walk worthy of that vocation and holy profession which they had taken upon
them: and having first showed, Chapter 1 verse 2. the great mercy of God
toward them in electing them to salvation through Jesus Christ, he does
thence enforce an exhortation, verse 13.14.15. of that Chapter, that they must
be holy, because God who is their father and has chosen them, is holy: And
having showed them secondty their Redemption, verse 18.19. that it was not made
with gold nor silver, but with the precious blood of that immaculate Lamb
Christ Jesus; he does thence infer another exhortation in the beginning of
this 2. chap. that seeing they are so pretiously bought, therefore they must
lay aside all maliciousnes, and dissimulation, and envy, and evil speaking,
and as newborn babes etc. And thirdly having amplified the great bountifulnes
of God toward them, partly by comparing them with others ver. 7.8.9. that
whereas Christ was made to others a stone to stumble at, and a rock of
offense, yet unto these he was an elect and precious stone, whereby they were
knit together in the Lords building: and partly by comparing their present
estate of grace with their former estate of nature, verse 9.10. that whereas
before, they had lien in darkness, now they were called to a mavelous
light; whereas in times past they were no people, now they are the people of
God; in times past they were not under mercy, but now they have obtained mercy;
he does thence infer, as it were by force of consequence this third
exhortation which I have now read unto you: The Sum whereof is briefly this,
to persuade those Christians to holiness of life: and as holiness of life
has two parts, so this exhortation consists of two branches answerable
thereunto. The first part of an holy life is The Mortifying and subduing of the
lusts of the flesh; and to this he exhorts us in the first branch of this
Scripture, verse 11. I beseech you Brethren abstain from etc. The second part
of an holy life is the honest conversation and carriage of our selves in the
world, and to this he exhorts us in the second branch of of this Scripture,
verse 12. Having your conversation honest, etc. In the first branch, that is,
verse 11. we may observe first the matter it self, Abstinence from fleshly
lusts; and secondly the Apostles enforcing of this matter upon them, using two
motives or inducements to persuade them to it: The first motive is drawn a
condition fidelium, from the estate and condition of Gods Children in this
life, they are Strangers and Pilgrims; the second motive is drawn a natura
concupiscentiae, from the nature of these lusts they fight against the Soul.
But yet to fasten the whole body of this exhortation upon them the rather, he
uses here two covert Insinuations: first, he closes with them by a term of
love and kindness, he calls them his dearly beloved: secondly, that he may the
better prevayle with them, he deals by humble entreatie, he beseeches them;
Dearly beloved, I beseech you. But before I come to handle either the parts
or the Insinuations, I must observe out of the coherence or agreement of this
with that which went before, one profitable note for our Instruction.

Seeing the Apostle does here infer this exhortation upon the rehearsal of
Gods blessings bestowed upon his people, as if, because God had so loved them,
therefore they were bound to perform this duty toward him, hence I note unto
you, that every blessing and mercy that God vouchsafes unto us, does
effectually call upon us to live in the fear and obedience of God.

For as Isaac dealt with his Son Jacob Genesis 28.1. he blessed him, and he
charged him, says the Text, he bestowed a blessing upon him, and withal he
charged him to perform a duty: even so does the Lord with his Children; he
gives them blessings, he bestows mercies upon them, but so, that every
blessing and favor which the Lord bestows upon them, does exact and call for
a duty that they must perform toward him.

In the 5. chap. of Esaias, verse 1.2. the Lord had done much for his Vineyard;
it was planted on a very fruitful hill, he hedged it, he gathered out the
stones of it, he planted it with the best plants, he built a Tower in the
midst of it, and made a winepresse therein: and what then? did he all this for
nothing? No; the Text says Then he looked that it should bring forth grapes;
as if the Prophet should say, because the Lord had done so much for his
Vineyard; therefore he expected, and great cause there was that it should
bring forth good store of good grapes. And this the Lord himself would teach
us by the words of his own mouth: For in Exodus 20.2. The Lord being to deliver
his Law to his people, tells them first, that he is the Lord their God, which
brought them out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage; using the
rehearsal of his goodness toward them, as a most effectual bond and
persuasion to tie them to the obedience of his Law. For thus it was even from
the first blessing that ever God bestowed upon man, there ensued a Commandment
upon it, as we read, Genesis 2.15.16. that the Lord placed Adam in the Garden of
Eden, and withal gave him Commandment, that he should abstain from the
forbidden fruit. Here then we see (beloved) the right and true use of the
blessings of God upon us; so many mercies as he shows unto us, we must esteem
to be so many spurs, to prick us forward to well doing; and to be so many
Messengers sent unto us from God, to call upon us for the due performance of
all such Christian Duties, as belong to our several callings. Satan himself,
though a malicious depraver and abuser of all Gods blessings toward us, yet
does acknowledge to Gods own face, that his blessings do exact a duty at our
hands, Does Job serve God for naught? says he, Job 1.9. As if Satan should
have said; It is true indeed, that Job is an upright and just man, one that
fears God, and eschewes evil; but does he so for naught? No, he has great
reason for it; For thou have made an hedge about him, and about all that he
has on every side. Now (Beloved) if Satan thought it reason that Job should
serve God, because God had blessed Job; oh, how wicked is our ingratitude, if,
when we have received favors and blessings at Gods hands, (as we do receive
daily) we do not in lieu and requital thereof apply our selves to Gods
service? The Apostle in the twelfth to the Romans, ver. 1. has given us an
excellent President in this case: I beseech you, says he, by the mercies of
God, that you give up your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto
God: He has no better means to adjure us, as it were, and to bind us to offer
up our selves a living sacrifice unto God, then the mercies and favors which
he has bestowed upon us.

To apply this present case more particularly to our selves, consider aright, I
beseech you, the case of these faithful, to whom the Apostle makes this
Exhortation; and when you have compared their case with your own case, then
tell me, if this same Exhortation may not as justly, nay, much more justly be
enforced upon us. These were Gentiles, and so are we; these had sitten in
darkness, and so did we; these were aliants from the covenant, and so were we;
but God had chosen them a peculiar people to himself, and so he has chosen
us; he brought them into a marveilous light, and so he has done by us; he
called them to the knowledge of his truth, and so he has called us; he
redeemed them with the precious blood of Jesus Christ, and so he has redeemed
us; he regenerated them by his spirit, and so he has done us; therefore this
Duty lies as hard upon us as upon them, and this same Exhortation is to be
pressed as forcibly upon us as upon them; wherefore, Dearly Beloved, I beseech
you as strangers and Pilgrims, to abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight
against the soul. Nay, to go a little further in this application, because
God has gone a great deal further in blessing us: they were but young Novices
in the Faith, as it seems to be implied in the second verse of this Chapter,
Newborn babes; but we have been long trained up in the knowledge, his
blessed Gospel having had free passage amongst us above these forty years:
they were dispersed abroad in the world, as appears Chapter 1. verse. 1. and
scattered here and there, but we enjoy the Communion of the Word and Sacraments
in the unity of this one particular Church; they were strangers where they
lived, but we sit at home under our Vine, and under our Fig Tree, as the
Prophet speaks, and Gods holy name be everlastingly praised for it. We need
not to gee beg the bread of life in foreign Nations, for we have it brought
home even to our doors: much more justly therefore do these extraordinary
blessings of God bind us to this Duty, then theirs did them, and much more
earnestly must this Exhortation be enforced upon us then upon them; wherefore,
Dearly beloved, I beseech you; you that have received this full measure of
love and mercy at Gods hands, I beseech you to abstain from fleshly lusts
which fight against the Soul. If we had given to him first, then these his
blessings had been but requitalls of our former kindness; but now seeing he
has loved us when we did not love him, seeing he has thus blessed us of his
own free good will, oh, how straightly do these undeserved favors of God
exact this Christian duty at our hands, even our holiness of life; wherefore I
beseech you, nay, you must know that the love of God does beseech you, or
rather impose it upon you as a necessary Duty, to abstain from fleshly lusts,
etc. And let this suffice to be observed concerning this point. Now I come to
the Insinuations; and first of the first.

Dearly Beloved, I call it an Insinuation, because the Apostle by this term
of Kindness, does artificially close with them, and wind both himself, and
his Exhortation into their hearts. For commonly the nature of Man, when it is
counseled and advised by others, is wont straight ways to look into the
heart of his Counselor, to search out with what affection he speaks it, and
accordingly as he finds the affection of his Counselor, so will he esteem of
his Counsel. If a man wills us to amend our manners, thereby vpbraiding us
with our faults, or bewraying any bitterness against us, we will reject his
counsel, though never so good: If a man advise us to any good course, for his
own profit, or for some advantage that himself may get by it, we refuse his
advise, though never so profitable: but if once we be persuaded, that he loves
us, and that for love and good will he advises us to any courses, presently we
hearken to him, and embrace his counsel, and are willing and ready to put it
in practice. Wherefore our Apostle deals very skilfully here with these
Christians, first, protesting his dear and tender love toward them, that he
does not counsel them to this for any shame he would bring upon them, or for
any vantage that he should procure to himself, but merely for his hearty
love and affection that he bears unto them, therefore they are in no case,
either to contemn it, or suspect it, but rather to embrace it with all
willingness. And here is an excellent Rule for us, to frame our counsels by;
that whenever any of us reprooues his brother for any sin, as for
drunkenness, swearing, uncleanness, or any such profane carriage, and
counsels him to amend it, we must take heed, that it come not from any gall or
bitterness in our hearts, for then it marres our Exhortation, and hardens him
more in his sin; but it must come from love within us, and that from a tender
and dear love toward him, if ever we desire that our counsel should take
effect with him in his heart, to the reformation of his life, and saving of his
soul.

Again, in that he calls them here his Dearly beloved, here is another
observation offered unto us. He had showed in the former Verses, that they were
the dearly beloved of God, and therefore here in this Verse he is bold to
call them his Dearly beloved; for, seeing that Christ did love them dearly,
his Apostle must needs love them dearly too. For the Lord never bestows his
love upon any, but withal he bestows many amiable Graces upon them, such as
may procure them love and favor amongst men; I say not, amongst carnal men,
that cannot look any farther then upon flesh and blood, nor yet amongst
worldly men, that only love those that are like themselves, but amongst
spiritual men, such as can discern the lovely gifts and graces of God,
shining in a man's soul. We read, Genesis 39.3, 4. of Joseph, that the Lord
was with him; Putiphar seeing the love of God upon him, did set his love upon
him too: and in the 21. verse of that Chapter, the Master of the Prison saw
that the Lord loved Joseph, and then he loved Joseph too; and in the 41.
Chapter, the 39. Verse, even Pharaoh himself saw that the spirit of God was in
Joseph, and therefore he favored him, and preferred him exceedingly. Thus was
it also with Christ himself, of whom we read, Luke 2.52. that he grew in love
and favor with God and with men; first, in favor with God, and then with men;
for men loved him because God loved him first. Here is then a perfect Rule,
whereby to frame our love toward men; if first we behold and descry in them
certain testimonies of the love of God, then may we be bold also to set our
dearest love and affection upon them. We must take heed that we be not too
light of our love, in bestowing it upon every one; for our Christian love is,
and ought to be a well settled affection, proceeding from a good ground, and
therefore we must bestow it especially upon those whom we see the Lord has
peculiarly endued with his sanctifying and saving grace: neither yet on the
other side must we be too sparing of our love, in bestowing it only upon some
few, that fit our own humor best, but as many as the Lord has vouchsafed to
admit into the bosom of his Church, and to call to the profession of our
Christian Faith, (except we see in them some evident cause to the contrary, as
that they are hypocrites, or yield any other manifest signs of impiety) those
we must love, as presuming and well hoping, that God does love them.

But howsoever the Apostle had many respects to draw his dearest love to these
faithful ones, partly, because they were his brethren in the flesh, but much
rather, because they were his brethren in the Lord, embracing the same faith,
worshipping the same God, regenerate by the same spirit, and living in the
communion of one and the same mystical body; yet there was one reason further
then all these, that inflamed his heart with most fervent love toward them
above all other; and this was the charge which was given to him over them, that
he should be their Instructor, to Preach the Doctrine of salvation unto them.
For the Ministerial charge, which was assigned unto Peter over the
Circumcision, Gal. 2.7. did knit his heart unto them, faster then ever the
heart of Jonathan was knit unto the heart of David; so that in this respect he
might well call them his dearly beloved. Wherein he gives an example to the
Ministers of God, teaching them how they ought to esteem the flock of Christ,
whereof the holy Ghost has made them ouer-seers; that they must carry a love
and affection toward them, and that not any common love, but such as proceeds
from the dearest and the deepest seat of their hearts. Dear is that love
which must prevail with us so far as to make us to lay down our lives for
those whom we do love; It is so dear, and such a great love, as that our
Savior, Ioh. 15.13. tells us, there can be no greater. Greater love can no
man show then this, when a man bestows his life for his friends; and yet such
must be the love of a Pastor toward his flock, even to lay down his life for
them, as Ioh. 10.11. A good Shepherd, etc. Thus it was with Moses; that would
rather be blotted out of the Book of life himself, then that the wrath of the
Lord should be powered out upon the Children of Israel, Exodus 32.32. And thus it
was with Paul; that would wish himself to be separated from Christ for his
brethren and kinsmen according to the flesh, Romans 9.3. And thus it was with the
great Shepherd of our souls, Christ himself, who did lay down his life for
his Sheep, and expose himself to all those dangers, which by our sins we
had incurred: and thus it ought to be with all the Ministers of God; they must
love their several Charges, even unto death, embracing them with their dearest
affection.

The second Insinuation is in these words, I beseech you. For although by that
Apostolic authority which he had received, he might command them, yet he had
rather to deal with them by entreatie, to beseech them. For this was a course
fitter for him, and fitter for them also. Fitter for him, as being a Minister
of the Word; it is for a Magistrate to command, it is for a Minister to
beseech: and fitter for them: the young tenderlings of a Vine are to be handled
gently and charily; and so these being but young Christians, as has been
already showed out of the second Verse, were to be mildly dealt withal.

In matters of Religion, though sometimes men may be compelled by strong hand,
and by force, to obedience, yet the readiest way, either to win those that
are without, or to contain those that are already won, in the bond of
obedience, is (for the most part) by fair means, and by kind persuasions:
Suadenda potius est pietas quam cogenda, says a learned Father, Sooner is
godliness fastened upon us by persuasion then by compulsion. And the very
Heathen man Seneca could tell us, that in good causes, Facilius ducimur quam
trahimur, It is easier to lead us on by kind entreatie, then to draw us on by
constraining means. Here then is controuled that imperious Spirit which
reigns in the Chair of the Romish Sea, that takes upon him to command all
the world. He challenges himself to be Christ's Vicar, and Peter's successor;
but whither he be either of them, let his commanding courses testify. Christ
said, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly: What meekness is there in him,
that sends forth his Mandamus, nothing but commands and threatenings to the
people of God? And Peter, as you see here, beseeches these Christians to be
advised by him: but he that challenges himself to be Peter's successor, looks
for it as a duty, to be besought and crouched unto by others, but himself
will beseech none. It may be, he succeedes him in place, though that may be
questioned too; but in meekness of Spirit, and the performance of his
Ministerial function, he does as far degenerate from Peter, as ever that
Idolatrous King Manassah did degenerate from the steps of his good Father
Hezekiah. And thus much of the Insinuations.

Now to the parts of the Exhortation; and first, of the former part, contained
in the 11. Verse, the mortifying and subduing of the lusts of the Flesh. First,
of the matter it self, and secondly, of the motives, whereby the Apostle
enforces this Exhortation upon them. First, of the matter, To abstain from
fleshly lusts. By lusts we are here to understand, the dispositions, or
inclinations that are within us: by the flesh, we are to understand, our whole
nature, and whatsoever in us is not regenerate by the spirit of God; all which
must be abstained from, they must be mortified and subdued within us; according
to that, Galatians the fifth Chapter, verse. 24. They that are Christ's, have
crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts thereof; that is, they have
crucified their nature, and the dispositions of their nature. Every one of
these words require a several Discourse; and therefore I will treat of them
severally, and first, of the lusts, secondly, of the flesh, thirdly, of
abstaining. First, of lusts.

God in the beginning created Man upright in nature, and without any blemish:
but because Man was but a creature, and therefore could not have all
perfections in himself, the Lord God furnished him with an holy appetite and
desire, whereby he might be carried to seek after God, in whom only he might
find and enjoy all perfections. This the Serpent perceiving, took occasion
hereby to solicit Eve, not to desire to enjoy God, but to desire to become
God; abusing this affection that was given to Man to make him happy, and
turning it to his utter bane and destruction. The end which the Serpent
proposed to her, to be as God, was a thing much to be desired; and the
Instrument which he used, the Apple of the forbidden tree, was very pleasant,
and much also to be desired, as is said, Genesis 3.6. and so the Serpent robbed
the Woman, and robbed her Husband, and robbed all their Posterity, of that
godly affection, that holy appetite and desire, which the Lord had furnished
Man's nature withal. Ever since which first perverting of our will and desire,
partly, by the propagation of this infection from our Parents into us, and
partly, by the Justice of God, which has inflicted it upon us as a curse of
that first sin, all the whole many of us are perverted in our wills, and so
corrupted in all our desires, that now the inclinations of our nature are no
longer desires, as they were in the beginning, but they are lusts and
concupiscences, nothing else but lewd and inordinate affections. For as a little
Leaven leaueneth the whole lump, even so this Lust has infected our whole
nature, that now we are but a mass, and a heap of Lusts. Look into all our
affections, they are nothing but Lusts: look into all our actions, they are
nothing but Lusts: look into all our sins, our original sin is nothing
but Lust, as S. James teaches, Chapter 1. Verse. 14. Every man is tempted, he is
drawn away by his own Lust: and Chap. 4. verse. 1. Whence are wars and
contentions? Are they not hence, even of your Lusts? Our actual sins are
nothing but lusts, as the Apostle shows, Galat. 5.19, 20. Where he calls the
works of the flesh, the lusts of the flesh; and the 1. Ioh. Chapter 2. verse.
16. Whatsoever is in the world, as the lust of the eyes, the lust of the flesh,
and pride of life, and this is a kind of lust too. Look into all the parts of
our bodies, and powers of our souls; and you shall find nothing but Lusts in
them: our eyes Lust after delightful sights, our ears Lust after pleasant
sounds, our stomachs after sweet meats, our hearts Lust after foolish
vanities, and the very spirit that is within us, says the Apostle, Lusts
after envy, Iam. 4.5. So then the Apostle here exhorting these Christians to
abstain from Lusts, has chosen a most significant and compendious word, to
express his meaning, he bids them to abstain from Lusts.

Wherein we may observe, first, that this is a general dehortation from all
kinds of sin, for Lust is the general name for them all; not only against
Adultery and Wantonness, which is the most natural meaning of Lust, but
against Pride, and Envy, and Oaths, and Blasphemies, and every other sin.
For he would not have the children of God be free from one sin, and defile
themselves with another, free from Adultery, but defiled with Drunkenness, or
free from Drunkenness, but defiled with Envy, but he would have them to be
entirely holy: and as in the first verse of this chapter, he willed them to lay
aside all dissimulation, all maliciousness, all evil speaking; so here he
wills them to abstain from all sin. What is it unto thy health, if thou be
free from one disease, and thy body infected with another? thou art still but a
diseased man: and what is it to the comelines of thy body, to have a fair
face, but to want the proportion of thy other limbs? Thou art still but a
deformed man: and what is it to the gracing of thy Soul in the sight of God,
to be clear from one sin, so long as another sin reigns within thee? but
if thou can sweep away these lusts which the Apostle here speaks of, then
thou art cleansed of all thy diseases to be a sound Christian, and ridd of all
thy deformities, to be gracious and acceptable in the sight of the Lord.

But we may take this exhortation to be more particular; as if the Apostle
should counsel these Christians to abstain especially from such lusts, as the
Gentiles amongst whom they lived, were addicted unto, that if they were given
to riot, these should especially endeavor themselves to sobriety; if they were
given to wantonness, these should especially labor to chastity; if they were
given to malice, these should especially labor to be most kind and gentle;
that, as it is in the 12. verse, when they should see the good examples of
these Christians, they might learn by them to be drawn from their sins, and
so glorify God in the day of their visitation. Or else we may take the
exhortation to be yet more particular; as if the Apostle should here counsel
them to enter into their own hearts, and there to make just trial what
special sin they did feel to rage most within them, and thereof they should
especially labor to purge themselves; for commonly every man, even the best of
us all, has his proper sin, some one sin, and some another, raging within
us above the rest; and I know not, whether this be that Malus Genius that evil
Spirit, which, the Heathen say, takes possession of every man; but sure I am,
that it is the proper lust of our own Nature, whether caused by the infection
of our Parents, or by the temperature of our complexions, or by some celestial
influence in our conception or birth, or rather indeed wrought in us by the
power of Satan, after we are come into the world; it is, I say, the proper
lust of every man's own nature, whereby he is inclined to one vice more then to
another. One has a touch of Envy, another has a touch of Lying, another has
a touch of evil speaking; in one is a spice of pride, in another a spice of
wantonness, in another a spice of covetousness, (I speak even of the best; for
in others it is more then a touch or spice, it reigns in the^:) in every one a
special inclination to some one special sin; and this is that lust which
fights against every ones Soul, after a special manner, as here is employed;
and therefore he would have us, as to abstain from all sins, so to make
special provision against that special Lust which is most rife and busy
within us. Ask thy own Soul, and examine thy self well, whether thou art
not more inclinable to one vice then to another; search it out thoroughly in the
bowels of thy Nature; and when thou have found what principal sin thou
feel the power of Satan and the desire of thy own flesh most often moving
thee unto, thou must consider that this is that fleshly lust, which of all
others fights most fiercely against thy Soul, and thou must know, that thou
art bound to labor especially against that lust, refraining from all occasions
and means, which may any way tend to the cherishing of that sinful and wicked
humor and lust in thee.

2. Seeing he diswades us here from lusts, we may observe that he would have
Christians not only to abstain from all sins, but also from the lusts of
sins, that is, the very first motions and inclinations to sin, for if we
do not stop and dry up the fountain of Sin, we shall hardly stay it in the
Channels; If we would kill a Serpent, we must crush him in the head: and if
we would destroy Sin, we must smother it in the very first conception. As
David, when he fought against Goliath, did smite that uncircumcised Philistine
in the forehead, and so slew him: even so must we deal with sin, we must
smite it in the forehead, and destroy it in the first motion, and the first
lust that we feel within us. For so do they that are Christ's; as the
Apostles shows, Galat. 5.24. they crucify the flesh with the affections and
lusts thereof: they crucify the flesh; there the Tree of sin is taken
down: they crucify the flesh with the affections: there both the sapp and the
heart of sin are perished: they crucify the flesh with the affections and
lusts thereof; there the root and all is withered and quite dried up. In the
first chapt. of Exodus verse 16. Pharaoh took this course to destroy the Male
Children of the Israelites; he commanded, that when their mothers had brought
them forth, death should be their midwife, they should presently be killed
and made away as soon as ever they began to live. Let us learn Pharaoh his
policy for a better practice; seeing we are to subdue sin, let the midwife
of sin be the death of sin, as soon as ever we feel it quicken within
us, and begin to live, we must presently stop the first breath that ever it
takes, and destroy it in the first motion. Learn we this same lesson of our
Savior, In the 4. chap. of Luke, verse 5. the Devil came to him, and showed
him all the Kingdoms of the world in a twinkling of an eye: it was only a
show; but our Savior could not abide a show of sin; it was but in the
twinkling of an eye; but our Savior could not abide one glimpse of sin; it
was (I say) but a moment of time; but our Savior could not abide that
temptatation should live so much as one moment of time, but so soon as ever it
began to stir and to move, presently he destroyed it.

Now as here is matter of exhortation, teaching us to beware of the first
motions of sin, so here is matter of reproof of an error in Popery, that
denies these first motions of sin to be any sins at all: they acknowledge
Lust or Concupiscene to be the cause of sin, but that it should be a sin
of it self, this they will in no wise acknowledge.

But if it be a sin to transgress the Law of God, then lust must needs be
sin: Now Saint John tells us, 1 Epistle, Chap. 3. verse. 4. that sin is
nothing else but the transgression of the Law; and it appears plainly out of
Romans 7.7. that Lust is the transgression of the Law, for the Law says, Thou
shall not lust; so that Lust must needs be sin. The Law requires that thou
should love the Lord thy God with all thy thought, Luke 10.27. therefore if
ever thy thought be inclined to sin, (as Lust takes her first hold in our
thought) thou have transgressed the Law, and sinned against God. It was but a
flying thought which the Devil suggested into the hearts of the Scribes, that
Christ blasphemed when he said to the sick of the Palsy, Thy sins are
forgiven thee: for so we read Mark. 2.6. they only reasoned so in their
hearts, as if they did not thoroughly consent unto it, but it was only a
conceit that run in their heads; and yet our Savior checkes them for it, and
calls it by the name of evil, as appears Mat. 9.4. Why think you evil in
your hearts? And if it be evil, consequently it must needs be sin. How light
soever these men make of Concupiscence, or Lust, I am sure that Paul felt by
his own experience, and to his great grief acknowledged it to be sin, as
Romans 7.20. Not I, says he, but sin that dwells in me. Their answer which
here they allege, that Lust is indeed sin, yet not properly, but only after
a kind of improper sense; if Solomon should hear it, he would condemn them
of foolishness; The fool, says he, Prou. 14.9. makes a toy of sin: and
surely, it is great foolishness, to make so small account of Lust, and to
esteem so light of sin, and to use such a toyish and frivolous distinction
in such an earnest and serious matter.

2. Now concerning the flesh, which is the second thing here to be spoken of.
By the name of flesh, we are here to understand our whole nature: for as Lust
is most proper to one sin above the rest, as namely, to Adultery, yet is it
rightly applied to all sins, because every sin is a Lust; so the flesh does
most properly signify our matter, our carnal and bodily part, as it is
opposed against our soul, or spiritual part, yet is it rightly extended to
our whole nature, both of soul and body, except we be regenerate and borne
anew; so that whatsoever is in us unregenerate, it is here called by the name
of flesh. For so it is taken, Mat. 16.17. where Christ says unto Peter, flesh
and blood has not revealed this unto thee; that is, nothing that is in the
nature of man, has taught thee this, but it is the special work of the
spirit of God. And in the 1. to the Corinthians, Chap. 2. verse. 4. (...), The
natural man; he says not, the carnal man, but even the whole nature of man,
soul and all, is so darkened, that it cannot perceive the things that are of
God: and therefore the Apostle calls our whole man, Corpus peccati, The body
of sin, Romans 6.6. because sin has infected our whole man; nay, he calls
it Corpus mortis, Romans 7.24. The body of death, because it is in it self
wholly cut off from the life of God, wherewith we were quickened before our
fall. The Reasons why the unregenerate man, and in the best of us the
unregenerate part is called by the name of flesh, as here in this place, are
two.

First, because either they proceed merely of the flesh, or at least are
wrought by the flesh. Some lusts proceed merely of the flesh: our original
sin, it is not to be thought to arise in our soul, for that is created holy,
and infused holy from above into every one of us at our first quickening in our
Mother; but it is the material part, the flesh which we draw from our Parents,
that is infected with sin in it self, and as soon as ever the soul is
united and joined unto it, it infects the soul also. As Cosbi the Midianitish
Woman defiled Zimri the Israelite, by lying with him, as we read Numbers 25.
And as Salomons wives, strange women, turned his heart after other Gods, 1
King. 11.4. And so the flesh which we receive of our Parents, as soon as it is
married, as it were, unto the soul, as soon as they are knit into one nature,
the flesh by clipping and embracing the soul, does defile the soul, and turn
it after carnal lusts: and when once this lust, this original infection has
seized upon us in body and soul too, then our nature is become like a fiery
Furnace, that continually sends forth many flames of Concupiscence: it still
eggs us on and provokes us unto sin, as the wife of Putiphar did solicit
Joseph, day by day to commit wickedness, and to sin against God. Other
lusts, though they do not arise out of the flesh, yet they are wrought in us
by the flesh: It is the old policy of Satan, to seek first to overcome the
weakest, that afterward he may overcome the strongest; he set first upon Eve,
that so he might overcome Adam; and so still he sets first upon our flesh,
which is the weakest and most inclinable to sin, that afterward he may
overcome the spirit; which, if it were not for the persuasions and allurements
of the flesh, would withstand sin. For the Devil could never do any thing
against us, but that he finds fit matter in our flesh to work upon. As our
Savior spoke of himself, Ioh. 14.30. The Prince of this world comes, and
he finds nothing in me; so if we had not any corruption in our own flesh,
Satan could even hardly fasten any temptation upon us. No, Beloved, here that
is verified which our Savior spoke in another case, Inimici hominis domestici
eius; The enemies of a man are they that are of his own household: and that
also which our Savior proved by his own experience; He that dippes his finger
with me in the dish, it is he that lifts up his heel against me; even the same
flesh which we nourish in our own bosom, lifts up it self against us to
destroy us. Here then let the children of God learn hereby to beware of their
own flesh; and whenever Satan tempts thee, take heed, that thy own flesh
do not play the traitor with thee, and deliver thee over into the will and
power of thine enemies. And let this kindle in every one of us, a serious
desire to be dissolved out of this earthly Tabernacle which we bear about us;
and to be rid from this treacherous enemy of our own flesh.

2. A second Reason, why the lusts of the unregenerate are called after the
name of flesh, is, because they tend to the cherishing of the flesh, the
carnal or natural part. For, why does the Epicure wallow up and down in all
licentiousness, and the Voluptuous man sell himself over to the pleasures of
this life, and the Covetous man obey his insatiable lust and desire of gain,
but that all things seem to tend to the cherishing of their own flesh? I
say, seem to tend, because it is but in appearance only: for indeed, these
things are so far from cheririshing the flesh, that contrariwise they are the
very spoil of our flesh and decay of our Nature. Voluptuousness, is called by
the Holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 6.18. a sin against a man's own body: Gluttony and
Drunkenness shorten men's lives and deforme their bodies, and mar their
constitutions: and Covetousness wastes away a man's spirits, and sokes up the
moisture of Nature. Let this therefore teach us to be careful and circumspect
that we be not deceived by the outward appearance of sin, though it make
never such a goodly show of cherishing our nature; seeing indeed it is the
very bane of our nature, hurtful to our bodies in this world, and the utter
destruction both of Soul and Body in the world to come.

3. Lastly, we are to speak in one word concerning Abstinence, which is the
third point here to be spoken of; Abstain from fleshly lusts. As a careful
Physician that is desirous to recover the health of his patient, does give him
special charge to abstain from such meats and drinks as are enemies to his
health; so the Apostle here wills this chosen people of God to abstain from
fleshly Lusts, and to forbear them as they love their Souls health. In the
first Epistle to the Corint. chap. 9. ver. 25. The Apostles enforces this
exhortation upon us by way of Comparison: Every one that proves Masteries,
(says he) abstaines from all things that might bring his body out of temper;
and this he does for a corruptible Crown; how much more ought we to abstain
from all fleshly lusts which will bring our Souls out of temper; especially
considering that the Crown which we strive for, is incorruptible and
everlasting in Heaven. And this is the true Abstinence which the Lord requires
at our hands, to abstain from sin, to abstain from lusts, to abstain from
the works of the flesh. Though we should abstain either from certain meats
never so precisely, or from all meats so far as it is possible, yet if we
do not withal abstain from sin and from the lusts of the flesh, it is no
abstinence at all, but rather fond superstition.

Wherefore beloved, let us hearken to this counsel of the Apostle, and observe
it in our daily practice, to abstain from fleshly lusts. Does our corrupt
nature at any time ask any thing at our hands? Let us deny it, and say it nay,
and forbear such desires. Does our flesh solicit us to do or think any
thing that is against our obedience to God? Let us deny our flesh, and forbear
all such lusts: Indeed if we were our own, then might we justly take our
liberty to our selves, and do what we list; but the Apostle 1 Cor. 6.19.
Tells us plainly, that we are not our own, but are bought with a price, even
with the most precious blood of Jesus Christ, and therefore we must be ruled
by him that bought us because we are his, and abstain from our own lusts,
and deny our own Flesh and Nature, because we are not our own. Our Savior
tells us, we must deny and forsake our selves, or else we are not to follow
him, Luke 9.23.

Oh let us follow him in the regeneration, by abstaining from our fleshly lusts
which fight against our Souls, and so we shall receive at length the end of
our Faith, the salvation of our Souls, even that incorruptible Crown, that
Crown of righteousness, spoken of by the Apostle Saint Paul in the first
Epistle to the Corinthians chap 9. ver. 25. and the second Epistle to Timothy
chap 4. ver. 8. which the Lord the righteous Judge, shall give at that day, to
all them that love that his appearing, and is attaineable by, and promised
only to those that thus abstain from and overcome their fleshly lusts; 1 Cor.
9.25. Rom 8.13. Revel. 2.26. Revel. 3.5.
which that we may so do as we are here exhorted, let us conclude with
prayer, calling upon God for the spirit of power to enable us thereunto, and
that through Jesus Christ, to whom with God the Father, and the blessed Spirit,
three distinct Persons, and yet but one God, be all Honor and Glory, both now
and for ever Amen, Amen.


