

Because that when thou go to study in holy scripture, thou should do it
with reverence, therefore for thy instruction and loving admonicion thereto, the
Reverend father in god, Nicolas, Bisshoppe of Salisbury has prescrybed the
this prayer following, taken out of the same.
O Lord God almyghtye which long agoo saydest by the mouth of James thyn
Apostle: Jacob. ^.
If any of you lack wysdom, let him ask it of God which gives it
plenteously to all men, and casts no man in the tethe, and it shall be given
him. Hear my peticion for this thy promise sake. Let my prayer ascend luckely
in to thy sight like incense. Psalm. 140. Psalm. 129. Sa^. 9.
Let thy^ ear be attent unto my deep desire. Give me wisdom which is eue^
assistent about thy seat. And put me not out from among (...), for I am thy
servant and ye son of thy handmayde* (...) her (I mean thy godly wisdom)
out of thine holy heavens, and from the trone of thy majesty, that she may be
with me, and labor with me, yt I may know what is acceptable in thy sight Oh
learn me goodness, Psalm. 118.
nurtoure, and knowledge, for I believe thy commandments. Thou art good and
gracyous, instruct me in thine ordynaunces. Let mine hertie besechynge ascend
in to thy presence. Give me understanding according to thy word. Oh give me
understanding, and I shall keep thy law, Ye I shall keep it with all mine
heart. Psa^. 24.
Show me thy ways o Lord, and teach me thy patthes. Lead me in to thy
truth and learn me, for thou art the God of my health. And on the do I depend
always. Psalm. 26.
Hear now my voice O Lord with which I have cried unto the. Have mercy upon
me, and gracyouslye hear me for Jesus Christ's sake our Lord, which lives
and reygneth with the his father and the holy ghost world without end. Amen.

After the end of any Chapter (if thou wylt) thou may say these verses
following.
Psalm. 118.
Lead me (o Lord) in thy way, and let me walk in thy truth.

Oh let mine heart delight in fearing thy name.

Order my goynges after thy word, that no wyckednes reygne in me.

Keep my steps within thy patthes, lest my fete turn in to any contrary way.

Unto the most victorious Prince and our most gracyous sovereign Lord, king
Henry the king of England and of France, lord of Irlonde. etc. Defendour of
the Faith, and under God the chief and suppreme head of the Church of England.
The right and just administracyon of the laws that God gave unto Moses and
unto Joshua: the testimonye of faythfulnes that God gave of David: the plenteous
abundaunce of wisdom that God gave unto Solomon: the lucky and prosperous age
with the multiplicacyon of sede which God gave unto Abraham and Sara his wife,
be given unto you most gracyous Prince, with your dearest just wife, and most
virtuous Pryncesse, Queen Anne, Amen.
CAiphas being bysshope of that year, like a blind prophet (not
understanding what he said) prophesied, that it was better to put Christ unto
death, then that all the people should perysshe: Io. 11. c
he meaning, that Christ was an heretic, a deceauer of the people, and a
destroyer of the law, and that it was better therefore to put Christ unto
death, tha^ to suffer him for to live, and to deceive the people. etc. where in
very deed Christ was the true prophet, the true Messiah, and the only true
Savior of the world, sent of his heavenly father to suffer the most cruel,
most shameful, and most necessary death for our redempcyon: according to ye
meaning of the prophecy truly understand.

Even after the same manner ye blind bishop of Rome, (that blind Baalam I
say) not understanding what he did, gave unto your grace this title:
Defendour of the faith, only because your hyghnes suffered your bysshoppes to
burn Gods word the rote of faith, and to persecute the lovers and mynisters
of ye same. where in very deed the blind bishop (though he knew not what
he did) prophesied, that by the ryghteous admynistracyon and contynuall
diligence of your grace, the faith should so be defended, that Gods word the
mother of Faith with the fruits thereof, should have his fre course through out
all Christendom, but specially in your realm.

If your highness now of your pryncely benignite will pardon me to compare
these two bysshoppes (I mean bishop Caiphas and the bishop of Rome) and
their prophecies together, I doubt not but we shall find them agree like
brethren, though the one be a Jew and the other a counterfayre Christian.
First, Caiphas prophesied that it was better to put Christ unto death, then
that the people should perysshe. The bishop of Rome also, not knowing what
he prophesied, gave your grace this title: Defendour of the faith. The truth
of both these prophecies is of the holy ghost (as was Baalams prophecy) though
they that spoke the^, knew not what they said. The truth of Caiphas prophecy
is, that it was necessary for man's salvation, that Christ by his death should
overcome death, and redeem us. And the truth of our Baalams prophecy is,
Nume. 24. c.
yt your grace in very deed should defend the Faith, Ye even the true faith
of Christ, no dreams, no fables, no heresy, no papisticall inuencions, but
the incorrupt faith of Gods most holy word, which to set forth (praised be
the goodness of God, and increace your gracyous purpose) your hyghnes with
your most honorable council, applies all his study and endeavor.

These two blind bysshopes now agree in ye understanding of their prophecies:
for Caiphas takes Christ for an heretic, Our Balaa^ takes the word of
Christ for heresy. Caiphas judges it to be a good deed to put Christ unto
death, that he should not deceive the people. Our Balaam calls defending of
the faith, the suppressyng, keeping secret, and burning of the word of faith:
lest the light thereof should utter his darkness: lest his own Decretales and
Decrees, his own laws and constitucions, his own statutes and inuencions
should come to none effect: lest his intolerable exactions and vsurpacions
should lose their strength: lest it should be known what a thief and
murderer he is in the cause of Christ, and how heinous a traytoure to God and
man in defraudynge all Christen kings and princes of their due obedience: lest
we your graces subjects should have eyes in the word of God, at the last to
spy out his crafty conueyau^ce and iuglynges: and lest men should se, how sore
he and his false Apostles have deceived all Christendom, specially your noble
realm of England.

Thus your grace seyth how brotherly the Iewysh bishop and our Balaam agree
together, not only in myter and outward appearaunce: but as the one
persecuted the Lord Jesus in his own person, so does the other persecute his
word and resysteth his holy ordinance in the auctorite of his anointed
kings. For so much now as the word of God is the only truth that dryueth
away all lies, and discloseth all iuglyng and disceate, therefore is our
Balaam of Rome so loathe that the scripture should be known in the mother
tongue: lest if kings and princes (specially above all other) were exercysed
therein, they should reclame and challenge again their due auctorite, which he
falsely has usurped so many years, and so (...) tie him shorter: and lest the
people being taught by the word of God, should fall from ye false feigned
obedience of him and his disguysed Apostles, unto the true obedience commanded
by Gods own mouth: as namely, to obey their prince, to obey father and
mother. etc. and not to step over father and mothers belly to enter in to his
painted religions, as his ypocrites teach: For he knows well enough, that if
the clear Son of Gods word come ones to the heat of the day, it shall
drive away all the foul mist of his deuelysh doctrines. Therefore were it more
to the mayntenaunce of Antichrists kingdom, that the world were still in
ignorance and blyndnes, and that the scripture should never come to light.
For the scripture (both in the old testament and in the new) declares most
abou^^dauntly that the office, auctorite and power given of God unto kings /
is in earth above all other powers: let them call the^ selves Popes,
Cardynalles, or what so ever they will, To. 13 a
the word of god declares them (ye and commands them under pain of
dampnacion) to be obedient unto the temporal sword: As in the old Testament
all the Prophets, Math. 17. d, Tit. 3. a Exodus 22. d. Psalm. 81. a.
Prestes and Levites were. And in the new Testament Christ and his Apostles
both were obedient them selves, and taught obedience of all men unto their
princes and temporal rulers: which here unto us in the world present the
person of God, and are called Gods in the scripture, because of the
excellency of their office. And though there were no mo auctorities but the
same, to prove the p^eminence of the temporal sword, Yet by this the
scripture declares plainly, that as there is nothing above God, so is there no
man above the king in his realm but that he only under God is the chief
head of all the co^gregacyon and church of the same. And in token that this is
true, there has been of old antiquite (and is yet unto this day) a loving
ceremonye used in your realm of England, yt wha^ your graces subjects read
your letters, or begin to talk or come^ of your hyghnes, they move their
bonettes for a sign and token of reverence unto your grace, as to their most
sovereign lord and head under God. which thing no man uses to do to any
bishop. whereby (if our understanding were not blinded) we might euydently
perceive, that even very nature teaches us the same, that scripture
commands us: and that like as it is against Gods word that a king should
not be the chief head of his people, even so (I say) is it against kind that
we should know any other head above him under God.

And that no pressed nor bishop is exempte (nor can be lawfully) from the
obedience of his prince, the scripture is full both of strayte commandments,
and practices of the holiest men. Aaron was obedient unto Moses, and called him
his lord, Nume. 12. b Ios. 4 c 3. Reg. 1. c. 3. Reg. 18. b. Leuit. 18. b.
Math. 14. a.
though he was his own brother. Eleasar and Phin^as were under the obedience
of Joshua. Nathan the prophet fell down to the ground before king David, he
had his Prince in such reverence (He made not the king for to kiss his foot
as the bishop of Rome makes Emperors to do) Notwithstondynge he spared not
to rebuke him, and that right sharply when he fell from the word of God to
adultery and manslaughter. For he was not afraid to reprove him of his sins,
no more than Helyas the prophet stood in fear to say unto king Achab: It is
thou and thy fathers house that trouble Israel, because ye have forsaken ye
commandments of the Lord, and walk after Baal. And as Johan Baptyste durst
say unto King Herod: It is not lawful for the to take thy brothers wife. But
to my purpose I pass over innumerable mo ensa^ples both of the old Testament
and of the new, for fear lest I be to tedyous unto your grace. Su^ma, in all
godly regimentes of old time the king and te^porall judge was obeyed of every
man, and was always under God the chief and suppreme head of the whole
congregacyon, and deposed even prestes when he saw an urgent cause, as Solomon
did unto Abiathar. 3. Reg. 2. d.
who could than stand against the godly obedience of his prince (except he
would be at defyaunce with God and all his holy ordinances) that were well
acquaynted with the holy scripture, which so earnestly commends unto every
one of us the auctorite and power given of God unto kings and temporal
rulers? Exodus 22. d. Ierem. 29. b. Bar. 2 c Math. 17. d,
Therefore does Moses so strately forbyde the Israelites to speak so much as
an evil word against the prince of ye people, much less than to disobeye
him, or to withstonde him. Does not Jeremy the prophet and Baruc also exhort
the people in captivity, to pray for the prosperous welfare of the king of
Babylon, and to obey him, though he was an infidele? In the new Testament wha^
our savior Christ (being yet fre and Lord of al kings and princes) showed
his obedience in payenge the trybute to our ensample, did he not a miracle
there in putting the piece of money in the fysshes mouth (that Peter might pay
the customer therewith) and all to stablysshe the obedience due unto princes?
Did not Joseph and Mary the mother of our savior Christ depart from Nazareth
unto Bethlee^, so far from home, to show their obedience in payenge the tax
to the prince? Lu. 2. a
And would not our Savior be borne in the same obedience? To. 13 a
Does not Paul pronounce him to resyste God him self, that resysteth the
auctorite of his prince? And (to be short) the Apostle Peter does not only
stablysshe the obedience unto princes and temporal rulers but affirms
plainly the king (and no bishop) to be the chief head. Innumerable places
mo are there in scripture, 1. Petr. 2. b.
which bind us to the obedience of our prince, and declare unto us, that no
man is nor can be lawfully except from the same: but that all the mynisters of
Gods word are under the te^porall sword: and Princes only to owe obedience
unto God and his word.

And where as Anthichrist unto your graces time did thrust his head into ye
imperial crown of your hyghnes (as he does yet with other noble princes mo)
that learned he of Satan the author of pride, and therein does he both against
the doctrine and also against ye ensample of Christ: which because his
kingdom was not of this world, meddled with no temporal matters, as it is
euydent both by his words and practyse: Luc. xii. Math. xxvi. Ioh. vi. Ioh.
xviii. where he yt has eyes to se, may se: and he yt has ears to hear,
may hear, yt Christ's admynistracion was nothing te^porall, but plain
spiritual, as he him self affirms and proves in the fourth chapter of saint
Luke out of the prophet Esaias: where all bysshoppes and prestes may se, how
far their byndynge and lowsynge extends, and where in their office
consists, namely in preaching the Gospel. etc.

wherefore (most gracyous prince) there is no tongue I think, that can fully
express and declare the intolerable injuries, which have been done unto God,
to al princes and to the comynalties of all christen realms, sense they which
should be only the ministers of Gods word, became lords of the world, and
thrust ye true and just princes out of their rowmes. whose heart would not
pity it (ye eue^ with lamentacyon) to remember but only the intolerable
wrong done by that Antychrist of Rome unto your graces most noble
predecessoure king John^? I pass over his pestilent pykynge of Peter pens out
of your realm: his stealing away of your money for pardons: benefices and
bysshoprykes: his disceauyng of your subjects souls with his deuelyshe
doctrynes and sects of his false religions: his bloudsheddyng of so many of
your graces people, for books of the scripture* whose heart would not be grieved
(ye and that out of measure) to call to remembrance, how obstinate and
disobedient, how presumptuous and stubburne that Antychrist made the bysshoppes
of your realm against your graces noble predecessors in times past, as it is
manifest in ye Cronicles? I trust verily there be no such now within your
realm* If there be, let them remember these words of scripture:
Presumptuousnes goes before destruccio^, Prove. 16* ^
and after a proud stomach there follows a fall.

what is now the cause of all these intolerable and no more to be suffered
abhominacions? Truly even the ignorance of the scripture of God. For how had
it else ben possible, that such blyndnes should have come in to ye world, had
not ye light of Gods word been extyncte? How could men (I say) have been so
far from the true service of God, and from the due obedience of their prince,
had not the law of God been clean shut up, depressed, cast aside, and put out
of remembrance? As it was before the time of that noble king Josias, and as it
has been also among us unto your graces time: by whose most ryghteous
admynistracyon (through the merciful goodness of God) it is now found again,
4. Re. 22. b. 2. Par. 24. c.
as it was in the days of that most virtuous king Josias. And praised be the
father, the son, and the holy ghost world without end, which so excellently
has endewed your Pryncely heart with such feruentnes to his honor, and to
the wealth of your loving subjects, that I may ryghtuously (by just occasyons
in your person) compare your hyghnes unto that noble and gracyous king, yt
lantern of light among princes, that fervent protector and defender of the
laws of God: which commanded straytly (as your grace does) that the law of
God should be read and taught unto all ye people: set the prestes to their
office in the word of god: destroyed Idolatry and false ydols: put down all
evil customs and abusyons: set up the true honor of God: applied all his
study and endeavor to the ryghtuous admynistracyon of the most incorrupt
law of God. etc. O what felicite was among ye people of Jerusalem in his
days? And what prosperous health both of soul and body follows the like
mynistracion in your hyghnes, we begin now (praised be God) to have
experience. Ierem. 44. d
For As false doctrine is the origenall cause of all evil plages and
destruccyon, so is ye true executynge of the law of God and the preaching of
the same, the mother of all godly prosperity. The only word of god (I say)
is the cause of all felicite, Sapie. 7. b.
it brings all goodness with it, it brings learning, it ge^dreth
understanding, it causes good works, it makes children of obedience,
breuely, it teaches all estates their office and duty. Seeing then that the
scripture of God teaches us every thing sufficiently, both what we ought to
do, and what we ought to leave undone: whom we are bound to obey, and whom
we should not obey: therefore (I say) it causes all prosperity, and sets
every thing in frame: and where it is taught and known, it lyghteneth all
darkenesses, comforts all sorry hertes, leaves no poor man vnhelped,
suffers nothing amysse vnamended, lets no prince be disobeyed, permytteth
no heresy to be preached: but refourmeth all things, ame^deth that is amysse,
and sets every thing in order. And why? because it is given by the
inspiracyon of God, therefore is it ever bringing profit and fruit, by
teaching, by improuynge, by amendynge and refourmyng all the^ yt will receive
it, 2. Tim. 3. b.
to make them parfecte and mete unto all good works.

Considering now (most gracyous prince) the inestimable treasure, fruit and
prosperity everlasting, that God gives with his word, and trusting in his
infynite goodness that he would bring my simple and rude labor herin to good
effect, therefore as the holy ghost moved other me^ to do the cost hereof, so
was I boldened in God, to labor in the same. Again, considering your
Imperial majesty not only to be my natural sovereign liege Lord and chief
head of ye church of England, but also the true defender and maynteyner of
Gods laws, I thought it my duty and to belong unto my allegiaunce, when I
had translated this Bible, not only to dedicate this translacyon unto your
highness, but wholly to commytte it unto the same: to the intent that if any
thing therein be translated amysse (for in many things we fail, even when we
think so be sure) it may sto^de in your graces hands, to correct it, to
amend it, to improve it, ye and clean to reiecte it, if your godly wisdom
shall think it necessary. And as I do with all humblenes submit mine
understanding and my poor translacyon unto ye spirit of truth in your
grace, so make I this protestacyon (having God to record in my conscience)
that I have nether wrested nor altered so much as one word for the
mayntenau^ce of any manner of sect: but have with a clear conscience purely
and faithfully translated this out of five sundry interpreters, having only
the manifest truth of the scripture before mine eyes: Trusting in the goodness
of God, that it shall be unto his worship: quietness and tranquilite unto your
hyghnes: a perfect stablyshment of all Gods ordynaunces within your graces
domynion: a general comfort to all Christen hertes, and a continual
thankfulness both of old and young unto god, and to your grace, for being
our Moses, and for bringynge us out of this old Egypt from the cruel hands
of our spiritual Pharao For where were the Jews (by ten thousand parts) so
much bound unto King David, for subduynge of great Goliath and all their
enemies, 1. Reg. 17. g.
as we are to your grace, for delyuerynge us out of our old Babylonycall
captiuyte? For yt which delyueraunce and victory I beseke our only medyatoure
Jesus Christ, to make soch means for us unto his heavenly father, yt we never
be unthankful unto him ner unto your grace: but that we ever increace in the
fear of him, in obedience unto your highness, in love unfeigned unto our
neghbours: and in all virtue that comes of God. To whom for ye defending of
his blessed word (by your graces most rightful administracyon) be honor and
thanks, glory and dominyon, world without end, Amen.

Your graces humble subject and daily orator, Miles Couerdale.

A prologe. Miles Couerdale Unto the Christen reader.
Considering how excellent knowledge and learning an interpreter of scripture
ought to have in the tongues, and ponderyng also mine own insufficiency
therein, and how weak I am to perform ye office of a translatoure, I was the
more loathe to meddle with this work Notwithstondynge when I co^sydered how
great pytie it was that we should want it so long, and called to my
remembrance ye aduersite of them, which were not only of ripe knowledge, but
would also with all their hertes have performed yt they began, if they had
not had impediment: considering (I say) that by reason of their aduersyte it
could not so soon have been brought to an end, as our most prosperous
nacyon would feign have had it: these and other reasonable causes considered, I
was the more bold to take it in hand. And to help me herin, I have had
sondrye translacions, not only in latin, but also of the Douche interpreters:
whom (because of their synguler gifts and special diligence in the Bible) I
have been the more glad to follow for the most part, according as I was
required. But to say the truth before God, it was nether my labor ner
desire, to have this work put in my hand: nevertheless it grieved me ye other
nacyo^s should be more plenteously provided for with ye scripture in their
mother tongue, then we: therefore when I was instantly required, though I could
not do so well as I would, I thought it yet my duty to do my best, and that
with a good will.

Where as some men think now yt many translacyons make diuisyon in ye faith
and in the people of God, yt is not so: for it was never better with the
congregation of god, then when every church almost had ye Bible of a sondrye
tra^slacion. Among the Greeks had not Origin a special translacyon? Had not
Vulgarius one peculyar, and likewise Chrysostom? Beside the seuentye
interpreters, is there not the translacyon of Aquila, of Theodotio, of
Symachus, and of sondrye other? Again among the Latin men, thou find yt
every one almost used a special and sondrye translacyon: for in so much as
every bishop had the knowledge of ye tongues, he gave his diligence to have
the Bible of his own translacion. The doctors, as Hireneus, Cyprianus,
Tertullian, S. Iherome, S. Augustine, Hylarius and S. Ambrose upon diverse
places of the scripture, read not ye text all alyke.

Therefore ought it not to be taken as euel, yt soch men as have understanding
now in our time, exercise them selves in ye tongues, and give their diligence
to translate out of one language in to another. Ye we ought rather to give god
hye thanks therefore, which through his sprete stereth up men's minds, so to
exercise them selves therein. would god it had never been left of after ye time
of S. Augustine, then should we never have come in to soch blindness and
ignorance, in to soch erroures and delusyons. For as soon as the Bible was
cast aside, and no more put in exercise, then began every one of his own
head to write what so ever came in to his brain and yt seemed to be good in
his own eyes: and so grew ye darkness of men's traditions And this same is ye
cause yt we have had so many writers, which seldom made me^cyon of ye
scripture of the Bible: and though they some time aleged it, yet was it done so
far out of season and so wide from ye purpose, that a man may well perceive,
how that they never saw the oryginall.

Seeing then yt this diligent exercise of translatynge does so much good and
edifyeth in other languages, why should it do evil in ours? Doutles like as
all nacyons in ye dyuersite of speeches may know one God in the unity of
faith, and be one in love: even so may diverse translacyons understand one
another, and that in the head articles and ground of our most blessed faith,
though they use sondrye words. wherefore me think we have great occasyon to
give thanks unto God, that he has opened unto his church the gift of
interpretacyon and of pryntyng, and that there are now at this time so many*
which with soch diligence and faithfulness interpret ye scripture to the
honor of god and edifyenge of his people, where as (like as when many are
shutynge together) every one does his best to be nyest the mark. And though
they can not all attain thereto, yet shuteth one nyer then another, and hytteth
it better then another, ye one can do it better the^ another. who is now then
so unreasonable, so despytefull, or enuyous, as to abhor him yt does all his
diligence to hytte ye prycke, and to shute nyest it, though he mysse and come
not nyest the mark? Ought not soch one rather to be commended, and to be helped
forward, that he may exercise himself the more therein?

For the which cause (acordyng as I was desired) I took the more upon me to set
forth this special translacyon, not as a checker, not as a reprouer, or
despyser of other men's translacyons (for among many as yet I have found none
without occasyon of great thankesgeuynge unto god) but lowly and faithfully
have I followed mine interpreters, and that under correccyon. And though I have
failed any where (as there is noman but he mysseth in some thing) love shall
constyrre all to ye best without any perverse judgment. There is noman living
yt cause all things, nether has god given any man to know every thing. One
seyth more clearly then another, one has more understanding then another, one
can utter a thing better then another, but noman ought to envy, or dispyse
another. He that can do better then another, should not set him at naught yt
understands less: Ye he that has ye more understanding, ought to remember
that the same gift is not his but Gods, and yt God has given it him to teach
and enfourme the ignorant. If thou have knowledge therefore to judge where any
fault is made, I doubt not but thou will help to amend it, if love be joined
with thy knowledge. Howbeit wherein so ever I can perceive by my self, or by the
informacyon of other, that I have failed (as it is no wonder) I shall now by
the help of God ouerloke it better and amend it.

Now will I exhort the (who so ever thou be ye read scripture) if thou find
ought therein yt thou vnderstondest not, or that apeareth to be repugnaunt,
give no temerarious ner haystye judgment thereof: but ascrybe it to thine own
ignorance, not to the scripture, think yt thou vnderstondest it not, or yt it
has some other meaning, or yt it is happlye ouersene of ye interpreters, or
wrong prynted. Again, it shall greatly help yt to understand scripture, if
thou mark not only what is spoken or written, but of whom, and unto whom,
with what words, at what time where, to what intent, with what circumstaunce,
considering what goes before, and what follows after. For there be some
things which are done and written, to the intent yt we should do likewise: as
when Abraham believes God, is obedient unto his word, and defends Loath his
kynsman from violent wrong. There be some things also which are written, to
the intent yt we should eschew soch like. As when David lies with Vrias wife,
and causes him to be slain. Therefore (I say) when thou read scripture, be
wise and circumspecte: and when thou come to soch strange manners of
speaking and dark sentences, to soch parables and similitudes, to soch
dreams or vysions as are hyd from thy understanding, committee them unto God
or to the gift of his holy sprete in them yt are better learned then thou.

As for the commendacyon of Gods holy scripture, I would feign magnifye it as
it is worthy, but I am far vnsufficie^t thereto. and therefore I thought it
better for me to hold my tongue, then with few words to praise or comme^de it:
exhorting ye (most dear reader) so to love it, so to cleue unto it, and so to
follow it in thy daily conuersacyon, yt other men seeing thy good works and
the fruits of ye holy ghost in the, may praise the father of heaven, and give
his word a good report: for to live after the law of God, and to lead a
virtuous conuersacyon, is the greatest praise yt thou can give unto his
doctrine.

But as touching the evil report and disprayse that the good word of God
has by the corrupt and evil conuersacyon of some, yt daily hear it and
profess it outwardly with their mouths, I exhort ye (most dear reader) let
not yt offend the ner withdraw thy mind from the love of ye truth, nether
move ye to be partaker in like unthankfulness: but seeing ye light is come in
to the world, love no more the works of darkness, receive not the grace of god
in vain. Call to thy remembrance how loving and merciful God is unto the,
how kyndly and fatherly he helps the in al^ trouble, teaches thine
ignorance, heals the in all thy sycknesse, forgeueth the all thy sins,
fedeth ye, gives the drink, helps ye out of preson, norysheth the in
strange countrees, cares for the, and seyeth yt thou want nothing. Call
this to mind (I say) and that earnestly, and consydre how thou have received
of god all these benefits (ye and many mo then thou can desire) how thou
art bound likewise to show thy self unto thy neighbor as far as thou
can, to teach him if he be ignorant, to help him in all his trouble, to
heal his sycknes, to forgive him his offenses, and that heartily, to feed him,
to cherish him, to care for him, and to se yt he want nothyng^ And on this
behalf I beseke the (thou yt have ye riches of this world, and love God
with thy heart) to lift up thine eyes, and se how great a multitude of poor
people run through every town: have pity on thine own flesh, help them
with a good heart, and do with thy council all that ever thou can, that this
unshamefast beggynge may be put down, that these idle folks may be set to
labor, and that soch as are not able to get their living, may be provided
for. At the leest thou yt art of council with soch as are in auctoryte, give
them some occasyon to cast their heads together, and to make prouysyon for the
poor. Put the in remembrance of those noble cities in other countrees, that
by the auctoryte of their princes have so rychely and well provided for their
poor people, to the great shame and deshonestye of us, if we likewise
receauynge ye word of God, show not soch like fruits thereof. would God yt
those men (whose office is to maynteyne ye common wealth) were as diligent in
this cause as they are in other. Let us bewarre by times, for after
unthankfulness there follows ever a plage: the mercyful hand of God be with
us, and defend us that we be not partakers thereof.

Go to now (most dear reader) and sit the down at the Lords fete and read
his words, and (as Moses teaches the Jews) take them in to their heart, and
let thy talking and communicacion be of them when thou syttest in thine house,
Deute. 6. a.
or go by ye way, when thou lie down, and when thou ryseth up. And above
all things fasshyon thy life, and co^uersacion acordyng to the doctrine of the
holy ghost therein, that thou may be partaker of ye good promyses of god in
the Bible, and be heir of his blessing in Christ. In whom if thou put thy
trust, and be an unfeigned reader or hearer of his word with thy heart, thou
shall find sweetness theryn, and spy wo^derous things, to thy
understanding, to the avoiding of all sedicyous sects, to the abhorrynge of
thy old sinful life, and to the stablyshynge of thy godly conuersacyon.

In the first book of Moses (called Genesis) thou may learn to know the
almightye power of god in creatynge all of naught, his infinite wisdom in
ordryng the same, his ryghteousnes in punyshynge ye ungodly, his love and
fatherly mercy in comfortynge the righteous with his promise. etc.

In the second book (called Exodus) we se the mighty arm of god, in
delyuerynge his people from so great bondage out of Egypt, and what prouysyon
he makes for them in the wilderness, how he teaches them with his wholesome
word and how the Tabernacle was made and set up.

In the third book (called Leuiticus) is declared what sacrifices the prestes
and Levites used, and what their office and ministracyon was.

In the fourth book (called Numerus) is declared how the people are nombred and
mustred, how the captains are chosen after ye trybes and kynreds, how they
went forth to ye battayll, how they pitched their tents, and how they brake
up.

The fyfth book (called Deuteronomium) shows how that Moses now being old,
rehearses the law of god unto ye people, puts them in remembrance again
of all the wonders and benefices that god had showed for them, and exhorts
them earnestly to love ye Lord their god, to cleue unto him, to put their
trust in him and to harken unto his voice.

After the death of Moses does Iosue bring the people in to the lord of
promise where God does wondrous things for his people by Iosue, which
distributeth ye land unto them, unto every trybe their possession. But in
their wealth they forgot the goodness of God, so that often times he gave the^
over in to the hand of their enemies. Nevertheless when so ever they called
faithfully upon him, and converted, he delivered them again, as the book of
Judges declares.

In the books of the kings, is descrybed the regiment of good and evil
princes, and how the decay of all nations comes by euel kings. For in
Jeroboam thou seyst what myschefe, what ydolatrye and soch like abhominacyon
follows, wha^ the king is a maynteyner of false doctrine, and causes the
people to sin against God, which fallinge away from gods word, increased so
sore among them, that it was the cause of all their sorrow and misery, and the
very occasion why Israel first and then Judah, were carried away in to
captyuite. Again, in Iosaphat, in Ezechias and in Josias thou seyst the nature
of a virtuous king. 2. Par. 17. b.
He puts down the houses of ydolatrye, seyth that his prestes teach
nothing but ye law of God, commands his lords to go with them, and to se
that they teach the people. In these kings (I say) thou seyst the co^dicyon
of a true defender of ye faith, for he spares nether cost ner labor, to
manteyne the laws of God, to seek the wealth and prosperity of his people, and
to rote out the wicked. And where soch a prince is, thou seyst again, how God
defends him and his people, though he have never so many enemies. Thus went
it with the^ in the old time, and even after ye same manner goes it now with
us: God be praised therefore, and grant us of his fatherly mercy, that we be
not unthankful: lest where he now gives us a Iosaphat, an Ezechias, ye a
very Josias, he send us a Pharao, a Jeroboam, or an Achab.

In the two first books of E^dras and in Hester thou seyst the delyueraunce of
the people, which though they were but few, yet is it unto us all a special
comfort, for so much as God is not forgetful of his promise, but brings them
out of captivity, acordynge as he had told them before.

In the book of Job we learn comfort and patience, in that God not only
punysheth the wicked, but proves and tries the just and righteous (howbeit
there is noman innocent in his sight) by diverse troubles in this life,
declaryng thereby, yt they are not his bastardes, but his dear sons, and that
he loves them.

In the Psalms we learn how to resort only unto God in all our troubles, to
seek help at him, to call only upon him, to satle our minds by patience,
and how we ought in prosperity to be thankful unto him,

The Proverbs and the Preacher of Solomon teach us wisdom, to know God, our
own selves, and the world, and how vain all things are, save only to cleue
unto God.

As for the doctrine of the Prophets, what is it else, but an earnest
exhortacion to eschew sin, and to turn unto God? a faithful promise of the
mercy and pardon of God, unto all them yt turn unto him, and a threatenyng of
his wrath to the ungodly? saving that here and there they prophecye also
manifestly of Christ, of ye expulsion of the Jews, and calling of the Heythen.

Thus much thought I to speak of ye old Testament, wherein almyghtie God
opens unto us his mighty power, his wisdom, his loving mercy and
righteousness: for the which cause it ought of no man to be abhorred,
despised, or lightly regarded, as though it were an old scripture yt nothing
belo^ged unto us, or yt now were to be refused. For it is Gods true scripture
and testimony, which the Lord Jesus commands the Jews to search. who so
ever believes not the scripture, Io. 5. d
believes not Christ, and who so refuses it, refuses God also.

The New Testament or Gospel, is a manifest and clear testymony of Christ how
God perfourmeth his ooth and promise made in the old Testament, how the New is
declared and included in the Old, and the Old fulfilled and verifyed in the
New.

Now where as the most famous interpreters of all give sondrye judgments of
the text (so far as it is done by ye sprete of knowledge in the holy ghost)
me think noman should be offended there at, for they refer their doings in
mekenes to the sprete of truth in the congregacyon of god: and sure I am, that
there comes more knowledge and understanding of the scripture by their
sondrie translacyons, then by all the gloses of our sophistical doctors. For
that one interprets somthynge obscurely in one place, the same trans^ateth
another (or else he him self) more manifestly by a more plain vocable of the
same meaning in another place. Be not thou offended therefore (good Reader)
though one call a scrybe, that another calls a lawyer: or elders, that
another calls father and mother: or repentance, that another calls
pennaunce or amendment. For if thou be not disceaued by men's traditions, thou
shall find no more dyuersite between these terms then between four pens and a
grote. And this manner have I used in my translacyon, calling it in some place
pennaunce, that in another place I call repentance, and that not only because
the interpreters have done so before me, but that the adversaries of the truth
may se, how that we abhor not this word pe^naunce (as they untruly report
of us) no more then the interpreters of latin abhor penitere, when they read
resipiscere. Only our hertes desire unto God, is, that his people be not
blinded in their understanding, lest they believe pennaunce to be ought save a
very repentance, ame^dment, or conuersyon unto God, and to be an unfeigned new
creature in Christ, and to live acordyng to his law. For else shall they fall in
to the old blasphemy of Christ's blood, and believe, that they the^ selves are
able to make satisfaccion unto God for their own sins, from the which
error god of his mercy and ple^teous goodness preserve all his.

Now to conclude: for so much as all the scripture is written for thy doctrine
and ensample, it shall be necessary for the, to take hold upon it, while it is
offered the, ye and with ten hands thankfully to receive it. And though it be
not worthily ministered unto the in this translacyon (by reason of my rudnes)
Yet if thou be fervent in thy prayer, God shall not only send it the in a
better shappe, by the mynistracyon of other that began it before, but shall
also move the hertes of them, which as yet meddled not withal, to take it in
hand, and to bestow the gift of their understanding thereon, as well in our
language as other famous interpreters do in other languages. And I pray God,
that through my poor ministracyon here in, I may give them that can do better,
some occasyon so to do: exhortyng the (most dear reader) in the mean while on
Gods behalf, if thou be a head, a Judge, or ruler of ye people, that thou let
not the book of this law depart out of thy mouth, but exercise thyselfe
therein both day and night, Ios. 1. a Deute. 17. d
and be ever readyng in it as long as thou lyuest: that thou may learn to
fear the Lord thy God, and not to turn aside from the commandment, nether
to the right hand ner to the left: left thou be a knower of persons in
judgment, and wrest the right of the stranger, of the fatherles or of the
wedowe, Deute. 24. Roma. 12. b. 1. Pet. 4. b. Actu. 20. d 1. Petr. 5. a. 1.
Tim. 4. b. Ti. 2. a
and so ye curse to come upon the. But what office so ever thou have wait upon
it, and execute it, to the mayntenaunce of peace, to the wealth of thy people,
defending the laws of God, and the lovers thereof, and to the destruccyon of
the wicked.

If thou be a preacher, and have the ouersighte of the flock of Christ, awake
and feed Christ's sheep with a good heart, and spare no labor to do them
good, seek not thy self, and bewarre of fylthy lucre / but be unto ye flock
an ensample, in ye word, in co^uersacyon, in love, in feruentnes of ye sprete,
and be ever reading, exhorting, and teaching in Gods word, that the people
of God run not unto other doctrynes and lest thou thy self (when thou
should teach other) be found ignorant therein And rather then thou would
teach the people any other thing then Gods word take the book in thine hand,
and read the words eue^ as they stand therein (for it is no shame so to do,
it is more shame to make a lie) This I say for soch, as are not yet expert in
the scripture, for I reprove no preaching without the book as long as they
say the truth.

If thou be a man that have wife and children, first love thy wife, Ephe. 5, c.
acordynge to the ensample of the love, wherewith Christ loved the congregation,
and remember that so doing, thou love even thyselfe: if thou hate her, thou
hate thine own flesh: if thou cherishe her and make much of her, thou
cherisest and make much of thyselfe for she is bone of thy bones, and flesh
of thy flesh. And who so ever thou be that have children, bring them up in the
nurtour and informacion of the Lord. Ephe. 6. a.
And if thou be ignorant, or art otherwise occupied laufully that thou can
not teach them thy self, then be even as diligent to seek a good master for
thy children, as thou wast to seek a mother to bear them: for there lies as
great weight in the one as in ye other. Ye better it were for the^ to be
unborn, then not to fear God, or to be euel brought up. which thing (I mean
bringing up well of children) if it be diligently looked to, it is the
vpholdinge of all common welthes: and the negligence of the same, the very
decay of all realms.

Finally, who so ever thou be, take these words of scripture in to thy heart,
and be not only an outward hearer, but a doer thereafter, and practyse
thyselfe therein: that thou may feel in thine heart, the sweet promyses thereof
for thy consolacion in all trouble, and for the sure stablyshinge of thy hope
in Christ, and have ever an eye to ye words of scripture, that if thou be a
teacher of other thou may be within the bounds of the truth, or at the
leest though thou be but an hearer or reader of another man's doings, thou
may yet have knowledge to judge all spretes, and be fre from every error,
to the utter destruction of all sedicious sects and strange doctrynes, that
the holy scripture may have fre passage, and be had in reputacion, to the
worship of the author thereof, which is even God himself: to whom for his
most blessed word be glory and domynion now and ever. Amen.

The books of the hole Bible* how they are named in Englysh and Latin / how
long they are written in the allegacions, how many chapters every book has,
and in what leaf every one begins.
The books of the first part.
Abbreuiacion. Book. Chapters. Leaf. Genesis Genesis, the first book of Moses. l.
First. Exo. Exodus, the second book of Moses. xl. xxiiii. Leui. Leuiticus, the
third book of Moses. xxvii. xlii. Number. Numerus, the fourth book of Moses.
xxxvi. lv. Deuteronomy. Deuteronomion, the fyfth book of Moses. xxxiiii. lxxiiii.

The books of the second part.
Abbreuiacion. Book Chapters. Leaf. Ios. Iosue, the book of Joshua. xxiiii. ii.
Iud. Iudicum, the book of the Judges. xxi. xiii. Ruth. Ruth, the book of Ruth.
iiii. xxiiii. I. Reg. Regum, the first book of the kings. xxxi. xxvi. II. Reg.
Regum, the second book of the kings. xxiiii. xl. III. Reg. Regum, the third
book of the kings. xxii. lii. IIII. Reg. Regum, the fourth book of the kings.
xxv. lxvi. I. Par. Paralipomenon, ye.I. book of ye Cronicles. xxx. lxxix. II.
Par. Paralipomenon, ye.II. book of ye Cronicles. xxxvi. xci. I. Esd. Esdre, the
first book of Esdras. x. cvii. II, Esd. Esdre, the second book of Esdras.
xiii. cxi. Hester. Hester, the book of Hester. x. cxvii.

The books of the third part.
Abbreuiacion. book. Chapters. Leaf. Job. Job, the book of Job. xlii. first
Psalm. Psalterium, the Psalter. cl. xii. Pro. Prouerbia, the proverbs of
Solomon. xxxi. xxxviii. Eccle. Ecclesiastes, the preacher of Solomon. xii.
xlvii. Cant. Cantica Canticoru^, Salomons balettes. viii. l.

The Prophets.
Abbreuiacion. Book. Chapters. Leaf. Esa. Esaias, Esaias the prophet. lxvi. ii.
Iere. Ieremias, Jeremy the prophet. lii. xxiiii. Tren. Trent, the lamentacions
of Jeremy. v. xlix. Bar. Baruc, Baruc the prophet. vi. li. Eze. Ezechiel,
Ezechiel the prophet. xlviii. lv. Dan. Daniel, Daniel the prophet. xii.
lxxvii. Ose. Oseas, Oseas the prophet. xiiii. lxxxiiii. Joel. Joel, Joel the
prophet. iii. lxxxvii. Amo. Amos, Amos the prophet. ix. lxxxviii Abd. Abdias,
Abdy the prophet. i. xc. Ion. Jonas, Jonas the prophet. iiii. xci. Mich.
Micheas, Micheas the prophet. vii. xcii. Na. Naum, Naum the prophet. iii.
xciiii. Aba. Abacuc, Abacuc the prophet* iii, xcv. Soph. Sophonias, Sophony
the prophet. iii. xcvi. Agg. Aggeus, Aggeus the prophet. ii. xcvii. Zacha.
Zacharias, Zachary the prophet. xiiii. xcvii. Mal, Malachias, Malachy the
prophet. iii. ci. III. Esdre. Esdre, the third book of Esdras. ix ii. IIII.
Esdre. Esdre. the fourth book of Esdras. xvi. viii. Tob. Tobias. the book of
Tobias. xiiii. xx. Judith. Judith. the book of Judith. xvi. xxiiii. Certain
Chapiters of Hester. vi. xxx. Sap. Sapientia. the book of wisdom. xix. xxxii.
Eccli. Ecclesiasticus, Jesus Syrac. li. xxxix. Sus. Susanna, the storye of
Susanna. i lvii. Bell. Bell, the storye of Bell. i. lviii. I. Mac. Machabeorum,
the first book of the Match. xvi. lix. II. Mac. Machabeoru^, The second book of
the Mac. xv. lxxiii.

The new Testament.
Abreuiacion. Book. Chapters. Leafe^ Math. Matthew the Evangelist. xxviii. ii^
Mar. Mark the Euangelst xvi. xvi^ Luc. Luke the Evangelist. xxiiiii. xxv. Ioh.
Ihon the Evangelist. xxi. xl. Act. The Acts of the Apostles xxviii. li. Romans
The Epistle to the Romans. xvi. lxvi. I. Cor. The first epistle to the
Corinthians. xvi. lxxii. II. Cor. The second epistle to the Corinthians. xiii.
lxxviii. Gal. The epistle to the Galathians. vi. lxxxii. Ephe. The Epistle to
the Ephesians vi. lxxxiiii. Phil. The epistle to the Philippians. iiii. lxxxvi.
Col. The epistle to the Collossians iiii. lxxxvii. I. Tess. The first Epistle
to the Tessalonians. v. lxxxix. II. Tess. The second Epistle to the
Tessalonians. iii. xc. I. Timo. The first Epistle unto Timothy. vi. xci. II.
Tim. The second Epistle unto Timothy. iiii. xci^. Tit. The epistle unto Tytus
iii. xciiii. Phile. The epistle unto Philemon i. xciiii. I. Pet. The first
epistle of S. Peter v. xcv. II. Pet. The second epistle of S. Peter. iii.
xcvi. I. Ioh. The first epistle of S. Ihon. v. xcviii. II. Ioh. The second
epistle of S. Ihon i. xcix. III. Ioh. The third epistle of S. Ihon i. xcix.
Heb. The epistle unto the Hebrews xiii. c. Iac. The epistle of S. James v.
ciiii. Iud. The epistle of S. Jude. i. cvi. Apo. The Reuelacion of S. Ihon.
xxii. cvi.

The first book of Moses / called Genesis
what this book conteyneth.
Chap. i. The creacion of the world in six days / and of man. Chap ii. The
rest of the seventh day. The tree of knowledge of good and evil is forbydde^
etc. Of the creacion of Eua.
Chap. iii, The serpent deceaueth the woman: they transgress and are driven
out of paradyse. Chap. iiii. Abels offering pleases God: therefore does his
brother Cayn hate him: murthureth him: and is cursed. Of the children of Cayn.
Chap. v. Of the generation, age and death of Ada^: Seth and his sons unto
Noe. Chap. vi. The occasion of the floude: and of the preparynge of the arcke.
Chap. vii. Noe with his household is preserved in the arcke: where as all the
world perishes through the floude. Chap. viii. The floude abateth. Noe goes
out of arcke. etc. Chap. ix. God blesses Noe and his sons: forbyddeth to
eat the blood of beestes, and to shed ma^s blood: makes a conuenaunt (and
gives the raynbowe for a token of the same) that he will destroy the world
no more by water. Noe is dronken. Ham uncovers him, and gets his curse.
Chap. x. The increace of ma^s generacio^ by Noes three sons: which go abroad
and begin to build. Chap. xi. The building of the tower of Babel is
hyndreth through the confusyon of the tongues. The generation of Sem until
Abram: which goes with Loath unto Haran. Chap. xii. Abram goes with Loath into
a strange land at the word of the Lord: which appears unto him in Canaan:
and promises to give the same land unto his sede: Afterward goes Abram into
Egypt and fayneth Saray to be his sister. Chap. xiii. Abram and Loath depart
again out of Egypt: and have so many cattle that they can not dwell
together. Abram receaueth the blessing and promise. Chap. xiiii. Loath is taken
presoner: Abram delivers him: Melchisedech fedeth Abram at his returning:
Abram gives him tithes of the spoils: and holds nothing of the king of
Sodoms goods. Chap. xv. God conforteth Abram and promyseth him sede: He
believes and is justified. Chap. xvi. Sarai gives Abram leave to take her maid
which bears him Ismaell. Chap. xvii. The co^uenaunt of circumcisyon. etc.
Chap. xviii. Three me^ appear unto Abraham to whom the destruction of Sodom is
declared. Chap. xix. Loath receaueth the two angels the: men of Sodom go about
to abuse them: Loath is delivered Sodom is destroyed: Loths wife is turned to a
pyler of salt: and his daughters bear children unto him. Chap. xx. Abraham
departs as a stranger in to Gerar: and fayneth Sarai to be his sister: the
king takes her and gives him her again. Chap. xxi. The birth of Isaac: Agar
is put out with her son. Abraham and Abimelech are sworn friends. Chap.
xxii. God tries Abraham which at his word would offer his own son. The
promise is confirmed unto him with an ooth. Chap. xxiii. The death of Sara: for
whom Abraham byeth a piece of land to burye her in. Chap. xxiiii. Abraham will
have his son to mary in his own kynred: the servant brings Rebecca: who^
Isaac takes to wife. Chap. xxv. Abraham begets mo children by another wife:
gives his good unto Isaac and dies. Isaac begins to grow: Esau sells
his birth right. Chap. xxvi Isaac goes into Gerar: fayneth Rebecca to be his
sister: increasseth in riches: The Philistines stop his wells. Abimelech and
he are sworn friends. Chap. xxvii. Jacob is blessed before Esau: and Esau
threateneth him: but he flies into Haram to Laba^ his mothers brother. Chap.
xxviii. Isaac s^ndeth Jacob away to mary among Labans daughters, Jacob seyth
a vision, God confirms him the promise made unto Abraham: whereupon Jacob
makes a vow. Chap. xxix. Jacob gives Labans sheep to drynke^ serves seven
year for Rachell: Lea is given him: and yet serves he seven year mo for
Rachell. Chap. xxx. Rachel gives Jacob her maiden and so does Lea: they bear
him children: his reward is appointed with a condition: whereby he is made
rich. Chap. xxxi. Jacob goes home ward. Rachell stealet^ her fathers images.
Laban ouertaketh them and fyndeth not his images: they swear together: the
angel meteth Jacob. Chap. xxxii. Jacob sends presents unto Esau: Puts
God in remembrance of his promise: and wresteleth with the angel: which
chaun^eth his name and blesses him. Chap. xxxiii. Jacob and Esau are agreed.
etc. Chap. xxxiiii. Dyna Jacobs daughter is forced by Sychem: whereof there
comes great blood sheddynge. Chap. xxxv. Rachell dies at the birth of
Benjamin. Ruben lies with his fathers concubyne. Chap. xxxvi. Of the princes
that came of Esau: and how Esau departs from his brother. Chap. xxxvii.
Joseph is hated of his brethren: and sold in to Egypt. Chap. xxxviii. Judah
lies with his daughter in law which bears him two sons. Chap. xxxix.
Joseph is beloved: and because he will not consent to the inordinate desire of
his mastresse, he is put in prison. Chap. xl. Joseph expounds the dreams of
the two presoners. Chap. xli. Joseph declares Pharaos dream: and is made a
Lord of Egypt. The derth begins. Chap. xlii. Joseph's brethren come in to
Egypt to bye corn: and are troubled of him. Chap. xliii. They come again for
corn: bring Ben-Iamyn with them: and are put to more trouble. Chap. xliiii.
As they go home he causes the^ be brought again: and put to more fear. Chap.
xlv. Joseph utters him self to his brethren: and sends for his father.
Chap. xlvi. Jacob comes in to Egypt with all his people: Joseph receaueth
him. Chap. xlvii. Pharao gives them the land of G^sen: ye derth is great in
Egypt. etc. Chap. xlviii. Jacob is sick: and blesses Joseph's sons. Chap.
xlix. Jacob before his death tells his sons what shall happen unto them,
and dies. Chap. l. Joseph burieth his father: and charge his brethren
concerning his bones: and dies in Egypt*
(...) lege of good and evil, shall thou not eat. For look in what day so
ever thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye the death.



And the LORD God said: It is not good yt man should be alone. I will make him
an help, Some read* * (...) be next by him.
to bear him company. And when God the LORD had made of the earth all manner
beasts of the field, and all manner fowls under the heaven, he brought them
unto man, to se what he would call the^: For as man called all manner of living
souls, so are their

Then the LORD God caused an herd sleep to fall upon man, and he slepte. And
he took out one of his rybbes, and (in stead thereof) he filled up ye place
with flesh. And the LORD God made a woman, ^ Cor. 11. a
of ye rybbe that he took out of man, and brought her unto him. Then said man:
This is once bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh. She shall be called woman,
because she was taken of man. Matt. 19. a Mar 10. a ^phe. 5. c ^ Cor. 6. c Genesis
3. b
For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and cleue unto his wife,
and they two shall be one flesh. And they were both naked, the man and his wife,
and were not ashamed.



The III. Chapter.
Eccl^ 25. d
the beasts of the field (which ye LORD God had made) and said unto the
woman: Ye, has God said indede: 2. Cor. 11. a
Ye shall not eat of all manner trees in the garden? Then said the woman unto
the serpent: We eat of the fruit of the trees in the garden: But as for the
fruit of the tree that is in the mids of the garden, God has said: Eat not
ye of it, and touch it not, lest ye dye.

Then said the serpent unto the woman: Iere. 14. b and 23. c
Tush, ye shall not dye the death. For God does know, that in what day so
ever ye eat of it, your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as God, and know
both good and evil. And the woman saw that ye tree was good to eat of, and
lustye unto the eyes, and a pleasant tree Some read: * while it made wise.
to make wise, and took of the fruit of it, and ate, and gave unto her husband
also thereof, and he ate. Then were the eyes of them both opened, and they
perceived that they were naked, and sowed Gene. 2. d
and made them apurns.

And they herd the voice of the LORD God, which walked in the garden in the
cool of the day. And Adam hyd him self with his wife, from the presence of ye
LORD God among the trees of the garden. And ye LORD God called Adam, and
said unto him: Where art thou? And he said: I herd thy voice in the garden,
and was afraid, because I am naked, and therefore I hyd myself. And he said:
who told the, that thou art naked? Have thou not eaten of the tree, whereof I
commanded the, yt thou should not eat?

Then said Adam: The woman which LORD God said unto the woman: wherefore have
thou done this? The woman said: the serpent disceaued me so, that I ate. Apo.
12. c
Then said the LORD God unto the serpent: Because thou have done this, cursed
be thou above all catell and above all beasts of the field. Upon thy belly
shall thou go, and earth shall thou eat all the days of thy life. And I will
put enemyte between the and the woman, and between ye sede and her sede. Matt.
4. a
Col. 2. b
The same shall tread down thy head, and thou shall tread him on the hele.

And unto the woman he said: I will increase thy sorrow, when thou art with
child: with pain shall thou bear thy children, and Some read: * Thou shall
bow down thy self before thy husband.
thy lust shall pertayne unto ye huszbande, and he shall rule the.

And unto Adam he said: For so much as thou have herkened unto the voice of
thy wife, and have eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded the, saying: thou
shall not eat of it. Cursed be ye earth for thy sake. With sorrow shall thou
eat thereof, all the days Eccl. 40. b Job 34. b
whence thou art taken: for earth thou art, and unto earth shall thou be turned
again.

And Adam called his wife Hena, because she is the mother of all living. And
the LORD God made Adam and his wife garments of skynnes, and those he put on
them. And the LORD God said: lo, Adam is become as it were one of us, and
knows good and evil. But now lest he stretch his hand, and take also of the
tree of life, and eat, and live for ever. Then the LORD God put him out of the
garden of Eden, to till ye earth, whence he was taken. And he cast Adam out.
And before the garden of Eden he set Cherubes, and a naked syrie sword, to
keep ye way unto the tree of life.

The IIII. Chapter.
LORD. And she proceaded forth, and bare his brother Abell. And Abell became a
shepherde, but Cain became an huszbande man.

And it fortuned after certain days, that Cain brought of the fruit of the
earth, an offrynge unto ye LORD. And Abell brought also of the firstlinges of
his sheep, and of ye fat of them. Heb. 11. a
And the LORD had respect unto Abell and to his offering: but unto Cain and
his offering he looked not. Then was Cain exceadinge wroth, and his
countenance changed. And the LORD said unto Cain: Why art thou angry? and
why does thy countenance change? Is it not so? that if thou do well, thou
shall receive it: but and if thou do evil, thy sin lies open in the door?
Some read: * Let it be subdued unto the, and rule thou it.
Shall he then be subdued unto the? and will thou rule him? And Cain talked with
Abell his brother.

And it happened, that when they were in the field, Cain arose against Abell
his brother, and slew him. Then said the LORD Sap. 10. a 1. Ioh 3. b Heb. 12.
d
And he said: What have thou done? The voice of thy brothers blood cries
unto me out of the earth. And now shall thou be cursed upon the earth, which
has opened her mouth, and received thy brothers blood of thine hand. When
thou tyllest ye ground, she shall henszforth not give her power unto the. Pro.
^
A vagabunde and a rennagate shall thou be upon ye earth. And Cain said unto
ye LORD: my sin is greater, Job ^
then that it may be forgeuen me. Behold, thou castest me out this day from
out of ye land, and from ye sight must I hyde myself, and must be a vagabunde
and a rennagate upon ye earth. And thus shall it go with me: that who so fyndeth
me, shall slaye me.

But the LORD said thus unto him: Genesis ^
it shall be avenged seuenfolde. And the LORD put a marck upon Cain, that no man
which found him, should kill him. So Cain went out from ye face of the LORD,
and dwelt in the land Nod, upon the east side of Eden.

And Cain lay with his wife, which conceived and bare Henoch. And he builded a
cite, and called it after the name of his son Henoch. And Henoch begat Irad,
Irad begat Mahuiael. Mahuiael begat Mathusael. Mathusael begat Lamech.

And Lamech took him two wives: ye one was called Ada, and the other Zilla. And
Ada bare Iabel, of whom came they that dwelt in tents and had catell. And his
brothers name was Iuball: Of him came they that occupied harpes and pypes. And
Zilla she also

And Lamech said unto his wives Ada and Zilla: Hear my voice (ye wives of
Lamech) and harken unto my words: for I have slain a man, and wounded my
self: and (have killed) a young man, and gotten my self strypes. Cain shall be
aue^ged seven times: but Lamech seven and seventy times.

Adam lay yet with his wife again, and she bare a son, and called him Seth.
For God (said she) has appointed me another sede, for Abell, whom Cain slew.
And Seth begat a son also, and called him Enos. At the same time began men
to call upon the name of the LORD.

The V. Chapter.
^. Par. 1. a
and begat a son, which was like his own image, and called his name Seth:
and lived thereafter eight hundredth year, and begat sons and daughters. And
his whole age was nine hundredth and thirty years, and so he dyed.

Seth was an hundredth and five year old, and begat Enos: and lived thereafter
eight hundredth and seven year, and begat sons and daughters. And his whole
age was nyene hundredth and twolue years, and so he dyed.



Kenan was seue^tie year old, and begat Mahalaliel: and lived thereafter eight
hundredth and forty year, and begat sons and daughters. And his whole age
was nyene hundredth and ten years, and so he dyed.

Mahalaliel was three score year old and five, and begat Iared: and lived
thereafter eight hundredth and thirty year, and begat sons and daughters. And
his whole age was eight hundredth, nyentie and five years, and so he dyed.



Eccli. 44. b lib. 11. a
Henoch was five and three score year old, and begat Mathusalah: and led a
godly conversation three hundredth years thereafter, and begat sons and
daughters. And his whole age was three hundredth and five and three score years.
Sap. 4. b 4. Re. 2. a
And for so much as he lived a godly life, God took him away, and he was
no more seen.

Mathusalah was an u^hdreth and seven and four score year old, and begat
Lamech: and lived thereafter seven hundredth and two and four score year, and
begat sons and daughters. And his whole age was nyene hundredth and nyene and
trescore years, and so he dyed.

Lamech was an hundredth and two and four score year old, and begat a son,
and called him Noe, and said: This same shall comfort us in our works, and
in the sorrow of our hondes upon the earth, Genesis 3. d
which the LORD has cursed. After this he lived five hundredth and five and
nyentie year, and begat sons and daughters. And his whole age was seven
hundredth seven and seventy years, and so he dyed.

Noe was five hundredth year old, and begat Sem, Ham and Iaphet.

The VI. Chapter.
SO when men began to multiply LORD: My sprete shall not allwaye strive with
man, for he is but flesh also. 1. Pet. 3. c
I will yet give him respyte an hundredth and twenty years. There were giauntes
also in the world at that time. For when the children of God had lain with the
daughters of men, and begotten them children, ye same (children) became mighty
in the world, and men of renown.

But when the LORD saw yt the wickedness 1. Re. 15. c
that he had made man upon the earth, and he sorowed in his heart, and said: I
will destroy man kind which I have made, from the earth: both man, be,
worm, and foul under the heaven: for it repents me, that I have made them.
Esa. 42. c
Nevertheless Noe found grace in the sight of the LORD.

This is ye generation of Noe. Noe was a righteous and parfecte man, Eccl. 44. b
and led a godly life in his time, and begat three sons: Sem, Ham and Iaphet.
Notwithstondinge ye earth was corrupt in ye sight of God, and full of
myschefe. Then God looked upon ye earth: and lo, it was corrupt (for all flesh
had corrupt his way upon the earth.)

Then said God unto Noe: Then end and pitch it within and without with pitch
and make it after this fashion: The length shall be three hundredth cubits, the
breadth fifty cubits, and the heyght thirty cubits. A wyndow shall thou make
above of a cubyte great: but the door shall thou set in the myddest in the
side of it: And the Arc shall thou make with three loftes one above another.
For ^o, I will bring a floude of water upon the earth, to destroy all flesh
(wherein the breath of life is) under the heaven: All that is upon earth, shall
perish.



The VII. Chapter.


LORD said unto Noe: Go in to the Arcke thou and thy whole house: ^. Pet. 2. b
for the have I seen righteous before me at this time. Leuit. 11. a
Of all clean beasts take unto the seven and seven, the male and his female.
And of unclean beasts a pair, the male and his female. Like wise of the
fowls under the heaven, seven and seven, the male and his female, that there
may besede left a live upon the whole earth.

For yet after seven days, I will send rain upon the earth forty days and
forty nights, and will destroy all manner of things that I have made, from
of the face of the earth.

And Noe did all that the LORD commanded Matt. ^ Luc. 1
with his sons, his wife, and his sons wives, for the waters of the floude.
Of clean beasts and of unclean, of all fethered fowls, and of all that
crepeth upon earth, went in unto him to the Arcke by pares, a male and a
female, as ye LORD commanded him. And when the seven days were past, the
water floude came upon the earth.

In the six hundredth year of Noes age, upon the seuentene day of the second
month, that same day were all ye fountaynes of the great deep broken up, and
the wyndowes of heaven were opened, and there came a rain upon ye earth
forty days and forty nights.

Upon the self same day went Noe in to LORD shut (the door) upon him.

Then came the water floude forty days Eccli* ^
and bare up the Arcke, and lift it up over ye earth. Thus the water prevailed,
and increased sore upon the earth, so that the Arcke went upon the waters. Ye
the waters prevailed and increased so sore upon earth, that all the hye
mountains under the whole heaven were covered. Fyftene cubytes hye prevailed
ye waters over the mountains, which were covered.

Then all flesh that crepte upon earth, perished, both fowls, catell, beasts,
and all yt moved upon earth, and all men. What so ever had the breath of life
upon the dry land, dyed.

Thus was destroyed all that was upon the earth, both man and beast, Sap. ^^
both worms and fowls under ye heaven: all these were destroyed from the
earth, Save Noe only remained, and they that were with him in the Arcke. And
the waters prevailed upon the earth, an hundredth and fifty days.

The VIII. Chapter.


Upon the seuentene day of the seventh month rested the Arcke upon the
mountains of Ararat. And the waters went away and decreased until the tenth
month: for the first day of the tenth month, the tops of the mountains
appeared.

After forty days Noe opened ye wyndow of the Arcke which he had made* and
sent forth a raven, which flew out, and (...)
came again, until the waters were dried up upon the earth.



Then he abode yet seven days mo, and sent out the dove again out of the
Arc: and she returned unto him about the even tide: and behold, she had
broken of a leaf of an olyue tree, and bare it in her nebb. Then Noe perceived,
that the waters were abated upon the earth. Nevertheless he tarried yet seven
other days, and sent forth the dove, which came no more to him again.

In the sixte hundredth and one year of Noes age, upon the first day of ye
first month, the waters were dried up upon the earth. Then Noe took of the
hatches of the Arc, and saw yt the face of the earth was dry. So upon the
seven and twentye day of the second month the whole earth was dry.

Then spoke God unto Noe, and said: ^ene. 1. d


So Noe went out, with his sons, and with his wife, and with his sons
wives. All the beasts also and all the worms, and all the fowls, and all
that crepte upon the earth, went out of the Arc, every one unto his like.

And Noe builded an altar unto ye LORD, Leui. 11.
and took of all manner of clean beasts and of all manner of clean fowls, and
offered bre^^ sacrifices upon ye altar. And ye LORD smelled the sweet savor,
and said in his heart: I will hence forth curse the earth no more for ma^s sake,
for the ymaginacion of man's heart is evil, even from the very youth of him.
Therefore from hence forth I will no more smite all that lives, as I have done.
Nether shall sowynge time and harvest, cold (...) heat Summer and winter,
day and (...) cease so long as the earth endure^*

The IX. Chapter.


ANd God blessed Noe and his sons, Genesis 1. d
so have I given you all. Leui. 7. c and 17. d
Only eat not the flesh with the blood, wherein the soul is: For the blood
of you wherein your soul is, will I require of the hand of all beasts: and
the soul of man will I require of man's hand, Exo. 21. c
ye^ every man's soul of another hand.

He that sheddeth ma^s blood, Tren. 4. b Mat. 26. c Apo. 13. b
his blood shall be shed by man again, for God made man after his own
licknesse. As for you, be ye fruitful, and increase, Genesis 1. ^
and be occupied upon the earth, that ye may multiplye therein.

Farthermore, God said unto Noe and Esa. 54. a
I make my covenant with you, and with your sede after you, and with every
living creature that is with you, both foul, catell, and all beasts upon the
earth with you, of all that is gone out of the Arc, what so ever beast of the
earth it be: And thus I make my covenant with you, ^cclesias^^ci. 44. b
that hence forth all flesh shall not be destroyed with the waters of any
floude, and from hence forth there shall come no floude to destroy the earth.

And God said: This is the token of my covenant which I have made between me
and you, and all living creatures among you for evermore: My bow will I set
in the clouds, and it shall be the token of my covenant between me and ye
earth: so that wha^ I bring clouds upon the earth, the bow shall appear in
the clouds. And then will I think upon my covenant betwixt me and you and
all living creatures in all manner of flesh: so that from hence forth there
shall no more come any floude of water to

The sons of Noe which went out of the Arc, are these: Sem, Ham and Iaphet.
As for Ham, he is the father of Canaa^. These are Noes three sons, of whom all
lands were ouerspred.



Esa. 5. a Matt. 21. a
and planted a vyniarde. And drank of the wine, and was dronken, and lay
uncovered in his tente. Now when Ha^ the father of Canaan saw his fathers
preuities, he told his two brethren without. The^ took Sem and Iaphet a
mantell and put it upon both their shulders, and went backwarde, and covered
their fathers secrets: and their faces were turned aside, yt they should not
se their fathers preuyties.

So when Noe awaked from his wine, and perceived what his younger son had done
unto him, he said: Cursed be Canaan, and a servant of servants be he unto
his brethren. He said morouer: Praised be the LORD God of Sem, and Canaan be
his servant. God increase Iaphet, and let him dwell in the tents of Sem, and
Canaan be his servant.

And Noe lived after the floude three hundredth and fifty year, so yt his whole
age was ix* hundredth and fyftie year, and so he dyed.

The X. Chapter.
THis is the generation of the children

The children of Iaphet are these: Gomer, Magog, Madai, Iauan, Tubal, 1. Pat*
Mesech and Thyras. The children of Gomer are these: Ascenas, Riphat and
Toga^ma. The children of Iauan are these: Elisa, Tharsis, Cithim and Dodanim:
Of these are divided the Isles of ye Heithen in their countrees, every one after
his speech, kynred and people.

The children of Ham are these: Chus, Misraim, Phut and Canaan. The children of
Chus are these: Seba, Heuila Sabtha, Reyma and Sabthecha.

The children of Reyma are these: Sheba LORD. Thereof comes the proverb:
This is a mighty hunter before the LORD like as Nemrod. And the origenall of
his kingdom was Babel, Erech, Gene. ^
Acad and Chalne in ye land of Synear. Out of that lord came Assure, and
builded Niniue, and ye streets of ye cite, and Calah, and Ressen between Ninyue
and Calah: This is a great cite. Ionae ^^
Mizraim begat Ludim, Enamim, Leabim, Naphtuhim, Pathrusim and Cas^uhim, from
whence came the Philistynes and Capthorims. Canaa^ also begat Zidon his eldest
son, and Heth, Iebusi,



This is now ye generation of ye children of Noe in their kynredes and people.
Of these were ye people upon earth spread a broad after ye floude.

The XI. Chapter.
^ome ^ade: ^ro^ the (...).
toward the East, they found a plain in ye land of Synear, and there they
dwelt, and said one to another: Come on, let us make bryck and burn it. And
they took bryck for stone, and slyme for mortar, And said: Come, let us build
a cite and a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven, yt we may make us a
name, before we be scatred abroad in all lands. Then came ye LORD down, to se
ye cite and tower, yt ye children of me^ had builded. And ye LORD said:
Behold, the people is one, and have one manner of language among the^ all, and
this have they begone to do, and will not leave of from all yt they have
purposed Deu. 32. a
Thus ye LORD scatred the^ from thence in all lo^des, so yt they left of to
build the cite. Therefore is it called Babell, because the LORD confounded
there the language of all the world, and from thence scatred them abroad in to
all lands.

These are ye generacions of Sem. Sem was an hundredth year old, and begat
Arphachsad two year after the floude, and lived thereafter five hundredth year,
and begat sons and daughters.

Arphachsad was five and thirty year old, and begat Salah, and lived
thereafter four hundredth and three year, and begat sons and daughters.



Eber was four and thirty year old, and begat Peleg, and lived thereafter
four hundredth and thirty year, and begat sons and daughters.

Peleg was thirty year old, and begat Regu, and lived thereafter two hundredth
and nyene year, and begat sons and daughters.

Regu was two and thirty year old, and begat Serug, and lived thereafter two
hundredth and seven year, and begat sons and daughters.

Serug was thirty year old, and begat Nahor, and lived thereafter two
hundredth year, and begat sons and daughters.

Nahor was nyene and twentye year old, and begat Terah, and lived herafter an
hundredth and nyentene year, and begat sons and daughters.

Terah was seventy year old, and begat

These are the generations of Terah: Te: rah begat Abram, Nahor and Haran.
Iosu. 24. a 1. Pa^. 1. b
And Haran begat Lot, but Hara^ dyed before Terah his father in ye land where
he was borne, at Vr in Chaldea.

Then Abram and Nahor took them wives. Abrams wife was called Sarai, Genesis 20. c
Genesis 22. d
and Nahors wife Milca the daughter of Haran, which was father of Milca and
Iisca. But Sarai was baren, and had no child.

Then took Terah Abra^ his son, Iosu. 24. a 2. Esd 9. b Iudi^. 5. b
and Lot his son Harans son, and Sarai his daughter in law, his son
Abrams wife, and carried them with him from Vr in Chaldea, to go in to the land
of Canaan. And they came to Haran, and dwelt there. And Terah was two hundredth
and five year old, and dyed in Haran.

The XII. Chapter.
ANd ye LORD said unto Abram: Get Acto. ^. a
and from thy kynred, and out of thy fathers house, in to a land which I will
show the. And I will make of the a mighty people, and will bless the, and make
the a great name, ye thou shall be a very blessing. Genesis 27. ^ Gene. 1^.
Genesis 22. c Acto. 3. ^
I will bless them that bless the, and curse them that curse the: and in the
shall all the generacions of the earth be blessed.

Then went Abram out, as the LORD commanded him, and Lot went with him.
Five and seventy year old was Abra^, when he went out of Haran. So Abram
took Sarai his wife, and Lot his brothers son, with all their goods which they
had gotten, and souls which they begat in Hara^, and departed to go in to ye
land of Canaan. Genesis 14. ^
And when they were come in to the same land, he went through, till he came
unto the place of Sichem, Genesis 10. ^ and 13. a
for ye Cananites dwelt in ye lord at ye same time.

Then the LORD appeared unto Abra^, and said: Genesis 17. a
This land will I give unto ye sede. And there he builded an altar unto ye
LORD, which appeared unto him. The^ brake he up from thence, unto a mountain
yt lay on ye east side of the cite of Bethel, and pitched his tent: so yt he
had Bethel on the west side, and Ay on ye east side: and there builded he an
altar also unto the LORD, and called upon the name of the LORD. Afterward
departed Abram farther, and took his iourneye southwarde. But there came a
derth in the land.

Genesis 20. a and 26. a
they will say: She is his wife, and so shall they slaye me, and save the alive.
Therefore (I pray ye) say thou art my sister, that I may fare the better by
reason of the, and that my soul may live for thy sake.



But ye LORD plaged Pharao and his house with great plages, Esa. 43. a
because of Sarai Abra^s wife. Then Pharao called Abra^ unto him, and said:
Why have thou dealt thus with me? Wherefore toldest thou not me at the first, yt
she was thy wife? Why saydest thou then, that she was ye sister? Wherefore I
took her to my wife. And now lo, there is ye wife, take her, and go thy way.
He gave his officers also a charge over him, to conveye him out, and his wife,
and all that he had.

The XIII. Chapter.
LORD Lot also which went with him, Genesis 12. b
had sheep, great catell and tents: so yt the land was not able to receive
them, that they might dwell together: for the substance of their riches was so
great, Genesis 36. a
that they could not dwell together. And there fell a strife between the
hirdmen of Abrams catell, (...)
and the hirdmen of Lots catell. The Cananites also and the Pheresites dwelt at
that time in the land.

Then said Abram unto Lot: O let there (...)
Depart fro me, I pray the. If thou will go to the left hand, I will take the
right: Or if thou will go to the right hand, I will take the left. Then Lot
lift up his eyes, and be held all the country round about Iorda^, that it
was a plenteous country of water. For before the LORD destroyed Sodoma and
Gomorra, it was round about Zoar, even as the pleasant garden of the LORD,
and as the land of Egipte.

Then Lot chose all the coasts of Iorda^, (...)
and sinned exceadingly against the LORD.

Now when Lot was departed from Abram, the LORD said unto Abram: Lift up
thine eyes, and look from the place where thou dwell, northwarde,
southwarde, Acts ^^
will I give unto the and to thy sede for ever, and will make thy sede as the
dust of the earth: so that if a man can nombre the dust of the earth, he shall
nombre thy sede also. Arise, and go through the land, in the length and breadth,
for I will give it unto the.

So Abram removed his tent, Genesis ^
and went and dwelt in ye Okegroue of Mamre, which is in Ebron, and builded
there an altar unto the LORD.



The XIIII. Chapter.
ANd it chaunsed in the time of Amraphel the king of Synear, Arioch the king
of Ellasar, Kedorlaomer the king of Elam, and Thydeal the king of ye Heithen,
That they made war with Bera ye king of Sodom, and with Birsa the king of
Gomorra, and with Sineab the king of Adama, and with Semeaber the king of
Zeboim, and with the king of Bela, which is called Zoar. These came all
together in to the broad valley, where now the salt see is: for twolue years
were they subjects unto king Kedorlaomer, and in the thirtenth year they
fell from him. Therefore in the fourtenth year came Kedorlaomer, and the kings
yt were with him, and smote the Giauntes in Astaroth Karnaim, and Susim at Ham,
and Emim in the field of Kiriathaim, and ye Horites in their own mount Seir
unto the plain of Pharan, which bordreth upon the wilderness. And then they
turned, and came to the well of judgment (which is Cades) and smote all the
country of the Amalechites, and also the Amorites, that dwelt in Hazezon Thamar.



Genesis 13. d
which dwelt in the Okegroue of Mamre the Amoryte, which was the brother of
Escol and Aner: for these were confederate with Abram.

^u. 10. b Re. 30. b (...). 41 c
Now when Abram herd yt his brother was taken, he harnessed his bond
servants borne in his own house, three hundredth and eightene, and followed
after them until Dan, and divided the^, and fell upon them by night with his
servants, and smote the^, and chased them away unto Hoba, which lies on ye
left hand of the cite of Damascos, (...) 39. b
and brought again all the goods, and also his brother Lot, and his goods,
ye women also and the people. And as he came again from the slaughter of
Kedorlaomer and of the kings that were with him, the king of Sodom went to
mete him in to the plain field, Number. 31. b
which is called kings dale.

But Melchisedech the king of Salem brought forth bred and wine. And he being
Hebr. 7. a
blessed him and said: Blessed be thou Abram unto the most hye God possessor
of heaven and earth. And praised be God the Highest, which has delivered thine
enemies in to thy hands. And Abram gave him tithes of all.

Then said the king of Sodom unto Abram: Give me the souls, and take ye
goods unto thy self. But Abram said unto the king of Sodom: I lift up my
hand unto the LORD the most hye God, possessor of heaven and earth, that I
will not take of all that is thine, so much as a threde or a shue lachet, lest
thou should say: I have made Abram rich: Save only that which the young
men have spent, and the men Aner Escol and Mamre, that went with me, let them
take their part.

The XV. Chapter.
IT happened after these acts, yt the LORD came unto Abra^ in a vysion, and
said: Fear not Abram, I am thy shylde and thy exceadinge great reward. But
Abram said: LORD LORD, what will thou give me? I go childles, and the
servant of my house (this Eleasar of Damascos) has a son. And Abram said
morouer: Behold, unto me have thou given no sede: and lo, the son of my
household shall be mine heir. And behold, the word of the LORD spoke unto
him, and said: He shall not be thine heir, but one that shall come out of thine
own body, he shall be thine heir. And he bad him go forth, and said: Look up
unto heaven, Deu. 10. d Esa. 49 d Iere. 33. d
and tell ye stars: Can thou nombre them? And he said unto him: To. 4. d
Even so shall thy sede be.

Abram believed the LORD, and yt was Psalm. 105. d Romans 4. a Gala. 3. a Iaco. 2.
c
And he said unto him: I am ye LORD, Genesis 11. d
yt brought the from Vr out of Chaldea, to give ye this land to possess it.
But Abram said: LORD LORD, Whereby shall I know, that I shall possess it?
And he said unto him: Take a cow of three year old, and a she goat of three
year old, Iere. 34. d
and a ram of three year old, and a turtyll dove, and a young pigeon. And he
took all these, and divided them in the mids, and laid the one part over
against the other, but the fowls divided he not. And the fowls fell upon the
flesh, but Abram drove them away.

Now when the Son began to go down, there fell an heavy sleep upon Abram.
And lo, fear and great darcknes fell upon him. And he said unto Abram: know
this of a suertye, Act. 7. a Exodus 12. f Iudit. 5. b Gala. 3. c
that thy sede shall be a stranger, in a land that is not theirs. And they
shall make bond men of them, and entreat them evil four hundredth years.
But the people who^ they shall serve, will I judge. Afterward shall they go
forth with great substance: Exo. 12. c
and thou shall depart unto thy fathers in peace, Gene. 25* a
and shall be buried in a good age. Deuteronomy. 20. c
for the wickedness of ye Amorites is not yet full.

So when the Son was down, and it was waxed darcke: Behold, there smoked a
furnace, and a fire brande went between ye parts. The same day made the
LORD a covenant with Abram, Genesis 24. a 3. Re. 4. b
and said: Unto thy sede will I give this lord, from the water of Egipte, unto
the great water Euphrates: the Kenytes, the Kenizites, the Kydmonites, the
Hethites, the Pherezites, the Giauntes, the Amorites, the Cananites, the
Gergesites, and the Iebusites.

The XVI. Chapter.


LORD has closed me, Isa. 66. b
that I can not bear. Go in (I pray the) unto my maid: Genesis 30. a
peradventure I shall be multiplied by her, more then by myself. And Abram
herkened unto the voice of Sarai. Than Sarai Abrams wife took Agar her maid ye
Egipcian (after they had dwelt ten year in the land of Canaan) and gave her
unto her huszbande Abra^, to be his wife. And he went in unto Agar, and she
conceived. Now when she saw yt she had conceived, she despised her mastresse.

LORD be judge between me and the. And Abram said unto Sarai: Behold, thy
maid is under thine auctorite, do with her, as it pleases the.

Now when Sarai dealt hardly with her, she fled from her. But the angel of the
LORD found her beside a well of water in the wilderness (even by the well in
the way to Sur) and said unto her: Agar Sarais maid, whence come thou?
and whyther wylt thou go? She said: I fle fro my mastresse Sarai. And the
angel of the LORD said unto her: Return to thy mastresse again,

And the angel of the LORD said unto her: Behold, I will so encreace ye sede,
that it shall not be nombred for multitude. And the angel of the LORD said
further unto her: Behold, thou art with child, (...)
and shall bring forth a son, and shall call his name Ismael, because the
LORD has herd ye trouble. He shall be a wild man. His hand against every
man, and every man's hand against him: and he shall dwell over against all his
brethren.

And she called the name of the LORD yt

And Agar bare Abram a son, Gal. ^
and Abram called his sons name which Agar bare him, Ismael. And Abram was
four score year old and six, when Agar bare him Ismael.

The XVII. Chapter.
NOw when Abram was nyentye year LORD appeared unto him, and said unto him:
(...)
I am the almighty God, walk before me, and be incorrupt. And I will make
my covenant between me and the, and will multiplye the exceadyngly. Then fell
Abram upon his face.

And God talked furthur with him, and said: Behold, It is I, and have my
covenant with the, and thou shall be a father of many people. Therefore shall
thou no more be called Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham: Romans ^
For I have made the a father of many nations, and I will multiplye the
exceadingly, and will make people of ye, Man* ^
ye and kings also shall come out of the. Morouer I will make my covenant
between me and the, and thy sede after the through out their posterities, that
it may be an everlasting covenant, so that I will be the God of the, and of
thy sede after the. And unto the and to thy sede after the, will I give the
land, wherein thou art a stranger: even all the land of Canaan for an
everlasting possession, and will be their God.

(...). 7. a
thou and they sede after the. This is my covenant which ye shall keep between
me and you, and thy sede after ye through out their posterites. Every manchilde
that is among you, shall be circumcyded: and ye shall circumcyde the foreskynne
of yor flesh. This same shall be a token of the covenant between me and you.
Every manchilde when it is eight days old, (...). 2. c (...). 12. a (...). 2^
shall be circu^cyded through out your posterities: In like manner all houszholde
folks borne at home, or bought, or any other also that is a stranger and not
of thy sede. Thus shall my covenant be in your flesh for an everlasting
covenant. And if there shall be any manchilde vncircumcided in the fore skin
of his flesh, his soul shall be roted out from his people, because he has
broken my covenant.

Matt. 1. a
ye and kings of many people. Then fell Abraham upon his face, and laughed,
and said in his heart: Shall a child be borne unto me that am an hundredth year
old? And shall Sara yt is nyentie year old, bear? And Abraham said unto
God: O that Israel might live in thy sight. ^en. 16. c (...) 13. b ^. R^. 13. a
^uc. 1. c
Then said God: Ye even Sara thy wife shall bear the a son, and thou shall
call his name Isaac: for with him will I make my everlasting covenant, and
with his sede after him. And as concerning Ismael also, I have herd thy
request: Behold, I have blessed him, and will increase him, and multiplye him
exceadingly. ^en. 25. b
Twolue princes shall he beget, and I will make a great nation of him.



The XVIII. Chapter.


ANnd the LORD apeared unto him Genesis 19. a
as he sat in his tent door in the heat of ye day. And as he lift up his
eyes, and looked, behold, there stood three men over against him. And when he
saw them, he ran to mete them from his tent door, and bowed himself down
upon the ground, and said: LORD, if I have found favor in thy sight, 1.
Re. 28. c
go not by ye servant. There shall be brought you a little water, and ye shall
wash yor fete, and rest your selves under the tree. Iudi. 19. b Psalm. 103. b
And I will fet you a morsel of bred, to comfort your hertes withal, and
then shall ye go your ways, for therefore are ye come to your servant. They
said: do even so as thou have spoken:

Abraham went a pace in to the tent to Sara, and said: Make haist, Matt. 13.
c Luc. 13. b
and mengle three peckes of fine meele, knede it, and bake cakes. And he ran
to the beasts, and fet a calf that was tender and good, and gave it unto a
young man, which made it ready at once. And he took butter and milk and of the
calfe that he had prepared, and set it before the^, stood him self by them
under the tree, Tob. 12. b Iud. 13 c
and they ate. Then said they unto him: where is Sara thy wife? He answered:
within in ye tent. Then said he: about this time twolue month, Some read:
As soo^e as the ^rute (...).
(if I live) I will come to the again, and Sara thy wife shall have a son.
And Sara herd that out of the tent door, which was behind his back. And
Abraham and Sara were both old, and well stryken in age: so that it went
no more with Sara after ye manner of women: therefore laughed she with in her
self, and said: Now that I am old and my 1. Pet. 3. a ^cc^i. 25. a
lord old also, shall I yet give my self to lust?

Then said ye LORD unto Abraham: Wherefore does Sara laugh, and say: Is this
true in deed, that I shall bear, and yet am old? Should any soch thing be to
hard for the LORD? ^. Re. 4. b To. 9. a
About this time (if I live) I will come to the again, and Sara shall have a
son. Then Sara denied it, and said: I laughed not, for she was afraid. But
he said: It is not so, thou dyddest laughe. Then the men stood up from thence,
and turned them toward Sodeme: and Abraham went with them, to bring them on
their way.

LORD: How can I hyde from Abraham, ye thing that I will do? seeing he shall be
a great and mighty people, and all ye people upon earth shall be blessed in
him? For I know him that he will command his children and his household after
him, to keep the way of ye LORD, and to do after right and conscience, that
the LORD may bring upon Abraham what he has promised him. And the LORD
said: There is a cry at Sodom and Gomorra, Eze. 16. ^
which is great, and their sins are exceadinge grievous: therefore will I go
down and se, whether they have done all together, acordinge to that cry, ^on.
1. a
which is come before me, or not, that I may know. And the men turned their
face, and went toward Sodom. But Abraham stood still before ye LORD, and
stepte unto him, and said:

Will thou then destroy the righteous with the ungodly? Peradventure there
may be fifty righteous within ye cite: will thou destroy those, and not
spare the place, for fifty righteous sake that are therein? That be far from
the, yt thou should do this, and to slaye the righteous with the ungodly, and
that the righteous should be as the ungodly. That be far from the. Should not
the judge of all the world do acordinge to LORD said: If I find fifty
righteous at Sodom in the cite, I will spare all the place for their sakes.

Abraham answered, and said: O se, I have taken upon me to speak unto the
LORD, Genesis 2 b
howbeit I am but dust and aszshes. Peradventure there may be five less then
fifty righteous therein: Will thou then des^troye the whole cite because of
those five? He said: if I find five and forty therein, I will not destroy
them?

And he proceeded further to speak unto him, and said: Peradventure there
might be forty found therein. And he said: I will do nothing unto them for
those fourtyes sake. Abraham said: Oh let not my LORD be angry, that I
speak yet more. Peradventure there might be thirty found therein. And he
said: If I find thirty therein, I will do nothing unto them. And he said: O
se, I have taken upon me to speak unto my LORD.

Peradventure there might be twenty found therein. He answered: I will not
destroy them for those twentyes sake. And said: O let not my LORD be angry,
that I speak yet once more. Peradventure there might be ten found therein. He
said: I will not destroy them for those ten sake.

And the LORD went his way, when he had left talking with Abraham. And
Abraham returned unto his place.

The XIX. Chapter.
IN the evening came the two angels (...)
Then compelled he them sore: and they turned in unto him, and came in to his
house. And he made them a feast, and baked sweet cakes, and ^
they ate.

But before they went to rest, the men of the cite of Sodom came and compased
the house round about, young and old, all the people from all quarters, and
called Lot, and said unto him: Where are the me^ that came unto the to night?
Bring them out here unto us, ^
that we may know them.

And Lot went out at the door unto the^, (...)
O brethren, do not so wickedly. Behold, I have two daughters, which yet have
known no man: them will I bring out unto you, do with them as it likes you.
Only do nothing unto these men of God, for therefore are they come under the
shadow of my rofe. But they said: Come thou hither. Then said they: Came
not thou only herin as a stranger, ^^o. ^. b
and will thou now be a judge? Well, we will deal worse with the the^ with them.

Pet. 2. b
and would have broken up the door, the men put out their hondes, and pulled
Lot unto them in to the house, ^ Re* 6. d ^p. 19. d
and shut to the door. And the m^n at ye door of the house were smytte^ with
blyndnesse both small and great, so that they could not find the door.

And ye men said unto Lot: Have thou yet here any son in law, or sons or
daughters? Who so ever belongs unto the in the cite, bring him out of this
place: for we must destroy this place, because the cry of them is great
before the LORD, which has sent us to destroy them. Then went Lot forth,
and spoke to his sons in law, which should have married his daughters, and
said: O stand up, and get you out of this place, for the LORD will destroy
this cite. Nevertheless they took it but for a sport.

Now when the morning arose, the angels caused Lot to speed him, and said:
Stand up, Cap. 10. b
take thy wife and thy two daughters which are at hand, that thou also per^she
LORD was merciful unto him,) and brought him forth, and set him without the
cite.

And when they had brought him out, they said: Save thy soul, and look not
behind the, nether stand thou in all this country: Save thy self upon the
mountain, that thou perish not. Then said Lot unto the^: Oh no my LORD,
behold, in as much ^s thy servant has found grace in thy sight, now make ye
mercy great, which thou have showed unto me, in that thou sauest my soul
alive. I can not save my self upon the mountain. There might some mysfortune
fall upon me, that I should dye. Behold, here is a cite by, that I may fly
unto, and it is a little one: let me save myself there in. Is it not a little
one, that my soul may live?



Then the LORD caused brymstone and fire to rain down from the LORD out of
heaven upon Sodoma and Gomorra, and overthrew those cities, Esa. 13. d Iere.
50. g Ose. 11. b Amos 4.
the whole region, and all that dwelt in the cities, and that that grew upon
the earth. Lu. 17. d Sap. 10. b
And his wife looked behind her, and was turned into a pillar of salt.

Abraham rose up early in the morning, and gat him unto the place, Genesis 18.
where he had stand before the LORD, and turned his face toward Sodoma and
Gomorra, and all ye land of that country, and looked. And

And Lot departed out of Zoar, and dwelt in the mountains with both his
daughters (for he was afraid to tarry at Zoar) and so remained he in a cave with
both his daughters.



Then said ye elder unto the younger: Our father is old, and there is not a
man more upon earth, that can come in unto us after the manner of all the
world. Come therefore, let us give our father wine to drink, and lie with
him, that we may save sede of our father. So they gave their father Leui. 18.
a
and lay with her father: and he perceived it not, nether when she lay down,
ner when she rose up.

On the morrow the elder said unto the younger: Behold, yesternight lay I with
my father: let us give him wine to drink this night also: that thou may go
in and lie with him, that we may save sede of our father. So they gave their
father wine to drink that night also: And the younger arose like wise, and lay
with him: and he perceived it not, nether when she lay down, ner when she
rose up.

Thus were both the daughters of Lot with child by their father. And the elder
bare a son, and called him Moab, of whom come ye Moabytes unto this day. And
ye younger bare a son also, and called him the son Ammi, of whom come the
children of Ammon unto this day.

The XX. Chapter.
Genesis 12. c and. 26. a
She is my sister. Then Abimelech the king of Gerar sent for her, and caused
her be fett away.

But God came to Abimelech by night in a dream, and said unto him: Behold,
thou art but a deed man, for the woman's sake which thou have taken, for she is
a man's wife. Nevertheless Abimelech had not yet touched her, and said: LORD,
will thou sley a righteous people? Said not he unto me: she is my sister? Ye
and said not she her self also: he is my brother? With a pure heart and with
innocent hands have I done this.



Then Abimelech rose up by times in the morning, and called all his
servants, and told all these things in their ears, and the men were sore
afraid, and Abimelech called Abraham, and said unto him: Wherefore have thou
done this unto us? And what have I offended ye, that thou should bring on me
and on my kingdom so great a

Abraham said: I thought: Peradventure there is no fear of God in this place,
and they shall sleye me for my wifes sake, And of a truth she is my sister,
for she is my fathers daughter, but not my mothers daughter, and is become my
wife. So when God charged me to wa^dre out of my fathers house, I said unto
her: Show this kyndnes upon me, that, where so ever we come, Genesis 1^*
thou say of me, that I am thy brother.

Then took Abimelech sheep and oxen, servants

As for Abraham, he prayed unto God: Then God healed Abimelech, and his wife,
and his maidens, so that they bare children. For before the LORD had closed all
the matrices of Abimelechs house, because of Sara Abraham's wife.

The XXI. Chapter.
THe LORD also vysited Sara, acordinge Gen* ^
as he had promised: and dealt with her, even as he had said. Heb. ^
And Sara was with child, and bare Abraham a son in his old age, even in
the time appointed, like as God had spoken unto him before. And Abraham called
his son which was borne unto him (who^ Sara bare him) Isaac, and circumcided
him the eight day, Gen* ^
like as God commanded him. Matt* ^ Iosu. ^
An hundredth year old was Abraham, when his son Isaac was borne unto him.

And Sara said: God has prepared a joy for me, for who so ever hears of
it, will rejoice with me. She said morouer: Who would have said unto Abraham,
that Sara should give children suck, and bear him a son in his old age?
And the child grew, and was weened. And Abraham made a great feast, in ye
day when Isaac was weened.

And Sara saw the son of Agar the Iudi^. ^ Galat. ^
Cast out this bond maiden and her son, for this bond mayde^s son shall
not be heir with my son Isaac. This word displeased Abraham sore, because of
his son.

Nevertheless God said unto him: let it not displease the because of the child
and the hand maid: What so ever Sara has said unto the, follow it, Romans ^
for in Isaac shall the sede be called unto the. As for the hand maidens
son, ^en. 17. c
I will make a people of him also, because he is of thy sede.

Then Abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bred and a botell with
water, and put it upon Agars shulders, and gave her the child, and sent her
away. Then departed she, and wandered out of the way in ye wyldernes beside
Berseba. Now when the water in the botell was out, she laid the child under a
bush, and went, and sat her down over on ye other side, a bow shote of. For
she said: I can not se the child dye. And she sat her down over on ye other
side, and lift up her voice, and wept.

(...). 17. c
for I will make a great people of him. (...). ^1. c
And God opened her eyes, that she saw a well of water.

Then went she and filled ye botell with water, and gave ye child drink. And
God was with the child, which grew up, and dwelt in ye wilderness, and became a
conning archer, and dwelt in ye wilderness of Pharan, and his mother took him a
wife out of the land of Egipte.

Genesis 2^. d
At the same time talked Abimelech and Phicol his chief captain with Abraham,
and said: God is with the in all that thou do. Therefore swear now unto me
by God, that thou will not hurt me, ner my children, ner my childers children:
but that thou shall show unto me (and to the land wherein thou art a
stranger) the same kyndnesse that I have done unto the. Genesis 20. d


Then said Abraham: I will swear. And Abraham rebuked Abimelech for the well
of water, Genesis 26. b
which Abimelechs servants had taken away by violence. Then answered
Abimelech: I knew not who did it, nether dyddest thou tell me, and I have not
herd of it but this day.



Then rose Abimelech and Phicol his chief captain, and departed again in to
the land of ye Philistynes. And Abraham planted trees at Berseba, and called
upon the name of the LORD ye everlasting God, and was a stranger in ye land
of the Philistynes a long season.

The XXII. Chapter.
AFter these acts God tempted Abraham, Iudit. 8. Eccl. 44. Heb. 11. d
And he answered: I am here. And he said: Take ye son, this only son of
thine, eue^ Isaac whom thou love, and go thy way in to the land of Moria,
and offer him there for a burnt offering, upon a mountain that I shall show
the. Then Abraham stood up by times in the morning, and sad led his Ass, and
took with him two young men, and his son Isaac, and cloue wodd for the brent
offering, gat him up, and went on unto the place, whereof the LORD had said
unto him.

Upon the third day Abraham lift up his eyes, and saw the place a far of,
and said unto his young me^: Tarry ye here with the Ass: as for me and the
child, we will go yonder: and when we have worshipped, we will come to you
again. And Abraham took the wodd to the brent offering, and laid it upon
Isaac his son. As for him self, he

Then said Isaac unto his father Abraham: My father. Abraham answered: here I
am, my son. And he said: lo, here is fire and wodd, but where is the sheep
for the brent offering? Abraham answered: My son, God shall provide him a
sheep for the brent offering. And they went both together.



And when they came to the place which God showed him, Abraham builded there an
altar, and laid the wodd upon it, and band his son Isaac, laid him on the
altar, above upon the wood, and stretched out his hand, and took the knyfe,
to have slain his son.

LORD called from heaven unto him, and said: Abraham Abraham. He answered:
here am I. He said: Lay not thy hands upon the child, and do nothing unto
him: for now I know that thou fear God, and have not Mac. 2 f To. 8. d
spared thine only son for my sake. Then Abraham lift up his eyes, and saw
behind him a ram, holde^ fast by the horns in the breres, and went, and
took the ram, and offered him for a brent sacrifice, in stead of his son.
And Abraham called the place. The LORD shall provide. Therefore it is a common
saying yet this day: Upon the mountain shall the LORD provide.

And the angel of the LORD cried unto Abraham from heaven the second tymy,
^eb. 6. b ^cclesias^^ 44. c
and said: I have sworen by mine own self (says the LORD) that for so much
as thou have done this, and have not spared thine only son, I will prospere
and multiplye thy sede as the stars of heaven, and as the sonde upon the sea
shore. ^en. 24. g
And thy sede shall possess the gates of his enemies: and Genesis 12. a ^alat. 3.
b ^ct. 3. d
in thy sede shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, because thou have
herkened unto my voice.



After these acts it fortuned, that it was told Abraham: Behold, Milca has
borne children also unto thy brother Nahor: namely, Job 1. ^
Hus ye eldest, and Job 32. a
Bus his brother, and Kemnel, of whom came the Syrians: and Cesed, and Haso,
and Pildas, and Iedlaph and Bethuel. And Bethuel begat Rebecca. These eight did
Milca bear unto Nahor Abraham's brother. And his concubyne called Rehuma, bare
also: namely, Theba, Sahan, Thahas, and Maacha.

The XXIII. Chapter.
Act. 8. a
to mourn and weep for her. Afterward he stood up from his coarse, and talked
with the Hethites, and said: I am a stranger and an indweller among you,
give me a possession to bury in with you, that I may bury Some read* * my
c^^arse (...) lies b^^fore (...)
my coarse by me.

Then the Hethites answered Abraham, and said unto him: O hear lord, thou
art a prince of God among us: bury thy dead in the best of our sepulcres,
there shall none of us forbid ye, that thou should not bury thy deed in his
sepulcre. Then Abraham stood up, and thanked the people of ye land: namely the
Hethites.

And he talked with them, and said: If

Then answered Ephron the Hethire unto Abraham, that the Hethites might hear,
before all that went out and in at the gates of his cite, and said: No my
lord, but hear me: As for the field, and the cave also that is therein, I give
it the: and in the sight of my people I give it the, to burye thy de^^^n.

^^en Abraham thanked the people of the land, and talked with Ephron, that the
people of the land might hear, and said: Hear me then, Receive of me the
money that I give the for the field, and so will I burye my deed there.

Ephron answered Abraham, and said

Thus Ephrons field (where in the dubble cave is) which lies over before
Mamre, even the field and the cave, was made sure for Abraham's own good, with
all the trees of the field also round about, in the sight of the Hethites,
and of all that go out and in at the gates of his cite. Then Abraham buried
Sara his wife in the dubble cave of the field, that lies over before Mamre
(that is, Hebron) in the land of Canaan. So the field and the cave therein was
made sure of the Hethites unto Abraham, for a possession to bury in.

The XXIIII. Chapter.
ABraham was old and well stricken LORD had blessed him in all things. And
he said unto his eldest servant of his house, which had the rule of all his
goods: (...). 47. g
Lay thine hand under my thye, that I may make the swear by ye LORD the
God of heaven and earth, that thou take no wife unto my son among ye
daughters of ye Cananites, (...). 2^. a (...). 7. a
(among whom I dwell) but that thou go in to my country? and Genesis 11. d
to mine own kynred, and bring my son Isaac a wife.

The servant said: What and the woman will not follow me in to this country?
shall I then carry thy son again in to yonder land, where thou came out of?
Abraham said unto him: Beware of that, that thou bring not my son thither
again. The LORD, the God of heaven, which took me fro my fathers house and
from the land of my kynred, and that talked with me, and swear also unto me,
Genesis 15. d
and said: Unto ye sede will I give this land: Even he shall send his angel
before the, that thou may bring my son a wife from thence. But if the
woman will not follow the, thou art discharged of this ooth: only bring not
my son thither again. Then ye servant laid his hand under his master
Abraham's thye, and swear the same unto him.



O LORD, thou God of my master Abraham, mete me to day, and show mercy unto
my master Abraham. Lo, I stand here beside the well of water, and the men's
daughters of this cite will come forth to draw water: Now if there come a
damsel, to whom I say: bow down thy pytcher, and let me drink, and if she
say: drink, and I will give ye Camels drink also: That ye same be she, whom
thou have provided for thy servant Isaac: and that I may know by ye same
that thou have showed mercy upon my master.

And or ever he had left of speaking, behold, Rebecca the daughter of Bethuel
(which was the son of Milca, that was the wife of Nahor Abraham's brother)
came forth, and bare a pytcher upon her shulder, and she was a very fair
damsel of face, and yet a virgin, and unknown of any man: She went down to
the well, and filled her pitcher, and came up again. Then ran the servant
to mete her, and said: Let me drink a little water out of ye pitcher. And she
said: drink sir.

And haistely let she down the pitcher LORD had prospered his journey or not.

Now when the Camels had all dronken, he took a golden earynge of half a Sycle
weight, and two bracelettes for her hands, weynge ten Sycles of gold, and
said: Daughter, whose art thou? tell me. Is there rowme for us in thy fathers
house to lodge in? She said unto him: I am the daughter of Bethuel, the son
of Mylca, whom she bare unto Nahor. Genesis 22. d
And said morouer unto him: We have plentye of litter and prouender, and rowme
enough to lodge in.

Then the man bowed himself, and thanked LORD, and said: Praised be the LORD
the God of my master Abraham, which has not withdrawn his mercy and his
truth fro my master, for the LORD has brought me the way to my masters
brothers house. And the damsel ran and told all this in her mothers house.
And Rebecca had a brother called Laban.

And Laban ran to the man without by the well side: and that came by the
reason that he saw the earynges, and the bracelettes upon his sisters hands,
and herd the words of Rebecca his sister, that she said: thus spoke the man
unto me.

And when he came to the man, behold, he stood by the Camels at the well side.
And he said: Come in Some read * thou be loved.
thou blessed of the LORD, wherefore stondest thou without? I have dressed the
house, and made rowme for ye Camels. So he brought the man in to ye house, and
unbridled the Camels, and gave them litter and prouender, and water to wash his
fete, and the men's that were with him, and set meat before him.

Nevertheless he said: I will not eat, till 1. Re. 16. ^
They answered: Tell on. He said: I am Abraham's servant, and the LORD has
prospered my master richely, so yt he is become great: and he has given him
sheep and oxe^, silver and gold, servants and maidens, Camels and Asses: ye
and Sara my masters wife has borne my master a son in her old age: ^en. 21.
a
unto him has he given all that he has.

And my master has taken an ooth of me and said: Thou shall not take a wife
for my son among the daughters of the Cananites, in whose land I dwell, but
go ye way to my fathers house and to mine own kynred, and there take a wife
for my son. But I said unto my master: What and the woman will not follow me?
Then said he unto me: The LORD (before whom I walk) shall send his angel
with the, and prospere thy journey, that thou may take a wife for my son
of mine own kynred, and of my fathers house. And so when thou come to my
kynred, if they give her not unto ye, thou shall be discharged of mine oothe.

LORD thou God of my master Abraham, If thou have prospered my journey that I
go: Behold, I stand here by the well of water: Now if there come forth a
virgin to draw water, and I say unto her: g^ue me a little water to drink out
of thy pitcher, and she say unto me: Drink thou, and I will draw water for
thy Camels also: that the same be the woman, which the LORD has provided for
my masters son. Now or ever I had spoken out these words in my heart,
behold, Rebecca comes forth with a pitcher upon her shulder, and goes down
to the well, and draws.

Then said I: give me a drink. And immediately she took down the pitcher from
her shulder, and said: drink, and I will give thy Camels drink also. So I
drank, and she gave the Camels also to drink. And I axed her, and said:
Daughter, whose art thou? She answered: I am ye daughter of Bethuel the son
of Nahor, whom Milca bare unto him. Then laid I the earinge upon her face, and
the bracelettes upon her hands, and bowed myself, and thanked the LORD, and
praised the God of my master Abraham, which had brought me ye right way, to
take my masters brothers daughters unto his son.

If ye be they then that show mercy and faithfulness unto my master, tell me: If
not, yet tell me, that I may turn me to ye right hand or to the left.

Then answered Laban and Bethuel, and said: This is come of the LORD,
therefore can we say nothing against the, nether evil ner good. There is
Rebecca before the, take her, and go thy way, that she may be thy masters
sons wife, as the LORD has said. When Abraham's servant herd these
words, he bowed him self unto the LORD flat upon the earth, and took forth
Jewels of silver and gold, and raiment, and gave them unto Rebecca. But unto
her brethren and the mother, he gave spyces. Then he ate and drunk, and the
men also that were with him, and tarried there all night.

But in the morning he arose, and LORD has prospered my journey: let me go,
that I may depart unto my master. Then said they: let us call the damsel,
and axe her, what she says thereto. And they called Rebecca, and said unto
her: Will thou go with this man?

And she answered: Ye I will go with him. So they let Rebecca their sister go
with her norse and Abraham's servant, and his men. And they blessed Rebecca,
and said unto her: Thou art our sister, grow in to many thousand times
thousands, Gen ^
and thy sede possess the gates of his enemies.

So Rebecca gat her up with her damsels, and satt them upon the Camels, and went
their way after the man. And the servant took Rebecca, and departed.

As for Isaac, he was coming from ^
the well of ye living and seeing, for he dwelt in the south country, and was
gone forth to his meditacions in the field about the even tide. And he lift up
his eyes, and saw, that there were Camels coming. And Rebecca lift up her
eyes, and saw Isaac. Then lighted she of the Camel, and said unto ye
servant: What man is this, that comes against us in the field? The servant
said: The same is my master.

Then took she her cloak, and put it about her. And the servant told Isaac
all the earande that he had done. Then Isaac brought her in to his mother Saras
tent, and took Rebecca, and she became his wife, and he loved her. So Isaac was
comforted over his mother.

The XXV. Chapter.
(...)
which bare him Simram and Iaksan, Medan and Midian, Ieszbak and Suah. Iaksan
begat Seba and Dedan. The children of Dedan were Assurim, Latusim, and Leumim.
The children of Midian were Epha, Epher, Hanoch, Abida and Eldaa. All these are
the children of Ketura. And Abraham gave all his goods unto Isaac: As for the
children that he had of the concubynes, he gave them gifts, and (while he yet
lived) he sent the^ away from his son Isaac, eastwarde in to the east
country.

This is the age of Abraham which he lived: even an hundredth and five and
seuentye year, and fell sick and dyed in a good age, (...). 15. c
when he was old, and had lived enough and was gathered unto his people. And
his sons Isaac and Ismael buried him in the dubble cave in the field of
Ephron the son (...). 32. c
in the field that Abraham bought of the Hethites. There was Abraham buried
with Sara his wife. And after the death of Abraham God blessed his son Isaac.
And he dwelt by the well of the living and seeing.

This is the generation of Ismael Abraham's son, whom Agar Saras maid the
Egipcian bare unto him. And these are the names of Ismaels children, of whom
their kynredes are named. The eldest son of Ismael, Nebaioth, Cedar, Abdeel,
Mibsan, Misma, Duma, Masa, Hadar, Thema, Iethur, Naphis and Kedma. These are
the children of Ismael with their names in their courts and cities (...). 17. c
twolue londeprynces. And this is the age of Ismael, even an hundredth and seven
and thirty year, and he fell sick and dyed, and was gathered unto his
people. He dwelt from Heuila unto Sur toward Egipte, as men go to the
Assirians And he dyed in the presence of all his brethren.



Isaac besought the LORD for his wife (because she was baren) and the LORD
was entreated, and Rebecca his wife conceived. And the children strove
totogether in her womb. Then said she: If it should go so with me, why am I
then with child? And she went for to axe the LORD. And the LORD said unto
her: Two manner of folk are in thy womb, and two manner of people shall be
divided out of thy body, and the one nation shall overcome the other, 2. Re 8.
c Romans 9. b
and the greater shall serve the less.

Now when the time came that she should be delivered, behold, Iosu. 24. a
there were two twyns in her womb. The first that came forth, was reed, all
rough as an hyde, and they called him Esau. Anon thereafter came his brother
forth, which held the hele of Esau with his hand, Ose. 12. a
and they called him Jacob. Three score year old was Isaac,

And Jacob dight a meace of meat. The^ came Esau from the field, and was
weery, and said unto Jacob: Let me prove of yt reed meace of meat, for I am
fayntie (therefore is he called Edom.) But Jacob said: Sell me this day thy
byrthright. Esau answered: Lo, I must dye nevertheless, what good then shall
my byrthright do me? Jacob said: Then swear unto me even this same day. And
he swear unto him, and so he sold his byrthright unto Jacob. Then Jacob gave
him bred and that meace of rise. And he ate and drunk, and stood up, Heb. 12. c
and went his way. And so Esau regarded not his byrthright.

The XXVI. Chapter.
THere came a derth in the land, passing the other that was in Abraham's Genesis
12. c
And Isaac went to Gerar, unto Abimelech the king of ye Philistynes. Then the
LORD appeared unto him, and said: Go not down in to Egipte, but tarry in the
land that I shall say unto the. Be thou a stranger in this land,
Ecclesiastici 44. d
and I will be with the and bless the. For unto the and thy sede will I give
all this land, and will perform mine ooth that I swear to thy father
Abraham. And I will multiplye thy sede as the stars of heaven, Genesis 15. c and
22. c
and unto thy sede will I give all this land, and through thy sede shall all
nations be blessed, because Abraham was obedient unto my voice, and kept mine
ordinances, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws.

So Isaac dwelt at Gerar. And when the men of the same place axed him of his
wife, Genesis 12. c and 20. a
he said: she is my sister. For he was afraid to say: she is my wife,
(thinkinge thus:) they might slaye me for Rebeccas sake, for she was beutifull
to look unto. Now when he had been there a long season, Abimelech the king of
the Phylistynes looked out at a wyndow, and saw Isaac sportinge with Rebecca
his wife.



And Isaac sowed in that land, and found the same year an hundredth
buszshels, for the LORD blessed him. And he became a great man, went forth,
and grew, till he was exceadinge great, so that he had much good in sheep and
great catell, and a great household. Therefore had the Philistynes envye at
him, Genesis 21. c
and stopped all the wells, that his fathers servants had dygged in the time
of Abraham his father, and filled them with earth, In so much that Abimelech
also himself said unto him: Depart from us, for thou art far mightier then
we.



Isaacs servants also dygged in the valley, and there they found a well of
lyuinge water. But the hyrdmen of Gerar strove with Isaacs hyrdmen, Genesis 1^. a
and said: The water is ours. Then called he the well Eseck, because they had
done him wrong.

Then dygged they another well, and strove for that also: therefore called he it
Sytena. So he gatt him from thence, and dygged another well, for the which they
strove not: th^rfore he called it Rehoboth, and said* Now has the LORD made
us rowme, and letten us grow in the land. Afterward he departed thence unto
Berseba.

And the LORD appeared unto him the same night, and said: I am the God of thy
father Abraham, fear thou not, for I am with the, and will bless the, and
multiplye thy sede for my servant Abraham's sake. Then builded he an altar
there, and called upon the name of the LORD, and pitched his tent there, and
there his servants dygged a well. (...)


And Abimelech went unto him from Gerar, and Ahusath his friend, and Phicolhis
chief captain. (...)
But Isaac said unto them: Wherefore come ye to me? seeing ye hate me, and have
put me away from you? They said: We se with open eyes, that the LORD is with
the, therefore we devised that there should be an ooth betwixt us and the, and
that we would make a bond with the, that thou do us no harm, like as we have
not hurt the, and as we have done nothing unto the, but all good, and let the
depart in peace.

As for the, thou art ye blessed of the LORD. Then Isaac made them a feast,
and they ate and drunk. And on the morrow they arose, and swear one to the
other. And Isaac let them go, and they departed from him in peace.

The same day came Isaacs servants, and told him of the well that they had
dug, and said unto him: We have found water. And he called it Saba.
Therefore is ye cite called Bersaba unto this day.

The XXVII. Chapter.
When Esau was fourtye year old, he took wives: Judith the daughter

And it came to pass when Isaac was old, his eyes waxed dymme of sight, and
he called Esau his greater son, and said unto him: My son. He answered
him: Here am I. And he said: Behold, I am old, and know not when I shall
dye. Now therefore take thy geer, thy quyuer and thy bow, and get the forth to
the field, and take me some venyson, and make me meat (soch as I love) and
bring it me herein, that I may eat, yt my soul may bless the, before I dye.

But Rebecca herd these words, that Isaac said unto his son. And Esau
went his way in to the field, to hunte venyson, and to bring it home. Then
said Rebecca unto Jacob her son: behold, I have herd thy father talkinge
with Esau thy LORD, yer I dye, Now therefore my son, hear my voice, what I
command the: Go thy way to the flock, and fetch me two good kyddes, that I
may make meat of them for thy father, soch as he loves: this shall thou
bring in unto thy father, that he may eat, that he may bless the before
his death.

Nevertheless Jacob said unto Rebecca his mother: Behold, my brother Esau is
rough, and I am smooth: then might my father peradventure feel me, and I should
seem unto him as though I begyled him, and so bring a curse upon me and not a
blessing. Then said his mother unto him: That curse be upon me my son,
follow thou my voice: go thy way and fetch it me. So he went his way, and
fetched it, and brought it unto his mother.



And he brought it in unto his father, and said: My father. He answered: here
am I, who art thou my son? Jacob said: I am Esau thy firstborne son, I
have done as thou saydest unto me: arise, sit up, and eat of my venyson, that
thy soul may bless me. But Isaac said unto his son? My son, how have
thou found it so soon? He answered: The LORD ye God brought it to my hand.

The^ said Isaac unto Jacob: Come near my son, that I may feel the,
whether thou be my son Esau or not. So Jacob went unto Isaac his father. And
when he had felt him, he said: The voice is Jacobs voice, but the hands are
the hands of Esau. And he knew him not, for his hands were rough like as ye
hands of his brother Esau. And he blessed him.

that my heart may wysh the good.
that my soul may bless the. Then he brought it him, and he ate: and he
brought him wine also, and he drank. And Isaac his father said unto him: Come
nigh, and kiss me my son. So he came nigh, and he kyssed him.

Then smelled he the sauoure of his clothes, and blessed him, and said:
Behold, the smell of my son is as ye smell of the field, which ye LORD has
blessed. Heb. 11. d Eccli. 3. b
God give the of the dew of heaven, and of the fatness of the earth, and
plenteousnes of corn and wine. Nations be thy servants, and people fall
down at ye foot. Be thou lord over thy brethren, and thy mothers children
fall down at thy foot. Cursed be he, Gen 12. a
that curses the: and blessed be he, that blesses the.

Now when Isaac had made an end

When Esau herd these words of his father, he cried loud, and was exceadynge
sorry, and said unto his father: O bless me also my father. But he said: Thy
brother came with sotyltie, and has taken thy blessinge away. Then said he:
He may well be called Jacob, for he has undermined me now two times. My birth
right has he away, and behold, now takes he away my blessing also.

And he said: Have thou not kept one

And he lift up his voice, and wept. Heb. 12. c
Then Isaac his father answered and said unto him: Behold, thou shall have a
fat dwellinge upon earth, Heb. 11. d
and of ye dew of heaven from above: with thy sword shall thou get thy
living, and shall serve thy brother. And it shall come to pass, yt thou shall
put of his yock, 4. Re. 8. c
and pluck it from thy neck.

Abd. 1. a
and said in his heart: The time will come shortly, that my father shall
mourn, for I will slaye my brother Jacob. The^ was it told Rebecca of these
words of her elder son, and she sent, and bad call for Jacob her younger
son, and said unto him: Behold, thy brother Esau threateneth the, that he
will slaye the. And now my son hear my voice: Get the up, and fly unto my
brother Laban in Haran, and tarry there with him a while, Genesis 33. a
till the furiousnes of thy brother be swaged, and till his wrath against yt be
turned from the, and he forget what thou have done unto him. So will I then
send for the, and cause the be fetched from thence. Why should I be robbed of
you both in one day?

And Rebecca said unto Isaac: I am weery of my life, because of the daughters
of Heth: If Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, Genesis 10. c
which are as the daughters of this land, what shall this life then profit me?

The XXVIII. Chapter.
Some read: * talked loui^gly with him.
blessed him, and charged him, and said unto him: Take not a wife of the
daughters of Canaan, but get the up, and go in to Mesopotamia unto the house of
Bethuel thy mothers father, and take yt there a wife of ye daughters of Laban
ye mothers brother. And the Almighty God bless the, and make the fruitful,
and multiplye the, (that thou may be a multitude of people) and give the the
blessing of Abraham unto ye and thy sede with the, that thou may possess
the land, wherein thou art a stranger, Genesis 15. d and 24. a
which God gave unto Abraham. So Isaac let Jacob depart, that he might go in
to Mesopotamia unto Laban the son of Bethuel of Siria, ye brother of Rebecca,
his and Esaus mother.

(...)
he took Mahaloth the daughter of Ismael (Abraha^s son) the sister of
Nebaioth, to wife.

As for Jacob, he departed from Bersaba, (...)
the angels of God went up and down upon it, and the LORD stood upon it, and
said:

I am the LORD God of thy father Abraham, and the God of Isaac: (...)
The land yt thou lie upon, will I give unto the, (...)
and to thy sede: and thy sede shall be as ye dust of ye earth. And thou shall
sprede forth toward the west, east, north, and south: (...)
and through the and thy sede shall all the kynreds upon earth be blessed. And
behold, I am with ye, and will keep the where so ever thou go, and will
bring the hither again in to this land: for I will not leave the, till I have
made good, all that I have promised the.

Now when Jacob awaked from his sleep, LORD is in this place, and I knew not.
And he was afraied, and said: How fearful is this place? here is nothing else
but an house of God, and a gate unto heaven. And Jacob arose early in the
morning, and took the stone that he had laid under his head, and set it up,
(...)
and poured oil upon it. And he called the place Bethel, but before the cite
was called Lus. And Jacob made a vow, and said: If God will be with me, (...)
and keep me in this journey yt I go and give me bred to eat, and clothinge to
put on, and bring me peaceably home again unto my father: The^ shall the
LORD be my God, and this stone that I have set up, shall be an house of God:
and all that thou geuest me, I will give the the tenth thereof.

The XXIX. Chapter.
THen Jacob gat him up upon his fete; so they put the stone again upon the
wells mouth in to his place.

And Jacob said unto them: Brethren, whence be ye? They answered: we are of
Haran. He said unto them: Know ye Laban the son of Nahor? They answered: We
know him well. (...). 4^. c
He said: Is he in good health? They answered: he is in good health. And lo,
there comes his daughter Rachel with the sheep. He said: It is yet hye day,
and is not yet time to drive in the catell: give the sheep to drink, and go
your way, and feed them. They answered: We can not, till all the flocks be
brought together, and till we roll the stone from the wells mouth, and so
give the sheep drink.



Wha^ Laban herd of Jacob his sisters son, he ran to mete him, and
enbraced him, and kyssed him, and brought him in to his house. And so he told
him all this matter. The^ said Laban unto him: Well, thou art my bone and my
flesh. Abide with me a month long. But after that said he unto Jacob:
Because thou art my brother, shall thou therefore serve me for naught? Tell me,
what shall thy wages be. Laban had two daughters, the eldest was called Lea,
and the youngest Rachel. And Lea was tender eyed, but Rachel was beutyfull and
well favored of face, and Jacob loved her well, and said: I will serve the
seven year, for Rachel thy youngest daughter. Laban answered: It is better that
I give her the, then unto another: tarry thou with me.



But on the morrow, behold, it was Lea. And he said unto Laban: Why have thou
done this unto me? Have not I served ye for Rachel? Why have thou then begyled
me? Laban answered: It is not the manner in our country, to mary the youngest
before the eldest. Hold out this weke, and I will give the this also, for the
service yt thou shall do me yet seven years more. Jacob did so, and held out
yt weke. Then gave he him Rachel his daughter to wife. And Laban gave Bilha his
maiden unto Rachel his daughter to be her maiden. So he lay with Rachel also,
and loved Rachel more the^ Lea, and served him yet seven years more.

But when the LORD saw, that Lea 1. Par. 2. a
and said: The LORD has looked upon my aduersite. Now will my huszbande love
me. And she conceived again, and bare a son, and said: The LORD has herd
that I am despised, and has given me this also, and she called him Symeon. She
conceived yet again, and bare a son, and said: Now will my huszbande keep
me company again, for I have borne him three sons, therefore called she his
name Leui. She conceived ye fourth time, and bare a son, and said: Now will
I give thanks unto the LORD, therefore called she him Judah, and left bearing.

The XXX. Chapter.
WHen Rachel saw that she bare no



And Jacob lay with her. So Bilha conceived, and bare Jacob a son. Then
said Rachel: God has given sentence on my side, and herd my voice, and given
me a son,

Now when Lea saw that she had left bearing, she took Silpa her maid, and
gave her unto Jacob to wife. So Silpa Leas maid bare Jacob a son. Then said
Lea: This is good luck, and she called him Gad. After this Silpa Leas maid
bare Jacob another son. Then said Lea: Well is me, for the daughters will
call me blessed, and she called him Asser.

Ruben went out in the time of ye wheat harvest, and found Mandragoras in
the field, and brought them home unto his mother Lea. Then said Rachel unto
Lea: Give

And he slepte with her that night. And God herd Lea, and she conceived, and
bare Jacob the fifth son, and said: God has rewarded me, because I gave my
maiden unto my huszbande, and she called him Isachar. Lea conceived yet again,
and bare Jacob the sixte son, and said: God has endewed me with a good
dowry. Now will my huszbande dwell with me again, for I have borne him six
sons, and she called him Zabulon. After that she bare a daughter, whom she
called Ge. 34. a
Dina.

1. Par. 2. a
and said: God give me yet another son.

Now when Rachel had borne Joseph, Jacob said unto Laban: ^. Re. 11. d
Let me go, and depart in to my place and unto mine own land: give me my
wives and my children, (for the which I have served the) yt I may go: for thou
know, what service I have done the. Laban said unto him: Can I not find
favor in thy sight? I perceive, that God has blessed me for thy sake. Genesis ^
Appoynte thou the reward, yt I shall give the. But he said unto him: Thou
know how I have served the, and what manner of catell thou have under me.
Thou had but little before I came hither, but now is it grown into a
multitude, and the LORD has blessed yt for my sake. And now when shall I look
to

Jacob said: Thou shall give me nothing at all, but if thou will do this for
me yt I say, then will I feed and keep thy sheep again. I will go through all
thy flocks to day, and separate thou from among them all the sheep that be
spotted and party colored, and all black sheep among the lambs. Now look
what shall be party colored and spotted among the kyddes, the same shall be my
reward: so shall my righteousness testify with me to day or tomorow, when it
comes unto my reward before the, so that, what so ever is not spotted and
party colored among the kyddes, and black among the lambs, let that be
theft with me.

Then said Laban: Behold, let it be so

But Jacob took staves of grene wyllies, hasell and of chestnottrees, and
pylled white strekes in them, and laid the staves that he had pylled, in the
drynkinge troughes before the flock, which came there to drink, that they
should conceive, when they came to drink. So the flocks conceived over ye
staves, and brought forth speckelde, spotted and party colored.

Then Jacob parted ye lambs, and put Thus the man became exceadinge rich, so
that he had many sheep, maidens and servants, Camels and Asses.

The XXXI. Chapter.


And the LORD said unto him: Genesis ^2. b
Depart again to thy fatherla^de, and to thy kynred, I will be with the. Then
sent Jacob and bad call Rachel and Lea in to the field to his flocks, and
said unto them: I se your fathers countenance, that it is not toward me
like as yesterdaye and yeryesterdaye: but the God of my father has been with
me. And ye know, that I have served your father with all my power.



And the angel of God said unto me in a dream: Jacob. And I answered: here am
I. He said: lift up thine eyes, and behold, the rams leap upon the
speckelde, spotted, and party colored flock: for I have seen all yt Laban
does unto the. I am ye God at Bethel, Genesis ^8. d
where thou dyddest anoynte the stone, and maydest a vow there unto me. Get
the up now, and depart out of this land, and go again in to the land of thy
kynred.



So Jacob gat up, and set his children and wives upon Camels, and carried away
all his catell and all his substance, that he had gotten at Mesopotamia, yt he
might come unto Isaac his father in the land of Canaan. Genesis 38. ^ 2. Re. 13. ^
Laba^ was gone to clyppe his flock, and Rachel stale her fathers Genesis 35. ^
images. Thus did Jacob steal away ye heart of Laban ye Syrian, in yt he told
him not that he fled. So he fled, and all that was his, gat up, and passed over
the water, and went straight toward the mount Gilead.

Upon the third day it was told Laban,

Then said Laban unto Jacob: What have thou done, that thou have stolen away
my heart, and carried away my daughters, as though they had been taken captyue
with ye sword? Wherefore keptest thou that secret, that thou would fly, and
have stolen away fro me, and toldest me not, that I might have brought the on
the way with mirth, with synginge, with tabrettes and harpes? and have not
suffered me to kiss my children and daughters? Thou have done foolishly, and so
much might I have made, that I could have done you evil: but your fathers God
said yesterdaye unto me: Bewarre, that thou speak nothing unto Jacob but
good. And for so much then as thou would needs depart, and longedest sore
after ye fathers house, why have thou stolen away my gods?

Jacob answered and said unto Laban: and found not the images.

And Jacob was wroth, and chode with Laban, answered and said unto him: What
have I trespased or offended, yt thou art so whote upon me? Thou have searched
all my household stuff, and what have thou found of thy household stuff? Lay
it here before my brethren and thine, yt they may judge between us both.
Twentye year have I been with the: thy sheep and goats have not been
unfruitful, the rams of thy flock have I not eaten: Look what was Ex. 22. b
torn of beasts, I brought it not unto yt, I was feign to pay it my self:
thou requyredest it of my hand^, whether it were stolen fro me by day or by
night. On the day time the heat consumed me, and the frost on the night, and
my sleep departed fro mine eyes.



Laban answered and said: The daughters are my daughters, and the children are
my children, and the flocks are my flocks, and all that thou seist is mine.
What can I do this day unto these my daughters, or to their children whom they
have borne? Now therefore come on, let us make a covenant (I and thou) which
may be a witness between me and the. Then took Jacob a stone, and set it up
(for a piler or markstone) and said unto his brethren: Gather stones. And they
took the stones, and made an heap, and ate upon the same heap. And Laba^
called it Iegar Sahadutha, but Jacob called it Gilead: (either of them after
the properte of his language.)

Hosu. 22. f ^ 24. f
This heap be witness between me and the this day (therefore is it called
Gilead) and a testimony, for he said: The LORD look between me and ye, when
we are departed ye one from ye other: if thou vex my daughters, or take other
wives unto them. There is no man with us, but lo, God is the witness between
me and the. And Laban said morouer unto Jacob: Behold, this is the heap, and
this is the marckstone that I have set up betwixt me and the: the same heap
be witness, and the same marckstone also be witness, if I pass over unto
the, or if thou pass over this heap and marckstone unto me, to do any harm.
The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, and the God of their fathers, be
judge between us.

And Jacob swear unto him by the fear of his father Isaac. And Jacob offered an
offering upon the mount, and called his brethren to eat bred. And when they
had eaten, they tarried upon the mount all night. But upon the morrow Laban rose
up early, kyssed his children and daughters, and blessed the^, and departed,
and came again unto his place. As for Jacob, he went on his journey, and the
angels of God met him. And when he saw them, he said: It is Gods host, and
called the same place Mahanaim.

The XXXII. Chapter.
Jacob sent messaungers before him Ios^ ^
in to the land of Seir, of the field of Edom, and commanded the^, and said:
Say thus unto my lord Esau: Thy servant Jacob sends ye this word: I have
been out with Laban, and have been hither to among strangers, and have oxen and
Asses, sheep, servants and mayde^s, and have sent forth to show it the my
lord, yt I might find favor in thy sight.

The messaungers came again unto Jacob, and said: We came unto thy brother
Esau, and he comes forth also against the with four hundredth men. Then was
Jacob sore afraid, and wist not what way to turn himself, and divided the
people that was with him, and the sheep, and the oxen, and the Camels in to two
droues, and said: If Esau come upon the one drove, and smite it, the other
shall escape.

Jacob said morouer: O God of my father LORD thou that saydest unto me: Ge^ ^
Depart again to thine own land and to thy kynred, and I will do the good: I
am to little for all the mercies and all the truth that thou have showed unto
thy servant (for I had no more but this staff when I went over this Jordan,
and now am I become two droues) deliver me from ye hand of my brother, from
the hand of Esau, for I am afraid of him, lest he come and smite me the
mother with the children. Thou saydest: I will do the good, and will make thy
sede as the sonde of ye see, which can not be nombred for multitude.

And there he tarried that night, and took of soch as came to hand, a present
unto his 1. Re. ^
twentye he goats, two hundredth sheep, twentye rams and thirty mylck camels
with their foales, fourtye kyne, ten bullockes, twentye she Asses with ten
foales, and put them in the hands of his servants, every flock by them
selves, and said unto them: Go ye forth before me, and put a space betwixt
one flock after the other, and commanded the first and said:

When my brother Esau meteth the, and axeth the: Whose art thou? and whyther
go thou? and whose are these that thou dryuest before the? Thou shall say:
They be thy servant Jacobs, which sends a present unto his lord Esau, and
comes behind us him self.



So the present went before him, but he tarried in the tente the same night,
and rose up in ye night, and took his two wives and the two maidens and his
eleven sons, and went unto the foorde of Jacob, took them and carried them
over the water, so that all that he had came over, and tarried him self alone on
this side.

Ose. 12. a
Then wrestled there a man with him until the break of ye day. And when he
saw yt he might not overcome him, he touched the senowe of his thye, and ye
senowe of his Genesis 35. b ^. Re. 18. d
He answered: Jacob. He said: Thou shall no more be called Jacob, but Israel,
for thou have stryuen with God and with men, and have prevailed. And Jacob axed
him, and said: Tell me, what is ye name? But he said: Iudi^. 13. c
Why axest thou what my name is? And he blessed him there. And Jacob called the
place Peniel, for I have seen God face to face, and my soul is recovered. And
as he came over from Peniel, ye Son rose upon him, and he halted upon his
thye. Therefore eat the children of Israel no vane upon the senow of ye thye
unto this day, because ye vane upon the senow of Jacobs thye was touched.

The XXXIII. Chapter.
Ge. 27. g
But Esau ran to mete him, and enbraced him, and fell about his neck, and
kyssed him, and wept, and lift up his eyes, and saw the wives with the
children, and said: What are these with the? He answered: They are the
children, which God has given unto thy servant. And the maidens came forth
with their children, and did their obeysaunce unto him.

Lea came forth also with her children, and 2. Re. 19. c Hest. 15. b
as though I had seen the face of God) and be at one with me. Take this present
in good worth, that I have brought ye, for God has given it me, and I have
enough of all things. So he compelled him to take it.

And he said: Let us go on and take our

So Esau departed again the same day

Afterward came Jacob peaceably unto the cite of Sichem, which lies in ye
land of Canaan, Genesis 28. ^
after that he was come again out of Mesopotamia, and pitched before the cite,
Iosu. 24. ^
and bought a piece of land of the children of Hemor ye father of Sichem for
Some read: * an hundredth la^bes.
an hundredth pens. There pitched he his tent, and there he set up an altar,
and called upon the name of the mighty God of Israel.

The XXXIIII. Chapter.


And Jacob understood, that Dina his daughter was defiled, and his sons were
with the catell in the field, and Jacob held his tongue till they came. Then
Hemor the father of Sichem went forth unto Jacob to comen with him. In the
mean season came Jacobs sons from ye field. And when they herd it, it
grieved the men, and they were very wroth, that he had wrought folly in Israel,
and lain with Jacobs daughter: for so was not the use to do.



Then Jacobs sons answered Sichem and Hemor his father (and spoke
disceatfully, because their sister Dina was defiled) and said unto them: That
can we not do, to give our sister to an vncircumcided man: for that were a
shame unto us.



These words pleased Hemor and his son well, and the young man defend not to
do the same, for he had lust to Jacobs daughter: and he was holden in honor
above all in his fathers house. Then came Hemor and Sichem his son under ye
gate of cite, and comened with the citisens of the cite, and said: These men
are peaceable with us, and will dwell in the land and occupye: now is the
land broad of both the sides, we will take their daughters unto us, and give
them our daughters.

But then will they consent unto us, to

And they herkened unto Hemor and Sichem his son, as many as went out and in
at ye gate of his cite, and circumcided all the males, that went out and in at
his cite. And upon the third day (when it was panefull to them) the two
sons of Jacob Simeon and Leui Dinas brethren, Iud^ ^
took every man his sword, and went boldly in to the cite, Ge* ^
and slew all the males, and slew Hemor also and Sichem his son with the edge
of the sword, and took their sister Dina out of Sichems house, and went their
way.

Then came Jacobs sons over the slain,

And Jacob said unto Symeon and Leui: Ye have brought it so to pass, yt I
stynke before the inhabiters of this land, ye Cananites and Pheresites, and I
am but a small nombre: If they gather them selves now together against me, they
shall slaye me, so shall I be destroyed with my house. But they answered: Should
they the^ deal with our sister as with an whore?

The XXXV. Chapter.
ANd God said unto Jacob: Get the Ge. ^
when thou fleddest from thy brother Esau. Then said Jacob unto his household
and to all yt were with him: Put away from you ye strange Ge ^
gods, that are among you, and cleanse your selves, and change your
clothes, and let us get up, and go unto Bethel, that I may there make an
altar unto the God, which herd me in the time of my trouble, (...) 28. ^
and has been with me in the way that I have gone.

LORD appeared unto him there, when he fled from his brother. Then dyed (...)
24. g
Debora Rebeccas norse, and was buried beneth Bethel under the Oak, and it was
called the Oak of lamentacion.

(...) 12. a
And God appeared again unto Jacob, after that he was come out of Mesopotamia,
and blessed him, and said unto him: Thou art called Jacob, (...). 12. e ^ c.
18. d
nevertheless thou shall no more be called Jacob, but Israel shall be ye name.
And so was he called Israel.

Ge. 17. a
I am the Almighty God, be fruitful and multiplye: people and a multitude of
people shall come of the, and Mat. 1. a
kings shall come out of thy loins: and the land that I gave unto Abraham
and Isaac, will I give unto the, and will give it unto thy sede after the. So
God departed from him, from ye place where he talked with him. And Jacob set up a
piler of stone, in the place where he talked with him, and poured drynk
offerynges thereon, and poured oil upon it. And Jacob called ye place where God
talked with him, Bethel.

^. Re. 4. d
ye myd wife said unto her: fear not, for thou shall have this son also.
But as her soul was departing, yt she must dye, she called him Ben Oni:
nevertheless his father called hi^ Be^ Iamin. Genesis 4^. b
So Rachel died, and was buried in the way toward Ephrath, which now is
called Bethlehe^. And Jacob set up a pillar upon her grave, there is Rachels
grauestone unto this day. And Israel departed, and pitched his tent beyond
the tower of ^ich. 4. b
Eder.

Ge. 49. a
and lay with Bilha his fathers concubyne, and that came to Isreal's ears.

And Jacob had twolue sons. The sons of Lea were these: Ruben Jacobs first
borne son, Simeon, Leui, Judah, Isachar, and Zabulo^. The sons of Rachel,
were Joseph and Ben Iamin. The sons of Bilha Raches maid: Dan, and Nepthali.
The sons of Silpa Leas maid: Gad and Aser. These are ye sons of Jacob,
which were borne unto him in Mesopotamia. And he came to his father Isaac to
Mamre in to the head cite which is called Hebron, where in Abraham and Isaac
were strangers. And Isaac was an hundredth and four score year old, and fell
sick, and dyed, and was gathered unto his people, when he was old, and had
lived enough: and his sons Esau and Jacob buried him.

The XXXVI. Chapter.
THis is the generacio^ of Esau, which Ge. 27. a
Ada the daughter of Elo^ the Hethite: and Ahalibama the daughter of Ana, the
childs child of Zibeon the Heuyte: And Basmath Ge. 28. b
Ismaels daughter, the sister of Nebaioth. And Adabare Eliphas unto Esau.
Basmath bare Reguel. Ahalibama bare Ie^s, Iaelam, and Korah. These are the
children of Esau, yt were borne unto him in the land of Canaan.

And Esau took his wives sons and daughters, and all the souls of his house,
his substance, and all the catell with all the goods that he had gotten in
the land of Canaan, and went in to a country away from his brother Jacob:
for their substance was so great, that they could not dwell together: and the
land wherein they were strangers, might not hold them because of their
goods. So Esau dwelt upon mount Seir. And Esau is Edom.

This is ye generacio^ of Esau, of who^ are Ge. 36. d
Thimna was a concubyne of Elyphas ye son of Esau, and bare him Amaleck.
These are ye children of Ada Esaus wife.

The children of Reguel are these: Nahath Serah, Samma, Misa. These are the
children of Basmath Esaus wife.

The children of Ahalibama Esaus wife, the daughter of Ana, that was the
childs child of Zibeon (which she bare unto Esau) are these: Ieus, Iaelam and
Korah.



And these are the children of Roguel Esaus son: ye prince Nahath, ye prince
Serah, ye prince Sa^ma, ye prince Misa. These are ye princes of Reguel in ye
land of ye Edomites, and they are ye children of Basmath Esaus wife. These are
the children of Ahalibama Esaus wife: The prince Icus, ye prince Iaelam, the
prince Korah. These are the princes of Ahalibama, ye daughter of Ana Esaus
wife. These are ye children of Esau and Ge. 36. b
Thimna.

The children of Sobal were these: Alua^, Manahat, Ebal, Sepho and Ona^. The
children of Zibeo^ were: Aia and Ana. This is the same Ana yt found Leu. 19. c
Mules in ye wyldernes, wha^ he kept his fathers Zibeons Asses. The children
of Ana were: Dison: and Ahalibama, yt is ye daughter of Ana. The children of
Dison were: Hemdan, Eszban, Iethra^ and Charan. The children of Ezer were:
Bilhan, Seaua^, and Ackan. The children of Disan were: Vz and Aran.

These are ye princes of ye Horites: The prince Lothan, ye prince Sobal, ye
prince Zibeo^, ye prince Ana, ye prince Dison, ye prince Ezer, ye prince Disan.
These are the princes of the Horites, which ruled in ye land of Seir.

1. Pa^. 1. d
Bela ye son of Beor was king in Edumea, and ye name of his cite was
Dinhaba. And wha^ Bela died, Iobab ye son of Serah of Bosra was king in his
stead. When Iobab dyed, Husam out of ye lord of the Themanites was king in
his stead. When Husam dyed, Hadad ye son of Bedad) which slew ye Madianites
in ye Moabites field) was king in his stead, and the name of his cite was
Auith. When Hadad dyed, Samla of Masreck was king in his stead. Wha^ Samla
died, Saul of Rehoboth by ye water side, was king in his stead. When Saul
dyed, Baal Hana^ the son of Achbor was king in his stead. Wha^ Baal Hana^
the son of Achbor dyed, Hadad was king in his stead, and the name of his
cite was Pagu, and his wifes name was Meher Abeel, the daughter of Matred, the
daughter of Mesahab. Thus are the princes of Esau called in their kynreds,
places and names: The prince Thymna, ye prince Alua, ye prince Ietheth, the
prince Ahalibama, the prince Ela, the prince Pynon, the prince Kenas, ye prince
Theman, ye prince Mibzar, the prince Magdiel, ye prince Ira^. These are the
princes in Edumea, like as they dwelt in ye land of their possessions. And
Esau is ye father of ye Edomites.

The XXXVII. Chapter.
Jacob dwelt in ye land, wherein his father

Now wha^ his brethren saw, yt his father loved him more the^ all his
brethren, they had evil will at him, and could not speak a fre^dl^ word unto
hi^. * Joseph also had once a dre^me, and told his brethren thereof. The^ hate^
they him ye more, for he said: Hear I pray you what I dreamed. Me thought we
were byndinge sheeues upon ye field, and my shefe arose, and stood up, and
your sheeues round about made obeysaunce unto my shefe.

Then said his brethren unto him: Shall

Now wha^ his brethren were gone forth ^
Here am I. And he said: Go thy way, and look whether it be well with thy
brethren and with ye catell, and bring me word again how it is. And he sent
him out of the valley of Hebron, to go unto Sichem.

Then a certain man found him, wandringe out of his way in the field, which
axed him, and said: Whom sekest thou? He answered: I seek my brethren: tell me
I pray the where they keep. The man said: They are gone from hence, for I
herd them say: let us go unto Dothan. Then followed Joseph after his brethren,
and found them at Dothan.

(...)
come on, and let us sley him, and cast him in a pytt, and say: a wicked beast
has devoured him: the^ shall it be seen, what his dreams are.

When Ruben herd that, he would have delivered him out of their hands, and
said: (...) 42. c
O let us not sley a soul. Ruben said morouer un to him: Shed no blood, but
cast him into this pytt yt is in the wyldernes, and lay ye no hands upon him.
(He would have delivered him out of their hands, yt he might have brought him
again unto his father.)



Then said Judah unto his brethren: what helps it us, that we sleye our
brother, and hyde his blood? Come, let us sell him unto the Ismaelites, that
our hands be not defiled upon him, for he is our brother, our flesh and
blood. And they herkened unto him.



And as the Madianites merchant men went by, they drew Joseph out of the
pytt, and sold him unto the Ismaelites (for twe^tye silver pens) which brought
him in to Egipte. Act. 7. b


Now when Ruben came again unto

But he knew it, and said: It is my sons coat, Ge. 44 d
a wicked beast has devoured him, a rauyshinge beast has rauyshed Joseph. And
Jacob re^te his clothes, and put a sackcloth about his loins, and mourned for
his son a long season. And all his sons and daughters came unto him to
comfort him. But he would not be comforted, and said: With sorrow will I go
down in to the grave unto my son. And his father wept for him. But the
Madianites sold him in Egipte unto Potiphar Pharaos chief Marshall. Psa. 104. c


The XXXVIII. Chapter.
IT fortuned at the same time, yt Judah

And she conceived again, and bare a son- who^ she called Ona^. She proceaded
yet further, and bare a son, who^ she called Sela. And wha^ she had borne
him, she left of bearinge.

And Judah gave his first son Er a wife, whose name was Thamar. But he was
wicked before the LORD, therefore the LORD slew him. Then said Judah unto his
son Onan: Go lie with thy brothers wife, and marye thyself with her, that
thou may raise up sede unto thy brother. But when Deuteronomy. 25. ^
he let it fall upon the earth and destroyed it, yt he should not give sede
unto his brother. This thing that he did displeased the LORD sore, and he
slew him also.

Then said Judas unto Thamar his sons wife. Remain a wyddow in thy fathers
house, till my son Sela be grown: for he thought: peradventure he might dye
also like as his brethren. So Thamar went her way, and remained in her
fathers house. Now wha^ many days were past, ye daughter of Sua Judas wife
dyed. And when Judah had left mourning, he went up unto Thimnath Ge. 31. c 2.
Re. 1^. c
to clyppe his sheep with his shepherde Hyra of Odollam.



Now when Judah saw her, he thought it had been an whore, for she had covered
her face: and he gat him to her in the way, and said: I pray the let me lie
with the, for he knew not that it was his daughter in law. She answered: What
will thou give me, that thou may lie with me? He said: I will send the a
kydd from the flock. She answered: Give me a pledge then, till thou send it
me. He said: What pledge will thou that I give the?



Judah sent the kydd by his shepherde of Odolla, to fetch the pledge again from
the woman, and he found her not. Then axed he the men of the same place, and
said: Where is the whore yt sat without in the way? They answered: There
has no whore been here. And he came again unto Judah, and said: I have not
found her, morouer ye men of the same place said: that there has no whore
been there. Judah said: Let her take it unto her, lest we happly be shamed, for
I have sent the kydd, and thou have not found her.



When the time came that she should be delivered, there were two twyns found
in her womb. And as she was now in trauelynge, the one put out his hand. Then
the mydwife took and bound a reed threde about it, and said: This shall come
out first. But when he pluckte in his hand again, his brother came forth. And
she said: Wherefore is there a rent maid for thy sake? And he was called ^
Phares. Afterward came his brother forth, which had ye reed threde about his
hand, and he was called Zarah.

The XXXIX. Chapter.
Joseph was brought down in to Egipte, (...)
and Potiphar an Egipcia^ Pharaos chief marshall bought him of ye Ismaelites,
yt brought him down. And ye LORD was with Joseph, in so much yt he became a
luckye man, and was in his master ye Egipcians house. And his master saw yt
the LORD was with him: for what so ever he did, the LORD made it to prospere in
his hand: so yt he found favor in his masters sight, and was his servant. He
made him ruler of his house, and put all that he had, under his hand. And from
the time forth that he had made him ruler of his house and all his goods, ye
LORD blessed the Egipcians house for Joseph's sake: and there was nothing but
the very blessing of the LORD in all yt he had in ye house and in the field,
therefore left he all yt he had, in Joseph's hand. And meddled with nothing
himself, save only the bred that he ate. And Joseph was fair of bewtye, and
well favored offace.

And it fortuned after these acts, that his

It fortuned upon a time, that Joseph

Now wha^ she saw that he had left his garment in her hand, and fled out, she
called the folks in the house, and said unto the^: Lo, he has brought us in
the Hebrew, to do us shame. He came in here unto me, to sleep by me: but I
cried with loud voice. And when he herd that I made a noise and cried, he
left his garment here by me, and fled, and ran out.



(...) 4. c
wherein the kings presoners lay. And there he lay in preson. But the LORD
was with him, and had mercy upon him, and caused him to find favor in the
sight of the officer of ye preson, so that he committed all the presoners of
the preson unto his hands: that what so ever were done, might be done by him.
For the officer of the preson saw, yt the LORD was with him in all yt was
under his hands, and that what so ever he did, the LORD made it to come
prosperously to pass.

The XL. Chapter.


And they dreamed, both the butlar and the baker in one night, every man his
own dream, and every dream had his interpretacio^. Now in the morning when
Joseph came in unto them, and saw that they looked sadly, he axed them and
said: Why look ye so sadly to day? They answered: We have dreamed, and have
no man to declare it unto us. Joseph said: Interpretinge belongs unto God,
but tell it me yet.



Joseph said: This is the interpretacio^: The three branches are three days,
and over three days shall Pharao take the, and putt the in thine office again,
that thou may give him the cup in his hand after the old manner, wha^
thou wast his butlar. But when thou art in thy prosperity, think upon me, and
show me kyndnesse, that thou may certify Pharao of me, yt he may bring
me out of this house: for I was preuely carried out of the land of the Hebrews,
and here also have I done nothing, that they should have put me in this
dongeon.

When the chief baker saw, that the interpretacion

Joseph answered, and said: This is the interpretacion: The three baszkettes
are three days, and after three days shall Pharao take the, and hang the upon
the galowe, and the fowls shall eat thy flesh from of ye.

And upon the third day it came to pass, that Pharao held his Mat. 14 a
birth day, and made a feast unto all his servants, and took the chief
butlar and the chief baker before all his servants, and restored the chief
butlar to his butlarshipe again, so that he reached the cup in to Pharaos
hand. As for the chief baker, he caused him be hanged like as Joseph had
interpretated unto him. Nevertheless the chief butlar thought not on Joseph,
but forgot him.

The XLI. Chapter.
ANd after two years Pharao had a

And he slepte again, and dreamed the second time. And he saw that seven
ears of corn grew upon one stalk, full and good. Afterward he saw seven
thynne and blasted ears come up, and the seven thynne ears devoured the seven
great and full ears. Then Pharao awaked, and saw that it was a dream. And
when it was day, his sprete was troubled, and he sent out, and caused to call
all the soythsayers in Egipte and all the wise men, and told them his dream.
But there was none, that could tell Pharao the interpretacion of it.

Then spoke the chief butlar unto Pharao,

Then Pharao sent and called for Joseph and they let him out of the dongeon.
And he let himself be shaven, and changed his clothes, and came in unto
Pharao. Then said Pharao unto him: I have dreamed a dream, and there is no
man that can interpret it: but I have herd tell of the, that wha^ thou
hear a dream, thou declarest it. Joseph answered Pharao, and said: God
shall give Pharao a prosperous answer, ye well without me.



And I saw again in my dream seven ears of corn, growinge upon one stalk,
full and good. Afterward there spronge up seven wythred ears, thynne and
blasted, and the seven thynne ears devoured the seven good ears. And I have
showed it unto my soithsayers, but they can tell me nothing thereof.



Behold, there shall come seven years with great plenteousnes in ye whole land
of Egipte, and after the same there shall come seven years of derth, so that
all this plenteousnes shall be forgotten in ye land of Egipte: and the derth
shall consume the land, so that the plenteousnes shall not be perceived in the
land, because of the derth that comes thereafter, for it shall be very
great. Where as Pharao dreamed the second time, it signifies that this
thing is surely prepared of God, and that God will shortly bring the same to
pass.

Let Pharao now provide for a man of

Thou shall be over my house, and acordinge (...)
only in the kings seat will I be more then thou. And he said: Behold, I
have set the over the whole land of Egipte. And he took of his ringe from his
hand, and gave it Joseph in his hand, and clothed him with white sylke, and
honge a cheyne of golge about his neck, and made him ride upon the second
charet: and caused it be proclaimed before him, that men should bow their knees
unto him, as to him who^ Pharao had set over the whole land of Egipte.

And Pharao said unto Joseph: I am Pharao: without thy will shall no man move
his hand or his foot in all the land Egipte. And he called him (...) Zaph^^^h
Pae^^ that is ^^aye: (...) expou^^^ of se^^te thin (...), or a (...) to (...)
secre^ ^hi^ges (...) ope^^.
Zaphnath Paena, and gave him a wife, even Asnath the daughter of Potiphar the
pressed of On. So Joseph went out, for to vyset the land of Egipte. (And he was
thirty year old, when he stood before Pharao.) And he departed from Pharao,
and went through all the land of Egipte.

And the land did so those seven plenteous years, and they gathered all the
food of the seven years that were in the land of Egipte, and laid it in the
cities. Look what food grew in the field round about every cite, they put
it therein. So Joseph laid up the corn in stoare, and that much above measure,
as the sonde of the sea: in so much yt he left of nombrynge of it, for it could
not be nombred.

^en. 46. c
And the first called he Manasses: for God (said he) has caused me to forget
all my labor, and all my fathers house. The second called he Ephraim: for
God (said he) has caused me to grow in ye land of my trouble.

Now when ye seven plenteous years were ended in Egipte, then began the
seven dear years to come, Act. 7. b
whereof Joseph had said. And there was derth in all lands, but in all the
land of Egipte there was food. Now when the land of Egipte began to suffer
honger also, the people cried unto Pharao for bred. But Pharao said unto all
ye Egipcians: Go unto Joseph, what he says unto you, yt do. So when there
was derth in all ye land, Joseph opened all yt was by him, and sold unto the
Egipcians. Thus ye derth prevailed in the land, and all countrees came to
Egipte to bye at Joseph: for the derth was mighty in all lands.

The XLII. Chapter.


Now wha^ his brethren came to him, they fell down to the ground before him
upon their faces. And he saw them, and knew the^, and held himself strange
toward them, and talked roughly with them, and said unto them: Whence come
ye? They said: Out of the land of Canaan to bye vytayle. Nevertheless though
he knew them, yet knew they not him. And Joseph thought upon ye dreams that
he had dreamed of them, Genesis 37. a
and said unto them: Ye are spies, and are come to se where the land is open.

They answered him: No my lord, thy servants

Joseph said unto them: This is it that I said unto you: spies are ye. Here
by will I prove you: By the life of Pharao ye shall not yet hence, except
your youngest brother come hither. Send away one of you to fetch your
brother, but ye shall be in preson. Thus will I try out yor words, whether ye
go about with truth or not: for else, by the life of Pharao ye are spies. And he
put the^ together in ward three days long.

Upon the third day he said unto the^:

And they said one to another: This have we deserved against our brother, in
that we saw the anguysh of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not
hear him: therefore comes now this trouble upon us. Ruben answered them, and
said: Told not I you ye same, when I said: Ge. 37. d
O sin not against ye lad, but ye would not hear. Now is his blood
required. But they knew not that Joseph understood it, for he spoke unto the^
by an interpreter. And he turned him from them, and wept. Now when he had
turned him to them again, and talked with them, he took Simon from among them,
and bound him before their eyes, and commanded to fill their sackes with corn,
and to put every man's money in his sack, and to give every one his expenses by
the way. And so was it done unto them.



Now when they came home to Jacob their father in the land of Canaan, they
told him all that had happened unto them, and said: The man that is lord of
the land, spoke roughly to us, and took us for spies of the country. And when
we answered: we are unfeigned, and were never spies, but are twolue brethren the
sons of our father: one is away, and the youngest is yet this day with our
father in the land of Canaan, He said: Hereby will I mark, that ye are
unfeigned: Leave one of your brethren with me, and take food necessary for
your houses, and go your way, and bring your youngest brother unto me: so
shall I know that ye are no spies, but unfeigned: the^ shall I deliver you your
brother also, and ye may occupy in the land.

And when they opened their sackes, every

Then said Jacob their father: Ye have robbed me of my children. Joseph is
away, Simeon is away, and ye will take Ben Iamin away: It goes all over me.
Ruben answered his father and said: If I bring him not to the again, then
slaye my two sons: deliver him but in to my hand, I will bring him again
unto the. He said: my son shall not go down with you: for his brother is
deed, and he is left alone. If any mysfortune should happen unto him by the
way yt ye go, ye should bring my graye hair with sorrow down unto the grave.

The XLIII. Chapter.


The^ Judah answered him, and said: The man swear unto us, and said: ye shall
not se my face, except your brother be with you. If so be now that thou will
send our brother with us, we will go down, and bye the food. But if thou will not send him, we will not go down. For the man said unto us: Ye shall not
se my face, except your brother be with you.

Israel said: Wherefore have ye done this ^
I will be suertye for him, of my hands shall thou require him. If I bring
him not unto the again, and set him before thine eyes, I will bear ye blame my
life long. For if we had not made this tarienge, we had now been come again
twyse.

Then said Israel their father unto the^: If it must needs be so, then do
this: take of the best fruits of the land in your sackes, and bring the man
a present: a curtesy balm, and honey, and spyces, and myrre, and dates, and
almondes. Take other money with you also, and the money that was brought again
in your sack mouths, carry it again with you: peradventure it was an
oversight. And take your brother, get you up, and

Then they took the present, and other money with them, and Ben Iamin, gat the^
up, and went in to Egipte, and stood before Joseph. Then Joseph beheld them
with Ben Iamin, and said unto the ruler of his house: Bring these men in, and
sley, and make ready, for they shall dyne with me at no one. And the man did as
Joseph bad him, and brought the men in to Joseph's house.

When they were brought in to Joseph's house, they were afraid, and said: We
are brought hither because of the money, that came again in our sackes at the
first, to pyke a quarrel with us, and to lay something to our charge, and to
take us for bond servants with our Asses.

Therefore came they to ye man, that was ruler of Joseph's house, and talked with
him at the door, and said: Sir, ^en. 4^. c
we came down at the first to bye food, and when we came in the Inn, and
opened our sackes, behold, every man's money was in his sack mouth with full
weight: therefore have we brought it with us again, and have brought other
money with us also, to bye food: but we can not tell, who put our money in
our sackes.

He said: Be content, fear you not, your God even ye God of your fathers
has given you yt treasure in your sackes, I had your money. And he brought
forth Simeon unto them, and led them in to Joseph's house, and gave them water
to wash their fete, and gave their Asses prouender.



And he lift up his eyes, and saw his brother Ben Iamin his mothers son, and
said: Genesis 42. b
Is this your youngest brother, that ye told me of? And he said morouer: God
be merciful unto the my son. And Joseph made haist (for the ground of his
heart was kyndled toward his brother) and sought how he might weep, ^. Re. 3. d
and went in to his chamber, and wept there.



The XLIIII. Chapter.


But when they were out of the cite, and not come far, Joseph said to the
ruler of his house: Up, and follow after the me^, and when thou ouertakest
them, say unto them: Wherefore have ye rewarded evil for good? Is not that it,
that my lord drynketh out of? and that he prophecieth withal? It is evil
done of you, that ye have done.

And when he had overtaken them, he said

And they made haist, and took down every man his sack to the ground, and
every man opened his sack: And he searched and began at the greatest unto the
youngest, and the cup was found in Ben Iamins sack. Then rent they their
clothes, and every man lade the burden upon his Ass, and went again unto
the cite. And Judah went with his brethren unto Joseph's house (for he was there
yet) and they fell before him on the ground. Joseph said unto them: What
manner of deed is this, that ye have done? Knew ye not, that soch a man as I
am, can prophecy?

Judah said: What shall we say unto my

The^ stepte Judah unto him, and said: My lord, let thy servant speak one
word in thine ears my lord, be not displesed at y^ servant also, for thou
art eue^ as Pharao. My lord axed his servants, and said: Have ye yet a
father or brother? Then answered we; We have a father, which is old, and a
young lad begotten in his age, and his brother is deed, and he is left alone of
his mother, and his father loves him.

Genesis 43. a
If your youngest brother come not hither with you, ye shall se my face no
more. Then went we up unto thy servant my father, and told him my lords
words. Then said our father: Go your way again, and bye us a little food.
But we said: We can not go down, except our youngest brother be with us,
then will we go down: for we darre not look the man in the face, if our
youngest brother be not with us. Then said thy servant my father unto us: Ye
know that my wife bare me two sons, one went out fro me, and I said: he is
torn in pieces. Genesis ^7. f
If ye take this fro me also, and any mysfortune happen him, then shall ye
bring my gray here with sorrow down unto the grave. Genesis 42. e


Genesis 43. b
and said: if I bring him not again, I will bear the blame all my life
long. Therefore let thy servant bide here in stead of ye lad, to be my lords
bond man, and let the lad go up with his brethren. For how can I go up unto my
father, if the lad be not with me? Then should I se the mysery that should
happen unto my father.

The XLV. Chapter.
Act. 7. b
And he said unto his brethren: I am Joseph, is my father yet alive? And his
brethren could not answer him, they were so abashed before his face. But he
said: Come nigh unto me. And they came nigh. And he said: I am Joseph your
brother. Ge^. ^
whom ye sold in to Egipte. And now vex not your selves, and think not yt
there is any wrath, because ye sold me hither. Ge^.^
For God sent me hither before you, for yor lives sake. For these are now two
years, that ye derth has been in the land, and there are yet five years
behind, wherein there shall be no plowinge ner harvest.

But God sent me hither before you, yt he

And he fell about his brother Ben Iamyns

And Pharao spoke unto Joseph: Say unto thy brethren: Do thus, lade your
beasts, go your way, and when ye come in to the land of Canaan, take your
father and your housholdes, and come unto me, I will give you of the goods in
the land of Egipte, so that ye shall eat the fatt in the land. And he
commanded them, Do thus, Take you charettes out of ye land of Egipte for
your children and wives, and bring your father, and come, and regard not
your household stuff: for the goods of all the land of Egipte shall be yours.

The children of Israel did so, and Joseph commandment, and expenses by the
way, and gave them all, unto every one a change of raiment: but unto Ben
Iamin he gave three hundredth silver pens, and five change of raiment. As for
his father, he sent him ten Asses laden with goods out of Egipte, and ten
Asses with corn and bred, and vytayles for his father by ye way. So he sent
away his brethren, and said unto them: Strive not by the way.



The XLVI. Chapter.
Iosu. 24. a Act. 7. b
And when he came to Berseba, he offered offerynges unto ye God of his father
Isaac. And God spoke unto him in a vision by night: Jacob Jacob. He said: here
am I. And he said: I am ye mighty God of thy father, be not afraid to go in
to Egipte, for there will I make a great people of the. I will go down with
the, and will bring the up also. And Joseph shall lay his hand upon thine eyes.

Then Jacob gat him up from Berseba, and ye children of Israel carried Jacob
their father with their children and wives upon the charettes that Pharao had
sent to carry him. And they took their catell and substance which they had
gotten in the land of Canaan, and so came in to Egipte: Esa. 52. a
Jacob and all his sede with him, his children and his childers children with
him, his daughters, and the daughters of his children, and all his sede.

Nu. 26. a
The first borne son of Jacob: Ruben. The children of Ruben: Hanoch, Pallu,
^. Pat. ^. a
Hezron and Charmi. The children of Simeon: Iemuel, Iamin, Ohad, Iachim, Zohar
and Saul the son of the Cananitish woman. The children of Leui: Gerson,
Cahath and Merari. The children of Judah: Er, Onan, Sela, Phares and Serah. But
Er and Onan dyed in the land of Canaan. The children of Phares: Hesron and
Hamul. The children of Isachar: 1. Pat. 8. a
Thola, Phua, Job and Semron. The children of Zabulon: Sered, Elon and Iahleel.
These are the children of Lea, which she bare unto Jacob in Mesopotamia with
his daughter Dina. These all together with sons and daughters make three and
thirty souls.

The children of Gad: Zipheon, Haggi, Suni, Ge. 29. d
whom Laban gave unto Lea his daughter, and she bare unto Jacob these sixtene
souls.

The children of Rachel Jacobs wife: Joseph and Ben Iamin. And unto Joseph in
ye land of Egipte Ge. 41. g
were borne Manasses and Ephraim, whom Asnath the daughter of Potiphar pressed of
On bare unto him. The children of Ben Iamin: Bela, Becher, Asber, Gera, Naama^,
Ehi, Ros, Mupim, Hupim and Ard. These are the children of Rachel, which were
borne unto Jacob, fourtene souls altogether.

The children of Dan: Husim. The children Deuteronomy. 10. ^
which proceaded out of his loins (beside the wives of his children) are
altogether six and sixty souls. And Joseph's children which were borne unto
him in Egipte, were two souls: so that all the souls of the house of Jacob
which came into Egipte, were seuentye.

And he sent Judah before him unto Joseph, to show him the way to Gosen, and
they came in to the land of Gosen. Then Joseph bended his charett fast, and
went up to mete Israel his father unto Gosen. And when he saw him, he fell
about his neck, and wept sore upon his neck. Then said Israel unto Joseph:
Now am I content to dye, for so much as I have seen thy face, that thou art yet
alive.

Joseph said unto his brethren, and to his dwell in the land of Gosen: for
the Egipcians abhor all kepers of catell.

The XLVII. Chapter.






Joseph brought in Jacob his father also, and set him before Pharao. And Jacob
thanked Pharao. But Pharao axed Jacob: How old art thou? Jacob said: The time
of my Job 14. c Psalm. 118. c
pylgremage is an hundredth and thirty years: little and evil is the time of
my pilgremage, and attayneth not unto the time of my fathers in their
pylgremages. And Jacob thanked Pharao, and went out from him.



There was no bred in all the land, for the derth was very sore: so yt the
land of Egipte and the land of Canaan were fameshed by ye reason of the
derth. And Joseph brough^ together all the money that was found in Egipte and
Canaan, for ye corn that they bought. And he laid up all the money in Pharaos
house.

Now when money failed in the land of Egipte and Canaan, all the Egipcians
came unto Joseph, and said: Give us bred. Why suffrest thou us to dye before
yt, because wear without money? Joseph said: Bring hither

When yt year was ended, they came unto him the next year, and said unto
him: We will not hyde it from or lord, yt not only the money, but all the
catell also is spent unto or lord: and there is nothing left more for or
lord, but only or body and our land. Wherefore suffrest thou both us to dye,
and our land? Take us and our land for bred, that we and

So Joseph took all the land of Egipte in for Pharao: for the Egipcians sold
every man his land, because ye derth was so mighty upon them: and so the
lord became Pharaos, with the people that went^ out and in at his cities, from
one side of Egipte unto the other, except the prestes land, that took he not
in: For it was ordened of Pharao for the prestes, that they should eat that
which was appointed them, which he gave them, therefore they neded not to sell
their lands.

Then said Joseph unto the people: Behold,

They said: Let us but live, and find grace before the our lord, we will
gladly be Pharaos servants: So Joseph made the^ a law unto this day over
the Egipcians land, to give Pharao the fifth part, except the prestes land,
which was not bond unto Pharao.



Now when the time came that Israel should dye, he called Joseph his son, and
said unto him: If I have found grace in thy sight, ^e. 24. a
then lay thine hand under my ^hye, yt thou shall show mercy and faithfulness
upon me, and not burye me in Egipte, but I will lie by my fathers, and thou
shall carye me out of Egipte, and burye me in their buryall. He said: I will do
as thou have said. But he said: ^e. 25. d
Then swear unto me. And he swear unto him. The^ Israel bowed himself toward
the bed head.

The XLVIII. Chapter.
Ge. 28. c
at Lus in ye land of Canaan, and blessed me, and said unto me: Behold, I
will cause ye to grow and increase and will make a multitude of people of ye,
and will give this land unto ye sede after ye for an everlasting possession.
Therefore shall now thy two sons Manasses and Ephraim (which were borne unto
the in Egipte, Genesis 41. g
before I came hither unto the) be mine, like as Ruben and Simeon. As for those
that thou begettest after the^, they shall be thine own. But these shall be named
with the names of their brethren in their inheritance.

Genesis 25. d
by the way, when there was yet but a feldes bread unto Eprath: and I buried
her in the way toward Ephrath, which now is called Bethleem.

And Israel looked upon Joseph's sons, and said: What are these? Joseph
answered: They are my sons, which God has given me here. He said: Bring
the^ hither to me, yt I may bless the^. (For Isreal's eyes were heavy for age,
and he could not well se.) And he brought the^ unto him. So he kyssed them, and
enbraced the^, and said unto Joseph: Behold, I have seen ye face, which I
thought not: and lo, God has caused me to se ye sede also. And Joseph took
them from his lap, and they fell down to the ground upon their face.

Then Joseph took them both, Ephraim Iosu. 1^. a
for Manasses was ye firstborne. And Heb. 11. d
he blessed Joseph, and said: The God before who^ my fathers Abraham and Isaac
have walked: ye God yt has fed me my life long unto this day: the angel
which has delivered me from all evil, bless these laddes, yt they may be
called after my name, and after ye name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac, yt
they may grow and multiplye upon earth. But wha^ Joseph saw yt his father
Iere. ^1. b


And Israel said unto Joseph: Behold, I dye, and God shall be with you, and
bring you again in to ye land of your fathers* Ioh. 4. a
I have given the a piece of land, without ye brethren, which I gat with my
sword and my bow out of the hand of the Amorites.

The XLIX. Chapter.
ANd Jacob called his sons, and said:

Rube^ my first son, Genesis 29. f
thou art my power and the beginning of my strength, chief Deu. 21. c
in governance, and chief in auctorite. Thou passest forth swiftly as ye
water. Thou shall not be the chefest: For Genesis 35. c 1. Par. 6. c
thou have clymmed up upon thy fathers bed, even than defyledest thou my couch
with going up.

Symeon and Leui brethren, their deedly weapens are perlous instruments. In to
their secrets come not my soul, and my worshipe be not joined with their
congregation: Genesis ^4. d
for in their wrath they slew a man, and in their selfwyll they houghed an ox.
Cursed be their wrath, because it is so fearce: and their indignacion, because
it is so rigorous. I will deuyde them in Jacob, and s^ater them in Israel*

1. Pa. 6. a
Judah, thou art he. Thy brethren shall praise the: for thy hand shall be in
thine enemies neck: thy fathers children shall stoop unto the. Mich. 5 b
Judah is a young lion, thou art come up hye my son, from the spoil. Nu. 23. d
He kneled down and couched himself as a lion and as a lioness: who will raise
him up? The cepter shall not be removed from Judah, ner a master from his fete,
till the Worthy come, and unto him shall the people fall. He shall bind his
foale unto the vine, and his Asses colte to ye noble branch. He shall wash his
garment in wine, and his mantell in the blood of grapes. His eyes are roudier
then wine, and his teth whyter then mylck.

^os. 19. ^
and shall border upon Sydon.

Isachar shall be a strong Ass, and lay him down betwixt ye borders. And he
saw rest, that it was good, and the land, that it was pleasant. And bowed
down his shulder to bear, and became a servant unto trybute.

^ud. 13.14.^5.16.17.18
Dan shall be judge in his people, as well as a trybe in Israel. Dan shall be a
serpent in the way, and an edder in the path, and byte the horse in the heles,
that his ryder may fall backwarde. LORD I look for thy salvation.

As for Gad, a wapened host of men shall fall violently upon him, but he shall
hurt them in the hele.

Of Asser comes his fat bred, and he shall give delicates unto kings.

(...). 4.5
Nepthali is a swift hynde, and gives goodly words.



Ben Iamin, a rauyshinge wolf. In the morning shall he devour the pray, but
in the evening he shall deuyde the spoil.

All these are the twolue trybes of Israel: and this is it that their father
spoke unto them, when he blessed them, every one with a sundry blessing.

And he commanded them, and said unto ^
burye me with my fathers in ye cave which is in the field of Ephron the
Hethite, in the dubble cave that lies over against Mamre in ye land of
Canaa^, which Abraham bought with the field, of Ephron the Hethite for a
possession to burye in. (...)
There buried they Abraham and Sara his wife, there buried they Isaac also and
Rebecca his wife: and their buried I Lea, in the good of the field and of the
cave therein, which was bought of the Hethites.

And when Jacob had ended this commandment unto his children, Act* ^
he pluckte his fete together upon the bed, and died, and was gathered unto his
people. The^ fell Joseph upon his fathers face, and wept, and kyssed him.

The L. Chapter.
ANd Joseph commanded his servants

Now when the mourning days were ended, Joseph spoke unto Pharaos household,
and said: If I have found favor in your sight, the^ speak unto Pharao and
say: My father has taken an ooth of me, and said: Behold, I dye, burye me
in mine own grave, Gen ^
which I dygged for myself in the land of Canaan. Therefore will I now go up,
and burye my father, and come again. Pharao said: Go thy way up, and burye
thy father, acordinge as thou have sworn unto him.

So Joseph went up, to burye his father.

Now when these came to the plain of Atad yt lies beyond Iordane, they made
there a very great and bitter lamentacion, and Eccl ^
he mourned for his father seven days. And wha^ the people in the land (the
Cananites) saw the mourning in the plain of Atad, they said: The Egipcia^s
make there great lame^tacion. Therefore is the place called: The lamentacion of
the Egipcians, which lies beyond Iordane.

(...)
And his children did as he had commanded them, and carried him to ye land of
Canaan, and buried him in ye dubble cave, that Abraham bought with the field
for a possession to bury in, (...) 23. c
of Ephron ye Hethite over against Mamre. So Joseph took his journey again in
to Egipte with his brethren, and with all those that went up with him to burye
his father, when they had buried him.

(...) 37. d
therefore let they say unto him: Thy father commanded before his death, and
said: Thus shall ye say unto Joseph: O for give thy brethren the offense and
their sin, that they did so evil unto the. O forgive now this trespace of us
the servants of thy fathers God. But Joseph wept, when they spoke so unto
him.

And his brethren went, and fell down before him, and said: Behold, here
are we thy servants. Joseph said unto the^: Fear ye not, for I am under
God. Ye thought evil over me, but God has turned it unto good, to do as it is
come to pass this day, for the saving of much people. Therefore be not ye now
afraid, I will care for you and your children. And he comforted them, and
spoke louyngly unto them.

Thus dwelt Joseph in Egipte with his Tob. 14. a Job 42. c Psalm. 127. a
unto ye third generation: In like manner the children of Machir the son of
Manasses, begat children also upon Joseph's lap.

And Joseph said unto his brethren: Hebr. 11. d
I dye, and God will vyset you, and bring you out of this land, to the land
that he swear unto Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Therefore took he an ooth of the
children of Israel, and said: When God shall vyset you, Exo. 13. d Iosu. 24. f
the^ carry my bones from hence. So Joseph dyed, wha^ he was an hundredth and ten
year old, and they embawmed him, and laid him in a chest in Egipte.

The end of the first book of Moses, called Genesis.
The second book of Moses, called, Exodus.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I. The children of Israel increase in Egipte. The king commands to
slaye the^, and to drown them. Chap. II. The birth of Moses, which is laid
upon the water. Pharaos daughter takes him and brings him up. He slays one
of the Egipcians, and flies his way in to Madian, where he marieth. The
children of Israel cry unto the LORD. Chap. III. God appears unto Moses in
the bush, and sends him unto the king and the people. Chap. IIII. Moses is
loath to go, and excuses himself. But the LORD enfourmeth him, makes him
strong, and comfort him. Moses takes leave of his father in law, to go
unto his people. Chap. V. Moses and Aaron go unto the king, which oppresses
the people the more. Chap. VI. God gives Moses more instruccio^ and sends
him unto the people. The trybes are nombred. Chap. VII. Moses and Aaron go unto
the king, and show tokens before him: but the king waxes hard hearted. Chap.
VIII. After many tokens Pharao grants to let the people go: but as soon as
the plage cease, he is as ungodly as before. Chap. IX. There comes a death
among all the catell: the^ comes the sores, blaynes, and the hayle. Chap. X.
The greshoppers and darcknes in Egipte. Pharao forbyddeth Moses to come any
more in his sight. Chap. XI. The LORD promises to bring yet another plage
upon Egipte, and commands the Israelites to borowe Jewels of silver and
gold of the Egipcians. Chap. XII. The use of the Easterlambe. God slays all
the firstborne. Pharao dryueth all the people out of the land. Chap. XIII. God
commands to sanctify all the firstborne unto him, and carries them toward
the land of promise, not the next way but through the wyldernes, by a cloud
in the day time, and a pyler of fire in the night. Chap. XIIII. Pharao
follows upon the people of God, which delyuereth his own, carries them through
the reed see, and drowneth the enemies therein. Chap. XV. Moses and the people
sing a song of thankesgeuynge unto the LORD, and come to Marath, where the
bitter water is made sweet. Chap. XVI. The LORD sends quayles and the Manna
to the impatient people. Chap. XVII. Water comes out of the stonye rock.
They fight against Amaleck. Chap. XVIII. Iethro brings Moses his wife and
children, and gives him a good council. Chap. XIX. The LORD appears unto
Moses upon mount Sinai Moses shows the people. Chap. XX. The LORD gives
Moses the two tables of the commandments unto the people. Chap. XXI. Laws
and statutes concerning bodily things. Of murthur, theft and other mo. Chap.
XXII. Of theft. Of hurt that is done with will or vnawarres. Of things given
to keep. Of borowynge and pledges. Chap. XXIII. Many diverse laws and
statutes. Chap. XXIIII. Of the book and blood of the covenant. Chap.
XXV.XXVI. The LORD commands Moses to make the Sanctuary, and the things
belonginge thereto. Chap. XXVII. Of the altar and the apparel thereof. Of the
court of the habitacio^. Of the oil and lamps. Chap. XXVIII. How the prestes
were arrayed and consecrated. Chap. XXIX. The consecratinge of Aaron, of his
sons, and of the altar. Chap. XXX. Of the altar of incense, and the brazen
lauer, the anoyntinge oil and incense. Chap. XXXI. The workmen are called. The
keeping of the Sabbath. The two tables of wytnes are given Moses. Chap. XXXII.
They make the golden calf, Moses in his displeasure breaks the tables, and
punysheth the transgressors. Chap. XXXIII. The people mourn. Moses pitcheth
the tabernacle, and the LORD talks with him. Chap. XXXIIII. Moses receaueth
other tables of the LORD with certain laws. The people are afraid at the
brightness of his face. Chap. XXXV. Certain statutes co^cerninge the
Tabernacle. The workmen are appointed. Chap. XXXVI. What the things be that
they made. Chap. XXXVII. The tabernacle of witness with the staves, Cherubins,
the table, candelsticke. Chap. XXXVIII. The altar of bre^t offeri^ges with the
things belonginge thereto. Chap. XXXIX. Of the prestes garments. Chap. XL. The
LORD commands Moses to set up the tabernacle, and to order the apparel
thereof.
The first Chapter.
(...)
every one came in with his house, Ruben, Simeon, Leui, Judah, Isachar, Zabulo^,
Ben Iamin, Dan, Nephtali, Gad and Aser. And of all the souls that came out of
the loins of Jacob, there were seventy.

As for Joseph, he was in Egipte all ready. Now wha^ Joseph was deed, and all
his brethren, and all they that lived at that time, (...)
the children of Israel grew, and increased, and multiplied, and became
exceadinge mighty, so yt the land was full of them.



And he set work masters over them, to keep them under with burdens. (For
they builded the cities Phiton and Raemses, for treasuries unto Pharao.) But
the more they vexed them, the more they multiplied and grew.



And the king of Egipte said unto the mydwyues of the Hebrueswemen. (Of the
which one was called Siphra, and the other Pua:) When ye help the women of the
Hebrews, and se upon the stole, that it is a son, then slaye him: but if it
be a daughter, let her live. Nevertheless the mydwyues feared God, and did not
as the king of Egipte commanded them, but let the children live.



Therefore God dealt well with the mydwyues. And the people multiplied, and
became exceadinge mighty. And for so much as the mydwyues feared God, Psalmo
126. a
he made them houses. Then Pharao commanded all his people and said: All the
sons that are borne, cast in to the water, but let all the daughters live.

The II. Chapter.
ANd there went forth a man of the Exodus 6. c
and took a daughter of Leui. Act. 7. c Heb. 11. d
And the wife conceived and bare a son. And when she saw yt it was a proper
child, she hyd him three months. And when she could hyde him no longer, she
took an Arc of redes, and dawbed it over with slyme and pitch, and laid the
child therein, and set it among the redes by the waters brynke. But his sister
stood a far of, to wete what would come of him.

And Pharaos daughter came down, to wash herself in the water: And her maidens
walked by the water side: and when she saw the Arc among the redes, she sent
one of her maidens, and caused it to be fett. And when she opened it, she saw
ye child: and behold the babe wept. Then had she pytie upon it, and said:
It is one of the Hebrews children.

Then said his sister unto Pharaos daughter: Shall I go, and call the a nurse

And when the child was grown, she brought it unto Pharaos daughter, and it
became her son, and she called him Moses. For she said: I took him out of
the water.

Upon a time when Moses was great, he went forth unto his brethren, and looked
upon their burdens, and saw, that an Egipcia^ smote one of his brethren ye
Hebrews. And he looked round about him: and when he saw that there was no
man, he slew the Egipcian, and buried him in the sonde.

The next day he went forth also, and saw two men of the Hebrews stryuynge
together, and said to the ungodly: Wherefore smytest thou thy neighbor? But he
said: Ge. 19. b Mat. 21. c Act. 7. c
Who made the a ruler or judge over us? Will thou slaye me also, as thou
slewest the Egipcian? The^ was Moses afraid,

The pressed Madian had seven daughters, which came to draw water, and filled
the troughes, to give their fathers sheep to drink. Then came the shepherdes,
and drove the^ away. But Moses gat him up, and helped them, and gave their
sheep to drink. And when they came to Reguel their father, he said: How came
ye so soon to day? They said: A man of Egipte delivered us from ye
shepherdes, and drew unto us, and gave the sheep to drink. He said unto his
daughters. Where is he? Wherefore let ye the man go, that ye called him not to
eat with us?

Nu. 12. a
And he gave Moses his daughter Zipora, which bare him a son, and he Exo 18. a
called him Gerson, for he said: I am become a stranger in a strange land.
And she bare him yet a son, whom he called Elieser, and said: The God of my
father is my helper, and has delivered me from Pharaos hand.

But after this in process of time, the king of Egipte dyed. And the children
of Israel sighed over their labor, and cried. And their cry over their
labor, came before God. And God herd their co^playnte, and remembered his
covenant Iudic. 2. c Genesis 15. c
with Abraham Isaac and Jacob. And God looked upon the children of Israel, and
God knew it.

The III. Chapter.
4. Es. 14. a Act. 7. d
Horeb. And the angel of ye LORD appeared unto him in a fla^me of fire out of
the bush. And he saw that ye bush brent with fire, and yet was not consumed, and
said: I will go hence, and se this great sight, why ye bush is not brent.

When the LORD saw, that he went his way to se, God called unto him out of
the bush, and said: Moses, Moses. He answered: Here am I. He said: Come not
hither, put thy shues of thy fete, for the place where upon thou stondest,
Iosu. 5. d
is an wholly ground. And he said morouer: (...)
I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, ye God of Isaac, and the God
of Jacob. And Moses covered his face, for he was afraid to look upon God.

And the LORD said: I have seen the trouble of my people in Egipte (...)
and have herd their cry over those that oppress them. I know their sorrow,
and am come down to deliver them from the power of the Egipcians, and to carye
them out of that lord, in to a good and wide land, even in to a land that
flows with milk and honey: namely, unto the place of the Cananites, Hethites,
Amorites, Pheresites, Heuytes and Iebusites. For so much now as the complaynte
of the children of Israel is come before me, and I have seen their oppression
wherewith the Egipcians oppress them: Go now ye way therefore, I will send the
unto Pharao, (...)
that thou may bring my people the children of Israel out of Egipte. Moses
said unto God: Who am I, (...)
yt I should go unto Pharao, and bring the children of Israel out of Egipte?

He said: I will be with the: and this shall ^
I will be has sent me unto you. And God said morouer unto Moses: Thus shall
thou say unto the children of Israel: The LORD God of your fathers, (...)
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, ye God of Jacob has sent me unto you,
this is my name for ever, and my memorial from child to childs child. Go
thy way therefore, and gather the elders of Israel the other, LORD God of your
fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Jacob has appeared
unto me, and said: I have vysited you, and seen what is done unto you in
Egipte, and have said: I will bring you out of the trouble of Egipte, in to ye
land of ye Cananites, Hethites, Amorites, Pheresites, Heuites and Iebusites:
in to a lord yt flows with milk and honey. And if they hear ye voice, then
shall thou and the elders of Israel go in to the king of Egipte, and say unto
him: (...)
The LORD God of ye Hebrews has called us. Let us go now therefore three days
journey in the wyldernes, yt we may do sacrifice unto the LORD our God.

(...)
so that when ye go forth, ye shall not go forth empty: but every wife shall
borowe of her neghbouresse and of her that so geourneth in her house, Jewels of
silver and gold and raiment: those shall ye put upon your sons and
daughters, and spoil the Egipcians.

The IIII. Chapter.
LORD has not appeared unto the. The LORD said unto him: What is yt, that
thou have in thine hand? He said a staff. He said: Cast it from the upon the
ground. And he cast it from him: then was it turned to a serpent. And Moses
fled from it. But ye LORD said unto him: Stretch forth thine hand, and take
it by the tail. Then stretched he forth his hand, and took it, and it became
a staff again in his hand. Therefore shall they believe that ye LORD God of
their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac ye God of Jacob has
appeared unto the.

LORD said furthermore unto him: Thrust thine hand in to ye bosom. And he
thrust it in to his bosom, and took it out: behold, the^ was it leper like
snow. And he said: Put it in to ye bosom again. And he put it again in to
his bosom, and took it out: behold, the^ was it turned again as his flesh.
If they will not believe the, ner hear ye voice of the first token, yet shall
they believe the voice of the second token. But if they will not believe these
two tokens ner hear thy voice, then take of the water of the river, and pour
it upon the dry land: so shall the same water yt thou have taken out of ye
river, be turned unto blood upon ye dry land.

LORD: Oh my LORD, ^^re. 1. a ^^to. 8. b
I am a man yt is not eloque^t, from yesterdaye and yeryesterdaye, and sense
the time yt thou have spo^^* unto thy servant: for I have a slow speech, and
a slow tunge. The LORD said unto him: Who has made the mouth of man? Or who
has made the domme, or the deaf, or the seeing or ye blind? Have not I the
LORD done it? Go now thy way therefore, I will be with thy mouth, and teach the
what thou shall say.

But Moses said* My LORD, send whom thou will send. Then was the LORD very
angry at Moses, and said: Do not I know then, yt thy brother Aaron the
Leuite is well spoken? And behold, he shall go forth to mete ye: and when he
seyth the, Exodus 4. c
he shall rejoice from his heart. Thou shall speak unto him, and put the words
in his mouth: and I will be with thy mouth and his, and teach you what ye shall
do: and he shall speak unto the people for the* He shall be thy mouth, and
thou shall be his God. And take in thine hand this staff, wherewith thou shall
do tokens.

Moses went, and came again unto Iethro LORD said also unto him in Madian:
Go yi way, turn again in to Egipte, for ye me^ are deed, that sought after
thy life. So Moses took his wife, and his sons, and carried them upon an Ass,
and went again in to the land of Egipte, and took the staff of God in his
hand. And the LORD said unto Moses: When thou co^mest again in to Egipte,
se yt thou do all the wonders (before Pharao) which I have put in ye hand.
Exodus 7. a
But I will harde^ his heart, yt he shall not let the people go. And thou shall
say unto Pharao: Thus says ye LORD: Israel is my firstborne son, and I
say unto the: Let my son go, yt he may serve me: If thou will not let him
go, then will I slaye thy firstborne son. Exodus 12. c


And as he was by the way in the Inn, LORD met him, and would have slain
him. Then took Zipora Iosu. 5. a
a stone, and circumcyded the foreskynne of her son, and touched his fete,
and said: A bloody brydegrome art thou unto me. The^ let he him go. But she
said: A bloody brydegrome, because of the circumcision.

And the LORD said unto Aaron: Go mete Moses in the wilderness. And he went,
and met him on the mount of God, and kyssed him. And Moses told Aaron all the
words of the LORD, which had sent him: and all the tokens yt he had charged
him withal. And they went, and gathered all the elders of the children of
Israel. And Aaron told all ye words, yt the LORD had spoken unto Moses: and
did the tokens before the people, and the people believed. And when they herd
yt the LORD vysited the children of Israel, and looked upon their trouble, they
bowed them selves, and worshipped.

The V. Chapter.
LORD the God of Israel: let my people go, yt they may keep holy day unto me
in the wilderness. Pharao answered: Job 2^. b
What fellow is the LORD, that I must hear his voice, and let Israel go? I
know not the LORD, nether will I let Israel go.

They said: The God of the Hebrews has called us. Let us go now therefore three
days journey in the wilderness, and do sacrifice unto the LORD or God, yt
there happen not unto us pestilence or sword. The^ said ye king of Egipte
unto the^: Why make ye ye people (thou Moses and Aaron) to leave their work?
Get you hence to yor labor. Pharao said morouer: Behold, ye people are to
many in ye land, and yet will ye bid them cease from their labor.



Then went the workmasters of the people and their officers out, and spoke
unto the people: Thus says Pharao: There shall no straw be given you, go
your way your selves, and get you straw, where ye can find it. But of
your labor there shall nothing be mynished. Then were the people scatred in
all ye land of Egipte, to gather stubble, that they might have straw.



Than went the officers of the children of Israel, and co^playned unto Pharao:
Wherefore will thou deal thus with thy servants? Thy servants have no straw
given the^, and yet must we make the brycke that are appointed us. And behold,
thy servants are beaten, and thy people are evil entreated. Pharao said: Ye
are idle, idle are ye, therefore say ye: we will go, and do sacrifice unto the
LORD. Go now yor way therefore, and work: there shall no straw be given you,
but the nombre of brycke shall ye deliver.

Then saw the officers of the children of LORD look upon you, and judge it,
for ye have made the sauoure of us to stynke before Pharao and his servants,
and have given them a sword in their hands, to slaye us.

But Moses came again unto the LORD, and said: LORD, wherefore dealest thou
so evil with this people? Wherefore have thou sent me? For sense the time that I
went in unto Pharao, to speak unto him in thy name, he has dealt evil with
this people, and thou have not delivered ye people. The LORD said unto Moses:
Now shall thou se, what I will do unto Pharao, for through a mighty hand must
he let them go, through a mighty hand must he drive them from him out of his
land. (...)


The VI. Chapter.
ANd God spoke unto Moses, and said LORD, and I appeared unto Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, an Almighty God: but ^
my name, LORD, have I not showed unto them: My covenant also have I made
with them, (...)
that I will give them the land of Canaan, the land of their pilgremage,
wherein they have been strangers. Morouer I have herd the complaynte of the
children of Israel, whom ye Egipcians oppress with labor, and have remembered
my covenant.

Therefore say unto the children of Israel: I am the LORD, and will bring you
out from yor burdens in Egipte, and will rydd you from your labor, and will
deliver you through a stretched out arm and great iudgme^tes, and will receive
you for my people, and will be yor God: so that ye shall know, that I the LORD
am yor God, which bring you out from the burden of Egipte, and will bring
you in to the land, over the which I have lift up my hand, to give it unto
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, ye same will I give unto you for a possession. I the
LORD.

LORD unto Moses, and said: Go thy way, and speak unto Pharao the king of
Egypt, yt he let the children of Israel go out of his land. But Moses spoke
before ye LORD, and said: Behold, ye children of Israel herke^ not unto me,
how should Pharao the^ hear me? (...). 4. c
And I am also of uncircumcised lyppes.

So the LORD spoke unto Moses and Aaron, and gave the^ a commandment unto
the children of Israel, and unto Pharao the king of Egipte, yt they should
bring the children of Israel out of Egipte.

(...). 6. b (...) 26. a (...). 6. a
These are ye heads of the house of their fathers. The children of Ruben the
first son of Israel, are these: Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, Charmi: These are the
generacions of Ruben.

The children of Simeon are these: Iemuel, Iamin, Ohad, Iachin, Zophar, and
Saul the son of the Cananitish woman: These are the generacions of Symeon.

^um. 3. c
Gerson, Kahath and Merari: Leui was an hundredth and seven and thirty year
old. The children of Gerson are these: Libni and Semei in their generacions.
The children of Kahath are these: Amram, ^ar. 24. b
Iezear, Hebron, Vsiel. Kahath was an hundredth and three and thirty year old.
The children of Merari are these: Maheli and Musi. These are ye generacions of
Leui in their kynreds.

And Amram took his uncles daughter (...). 2. a (...). 26. g
Iochebed to wife, which bare him Aaron and Moses. Amram was an C. and vij. and
thirty year old. The children of Iezear are these: Korah, Nepheg, Sichri.
The children of Vsiel are these: Misael, Elzaphan, Sithri.

Aaron took Elizaba ye daughter of Aminadab Nahassons sisters to wife, which
bare him Nadab, Abihu, Eleasar, Ithamar.



This is yt Aaron and Moses, unto whom ye LORD said: Bring ye children of
Israel out of the land of Egipte with their armies. It is they (namely Moses and
Aaron) yt spoke unto Pharao the king of Egipte, yt they might bring the
children of Israel out of Egipte. The same day spoke ye LORD unto Moses in ye
land of Egipte, and said: I am ye LORD, speak thou unto Pharao ye king of
Egipte, all yt I say unto ye. And he answered before ye LORD: Behold, I am
of uncircumcised lips, Exodus 6. b
how shall Pharao the^ hear me?

The VII. Chapter.
THe LORD said unto Moses: Behold, Exo. 4. d
Nevertheless I will harden Pharaos heart, yt I may multiplye my tokens and
wonders in the land of Egipte. And Pharao shall not hear you, yt I may show
my hand in Egipte, and bring mine armies, even my people the children of
Israel out of ye land of Egipte, by great iudgme^tes. And ye Egipcians shall
know, yt I am the LORD, when I shall stretch out my hand upon Egipte, and
bring the children of of Israel out from among them.

Moses and Aaron did as the LORD commanded LORD said unto Moses and Aaron:
When Pharao says unto you: Show your wonders, then shall thou say unto
Aaron: Take thy staff, and cast it before Pharao, and it shall turn to a
serpent.

Then went Moses and Aaron in unto Pharao, and did as the LORD commanded
them. And Aaron cast his staff before Pharao and before his servants, and it
turned to a serpent. Then Pharao called for ye wise men and Sorcerers. And the
Sorcerers of Egipte also did like wise with their Sorceries, and every one cast
his staff before him, and they turned unto serpents. But Aarons staff devoured
their staves. So Pharaos heart was hardened, and he herkened not unto them, even
as the LORD had said.

And the LORD said unto Moses: The LORD God of the Hebrews has sent me unto
the, and sends ye word: Let my people go, Exodus ^. ^
that they may serve me in the wilderness: but hither to thou would not
hear.

Therefore thus says the LORD: Hereby shall thou know, yt I am ye LORD.
Behold, with the staff yt I have in my hand, will I smite the water which is in
ye river, and it shall be turned in to blood: so that the fishes in the river
shall dye, and the river shall stynke: and it shall grieve the Egipcians to
drink of ye water of the river.

LORD spoke unto Moses: Say unto Aaron: Take ye staff, and stretchout thine
hand over ye waters of Egipte, over their ryuers and brokes and pondes, and
over all water poles, yt they may be turned to blood, and that there may be
blood in all ye land of Egipte, both in vessels of wodd and stone.

Psalm. 77. c
Moses and Aaron did as ye LORD commanded them, and lift up the staff, and
smote the water yt was in the river, before Pharao and his servants, and all
the water in the river was turned in to blood, and the fysh in the river dyed,
and the river stanke, so yt the Egipcians could not drink of the water of ye
river, and there was blood in all the land of Egipte. And the Sorcerers also
of Egipte, did likewise with their Sorceries. But Pharaos heart was hardened,
and he herkened not unto the^, * like as the LORD had said. And Pharao turned
himself, and went home, and set not his heart there on. All the Egipcia^s
dygged round about ye river, for water to drink: for they could not drink
of ye water out of the river. And this endured seven days long, that the
LORD smote the river.

The VIII. Chapter.
LORD said unto Moses: Go ye way to Pharao, and speak unto him: Thus says
the LORD: Let my people go, yt they may serve me: If thou will not let the^
go, behold, I will smite all ye borders of ye lord with frogs, so yt the river
shall scraule with frogs: these shall clymme up, and come in to thine house, in
to yi chamber, where thou slepest, upon thy bed, and in to the houses of thy
servants, among thy people, in to thine ouens, and upon thy dowe: and the
frogs shall come up upon the, and upon thy people, and upon all thy
servants.

LORD spoke unto Moses: Say unto Aaron: Psalm. 77. c and 104. d
Stretch forth thine hand with thy staff over the streams, and ryuers, and
pondes, and let frogs come upon the land of Egipte. And Aaron stretched his
hand over the waters in Egipte, and there came up frogs, so yt the ^onde of
Egipte was covered.

The Sorcerers also did likewise, with their Sorcerirs, and caused frogs to
come upon ye lord of Egipte. The^ called Pharao for Moses and Aaron, and
said: ^
Pray the LORD for me, yt he may take away the frogs fro me and fro my
people, and I will let ye people go, yt they may do sacrifice unto the LORD.

Moses said: Have thou the honor before LORD or God: And the frogs shall be
taken from the, and from yi house, from thy servants, and from thy people,
and remain only in the river.

So Moses and Aaron went from Pharao, and Moses cried unto the LORD for the
appointment over the frogs, which he had promised unto Pharao. And ye LORD
did as Moses said. And the frogs dyed in ye houses, in ye courts, and upon
ye field: and they gathered the^ together, here an heap, and there an heap,
and the land stanke of them. But when Pharao saw yt he had gotten breath, his
heart was hardened, and he herkened not unto the^, even as the LORD had said.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses: Say

The Sorcerers also assayde likewise with their Sorcerirs yt they might bring
forth lyse, but they could not. And ye lyse were upon men and catell. Then
said ye Sorcerers unto Pharao: It is the finger of God. But Pharaos heart was
hardened, and he herkened not unto the^, even as the LORD had said.

And ye LORD said unto Moses: Get ye LORD: let my people go, yt they may
serve me: if not, behold, I will cause cruel worms (or flies) to come upon
the, thy servants, ye people, and thy house, so yt all the Egipcians houses,
and the field, and what thereon is shall be full of cruel worms: and the same
day will I separate the land of ^
Gosen, wherein my people are, so yt no cruel worm shall be there, that thou
may know, that I am ye LORD in the myddest of the earth. And I will set a
delyueraunce between my people and thine. Tomorow shall this token come to pass.

And the LORD did so. And there came perlous cruel worms in to Pharaos
house, in to his servants houses, and upon all the land of Egipte: and the
land was marred with noisome worms.

LORD or God. Behold, if we should offer the abhominacion of ye Egipcians
before their eyes, should they not stone us? Three days journey will we go in
the wyldernes, and do sacrifice unto the LORD our God ^xod. 3. c
like as he has said unto us.

Pharao said: I will let you go, yt ye may do sacrifice unto the LORD yor God
in the wyldernes (only yt ye go no farther) and pray for me. Moses said:
Behold, when I am come forth from ye, I will pray unto ye LORD, yt the cruel
worms may be taken from Pharao, and from his servants, and from his people,
even tomorow: only disceaue me no more, that thou would not let the people go
to do sacrifice unto the LORD.

And Moses went out from Pharao, and prayed unto the LORD. And the LORD did
as Moses said, and took away the cruel worms from Pharao, from his
servants, and from his people, so yt there remained not one. But Pharao
hardened his heart eue^ then also, and let not ye people go.

The IX. Chapter.
LORD said unto Moses: Go in to Pharao, and speak unto him: Thus says the
LORD God of ye Hebrews: let my people go, yt they may serve me. If thou will
not, but hold them longer, behold, the hand of the LORD shall be upon thy
catell in the field, upon horses, upon Asses, upon Camels, upon oxen, upon
sheep with a very sore pestilence. And ye LORD shall make a diuysion between
the catell of the Israelites and the Egipcians, so yt there shall nothing dye
of all that the children of Israel have. And ye LORD appointed a time, and
said: Tomorow shall the LORD do this upon earth.

LORD did the same on the morrow. And there dyed of all manner of catell of the
Egipcians: but of ye catell of ye children of Israel there dyed not one. And
Pharao sent thither, and behold, there was not one of the catell of Israel
deed. But Pharaos heart was hardened, so yt he let not ye people go. Then said
ye LORD unto Moses and Aaron: Take your hands full of aszshes out of the
furnace, and let Moses sprenkle it toward heaven before Pharao, that it may
be dust in all the land of Egipte, and that there may be sores and blaynes
upon men and upon catell in all the land of Egipte.

And they took aszshes out of ye furnace, and stood before Pharao, and Moses
sprenkled it toward heaven. Then were there sores and blaynes upon men and
upon catell, so that the Sorcerers might not sto^de before Moses by reason of
the sores. For there were sores upon LORD hardened Pharaos heart, so that he
herkened not unto them, eue^ as the LORD had said unto Moses.

Then said the LORD unto Moses: Get the up tomorow by times, and stand
before Pharao, and speak unto him: Thus says ye LORD God of the Hebrews:
let my people go, yt they may serve me, else will I at this time send all my
plages in to thine heart, and upon thy servants and upon thy people: that thou
may know, yt there is none like me in all lands. For I will now stretch
out my hand, and smite the and thy people with pestilence, so yt thou shall be
roted out from the earth. Yet have I Some read: * I have holden the up.
stered ye up for this cause, even to show my power upon ye, and that my name
might be declared in all lands.

Thou hold my people yet, and wilt not let LORD among Pharaos servants,
caused his servants and catell to fly in to the houses: but look whose
hertes regarded not the word of ye LORD, left their servants and catell in
the field.

Then said the LORD unto Moses: Psalm. 77. c and 104. d
and the LORD caused it to thonder and hayle, so yt the fire ran alonge upon
the earth. Thus the LORD hayled and rayned upon the land of Egipte, so that
the hayle and fire went so horrybly together, as never was in all the land of
Egipte, sens the time that there were LORD is righteous, but I and my people
are ungodly. Yet pray ye unto the LORD, that the thonder and hayle of God
may cease, then will I let you go, that ye shall tarry here no longer. Moses
said unto him: When I am come out of the cite, I will stretch out mine hands
unto the LORD, so shall the thonder cease, and there shall be no more hayle:
that thou may know, that the earth is the LORDS. But I know, yt both thou
and thy servants fear not yet the LORD

So Moses went from Pharao out of ye cite, and stretched out his hands unto
ye LORD. And ye tho^der and the hayle ceased, and the rain dropped not upon
the earth. But wha^ Pharao saw yt the rain and thonder and hayle ceased, he
sinned again, and herdened his heart, he and his servants. So Pharaos heart
was hardened, yt he let not the children of Israel go, eue^ as the LORD had
said by Moses.

The X. Chapter.
LORD said unto Moses: Go in unto Pharao, for I have hardened his heart and
the hertes of his servants, yt I might do these my tokens among the^, and
that thou might show it in the ears of thy children and of thy childers
children, what I have done in Egipte, and how I have showed my tokens among
the^, that ye may know, how that I am the LORD.

So Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharao, and spoke unto him: Thus says ye
LORD God of the Hebrews: How long refusest thou to submyt thy self unto me,
to let my people go, yt they may serve me? If thou will not let my people go,
behold, tomorow will I cause greshoppers to come upon all places, yt they may
cover the land, so yt the land can not be seen, and they shall eat up yt
LORD their God. Know thou not yet, yt Egipte is destroyed? Moses and Aaron
were brought again to Pharao, which said unto them: Go yor way, and serve ye
LORD yor God. But who are they yt shall go? Moses said: We will go with young
and old, with sons and daughters, with sheep and oxe^* for we have a feast of
the LORD. He said unto the^: Let it be so, the LORD be with you: Should I
let you go and yor children also? look that ye have not some myschefe in hand.
Not so, but go ye that are men, and serve the LORD, for that was your desire.
And they thrust them out from Pharao.

The^ said ye LORD unto Moses: Stretch Psa* Sap. ^^ Joel* ^^ Apo* ^
greshoppers, yt they may come upon ye land of Egipte, and eat up all the
herbs in the land, with all yt escaped the hayle. Moses stretched out his staff
over ye land of Egipte, and the LORD brought an east wind in to the land
all yt day and all yt night, and in the morning, the east wind brought the
greshoppers. And they came over the whole land of Egipte, and lighted in all
places of Egipte, so exceadinge many, that before time there were never soch,
nether shall be here after: for they covered the land, and made it darcke. And
they ate up all the herbs in ye land, and all the fruits upon the trees which
remained from ye hayle, and left no grene thing behind in the trees and
herbs upon the field in all the land of Egipte.

Then Pharao called for Moses and Aaron LORD yor God, and against you: forgive
me my sin this once also, and pray the LORD yor God, yt he may take away
fro me this death only. And he went out from Pharao, and prayed unto the
LORD. The^ the LORD turned a marvelous strong west wind, and took up the
greshoppers, and ca^^ them in to the reed see, so that there was not one left
in all the quarters of Egipte. But the LORD hardened Pharaos heart, that he let
not the children of Israel go. The LORD said unto Moses: Stretch out thine
hand toward heaven, that it be so darck in the land of Egipte, yt it may be
felt. And Moses stretched out his hand toward heaven, the^ was there a thick
darcknesse in all the land of Egipte three days, Sap. ^
so yt in three days no man saw another, nor rose up from ye place where he
was. But with the children of Israel there LORD: only leave yor sheep and yor
oxen here: let yor children go with you also. Moses said: Thou must give us
offringes and brent offerynges, that we may do sacrifice unto the LORD or
God. Our catell shall go with us, and there shall not one hooffe be left behind:
for we must take thereof for the service of the LORD or God. Morouer we know
not wherwithall we shall serve ye LORD, till we come thither. But the LORD
hardened Pharaos heart, yt he would not let them go. And Pharao said unto him:
Get the hence fro me, and bewarre, that thou come no more in my sight: For look
what day so ever thou co^mest in my sight, thou shall dye. Moses answered:
Eue^ as thou have said, I will come no more in thy sight.

The XI. Chapter.
LORD said unto Moses: I will yet bring a plage upon Pharao and Egipte: after
yt shall he let you go from hence, and shall not only let all go, but also drive
you hence. Therefore say now unto the people, yt every man borowe of his
neighbor, and every woman of his neghbouresse, Jewels of silver and gold: ^o.
3. ^ ^ud 12. ^
for the LORD shall give the people favor in the sight of ye Egipcia^s. ^ccli.
45. a
And Moses was a very great man in the land of Egipte, in ye sight of Pharaos
servants, and in the sight of the people.

LORD: At mydnight will I go out in the land of Egipte, and all ye first borne
in the land of Egipte shall dye: from Pharaos first son (yt sytteth upon his
seat) unto the first son of the maid servant which is behind ye myll:
and all the first borne among the catell: and there shall be a great cry in
all the land of Egipte, soch as never was, ner shall be. But among all the
children of Israel there shall not a dog quatch with his tongue, fro men unto
catell, yt ye may know, how yt the LORD has put a difference betwixt
Egipte and Israel. LORD said unto Moses: Pharao herkeneth not unto you, yt
many wonders may be done in ye land of Egipte. And Moses and Aaron did all
these wonders before Pharao: but ye LORD hardened his heart, yt he would not
let ye children of Israel go out of his land.

The XII. Chapter.
THe LORD said unto Moses and Aaron Ioh. 1. d
la^be (or a kydd) where a householder is, to every house a la^be. But if the
household be to few for a lamb, the^ let him and his neghbor yt is next unto
his house, take it acordinge to the nombre of ye souls, and count to the
lamb, what every man may eat. But it shall be a lamb with out blemish, a
male, and of a year old. From among the lambs and goats shall ye take it.

And ye shall keep it unto ye fourtene day of the month. And every man of the
congregation of Israel shall slaye it about the eueninge. And they shall take of
his blood, Eze. 9. a
and stryke it on both the side posts of the door, and on the vpperdore post
of the house, that they eat it in. And so shall they eat flesh ye



Of this manner shall ye eat it: Ye shall be gyrded about your loins, and have
your shues upon your fete, and staves in yor hands, and ye shall eat it with
haist: for it is ye LORDS Passover. Psa. 135. a
For in the same night will I go through the land of Egipte, and smite all the
firstborne in the land of Egipte, from men unto catell, and upon all the
gods of Egipte will I do execucion. Even I the LORD. And the blood shall be
your token, upon the houses wherein ye are: Heb. 11. ^
yt when I se the blood, I may pass over, and that the plage happen not unto
you, to destroy you, when I smite the land of Egipte.

LORD, ye and all your posterities, for a perpetual custom. Exo. 23. b and*
34. c
Seven days shall ye eat vnleuended bred: namely, upon the first day shall ye
leave of with leuended bred in your houses. Who so ever eats leuended bred
from the first day unto ye seventh that soul shall be roted out from Israel.
The first day shall be called holy among you, and the seventh also. No manner
of work shall ye do therein, save what belongs to the meat for all manner of
souls, that only may ye do for you. And keep you to leuended bred.

For even upon that same day will I bring your armies out of the land of
Egipte, therefore shall ye and all your posterities keep this day for a
perpetual custom. Upon the fourtene day of the first month, Leui. 23. a Nu.
28. c
at even, shall ye eat vnleuended bred, unto the one and twentye day of the
month, at even: so that there be no leuended bred found in your houses seven
days. For who so ever eats leuended bred, that soul shall be roted out from
the congregation of Israel, whether it be a stranger or borne in the land.
Therefore eat no leuended bred, but only vnleuended bred in all your
dwellynges.

LORD: and take a bunch of ysope, and dip it in the blood in the basen, and
stryke it upon the vpperposte and upon the two side posts, and none of you go
out at the door of his house until ye morning, for the LORD will go about
and plage the Egipcians. And when he seyth the blood upon the vpperposte, and
upon the two side posts, he will pass over by the door, and not suffer the
destroyer to come in to your houses to plage. Therefore keep this custom for
the and thy children for ever.

And when ye be come in to ye land that the LORD shall give you, (as he has
said) then keep this service. Ios. 4. d
And when your children say unto you: What service is this, that ye have? Ye
shall say: It is the sacrifice of the LORDS Passover, which passed over by
the children of Israel in Egipte, when he plaged the Egipcians, and saved our
houses. Then the people bowed them selves, and worshipped. And the children of
Israel went and did, as the LORD had commanded Moses and Aaron.

And at mydnight the LORD smote all the firstborne in the land of Egipte:
(...)
from Pharaos first son (which sat upon his seat) until the first son of
the presoner that was in the preson, and all the firstborne of the catell. Then
Pharao arose ye same night, and all his servants, and all the Egipcians, and
there was a great cry in Egipte: for there was no house wherein there was not
one deed.

And he called for Moses and Aaron in ye night, and said: Get you up, (...)
and depart out fro my people, ye and the children of Israel: go your way,
and serve the LORD, as ye have said: and take your sheep and your oxen with
you, ^
as ye have said, and depart, and bless me also. And the Egipcians were
fearce upon the people, to drive them haistely out of the land, for they
said: we are all but deed.

And the people took the raw dowe, before it was leuended (for their food)
bound in their clothes upon their shulders. And the children of Israel had
done ^
as Moses said, and borrowed Jewels of silver and gold, and clothes of the
Egipcians: the LORD also had given the people favor in the sight of the
Egipcians, that they lent them, and so they spoiled the Egipcians.

Thus ye children of Israel took their journey (...)
^
six hundredth thousand men of foot, beside children. There went with them
also much common people, and sheep, and oxen, and exceadinge many catell.

And of the raw dowe that they brought out of Egipte, they baked vnleue^ded
cakes: for it was not leuended, in so much as they were thrust out of Egipte,
and could not tarry: nether had they prepared them any other meat.

The time yt the children of Israel dwelt in Egipte, is four hondreth and
thirty years. When the same were ended, the whole host of the LORD went
out of the land of Egipte in one day. Therefore shall this night be kept unto
the LORD, because he brought them out of the land of Egipte: And the children
of Israel shall keep it unto the LORD, they and their posterities.

And the LORD said unto Moses and and an hired servant shall not eat of it.
In one house shall it be eaten. Ye shall carry none of his flesh out of the house,
and (...). 9. b (...) 9. d
ye shall not break a bone of him. The whole congregation of Israel shall do it.

But if there dwell a stranger with the, and will hold Passover unto the
LORD, let him circumcyse every one that is male, and then let him first come,
and do it, and be as one that is borne in the land: for there shall no
vncircumcysed eat thereof. One manner of law be unto him yt is borne in the
land, and unto the stranger yt dwells among you. And all the children of
Israel did as the LORD commanded Moses and Aaron. So upon one day the LORD
brought the children of Israel out of the lord of Egipte with their armies.

The XIII. Chapter.
LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: (...). 22. d (...)* ^4. c (...). ^. c
(...). 1. d (...). ^. d
Sanctify unto me every firstborne, yt breaks all manner of Matrices among
the children of Israel, both of men and catell: for they are mine. Then said
Moses unto ye people: Think upon this day, in the which ye are gone out of
Egipte from the house of bondage, how yt ye LORD brought you out from thence
with a mighty hand. Therefore shall ye eat no sour dowe. This day are ye gone
out, eue^ in ye month of Abib.

^xo. 2^ c (...). 33. a
Now wha^ ye LORD has brought ye in to ye land of ye Cananites, Hethites,
Amorites, Heuites and Iebusites, which (...). 15. d ^^od. 3. d
he swear unto yi fathers to give ye (even a land that flows with milk and
honey) then shall thou keep this service in this month. Seven days shall thou
eat vnleuended bred, and upon the seventh day is the LORDS feast: therefore
shall thou eat vnleuended bred seven days, that there be no sour dowe, ner
sowred bred seen in all thy quarters.

LORD did for me, when I departed out of Egipte. Therefore shall it be a sign
unto ye in thine hand, and a token of remembrance before thine eyes, that the
law of ye LORD may be in thy mouth, how that ye LORD brought the out of
Egipte with a mighty hand: Therefore keep this manner yearly in his time.

When the LORD now has brought ye in to ye land of the Cananites (as he has
sworn unto the and thy fathers) and has given it the, ^en. 15. d
then shall thou sunder out unto the LORD all that breaks the Matrice, and
firstborne among thy catell, soch as is male. The firstborne of the Ass shall
thou bye out with a sheep: but if thou redeem it not, then break his neck. All
the firstborne of men among thy children shall thou redeem.

And when thy child axeth the to day or LORD brought us out of Egipte from
the house of bondage with a mighty hand: for when Pharao was loath to let us go,
the LORD slew all the firstborne in the land of Egipte, from the firstborne
of men unto ye firstborne of the catell: therefore offer I unto the LORD all
that breaks ye Matrice, being a male, and ye firstborne of my children I
redeem. And this shall be a sign unto the in thine hand, and a token to think
upon before thine eyes, how that the LORD brought us out of Egipte with a
mighty hand.

Now when Pharao had let ye people go, Ge. 50. d Iosu. 24. f
for he took an ooth of the children of Israel, and said: God will surely
vyset you, therefore carry away my bones with you from hence.

So they took their journey from Suchoth, and pitched their te^tes in Etha^ in
ye edge of the wilderness. Nu. 14. b Neem. 9. ^ 1. Cor. 10. a Esaiae 4. b
And ye LORD went before the^ by day in a piler of a cloud, to lead the^ ye
right way: and by night in a piler of fire, that he might show the^ light to
walk both by day and night. The piler of the cloud departed never from the
people by day, and the pyler of fire departed not from the^ by night.

The XIIII. Chapter.
ANd the LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: Speak unto the children of Israel,
and bid them that they turn about, Number. ^^. b
and pitch their tents before the valley of Hyroth, betwixt Migdol and the sea toward Baal Zepho^, and there pitch ye tents right over by the sea. For
Pharao shall say of the children of Israel: They can not tell how to get* out
of the land, the wilderness has shut them in. And I will harden his heart, yt
he shall follow after them, and I will get me honor upon Pharao, and upon all
his power. And ye Egipcia^s shall know, yt I am the LORD. And they did so.

LORD hardened ye heart of Pharao king of Egipte, that he followed after the
children of Israel. And the children of Israel went out with an hye hand.

^^su. 24. b
the children of Israel lift up their eyes, and behold, ye Egipcians went
behind the^, and they were sore afraid, and cried unto the LORD.

And said unto Moses: Were there no graves in Egipte, yt thou have brought us
away to dye in the wyldernes? ^sal. 103. a
Wherefore have thou done this unto us, that thou have carried us out of Egipte?
Is not this it, that we said unto the in Egipte? Leave of, and let us serve
the Egipcians: for it were better for us to serve the Egipcians, then to dye in
the wyldernes? Moses said unto the people: ^. Pa. 20. c ^sa. 30. c
Fear you not, stand still, and behold, what a salvation the LORD shall
show upon you this day: Deu. 2^ g
for these Egipcians whom ye se this day, shall ye never se more for ever: the
LORD shall fight for you, only quyete your selves.

The LORD said unto Moses: Wherfofore ^ap. 14. a
and part it asunder, yt the children of Israel may go in through ye midst
of it upon the dry ground. Behold, I will harden ye heart of the Egipcians,
yt they shall follow after you. Thus will I get me honor upon Pharao, and upon
all his power, upon his charettes and horsemen: and the Egipcians shall know,
that I am ye LORD, when I have gotten me honor upon Pharao, upon his
charettes, and upon his horsemen.

Then the angel of God yt went before the armies of Israel, Psalm. 104. c
removed, and gat him behind them: and the cloudy piler removed also from
before them, and stood behind the^ and came betwixt the armies of the
Egipcians and the armies of Israel. It was a darcke cloud, and gave light that
night, so that all the night long these and they could not come together.



Wha^ Moses now stretched forth his hand (...)
the LORD caused it to pass away through a mighty eastwynde all that night,
and made the sea dry, Ios^* (...) and (...) Iud^^ (...) Psalm*
and ye water divided it self asunder. And the children of Israel went in
through the midst of ye see upon the dry ground: and ye water was un to them
as a wall, upon their right hand and upon their left. And ye Egipcia^s
followed, and went in after the^, all Pharaos horses, and charettes, and
horsemen, eue^ in to ye midst of ye see.

Now when the morning watch came, the LORD looked upon the armies of the
Egipcians out the piler of fire and ye cloud, (...)
and troubled their armies, and smote the wheles from their charettes, and
overthrew them with a storm. Then said the Egipcians: ^
Let us fly from Israel, the LORD fights for the^ against the Egipcians.

But ye LORD said unto Moses: Stretch LORD overthrew them in the myddest of
the sea, (...)
so that the water came again, and covered ye charettes and horsemen, and all
Pharaos power which followed after them in to the sea, so that there remained
not one of them. But the children of Israel went dry through ye myddest of the sea, Esa. ^
and the water was unto them as a wall upon their right hand and upon their
left.

Thus the LORD delivered Israel in yt day from the hand of the Egipcians.
(...)
And they saw the Egipcians deed upon ye see side, and the great hand yt the
LORD had showed upon the Egipcians. And ye people feared ye LORD, and believed
him, and his servant Moses.

The XV. Chapter.
LORD, and said:

(...). 15. c
I will sing unto ye LORD, for he has done gloriously, horse and charet has
he over thrown in the sea.

(...). 117. b (...). 12. a
The LORD is my strength, and my song, and is become my salvation.

This is my God, I will magnify him: He is my fathers God, I will exalte him.

The LORD is the right man of war, LORD is his name. The charettes of
Pharao and his power, has he cast in to the sea.

His chosen captains are drowned in the reed see, ye deep has covered them:
they fell to the ground as a stone.

Thy right hand (O LORD) is glorious in power: thy right hand (O LORD) has
smytten the enemies.

And with thy great glory thou have destroyed thine adversaries: thou
sentestout ye wrath, and it consumed them, even as stobble.

In the breath of thy wrath the waters fell together, the floudes went upon a
heap: The depes plomped together in ye myddest of the sea.



I will draw out my sword, and my hand shall destroy them.

Thou blewest with thy wind, the sea covered them, and they sancke down as
leed in the mighty waters.

LORD, who is like unto the among ye gods? Who is so glorious in holiness,
fear full, laudable, and doing wonders?

When thou stretchedest out ye right hand, the earth swalowed them up.

Thou of ye very mercy have led this people, whom thou have delivered, and with
ye strength thou have brought them unto the dwelling of thy Sanctuary.

When ye nations herd this, they raged, sorrow came upon the Philistynes.

Then were ye princes of Edom afraid, trembling came upon ye mighty of Moab,
all the indwellers of Canaan waxed faynte hearted.

LORD) be gone through, till yi people whom thou have gotten, be gone through.

Bring them in, and plant them upon the mountain of thy enheritaunce, unto
ye place that thou have made for thine own dwelling: even to ye temple (O
LORD) which thy hands have prepared.

The LORD shall be king for ever and ever. For Pharao went in to the sea with
horses, and charettes, and horsemen, and the LORD made the sea fall again upon
them.

But the children of Israel went dry through the myddest of the sea.

And Miriam the prophetisse, Aarons sister, took a tymbrell in her hand, and
all the women followed out after her with timbrels in a daunse. And Miriam sange
before the^: O let us sing unto the LORD, for he has done gloriously, Exo.
1^. ^
man and horse has he over thrown in the sea.

Moses caused the children of Israel to depart Number. ^^. b
unto the wyldernes of Sur, and they went three days in ye wilderness, yt they
found no water. Then came they to Marath, but they could not drink ye water
for bytternes, for it was very bitter. Therefore was it called Marah, (yt is
bytternes.) Then ye people murmured against Moses, and said: What shall we
drink? Judith. 5. d Eccli^. 3^. ^ 4. R^. ^4. f
And Moses cried unto ye LORD, which showed him a tree: this he put in ye
water, the^ was it sweet.

There he made the^ a statute, and a law, and tempted them, and said: If thou
wyl^ harken unto the voice of ye LORD ye God, and do that which is right in
his sight, and give ear unto his commandments, Deuteronomy. 2^. ^
and keep all his statutes, then will I lay upon ye none of the sicknesses,
that I laid upon Egipte, for I am the LORD thy surgione.

The XVI. Chapter.
ANd they came unto Elim, where there Nu. 11. a
murmured against Moses and Aaron in ye wilderness, and said unto them: Would
God we had dyed in the land of Egipte by the hand of the LORD, when we sat
by ye flesh pottes, and had bred enough to eat: for ye have brought us out in
to this wyldernes, to cause this whole multitude dye of honger.

The^ said ye LORD unto Moses: behold I will rain you bred from heaven, and
let the people go out, and gather daily, what they need, that I may prove
whether they walk in my law or not. But upon the sixte day they shall prepare
the^ selves, that they may bring in twyse as much as they gather daily.

LORD has brought you out of the lord of Egipte, and in the morning shall
ye se the glory of the LORD: for he has herd your grudginges against the
LORD. For what are we, that ye grudge against us?

Number. 11. d
Moses said morouer: At even shall the LORD give you flesh to eat, and in the
morning bred enough: because ye LORD has herd your grudginges, that ye
have grudged against him. For what are we? Your murmuringe is not against us,
but against the LORD. And Moses said unto Aaron: Speak unto the whole
multitude of ye children of Israel: Come forth before the LORD, for he has
herd your murmuringes.

LORD appeared in a cloud, and the LORD said unto Moses: I have herd the
murmuringe of ye children of Israel. Tell them: At even shall ye have flesh to
eat, and in the morning shall ye be filled with bred, and ye shall know, that
I am the LORD your God.

And at even the quayles came up, and covered the tents: and in the morning
the dew lay round about the tents. And when the dew was fallen, behold,
there lay a thing in the wilderness, thynne and small, as the horefrost upon
the ground.



Some read: * What is this?
This is Man. For they wist not what it was. But Moses said unto them: It is
the bred that ye LORD has given you to eat. This is it that ye LORD has
commanded: Every one gather for himself as much as he eats, and take a Gomor
for every head, acordinge to the nombre of the souls in his tente.

And the children of Israel did so, and gathered some more, some less. But
when it was measured out with ye Gomor, he that gathered much, had not the
more: (...)
and he yt gathered little, wanted nothing, but every one gathered for himself,
as much as he ate. And Moses said unto them: Let no man leave ought thereof
until the morning. But they harkened not unto Moses. And some left of it
until the morninge. Then waxed it full of worms and stanke. And Moses was
angry at them.

And every morning they gathered for them selves, as much as every one ate:
but as soon as it was whote of the Son, it melted away. And upon the sixte
day they gathered twyse as much of bred, two Gomors for one. And all the
rulers of the congregation came in, and told Moses. And he said unto them:
This is it, that the LORD has LORD: look what ye will bake, that bake: and
what ye will sees, that sees and that remains over, let it remain, yt it
may be kept until the morning. And they let it remain till the morrow, as
Moses commanded. Then stanke it not, nether was there any worm therein. The^
said Moses: Eat that to day, for to day is ye Sabbath of the LORD, to day
shall ye find none in the field. Six days shall ye gather it, but the seventh
day is the Sabbath, wherein there shall be none.

But upon the seventh day there went out some of the people to gather, and
found nothing. Then said ye LORD unto Moses: (...)
How long refuse ye to keep my commandments and laws? Behold, ye LORD
has given you the Sabbath, therefore upon the sixte day he gives you bred for
two days: therefore let every man now bide at home, and no man go forth of his
place upon the seventh day.

So the people rested upon ye seventh day. (...)
and had a taist like symnels with honey.

And Moses said: This is it that ye LORD has commanded: Fill a Gomor thereof
to be kept for your posterities, yt they may se the bred, wherewith I fed
you, when I brought you out of ye land of Egipte. And Moses said unto Aaron:
Take a cruse, and put a Gomor full of Man therein, (...)
and lay it up before the LORD, to be kept for your posterities, as the
LORD commanded Moses. So Aaron laid it up there for a testimony to be kept.

(...). 5. d (...). 9. d (...). c
And the children of Israel ate man fourtye years, till they came unto a land,
where people dwelt: even until they came to ye borders of the land of Canaan
ate they Man. A Gomor is the tenth part of an Epha.

The XVII. Chapter.
LORD commanded the^) and pitched in Raphidim. (...)
Then had the people no water to drink. And they chode with Moses, and said:
Give us water, yt we may drink. Moses said unto the^: Why chyde ye with me?
Wherefore te^pte ye ye LORD? But when the people thyrsted there for water, they
murmured against Moses, (...) ^0. a (...). 7. d
and said: Wherefore have thou caused us to come out of Egipte? to let us, our
children, and our catell dye of honger?

LORD, and said: What shall I do with this people? They are all most ready to
stone me. The LORD said un to him: Go before the people, and take some of the
elders of Israel with ye, and take in thine hand thy staff, wherewith thou
smotest the water, and go thy way: Behold, I will stand there before the upon
a rock in Horeb, (...). 77. b (...). 10. a
there shall thou smite the rock, so shall there water run out, that the
people may drink. Moses did so before the elders of Israel. (...) 20. b
(...). 9. d
Then was that place called Massa Meriba, because of the chydinge of the
children of Israel, and because they tempted ye LORD, and said: Is the LORD
among us, or not?



Iudit. 4. c
but when he let down his hand, Amalek had the victory.

But Moses hands were heavy, therefore took they a stone, and laid it under
him, that he might sit upon it. And Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands, the one
upon the one side, and the other upon ye other side. So his hands were
steadfast unto ye Son went down. And Joshua discomfited Amalek, and his
people through the edge of the sword.

And ye LORD said unto Moses: Write this for a remembrance in a book, and
committee it unto ye ears of Joshua: Nu^* 4. d 1. Re. 15. a
for I will rote out Amalek from under heaven, so that he shall no more be
remembered. And Moses builded an altar unto the LORD, and called it: that is:
The LORD is he that lifts me up.
The LORD Nissi, for he said: The battayll of the LORD shall be against Amalek
through an hand under the defense of God from child to childs child.

The XVIII. Chapter.
ANd when Iethro ye pressed in Madian LORD had brought Israel out of Egipte, he
took Zipora Moses wife, whom he had sent back, with her two sons. The one
was called Gerson, for he said: Exodus 2. d
I am become a stranger in a strange land. And the other was called Eliaser,
for he said: The God of my fathers has been my help, and has delivered me
from Pharaos sword.

Now wha^ Iethro Moses father in law, and his sons and his wife came unto
him in the wyldernes by the mount of God, where he had pitched his tent, he
sent word unto Moses: I Iethro thy father in law am come unto the, and yi
wife and both her children with her. Then went Moses forth to mete him, and
did obeysau^ce unto him, and kyssed him. And when they had saluted each other,
they went in to the tente.

Then Moses told his father in law all LORD had done unto Pharao and the
Egipcians for Isreal's sake, and all the travail that had happened them by ye
way, and how the LORD had delivered them. Iethro reioysed over all ye good
that the LORD had done for Israel, yt he had delivered them from the hand of
the Egipcians. And Iethro said: Praised be the LORD, which has delivered you
from the hand of the Egipcians and of Pharao, (and) that knows how to
deliver his people from the Egipcians hand. Now I know, that the LORD is
greater the^ all gods, because they dealt proudly with them. And Iethro took
brent offerynges, and offered unto God. Then came Aaron and all ye elders of
Israel to eat bred with Moses father in law before God.



His father in law said unto him: It is not well that thou do. Thou
weeriest thy self, and the people that is with the. This business is to sore
for the, thou can not perform it alone. But harken unto my voice, I will
give the council, and God shall be with the. Be thou unto the people to God
ward, and bring the causes before God, and provide them with statutes and
laws, that thou may show the^ the way wherein they should walk, and the
works that they should do.

But look out among all the people, for honest men, that fear God, soch as
are true, and hate covetousness: make these rulers over them, some over
thousands, over hundredes, over fifty, and over ten, that they may Deuteronomy. 1. c
that they bring the same unto the, and judge the small causes them selves: so
shall it be lighter for the, if they bear the burden with the. If thou shall
do this, then may thou endure the thing that God charge the withal, and
all this people may go peaceably unto their place.

Number. 11. d
Moses herkened unto the voice of his father in law, and did all that he said.
And he chose honest men out of all Israel, and made them heads over the
people, some over thousands, over hundredes, over fifty, and over ten, that
they might allwaye judge the people. As for soch causes as were herd, they
brought them unto Moses, and judged the small matters them selves. So Moses let
his father in law depart in to his own land.

The XIX. Chapter.
IN the third month after that the (...)
And Moses went up unto God.

And the LORD called unto him out of the mount, and said: (...)
Thus shall thou say unto the house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel:
Ye have seen what I have done unto the Egipcians, and how I have borne you upon
Aegles wings, and brought you unto my self. (...)
If ye will harken now unto my voice, and keep my covenant, ye shall be mine
own before all people: for the whole earth is mine: and ye shall be unto me ^
a presterly kingdom, and an holy people. These are the words that thou shall
say unto the children of Israel.

Moses came and called for the elders of LORD had commanded. And all the
people answered together, and said: ^
All that the LORD has said, will we do.

And Moses told the words of the people unto the LORD again. And the LORD
said unto Moses: Behold, I will come unto the in a thick cloud, that the
people may hear my words, which I speak unto the, and believe the for ever.
And Moses showed the words of the people unto the LORD.

The LORD said unto Moses: Go unto the people, and sanctify the^ to day and
tomorow, yt they may wash their clothes, and be ready against the third day:
for upon the third day shall the LORD come down upon mount Sinai before all
the people. And set marks round about the people, and say unto them:
Bewarre, that ye go not up in to ye mount, ner touch ye border of it. ^
For who so ever touches ye mount, shall dye ye death. There shall no hand
touch it, but he shall either be stoned, or shot through: whether it be be or
man, it shall not live. When the horn blows, then shall they come up unto the
mount.





Now when the third day came (and it was early) it began to thonder and
lighten, and there was a thick cloud upon the mount, and a noise of a trompet
exceadinge mighty. And the people that were in the tents, (...). 4. b
were afraid. And Moses brought the people out of the tents to mete with God,
and they stood under the mount.

But all mount Sinai smoked, because ye LORD came down upon it with fire. And
the smoke thereof went up as the smoke of a furnace, so that the whole mount
was exceadinge terrible. And the noise of the trompet went out, and was
mighty. Moses spoke, and God answered him loud. Now when the LORD was come
down upon mount Sinai, even upon the top of it, he called Moses up unto ye
top of the mount. And Moses went up.

LORD unto him: Go down, and charge the people, yt they preasse not unto the
LORD to se him, and so many of them perish. The rulers also that come nigh
unto ye LORD, shall sanctify themselves, lest the LORD smite the^. But Moses
said unto the LORD: The people can not come up upon mount Sinai, for thou
have charged us, and said: Set marks about the mount, and sanctify it.

The LORD said unto him: Go thy way, get ye down. Thou and Aaron with the
shall come up: but the rulers and ye people shall not preasse to come up unto ye
LORD, lest he smite the^. And Moses went down to the people, and told them.

The XX. Chapter.
LORD spoke all these words, ^eut. 5. a
and said: I am the LORD thy God, which Exo. 14. c
have brought the out of the land of Egipte from ye house of bondage.

Thou shall have none other Gods in my sight. Deu. 4. c and 27. b
Thou shall make the no graven image ner any symilitude, nether of it that is
above in heaven, ner of it that is beneth upon earth, ner of it that is in the
water under the earth. Worshipe them not, and serve them not: for I the LORD
thy God am a Nau^. 1. a Exo. 34. a Deu. 7. b
gelouse God, vysitinge ye sin of the fathers upon the children, unto ye
third and fourth generation, of them that hate me: And do mercy upon many
thousands, that love me, and keep my commandments.

Thou shall not take the name of ye LORD Leui. 19. c Eccli^. 23. b
Le. 24. b
For the LORD shall not hold him ^ngiltie, that takes his name in vain.

Remember the Sabbath day, that thou sanctify it. Exo. 23. b 34. c. 35. a
Eze. 20. b
Six days shall thou labor and do all thy work: But upon the seventh day
is the Sabbath of the LORD thy God: thou shall do no manner work in it, nether
thou, ner thy son, ner thy daughter, ner thy servant, ner thy maid, ner thy
catell, ner thy stranger that is within thy gates. Gene. 2. a
For in six days the LORD made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all that
therein is, and rested upon the seventh day: therefore the LORD blessed the
seventh day, and hallowed it.

Honor thy father and thy mother, Matt. 1^. a Ephe. 6. a
that thou may live long in the land, which the LORD thy God shall give
the.

Thou shall not kill.

Thou shall not break wedlock.

Thou shall not steal.

Thou shall bear no false witness against thy neighbor.

Thou shall not To. 7. b and. ^3. b
lust after ye neghbours house.

Thou shall not lust after thy neghbours wife, ner his servant, ner his maid,
ner his ox, ner his Ass, ner all that thy neighbor has

And all the people saw the thonder and the lightenynge, and the noise of the
trompet, and how that the mountain smoked, and were afraid, and stackerd, and
stood a far of, and said unto Moses: Deu. 1^. c Heb. 12. c
Talk thou with us, we will hear: and let not God talk with us, we might else
dye. And Moses said unto the people: Be not afraid, for God is come to prove
you, and that his fear may be before your eyes, yt ye sin not.

And the people stood afar of. But Moses God was. And the LORD spoke unto
him: Thus shall thou say unto the children of Israel: Ye have seen, that I
have talked with you from heaven: therefore shall ye make nothing with me: gods
of silver and gold shall ye not make you.

Make me an altar of earth, where upon thou may offer y^ burnt offerynges,
and peace offerynges, thy sheep and thine oxen. For look in what place so ever
I make ye remembrance of my name, there will I come unto the, and bless the.

Deu 27. a Iosu. ^ g 1. Mac. 4. f
And if thou will make me an altar of stone, thou shall not make it of hewn
stone: For if thou lift up thy tole upon it, thou shall vnhalowe it. Morouer
thou shall not go up upon steps unto mine altar, that thy shame be not
discovered before it.

The XXI. Chapter.
Leuit. 25. f Deu. ^5 b Iere. 34. b
If thou bye a servant that is an Hebrew, he shall serve the six years, in
the seventh year shall he go out fre and lowse. If he came alone, then shall he
go out alone also: but if he came married, then shall his wife go out with him.
If his master have given him a wife, and she have borne him sons or
daughters, the^ shall the wife and ye children be the masters, but he shall go
out alone. Nevertheless Deu. 15. c
if the servant say: I love my master, and my wife and children, I will not go
out fre: then let his master bring him before the Gods, and hold him to the
door or post, and bore him through the ear with a botkin, and let him be his
servant for ever.

If a man sell his daughter to be an hand maid, then shall she not go out as
the men servants. But if she please not her master, and he have not married
her, then shall he let her go fre: but to sell her unto a strange people he
has no auctorite, for so much as he has despised her. If he promise her unto
his son, then shall he do unto her after the law of daughters. But if he give
him another wife, then shall he mynishe nothing of her food, raiment, and
duty of marriage. If he do not these three, then shall she go out fre, and pay
nothing.

Leu. 14. d Matthew. 5. c
Nu. 35. b Deuteronomy. 19. a
If he have not laid wait for him, but God let him fall in his hand
unawares, then will I appoynte the a place, where he shall fly unto. But if a
man presume upon his neighbor, and slaye him with disceate, ^. Re. 1. g
then shall thou take the same fro mine altar, that he may be slain* Who so
smyteth his father or mother, shall dye the death.

He that steals a man, and sells him, (...)
so that he be found by him, the same shall dye the death.

^
Who so curses father and mother, shall dye the death. If men strive together
and one smite another with a stone, or with his fist, so that he dye not, but
lies in bed: If he rise, and go forth upon his staff, the^ shall he that
smote him, be unguilty: save that he shall pay the loss of his time, and give
ye money for healynge him.

He that smyteth his servant or maid with a staff, that he dye under his
hands, the same shall suffer vengeance therefore. But if he endure a day or
two, then shall he suffer no ve^geaunce therefore, for it is his money.

If men strive, and hytt a woman with ^
then shall he pay soul for soul, eye for eye, toth for toth, hand for
hand, foot for foot, burning for burning, wound for wound, strype for
strype.

If a man smite his servant or his maid in the eye, and destroy it, he shall
let them go fre and lowse for the eye sake. In like manner if he smite out a
tothe of his servant or maid, he shall let them go fre and lowse for the
tothes sake.

^
If an ox gorre a man or a woman, that he dye, then shall that ox be stoned,
and his flesh not eaten: so is the master of the ox unguilty. But if the ox
have been used to push in times past, and it has been told his master, and he
has not kept him, and besides that slays a man or a woman, then shall ye ox
be stoned, and his master shall dye. But

If a man open a well, or dygge a pytt, and cover it not, and there fall an ox
or Ass therein, then shall the owner of the pytt make it good with money, and
restore it unto his master: but the deed carcass shall be his own.

If one man's ox gorre another, that he dye, then shall they sell the living
ox, and deuyde the money, and the deed carcass shall they deuyde also. But if
it be known, that the ox have been used to gorre before, then shall he pay his
ox for the other, and the deed carcass shall be his own.

The XXII. Chapter.
IF a man steal an ox or sheep, and (...)
four sheep for a sheep.

If a thief be taken breakinge in, and upon that be smytten that he dye, then
shall not he that smote him, be guilty of his blood. But if the son be gone
up upon him, then has he committed manslaughter, and he shall dye.

A thief shall make restitucion. If he have nothi^ge, the^ let him be sold for
his theft. But if ye theft be found by him alive (from the ox unto the Ass
or sheep) then shall he restore dubble.

If a man hurt a field or vynyarde, so yt he let his catell do harm in
another man's field, the same shall make restitucion even of the best of his
own field and vynyarde.

(...). 14. c
If a fire come out, and take hold of ye thorns, so that the sheeues be
consumed, or the corn that stondeth yet upon the field, he that kyndled the
fire shall make restitucion.

Mac. 3. c
If a man deliver his neighbor money or vessels to keep, and it be stolen
from him out of his house: if the thief be found, he shall restore dubble. But
if the thief be not found, then shall the good man of the house be brought
before the ^sal. 81. a (...). 10. d
Gods (and shall swear) that he has not put his hand unto his neghbours
good.

If one accuse another in any manner of trespace, whether it be for ox, or
Ass, or sheep, or raiment, what so ever it be that is lost: then shall both
their causes come before the Gods: Look whom the Gods condemn, the same
shall restore dubble vibe to his neighbor.

If a man deliver unto his neighbor an Ass, or ox or sheep, or any manner of
catell to keep, and it dye, or be hurt, or driven away that no man se it,
then shall there an ^oth of the LORD go between them, that he has not put his
hand unto his neghbours good: and the owner of ye good shall accept it, so
that the other shall not make it good. If a thief steal it from him, then shall
he make restitucio^ unto the owner thereof. But if it be rauyshed (of beasts)
then shall he bring record thereof, and not make it good.

If a man bo^owe ought of his neighbor,

If a man begile a maid, Genesis 34. a Deu. 22. d
that is not yet spoused, and lie with her, the same shall give her her dowry,
and take her to his wife. But if her father refuse to give her unto him, the^
shall he we ye there the money, acordinge to the dowry of virgins.

Thou shall not suffer a witch to live. 1. Re. 28. a
Deu. 27. ^
Who so lies with a be, shall dye the death. Who so offreth to any gods,
save unto the LORD only, let him dye without redemption.

Thou shall not vex ner oppress a stranger, Leui. 19 g Zach. 7. b
for ye your selves were strangers also in the land of Egipte.

Ye shall truble no wyddowe ner fatherless child. If thou shall trouble them,
Job 24. a
they shall cry unto me, and I shall hear their cry: then shall my wrath wax
whote, so yt I shall sley you with the sword, and your wives shall be wedowes,
and your children fatherless,

Leu. 2^. ^ Deuteronomy. 23. ^ Eze. 23. b
If thou lend money unto my people that is poor by the, thou shall not behave
thy self as an usurer unto him, nether shall thou oppress him with usury.

If thou take a garment of thy neighbor to pledge, thou shall give it him
again Deu. 24* b
for his rayme^t is his only covering of his skin: wherein he slepeth. But
if he shall cry unto me, I will hear him: for I am merciful.

Thou shall not speak evil of the Gods, 2. Re. 1^. b
Act. 23. ^
and the ruler of thy people shall thou not blaspheme.

Thy dry and moist fruits shall thou not keep back. Thy first son shall
thou give unto me. So shall thou do also with thine oxen and sheep. Seven days
let it be with the dame: Upon the eight day shall thou give it unto me. Ye
shall be holy people before me. Therefore shall ye eat no flesh, that is torn of
beestes in the field, Leui. 22. a Ez^. 44. d
but cast it unto the dogs.

The XXIII. Chapter.
THou shall not accept a vain tale, that thou would manteyne the ungodly,
and be a false witness.

Thou shall not follow the multitude unto evil, ner answer at the law that
thou would (to follow the multitude) turn a side from the right.

Thou shall not paynte a poor ma^s cause. Deu. 22. a
If thou mete thine enemies ox or Ass, goinge astraye, thou shall bring the
same unto him again.

Deu. 22. a Luc. 14. a
If thou se the Ass of him that hates the, lie under his burden, thou shall
not let him lie, but shall help him up.

Thou shall not wraist the right of thy poor in his cause. Keep the far
from false matters. Susan. g
The innocent and righteous shall thou not sley, for Iiustifie not ye ungodly.

Deu. 17. a Eccl. 20. d
Thou shall not take gifts: for gifts blind even them yt are sharp of sight,
and wraist the righteous causes.

Ye shall not oppress a stranger, for ye know the heart of strangers, Ge.
46. a
for so much as ye your selves also have been strangers in the land of
Egipte.

Leui. 25. a
In the seventh year shall thou let it rest and lie still, that the poor
among thy people may eat thereof: and look what remains over, let ye
beestes of the field eat it. Thus shall thou do also with thy vynyarde and
olyue trees.

Exo. 20. b ^4. c 35. a Deuteronomy. 5. b
Six days shall thou do thy work, but upon the seventh day thou shall keep
holy day, that thine ox and Ass may rest, and that the son of thy
handmayden and the stranger may refresh them selves.

All that I have said unto you, that keep. And as for the names of other
gods, ye shall not remember them, and out of your mouths shall they not be
herd.

Three times in the year shall thou keep feast unto me: namely the feast of
vnleuended bred shall thou keep, that thou eat vnleuended bred seven days (
Exo. 12. a
like as I commanded ye) in the time of ye month Abib, for in the same wentest
thou out of Egipte. But appear not emptye before me.) And ye feast when thou
first reapest thy labors, Deu. 16. b
yt thou have sown upon the field. And the feast of ingatherynge in the end
of ye year, when thou have gathered in thy labors out of the field. Deu. 16.
c
Three times in the year shall every male that thou have, appear before the
LORD the Gouernoure.



The first of the first fruits of thy field shall thou bring in to the house
of the LORD thy God. (...)
And shall not sees a kydd, while it is in his mothers milk.

Behold, I send an angel before the, (...)
to keep the in the way, and to bring the unto the place, that I have
prepared. Therefore be war of his face, and harken unto his voice, and anger
him not, for he shall not spare your myszdedes, and my name is in him. But if
thou shall harken unto his voice, (...)
and do all that I shall tell the, then will I be enemy unto thy enemies, and
adversary unto thy adversaries.

Now wha^ mine angel goes before the, and brings the unto ye Amorites,
Hethites, Pheresites, Cananites, Heuites and Iebusites, and I shall have
destroyed them: then ^
shall thou not worshipe their gods, ner serve them, nether shall thou do as
they do, but shall overthrow their gods, and break the^ down. (...)
But ye LORD yor God shall ye serve, so shall he bless thy bred and thy water,
and I will remove all sickness from the.

There shall be nothing baren ner unfruitful (...)
I will send hornettes before ye, and drive out the Heuytes, Cananites and
Hethytes before the*

In one year will I not cast the^ out before the, yt the land become not
waist, and wild beasts multiply against yt: By little and little will I drive
them out before the, till thou grow, and have the land in possession. (...)
And I will set the borders of thy land, even from the reed see unto ye see of
the Philistynes, and from the wyldernes unto the ^
water. For I will deliver the indwellers of the land in to thine hand, yt
thou shall drive them out before the. (...)
Thou shall make no covenant with them ner with their gods, but let the^ not
dwell in thy land, that they make the not sin against me. ^
For if thou serve their gods, it will surely be thy decay.

The XXIIII. Chapter.
ANd he said unto Moses: Come up LORD thou and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and
the seue^tie elders of Israel, and worshipe afar of. But let Moses only come
nigh unto the LORD, and let not them come nigh, and let not the people also come
up with him.

Moses came and told the people all the words of the LORD, and all the
laws. Then answered all the people with one voice, and said: (...)* 19. b
All ye words that the LORD has said, will we do.

LORD, and gat him up bytymes in the morning, * and builded an altar under
ye mount with twolue pilers, acordinge to the twolue trybes of Israel: and sent
twolue young me^ of the children of Israel, to offer burnt offerynges, and
peace offerynges thereon of bullockes unto the LORD.

And Moses took the half part of the blood, and put it in a basen, the other
half sprenkled he upon the altar: and took the book of ye covenant, and cried
in the ears of the people. And when they had said: All yt the LORD has
said, will we do, and harken unto him: Pet. 1. a (...). 9. c (...) 10. c
Moses took the blood, and sprenkled it upon the people, and said: Behold,
this is ye blood of the covenant that the LORD makes with you upon all these
words.

(...). 19. d
and the seuentye elders of Israel up, and saw ye God of Israel. Under his
fete it was like a stone work of Saphyre, and as the fashion of heaven, wha^
it is clear, and he put not his hand upon the pryncipall of Israel. And when
they had seen God, they ate and drunk.

Exo. 31. d (...) 32. d
And the LORD said unto Moses: Come up unto me upon the mount, and remain
there, yt I may give the tables of stone, and ye law and commandments yt I
have written which thou shall teach the^. Then Moses gat him up and his
mynister Joshua, and went up in to the mount of God, and said unto the elders:
Tarry ye here, till we come to you again: behold, Aaron and Hur are with you,
if any man have a matter to do, let him bring it unto them.

Now wha^ Moses came up in to ye mount, a cloud covered ye mount: and the
glory of ye LORD abode upon mount Sinai, and covered it with the cloud six
days, and upon the seventh day he called Moses out of ye cloud. And ye
fashion of ye glory of ye LORD was like a co^sumynge fire upon the top of ye
mount in the sight of the children of Israel. And Moses went in to the myddest
of the cloud, and ascended up in to the mount, and abode upon the mount
fourtye days and fourtye nights. ^xo. 34. d


The XXV. Chapter.
LORD talked with Moses and aid: ^xo. 35. a
Speak unto ye children of Israel, yt they give me an Heue offering, and take
the some of every man, that has a frewyllynge heart thereto. And this is the
Heue-offerynge that ye shall take of them: Gold, silver, brass, yalowe sylke,
scarlet, purple, white twyned sylke, goats hair, reed skynnes of rams, do
skynnes, Fyrre tree, oil for lamps, spyces for the anoyntynge oil, and for
sweet incense. Onix stones and set stones for the ouerbody cote and for the
brestlappe.

And they shall make me a Sanctuary, that I may dwell among them. Like as I
shall show ye a patron of the Habitacion, and of all the ornaments thereof, so
shall ye make it.

Make an Arc of Fyrre tree two cubytes Exo. 37. ^
and a cubyte and an half hye: this shall thou ouerleye with pure gold within
and without, and make an hye upon it a crown of gold round about, and cast
four rings of gold, and put them in the four corners of it, so that two
rings be upon the one side, and two upon the other side. And make staves of
Fyrre tree, and ouerlaye them with gold, and put them in the rings alonge by
the sides of the Arc, to bear it withal: and they shall abide still in the
rings, and not be taken out. And in ye Arc thou shall lay the witness, that
I will give the. Thou shall make a Mercyseate also of pure gold, two cubytes
and a half long, and a cubyte and a half broad.

And thou shall make two Cherubyns of beaten gold upon both ye ends of the
Mercyseate, yt the one Cherub may be upon the one end, and the other upon the
other end, and so to be two Cherubyns upon the ends of the Mercyseate. And
the Cherubyns shall sprede out their wings over an hye, yt they may cover ye
Mercyseate with their wings: and yt either of their faces may be right over one
against another, and their faces shall look unto the Mercyseate.

And thou shall set ye Mercyseate above Number. 7. l
From yt place will I testify unto ye, and talk with the, namely, from ye To.
3. c Heb. 5. a
Mercyseate (betwixt the two Cherubyns) which is upon the Arc of witness, of
all that I will command ye unto the children of Israel.

Thou shall make a table also of Fyrre tree, two cubits long, and one cubyte
broad, Exo. 37. b
and a cubyte and a half hye, and ouerlaye it with pure gold, and make a
crown of gold round about it, and an whope of an hand bread hye, and a
crown of gold unto ye whope round about.

And unto it thou shall make four rings of gold, on the four comers in the
four fete of it: hard under the whope shall ye rings be, to put in staves
and to bear the table with all: and thou shall make the staves of Fyrre tree, and
ouerlaye them with gold, yt the table may be borne therewith.

Thou shall make also his diszshes, spones, pottes, and flat pieces of pure
gold, to pour out and in. Leu. 24. b
And upon the table thou shall allwaye set shewbred before me.

Exo. 37. c Number. 8. a
where upon shall be the shaft with branches, cups, knoppes, and flowers.
Six branches shall proceade out of the sides of the candelsticke, out of
every side three branches. Every branch shall have three cups, (like
allmondes) three knoppes, and three flowers. These shall be the six branches of
the candilsticke. But the shaft of the candilsticke it self shall have four
cups, knoppes and flowers, and allwaie a knoppe under two branches, of the
six that proceade out of the candilsticke. For both the knoppes and branches
shall proceade out of the shaft, all one piece of fine beaten gold.

And thou shall make seven lamps above there on, that they may give light one
over against another, and snoffers and out quenchers of pure gold. Out of an
hundredth pound weight of pure gold shall thou make it, with all this
apparel. Heb. 8 a Acto. 7. f
And se that thou make it after the patron that thou have seen in the mount.

The XXVI. Chapter.


Exo. 36. c
of eleven curteynes. The length of one curteyne shall be thirty cubytes, the
breadth four cubytes. And all the eleven shall be alike great: five shall thou
couple together by the^ selves, and six also by them selves, yt thou may
dubble the sixte curteyne in the fore front of the Tabernacle. And upon every
curteyne thou shall make fifty loupes upon the edges of them, that they may
be coupled together by the edges. And fifty buttons of brass shall thou make,
and put the buttons in to the loupes, that the tent may be coupled together,
and be one covering.

As for the remnaunt of the curteynes of the tente, thou shall let the half
part hang over behind ye te^te, upon both the sides a cubyte long, yt the
resydue may be upon the sides of the Tabernacle, and cover it upon both the
sides.

Besides this covering thou shall make

Thou shall make bordes also for the habitacion, of Fyrre tree, which shall
stand: one board shall be ten cubytes long, and a cubyte and a half broad. Two
fete shall one board have, that one may be set by the other.

Thus shall thou make all the bordes for ye Tabernacle: Twentye of them shall
sto^de toward the south, which shall have fourtye sokettes of silver under
them, two sokettes under every board for his two fete.

Likewise upon the other side toward the north there shall stand twentye
bordes also, and fourtye sokettes of silver, two sokettes under every board.

But behind the habitacion toward ye

And thou shall make bars of fyrre tree, thou set up the Tabernacle, acordinge
to ye fashion a^ thou have seen upon ye mount.





And in the door of the Tabernacle thou shall make an hanginge, of yalow sylke,
purple, scarlet and white twyned sylke. And for the same hanginge thou shall
make five pilers of Fyrre tree, ouerlayed with gold, with knoppes of gold. And
shall cast five sokettes of brass for them.

The XXVII. Chapter.
(...). 38. a (...). 43. d
five cubytes long and broad, yt it may be four square, and three cubytes
hye: thou shall make horns upon the four corners of it, and shall over lay
it with brass. Make ashpa^nes, shouels, basens, fleshokes, cole pa^nes. All ye
apparel thereof shall thou make of brass. Thou shall make a gredyron also like
a nett, of brase, and four brazen rings upon the four corners of it: from
under up about the altar shall thou make it, so that the gredyron reach unto
ye myddest of the altar. Thou shall make staves also for the altar, of Fyrre
tree, over laid with gold, and shall put the staves in the rings, that the
staves may be on both the sides of ye altar, to bear it withal. And holowe
with bordes shall thou make it, like as it is showed the in the mount.

C. cubytes long toward the south, and xx. pilers upon xx. brazen sokettes,
and the knoppes with their whopes of silver. Likewise upon ye north side there
shall be an hanginge of an C. cubytes long, twenty pilers upon twenty brazen
sokettes, and their knoppes with their whopes of silver.

But upon the west side the breadth of ye court shall have an hanginge of fifty
cubits long, and ten pilers upon ten sokettes. Upon the east side also shall
the breadth of the court have fifty cubytes, so that the hanging have upon
one side fyftene cubits, and three pilers upon three sokettes: And upon ye other
side fiftene cubytes also, and three pilers upon three sokettes.

And in the court gate there shall be an

Command ye children of Israel, Leu. 24. a
yt they bring unto ye the most clear and pure oil olive beaten, to give
light, yt it may allwaye be put in the la^pes in the Tabernacle of wytnes
without the veil, that hangs before the witness. And Aaron and his sons
shall dress it from the evening until ye morning before the LORD. This
shall be unto you a perpetual custom for your posterities among the children
of Israel.

The XXVIII. Chapter.
ANd thou shall take unto the Aaron

These are ye garments which they shall make: a brestlappe, an ouerbody cote, a
tunycle, an albe, a myter and a girdell. Thus shall they make holy garments for
ye brother Aaron and his sons, that he may be my pressed. They shall take
thereto gold, yalow silk, scarlet, purple, and white sylke.

The ouerbody cote shall they make of gold, sylke. And thou shall take two Onix
stones, and grave in them the names of the children of Israel. Six names upon
the one stone, and the six other names upon the other stone acordinge to the
order of their age. This shall thou do by the stonegrauers that grave
signettes, so that ye stones with the names of the children of Israel to be set
round about with gold: and thou shall put them upon the two shulders of the
over body cote, that that they may be stones of remembrance for the children
of Israel, that Aaron may bear their names upon both his shulders before the
LORD for a remembrance.



The brestlappe of judgment shall thou make of broderd work, even after the
work of the ouerbody cote: of gold, yalow sylke, scarlet, purple, and white
twyned sylke. Four square shall it be and dubble, an hand breadth long, and
an handebredth broad. And thou shall fill it with four rows full of stones.
Let the first row be a Sardis, a Topas, and a Smaragde. The second: a Ruby, a
Saphyre, and a Dyamonde. The third: a Ligurios, an Achatt, and an Ametyst. The
fourth: a Turcas, an Onix, and a Iaspis. In gold shall they be set in all the
rows, and shall stand acordinge to ye twolue names of the children of Israel,
graven of the stonegrauers, every one with his name acordinge to the twolue
trybes.



And thou shall make two other rings of gold, and fasten them unto ye other
two edges of ye brestlappe, namely to ye borders thereof, wherewith it may hang
on the ynsyde upon the ouerbody cote. And yet shall thou make two rings of
gold, and fasten them upon the two edges beneth to the ouerbody cote, upon the
outsyde one over against anothe, where the ouerbody cote joins

Thus shall Aaron bear the names of the children of Israel in ye brestlappe of
judgment upon his heart, when he goes into the Sanctuary, for a remembrance
before the LORD allwaye. And in the brestlappe of judgment thou shall put ^
light and perfectness, that they be upon Aaro^s heart, when he goes in before
the LORD, and that he may bear the judgment of the children of Israel upon
his heart before the LORD allwaye.

Thou shall make the tunykle also to the ouerbody cote all of yalow sylke, and
above in the myddest there shall be an hole, and a bond folden together round
about the (...)
And Aaron shall have it upon him wha^ he mynistreth, that the sou^de there of
may be herd, when he goes out and in at the Sanctuary before the LORD, that
he dye not.

Thou shall make a foreheade plate also of pure gold, and grave therein (after
the workmanshipe of the stone grauer): the holiness of the LORD, and with a
yalow lace shall thou fasten it unto the fore front of the myter upon Aarons
foreheade, yt Aaron may so bear ye sin of the holy things, which the
children of Israel halowe in all their gifts and Sanctuary. And it shall be
allwaye upon his fore head, that he may reconcyle them before the LORD.

Thou shall make an albe also of white

And for Aarons sons thou shall make cotes, gyrdles and bonetes, honorable
and glorious, and shall put them upon thy brother Aaron and his sons, and
shall anoynte them, and fill their hands, and consecrate them, that they may
be my prestes. And thou shall make them lynnen breches, to cover the flesh of
their preuities, from the loins unto the thyes. And Aaron and his sons shall
have them on, when they go in to the Tabernacle of witness, or go unto the
altar to mynister in the Holy, that they bear not their sin, and dye. This
shall be a perpetual custom for him, and his sede after him.

The XXIX. Chapter.
(...)
and two rams without blemish, vnleuended bred, and vnleuended cakes myxte with
oil, and wafers of sweet bred tempered with oil: Of wheat flower shall thou
make them all, and put them in a maunde, and bring them in the maunde, with
the bullock and two rams.

And thou shall bring Aaron and his sons unto the door of the Tabernacle of
witness, and wash them with water, and take the garments, and put upon Aaron
the albe and the tunycle, and the over body cote, and the brestlappe to ye over
body cote, and shall gyrde him on the out side upon the over body cote, and set
the myter upon his head, and the holy crown upon the myter: and shall take
the anoyntinge oil, and pour it upon his head, and anoynte him.



And thou shall fill the hands of Aaron and his sons, and bring forth the
bullock before the Tabernacle of witness. Leuit. ^. a
And Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands upon the head of the
bullock, and thou shall sley the bullock before the LORD, at the door of the
Tabernacle of witness, and shall take of his blood, and put it upon the
horns of the altar with thy finger, and pour all the other blood upon the
botome of the altar.

^^uit. ^. a
And thou shall take all the fat that covers the bowels and the nett upon the
lever, and the two kydneys with the fat that is about them, and burn them
upon the altar. But the bullockes flesh, skin and donge, shall thou burn
with fire without the host: for it is a sin offering.

LORD.

As for the other ram, Leuiti. ^. ^
thou shall take him, and Aaron with his sons shall lay their hands upon
his head, and thou shall slaye him, and take of his blood, and put it upon
the typpe of the right ear of Aaron and his sons, and upon ye thombe of
their right hands, and upon the great too of their right fete, and thou shall
sprenkle the blood upon the altar round about, and shall take of the blood
upon the altar and the anoyntinge oil, and sprenckle it upon Aaron and his
vestymentes, upon his sons and their vestymentes. So shall he and his
clothes, his sons and their clothes be consecrated.

Then shall thou take the fat of the ram, Leu. 8. e
and the fatt that covers ye bowels, the net upon the lever, and the two
kydneys with the fatt that is about them, and the right shulder (for it is a
ram of co^secracion) and a symnel of bred, and an oyled cake, and a wafer out
of the maunde of the vnleuended bred Exo. 25. c
that stondeth before ye LORD, and put all in to the hands of Aaron and of
his sons, and wave it unto the LORD. The^ take it out of their hands, and
burn it upon the altar for a burnt offeringe, to be a sweet sauoure unto ye
LORD. For it is the LORDS sacrifice.

And thou shall take the breast of the ram Leui. ^ f
and shall wave it before ye LORD, yt shall be his part. And thus shall thou
halowe ye Wauebrest and ye Heueshulder (yt are waued and heaued) of ye ram of
the consecracion of Aaron and his sons: And it shall be a perpetual custom
for Aaron and his sons of ye children of Israel: for it is an Heue offrynge,
and the Heue offrynge shall be the LORDS duty of the children of Israel, in
their Some call the^ peace offeringes
dead offrynges and Heue offrynges which they do unto the LORD.

And the holy garments of Aaron shall his sons have after him, that they
may be anointed therein, and yt their hands may be filled. Nu. 20. d
Look which of his sons shall be pressed in his stead, the same shall put them on
seven days, that he may go in to the Tabernacle of witness, to mynister in
the Sanctuary.

But the ram of consecracion shall Leui. ^* ^
and sees his flesh in an holy place. And Aaron with his sons shall eat the
flesh of the some ram with the bred in the maunde, at the do^^ of the
Tabernacle of witness: for there is an atonement made therewith, to fill their
hands, that they may be consecrated. A stranger shall not eat thereof, for it
is holy.

But if any of the flesh of the consecracion, and of the bred remain until
the morning, thou shall burn it with fire, and not let it be eaten, for it is
holy. And thus shall thou do with Aaron and his sons all that I have
commanded ye. Seven days shall thou fill their hands, and offer a bullock
daily for a sin offeringe, because of them yt shall be reconciled. And thou
shall halowe the altar, when thou reconcylest it: and shall anoynte it, that
it may be consecrated. Seven days shall thou reconcyle the altar, and
consecrate it, that it may be an altar of the Most holy. Who so will touch
the altar, must be consecrated.

Nu* 28. a 1. Par. 17. e
the one lamb in the morning, and the other at even. And to one lamb a tenth
deal of wheat flower, me^gled with ye fourth part of an Hin of beaten oil,
and ye fourth part of an Hin of wine for a drynk offering With the other
lamb at even shall thou do like as with ye meat offering and drynk offering
in the morning, for a sweet sauoure of sacrifice unto ye LORD. This is the
daily burnt offering among your posterities, at the door of the Tabernacle
of witness before the LORD, Leui. 1. a Number. 12. a
where I will proteste unto you, and talk with the. There will I proteste unto
the children of Israel, and be sanctified in my glory, and will halowe the
Tabernacle of wytnes and the altar, and consecrate Aaron and his sons, Leu
26. b 2. Cor. 6. b
to be my prestes. And I will dwell among the children of Israel, and will be
their God: so yt they shall know, how that I am the LORD their God, which
brought them out of the land of Egipte, that I might dwell among them, even I
the LORD their God.

The XXX. Chapter.


The staves shall thou make of Fyrre tree also, and ouerlaye the^ with gold:
and shall set it before the veil, that hangs before the Arc of witness,
and before the Mercy seat yt is upon the witness, from whence I will proteste
unto the. And Aaron shall burn sweet incense thereon every morninge, wha^ he
dresseth the lamps. In like manner when he lights the lamps at even, he
shall burn soch incense also. This shall be the daily incense before the LORD
among your posterities.

Ye shall put no strange incense therein, and offer no burnt offering, ner
meat offering, (...)
nether drynk offering thereon. And ^
upon ye horns of it shall Aaron reconcyle once in a year, with ye blood of
the sin offering, which they shall offer that are reconcyled. This shall be
done among your posterities for this is the most holy unto the LORD.

And the LORD Espake unto Moses, (...)
and said: When thou nombrest the heads of the children of Israel, then shall
every one give unto the LORD the reconcylinge of his soul, yt there happen
not a plage unto them, when they are nombred. Every one that is told in the
nombre, shall give half a Sycle, after the Sycle of the Sanctuary: ^
one Sycle is worth twentye Geras. This half Sycle shall be ye LORDS Heue
offering. Who so is in the nombre from twenty year and above, shall give this
Heue offering unto ye LORD. The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall
not give less in the half Sycle, which is given unto the LORD to be an Heue
offering for the reconcylinge of their souls.

And this money of reco^cilinge shall thou take of the children of Israel, and
put it to the LORD, that he may let himself be reconcyled over their souls.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: (...)
Thou shall make a brazen lauer also with a foot of brass to wash, and shall
set it betwixt the Tabernacle of witness and ye altar, and put water therein,
that Aaron and his sons may wash their hands and fete therout, when they go
in to the Tabernacle of witness, or to the altar, to mynistre unto the LORD
with offering incense, yt they dye not. This shall be a perpetual custom for
him and his sede among their posterities.

And ye LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: Take unto the spyces of the best,
(...)
five hundredth Sycles of Myrre, and of Cynamo^ half so much, even two hundredth
and fyftie, and of Kalmus two hundredth and fiftye, and of Cassia five hundredth
(after the Sycle of the Sanctuary) and an Hin of oil olyue, and make an holy
anoyntinge oil, after the craft of the Apotecary.

(...). 8. b
and the Arc of wytnes, the table with all his apparel, ye candilsticke with
his apparel, the altar of incense, the altar of burnt offerynges with all
his apparel, and the lauer with his foot: and thus shall thou consecrate them,
that they may be most holy: for who so will touch the^, must be consecrated.
Thou shall anoynte Aaron also, and his sons, and consecrate them to be my
prestes.

And thou shall speak unto the children of Israel, and say: This oil shall be
an holy ointment unto me among yor posterities: It shall not be poured upon
man's body, nether shall thou make any soch like it, for it is holy: therefore
shall it be holy unto you. Who so makes any soch like, or gives a stranger
thereof, the same shall be roted out from among his people.

And the LORD said unto Moses: Take unto the spyces: Balm, Stacte, Galban,
and pure franckencense, of one as much as of another, and make incense thereof
(after the craft of the Apotecary) myngled together, that it may be pure and
holy. And thou shall beat it to poulder, and shall put of the same before the
witness in the Tabernacle of witness, from when^e I will proteste unto the,
but it shall be holy unto the for the LORD. Who so makes soch to cense
therewith, shall be roted out from among his people.

The XXXI. Chapter.
LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: (...)* 35. d (...). 2. b
I have called by name Bezaleel the son of Vri ye son of Hur, of ye trybe
of Judah, Re. 7. b
and have filled him with ye sprete of God, with wyszdome and understanding
and knowledge, and to work with all manner of conning work, in gold, silver,
brass, to grave stones connyngly, and to set them, to carue well in tymbre,
and to make all manner work. And behold, I have given him Ahaliab the son of
Ahisamach of the trybe of Dan, to be his companyon, and have given wyszdome in
to the hertes of all that are wise, that they shall make all that (...)*
25.26.^^.30.
the Arc of witness, the Mercyseate thereon, and all the ornaments of ye
Tabernacle: the table and his apparel, the candilsticke and all his apparel,
the altar of incense, the altar of burnt offerynges with all his apparel, the
lauer with his foot, the mynistrynge vestimentes of Aaron ye pressed, and the
garments of his sons to serve like prestes, the anoyntinge oil, and the
ince^se of spyces for ye Sa^ctuary. All that I have commanded the, shall they
make.

And the LORD talked unto Moses, Exo. 20.^*
for it is a token between me and you, and your posterities, that ye may
know, how that I am the LORD which haloweth you: therefore keep my Sabbath,
for it shall be holy unto you. Nu. 1^. ^
Who so vnhaloweth it, shall dye the death: For who so does any work therein,
shall be roted out from among his people.

Six days shall men work, but upon Gene. ^. a
the holy rest of the LORD. Who so does any work upon the Sabbath day, shall
dye the death.

Therefore shall the children of Israel keep the Sabbath, that they may keep it
also among their posterities for an everlasting covenant. An everlasting
token is it betwixt me and the children of Israel. For in six days made the
LORD heaven and earth, but upon ye seventh day he rested, and was refreshed.

And when the LORD had made an end of talkinge with Moses upon the mount
Sinai, he gave him two tables of witness, Exo. 24. c and 32. d Deuteronomy. 5. c and
9. b
which were of stone, and written with the finger of God.

The XXXII. Chapter.


But when the people saw that Moses Acto. 7. c
for we can not tell what is become of this man Moses, that brought us out of
Egipte. Aaron said unto them: Iudic. 8. c
Pluck of the golden earynges from the ears of your wynes, of yor sons,
and of yor daughters, and bring them unto me. Then all the people pluckte of
their golden earynges from their ears, and brought them unto Aaron. And he
took them of their hands, and fashioned it with a grauer. ^^al. 105. c
And they made a molten calfe, and said: These are thy gods (O Israel) that
brought the out of the land of Egipte.

LORDS feast. And they arose up early in the morning, and offered burnt
offerynges, and brought dead offerynges also: cor. 10. a
Then the people sat them down to eat and drink, and rose up to play.

^eut. 9. c
But the LORD said unto Moses: Go get the down, for thy people whom thou
broughtest out of the land of Egipte, have marred all: they are soon gone out
of the way, which I commanded them. They have made them a molten calfe, and
have worshipped it, and offered unto it, and said: ^. Reg. ^. e
These are thy gods (O Israel) that brought the out of the land of Egipte.

LORD said unto Moses: I se, ^xo. 33. a Iu. 14. b
that it is a styffnecked people, and now suffer me, that my wrath may wax
whote over them, and that I may consume them, so will I make a great people of
the.

But Moses be sought the LORD his God, and said: Oh LORD, wherefore will thy
wrath wax whote over thy people, whom thou have brought out of the lord of
Egipte with great power and a mighty hand? Wherefore should the Egipcians
speak, and say: He has brought the^ for their myschefe, to slaye them in the
mountains, and to destroy the^ Ge. ^2. c
thou swarest by thine own self, and saydest: I will multiplye your sede as
the stars of heaven, and all the land that I have promised you, will I give
unto your sede, and they shall inheret it for ever. Thus the LORD repented of
the evil, which he said he would do unto his people.

Moses turned him, and went down from the mount, and in his hand he had the
two tables of witness, which were written upon both the sides, and were Gods
work, and the wrytinge was the wrytinge of God therein. Now when Joshua herd
the noise of ye people, as they shouted, he said unto Moses: This is a noise
of war in the host. He answered: It is not a noise of them that have the
victory, and of them that have the worse, but I hear a noise of synginge at a
daunse.

When he came nigh unto the host, and (...)
he was moved with wrath, and cast the ^ables out of his hand, and brake them
beneth the mount. (...)
And he took the calfe that they had made, and brent it with fire, and stamped
it unto poulder, and strowed it in the water, and gave it unto the children of
Israel to drink, and said unto Aaron: What did this people unto the, that
thou have brought so great a sin upon them?

Aaron said: Let not the wrath of my lord wax fearce: thou know, that
this is a wicked people. They said unto me: Make us gods to go before us,
for we can not tell what is become of this man Moses, yt brought us out of the
land of Egipte. I said unto them: Who so has gold, let him pluck it of,
and give it me: and I cast it in the fire, thereof came this calfe.

Now when Moses saw, that the people LORD, let him come hither unto me. Then
all the children of Leui gathered them selves unto him, and he said unto them:
Thus says the LORD the God of Israel: Every man put his sword by his side,
and go through in and out from one gate to another in the host, and slaye every
man his brother, friend, and neighbor.

The children of Leui did, as Moses said unto them. And there fell of the
people the same day three thousand men. The^ said Moses: Consecrate your
hands this day unto the LORD, every man upon his son and brother, that the
praise may be given over you this day.

On the morrow Moses said unto the LORD, if peradventure I may make an
atonement for your sins.

Now wha^ Moses came again unto ye LORD, he said: Oh this people have done a
great sin, and have made them gods of gold. ^
Now for give them their sin: if not, the^ wype me out of ye book, that thou
have written. The LORD said unto Moses: What? Him that synneth against me,
will I wype out of my ^
book. Go thou ye way therefore, and bring ye people thither as I have said
unto the, (...). 13. a (...)* ^3. c
Behold, mine angel shall go before the. But in the day of my visitacion I
will vyset their sins upon them. So the LORD plaged the people, because they
made ye calfe which Aaron made.

The XXXIII. Chapter.
LORD said unto Moses: Go, depart hence, thou and the people, whom thou have
brought out of the land of Egipte, unto ye land that I swear unto Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, and said: unto ye sede will I give it, (...)^punc; 22. c
(...)^punc; 23. d (...). 7. d (...)^punc; 24. c
and I will send an angel before the (and cast out the Cananites, Amorites,
Hethites, Pheresites, Heuites and Iebusites) in to the land that flows with
milk and honey, for I will not go up with the: (...). 32. c
for thou art an hardnecked people, I might consume the by the way. When the
people herd this evil tydinges, they sorowed, and no man put on his best
raiment.

LORD said unto Moses: Speak unto the children of Israel: Ye are a
styfnecked people, I must once come suddenly upon the, and make an end of the.
And now put of thy goodly array from the, yt I may know what to do unto the.
So the children of Israel laid their goodly array from the^, even before the
mount Horeb.

Moses took the Tabernacle, and pitched it without afar of from ye host, and
called it the Tabernacle of witness. And who so ever would axe any question at
the LORD, went out unto the Tabernacle of witness before the host. And when
Moses went out unto the Tabernacle, all the people rose up, and stood every
one in his tent door, and looked after Moses, till he was gone in to the
Tabernacle. (...). 31* d
And when Moses entered in to the Tabernacle, the cloudy pyler came down, and
stood in the door of the Tabernacle, and he talked with Moses. And all the
people saw the cloudy piler stand in the door of the Tabernacle, and rose up,
and worshipped, every one in his tent door.

LORD spoke unto Moses face to face, (...). 1^. a
as a man speaks unto his friend. And when he turned again to the host, ye
young man Joshua ye son of Nun his minister, Pa^. ^. c
departed not out of ye Tabernacle. And Moses said unto the LORD: Behold,
thou saydest unto me: Bring ye people up, and let me not know, whom thou will send with me, and yet have thou said: I know the by name, and thou have
found grace in my sight. Let me know thy way therefore, whereby I may be
certified, yt I find grace in thy sight: And consydre yet, that this people is
thy people.

He said: My presence shall go before the, there with will I led the. But he
said unto him: If thy presence go not, then carry us not up from hence: for
whereby shall it be known, yt I and thy people have found favor in thy sight,
but in yt thou go with us? that I and thy people may have some preemynence
before all people that are upon the face of the earth. The LORD said unto
Moses: I will do this also that thou have said, for thou have found grace in
my sight, and I know the by name.

He said: Oh let me the^ se thy glory. And LORD be called upon before the.
To. 9. b
And I show mercy, to whom I show mercy: and have compassion, on whom I have
compassion. And he said morouer: Thou may not se my face, Deu. 4. b Iudic.
6. c and 13. d Ioh. 1. b
for there shall no man live, yt seyth me. And ye LORD said farthermore:
behold, there is a place by me, there shall thou sto^de upon the rock. Now
when my glory goes forth, I will put ye in a clyfte of ye rock, and my hand
shall hold still upon the, till I be passed by. And when I take away mine
hand from the, thou shall se my back parts, but my face shall not be seen.

The XXXIIII. Chapter.
ANd the LORD said unto Moses: Deu. 10. ^
like as ye first were, that I may write in them the words, yt were in the
first tables, which thou brakest* and be ready in the morning, that thou
may come up early unto mount Sinai, and stand me upon the top of the
mount. And let no man come up with the, that there be no man seen through out
all ye mount: and let nether sheep ner oxen feed before the mount.

And Moses hewed two tables of stone, like as the first were, and arose early
in the morning, and went up unto mount Sinai, as ye LORD commanded him, and
took ye two tables of stone in his hand. The^ came the LORD down in a
cloud. And there he stepte unto him, and called upon ye name of ye LORD. And
when ye LORD passed by before his face, he cried: LORD LORD, God, merciful
and gracious, and long sufferinge, Psalm. 8^. c and ^02. a Deuteronomy. 5. b I^re. 32.
c and 30. b Nau^ 1. a
and of great mercy and truth, thou that kepest mercy in stoare for
thousands, and forgeuest wickedness, trespace and sin (before whom there is
no man innocent) ^xo 20. a ^^ut. 7. b
thou that visitest the wickedness of the fathers upon ye children and
childers children, unto the third and fourth generation.

LORD, if I have found grace in thy sight, the^ let the LORD go with us (for
it is an hard necked people) that thou may have mercy upon our wickednesses
and sins, and let us be thine inheritance.

And he said: Behold, I make a covenant before all yi people, and will do
wonders, soch as have not been done in all lands, and among all people. And
all ye people among whom thou art, shall se ye work of ye LORD, for a
terryble thing shall it be, yt I will do with the. Keep that I command ye this
day. Behold, I will cast out before the: ye Amorites, Cananites, Hethites,
Pheresites, Heuytes and Iebusites. Exo. 23. d ^eut. 7. a ^ Re. 11. a
Bewarre, that thou make no covenant with the indwellers of the land yt thou
come in to, lest they be cause of yi ruin in the myddest of the: but their
alters shall thou overthrow, and break down their gods, and rote out their
groaues: for thou shall worshipe no other god. For ye LORD is called gelous,
because he is a gelous God: lest (if thou make any agreement with the indwellers
of the land, and when they go a whoringe after their gods, and do sacrifice
unto their gods) they Nu. 25. a
call ye, and thou eat of their sacrifice, and lest thou take of their
daughters unto thy sons to wives, and the same go a whoringe after their
gods, and make thy sons go a whoringe after their gods also.

Exo. 12. c and 23. b
The feast of sweet bred shall thou keep. Seven days shall thou eat vnleue^ded
bred, like as I commanded the in the time of the month Abib: for in the
month Abib thou wentest out of Egipte.* All yt first breaks the Matrix, is
mine, soch as shall be male among ye catell, yt breaks the Matrix, whether it
be ox or sheep. But the first of thine Ass shall thou bye out with a sheep: if
thou redeem it not, then break his neck. All the first borne of thy children
shall thou redeem.

^ccli. 35. a
And se that no man appear before me ^mp^ye.

Ex. 20. ^ ^3. b. 35. a
Six days shall thou labor, upon ye se^e^th day shall thou rest both from
plowinge and reapynge. The feast of wekes shall thou keep with the firstlinges
of the wheat harvest: and the feast of yngaderynge at ye years end. Thryse
in a year shall all yor men children appear before the Souernoure, even the
LORD and God of Israel.

When I shall cast out the Heithen before the, and enlarge y^ borders, there
shall no man desire thy lord: for so much as thou go up three times in the
year, to appear before ye LORD thy God. Thou shall not offer the blood of
my sacrifice with leue^ded bred. And the offering of the Easter feast shall not
remain over night until the morning. The firstlinges of ye first fruits of
thy lord shall thou bring in to the house of the LORD thy God. ^
Thou shall not seith a kydd, (...)
while it is yet in his mothers milk.

And the LORD said unto Moses: write (...)
And he was there with the LORD fourtye days and fourtye nights, and ate no
bred, and drank no water. And ^
he wrote in the tables the words of the covenant, even ten verses.

Now wha^ Moses came down fro mount Sinai, he had the two tables of witness
in his hand, and wist not yt the skin of his face shyned, because he had
talked with him. And wha^ Aaron and all the children of Israel saw yt the
skin of his face shyned, they were afraid to come nigh him. The^ Moses called
them. And they returned unto him, both Aaron and all the chefest of the
congregation. And he talked with them. Afterward came all the children of Israel
unto him. And he commanded the^, all yt the LORD had said unto him upon the
mount Sinai. Now when he had made an end of talking with the^, ^
he put a covering upon his face. And when he went in before ye LORD to
talk with him, he took ye covering of, till he went out again. And when he
came forth and spoke with the children of Israel what was commanded him, the^
the children of Israel saw his face, how yt the skin of his face shyned: so
he put the covering upon his face again, till he went in again to talk
with him.

The XXXV. Chapter.
ANd Moses gathered all the congregation LORD has commanded you to do: (...)
Six days shall ye work, but the seventh day shall ye keep holy: a Sabbath
of the LORLES rest. Who so ever does any work therein, shall dye. Ye shall
kyndle no fire upon the Sabbath day in all your dwellynges.

And Moses said unto ye whole congregation of the children of Israel: This is
it, that the LORD has commanded: Give from among you Heue offerynges unto
ye LORD, (...). 25. a
so that every one bring the LORDS Heue offering with a fre heart: gold,
silver, brass, yalowe sylke, scarlet, purple, white sylke, and goats hair,
reed skynnes of rams, do skynnes, and Fyrre tree, oil for the lamps, and
spyces for the anoyntinge oil and for sweet incense. Onix stones, and stones
to be set in ye ouerbody cote, and for the brestlappe.

LORD has commanded: namely, the Habitacion with the tent and covering
thereof, the rings, bordes, bars, pilers and sokettes: The Arc with the staves
thereof, the Mercy seat and the veil: the table with his staves and all his
apparel: and the shewbred: The ca^dilsticke of light and his apparel, and his
lamps, and the oil for the lights: The altar of incense with his staves:
The anoyntynge oil and spyces for incense: The hanging before ye Tabernacle
door: The alter of burnt offerynges with his brazen gredyron, staves and all
his apparel: The lauer with his foot: The hanginges of the court, with the
pilers and sokettes thereof, and the hanging of the court door: The nales of
the habitacion and of ye court with their coardes: The mynistringe garments
for the service in the Holy, ye holy vestimentes of Aaron the pressed with the
vestimentes of his sons for ye prestes office.

LORD for ye work of the Tabernacle of witness, and for all the service
thereof, and for the holy vestime^tes. Both men and women that were of a
willing heart, brought bracelettes, earynges, rings and gyrdels, and all manner
Jewels of gold: Every man also brought gold for Wave offerynges unto the
LORD.

And who so ever found by him yalow sylke, scarlet, purple, white sylke,
goats hair, reed skynnes of ra^mes, and Do skynnes, brought it. And who so
ever houe up silver and brass, brought it for ye Heue offering unto the
LORD. And who so ever found Fyrre tree by him, brought it for all manner of
work of the Gods service. And soch women as were wise herted, spanne with
their hands, and brought their sponne work of yalow sylke, scarlet, purple,
and white sylke. And soch women as had hye understanding in wyszdome, spanne
goats hair.

As for ye princes, they brought Onix stones, LORD had commanded by Moses, to
be made.

And Moses said unto the children of Israel: Behold, Exo. 31. a
ye LORD has called by name Bezaleel ye son of Vri, ye son of Hur of the
trybe of Judah, and has filled him with the sprete of God, that he may have
wyszdome, understanding, and knowledge for all manner of work, to work
connyngly in gold, silver and brass, to grave precious stones and to set
them, to carue in wodd, to make all manner of conning works, and has given
instruccion in his heart, both him and Ahaliab the son of Ahisamach of ye
trybe of Dan. These has he filled with wyszdome of heart, to make all manner of
work, to carue, to brother, to work with nedle work, with yalow sylke,
scarlet, purple and white sylke, and with wee^ynge to make all manner of work,
and to deuyse conning works.

The XXXVI. Chapter.
THen wrought Bezaleel and Ahaliab and LORD had given wyszdome and
understanding to know, how they should make all manner work for the service
of the Sanctuary, acordinge unto all yt the LORD commanded. And Moses called
for Bezaleel and Ahaliab, and all the wise herted men, unto whom the LORD had
given wyszdome in their hertes, namely, all soch as wyllingly offered them
selves there, and came to labor in the work. And they received of Moses all
the Heue offerynges, that the children of Israel had brought for the work of
the service of the Sanctuary, that it might be made: and every morninge brought
they their willinge offerynges unto him.

Then came all the wise men yt wrought LORD has commanded to make. The^
commanded Moses, that it should be proclaimed through out the host: No man
bring more to the Heue offering of the Sanctuary. Then were the people
forbidden to bring: for there was stuff enough for all manner of work, that
was to be made, and to much.

So all ye wise herted men among the^ yt wrought in ye work of the
Habitacion, Exo. 26. a
made ten curtaynes of white twyned sylke, yalow sylke, scarlet, purple, with
Cherubyns of broderd work. The length of one curtayne was eight and twentye
cubits, and the breadth four cubits, and were all of one measure: and he
coupled the curtaynes five and five together one to the other.



Exo. 26. b
And he made xj. curtaynes of goats hair (for the tent over the habitacion) of
thirty cubytes long, and four cubytes broad, all of one measure, and coupled
five together by them selves, and six by them selves, and made fifty loupes a
long by ye edge of every curtayne, whereby they might be coupled together, and
made fifty buttons of brass, to couple ye tent together withal. And made
over ye tent a covering of reed skynnes of rams, and over that a covering
of Do skynnes.

Exo. 26. c
of Fyrre tree, every one ten cubytes long, and a cubyte and a half broad, and
two fete unto every one, whereby one might be joined to another: that on the
south side there stood twentye of the same bordes: and made fourtye silver
sokettes there under, under every board two sokettes for his two fete. In like
manner for the other side of the Habitacion toward the north, he made twentye
bordes also with fourtye silver sokettes, under every board two sokettes: But
behind the Habitacion upon the west side, he made six bordes, and two other
for the corners of the Habitacion behind, that either of them both might be
joined with his corner board from under up, and above upon the head to come
together with a clampe: so that there were eight bordes, and sixtene sokettes
of silver, under every one two sokettes.



And made Cherubyns upon the hanging with broderd work, of yalow sylke,
scarlet, purple, and white twyned sylke. And made for the same, four pilers of
Fyrre tree* and ouerlayed them with gold, and their knoppes of gold, and cast
four sokettes of silver for them.

And made an hanginge in the Tabernacle door, of yalow sylke, scarlet, purple,
and white twyned sylke, of nedle work, and five pilers thereto with their
knoppes (and ouerlayed their knoppes and whopes with gold) and five sokettes
of brass thereto.

The XXXVII. Chapter.
ANd Bezaleel made the Arc of Fyrre (...)
a cubyte and a half broad, and a cubyte and a half hye, and ouerlayed it with
fine gold within and without, and made a crown of gold unto it round
about, and cast for it four rings of gold to the four corners of it, upon
every side two. And made staves of Fyrre tree, and ouerlayed the^ with gold,
and put them in the rings a long by ye sides of the Arc, to bear it withal.

And he made ye Mercyseate of pure gold two cubytes and a half long, and a
cubite and a half broad, and made two Cherubyns of fine beaten gold upon the
two ends of the Mercyseate: One Cherub upon the one end, and the other Cherub
upon the other end: and the Cherubyns spredde out their wings above an hye,
and covered ye Mercyseate therewith: and their faces stood one over against the
other, and looked unto the Mercyseate.

And he made ye table, of Fyrre tree, two cubytes (...)
and a cubyte and a half hye, and ouerlayed it with fine gold, and made thereto
a crown of gold round about, and made unto it an whoope of an hand breadth
hye, and made a crown of gold round about the whoope. And for it he cast
four gold rings, and put them in the four corners by the fete hard by the
whoope, that the staves might be therein, to bear the table withal: and made
the staves of Fyrre tree, and ouerlayed the^ with gold, to bear the staves
withal. And the vessels upon the table made he also of fine gold: the
disshes, spones, flat pieces and pottes, to pour in and out withal.

And he made the candilsticke of fine beaten gold, (...). 25. a
where upon was the shaft with branches, cups, knoppes, and flowers. Six
branches proceaded out of ye sides thereof, upon either side three branches:
upon every brau^ch were three cups like allmo^des, with knoppes and flowers.
Upon the candilsticke self were four cups with knoppes and flowers, under
every two branches a knoppe. The knoppes and branches thereof proceaded out of
it, and were all one piece of fine beaten gold. And he made the seven lamps
with their snoffers and outquenchers of pure gold. Of an hundredth weight of
gold made he it, and all the apparel thereof.



And he made the holy anoyntinge oil, and the incense of pure spyces, after ye
craft of the Apotecary.

The XXXVIII. Chapter.
^xo. 27. a ^. Pat. 1. a
five cubytes long and broad, eauen four squared, and three cubits hye. And
made four horns, which proceaded out of the four corners thereof, and
ouerlaied it with brass. And he made all manner of vessels for the altar,
cauldrons, shouels, basens, fleshokes, and colepannes all of brass. And unto
the altar he made a brazen gredyron of net work round about, from under up
unto the myddest of the altar, and cast four rings in the four corners of
the brazen gredyron, for the staves: which he made of Fyrre tree, and ouerlayed
them with brass, and put them in the rings by the sides of the altar, to bear
it withal, and made it holowe with bordes.

And he made the Lauer of brass, and his foot also of brass upon the place of
ye host, that lay before the door of the Tabernacle of witness.



And the hanging in ye court gate made

This is now the sum of the Habitacion of witness (which was counted at the
commandment of Moses to ye Gods service of the Levites under the hand of
Ithamar the son of Aaron the pressed) which Bezaleel the son of Vri, the
son of Hur of the trybe of Judah made, all as the LORD commanded Moses. And
with him Ahaliab ye son of Ahisamach of the trybe of Dan, a conning grauer, to
work nedle work, with yalow sylke, scarlet, purple, and white sylke.

All the gold yt was wrought in all this work of the Sanctuary (which was
given to the Wave offering) is nine and twenty hundredth weight, seven hundredth
and thirty Sycles, after ye Sycle of ye Sanctuary. Exo. ^^. b
The silver yt came of the congregation, was five

Of the five score hundredth weight of silver, were cast the sokettes of the
Sanctuary, and the sokettes of the veil, an hundredth sokettes of the five
score hundredth weight, an hundredth weight to every sokett. Of the thousand,
seven hundredth and five and seuentye Sycles were made the knoppes of the pilers
(and their heads ouerlayed) and their whoopes.

As for the Wave offering of brass, it was seuentye hundredth weight, two
thousand and four hundredth Sycles: Whereof were made the sokettes in the door
of the Tabernacle of witness, and the brazen altar, and the brazen gredyron
thereto, and all the vessels of the altar, and the sokettes of ye court round
about, and the sokettes of ye court gate, all ye nales of the Habitacion, and
all ye nales of ye court round about.

The XXXIX. Chapter.


Exo* 28* a
to do service in the Sanctuary, as ye LORD commanded Moses.

And he made the over body cote, of gold, yalowe sylke, scarlet, purple, and
white twyned sylke, and bett the gold in to thin plates, and cut it in to
wyres, that it might be wrought among the yalowe sylke, scarlet, purple and
white sylke, and made it so, that ye ouerbody cote came together by the edges
on both the sides. And his gyrdel was after the same craft and work: eue^ of
gold, yalowe sylke, scarlet, purple and white twyned sylke, as the LORD
commanded Moses.

And they wrought two Onix stones, set round about with gold, graven by the
stone grauer with the names of the children of Israel: and fastened them upon
the shulders of the ouerbody cote, that they might be stones of remembrance
unto the children of Israel, as the LORD commanded Moses.



And upon the brestlappe they made wrythen cheynes of pure gold, and two hokes
of gold, and two gold rings, and fastened the two rings upon the two edges
of the brestlappe: and ye two wrythen cheynes put they in the two rings upon
the corners of the brestlappe. But the ^wo ends of ye wrethen cheynes put they
to the two hokes, and fastened them upon the corners of the over body cote, one
over against another.

And they made two other rings of gold, LORD commanded Moses.

And he made the tunycle unto the ouerbody cote, wrought all of yalow sylke,
and the hole thereof above in the myddest, and a bond folde^ together round
about the hole, that it should not rent. And beneth upon ye hemme of it, they
made pomgranates of yalow sylke, scarlet, purple, and white twyned sylke: and
they made belles of pure gold, which they put betwixt ye pomgranates round
about upon the hemme of the tunycle, a bell and a pomgranate, a bell and a
pomgranate round about, to do service in, as the LORD commanded Moses.

And they made albes also wrought of LORD commanded Moses.

They made the fore head plate also to ye holy crown, of pure gold, and
wrote therein with graven work: the holiness of the LORD, and festened a yalowe
lace thereon, to tie (...) unto the myter above, as the LORD commanded Moses.

Thus the whole work of ye Habitacion of ye Tabernacle of witness, was
fynished. And the children of Israel did all that the LORD commanded Moses,
and brought the Habitacion unto Moses: the Tabernacle and all the apparel
thereof, the buttons, bordes, bars, pilers, sokettes, ye covering of reed
slrynnes of rams, the covering of do slrynnes, and the veil, ye Arc of
witness with LORD commanded Moses, eue^ so did the children of Israel in all
this service. And Moses saw all ye work, yt they did it eue^ as ye LORD had
commanded, and he blessed them.

The XL. Chapter.


ANd ye LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: In the first day of the first
month shall thou set up ye Habitacio^ of ye Tabernacle of witness, and shall
put the Arc of wytnes therein, and hang the veil before ye Arc. And thou
shall bring in the table, and garnish it, and bring in the ca^dilsticke, and
put the lamps thereon. And ye golden altar of incense shall thou set before ye
Arc of witness, and hang up the hanginge in the door of the Habitacio^. But
the altar of burnt offeringes shall thou set before the door of the Habitacion
of the Tabernacle of witness: and the lauer betwixt the Tabernacle of
witness and the altar, and put water therein, and set the court round
about, and hang up the hanginge in the court gate.

Exo ^0. c
and shall consecrate it, and all ye apparel thereof, that it may be holy. And
thou shall anoynte the altar of burnt offerynges and all his vessels, and
consecrate it, that it may be most holy. The lauer also and his foot shall
thou anoynte and consecrate.

Exo. 29. a
And thou shall bring Aaron and his sons unto the door of the Tabernacle of
witness, and wash them with water, and put the holy vestimentes upon Aaron,
and anoynte him, and consecrate him, that he may be my pressed. And thou shall
bring his sons also, and put the albes upon them, and anoynte them, as thou
have anointed their father, yt they may be my prestes. And this anoyntinge
shall they have for an everlasting presthode among their posterities. Nu. 7. a
And Moses did all as the LORD commanded him.

Number. 9. c
And when Moses reared it up, he fastened ye sokettes and the bordes, and
bars, and set up the pilers, and spread out the tent over the Habitacion, and
put the covering of the tent above an hye, as the LORD commanded him. And he
took the witness, and laid it in the Arc, and put ye staves in the Arc, and
set the Mercyseate above upon the Arc, and brought the Arc in to the
Habitacion, and hanged the veil before the Arc of witness, as the LORD
commanded him.

And he set the table in the Tabernacle of witness, in the corner of the
Habitacion upon the north side without the veil, and prepared bred thereon
before ye LORD Exo. 2^. c
as the LORD commanded him.

LORD, as the LORD commanded him. And the golden altar set he in also
before the veil, and brent sweet incense thereon, as the LORD commanded him.
And hanged up the hanging in the Tabernacle door. As for the altar of burnt
offerynges, he set it before the door of the Habitacion of ye Tabernacle of
witness, and offered burnt offerynges and meat offerynges thereon, as the LORD
commanded him.

And the Lauer set he betwixt the Tabernacle of witness and ye altar, (...)
and put water therein to wash withal. And Moses, Aaron and his sons washed
their hands and fete there at: for they ought to wash the^, when they went in
to the Tabernacle of witness, or when they went unto the altar, as the LORD
commanded him.

And he set up the court round about

Then a cloud covered ye Tabernacle of witness, and the glory of the LORD
filled the Habitacion. And Moses could not go in to the Tabernacle of
witness, while the cloud abode thereon, and the glory of ye LORD filled the
Habitacion.

And when the cloud removed from the Habitacion, then went the children of
Israel forth, as often as they took their journey. But if the cloud removed not,
then took not they their journey, till the day that it removed: for in the
day time was the cloud of the LORD upon the Habitacion, and in the night
season was fire therein, in ye sight of all ye house of Israel, in all their
iourneis.

The end of the second book of Moses, called Exodus.
The third book of Moses, called Leuiticus.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I. The order and use of burnt offerynges, whether it be of small or
great catell, or of fowls. Chap. II. Of meat offerynges with fine flower,
andc. Chap. III. Of deed offerynges, otherwise called health offrynges, peace
offrynges, or tha^k-offerynges, and of the fatt. Chap. IIII. The offringe for
the sin of a pressed, of the whole congregation, of the ruler, or of any other
mean man. Chap. V. The offering for swearinge, for an error or ignorance.
Chap. VI. Of daily burnt offerynges and other oblacions: The offering of the
pressed in the day of his anoyntinge. Chap. VII. Of thank offerynges. Of the fat
and blood, and of the anoyntinge of the prestes. Chap. VIII. Of the anoyntinge
and consecratynge of Aaron and of his sons. Chap. IX. How Aaron and his
sons offered for sin, and how the fire of God consumed the burnt offering.
Chap. X. The death of Nadab and Abihu. The prestes were forbidden to drink
wine, and their portion of the offerynges appointed them. Chap. XI. Of clean
and unclean beasts and fowls. Chap. XII. Of the uncleanness of a woman in
child bed, of her clensynge or purificacion and of her offering. Chap. XIII.
Of Leprosy or Mezell. Chap. XIIII. The cle^synge of lepers, and of their
offering. Chap. XV. Of all manner of unclean fluxes or yssues, both of men and
women. Chap. XVI. Aaron might not allwaie go in to the Sanctuary. Of the two
goats. Of fasting in the seventh month. Chap. XVII. All offrynges were first
brought to the Tabernacle door. No blood ner deed caryon was to be eaten.
Chap. XVIII. The degrees of consanguynite and affynite: And what women men
ought not to marye. Chap. XIX. Diverse and many commandments and statutes.
Chap. XX. To give sede unto Moloch, and other unlawful things are forbidden.
Chap. XXI. How clean and undefiled the prestes ought to live. Chap. XXII. How
the prestes and their housholdes ought to be: and how the offerynges ought to
be used. Chap. XXIII. Of the holy days and hye feasts: namely, the Sabbath,
Easter, Whyt sunday (otherwise called the feast of wekes) the feast of
Tabernacles, andc. Chap. XXIIII. Of the oil for the lamps and lights Of the
shewbred. Punishment for cursynge and blasphemy. Chap. XXV. Of the rest of the
seventh year, and liberty of the Fiftieth year, otherwise called the year
of Iubylie, the year of horns blowinge, or the trompet year. Chap. XXVI.
Sweet and loving promyses of God for all soch as will kep^ his commandments:
Again, Marvelous sore plages are threatened unto them, that will not harken to
his word. Chap. XXVII. Of vows, and of the fre year. Of redemynge or
lowsynge out again of catell or land, that a man promyseth, voweth or
dedicateth unto the LORD.
The first Chapter.
ANd the LORD called Exo. 29. g
and spoke unto him out of ye Tabernacle of witness, and said: Speak unto ye
children of Israel, and say unto them: Who so ever among you will bring an
offering unto the LORD, let him bring it of ye catell, even of the oxen, and
of the sheep.

If he will bring a burnt offering of ye oxen (or great catell) the^ let him
offer a male without blemysh, before ye door of the Tabernacle of witness, to
reconcyle him self before the LORD, Exo. 29. b Leui. 3. a
let him lay his hand upon the head of the burnt offering, then shall he be
reconcyled, so yt God shall be merciful unto him.

And he shall kill the young ox before ye LORD: and ye prestes Aarons sons
shall bring the blood, and sprenkle it round about upon the altar, that is
before the door of the Tabernacle of witness. And the slrynne shall be flayne
from of the burnt offering, and it shall be hewn in pieces. And the sons of
Aaron the pressed shall make a fire upon the altar, and lay wod above there on:
and ye pieces, the head, and the fatt shall they lay upon the wodd that lies
upon ye fire on the altar. But ye bowels and legs shall be waszshen with
water, and the pressed shall burn altogether upon the altar for a
burntsacrifice: this is an offering of a sweet sauoure unto the LORD.

If he will offer a burntsacrifice of the LORD, even at the corner of the
altar on the north side before ye LORD. And (the prestes) Aarons sons shall
sprenkle his blood round about upon ye altar, and it shall be hewn in
pieces. And the pressed shall lay them with the head and the fatt, upon the wodd
that lies upon the fire on the altar. But the bowels and ye legs shall be
waszshen with water. And ye pressed shall offer it altogether, and burn it upon
ye altar for a burntsacrifice. This is an offering of a sweet sauoure unto
the LORD.

LORD, then let him offer it of the turtill doves or of ye young pigeons. And
the pressed shall bring it unto the altar, and wrynge the neck of it a sunder,
that it may be burnt upon the altar, and let the blood of it run out upon
the sides of the altar, and the croppe of it with the feathers shall be cast upon
the heap of aszshes beside the altar toward the east, and he shall deuyde
the wings of it, but not break the^ clean of. And thus shall the pressed burn
it upon the altar, even upon the wodd that lies upon the fire, for a
burntsacrifice. This is an offering of a sweet sauoure unto the LORD.

The II. Chapter.
LORD, Leui. 6. b and 9. c Nu. 15. a
then shall it be of fine flower, and he shall pour oil upon it, and put
frankencense thereon, and so bring it unto Aarons sons the prestes. Then shall
one of them take his handefull of the same flower, and oil with all the
franke^cense, and burn it for a remembrance upon the altar. This is an
offeringe of a sweet sauoure unto the LORD. Leui. 10. d
As for ye remnaunt of the meat offering, it shall be Aarons and his sons.
This shall be ye most holy of the offerynges of the LORD.

LORD, shall thou bring unto ye pressed, which shall bring it unto the altar,
and shall Heue up the same meat offering for a remembrance, LORD. As for the
remnaunt, it shall be Aarons and his sons. This shall be the most holy of the
offerynges of the LORD.

All the meat offerynges that ye will offer unto the LORD, shall ye make without
leue^. For there shall no leue^ nor honey be burnt for an offering unto the
LORD. But for the offering of the firstlinges shall ye offer the^ unto the
LORD. Nevertheless they shall come upon no altar for a sweet sauoure.

All thy meat offerynges shall thou (...)
salt. And thy meat offering shall never be with out ye salt of the covenant
of thy God: for in all thy offerynges shall thou offer salt.

But if thou will offer a meat offering of the first fruits unto ye LORD,
then shall thou dry that which is grene, by the fire, and beat it small, and
so offer the meat offering of thy first fruits. And thou shall put oil upon
it, and lay franke^cense thereon, so is it a meat offering. And then shall the
pressed beat it, and burn of the oil with all the franke^cense for a
remembrance. This is an offering unto the LORD.

The III. Chapter.
But if his offering be a deed offeringe LORD, and shall lay his hand upon
the head of it, and kill it before the door of the Tabernacle of witness. And
the prestes Aarons sons, shall sprenkle the blood round about upon the
altar, and shall offer of ye dead offering unto the LORD: namely, all the fat
that is within, and the two kydneyes with the fat that is thereon upon the
loins, and the nett on the lever upon the kydneyes also. And Aarons sons
shall burn it upon the altar for a burnt offering, even upon the wod that
lies on the fire. This is an offering of a sweet sauoure unto the LORD.

If his dead offering be of small catell, LORD, and shall lay his hand upon
the head of it, and sleye it before the Tabernacle of witness. And Aarons
sons shall sprenkle his blood round about upon the altar, and so offer of
the dead-offerynge unto the LORD: namely, the fa^ of it, all the rompe with
the back, and the fat that covers the bowels, with all ye fat that is
within, and the two kydneys with the fat that is thereon upon the loins, and
the nett on the lever upon the kydneys also. And the pressed shall burn it upon
the altar, for ye meat of the offering unto ye LORD.

But if his offeringe be a goat, and brings LORD, he shall lay his hand
upon the head of it, and kill it before the Tabernacle of witness. And Aarons
sons shall spre^kle the blood round about upon the altar, and shall offer
thereof a sacrifice unto the LORD: namely, the fat yt covers the bowels, and
all the fat yt is within, the two kydneys with the fat that is thereon upon the
loins, and the net on the lever upon the kydneys. And the pressed shall burn it
upon the altar, for the meat of the sacrifice to a sweet sauoure.

^^it. 7. c
All the fatt is the LORDS. Let this be a perpetual law among yor
posterities in all your dwellynges, that ye eat no fatt, (...). 9. a (...).
17. d (...) 19. f
ner blood.

The IIII. Chapter.
LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: Speak unto the children of Israel, and
say: When a soul synneth through ignorance in any commandment of the LORD,
which he ought not to do: As namely, if a pressed which is anointed, sin, that
he make the people do amysse, he shall bring for ye sin that he has done, a
young bullock without blemysh unto the LORD for a syn offering. ^euit. 9. b
And the bullock shall he bring to the door of the Tabernacle of witness
before the LORD, and lay his hand upon his head, and kill him before ye
LORD. And ye pressed yt is anointed, Leui. 16. c
shall take of his blood, and bring it in to the Tabernacle of LORD, toward
the veil of ye Holy. And he shall put of the same blood upon the horns of the
altar of incense, yt stondeth before ye LORD in the Tabernacle of witness:
and all the blood of the bullock shall he pour upon the botome of the altar
of burnt offeringes, yt stondeth at the entringe in of ye Tabernacle of
witness. And all the fat of the syn offering shall he Heue up: namely, the fat
yt covers the bowels, and all the fat yt is within, ye two kydneys with the
fatt that is thereon upon the loins, and the net on the lever upon the kydneys
also (like as he Heueth it from the ox in the dead offering) and shall burn
it upon the altar of ^xo. 29. b Nu. 19. a
and all the flesh, with the head and legs, and the bowels and the donge,
shall he carry altogether out of the host, in to a clean place, where ye
aszshes are poured out, and shall burn it upon wodd with fire.

When the whole congregation of Israel synneth through ignorance, and the deed
be hyd from their eyes, so yt they do ought against any of the commandments
of the LORD, which they should not do, and come afterward to the knowledge of
the sin that they have done, they shall bring ^ young bullock for a syn
offering, and set him before ye door of ye Tabernacle of witness. And the
Elders of the congregation shall lay their hands upon his head before the
LORD, and kill ye bullock before the LORD. And ye pressed yt LORD, eue^
before the veil of the Holy. And shall put of the blood upon the horns of
the altar, yt stondeth before the LORD in the Tabernacle of witness: and all
ye other blood shall he pour upon the botome of ye altar of burnt-offerynges,
yt stondeth before the door of ye Tabernacle of witness. But all his fatt shall
he Heue up, and burn it upon the altar: and shall do with this bullock, as he
did with ye bullock of the syn offeringe: Thus the pressed shall make an
atonement for them, and it shall be forgeuen them. And the bullock shall he
bring without the host, and burn him, as he brent ye first bullock. This
shall be ye synofferynge of the congregation.

When a prince synneth, and does against LORD his God, yt he ought not to do,
and offends ignorauntly, and comes to the knowledge of his sin yt he has
done, he shall bring for his offeringe an he goat without blemysh, and lay
his hand upon the goats head, and slaye him in ye place where ye burnt
offeringes are slain before ye LORD. The^ shall ye pressed take of ye blood of
ye syn offeringe with his finger, and put it upon the altar of burnt offerynges,
and pour the other blood upon the botome of the altar of burnt offerynges.
But all the fat of it shall he burn upon the altar, like as the fat of the
health offering. And so the pressed shall make an atonement for his sin, and
it shall be forgeuen him.

Wha^ a soul of ye common people synneth LORD, yt he ought not to do, and so
offends, and comes to ye knowledge of the sin yt he has done, he shall
bring for his offering a she goat without blemysh, for the sin yt he has
done, and shall lay his hand upon the head of the synofferynge, and slaye it
in the place of the burnt-offerynges. And the pressed shall take of the blood with
his finger, and put it upon the horns of ye altar of burnt offerynges, and
pour all the blood upon the botome of the altar. But all the fat of it shall
he take away, like as he takes away the fat of the dead-offerynge, and shall
burn it upon the altar for a sweet sauoure unto the LORD. And so shall the
pressed make an attoneme^t for him, and it shall be forgeuen him.

LORDS sacrifice. And so ye pressed shall make an atonement for the sin that
he has done, and it shall be forgeuen him.

The V. Chapter.
^eui 24. c
and is witness thereof, or has seen it, Agg. ^* b
or known it, and tells it not, he is guilty of a trespace. Or when a soul
2. cor. 6. c
touches any unclean thing, whether it be ye carrion of an unclean beast, or
catell, or worm, and was not awarre of it, he is unclean, and has offended.
Or when he touches an unclean man (what uncleanness so ever a man is defiled
withal) and was not awarre of it, and afterward comes to ye knowledge
thereof, ye same has offended. Or when a soul swears, so yt he pronounces
with his mouth to do evil or good (what so ever it be that a man pronounces with
an ooth) and was not awarre of it, and afterward comes to the knowledge
thereof, he has offended in one of these.

LORD for his trespace of this his sin yt he has done, a female from the
flock, either a yewe or a she goat for a syn offering: so shall the pressed
make an atonement for him concerning his sin. Leui. 12. d
But if he be not able to bring a sheep, then let him bring unto ye LORD for
his offense that he has done, two turtill doves or two young pigeons: one for
a syn offering, the other for a burnt offering, and bring them to the pressed:
Which shall make the first a syn offering, and first wringe the neck of it, so
that he pluck it not clean of, and sprenkle with the blood upon the sides of
the altar, and let the resydue of the blood blede out upon the botome of the
altar: This is the syn offering. As for LORD. This is a syn offeringe. And
so shall the pressed make an attoment for him, concerning his sin that he has
done, and it shall be forgeuen him. And the remnaunt shall be the prestes, like a
meat offering.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: If a soul trespace, so yt through
ignorance he offends in any thing yt is hallowed unto the LORD, he shall
bring his trespace offeringe unto the LORD, even a ram (...)
after the Sycle of the Sanctuary, for a trespace offering: and look what he
has offended in the hallowed thing, he shall make restitucion, and give the
fifth part more thereto. And he shall deliver it unto ye pressed, which shall make
an atonement for him with the ram of the trespace offeringe, and it shall be
forgeuen him.

When a soul synneth, and does ought against any commandment of the LORD,
yt he should not do, and is infourmed thereof, he has trespased, and is guilty
of the sin. And he shall bring from the flock a ram with out blemysh (that
is worth a trespace offeringe) unto the pressed, which shall make an atonement
for him concerning his ignorance which he did, and was not awarre, and it
shall be forgeuen him. This is the trespace-offerynge, because he trespaced
against the LORD.

And ye LORD talked with Moses, and LORD, so that he denies unto his
neighbor that which he gave him to keep, or that was put under his hand, or
that he has violently taken away, or gotten unrighteously, or found that was
lost, and denies it with a false ^oth, what so ever it be, wherein a man
synneth against his neighbor. Now when it comes so to pass, (...). 5. a
that he synneth after this manner, and trespaceth, he shall restore again that
he took violently away, or gat wrongeously, or that was given him to keep, or
that he has found, or what so ever it be about ye which he has sworn
falsely, he shall restore it again whole altogether, and give the fifth part
more thereto, even to him that it belonged unto, the same day that he gives
his trespace offering. But for his trespace he shall bring for the LORD
(even unto the pressed) a ram from the flock without blemysh, that is worth a
trespace offering. Then shall the pressed make an atonement for him before the
LORD, and all that he has sinned in, shall be forgeuen him.

The VI. Chapter.
LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: Command Aaron and his sons, and say:
This is the law of the burnt offering. The burnt offering shall burn upon
the altar all night until the morning. But the fire of the altar only shall
burn thereon. (...). 28. g
And ye pressed shall put on his lynen albe, and his lyuen breches upon his flesh,
and shall take up the aszshes, that the fire of the burnt offering upon the
altar has made, and shall pour them beside the altar. Then shall he put of
his raiment, and put on other raiment, and carry out the aszshes without the
host, into a clean place.

The fire upon the altar shall burn, and never go out. The pressed shall kyndle
wod thereon every morning, and dress the burnt offering upon it, and burn
the fat of the deed offerynges thereon. The fire shall ever burn upon the
altar, and never go out.

^um. 15. a ^eui. 2. a
which Aarons sons shall offer before the LORD upon the altar. One of them
shall Heue his handful of fine flower of ye meat offering, and of the oil,
and all the frankencense that lies upon the meat offering, and shall burn it
upon the altar for a sweet sauoure a remembrance unto the LORD. As for the
remnaunt, Aaron and his sons shall eat it, and vnleuended shall they eat it
in the holy place, namely, in the court of the Tabernacle of witness. With
leue^ shall they not bake their portion, which I have given them of my
offerynges. It shall be unto them most holy, as the syn offering and trespace
offering. All the males among the children of Aaron shall eat of it. Let
this be a perpetual law for your posterities in the sacrifices of the LORD.
No man shall touch it, except he be consecrated.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, and LORD in the day of their anoyntinge. The
tenth part of an Epha of fine flower for a meat offering daily, the one half
part in the morning, the other half part at even. In the pan with oil
shall thou make it, and bring it fried, and in pieces shall thou offer it for
the sweet sauoure of the LORD. And the pressed which among his sons shall be
anointed in his stead, shall do this. This is a perpetual duty unto the
LORD. It shall be burnt altogether: for all the meat offerynges of the pressed
shall be consumed with the fire, and not be eaten.

And ye LORD talked with Moses, and said: Speak unto Aaron and his sons,
LORD. This is most holy. Ose 4. b
The pressed that offers the syn offering, shall eat it in the holy place, in
the court of ye Tabernacle of witness. No man shall touch ye flesh thereof,
except he be hallowed. And if any garment be sprenkled with the blood of it,
it shall be washe^ in the holy place. And Leui. 11. e and 15. b
the earthe^ pot that it is sodden in, shall be broken. But if it be a brazen
pot, it shall be scoured, and re^sed with water. All ye males among the prestes
shall eat thereof, for it is most holy. Notwithstondinge all ye syn offering
whose blood is brought in to the Tabernacle of witness to make an atonement,
shall not be eaten, but burnt with fire.

The VII. Chapter.
ANd this is the law of the trespace-offerynge, LORD. This is a trespace
offering.

All the males among the prestes shall eat it in the holy place, for it is
most holy: even as the syn offering, so shall the trespace offering be also,
they shall both have one law: and it shall be the prestes, that reconcyleth
there with. Look which pressed offers any man's burnt offorynge, the skin of the
same burnt offrynge that he has offered, shall be his. And every meat offering
that is baken in the oven, roasted upon the gredyron, or fried in the pan,
shall be the prestes yt offers it. And every meat offering yt is myngled with
oil, or dry, shall belong unto all Aaron sons, unto one as well as another.

LORD, Psalm. 115. a
If they will offer a sacrifice of thankesgeuynge, then shall they offer
vnleue^ded cakes me^gled with oil, and sweet wafers straked over with oil,
and fried cakes of fine flower mengled with oil. This offering also shall
they bring upon a cake of leuended bred, to the thank offering of his
health-offerynge: and of them all he shall offer one for an Heue offering unto
the LORD. And it shall be the prestes, that sprenkleth the blood of the health
offering. And the flesh of the thank offering in his healthofferynges, shall be
eaten the same day that it is offered, and there shall nothing be left over
until the morning.

Leui. 19. b
And whether it be a vow or a fre wyl-offerynge, ^it shall be eaten the same day
that it is offered: if ought be left over until the morning, yet may it be
eaten. But look what remains unto ye third day of the flesh that is offered,
it shall be brent with the fire. And if any man upon the third day eat of ye
offered flesh of his health offering, he shall not be accepted that offered it.
Nether shall it be rekened unto him, but it shall be refused. And look which
soul eats thereof, the same is guilty of a mysdede.

LORD, his uncleanness be upon him, and he shall be roted out from among his
people.

And when a soul touches any unclean thing, whether it be an unclean man,
catell, or any other abhominacion that is, and eats of the flesh of the burnt
offering, that belongs unto the LORD, the same shall be roted out from among
his people.

And the LORD talks with Moses, and said: Speak unto the children of
Israel, and say: Ye shall eat no fat of oxen, (...)
lambs, and goats: nevertheless the fat of it that dies alone, and of soch
as is torn of wild beasts, that may ye occupye to all manner of uses, but ye
shall not eat it.

For who so ever eats the fat of ye be that is given unto the LORD for an
offering, the same soul shall be roted out from his people. Morouer, (...)
ye shall eat no blood, nether of catell, ner of fowls, where so ever ye
dwell. What soul eats any blood, the same shall be roted out from his
people.

And the LORD talked with Moses, and said: Speak unto the children of
Israel, and say: Who so will offer his health-offerynge unto the LORD, the
same shall also bring with all, that belongs unto ye health offering for
the LORD. But he shall bring it with his hand for the offering of the
LORD: namely the fat upon the breast shall he bring, with the breast, to be a
Wave offering before the LORD. And the pressed shall burn the fat upon the
altar, and the breast shall be Aarons and his sons.

And the right shulder shall they give unto (...)
For the Wauebrest and the Heueshulder have I taken of the children of Israel,
and of their health offerynges, and have given them unto Aaron the pressed and
unto his sons for a perpetual duty.

This is the anoyntinge of Aaron and of his sons, of the offerynges of the
LORD, in the day wha^ Moses presented them to be prestes unto the LORD, what
time as the LORD commanded (in the day when he anointed them) to be given
them of the children of Israel for a perpetual duty, and unto all their
posterities. And this is the law of the burnt offering, of the meat
offering, of the syn offering, of the trespace offering, of the offering of
consecracion, and of the health offerynges, which the LORD commanded Moses
upon mount Sinai, in the day when he gave him in commaudement unto the
children of Israel, to offer their offerynges unto ye LORD in the wilderness
of Sinai.

The VIII. Chapter.


LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: Take Aaron and his sons with him, and their
vestimentes, and the anoyntinge oil, ^^o. 29. a
and a bullock for a syn offering, two rams, and a maunde with vnleuended
bred, and call the whole congregation together, before the door of the
Tabernacle of witness. Moses did as the LORD commanded him, and gathered the
congregation together unto the door of ye Tabernacle of witness, and said
unto them: This is it, that the LORD has commanded to do.

LORD commanded Moses.

And Moses took the ^xo. 30. d
anoyntinge oil, and anointed the Habitacion, and all that was therein, and
consecrated it, and sprenkled there with seven times upon the altar, and
anointed the altar with all his vessels, the lauer with his foot, that it
might be consecrated: (...). 132. a
and poured the anoyntinge oil upon Aarons head, and anointed him, yt he
might be consecrated.

LORD commanded him.

And he caused bring a bullock for a syn offrynge. And Aaron with his sons
laid their hands upon his head, and then was he slain. And Moses took of
the blood, and put it upon the horns of the altar round about with his
finger, and purified the altar, and poured the blood upon the botome of the
altar, and consecrated it, that he might reconcyle it. And took all the fat
upon the bowels, the nett upon the lever, and the two kydneys with the fat
thereon, and burned it upon the altar. But the bullock with his skin, flesh,
and donge, burned he with fire without the host, Exo. 29. ^
as the LORD commanded him.

And he brought a ram for a burnt offering. LORD, Exo. 29. ^
as the LORD commanded him.

He brought also the other ram of the offering of the consecracion. And
Aaron with his sons laid their hands upon his head, and then was it
slain. And Moses took of his blood, and put it upon the typpe of Aarons right
ear, and upon the thombe of his right hand, and upon the great too of his
right foot.

And he brought Aarons sons, and put Exo. 29. ^
and all the fat upon the bowels, and the nett upon the lever, the two kydneys
with the fat thereon, and the right shulder. And out of the maunde of
vnleuended bred before the LORD, he took an vnleue^ded cake, and a cake of
oyled bred, and a wafer, and laid them upon the fat, and upon the right
shulder, and put altogether upon the hands of Aaron and of his sons, and
waued it for a Wave offering before the LORD.

And afterward took he all again from LORD. And Moses took the breast, Exo.
^9.
and waued it a Wave offering before the LORD, of the ram of the offering
of consecracion: the same was Moses part, as the LORD commanded Moses. And
Moses took of ye anoyntinge oil, and of the blood upon the altar, and
sprenkled it upon Aaron and his vestimentes, upon his sons and upon their
vestimentes, and so consecrated Aaron and his vestimentes, his sons and their
vestimentes with him.

LORD has commanded to do it, that ye might be reconcyled. And ye shall tarry
before the Tabernacle of witness day and night seven days long, and shall
keep ye watch of ye LORD, that ye dye not, for thus am I commanded. And Aaron
with his sons did all, that ye LORD commanded by Moses.

The IX. Chapter.
LORD, and speak unto the children of Israel, and say: Take an he goat for
a syn-offerynge: and a calf, and a sheep, both of a year old, and without
blemysh for a burnt offering: and an ox and a ram for an health offering,
that we may offer before the LORD: and a meat offering myngled with oil.
For to day shall the LORD appear unto you.

LORD. Then said Moses: This is it, which the LORD commanded that ye should
do, and then shall the glory of ye LORD appear unto you. And Moses said unto
Aaron: Go unto ye altar, and Heb. 5. b and 7. d
offer thy syn offering and thy burnt offering, and make an attoneme^t for
the and for the people. Then offer the peoples offering, and reconcyle them
also, as the LORD has commanded.

Leui. 4. a
And Aaron went unto the altar, and slew ye calfe for his syn offering, and
his sons brought the blood unto him. And he dypte his finger in the blood,
and put it upon the horns of the altar, and poured ye blood upon ye botome
of the altar. As for the fat and the kydneys and the net upon the lever of the
syn offering, he burnt the^ upon the altar, as the LORD commanded Moses.
The flesh also and the hyde burnt he with fire without the host.

Afterward he slew the burnt offeringe,

Then brought he the offering of the people, and took the goat, (...)
that syn offering of the people, and slew it, and made a syn offering
thereof, as of the first. And brought the burnt offering, and did as the law
is: and brought the meat offering, and took his handful, (...)
and burnt it upon the altar, beside the burnt offeringe of the morning.

Afterward slew he the ox and the ram LORD, (...)
as the LORD commanded Moses.

And Aaron lift up his hand over the people, and blessed them, and came down
from the work of the syn offering, burnt offering, and health offering. And
Moses and Aaron went in to the Tabernacle of witness. And when they came out
again, they blessed the people. Then appeared the glory of the LORD unto all
the people. For there came (...)
a fire from the LORD, and upon the altar it consumed the burnt-offerynge and
the fat. When all the people saw that, they reioysed, and fell upon their
faces.

The X. Chapter.
ANd ye sons of Aaron, Nadab and (...)
and put fire therein, and laid incense upon it, and brought strange fire
before the LORD, (...)
which he commanded them not. Then went there out a fire from ye LORD, and
consumed them, so that they dyed before the LORD. Then said Moses unto Aaron:
This is it, that the LORD said: I will be sanctified upon them that come nigh
me, and before all the people will I be glorified. And Aaron held his peace.



Then said Moses unto Aaron and to his sons Eleasar and Ithamar: (...) 14.^
(...) 6. a
Ye shall not uncover your heads, ner rent yor clothes, that ye dye not, and
the wrath come upon the whole congregation: Let your brethren of the whole
house of Israel bewepe this LORD has done. As for you, ye shall not go out
from the door of the Tabernacle of witness, lest ye dye: for the anoyntinge
oil of the LORD is upon you. And they did as Moses said.

The LORD spoke unto Aaron, and said: Thou and thy sons with the shall drink
no wine ner strong drink, (...) 44. d (...) 1. b
when ye go in to the Tabernacle of witness: that ye dye not. Let this be a
perpetual law unto all yor posterities: yt ye may have knowledge to discern,
what is holy and unholy, what is clean and unclean: and that ye may teach
the children of Israel all the laws, which the LORD has spoken unto you by
Moses.

And Moses said unto Aaron, and unto (...)
Take the remnaunt of the meat offering in the sacrifices of ye LORD, and
eat it without leven beside the altar, for it is most holy, even in the holy
place shall ye eat it. For it is thy duty and thy sons duty in the
sacrifices of the LORD: for thus am I commanded. But the Wauebrest and the
Heueshulder shall thou eat, and thy sons and thy daughters with the in a
clean place. For this duty is given unto the and thy children in the dead
offerynges of the children of Israel. For the Heueshulder and the Wauebrest to
the offerynges of the fat, shall be brought in, that they may be waued for a
Wave offeringe before the LORD. Therefore is it thine and thy childrens for a
perpetual duty, as the LORD commanded.

And Moses sought for the goat of the LORD. Behold, the blood of it came
not in to the Sanctuary: Ye should have eaten it in the Sanctuary, as I was
commanded.

Aaron said unto Moses: Behold, this day have they offered their syn
offering and their burnt offering before ye LORD. And it is chaunsed me
after this manner. And should I eat of the syn offering to day, and be merry
before the LORD? When Moses herd that, he was content.

The XI. Chapter.
ANd ye LORD talked with Moses and Aaron Deu. 14. a Act. 10 b
These are the beestes which ye shall eat among all ye beestes upon earth:
What so ever has hoffe, and deuydeth it in to two claws, and cheweth cud
among the beestes, that shall ye eat. But look what cheweth cud and has
hoffe, and deuydeth it not, as the Camel, the same is unclean unto you, and
ye shall not eat it. The Conyes chewe cud, but they deuyde not the hoffe in to
two claws, therefore are they unclean unto you. The Hare cheweth cud also, but
deuydeth not ye hoffe in to two claws, therefore is he unclean unto you. And
the Swyne deuydeth

These shall ye eat of all that are in the waters: What so ever has fynnes
and scales in the waters, sees and ryuers, that shall ye eat. But what so ever
has not fynnes and scales in the sees and ryuers, among all yt move in the
waters, and of all that live in the waters, it shall be an abhominacion unto you,
so that ye eat not of their flesh, and that ye abhor their carcases. For all
that have not fynnes and scales in the waters, shall ye abhor.

Leui. 5. a Agg 2. b
and ye shall take it for unclean. Who so ever touches the carcass of soch,
shall be unclean until ye even: and who so ever bears the carcass of any of
these, shall wash his clothes, and shall be unclean until the even.

Therefore every be that has hoffe, and deuydeth it not in to two claws,
and cheweth not cud, shall be unclean unto you. Who so ever touches soch,
shall be unclean. And what so ever goes upon hands among ye beestes that go
upon four fete, shall be unclean unto you. Who so ever touches the carcases of
the^, shall be unclean until even. And he yt bears their carcass, shall wash
his clothes, and be unclean until the eue^: For soch are unclean unto you.

Leui. 6. d and 15. b
All manner of earthen vessel that any soch carcass falls in to, shall all be
unclean that therein is, and ye shall break it. All meat which is eaten, that
any soch water comes in to, is unclean: and all manner of drink that is
dronke^ in all manner of soch vessel, is unclean. And what so ever any soch
carcass falls upon, it shall be unclean, whether it be oven or kettell, so
shall it be broken, for it is unclean, and shall be unclean unto you:
Nevertheless the fountaynes, wells, and pounds of water are clean. But who so
ever touches their carcases, is unclean.

And though the deed carcass of any soch

When a be dies that ye may eat, he that touches the deed carcass
thereof, is unclean until even. Who so eats of any soch carcass, shall wash
his clothes, and be unclean until the even. Likewise he that bears any soch
carcass, shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even.

What so ever crepeth upon earth, shall be an abhominacion unto you, and shall
not be eaten. And what so ever crepeth upon ye belly, or all that goes upon
four or mo fete, among all that crepeth upon earth, shall ye not eat, for it
shall be an abhominacion unto you. Make not your souls abominable, and defyle
you not in them, to stayne your selves: for I am the LORD your God. Therefore
shall ye sanctify your selves, that ye may be holy, for I am holy. (...)
And ye shall not defyle your selves on any manner of crepynge be, that
crepeth upon earth: for I am the LORD, which brought you out of the land of
Egipte, that I might be your God: therefore shall ye be holy, for I am holy.

This is the law over ye beestes and fowls, and all manner of souls of
crepynge beestes in the waters, and all manner of souls yt crepe upon earth:
that ye may know to discern what is unclean and clean, and what manner of
beestes are to be eaten, and which are not to be eaten.

The XII. Chapter.
ANd the LORD talked with Moses, (...)
and in ye eight day shall ye flesh of his foreskynne be cut away. And she
shall bide at home three and thirty days in ye blood of her purifienger she
shall touch no holy thing, ner come in to ye Sa^ctuary, till the days of her
purifienge be out. But if she hear a maid child, the^ shall she be unclean
two wekes, so long as she suffers her disease, and six and three score days
shall she bide at home in the blood of her purifienge.

(...)
And when the days of her purifienge are out, for the son or for the
daughter, she shall bring a lamb of one year old for a burnt offering, and
a young pigeon or a turtill done for a syn offering to the door of ye
Tabernacle of witness unto ye pressed, which shall offer it before the LORD, and
make an attoneme^t for her, and so shall she be cleansed from her bloudyssue.
This is the law for her that bears a manchilde or maid child.

^uit. 5. b
But if she be not able to bring a sheep, then let her take two turtill doves,
or two young pigeons, the one for a burnt offering, the other for a syn
offering, then shall the pressed make an atonement for her, so that she shall be
clean.

The XIII. Chapter.
LORD spoke unto Moses and Aaron, and said: When there ryseth up any thing
in the skin of a man's flesh, whether it be a scabbe or a glistrynge white (as
though there would be a leprosy in ye szkynne of his flesh) he shall be brought
unto Aaron the pressed, or to one of his sons among ye prestes. And when the
pressed seyth the plage upon the szkynne of the flesh, that the hayres are turned
to white, and it seem deper in that place then the other szkynne of his flesh,
then is it surely a leprosy, therefore shall the pressed look upon him, and judge
him unclean.

But when there is any white plecke in the szkynne of his flesh, and yet seem
no deper then the other szkynne of the flesh, and the hayres be not turned to
white, the^ shall the pressed shut him up seven days, and on ye seventh day look
upon him: if the plage seem unto him as before, and has frett no deper in the
szkynne, then shall the pressed shut him up yet seven days mo. And when he
looks on him again upon the seventh day, and fyndeth, that the plage be
darkish, and has frett no deper in the szkynne, the^ shall he judge him clean,
for it is but a szkyrfe, and he shall wash his clothes, and then is he clean.



When a plage of leprosy is upon a man, he shall be brought unto the pressed. When
he seyth and fyndeth, that there is white risen up in the szkynne, and the
hair turned unto white, and there be raw flesh in the sore, the^ is it surely
an old leprosy in ye szkynne of his flesh, therefore shall the pressed judge him
unclean, and not shut him up, for he is un clean already.

But when the leprosy breaks out in the szkynne, and covers the whole
szkynne, from the head unto the foot, all that the pressed can se, So when the
pressed looks upon it, and fyndeth, that ye leprosy has covered all the flesh,
he shall judge him clean, for so much as it is turned all in to white upon him,
for he is clean.

Notwithsto^dinge if there be raw flesh

When there is a byle in the szkynne of any man's flesh, and heals again, and
afterward in the same place there arise up any white thing, or a glisterynge
white some what reedish, he shall be seen of the pressed. So when the pressed,
seyeth, that it appears to be lower then the other szkynne, and the hair
turned to white, then shall he judge him unclean, for it is surely a plage of
leprosye broken out of the byle. But if the pressed se and find, that the hayres
are not white, and it not lower then the other szkynne, and is darkysh, he shall
shut him up seven days. If it has frett farther in the szkynne, then

When the szkynne of any man's flesh is hurt with fire, and the prynte of the
burninge be reedysh or white, and the pressed looks upon him, and fyndeth the
hair turned to white upon the mark of the burning, and it apeare deper then
the other szkynne, the^ is there surely a leprosy broken out of ye prynte of ye
burning: therefore shall ye pressed judge hi^ unclean, for it is a plage of
leprosye. But if the pressed se and find, that ye hair upon the prynte of the
burninge is not turned unto white, and is no lower then the other skin, and
is darkish also, he shall shut him up seven days.

And upon the seventh day he shall look upon him: if it has frett farther in
ye skin, then shall he judge him unclean, for it is a leprosy. But if it
sto^de still upon the mark of the burning, and frett no farther in the skin,
and is darkysh, then is it a sore in ye mark of the burning, and the pressed
shall judge him clean, for it is but the prynte of the burning.



Wha^ there is any glisteringe white upon ye skin of the flesh of a man or
woman, and the pressed seyth there that the glisterynge white vanysheth: then is
it but a white scabbe risen up in ye skin, and he is clean.

When the hayres fall out of the head of a man or a woman, so that he is
balde, the same is clean. If they fall out of his fore head, then is he fore
head balde and clean. But if there be a white reedish sore in the balde
head, or balde fore head, then is there a leprosy risen up in the balde head
or balde foreheade: therefore shall ye pressed look upon him. And when he fyndeth
the white reedysh sore risen up in his balde head or balde foreheade, then
shall ye skin of the flesh be as leporous, therefore is he a leporous man and
unclean. And the pressed shall judge him unclean, because of ye same sore upon
his head.

Who so now is leporous, his clothes shall (...)
he shall be unclean, dwell alone, and have his dwellinge without the host.

When the plage of leprosy is in a cloth, whether it be woollen or lynnen, in
the warpe or weft, whether it be lynnen or woollen, or in a skin, or in any
manner thing that is made of skin. And when ye plage is pale or reedish in
the cloth or skin, either in the warpe or weft, or in any manner thing that
is made of skin, the same is surely the plage of leprosy, therefore shall the
pressed look upon it. And when he seyth the plage, he shall shut it up seven
days. And upon the seventh day when he seyth that ye plage has frett farther
in the cloth, in the warpe or weft, in a skin or in any manner thing that is
made of skin, then is it a fretinge plage of leprosye, and is un clean. And
the cloth shall be burnt, either warpe or weft, whether it be woollen or lynne^,
or any thing made of skin, wherein is any soch plage. For it is a plage of
leprosy, and shall be burnt with fire.

But if the pressed se that the plage has thing made of skin that is
waszshe^, and the plage be departed from it, it shall be waszshen once again,
and then is it clean.

This is the law over the plage of leprosy in clothes, whether they be woollen
or lynne^ (either in the warpe or in the weft) and in any manner of thing made
of sknne, to judge them clean or unclean.

The XIIII. Chapter.
LORD sp^t^ unto Moses, and said: This is the ^^we over ye leper, when he
shall be cleansed. (...)
He shall come unto ye pressed, and the pressed shall go out of the host, and look
how the plage of leprosye is healed upon the leper. And he shall command him
that is to be cleansed, to take two lyuinge by^des, which are clean, and Ceder
wodd, and purple woll, and ysope: and shall command the one bird to be
killed in an earthen vessel over sprynginge water. And he shall take the
living bird with the Ceder wodd, the purple woll, and ysope, and dip them
in the blood of the slain bird upon the springynge water, and sprenkle it
seven times upon him that must be cleansed from ye leprosy. And so cleanse him,
and let the living bird fly at liberty in to the field.



And upon the eight day shall he take two lambs without blemysh, and a sheep
of a year old without blemysh, and three tenth deals of fine flower for a
meat offering, myngled with oil, and a Logg of oil. The^ shall the pressed
present him that is cleansed and these things before the LORD, before the
door of the Tabernacle of witness, and shall take ye one lamb, and offer it
for trespace offering, with the Logg of oil, and shall wave them, before ye
LORD, and afterward slaye the lamb, where the syn offering and burnt
offering are slain, namely, in the holy place. For as the syn offering, so
is the trespace offering the prestes also, for it is most holy.

LORD. As for the remnaunt of the oil in his hand, he shall put it upon the
typpe of the right ear of him that is cleansed, and upon the thombe of his
right hand, and upon the great too of his right foot, even above upon the
blood of the trespace offering. But the remnaunt of the oil in his hand,
shall he pour upon the head of him that is cleansed, and make an atonement
for him before the LORD. And he shall make the syn offering, and reconcyle
him that is cle^sed, because of his uncleanness. And afterward shall he sleye
the burnt offering, and shall offer it upon the altar with the meatofferynge,
and make an atonement for him, and than is he clean.

But if he be poor, and gets not so LORD.

Then shall the pressed take the lamb for the syn offering, and the Logg of
oil, and shall wave them all before the LORD, and sley the lamb of the
trespace offering: and take of ye blood of the same trespace offering, and
put it upon the typpe of the right ear of him that is cleansed, and upon the
thombe of his right hand, and upon the great too of his right foot, and
pour of the oil in to his own left hand, and with his right finger
sprenkle the oil that is in his left hand, seven times before the LORD.

As for the remnaunt of the oil in his for him before the LORD. And
afterward of the one of the turtill doves or young pigeons (acordinge as his
hands are able to get) he shall make a syn offering, of ye other a burnt
offering, with the meat offering: and so shall the pressed make an attoneme^t
for him that is cleansed before the LORD.

Let this be the law for the leper, which is not able with his hand to get,
that belongs unto his clensynge.

LORD spoke unto Moses and Aaron, and said: When ye are come in to the land
of Canaan, which I give you to possess: and if there happen a plage of leprosy
in any house of your possession, then shall he that owes the house, come and
tell the pressed, and say: Me think there is as it were a plage of leprosy in
my house. Then shall the pressed command to rydde all thing out of the house or
ever the pressed go in to se ye plage, lest all that is in the house be made
unclean. Afterward shall ye pressed go in, to se the plage.

Now when he looks, and fyndeth, yt there be holowe strakes yalowe or reedish
in the walls of the house, and they seem to be lower then the wall beside,
then shall he go out at the door of the house, and shut up the house for seven
days. And upon the seventh day when he comes, and seyth that the plage has
fretten farther in the walls of the house, the^ shall he command to break
out the stones wherein the plage is, and to cast the^ in a foul place without
the cite, and the house to be scraped within round about, and the dust yt is
scraped of, to be poured without ye cite in an unclean place, and to take
other stones, and put them in the place of the other, and to take other
plaster, and plaster the house.



But if the pressed se (wha^ he goes in) that this plage has frett no farther
in the house, after that the house is new playsterd, the^ shall he judge it to
be clean, for the plage is healed. And to a syn offeringe for the house, he
shall take two birds, Ceder wodd, and purple woll, and ysope, and slaye the one
bird in an erthen vessel upon sprynginge water, and shall take the Ceder
wodd, the purple woll, the ysope, and the lyuinge bird, and dip them in the
blood of the slain bird upon the sprynginge water, and sprenkle the house
with all seven times: and so shall he purify the house with the blood of the
bird, with the springinge water, with the lyuinge bird, with the Ceder wodd,
with the ysope, and with the purple woll. And the living bird shall he let
fly at liberty out of the town in to the field, and make an atonement for
the house, and then is it clean.

This is the law over all manner plage of leprosye and skyrfe, over ye leprosye
of clothes and of houses, over sores, scabbes, and gliste ring white, that it
may be known, when any thing is unclean or clean. This is ye law of
leprosy.

The XV. Chapter.
ANd the LORD talked with Moses

And he that touches his bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe him self with
water, and be unclean until the even.

And he yt sytteth where he sat, shall wash his clothes, and bathe him self with
water, and be unclean until the eue^. Who so touches his flesh, shall wash
his clothes, and bathe him self with water, and be unclean until the even.
When he spytteth upon him that is clean, ye same shall wash his clothes, and
bathe him self with water, and be unclean until the even.

And the saddell and what so ever he rydeth (...)
When he touches an erthen vessel, it shall be broken: but the treen vessel
shall be rensed with water. And wha^ he is clean of his issue, he shall nombre
vij. days, after yt he is made clean, and wash his clothes, and bathe him
self with sprynginge water, the^ is he clean. And upon the eight day shall he
take two turtill doves or two young pigeo^s, and bring them before the LORD
before the door of the Tabernacle of witness, and give them unto the pressed.
And the pressed shall make of the one a syn offeringe, of the other a burnt
offering, and make an atonement for him before the LORD, as concerning his
issue.



When a woman has the blood issue of her flesh, she shall be put a part vij.
days in to a sundry place. Who so ever touches her, shall be unclean until
the eue^. And all that she lies upon (as long as she is put aparte) shall be
unclean. And that she sytteth upon, shall be unclean. And who so ever touches
her bed, shall wash his clothes, and bathe him self with water, and be unclean
until the even. And who so ever touches any manner thing that she has sytten
upon, shall wash his clothes, and bathe him self with water, and be unclean
until the eue^.

Leui. 18. c
and the bed that he lay upon, shall be unclean.

Matt. 9. c
But when a woman has her blood issue a long season, not only at the time of
her natural course, but also out of the time of her natural course, then
shall she be unclean so long as she has the issue: eue^ as she is at the
time when she is put aparte, so shall she be unclean here also. What so ever
she lies upon all the time of her issue, shall be as her bed, when she is put
aparte. And all that she sytteth upon, shall be unclean, as is her uncleanness,
when she is put aparte. Who so ever touches any of them, shall be unclean, and
shall wash his clothes, and bathe him self with water, and be unclean until
the even.

LORD, as concerning the issue of her uncleanness.

Thus shall ye se that the children of Israel keep them selves from their
uncleaness, that they dye not in their uncleanness, when they defyle my
habitacion, which is among you.

This is the law over him that has a runnynge sore, and him whose sede
departs from him in sleep, so that he is unclean there of. And over her that
has her blood issue, and who so ever has a runnynge sore, whether it be man
or woman, and when a man lies with her that is unclean.

The XVI. Chapter.
ANd the LORD spoke unto Moses Leu. 10. ^
when they offered before the LORD) and said: Speak unto Aaron thy brother,
yt he go not at all times in to ye ynnermer Sanctuary, within the vale before
the Mercyseate, which is upon the Arc, yt he dye not: Exo. 40. ^ 3. Re. 8. b
for I will appear in a cloud upon ye Mercyseate. But herewithall shall he go
in, even with a young bullock for a syn offering, and with a ram for a
burntofferynge, and shall put on the holy lynnen albe, and have lynnen breches
upon his flesh, and gyrde him with a lynne^ girdell, and have the lynnen myter
upon his head.

For these are ye holy garments: and he shall

And Aaron shall bring the bullock his own syn offering, Heb. 9. b
and make an attoneme^t for himself and his house: and afterward shall he take
the two goats, and present them before the LORD, even before the door of the
Tabernacle of witness, and shall cast lottes over the two goats: the lot of
the one goat for the LORD, and the other for the fre goat. And the goat
that ye LORDS lot fell upon, shall he offer for a syn offering. But the goat,
that the fre goats lot fell upon, shall he present alive before ye LORD, to
make an atonement for him, and to let the fre goat go into ye wyldernes. And
so shall he bring the bullock of his syn offering, and make an atonement for
him and his household, and shall kill him.

And he shall take a censor full of coals from the altar that stondeth before
the LORD, and his handful of beaten incense, and bring them in within ye
veil, and put the incense upon the fire before ye LORD, that the cloud of
the incense may cover the Mercyseate, which is upon the witness, ^eui. 4. a
that he dye not. And he shall take of the blood of the bullock, and sprenkle
it with his finger toward the Mercyseate on the foresyde. Seven times shall he
sprenkle of the blood thus with his finger before the Mercyseate. The^ shall he
kill the goat which is the peoples syn offering, and bring in of his blood
within the veil, and shall do with his blood, as he did with the blood of
the bullock, and sprenkle therewith also on the foresyde toward the
Mercyseate, and so shall he reconcyle the Sa^ctuary from the uncleanness of the
children of Israel, and

No man shall be in the Tabernacle of witness, when he goes in to make an
atonement in the Sa^ctuary, until he go out: and so shall he make an
atonement for him self and his house, and for the whole congregation of
Israel. And wha^ he goes forth unto the altar that stondeth before the LORD,
he shall reconcyle it, and shall take of ye bullockes blood, and of the goats
blood, and put it upon the horns of the altar round about. And with his
finger shall he spre^kle of the blood thereon seven times, and halowe it, and
consecrate it from the uncleanness of the children of Israel.



The^ shall Aaron lay both his hands upon ye head of him, and confess over
him all the myszdedes of ye children of Israel, and all their trespaces in
their sins, and shall lay the^ upon ye head of the goat, and by some man yt
is at hand, shall he let him run in to the wilderness: yt the goat may so
bear all their misdeeds upon him in to ye wilderness, and he shall leave him
in the wilderness.

And Aaron shall go in to the Tabernacle of witness, and put of the lynnen
clothes, which he put on wha^ he went in to ye Sa^ctuary, and shall leave them
there, and bathe his flesh with water in the holy place, and put on his own
raiment.

And he shall go forth, and make his burnt

The bullock of the syn offering, and ye goat of the syn offering (whose
blood was brought in to the Sanctuary to make an attoneme^t) shall be carried out
of ye host, and brent with fire, both their skynnes, flesh, and donge. And he
that burns them, shall wash his clothes, and bathe him self with water, and
then come in to the host.

And this shall be a perpetual law unto Leu^* ^
Upon the tenth day of the seventh month shall ye humble your souls, and do
no work, whether it be one of your selves, or a stranger among you. For in
this day is your attoneme^t made, that ye may be cleansed from all your
sins before the LORD: therefore shall it be a fre Sabbath unto you, and ye
shall humble your souls. Let this b^ a perpetual law.

But the pressed that is anointed, and whose hand was filled to be pressed in his
fathers stead, shall make this atonement, and shall put on the lynnen clothes,
namely the holy vestime^tes, so shall he reco^cyle the holy Sa^ctuary, and the
Tabernacle of witness, and the altar, and ye prestes, and all the people of
the congregation. (...)
This shall be a perpetual law unto you, that ye reconcyle ye children of
Israel from all their sins once a year. And Moses did, as the LORD
commanded him.

The XVII. Chapter.
ANd ye LORD talked with Moses, and LORD has commanded: What so ever he be
of ye house of Israel, yt kylleth an ox, or la^be, or goat in the host, or
out of the host, and brings it not before the door of the Tabernacle of
witness, that it may be brought unto the LORD for an offering before the
Habitacion of ye LORD, the same shall be guilty of blood, as though he had
shed blood, and soch a man shall be roted out from among his people.

Therefore shall the children of Israel LORD, even before the door of the
Tabernacle of witness, unto the pressed, and there offer their health offerynges
unto the LORD. And the pressed shall sprenkle the blood upon the altar of the
LORD before the door of the Tabernacle of witness, and burn the fat for a
sweet sauoure unto the LORD: and they shall offer their offerynges no more unto
deuels, with whom they go a whorynge. This shall be a perpetual law unto them
among their posterities.

LORD, he shall be roted out from among his people.

^^ui. 7. c
And what man so ever it be (either of the house of Israel, or a stranger
among you) that eats any manner of blood, against him will I set my face,
and will rote him out from among his people: for the soul of ye body is in the
blood, and I have given it you for the altar, that your souls may be
reconcyled there with: For the blood that is in the soul makes atonement.
Therefore have I said unto the children of Israel: No soul among you shall
eat blood, no ner any stranger that dwells among you.



And I have said unto the children of Israel: ^eu. 9. a ^^ui. 3. c (...). 19. f
Ye shall eat the blood of no body: for the life of all flesh is in his
blood. Who so ever eats it, shall be roted out. And what so ever soul eats
that which dyed alone, or yt was torn of wild beestes (whether he be one of
your selves or a stranger) the same shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself
with water, and he unclean until the even, and then is he clean. But if he
wash not his clothes, nor bathe him self, then shall he bear his sin.

The XVIII. Chapter.
LORD talked with Moses, and said: Speak unto the children of Israel, and say
unto them: I am the LORD your God, Ye shall not do after ye works of the
land of Egipte, wherein ye dwelt: nether after the doings of the land of
Canaan, in to the which I will bring you. Ye shall not walk after their
customs, but after my laws shall ye do, and my statutes shall ye keep, that
ye may walk therein: for I am the LORD your God. Therefore shall ye keep my
statutes and my laws. To. 10. a
For the man that does the same, shall live therein, for I am the LORD.

No man shall come at his next kinszwoma^, to uncover her preuytie: for I am ye
LORD.

Thou shall not uncover ye preuytie of ye father and of ye mother. It is thy
mother, Genesis 14. Eze. 22. ^
therefore shall thou not uncover her preuytie.

Thou shall not uncover ye preuytie of ye fathers wife, for it is ye fathers
preuytie. Deu. 22. and. 27. ^ 1. Cor. 5.


Thou shall not uncover the preuytie of thy sister, which is the daughter of ye
father or of ye mother, whether she be borne at home or without.

Thou shall not uncover the preuytie of thy sons daughter, Deu. 27. 2. Re. 1^.
or of thy daughters daughter, for it is thine own preuytie.

Thou shall not uncover ye preuytie of ye

Thou shall not uncover the preuytie of thy fathers sister, for it is thy
fathers next kynszwoman.

Thou shall not uncover the preuytie of thy mothers sister, Leui. ^0. ^
for it is ye mothers next kynszwoman.

Thou shall not uncover the preuytie of thy fathers brother, to take his wife,
for she is thine awnte.

Thou shall not uncover ye preuytie of ye daughter in law, for she is ye
sons wife, Genesis 38. ^ Deu. 27. ^
therefore shall thou not uncover her preuitie.

Thou shall not uncover the preuytie of thy brothers wife, Leui. 20. ^ Mat. 14.
^
for it is thy brothers preuytie.

Thou shall not uncover the preuytie of thy wife and of her daughter also,
nether shall thou take her sons daughter or her daughters daughter, to
uncover their preuyties, for they are her next kynszwomen. And it is
wickedness.

Thou shall not take a wife and her sister Genesis 29. ^
while she is yet alive.

Thou shall not go unto a woman to uncover her preuytie, Leu. 15. d Eze. 22. b
so long as she has her disease in her uncleanness.

Thou shall not lie with thy neghbours wife to meddle with her, 2. Re. 11. ^
for to defyle thy self withal.

Thou shall not give of thy sede also, to be burnt unto Moloch, Leu. 20. ^
lest thou vnhalowe the name of thy God, for I am the LORD.

^om. 1. d ^eu. 20. b
Thou shall not lie with mankind as with womankynde, for yt is abhominacion.

^eu. 27. c
Thou shall lie with no manner of be, to defyle ye self therewith. And no woman
shall have to do with a be, for it is abhominacion.

LORD your God.

The XIX. Chapter.
LORD talked with Moses, and said: Speak to the whole congregation of the
children of Israel, and say unto them: Leui. 11. g and 20. c 1. Pet. 1. c
Ye shall be holy, for I am holy, even the LORD your God. Every one fear his
father and his mother. Repe my holy days: for I am the LORD your God. Ye
shall not turn your selves unto Idols, and ye shall make you no gods of
metal: for I am the LORD your God.

LORD, then shall ye offer the^, that he may be merciful unto you, Leuit. 7. b
and ye shall eat them the same day that ye offer them, and on the morrow: what
so ever is left on the third day, shall be burnt with fire. But if any man eat
thereof upon the third day, then is he unholy, and shall not be accepted, and
the same eater shall bear his sin, because he has unhallowed the Sanctuary of
the LORD: and soch a soul shall be roted out from among his people.

Leui. 33. d Deu. ^4. d
ner gather it all clean up. Even so likewise thou shall not pluck thy
vynyarde clean also, ner gather up the grapes that are fallen down, but shall
leave them for ye poor and strangers: for I am the LORD your God.

Ye shall not steal, nether lie, ner deal falsely one with another.

Ye shall not swear falsely by my name, Exo. ^ Man* ^
and so to vnhalowe the name of thy God: for I am the LORD.

Thou shall do ye neighbor no wrong, ner rob him. Deuteronomy. ^ Tob* ^
The workma^s labor shall not bide with the until the morning.

Thou shall not curse the deaf. (...)
Thou LORD.

Ye shall not deal wrongeously in judgment, nether shall ye accept the
person of the poor, ner honor the parsonne of the great, but thou shall
judge thy neighbor righteously.

Thou shall let no preuy accuser go among ye people. Nether shall thou stand
against ye neghbours blood: for I am ye LORD.

Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, Mat. ^ Ecc^
but shall tell ye neighbor his fault, that thou bear not sin for his sake.

Thou shall not avenge thy self, ner bear evil will against the children of
thy people.

(...) Ro^ ^ Genesis ^
Thou shall love thy neighbor, as thy LORD.

My statutes shall ye keep, that thou (...) Ro^ ^ Genesis ^
let not ye catell gendre with beestes of another kind: nether sow thy field
with myngled sede. And let no garment come upon the, yt is mixte with woollen
and lynnen.

When a man lies with a woman, and has to do with her, which is a bond
woman, and has been meddled withal of another man, but not lowsed out, ner
has optayned fredome, it shall be punyshed, but they shall not suffer death,
because she was not fre. But he shall bring for his trespace unto ye LORD
(even before the door of the Tabernacle of witness) a ram for a trespace of
ferynge* and the pressed shall make an atonement for him with the trespace
offering before the LORD, concerning the sin that he has done: He^ ^
so shall God be merciful unto him, as concerning his sin which he has
done.

What time as ye are come into the land, LORD. In the fifth year shall ye
eat the fruits, and gather them in: for I am ye LORD your God.

^eui. 3. c ^eu. ^8. b
Ye shall eat nothing with blood. Ye shall not regard ye fowls cryenge, ner
chose out days.

^eui. 21 a (...). 44. c
Ye shall shave no crowns upon your head, nether shall thou clyppe thy beerde
clean off.

Ye shall rent out no marks in your body (for any that is deed) ner make
lettres upon you: for I am the LORD.

Thou shall not hold thy daughter to whordome, that the land fall not to
whordome, and wax full of wickedness.

Keep my holy days, and stand in awe LORD.

^eg 28. b
Ye shall not turn yor selves to ye Soyth sayers, and axe nothing at the
expounders of tokens, that ye be not defiled by them: for I am the LORD your
God.

^ccli. 8. a Tim. 5. a
Thou shall rise up before a graye head, and shall give reverence unto the
aged. For thou shall fear God: for I am ye LORD.

^word. 22. c
When there dwells a stranger among you in your land, ye shall not vex
him. He shall dwell with you, even as one that is at home among you, and thou
shall love him as ye self: for ye your selves also were strangers in the
land of Egipte. I am the LORD your God.

Ye shall not deal wro^geously in judgment, with meteyarde, with weight, with
measure: A true balaunce, a true weight, a true Epha, a true Hin shall be among
you. For I am the LORD your God, which brought you out of the land of
Egipte, that ye should keep and do all my statutes and laws: for I am the
LORD.

The XX. Chapter.
LORD talked with Moses, and said: Tell the children of Israel: Leui. 18. c
Deuteronomy. 27. a
Who so ever he be among the children of Israel, (or any stranger that
dwells in Israel) which gives of his sede unto Moloch, the same shall dye
the death: the people of the land shall stone him, and I will set my face
against that man, and will rote him out from among his people, because he has
given of his sede unto Moloch, and defiled my Sanctuary, and unhallowed my holy
name. And though the people of the land look through the fyngers upon that man,
which has given of his sede unto Moloch, so that they put him not to death,
yet will I set my face against the same man, and against his generation: And
him, and all that go a whorynge with him after Moloch, will I rote out from
among their people.

If any soul turn him to ye soythsayers and expounders of tokens, so that he
goes a whorynge after them, I will set my face against the same soul, and will
rote him out from among his people. Leui. 1^ Nu. 11. ^ Iosu. 3. ^
Sanctify your selves therefore, and be holy: for I am holy even your God.
And keep ye my statutes, and do them: for I am ye LORD that sanctifies you.

Who so ever curses his father or his mother, Exo. 21. Pro. 20 ^ Matt. ^^
his blood be upon him, because he has cursed his father or mother.

He that breaks wedlock with any ma^s wife, Deu. 22
shall dye the death (both the aduouterer and ye aduouteresse) because he has
broken wedlock with his neghbours wife.

If any man lie with his fathers wife, Leuit. 18 Deu. 27
so yt he uncover his fathers preuyte, they shall both dye the death: their
blood be upon the^.

If any man lie with his daughter in law, Leui. 1^.
they shall dye both of them, for they have wrought abhominacion: their blood
be upon them.

If any man lie with the mankind, Leui. 18. Romans 1.
as with womankynde, they have wrought abhominacion, and shall both dye the
death: their blood be upon them.

If any man take a wife, Leui. 18.
and her mother thereto, the same has wrought wickedness: he shall be burnt with
fire, and so shall they also, that there be no wickedness among you.

If any man lie with a be, Leui. 18. Deu. 27.
he shall dye the death, and the beast shall be slain.

If a woman meddle with a be, so yt she have to do with it, thou shall put her
to death, and the beast also, they shall dye the death: their blood be upon
them.

If any man take his sister, his fathers

If a man lie with a woman in the time of her sickness, and uncover her
secrets, Leui. 15. ^ and 18. c
and open up her founteyne, and she uncover the fountain of her blood, they
shall both be roted out from among their people.

Thou shall not uncover the preuytie of thy mothers sister, and of thy fathers
sister: Leui. 18. b
for soch one has uncovered his next kynswoman, and they shall bear their
sin.

If any man lie with his uncles wife, the same has uncovered the preuytie of
his uncle: they shall bear their sin, without children shall they dye.

(...). 18. b (...). 14. a
If any man take his brothers wife, yt is an unclean thing: they shall be
without children, because he has uncovered his brothers secrets.

^eut. 9. a
For all soch things have they done, and I have abhorred the^.

But I say unto you: Ye shall possess their land. For I will give you to
enheritaunce a lord, that flows with milk and honey. I am the LORD your
God, which have separated you from the nations, that ye also should separate
the clean beestes from the unclean, and the unclean fowls from the clean:
and not to defyle your souls upon beestes, upon fowls and upon all that
crepeth on the ground: ^eui. 11. a ^eut. 14 a
which I have separated unto you, that they should be unclean. Therefore shall
ye be holy unto me: for I the LORD am holy, which have separated you from the
nations, that ye should be mine.

^eu. 1^. b Re. 28. b
If a man or woman be a soythsayer or an expounder of tokens, the same shall dye
the death: they shall be stoned, their blood be upon them.

The XXI. Chapter.
LORD said unto Moses: Speak to ye prestes ye sons of Aaron, and say unto
the^: (...). 44. d
A pressed shall defyle him self upon no soul of his people, but upon his next
kynne yt belongs unto him: as upon his mother, upon his father, upon his
son, upon his daughter, upon his brother, and upon his sister, which is yet a
virgin, and has been no man's wife (which belongs unto him) upon her may he
defyle himself. Morouer he shall not defyle him self upon any ruler in his
people, to vnhalowe him self.

Leui. 19* f Eze. 44* c
He shall make no crown also upon his head, ner shave of his beerd, nether
shall they cut out any marks i^ their flesh. They shall be holy unto their God,
and not vnhalowe ye name of their God: for they offer the sacrifice of the
LORD, the bred of their God, therefore shall they be holy.

1. Tim. 2. a
or yt is put away from her huszbande, for he is holy unto his God: therefore
shall he sanctify him self, for he offreth the bred of thy God. He shall be holy
unto the, for I am holy, even the LORD that sanctifies you.

If a prestes daughter fall to whoringe, she shall be burnt with fire, for she
has shamed her father. He that is hye pressed among his brethren, upon whose
head the anoyntinge oil is poured, and his hand filled (yt he might be
arrayed with the vestimentes) shall not uncover his head, ner cut his clothes,
and shall come at no deed, Luc. ^
and shall defyle him self nether upon father ner mother. He shall not go out of
the Sanctuary, that he vnhalowe not the Sanctuary of his God. For ye crown of
the anoyntinge oil of his God is upon him, for I am the LORD.

A virgin shall he take to wife, but no wedowe, Eze. ^ Man. ^
but a virgin of his own people shall he take to wife, yt he vnhalowe not his
sede among his people. For I am ye LORD, which sanctify him.

And ye LORD talked with Moses, and said: Speak unto Aaron, and say: If there
be a blemysh upon any of ye sede in yor generacions, the same shall not preasse
to offer the bred of his God: (...)
For who so ever has a blemysh upon him, shall not come nere, whether he be
blind, lame, with an evil favored nose, with any myszshappen membre, or yt
has a broken foot or hand, or is croke backed, or has any blemysh in the
eye, or is gleyd, or is skyrvye or scaulde, or has his stones broken.

Who so ever now of the sede of Aaron ye LORD. For he has a deformyte.
Therefore shall he not preasse unto the bred of his God, to offer it.
Notwithstondinge he shall eat of the bred of his God, both of the holy, and of
ye most holy: but he shall not go in to ye veil, ner come nigh the altar (for
so much as he has a blemysh upon him) yt he vnhalowe not my Sa^ctuary. For I
am ye LORD yt sanctifies the^. And Moses spoke this unto Aaron and to his
sons, and to all the children of Israel.

The XXII. Chapter.
ANd the LORD talked with Moses, and LORD. Say now unto them and their
posterities: Who so ever he be of yor sede, yt comes nigh unto the holy
things, which the children of Israel halowe unto the LORD, and so defyleth
him self upon the same, his soul shall perish before my face: for I am the
LORD.

Who so ever of the sede of Aaron is a leper, or has a runnynge issue, shall
not eat of the holy things, till he be cleansed. Who so touches any unclean
thing, or whose sede departs from him by night, or who so touches any worm
that is unclean unto him, or a man yt is unclean unto him, and what so ever
defyleth hi^, look what soul touches any soch, is unclean until the even,
and shall not eat of the holy things, but shall first bath his flesh with
water. And wha^ ye Son is gone down, and he clean, then may he eat
thereof, for it is his food. Look what dies alone, or is rent of wild
beestes, shall he not eat, yt he be not unclean thereon: for I am ye LORD.
Therefore shall they keep my law, yt they lade not sin upon them, and dye
therein, when they vnhalowe them selves in it. For I am ye LORD, yt halowe them.



Who so else eats of the hallowed things, vnwyttingly, shall put ye fifth part
there unto, and give it unto the pressed with the hallowed thing, that they
vnhalowe not ye hallowed things of the children of Israel, which they Heue up
unto the LORD, lest they lade them selves with myszdoinge and trespace, wha^
they eat their hallowed things, for I am ye LORD which halowe the^.

LORD talked with Moses, and said: Speak unto Aaron and his sons, and to all
ye children of Israel: Deuteronomy. 15. c and 17. a
What so ever Israelite or stranger in Israel will do his offering, whether
it be their vow, or of fre will, that they will offer a burnt offering unto
the LORD, to reconcyle them selves, it shall be a male, and without blemysh, of
the oxen, or lambs or goats. ^al. 1. b
What so ever has any blemish, shall they not offer, for they shall find no
favor therewith.

And who so will offer an health offeringe unto the LORD to separate out a
vow, or of fre will, oxen or sheep, it shall be without blemysh, yt it may be
accepted. It shall have no deformite. If it be blind, or broken, or wounded, or
have a wen, or skyrvye, or scabbed, they shall offer none soch unto the LORD,
ner put an offering of any soch upon the altar of the LORD.

An ox or sheep yt has myszshappe^ members, or no rompe, may thou off^^ of
a fre will: but to a vow it may not be accepted. Thou shall offer also unto
the LORD nothing yt is bruised, or broken, or rent, or cut out, and ye shall
do no soch in your land. Morouer ye shall offer no bred unto your God of a
strangers hand: for it is marred of him, and he has a deformite, therefore
shall it not be accepted for you.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: LORD, the^ is it accepted. Whether
it be ox or lamb, it shall not be slain with his young in one day.

But wha^ ye will offer a tha^k offringe unto the LORD yt it may be accepted,
ye shall eat it the same day, and keep nothing over until the morning: for
I am the LORD. Therefore keep now my commandments, and do them: for I am the
LORD, yt ye vnhalowe not my holy name, and that I may be hallowed among the
children of Israel. For I am he that halowe you, eue^ ye LORD, which brought
you out of ye lord of Egipte, yt I might be yor God: Even I ye LORD.

The XXIII. Chapter.
ANd the LORD talked with Moses, and LORD, which ye shall call holy days.
Six days shall thou work, Exo. 2^. ^ Deu. 5. b
but the seventh day is the rest of the Sabbath, and shall be called holy. Ye
shall do no work therein, for it is the Sabbath of the LORD, where so ever ye
dwell.

These are the feasts of the LORD, yt are called holy, which ye shall call
your feasts: Exo. 12. ^ Nu. 28. c Eze. 45. ^
Upon ye fourtene day of ye first month at even, is the LORDS Easter. And
upon ye fiftene day of the same month is the feast of vnleue^ded bred of the
LORD. Then shall ye eat vnleuended bred seven days.

The first day shall be called holy among Nu. 2^. ^
and seven days shall ye offer unto ye LORD. The seventh day shall be called
holy likewise, wherein ye shall do no work of bondage also.

And ye LORD talked with Moses, and said: Speak to the children of Israel, and
say unto them:* When ye come in to the land yt I shall give you, and reap
down your harvest, ye shall bring a shefe of the first fruits of your
harvest unto the pressed, the^ shall the shefe be waued before the LORD, that ye
may be accepted: but this shall the pressed do the next day after the Sabbath.
And ye same day that yor shefe is waued, shall ye offer a burnt offeringe unto
the LORD, of a lamb which is without blemysh and of one year old, with the
meat offering, two tenth deals of fine flower mengled with oil, for an
offering of a sweet sauoure unto the LORD: and the drynk offering also, eue^
the fourth part of an Hin of wine.

^osu. ^. c
This shall be a law unto your posterities, where so ever ye dwell.

Deu. 16. b
Then shall ye nombre (from the next day after the Sabbath, when ye brought ye
Waueshefe) seven whole wekes, until the next day after ye seventh weke,
namely, fifty days, shall ye nombre, and offer new meat offerynges unto the
LORD. And out of all your dwellinges shall ye offer, namely, two Wave loaves
of two tenth deals of fine flower leue^ded, and baken for the first fruits
unto ye LORD. ^u. 28. d
And with your bred ye shall bring seven lambs of one year old without
blemysh, and a young bullock, and two rams: this shall be the LORDS burnt
offering, meat offering, and drynk offrynge. This is a sacrifice of a sweet
sauoure unto the LORD.

LORD with the two lambs. And they shall be holy unto the LORD, and shall be
the prestes. And this day shall ye proclaim, for it shall be called holy among
you: no seruyle work shall ye do therein. A perpetual law shall it be among
yor posterities, where so ever ye dwell.

Leu. 19. c ^eu. 24. d
When ye reap down ye harvest of your land, ye shall not cut it clean down
upon the field, ner gather up all, but shall leave it for the poor and
strangers. I am the LORD your God.

And ye LORD talked with Moses, and said: Speak unto the children of Israel,
and say: ^u. 39. a
Upon the first day of the seventh month shall ye have the holy rest of the
remembrance of blowinge, wherein ye shall do no seruyle work, and ye shall offer
sacrifice unto the LORD.

LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: Leu^ ^ Nu. ^
Upon the tenth day in this seventh month is the day of reconcylinge, which
shall be an holy conuocacion with you. Ye shall humble your souls therein, and
offer unto the LORD, and shall do no seruyle work in this day: for it is the
day of atonement, that ye may be reconcyled before the LORD your God. For
what soul so ever humbles not him self upon this day, the same shall be roted
out from among his people. And what soul so ever does any work this day,
the same will I destroy from among his people: therefore shall ye do no work.
This shall be a perpetual law unto your posterities, where so ever ye dwell.
It is the rest of your Sabbath, that ye may humble your souls. Upon the
nyenth day of ye month at even, shall ye keep this holy day from the even
forth until the eue^ again.

And the LORD talked with Moses, and (...)
Upon the fiftene day of the seventh month, is the feast of Tabernacles seven
days unto the LORD. The first day shall be an holy co^uocacion: no seruyle
work shall ye do therein. Seven days shall ye offer unto the LORD. The eight
day shall be an holy conuocacion unto you also, and ye shall offer unto the
LORD: for it is the day of gatheringe together: No seruyle work shall ye do
therein.

These are the holy days of the LORD, which ye shall proclaim and hold for
holy conuocacions, that ye may offer unto the LORD burnt offerynges, meat
offerynges, drynk offerynges and other offerynges, every one acordinge to his
day, beside ye Sabbathes of ye LORD, and your gifts, and vows, and frewyl
offerynges, that ye offer unto the LORD.

So upon the fiftene day of the seventh LORDS feast seven days long. The
first day shall be kept holy day, and the eight day shall be kept holy day
also. And upon the first day ye shall take of ye goodly fruitful trees,
branches of palm trees, and bows of thick trees, and Wyllies of the broke,
and seven days shall ye be merry before ye LORD your God: and thus shall ye
keep the feast unto the LORD seven days in the year. This shall be a
perpetual law among your posterities, that they keep holy day thus in ye
seventh month. Seven days shall ye dwell in bothes. Who so ever is an
Israelite borne, shall dwell in bothes, that they which come after you, may
know, how that I made ye children of Israel to dwell in bothes, when I brought
them out of the lord of Egipte. I am the LORD your God. And Moses told the
children of Israel these holy days of the LORD.

The XXIIII. Chapter.
LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: (...) 7. d
Command the children of Israel, that they bring pure oil olyue beaten for
lights, that it may be allwaye put in the lamps, without before the veil of
witness in the Tabernacle of witness. And Aaron shall dress it allwaye at
even and in ye morning before the LORD. Let this be a perpetual law unto
your posterities. The la^pes shall he dress upon the pure candilsticke before
the LORD perpetually.

(...). 25. c
two tenth deals shall every cake have, and thou shall lay them six on a row
upon the pure table before the LORD. And upon the same shall thou lay pure
frankencense, that it may be bred of remembrance for an offering unto ye
LORD. Every Sabbath shall he prepare the^ before the LORD allwaye, and receive
them of the children of Israel for an everlasting covenant. (...). 21. a
And they shall be Aarons and and his sons, which shall eat them in the holy
place. For this is his most holy of the offerynges of the LORD for a
perpetual duty.

(...). 10. b
and named the name of God blasphemously, and cursed. Then brought they him
unto Moses. His mothers name was Selomith, the daughter of Dibri, of the trybe
of Dan. (...) 1^. d
And they put him in preson, till they were infourmed by the mouth of the LORD.



And the LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: Bring him that cursed, out of the
host, and let all the^ that herd it, lay their hands upon his head, and
let the whole congregation stone him. And say unto the children of Israel.
Mat. 26. g Ioh. 19. a
Who so ever blasphemeth his God, shall bear his sin: and he that
blasphemeth the name of the LORD, shall dye the death. The whole congregation
shall stone him. As the stranger, so shall he of the household be also. If he
blaspheme the name, he shall dye.

He that slays a man, shall dye ye death. Exo. 21. b Deuteronomy* 19. a Iudic. 1 b
Math. 5^ c
Soul for soul. And he that maymeth his neighbor, it shall be done unto him,
even as he has done: broke for broke, Math. 5. c
eye for eye, tothe for tothe: even as he has maimed a a man, so shall it be
done unto him again, so that, who so slays a be, shall pay for it: But
he that slays a man, shall dye. There shall be one manner of law among you, to
ye stranger as to one of your selves: for I am the LORD your God.

Moses told the children of Israel. And they brought him that had cursed, out
of ye host, and stoned him. Thus did the children of Israel as the LORD
commanded Moses.

The XXV. Chapter.
ANd the LORD talked with Moses Exo. 23. b
yt I shall give you, the land shall rest unto the LORD, so that thou sow thy
field six years, and six years cut ye vynes, and gather in the fruits. But
in the seventh year the lord shall have his Sabbath of rest for a Sabbath unto
the LORD, wherein thou shall not sow thy field ner cut thy vynes.

Look what grows of it self after thy harvest, thou shall not reap it. And
the grapes that grow without thy labor, shall thou not gather, for so much
as it is the year of the lands rest: Deuteronomy. 15. ^
But the rest of the land shall thou keep for this intent, that thou may
eat thereof, thy servant, thy maid, thy hyrelinge, thy gest, thy stranger
with the, thy catell, and the beestes in thy land. All the increase shall be
meat.

And thou shall nombre seven of these year land, for all them that dwell
therein: for it is the year of Iubilye. Eze. 46. c
Then shall every one among you come again to his possession and to his
kynred: for the fiftieth year is ye year of Iubilye. Ye shall not sow ner
reap it that grows of itself, ner gather the grapes, that grow without
labor. For the year of Iubilye shall be holy among you. But look what the
field bears, that shall ye eat. This is the year of Iubilye, wherein ye shall
come again every man to his own.

LORD your God. Wherefore do after my statutes, and keep my laws, so yt ye do
them that ye may dwell safe in the land. For the land shall give you her
fruit, so that ye shall have enough to eat, and dwell safe therein.

And if ye would say: What shall we eat in the seventh year, in as much as
we shall not sow, ner gather in our increase? I will send my blessing upon
you in the sixte year, that it shall bring forth fruit for three year: Psalm.
23. a
for the lord is mine. And ye are strangers and indwellers before me. And in
all your land shall ye give the land to lowse.

Nu. 36. c ^ere. 32 a Ruth. 4. a
When thy brother waxes poor, and sells ye his possession, and his next
kynszma^ comes to him, yt he may redeem it: then shall he redeem that his
brother sold. But when a man has none to redeem it, and ca^ get so much with
his hand as to redeem one part, then shall it be rekened how many years it
has been sold, and the remnaunt shall be restored unto him to whom he sold
it, yt he may come again to his possession. But if his hand can not get so
much, as to have one part again, the^ shall it yt he sold be still in the
hand of the byer until ye year of Iubilye: In ye same shall it go out, and
return to his owner again.

He that sells a dwellinge house within

The cities of the Levites, and the houses in the cities that their possession
is in, may all way be redeemed. Who so purchaceth ought of the Levites, shall
leave it in the year of Iubilye, whether it be house or cite that he has had
in possession. For the houses in the cities of the Levites are their possession
among the children of Israel. But the field before their cities shall not be
sold, for it is their own for ever.

When thy brother waxes poor, and falls (...)
usury of him, ner more then thou have given, but shall fear thy God, that thy
brother may live besides the. For thou shall not lend him ye money upon
usury, ner deliver him thy meat upon vauntage. For I am the LORD yor God,
which have brought you out of the lord of Egipte, to give you the land of
Canaan, and to be your God.

When thy brother waxes poor beside the, and sells himself unto the, (...)
thou shall not hold him as a bo^de man: but as an hired servant and as a
soiourner shall he be with the, and serve the until ye year of Iubilye. Then
shall he depart lowse from the, and his children with him, and shall return to
his own kindred, and to his fathers possession: for they are my servants,
whom I brought out of the land of Egipte. Therefore shall they not be sold like
bondmen. And thou shall not reign over them with cruelty, but shall fear thy
God. But if thou wylt have bo^de servants and maidens, thou shall bye them of
the Heithen, that are round about you: of the children of the soiourners and
strangers among you, and of their generacions with you, and that are borne in
your land, the same shall ye have for bond servants, and shall possess
them, and your children after you for an everlasting possession, these shall be
yor bondmen. (...)
But over your brethren the children of Israel, there shall none of you reign
over another with cruelty.



If there be yet many years unto ye year of Iubilye, then shall he (acordinge
to the same) give the more for his delyueraunce, thereafter as he is sold. If
there remain but few years unto the year of Iubilye, then shall he give
again thereafter for his redemption. And his wages from year to year shall he
reken withal, and thou shall not let the other reign cruelly over him in ye
sight. But if he bye not him self out after this manner, then shall he go out fre
in the year of Iubilye, and his children with him: for the children of Israel
are my servants, which I have brought out of the land of Egipte. I am the
LORD your God.

(...). 3. a
Ye shall make you no Idols ner image, and ye shall rear you up no piler, ner
set up any markstone in your land, to bow your selves thereto. For I am the
LORD your God. Keep my Sabbathes, and stand in awe of my Sanctuary. I am the
LORD.

The XXVI. Chapter.
(...). 28. a
the^ will I give you rain in due season, and ye land shall give her increase,
and the trees of ye field shall bring forth their fruit. And the threszshinge
time shall reach unto the wine harvest, and the wine harvest shall reach unto
the sowynge time. And ye shall eat yor bred in plenteousnes, and shall dwell
safe in your land. I will give peace in your land, so that ye shall sleep,
and no man shall make you afraid. I will ryd evil beestes out of your land,
and there shall no sword go through your land.

Ye shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall into ye sword before you.
(...). 23. c (...). 30. c
Five of you shall chase an hundredth: and an hundredth of you shall chase ten
thousand. For your enemies shall fall in to the sword before you. And I will
turn me unto you, and will cause Exo. 29. g 2. Cor. 6. c
I will have my dwelling among you, and my soul shall not refuse you. And I
will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my people. For I am
the LORD your God, which brought you out of the land of Egipte, that ye
should not be their bondmen. And I have broken the cepter of your yocke, and
caused you to go up right.

But if ye will not harken unto me, Deuteronomy. 28. b Mala. 2. a
ner do all these commandments, and will despise my statutes, and if your
souls refuse my laws, yt ye will not do all my commandments, and shall let
my covenant stand, then will I do this again unto you. I will vyset you
shortly with swellynges and fevers, which shall destroy ye eyes, and consume
away ye heart. Ye shall sow your sede in vain, and your enemies shall eat it
up.

And I will set my face against you, and Pro. 28. a
And ye shall fly, wha^ no man chaseth you.

But if ye will not harken unto me for all this, then will I make it yet seven
times more, to punysh you for your sins, that I may break ye pride of
your strength, and will make your heaven like iron, and your earth as brass:
and your travail and labor shall be but lost, so that your land shall not
give her increase, and the trees in the land shall not bring forth their fruit.

If ye walk yet against me, and will not harken unto me, then will I make it
yet seven times more, to punysh you because of your sins: and will send
wild beestes amo^

But if ye will not yet be reformed here withal, and will walk contrary unto
me, then will I walk contrary unto you also, and will punysh you yet seven
times for your sins. And I will bring upon you a sword of vengeance, which
shall avenge my Testament. And though ye gather you together in to your
cities, yet will I send the pestilence among you, and will deliver you in to
the hands of your enemies. For I will destroy your prouysion of bred, so yt
ten women shall bake your bred in one oven, and your bred shall be delivered
out by weight. Osc. 4. b Mich. 6. c
And when ye eat, ye shall not have enough.

4. Re. 6. f
so that ye shall eat the flesh of your sons and daughters. And I will
destroy your hye altares, and rote out your images, and will cast your
bodies upon the bodies of your Idols, and my soul shall abhor you. And
your cities will I make waist, and bring your churches to naught, and will
not smell your sweet odoures.

Thus will I make the land desolate, so that your enemies shall dwell therein,
and make it waist: but you will I scater among the Heythen, and draw out the
sword after you, so that your land shall be waist, and your cities desolate.



And as for them that remain of you, I will make them faynte hearted in the
land of their enemies, so that a shaking leaf shall chase them. And they
shall fly from it, as though a sword persecuted them, and shall fall noman
following upon them. And they shall fall one upon another (as it were before
the sword) and noman yet chacynge them. And ye shall not be so bold, as to
withstonde your enemies, and shall perish among the Heithen, and the land of
your enemies shall eat you up.

And they that are l^ft of you, shall pyne away in their myszdede, even in the
enemies land, and in the myszdedes of their fathers shall they consume away.
Then shall they knowledge their myszdedes, and the myszdedes of their fathers in
the trespace, wherewith they have trespaced against me, and walked contrary unto
me. Therefore will I also walk contrary unto the^, and will bring them in to
the enemies land.

Deuteronomy. 4. c
And I shall think upon my covenant with Jacob, and upon my covenant with
Isaac, and upon my covenant with Abraham, and will think upon the lord. As
for the land* when it shall be left of them, it shall rejoice in her Sabbathes,
even then, when it lies waist, and they tylle it not. And they shall make
atonement for their myszdedes, because they despised my laws, and their
souls refused my statutes. Morouer I have not so refused them, that they
should be in the enemies land: nether have I so utterly abhorred them, that I
would bring them to naught, and break my covenant with them: for I am ye LORD
their God. And for their sake I will remember (...)
my first covenant, wha^ I brought them out of ye land of Egipte in the sight
of the Heythen, yt I might be their God. Even I the LORD.

These are the ordinances, statutes and laws, which ye LORD made betwixt
him and the children of Israel upon mount Sinai, by the hand of Moses.

The XXVII. Chapter.
ANd the LORD talked with Moses, and LORD, so yt he pryse a soul, then shall
this be the valuacion: A man of twentye year old unto the three score year,
shall thou set at fifty silver Sycles, after the Sycle of the Sanctuary: but a
woman at thirty Sycles. If it be five year old unto twentye year, thou
shall set it at twentye Sycles, when it is a man child: (...)
but a woman at ten Sycles. If it be a month old unto five year, thou shall
set it at five Sycles of silver, when it is a ma^childe: but a woman at three
Silver Sycles. If he be three score year old and above, the^ shall thou set
him at fiftene Sicles wha^ it is a man a woman at te^ Sicles. If he be to poor
so to be set, the^ let him present himself to ye pressed, and ye pressed shall value
him. Nevertheless he shall value him, acordinge as ye hand of him that vowed, is
able to get. But if it be a be yt may be offered unto ye LORD, all yt is
offered unto ye LORD of soch, is holy: it shall not be altered ner changed, a
good for a bad, or a bad for a good. If any man change it, one be for
another, then shall they both be holy unto ye LORD. But if ye be be un
clean which may not be offered unto ye LORD, the^ shall it be set, before ye
pressed, and ye pressed shall value it, whether it be good or bad, and it shall
stand at the prestes valuynge. But if any man will bye it out, he shall give the
fifth part more, to that it was set at.

When any man sanctifies his house unto the LORD for ye Sanctuary, the pressed
shall value it, whether it be good or bad. And as the pressed valueth it, so shall
it stand. But if he yt sanctified it, will redeem it, he shall give ye fifth
part of silver thereto, above that it was set at: So shall it be his.

LORD, it shall be set acordinge to yt it bears. If it bear an Homer of
barlye, it shall be valued at fiftye Sycles of silver. But if he halowe his land
immediately from the year of Iubilye forth, then shall it be set acordinge to ye
value thereof. If he have hallowed it after the year of Iubilye, then shall the
pressed reke^ it, acordinge to ye years yt remain unto ye year of Iubilye, and
thereafter shall he set it the lower.

But if he yt sanctified the land, will redeem it again, then shall he give the
fifth part of silver thereto, above that it was set at: So shall it be his. If
he will not lowse it out, but sells it unto another, then shall he redeem it
no more: but the same land when it goes out fre in ye year of Iubilye, shall
be holy unto the LORD, as a dedicated field, and shall be the prestes
inheritance.

LORD a field, which he has bought, and is not his inheritance, then shall ye
pressed reken it, what it is worth unto the year of Iubilye, and the same day
shall he give the price that it is set at, unto the LORD for the Sanctuary.
But in ye year of Iubilye it shall return unto him that bought it, yt it may
be his inheritance in the land. All manner of prysinge shall be made acordinge
to the Sycle of the Sa^ctuary. One Sycle makes xx. Geras.

(...) 30. b ^^. g (...). 45. b (...). 15. c
The first borne among ye catell (which belongs unto the LORD) shall no man
Sanctify unto the LORD, whether it be ox or sheep, for it is the LORDS all
ready. But if there be any un clean thing upon the beast, the^ shall it be
lowsed out thereafter as it is worth, and the fifth part shall be given more
therro. If he will not redeem it, the^ let it be sold, as it is worth.

LORD, of all yt is his good, whether it be me^, catell or lord. For every
dedicated thing, is most holy unto ye LORD. There shall no dedicated thing of
man be bought out, but shall dye the death. All the tithes in the land, both of
the sede of the land, and of ye fruits of the trees, are the LORDS, and shall
be holy unto the LORD. But if any man will redeem his tithes, he shall give the
fifth part more thereto. And all the tithes of oxen and sheep, and that goes
under the rod, the same is an holy tithe unto the LORD. It shall not be axed
whether it be good or bad, nether shall it be changed. But if any man change
it, then both it and that it was changed withal, shall be holy, and not
redeemed.

These are the commandments, which ye LORD gave Moses in charge unto
children of Israel upon mount Sinai.

The end of the third book of Moses, called Leuiticus.
The fourth book of Moses, called Numerus.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I. The children of Israel are nombred and musterd out, as many as are
mete for the battle: The captains are ordained, and Leui appointed to the
service of the Tabernacle. Chap. II. The order and manner how the te^tes were
pitched, and how the children of Israel lay about the Tabernacle of wytnes.
Chap. III. The office of Leui, and of the sons of Aaron. Chap. IIII. The
office of the sons of Kahath, Gerson and Merari. Chap. V. What manner of
people were driven out of the host. The law of Gelousy of the man toward the
wife. Chap. VI. The law and ordinance concerning the Nazarees or absteyners.
The blessing of the Israelites. Chap. VII. The offerynges of the captains at
the dedicacio^ of the altar, after that the Tabernacle was set up. Chap. VIII.
Of the candilsticke, offerynges, purifienge, and altar of the Levites. Chap.
IX. Of the feast of Easter, and how the unclean should keep it. Of the cloud
upon the Tabernacle. Chap. X. The use of the silver trompettes, and how the
children of Israel brake up, and took their journey with Hobab Moses brother in
law. Chap. XI. The people are weery and vnpacie^t by the way, murmur against
Moses, desire flesh, and abhor the Manna The LORD gives them after their
lust, but punishes them sore. Chap. XII. Miriam and Aaron grudge against
Moses, and Miriam is smytten with Leprosy. Chap. XIII. The spies that were sent
in to the land of Canaan* come again, and put the people in fear. Chap.
XIIII. The people are impatient, weep, and murmur against Moses, Iosue and
Caleb give the land a good word, and comfort them. The LORD is angry, and
punysheth the people. Chap. XV. Of diverse offerynges, and how he was punyshed,
that gathered sticks upon the Sabbath. The people are commanded to make
gardes of remembrance upon their garments, to think upon the commandments
of the LORD. Chap. XVI. Of the vproure and insurreccion of Corah, Dathan and
Abyram, and their punishment. The people murmur Fourtene thousand and seven
hundredth dye in the plage. Chap. XVII* By the florishinge staff of Aaron, (...)
is declared, that the trybe of Leui and the presthode of Aaron is chosen of
God. Chap. XVIII. The office and mynistracion of Aaron* of the prestes and
Levites, and their duty. Chap. XIX. Of the reed cow that was brent, and how
the sprynklinge water was made of the aszshes of her. Chap. XX. Miriam dies at
Cades. The people chyde with Moses and Aaron for fault of water, the LORD
gives it them out of the hard stonye rock. Moses desires the king of Edom,
to let them go through his land. Aaron dies upon mount Hor. Chap. XXI. The
battaill between Israel and Arad the king of the Cananites. The people murmur,
and are plaged with the serpents. They win the victory of Og and Sihon.
Chap. XXII. Of Balac the king of the Moabites, and of Balaam the Soythsayer.
Chap. XXIII. Balaam is brought to curse the people of God. Chap. XXIIII. The
LORD turns Balaams curse in to a blessing and praise. Chap. XXV. The people
fall to whordome and Idolatrye with the women of Moab, and join themselves to
the service of Ball Peor. Four and twentye thousand are destroyed* Phineas in
his fervent zele slays a man and woman in their sin. Chap. XXVI. The people
are nombred again and musterd. Chap. XXVII. What inheritance the daughters
have, where there is no son. Joshua is made captain of the people in Moses
stead. Chap. XXVIII. Offeringes appointed for every time. Chap. XXIX. The feast
of the seventh month and the offerynges thereof. Chap. XXX. Of vows made by
me^ or women. Chap. XXXI. Israel wynneth the victory of the Madianites, and
deuydeth the spoil. Chap. XXXII. Ruben, Gad, and the half trybe of Manasse
have their inheritance appointed them on this side of Jordan. Chap. XXXIII. The
iourneys of the children of Israel are nombred. The people are commanded (when
they come in to the land of Canaan) to destroy all utterly. Chap. XXXIIII.
The deuydinge of the land of Canaan with the borders thereof, and what they be
that deuyde it. Chap. XXXV. The portion of the Levites. Fredome for soch as
commytte slaughter unawares. Diverse slaughters* Chap. XXXVI. The inheritance
of the tribe may not be mixte nor changed.
The first Chapter.
LORD spoke unto Moses in ye wilderness of Sinai, in the Tabernacle of
witness, the first day of the second month in the second year, wha^ they
were gone out of the land of Egipte, and said: Exo. ^0. b (...). 26. a
Take ye sum of the whole congregation of the children of Israel, after their
kynredes and their fathers houses, with the nombre of the names, all that are
males, head by head, from twentye year and above, as many as are able to go
forth into ye war in Israel. And ye shall nombre them acordinge to their
armies thou and Aaron, and of every trybe ye shall take unto you one captain
over his fathers house.

These are the names of the captains that shall stand with you. Of Ruben,
Elizur the son of Sedeur. Of Simeon, Selumiel the son of Zuri Sadai. Of
Judah, Nahasson the son of Aminadab. Of Isachar, Nathaneel the son of Zuar.
Of Zabulon, Eliab the son of Helon. Among the children of Joseph: Of
Ephraim, Elisama ye son of Amihud. Of Manasse, Gamaliel the son of Pedazur.
Of Ben Iamin, Abidam ye son of Gedeoni. Of Dan, Ahieser the son of Ammi
Sadai. Of Asser, Pagiel the son of Ochram. Of Gad, Eliasaph ye son of
Deguel. Of Nephthali, Ahira the son of Enan.

These are the awncient men of the congregation,

And Moses and Aaron took them (like as they are there named by name) and
gathered the whole congregation together also, ye first day of the second
month, and rekened the^ after their birth, acordinge to their kynreds and
fathers houses by their names, from twe^tye year and above, head by head, as
the LORD commanded Moses, and nombred them in the wyldernes of Sinai.

The children of Ruben Isreal's first son, their kynreds and generacions after
their fathers houses, in ye nombre of their names head by head, all yt were
males, from twentye year and above, and were able to go forth to the war,
were nombred to the trybe of Ruben, six and fourtye thousand, and five
hundredth.

The children of Simeon their kynreds and

The children of Gad their kynreds and generacions after their fathers houses
in ye nombre of the names, from twentye year and above, all that were able to
go forth to the war, were nombre to the trybe of Gad, five and fourtye
thousand, six hundredth and fifty.

The children of Judah their kynreds and generacions after their fathers houses
in ye nombre of the names, from twentye year and above, all that were able to
go forth to the war, were nombred to the trybe of Judah, four and seuentye
thousand, and six hundredth.



The children of Zabulon their kynreds and generacions after their fathers
houses in the nombre of the names from twentye year and above, all that were
able to go forth to the war, were nombred to the trybe of Zabulon, seven and
fiftye thousand and four hundredth.

Joseph's children of Ephraim, their kynreds and generacions after their fathers
houses in ye nombre of the names, from twe^tye year and above, all yt were
able to go forth to ye war, were no^bred to the trybe of Ephraim, fourtye
thousand and five hundredth.



The children of Ben Iamin their kynreds and generacions, after their fathers
houses, in the nombre of the names from twentye year and above, all that were
able to go forth to the war, were nombred to the trybe of Ben Iamin, five and
thirty thousand and four hundredth.

The children of Dan their kynreds and generacions after their fathers houses,
in the nombre of the names, from twentye years and above, all that were able
to go forth to the war, were nombred to the trybe of Dan, two and three score
thousand, and seven hundredth.



The children of Nephthali, their kynreds and generacions after their fathers
houses in the nombre of the names, from twentye year and above, all that were
able to go forth unto the war, were nombred to the trybe of Nephthali, three
and fifty thousand and four hundredth.

These are they whom Moses and Aaron nombred with ye twolue princes of Israel,
whereof every one was over ye house of their fathers. Exo. 12. f Number. 11.
And the sum of the children of Israel after their fathers houses, from
twentye year and above (what so ever was able to go forth to the war in
Israel) was six C. thousand, three thousand, five C. and fift^e. But the
Levites after the trybe of their fathers, were not nombred among them.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, and 1. Par. 14. ^
And they shall bear the Tabernacle and all the ordinance thereof, and shall
wait upon it, and shall pitch their tents round about it. And when men shall
go on their journey, the Levites shall take down ye Tabernacle. And when the
host pitch their te^tes, they shall set up the Tabernacle. And if a stranger
preasse nigh unto it, he shall dye. The children of Israel shall pitch their
tents, every one in his own army, and by the baner of his own company. But
the Levites shall pitch round about the Tabernacle of witness, that there
come no wrath upon ye congregation of the children of Israel: therefore shall the
Levites wait upon the Habitacion of witness. And the children of Israel did
all, as the LORD commanded Moses.

The II. Chapter.
ANd ye LORD spoke unto Moses and

On the East side shall Judah pitch with his banner and host, their captain
Nahasson the son of Aminadab. And his army in the sum, four and seventy
thousand and six hundredth. Next unto him shall the trybe of Isachar pitch,
their captain Nathaneel the son of Zuar: and his army in the sum, four
and fiftye thousand and four hundredth. The trybe of Zabulon also, their
captain Eliab the son of Helon: his army in the sum, seven and fifty
thousand and four hundredth.

So yt all they which belo^ge to ye host of Judah, be in the sum an C. six
and four score thousand, and four hundredth be longinge to their army, and
they shall go before.

C. Next unto him shall the trybe of Simeon pitch, their captain Selumiel ye
son of Zuri Sadai: and his army in ye sum, nine and fifty thousand, and
three hundredth. The trybe of Gad also, their captain Eliasaph ye son of
Deguel: and his army in the sum, five and fourtye thousand, six hundredth
and fifty. So that all they which belong to the host of Ruben, be in the
sum, an hundredth, one and fifty thousand, four hundredth and fiftye,
belonginge to their army. And they shall be the second in the journey.



On the West side shall lie ye pauylions and baner of Ephraim with their host:
their captain shall be Elisama son of Amihud, and his army in the sum,
fourtye thousand and five hundredth. Next unto him shall ye trybe of Manasse
pitch, their captain Gamaliel the son of Pedazur: his army in the sum,
two and thirty thousand and two hundredth. The trybe of Ben Iamin also, their
captain Abidan the son of Gedeoni: his army in the sum, five and thirty
thousand and four hundredth. So yt all they which belong to the host of
Ephraim, be in the sum, an hundredth thousand, eight thousand, and an
hundredth, belonginge to his army. And they shall be the third in the journey.

On the North side shall lie ye pauylions Ahieser ye son of Ammi Sadai, his
army in the sum, two and sixtye thousand and seven hundredth. Next unto him
shall the trybe of Asser pitche: their captain Pagiel ye son of Ochran, his
army in the sum, one and forty thousand, and five hundredth. The trybe of
Nephthali also, their captain Ahira the son of Enan: his army in the sum,
three and fiftye thousand and four hundredth. So yt all they which belong to
the host of Dan, be in the sum, an hundredth thousand, seven and fifty
thousand, and six hundredth. And they shall be the last in the journey with
their baners.

This is the sum of the children of Israel, after their fathers houses and
armies with their hoostes: even six hundredth thousand, and three thousand,
five hundredth and fifty. But ye Levites were not nombred in ye sum among
the children of Israel, (...). ^. g
as ye LORD commanded Moses. And ye children of Israel did all as the LORD
commanded Moses. And so they pitched under their baners, and took their
journey, every one in his kynred, acordinge to the house of their fathers.

The III. Chapter.
LORD spoke unto Moses at ye same time upon mount Sinai. And these are ye
names of the sons of Aron. (...). 10. a (...). 26. g
The firstborne, Nadab: then Abihu, Eleasar and Ithamar. These are ye names of
the sons of Aaron, ^eui. 8. a
which were anointed to be prestes, and their hands filled for ye presthode.
^^ui. 10. a
But Nadab and Abihu dyed before ye LORD, wha^ they offered strange fire
before ye LORD, in ye wilderness of Sinai, and had no sons. But Eleasar and
Ithamar executed ye prestes office with their father Aaron.

(...). 1^. b (...) 18. a Pa^. 10. b
And the LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: Bring hither the trybe of Leui, and
set them before Aaron the pressed, yt they may serve with him, and wait upon him
and upon the whole congregation before ye Tabernacle of witness, and execute
the service of the habitacion, and keep all the apparel of the Tabernacle of
witness, and wait upon the children of Israel, to mynistre in the service of
the habitacion.

(...). 3. f (...) 16. a Number. ^. f and ^. b
If another preasse thereto, he shall dye.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: Behold, I have taken the Levites
from among the children of Israel, for all the first borne that open the
Matrix among the children of Israel* so that the Levites shall be mine. Exodus 13.
For the firstborne are mine, sense ye time that I smo^e all the first borne in
ye land of Egipte, wha^ I sanctified unto me all the firstborne in Israel,
from me^ unto catell, that they should be mine. I the LORD.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses in

So Moses nombred them acordinge to the word of the LORD, as he had
commanded. And these were the children of Leui with their names: Gerson,
Kahath, Exodus 6.
Merari. The names of the children of Gerson in their kynreds, were: Libni and
Semei.

The children of Kahath in their kynreds were, Amram, Iezehar, Hebron and Vsiel.

The children of Merari in their kynreds, were Maheli and Musi. These are the
kynreds of Leui after their fathers houses.

These are ye kynreds of Gerson: The Libnites

These are the kynreds of Kahath: The Amramites, the Iezeharites, the
Hebronites, and Vsielites, all that were males of a month old and above, in
nombre eight thousand and six hundredth, waytinge upon the Tabernacle of the
Sanctuary, and shall pitch on the south side of ye Habitacion: Let Elisaphan the
son of Vsiel be their ruler. And

These are ye kynreds of Merari: The Mahelites and Musites, which were in
nombre six thousand and two hundredth, all that were males of a month old
and above: Let Zuriel ye son of Abihail be their ruler, and they shall pitche
upon the north side of the Habitacion. And their office shall be to keep the
bordes, and bars, and pilers, and sokettes of the Habitacion, and all the
apparel thereof and that serves thereto: ye pilers also about ye court, with
the sokettes, and nales, and cords.

Number. 3 b and. 16. a
If any other preasse thereto, he shall dye.

All the Levites in the sum, whom Moses and Aaron nombred after their
kynreds, Nu. 26. g
acordinge to the word of the LORD, all that were males, of a month old and
above, were two and twentye thousand.

And ye LORD said unto Moses: Nombre all the first borne, that are males
among the children of Israel, of a month old and above, and take the nombre
of their names. Number. 3. b and 8. b
And ye Levites shall thou take out unto me the LORD, for all ye first borne
of ye children of Israel, and the catell of the Levites for all the first borne
among the catell of ye children of Israel. And Moses nombred all the first
borne among the children of Israel, LORD commanded him. And in the nombre of
the names of all the first borne, that were males of a month old and above,
in their sum, there were found two and twentye thousand, two hundredth, and
three and seuentye.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: Take the Levites for all ye first
borne among the children of Israel, and the catell of ye Levites for their
catell, yt the Levites may be mine the LORDS. Leui. 27. a
But the redemption money of the two hundredth three and seuentye yt remain of
the first borne of the children of Israel, above the nombre of the Levites,
shall thou take, even five Sycles of every head, after the Sycle of the
Sanctuary (...). 50. b (...). 26. d (...)* 45. b
(one Sycle is worth twentye Geras) and the money yt remains over their
no^bre, shall thou give unto Aaron and his sons.

Then took Moses ye redemption money (that remained over above the nombre of
the Levites) from ye first borne of the children of Israel, even a thousand,
three hundredth, and five and three score Sycles, after ye Sycle of the Sanctuary,
and gave it unto Aaron and his sons, acordinge to the word of the LORD, as
the LORD commanded Moses.

The IIII. Chapter.
ANd the LORD spoke unto Moses and (...)
from thirty year and above until fiftye year, all that are mete for the
war, that they may do the work in the Tabernacle of witness. This shall be
the office of the children of Kahath in the Tabernacle of witness, which is
most holy.

When the host breaks up, Aaron and his sons shall go in, and take down
the veil, and cover the Arc of witness therewith, and lay the covering of
do skynnes upon it, and sprede a whole yalowe clothe above thereon, and put his
staves therein. And upon the show table they shall sprede a yalowe clothe also,
and set thereon the disshes, spones, flatpeces and pottes to pour out and in,
and the daily bred shall lie upon it, and they shall sprede a purple clothe
there over, and cover it with a covering of do skynnes, and put the staves of
it therein.

And they shall take a yalowe clothe, and cover the ca^dilsticke of light
therewith, and his lamps, with his snoffers and outquenchers, and all the oil
vessels that belong to the service, and about all this shall they put a
covering of do skynnes, and put it upon staves.

So shall they sprede a yalowe clothe over

Now when Aaron and his sons have done this, and have covered the Sanctuary
and all the orname^tes thereof, when the host breaks up, (...)
then shall the children of Kahath go in, that they may bear it, and the
Sanctuary shall they not touch, (...)
lest they dye. This is the charge of the children of Kahath in the Tabernacle
of witness.



And the LORD spoke unto Moses and Aaron, and said: Ye shall not destroy the
trybe of the kynred of the Kahathites among the Levites, but this shall ye do
with them, yt they may live and not dye, if they touch the most holy. Aaron
and his sons shall go in, and appoynte every one unto his office and charge.
But they shall not go in, presumptuously to look upon ye Sanctuary, lest they
die. And ye LORD spoke unto Moses and Aaron and said: Take the sum of the
children of Gerson also, after their fathers house and kynred, (...). 8. d
from thirtye year and above, until fiftye year, and appoynte them all yt
are mete for the war, to have an office in the Tabernacle of witness.





And Moses and Aaron with the captains of the congregation, nombred the LORD
by Moses.

The children of Gerson were nombred also in their kynreds and fathers houses
from thirty year and above until fyftie, all that were mete for the war,
to have office in ye Tabernacle of witness, and the sum was two thousand,
six hundredth and thirty. This is ye sum of the kindred of the children of
Gerson, which all had to do in the Tabernacle of witness, whom Moses and Aaron
nombred, acordinge to ye word of ye LORD.

The children of Merari were nombred also acordinge to their kynreds and
fathers LORD by Moses.

The sum of all the Levites, whom Moses and Aaron with the captains of
Israel told, after their kinreds and fathers houses, from thyrtie year and
above until fyftye, all that went in to do every one his office, and to bear
the burden in ye Tabernacle of witness, was eight thousand five hundredth and
four score, which were nombred acordinge to the word of the LORD by Moses,
every one to his office and charge* as the LORD commanded Moses.

The V. Chapter.
ANd ye LORD spoke unto Moses, and Leu. 13. ^
all ye lepers, and all that have yssues, and that are defiled upon the deed,
both men and women shall they putt out of the host, that they defyle not their
tents, wherein I dwell among them. And ye children of Israel did so, and put
them out of the host, as ye LORD had said unto Moses.

And the LORD talked with Moses, and said: Speak unto the children of Israel
and say unto them: When a man or woman does a sin to any body, and offends
there with against the LORD, then has that soul a trespace upon it. ^eui. 5. c
And they shall knowledge their sin, that they have done, and shall make
amends for their trespace, even with the whole sum, and put ye fifth part
more thereto, and give it unto him, against whom they have trespaced. But if
there be noman to make the amends unto for the offense yt he has trespaced
against him, then shall the reconcylynge be made unto the LORD for the pressed,
besides the ram of the attoneme^t, wherewith he shall be reconcyled.

LORD, and offer unto the pressed, shall be his. And who so haloweth enythinge,
it shall be his. And who so gives the pressed any thing, it shall be his also.

And the LORD talked with Moses, and said: Speak to the children of Israel;
and say unto them: When any man's wife goth aside, and trespaceth against him,
and any man lie with her fleshlye, and the thing be yet hyd from his eyes, and
is not come to light that she is defiled, and he can bring no witness against
her (for she was not taken therein) and the sprete of gelousye kyndleth him, so
that he is gelous over his wife: whether she be unclean or not unclean, then
shall he bring her unto the pressed, and bring an offering for her, even the
tenth part of an Epha of barlye meele, and shall pour no oil thereon, ner put
frankensence upon it: for it is an offering of gelousy, and an offeringe of
remembrance, that remembers sin.

LORD, and take of the Number. 19 b
holy water in an earthen vessel, and put of ye dust that is on the floor of
the habitacion, in to the water. And he shall set the wife before ye LORD, and
uncover her head, and the offeringe of remembrance which is an offeringe of
gelousy, shall he lay upon her hands. And the pressed shall have in his hand
bitter cursinge water, and shall conjure the wife, and say unto her: If no man
have lye^ with the, and thou have not gone aside from thy huszbande, to defyle
thy self, then shall not these bitter cursinge waters hurt the. But if thou
have gone aside from thy huszbande, so that thou art defiled, and some other
man has lain with the beside thy huszbande, then shall the pressed conjure the
wife with this curse, and shall say unto her: The LORD set the to a curse and
a coniuracion among thy people, so that the LORD make thy thye rotte, and thy
womb to berst. So go this cursed water in to thy body, that ye womb berst,
and thy thye rotte. And the wife shall say: Amen Amen.

So the pressed shall write this curse in a LORD, and offer it upon the altar:
namely, he shall take an handful of the meat offering for her remembrance,
and burn it upon the altar, and then give the wife the water to drink. And
wha^ she has dronken the water, if she be defiled and have trespaced against
her huszbande, then shall the cursinge water go in to her, and be so bitter,
that her womb shall berst, and her thye shall rotte, and the wife shall be a
curse among her people. But if the same wife be not defiled, but is clean,
then shall it do her no harm, so that she may be with child.

This is the law of gelousy, when a wife goes aside from her huszbande, and
is defiled: Or when ye sprete of gelousy kyndleth a man, so that he is gelous
over his wife, yt he bring her before the LORD, and that ye pressed do all with
her acordinge unto this law. And ye man shall be giltlesse of the sin, but the
wife shall bear her myszdede.

The VI. Chapter.
ANd the LORD talked with Moses, LORD, he shall absteyne from wine and strong
drink. (...)
Vyneger of wine and of strong drink shall he not drink, ner that is pressed
out of grapes: he shall nether eat fresh ner dry grapes, so long as his
abstinence endures. Morouer he shall eat nothing that is made of the vine
tree, from the wine cornels unto the hulle.

As long as the vow of his abstynence endures, there shall no rasoure come
upon his head, till the time be out which he absteyneth unto the LORD, for he
is holy.

And he shall let the here of his head grow, and stand bare openly. All the
time over yt he absteyneth unto the LORD, shall he go to no deed. Nether shall
he defyle himself at ye death of his father, of his mother, of his brother, or
of his sister. For the abstinence of his God is upon his head, and ye whole
time of his abstinence shall he be holy unto the LORD.

LORD, and he shall bring a lamb of a a year old for a trespace offering.
But ye days before shall be but lost, because his abstinence was defiled.

LORD, even an he lamb of a year old without blemysh for a burnt offeringe,
and a she lamb of a year old without blemysh for a syn offering, and a
ram with out blemish for an health offering, and a mau^de with vnleuended cakes
of fine flower myngled with oil, and sweet wafers anointed with oil, and
their meat offeringes and drynkofferynges.

And the pressed shall bring it before the LORD, and shall make his syn
offering and his burnt offering, and ye ram shall he make an health
offering unto the LORD, with ye maunde of the vnleuended bred. His meat
offering and drink offeringe shall he make also. And he shall shave the head
of the absteyners abstinence before the door of the Tabernacle of witness, and
shall take the head here of his abstinence, and cast it upon the fire that is
under ye health-offerynge.

LORD. This is holy for the pressed with the Wave breast, and Heueshulder. After
that, may the absteyner drink wine. This is the law of the absteyner, which
voweth his offeringe unto the LORD for his abstynence, besides that, which his
hand can get. As he has vowed, so shall he do acordinge to the law of his
abstinence.

And the LORD talked with Moses, and said: Speak unto Aaron and his sons,
and say: Thus shall ye say unto the children of Israel, when ye bless them.

Eccli. 3^. b
The LORD bless the, and keep the.

The LORD make his face to shine upon the, and be merciful unto the.

The LORD lift up his countenance upon the, and give the peace.

For they shall put my name upon the childr^^ of Israel, that I may bless them.

The VII. Chapter.
ANd when Moses had set up the Habitacion Exo. 40 b
and sanctified it with all the apparel thereof: and had anointed and hallowed
the altar also with all his vessels, Then offered the captains of Israel,
which were the rulers in their fathers houses.

For they were the captains among ye kynreds, and stood over the^ that were
nombred. And they brought their offerynges before the LORD, six covered
charettes, and twolue oxen, for every two captains a charett, and an ox for
every one, and brought them before the habitacion.

And the LORD said unto Moses: Take it of them, that it may serve for the
mynistracion of the Tabernacle of witness, and give it unto the Levites, unto
every one acordinge to his office. Then took Moses the charettes and oxen, and
gave them unto the Levites.

Two charettes and four oxen gave he unto ye children of Gerson acordinge to
their office: and four charettes and eight oxen gave he unto the children of
Merari acordinge to their office, under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron
the pressed.

But unto the children of Kahath he gave nothing, because Number. 4. b 2. Re. 6. b
they had an holy

And ye LORD said unto Moses: Let every captain bring his offering upon
his day to the dedicacion of the altar.

On the first day, Nahasson the son of Aminadab, of the trybe of Judah,
offered his g^fte. And his gift was a silver charger, worth an hundredth and
thyrtie Sycles: A silver boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of the
Sanctuary) both full of fine ^loure myngled with oil for a meat offeringe: And
a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of gold, full of incense: A bullock from
among the great catell, a ram, a lamb of a year old for a burnt
offering, an he goat for a syn offering: And for an health offering two
oxen, five rams, five he goats, and five lambs of a year old. This is the
gift of Nahasson the son of Aminadab.



On the third day, the captain of the children of Zabulon, Eliab the son
of Helon. His gift was a silver charger, worth an hundredth and thirty Sycles:
A silver boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sanctuary) both
full of fine flower myngled with oil for a meat offering:

On the fourth day, the captain of the children of Ruben, Elizur the son of
Sedeur. His gift was a silver charger, worth an hundredth and thirty Sycles: A
silver boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sanctuary) both
full of fine flower myngled with oil for a meat offering: And a golden spone,
worth ten Sycles of gold, full of incense: A bullock from among the great
catell, a ram, a lamb of a year old for a burnt offeringe, an he goat for
a syn offering: And for an health offering two oxen, five rams, five he
goats, and five lambs of a year old. This is the gift of Elizur the son
of Sedeur.

On the fifth day, the captain of ye children

On the sixte day, the captain of ye children of Gad, Eliasaph the son of
Deguel. His gift was a silver charger, worth an hundredth and thirty Sicles: A
silver boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of ye Sanctuary) both full
of fine flower myngled with oil for a meat offering: And a golden spone,
worth ten Sycles of gold, full of incense: A bullock from among ye great
catell, a ram, a lamb of a year old for a burnt offeringe, an he goat for
a synn offering: And for an health offering two oxen, five rams, five he
goats, and five lambs of a year old. This is the gift of Eliasaph the
son of Deguel.

On the seventh day the captain of the

On the eight day, the caytayne of the children of Manasse, Gamaliel the son
of Pedazur. His gift was a silver charger, worth an hundredth and thirty
Sycles: A silver boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of ye Sanctuary)
both full of fine flower myngled with oil for a meat offering: And a golden
spone, worth ten Sycles of gold, full of ince^se. A bullock from among the
great catell, a ram, a lamb of a year old for a burnt offering, an he
goat for a syn offering. And for an health offering two oxen, five rams,
five he goats, and five lambs of a year old. This is the gift of Gamaliel
the son of Pedazur.



On the tenth day, the captain of the children of Dan, Ahieser the son of
Ammi Sadai. His gift was a silver charger, worth an hundredth and thirty
Sycles: A silver boule, worth seventy Sycles (after the Sycle of the
Sa^ctuary) both full of fine flower myngled with oil for a meat offering: And
a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of gold, full of incense: A bullock from
among the great catell, a ram, a lamb of a year old for a burnt
offering, an he goat for a syn offering: And for an health offering two
oxen, five rams, five he goats, and five lambs of a year old. This is the
gift of Ahieser the son of Ammi Sadai.



On the twolfte day, the captain of the children of Nephtali, Ahira the son
of Enan. His gift was a silver charger, worth an hundredth and thirty Sycles:
A silver boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sanctuary) both
full of fine flower myngled with oil for a meat offering: And a golden spone,
worth ten Sycles of gold, full of incense: A bullock from among the great
catell, a ram, a lamb of a year old for a burnt offeringe, an he goat for
a synn offeringe: And for an health offeringe two oxen, five rams, five he
goats, and five lambs of a year old. This is the gift of Ahira the son
of Enan.

This is ye dedicacion of the altar, what

The sum of the catell for the burntofferinges, was twolue bullockes, twolue
rams, twolue la^bes of a year old with their meat offeringes: And twolue he
goats for synn offeringes. And the sum of the catell for the health
offeringes, was four and twe^tye oxen, three score rams, and three score he
goats, three score la^bes of a year old. This is the dedicacion of the
altar, after that it was anointed.

And when Moses went in to the Tabernacle of wytnes, Exo. ^^. c
yt he might be commoned withal, he herd the voice speaking unto him from of
the Mercy seat, which was upon the Arc of witness betwixt the two Cherubins,
from thence was he co^moned withal.

The VIII. Chapter.
ANd the LORD talked with Moses, and said: Speak to Aaron, and say unto
Exo* 25. d
When thou set up ye la^pes, thou shall set the^ so, that they may all
seven give light above upon ye candilsticke. And Aaron did so, and set ye
lamps upon ye candilsticke, as ye LORD commanded Moses. The work of ye
ca^dilsticke was of beaten gold, both ye shaft and flowers thereof: Acordynge
to ye vision that the LORD had showed Moses, even so made he the candelsticke.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: Take the Levites from among the
children of Israel, and cleanse them. But thus shall thou do with them, that
thou may cleanse them. Thou shall sprenkle purifienge water upon them, and
let a rasure go over their whole body, and wash their clothes, and then are
they clean. Then shall they take a young bullock, and his meat offering of
fine flower myngled with oil. And another young bullock shall thou take for a
synofferinge.

LORD. And the children of Israel shall lay their hands upon the Levites.
And Aaron shall wave ye Levites before the LORD for the children of Israel,
that they may mynistre in the service of the LORD.

And the Levites shall lay their hands upon the heedes of the bullockes, and
the one shall be made a synn offering, the other a burnt offeringe unto the
LORD, to make an atonement for the Levites. And thou shall set the Levites
before Aaron and his sons, and wave them before the LORD, and so shall thou
separate them from ye children of Israel, that they may be mine. The^ shall
they go in, that they may do service in the Tabernacle of witness. Thus shall
thou cleanse the^, and wave them: for they are my gift of the children of
Israel, Number. 3. b
and I have taken them unto me for all that opens the Matrix, namely for the
first borne of all the children of Israel.

Exo. 13. a Luc. 2. d
both of men and of catell, sens the time that I smote all the first borne in
the land of Egipte, and sanctified them unto myself, and took the Levites for
all the first borne among the children of Israel, and gave them for a gift
unto Aaron and his sons from among the children of Israel, yt they should do
the service of the children of Israel in the Tabernacle of witness, to make
attoneme^t for the children of Israel, that there be not a plage among the
children of Israel, if they will come nigh ye Sanctuary.

And Moses with Aaron and the whole congregation of the children of Israel, did
with the Levites all as the LORD had commanded Moses. And they purified the
Levites, and waszshed their clothes. And Aaron waued them before the LORD, and
made attoment for them, that they might be clean.

After that went they in, to do their office in the Tabernacle of witness
before Aaron and his sons: as the LORD commanded Moses concerning the
Levites, even so did they with them.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses and said: This is it that belongs unto the
Levites: (...)
From five and twentye year and above, shall they go in to the office of the
Tabernacle of witness. But from fyftie year forth, they shall cease from the
waitinge of the service thereof, and shall mynister no more, but shall appoynte
their brethren to wait and to serve in the Tabernacle of witness: but the
office shall not they execute. Thus shall thou do with the Levites in their
seruyces, that every one may wait upon his own charge.

The IX. Chapter.
ANnd the LORD spoke unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in ye first
month of the second year that they were departed out of the land of Egipte*
and said: (...)
Let the children of Israel keep Easter in his season, even upon the fourtene
day of this month at even, in his season shall they keep it, acordynge to all
the statutes and laws thereof. And Moses spoke to ye children of Israel, yt
they should keep Easter. And they kep Easter upon the fourtene day of the
first month at even in the wilderness of Sinai. Acordinge to all that the LORD
commanded Moses, even so did the children of Israel.

Then were there certain men defiled of a deed man, so that they could not
keep Easter upon that day: these came before Moses and Aaron the same day,
and said unto him: We are defiled of a deed man: wherefore should we be
despised, that we must not bring our gifts in his season among the children
of Israel? Moses said unto them: Stand still, I will hear what the LORD
commands you.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: Speak unto the children of Israel,
and (...)
or is among your kynszfolkes, yet shall he keep Easter, but in the second
month upon ye fourtene day at even, and they shall eat it with vnleuended
bred and sour sawse, and shall leave none of it until the morning, (...)
ner break any bone thereof, and shall keep it acordinge to all ye manner of ye
Easter.

But he that is clean, and not gone in a journey, and is negligent to keep the
Easter, the same soul shall be roted out from among his people: because he
brought not his gift to the LORD in his season, he shall bear his sin. And
when there dwells a stranger among you, he shall keep Easter also unto the
LORD, and shall hold it acordinge to ye ordinance and law of ye Easter. This
statute shall be unto you alike, to the stranger as to him that is borne in the
land.

^^o. c.^ ^. 8. b ^9. a
a cloud covered it upon the Tabernacle of witness, and at even there was a
symilitude of fire upon the Habitacion until the morning. So came it to pass
allwaye, yt the cloud covered it by day, and the symilitude of fire by night.
And when the cloud was taken up from the Habitacion, then the children of
Israel went on their journey. And look in what place the cloud abode, there
the children of Israel pitched their tents. Acordinge to the word of the
LORD took the children of Israel their journey, and acordinge to his word
pitched they their tents. So long as the cloud abode upon the Habitacion,
they lay still. And when the cloud tarried many days upon the Habitacion, the
children of Israel waited upon the LORD, and went not on their journey.

LORD, and after the word of the LORD went they on their journey. When the
cloud was there from the evening until the morning, and so was taken up,
then went they on their journey: and whether it was taken up by day or by
night, they iourneyed. But when it tarried upon the habitacion two days, or a
month, or a long season, then lay the children of Israel, and iourneyed not:
and so when it was taken up, they went on their journey. For acordinge to the
mouth of the LORD they lay, and after the mouth of the LORD they iourneyed,
so yt they kept the LORDS watch, acordinge to the word of the LORD by Moses.

The X. Chapter.
LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: Make the two trompettes of beaten silver,
that thou may use them, to call the congregation together, and when the
host shall break up. When they blow with both, then shall the whole
congregation gather them selves together unto the before the door of the
Tabernacle of witness. When they blow but with one, then the captains, the
rulers over the thousands in Israel shall gather them selves together unto the.
When ye trompe, then shall the hoostes that lie on the East side, break up. And
when ye trompe the second time, the hoostes that lie on the South side, shall
break up. For ye shall trompe, when they shall take their iourneys. Iudic. ^. d
But when ye congregation is to be gathered together, ye shall blow, and not
trompe. This blowinge with the trompettes shall the sons of Aaron the pressed do.
And it shall be yor law for ever among your posterities.

When ye go to a battayll in your land against your enemies yt vex you, ye
shall trompe with the trompettes, that ye may be remembered before the LORD
yor God, and delivered from your enemies.

Like wise when ye are merry, and in your LORD your God.

Upon the twentye day in the second month of the second year, arose the
cloud from the habitacion of witness. And the children of Israel went on
their journey out of the wilderness of Sinai, Number. 33. c Deuteronomy. 1. a
and the cloud abode in the wilderness of Paran, First brake up (acordinge to
the word of the LORD by Moses.) Namely, the baner of the host of Judah went
forth first with their armies, Number. 1* a
and over their host was Nahasson the son of Aminadab. And over the host of
the trybe of the children of Isachar was Nathaneel the son of Zuar. And over
the host of the trybe of the children of Zabulon was Eliab the son of Elon.
And the habitacion was taken down, Number. 4. a
and the children of Gerson and Merari bare the habitacion.

After that went the baner of the host

After that went the baner of the host of the children of Ephraim with their
armies, and over their host was Elisama the son of Amihud. And Gamaliel the
son of Pedazur over the host of the trybe of the children of Manasse. And
Abidan the son of Gedeoni over the host of the trybe of the children of Ben
Iamin.

After that went the baner of the host of the children of Dan with their
Armies, (and so were all the hoostes up) and Ahieser the son of Ammi Sadai
was over their host. And Pagiel ye son of Ochran, over the host of the
trybe of the children of Asser. And Ahira the son of Enan over the host of
the trybe of the children of Nephthali. Thus the children of Israel went forth
with their armies.

LORD said: I will give it you: Come now with us therefore, and we will do ye
best with the, for the LORD has promised good unto Israel. But he answered: I
will not go with you, but will go in to mine own land unto my kynred. He said:
Oh nay, leave us not: for thou know where is best for us to pytche in the
wilderness, and thou shall be our eye. And if thou go with us, look what
good the LORD does unto us, the same will we do unto the. So they departed from
the mount of the LORD three days journey, and the Ark of the LORD'S covenant
went before them those three days journey, to show the^ where they should
rest. And ye cloud of the LORD was over them in the day time, when they
went out of ye te^tes.

And when the Arc went forth, Moses said: Psalm. 67. a
Arise LORD, let thine enemies be scatered, and let them that hate the, fly
before the. And when it rested, he said: Come again O LORD unto the
multitude of the thousands of Israel.

The XI. Chapter.
LORD. Exo 16. a Deuteronomy. 9. d
And when the LORD herd it, his wrath waxed whote, and the fire of ye LORD
burnt among them, so yt it consumed the vttemost of ye host. The^ cried the
people unto Moses. And Moses prayed unto the LORD. So ye fire quenched. And
the place was called Tabera, because the fire of the LORD burnt among them.

Then the common sort of people yt was among them, fell a lustinge, and sat
and wept with the children of Israel, and said: Who will give us flesh to eat?
We remember the fish, the we ate in Egipte for naught, and Cucumbers, Melouns,
lekes, onyons, and garleke: But now is our soul dried away, our eyes se
nothing then the Manna.



The Manna was like Coria^der sede, and (...)
And the people ran here and there, and gathered it, and ground it in
Milles, and beat it in morters, and baked it in pa^nes, and made cakes of it,
and it had a taist like an oil cake. And when ye dew fell upon the te^tes in
the night, ye Manna fell therewith.

Now when Moses herd the people weep among their kynreds, every one in his
te^t door, then the wrath of the LORD waxed exceadinge whote. And it grieved
Moses also. And Moses said unto the LORD: Why vexest thou thy servant? And
why find

And the LORD said unto Moses: Gather (...)
seuentye men among the Elders of Israel, whom thou know yt they are the
Elders in ye people and officers over them, and bring them before the
Tabernacle of witness, and set them there with the: then will I come down, and
talk with the even there, and take of thy sprete that is upon the, and putt it
upon them, that they may bear the burden of the people with the, yt thou
bear not all alone.

And unto ye people thou shall say: Sa^ctifye yor selves against tomorow, (...)
yt ye may eat flesh: for your weeping is come into the ears of the LORD,
ye that say: Who shall give us flesh to eat? for we were well at ease in
Egipte. (...)
Therefore shall the LORD give you flesh to eat, not one day, not two, not
five, not ten, not twentye days long, but a month long, till it go out at
your noses, and till ye loathe it: even because ye have refused the LORD,
which is among you, and have wept before him, (...)
and said: Wherefore went we out of Egipte?

(...)
and thou say: I will give you flesh to eat a month long. Shall the sheep
and oxen be slain to be enough for them? Or shall all the fishes of the sea be
gathered together, to be sufficient for them? The LORD said unto Moses: (...)
Is the LORDS hand shortened then? But now shall thou se, whether my words
shall be fulfilled in deed, or no?

And Moses went out, and told the people ye word of the LORD, and gathered
the seuentye men among the Eldest of the people, and set them round about
the Tabernacle. Then came the LORD down in a cloud, and spoke unto him, and
took of the sprete yt was upon him, and put it upon the seventy Elders. And
when the sprete rested upon them, they prophesied, and ceased not.

(...). 2. f (...). 14. a
would God, yt all the people of ye LORD could prophecy, and that ye LORD
would give them his sprete. So Moses and the Elders of Israel gat them to the
host.

LORD, (...). 16. c
and caused quayles to come from the sea, and scatred the^ over the host here
a days journey, there a days journey round about ye host, two cubytes hye
above ye earth. Then the people stood up all that day and all yt night, and
all the next day, and gathered quayles: and he that gathered the leest,
gathered ten Homers, and they killed them round about the host.

(...). 77. c
But while ye flesh was yet between their tethe, and or ever it was up, the
wrath of the LORD waxed whote among the people, (...)
and slew them with an exceadinge great slaughter. Therefore is the same place
called the graves of lust, because the voluptuous people were buried there.
From the lustgraues took the people their journey unto Hazeroth, and abode at
Hazeroth. Number. ^^. ^


The XII. Chapter.
ANd Miriam and Aaron spoke against Exo. 2. ^
which he had taken, Deu. 24. b
because he had taken a Morian to wife, and they said: Does the LORD speak
only through Moses? Speaks he not also by us? And the LORD herd it. Eccli.
45. a
But Moses was a very meke man, above all men upon earth. And haistely spoke
the LORD unto Moses, and to Aaron, and to Miriam: Go out ye three unto ye
Tabernacle of witness. And they went out all three.

Then came the LORD down in the cloudy piler, Psalm. 98. b
and stood in the door of the Tabernacle, and called Aaron and Miriam, and they
both went out. And he said: Hear my words: If any man be a prophet of the
LORD, unto him will I show my self in a vision, or will speak unto him in a
dream. But not so with my servant Moses, Heb. 3. a
which is faithful in all my house. Exo. 33. ^
Mouth to mouth speak I unto him, and he seyth the LORD in his fashion, not
through dark words or licknesses: Wherefore were ye not afraid then to speak
against my servant Moses?

And ye wrath of the LORD waxed whote 2. Pa. ^6. d
then was Miriam become leporus, as it were snow. And Aaron turned him unto
Miriam, and saw that she was leporous, and said unto Moses: Oh my lord, put
not the sin upon us, which we have foolishly committed and sinned, that she
be not as one that comes deed out of his mothers womb: It has eaten up half
her flesh already.

But Moses cried unto the LORD, and said: Oh God, heal her. The LORD said
unto Moses: If her father had spytte in her face, should she not be ashamed
seven days? Leu. 1^.1^
Let her be shut out of ye host seven days, after yt let her be received
again. So Miriam was shut out of the host seven days, and the people went
no farther, till Miriam was received again. Afterward departed the people
from Hazeroth, Number. 3^. c
and pitched in ye wilderness of Paran.

The XIII. Chapter.
ANd the LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: Deuteronomy. 1. d
Send forth men to spy out ye land of Canaan (which I will give unto ye
children of Israel) of every trybe of their fathers a man, and let them all be
soch as are captains among them. Moses sent the^ out of the wilderness of
Paran, acordinge to the word of the LORD, soch as were all heads among the
children of Israel, and these are their names:

Samma the son of Zacur, of the trybe of Ruben. Saphat the son of Hori, of
the trybe of Simeon. Caleb ye son of Iephune, of the trybe of Judah. Igeal the
son of Joseph, of the trybe of Isachar. Hosea the son of Nun, of ye trybe
of Ephraim. Palti the son of Raphu, of the trybe of Ben Iamin. Gadiel the
son of Sodi, of ye trybe of Zabulon. Gaddi the son of Susi, of the trybe of
Joseph of Manasse. Ammiel the son of Gemalli, of the trybe of Dan. Sethur ye
son of Michael, of the trybe of Asser. Nahebi the son of Vaphsi, of the
trybe of Nephtali. Guel the son of Machi, of the trybe of Gad. These are the
names of the men, whom Moses sent forth to spy out the land. As for Hosea the
son of Nun, Moses called him Joshua.



They went up, and spyed the land, from ye wilderness of Zin, until Rehob, as
me^ go unto Hemath. They went up also toward the south, and came unto Hebron,
where Ahiman was, and Sesai and Thalmai, the children of Enack (Hebron was
builded seven year before Zoan in Egipte.)

Deuteronomy. 1. ^
and caused two to bear it upon a staff, pomgranates also and fygges. The
place is called the river of Escol, because of the cluster of grapes, which the
children of Israel cut down there.

And when they had spyed out the land, they turned bake again after fourtye
days, and went, and came to Moses and Aaron, and to the whole congregation of
ye children of Israel in to ye wilderness of Paran, eue^ unto Cades, and
brought them word again, and to the whole congregation, how it stood, and let
them se the fruit of the land, and told them, and said: We came into ye
land, whither ye sent us, where it flows with milk and honey, and this is
the fruit thereof: saving that strong people dwell therein, and the cities are
exceadinge strong and great. And we saw the children of Enack there also.
The Amalechites dwell in the south country, the Hethites, and Iebusites and
Amorites dwell upon the mountains, but the Cananites dwell by the sea, and
about Iordane.

Howbeit Caleb stylled ye people that was (...)
We are not able to go up against that people, for they are to strong for us.
And of the land that they had searched, they brought up an evil report
among the children of Israel, and said: The land that we have gone through to
spy out, eats up the indwellers thereof: and all the people that we saw
therein, are men of great stature. We saw giauntes there also, ye giauntes as
the children of Enack. and we seemed in our sight as ye greshoppers, and so
did we in their sight.

The XIIII. Chapter.
THen the whole congregation took on, De^^* (...) Psalm. (...)
and the people wept yt night. And all the children of Israel murmured against
Moses and Aaron, and the whole congregation said unto them: Oh that we had
dyed in the land of Egipte, or that we might dye yet in this wilderness.
Wherefore brings the LORD us in to this land, that our wives should fall
through the sword, and over children be a pray? Is it not better, that we go
again in to Egipte? And they said one to another: Let us make a captain, and
go in to Egipte again.

But Moses and Aaron fell upon their faces before ye whole congregation of the
multitude of the children of Israel. (...). 46. b ^^ch. 2. f
And Joshua ye son of Nun, and Caleb ye son of Iephune (which also had spyed
out the land) rent their clothes, and spoke to the whole congregation of the
children of Israel: The land yt we have walked through to spy it out, is a
very good land. If the LORD have lust unto us, he shall bring us in to the
same land, and give it us, which is a land that flows with milk and honey.
But in any wise rebel not ye against the LORD, and ^eut. 10. a
fear not ye people of this land, for we will eat the^ up as bred. Their
defense is departed from them, ^om. ^. d
but the LORD is with us, be not ye afraid of them.

LORD in the Tabernacle of witness unto all the children of Israel, and the
LORD said vnMoses: How long shall this people blaspheme me? And how long will
it be, or they believe me, for all the tokens that I have showed among them? I
will smite them with pestilence and destroy the^, ^xo. 32. c
and will make of the a greater and mightier people then this is.

^eu. 9. d
But Moses said unto ye LORD: Then shall ye Egipcians hear it (for with thy
power have thou brought this people from among the^) so shall it be told the
inhabiters of this land also, which have herd, yt thou O LORD art among
this people, yt thou art seen from face to face, and that thy cloud stondeth
over them, ^xo. 13. d
and that thou go before them in the cloudy piler on the day time, and in
the fyrie piler on the night season. If thou should now slaye this people as
one man, then the Heythen that have herd so good report of the, ^xo. 32. c
should say: The LORD was not able to bring the people in to the land, that
he swear unto them, therefore has he slain them in the wyldernes.

LORD now be great, acordinge as thou have spoken and said: The LORD is of
long sufferaunce and of great mercy, and forgeueth sin and trespace, and
leaves no man innocent, and vysiteth the myszdede of the fathers upon the
children in to the third and fourth generation. O be gracious now unto the
sin of this people acordinge to thy great mercy, like as thou have forborne
this people also, ever from Egipte unto this place. And the LORD said: I have
forgiven it, as thou have said. But as truly as I live, all ye world shall be
full of my glory. Nu. 26. ^ Deuteronomy. 1. ^ and 2. c
For of all ye men that have seen my glory and my tokens, which I did in Egipte
and in the wilderness, and tempted me now ten times, and have not herkened
unto my voice, there shall not one se the land that I swear unto their
fathers: nether shall any of them that have blasphemed me, se it. Iosu. 14*
But my servant Caleb, because there is another manner sprete with him, and
because he has followed me, him will I bring in to the land, which he has
gone through, and his sede shall conquer it, and ye Amalechites also and the
Cananites, that dwell in the low countrees. Tomorow turn you, and get you to
the wilderness, in the way toward the reed see.

And ye LORD spoke unto Moses and Aaron, Nu. 32. b
As truly as I live (says ye LORD) I will do unto you, even as ye have
spoken in mine ears: Your carcases shall lie in this wilderness. And all ye
that Number. 1.
were nombred from twentye year and above, which have murmured against me,
shall not come in to the land (concerning the which I lift up my hand, yt I
would let you dwell therein) save Caleb ye son of Iephune, and Joshua the son
of Nun.

Your children, of whom ye said: Deuteronomy. 1. f
They shall be a spoil, them will I bring in, so yt they shall know the land,
which ye have refused. But ye with your carcases shall lie in this
wilderness, and yor children shall wander in this wilderness fourtye years,
and bear yor whordome, till yor carcases be waisted in the wilderness,
acordinge to the nombre of ye fourtye days, wherein ye spyed out the land.
Exe. 4. a
A day for a year, so yt fourtye LORD have said it, and will do it in deed
unto all this evil congregation, that have lift up themselves against me: In
this wilderness shall they be consumed, and there shall they dye.

So there dyed and were plaged before the LORD all the me^, 1. cor. 10. ^
whom Moses sent to spy out the land, and came again, and made the whole
congregation to murmur against it, because they brought up a myszreporte of the
land, that it was evil. But Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb ye son of
Iephune were left alive, of the men that went to spy out the land. And Moses
spoke these words unto all the children of Israel. The^ took the people great
sorrow.

^^ut. 1. ^
Lo, here are we, and will go up to the place, whereof the LORD has said: for
we have sinned. But Moses said: wherefore go ye on this manner beyond ye word
of the LORD? It shall not prospere with you: go not up (for ye LORD is not
among you) yt ye be not slain before yor enemies. For the Amalechites and
Cananites are there before you, and ye shall fall through ye sword, because ye
have turned yor selves from the LORD, and the LORD shall not be with you.

But they were blinded to go up to the top of the mountain: nevertheless the
Ark of the LORD'S covenant and Moses came not out of the hooste. Then came
down ye Amalechites and Cananites which dwelt upon that mountain, and smote
them and hewed them, even unto Horma.

The XV. Chapter.
LORD talked with Moses, and said: Speak to the children of Israel, and say
unto them: When ye come in to the land of your dwellinge, which I shall give
you, and will do sacrifice unto the LORD, whether it be a burnt offering, or
an offrynge for a special vow, or a frewyll offering, or your feast
offerynges, that ye may make a sweet sauoure unto the LORD, of oxen or of
sheep.

^euit. 2. a (...) ^. b
He yt will offer now his gift unto ye LORD, shall bring for the meat offeringe
a tenth deal of fine flower myngled with oil of the fourth part of an Hin,
and wine for ye drynk offering the fourth part of an Hin also: to the burnt
offeringe, or any other offeringe, when a lamb is offered. But wha^ there is a
ram offered, thou shall make the meat offering two tenth deals of fine
flower myngled with oil, of the third part of an Hin, and ye third part of
an Hin of wine also for a drynk offeringe: this shall thou offer for a sweet
savor unto the LORD.

LORD, thou shall bring to the ox, the meat offrynge, even three tenth deals
of fine flower mingled with half an Hin of oil, and half an Hin of wine for a
drynk offrynge. This is an offering of a sweet sauoure unto the LORD. Thus
shall thou do with an ox, with a ram, with a lamb, and with a goat.
Acordinge as the nombre of the offerynges is, thereafter shall the nombre of the
meat offerynges and drynk offerynges be also.

He that is one of your selves, shall do this, that he may offer a sacrifice
of a sweet sauoure unto the LORD. And if there dwell a stranger with you, or
is among your kynszfolkes, and will do an offering unto the LORD for a sweet
sauoure, the same shall do as ye do. Let there be one statute for the whole
congregation, both unto you and to the strangers. A perpetual statute shall it
be unto your posterities, that the stranger be eue^ as ye before ye LORD.
One law, and one ordinance shall be unto you and to the stranger that dwells
with you.

And the LORD talked with Moses, and said: Speak to the children of Israel,
and say unto them: When ye come in to the land, in to yt which I shall bring
you, (...)
so that ye eat the bred of the land, ye shall heue up an Heue offering unto
the LORD, namely, a cake of the firstlinges of your dowe shall ye give for an
Heue offering: (...)
as the Heue offering of the barn, even so shall ye give the firstlinges of
your dowe also unto the LORD, for an Heue offering among your posterities.

And when ye through ignorance over se (...)
which the LORD has spoken by Moses, and all yt the LORD has commanded you
by Moses (from the day that the LORD began to command for your
posterities) and the congregation do ought ignorauntly, the^ shall the whole
congregation offer a young bullock from among the great catell to a burnt
offering, for a sweet sauoure unto the LORD, with his meat offering and
drynk offering as the manner is, and an he goat for a syn offering. And so
shall the pressed make an atonement for the whole congregation of the children of
Israel, and it shall be forgeuen them: for it is an ignorance. And they shall
bring these their gifts for an offering unto the LORD, and their syn
offering before the LORD for their ignorance, and it shall be forgeuen the
whole congregation of the children of Israel, and the stranger also yt
dwells among you, for so much as all the people is in soch ignorance.

If one soul sin through ignorance, (...)
the same shall bring a she goat of a year old for a syn offering. And the
pressed shall make an atonement for soch an ignorant soul with the syn
offeringe for the ignorance before the LORD, that he may reconcyle him, and
it shall be forgeuen him. And it shall be one law, (that ye shall do for ye
ignorance) both unto him that is borne among the children of Israel, and to
the stranger that dwells among you.

(...)
But if a soul do ought presumptuously, whether he be one of your selves or a
stranger, he has despised the LORD: ye same soul shall be roted out from
among his people: because he has despised the word of the LORD, and has
left his commandment undone: that soul shall utterly perish, his sin
shall be upon him.



(...). ^4. c
And they put him in preson, for it was not declared what should be done unto
him. The LORD said unto Moses: The man shall dye the death, the whole
congregation shall stone him without the host. Then the whole congregation
brought him out of ye host, and stoned him that he dyed, as ye LORD
commanded Moses.

And ye LORD said unto Moses: Speak to the children of Israel, (...) 22 b
and say unto the^, yt they make them gardes upon ye quarters of their
garments among all yor posterities, and put yalowe rybandes upon the gardes
in ye quarters. And ye gardes shall serve you, yt ye may look upon the^, and
remember all the commandments of the LORD, and do them: that ye order not
your selves after ye meaning of your own heart, ner go awhorynge after your
own eyes. Therefore shall ye remember and do all my commandments, and be holy
unto your God. I am the LORD your God, which brought you out of the land of
Egipte, to be yor God. Even I the LORD your God.

The XVI. Chapter.
ANd Corah the son of Iezehar the Eccli. 4^. ^
with Dathan and Abiram the son of Eliab, and On the son of Peleth, ye
sons of Rube^, stood up against Moses, with certain men among the children
of Israel, two hundredth and fyftie captains of the congregation, councelers,
and famous men. And they gathered them selves against Moses and Aaron and said
unto them: Ye make to much a do, Exo. 19. ^
for all the congregation is holy every one, and the LORD is among them: Why
lift ye your selves up then above the congregation of the LORD?

When Moses herd yt, he fell upon his face, and said unto Corah, and to all
his company: Tomorow shall ye LORD show who is his, and who is holy to come
unto him. Who^ so ever he choseth, ye same shall come unto him. This do: Take ye
censors, thou Corah and all ye company, and do fire therein, and put incense
thereon tomorow before the LORD: then whom so ever the LORD choseth, the same
shall be holy. Ye make to much a do, ye children of Leui.

And Moses said unto Corah: Hear ye Number. ^. ^
yt ye God of Israel has separated you from ye multitude of Israel, yt ye
should come nigh him, to do the service of the dwelling place of the LORD, and
stand before the people to mynister unto them? He has caused the and all thy
brethren the children of Leui with the, to come nigh unto him: and now ye seek
the presthode also. Thou and all thy company conspyre against the LORD. What
is Aaron, that ye should murmur against him?

And Moses sent to call Datha^ and Abira^ ye sons of Eliab. But they said:
We will not come up. Is it to little yt thou have brought us out of ye land of
Egipte (yt flows with milk and honey) to kill us in ye wilderness: but thou
must reign over us also? How goodly well have thou brought us in to a land,
that flows with milk and honey, and given us feldes and vyniardes in
possession? Will thou put out these men's eyes? We will not come up.

Then was Moses very wroth, and said unto ye LORD: Turn ye not unto their
meatofferinges. LORD, thou, and they, and Aaron. And take every one his
censer, and put incense therein, and come before the LORD, every one with his
censer (that is two hundredth and fiftye censers) and both thou and Aaron take
either his censer.

And every one took his censer, and put fire therein, and laid incense thereon,
and came before the door of the Tabernacle of witness, and Moses and Aaron also.
And Corah gathered ye whole congregation against the^ before the door of the
Tabernacle of witness.

But ye glory of the LORD appeared before ye whole congregation. And ye LORD
spoke unto Moses and Aaron, and said: Separate your selves from this
congregation, yt I may shortly consume them. And they fell upon their faces,
and said: O God, thou God of the spretes of all flesh, if one man have sinned,
will thou therefore be wroth over the whole congregation? And the LORD spoke
unto Moses, and said: Speak to the congregation, and say: Come up from ye
dwelling of Corah, and Dathan, and Abiram.



And Moses said: Hereby shall ye know that the LORD has sent me, to do all
these works, and that I have not done them of mine own heart. If these men dye
the common death of all men, or be vysited as all men are vysited, then has not
the LORD sent me. But if the LORD make a new thing, and the earth open her
mouth, and swalowe them with all that they have, so yt they go down quycke in
to hell, the^ shall ye know, that the se men have blasphemed the LORD.



Deu. 11. a Nu 26. b Psalm. 10^. b
ye ground cloue asunder under the^, and the earth opened her wouth, and
swalowed the^, with their houses, and all the me^ yt were with Corah, and all their
substance, and they went down quycke in to the hell, with all that they had.

And the earth closed upon them, and so they perished from among ye
congregation. And all Israel yt were about the^, fled at ye cry of the^, for
they said: That ye earth swalowe not us also. Morouer the fire came out from
the LORD, and consumed the two hundredth and fyftye men, that offered the
incense.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: Speak to Eleasar ye son of Aaron
ye pressed, yt he take up ye censers out of ye burninge, and scater ye fire here
and there (For the censers of these sinners are hallowed through their souls) yt
they may be beaten in to thin plates, and fastened upon ye altar. For they
are offered before ye LORD, and hallowed: and they shall be a token unto ye
children of Israel.

And Eleasar the pressed took ye brazen censers LORD, yt it happen not unto him
as unto Corah and his company, acordynge as the LORD said unto him by Moses.

On the next morrow murmured ye whole congregation of ye children of Israel
against Moses and Aaron, and said: Ye have slain ye people of ye LORD. And
when the co^gregacio^ was gathered against Moses and Aaron, they turned the^
toward ye Tabernacle of witness And behold, the^ ye cloud covered ye
Tabernacle, and ye glory of ye LORD appeared. And Moses and Aaron went in
before ye Tabernacle of witness. And ye LORD spoke unto Moses and said: Get
you out of this congregation, I will shortly consume the^. And they fell upon
their faces. And Moses said unto Aaron: LORD, and the plage is bego^ne among
the people.

And Aaron did as Moses said, and ran in the myddest among ye congregation.
And behold, ye plage was bego^ne. And he burnt ince^se and made an attoneme^t
for the people, (...)
and stood between the deed and the living, and the plage ceased. But there
were fourtene thousand, and seven hundredth deed in the plage, besides them
that dyed about the business of Corah. And Aaron came again unto Moses
before the door of the Tabernacle of witness. And the plage ceased.

The XVII. Chapter.
ANd ye LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: take of the^ twolue staves, of every
captain of his fathers house one, and write every man's name upon his staff.
But Aarons name shall thou write upon the staff of Leui. For every head of
their fathers house shall have a staff. And lay the^ in the Tabernacle of
witness, before the witness where I testify unto you. And look whom I shall
chose, his staff shall florishe, yt I may stylle the grudginges of the
children of Israel, which they grudge against you.

And Moses spoke unto the children of Israel, and all their captains gave him
twolue staves, every captain a staff, after ye house of their fathers. And
Aarons staff was among their staves also. And Moses laid the staves before
the LORD in the Tabernacle of witness.

(...) 45. c (...). a
Aaro^s rod of the house of Leui flourished, and brought forth blossoms, and
bare allmondes. And Moses brought forth all ye staves from ye LORD before all
ye children of Israel, that they might se it. And they took every man his
staff.

The LORD said unto Moses: Bring Aaro^s staff again before the witness,
yt it may be kept for a toke^ to the children of rebellion, that their
murmuringes may cease from, lest they dye.

Moses did as ye LORD commanded him. And ye children of Israel said unto
Moses: Behold, we consume away, we are destroyed, and perish. Who so comes
nigh ye dwelling place of ye LORD, he dies. Shall we the^ utterly consume
away?

The XVIII. Chap.
LORD said unto Aaron: Thou and thy sons, and thy fathers house with the shall
bear the myszdede of ye Sa^ctuary: and thou and thy sons with the, shall bear
the myszdede of yor presthode. (...)
But thy brethren of the trybe of Leui ye father, shall come nigh the, and be
joined unto the, that they may mynistre unto ye. But thou and thy sons with
the, shall mynistre before ye Tabernacle of witness. And they shall wait upon
ye service and upon ye service of the whole Tabernacle. But nigh unto the
vessels of ye Sa^ctuary and to the altar, shall they not come, yt both they
and ye dye not: howbeit they shall be joined unto the, to wait upon the
mynistracion in the Tabernacle of witness, in all the service of the
Tabernacle. And there shall no stranger come nigh unto you.

Therefore wait now upon the service of the Sanctuary, and upon the service of
the altar, that there come no more wrath upon the children of Israel. For lo,
I have taken yor brethren the Levites from among the children of Israel, to be
your gift, for a present unto ye LORD, to do ye service in ye Tabernacle of
witness. As for ye, and yi sons with the,

And the LORD said unto Aaron: behold, I have given the my Heue offerynges:
And all that the children of Israel halowe, have I given unto the, and to thy
sons for a perpetual duty. This shall thou have of the most holy things
that they offer. All their gifts with all their meat offeringes, and with all
their syn offerynges, and with all their trespace offerynges, that they give me,
the same shall be most holy unto the and ye sons. In the most holy place shall
thou eat it. All that are males shall eat thereof: For it shall be holy unto
the.

The Heue offering of their gifts in all Leu. 7. d
and to thy sons, and to thy daughters for a perpetual duty. Who so is
clean in thy house, shall eat thereof. All the fat of the oil, and a^ ye fat
of the wine and corn of their firstlinges, that they give unto the LORD, have
I given unto ye. The first fruits of all that is in their land, which they
bring unto the LORD, shall be thine. Who so ever is clean in thine house,
shall eat thereof.

All dedicate things in Israel shall be thine. All that breaks the Matrix
among all flesh, which they bring unto the LORD, whether it be man or be,
shall be thine. But so, that thou cause the firstborne of man to be redeemed, and
that thou cause the first borne of unclean beestes to be redeemed also (They
shall redeem it when it is a month old, and shall give it lowse for money,
even for five Sycles, after the Sycle of the Sanctuary, Exo. ^0. b Leu. 27. d
Eze. 45. ^
which Sycle is worth twentye Geras.)

But the first fruits of an ox, or lamb, or goat shall thou not cause to be
redeemed for they are holy. Their blood shall thou sprenkle upon the altar,
and their fat shall thou burn for an offering of a sweet sauoure unto ye
LORD. Their flesh shall be thine, like as ye Wauebrest and ye right shulder is
thine also. All the Heue offeringes that ye children of Israel halowe unto ye
LORD, have I given unto the, and to thy sons, and to thy daughters with the
for a perpetual dewtie. This shall be a salted covenant for ever before ye
LORD, unto the and thy sede with the.

And the LORD said unto Aaron: Thou shall inheret nothing in their land,
Deuteronomy. 18. a ^ze. 44. d
ner have any porcio^ among them: for I am ye portion, and thine enheritaunce
among the children Ios. 13. b
And they shall inheret none inheritance among the children of Israel. For ye
tithes of the children of Israel, which they Heue unto ye LORD, have I given
unto the Levites for an heretage. Therefore have I said unto them, that they
shall inheret no inheritance among the children of Israel.

And ye LORD talked with Moses, and said: Speak to the Levites, and say unto
them: Wha^ ye take of ye children of Israel ye tithes, yt I have given you of
the^ for yor inheritance, ye shall take an Heue offeringe of the same unto the
LORD, even the tenth of the tithe. And the same yor Heue offering shall ye
reken, as though ye gave corn out of the barn, and fulness out of the
wynepresse.

LORD of all yor tithes, which ye take of the children of Israel, yt ye may
give the same Heue offering of ye LORD, unto Aaron ye pressed. And all yt ye
give of ye tithes, and halowe unto ye LORD for a gift, ye same shall be his
of the best. And say thou unto them: When ye thus Heue up ye fat thereof, it
shall be rekened unto the Levites as the increace of the barn, and as the
increace of the wine press. And ye may eat it in all places, ye and yor
children: for it is your reward for your service in the Tabernacle of
witness: and ye shall not lade sin upon you in the same, when ye Heue the fat
thereof, and vnhalowe not the hallowed things of the children of Israel, and ye
shall not dye.

The XIX. Chapter.
ANd the LORD spoke unto Moses and LORD has commanded, and said: Speak
unto ye children of Israel, yt they bring unto ye a reed cow with out spot,
wherein is no blemysh, and upon who^ there came never yock: and ye shall give her
unto Eleasar the pressed, (...)
which shall bring her without the hooste, and cause her to be slain there
before him.

And Eleasar ye pressed shall take of her blood with his finger, and sprenckle it
seuenty-met straight toward the door of the Tabernacle of witness, (...)
and cause the cow to be burnt before him, both her szkynne and her flesh, and
her blood also with her donge. And the pressed shall take Ceder wodd and ysope,
and purple woll, and cast it upon the cow as she burns, and he shall wash his
clothes, and bathe his body with water, and the^ go in to the host, and be
unclean until ye eue^.

And he that burnt her, shall wash his clothes (...)
aszshes of ye cow, and pour them without the host in a clean place, that
they may be kept there, for sprenklinge water to the congregation of the
children of Israel, for it is a syn offeringe. And he that gathered up the
aszshes of the cow, shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even.
This shall be a perpetual law unto ye children of Israel, and to the strangers
that dwell among you.

Who so now touches a deed man, (...)
shall be unclean seven days: the same shall purify himself here with, on the
third day and on the seventh day, and then shall he be clean. And if he
puryfye not himself on the third day, and on the seventh day, the^ shall he
not be clean. But wha^ any man touches a deed person, and will not purify
himself, he defyleth the dwelling of the LORD, and the same soul shall be
roted out of Israel, because the sprenklinge water is not sprenkled upon him:
and he is unclean, as long as he lets not himself be pourged thereof.

This is the law. When a man dies in ye

So now for the unclean person, they shall take of ye aszshes of this burnt
syn offeringe, and put springinge water thereon in to a vessel, and a clean
man shall take (...)
ysope, and dip it in the water, and sprenkle it upon the tente, and upon all
the vessels, and all the souls that are therein. Likewise also upon him, yt
has touched a deed man's bone, or a slain person, or a deed body, or a grave.

And he that is clean, shall sprenkle upon the unclean, ye third day, and
the seventh day, and purifye him on ye seventh day. And he shall wash his
clothes, and bathe him self with water, and so at even he shall be clean.

LORD, and is not spre^kled with spre^klinge water, therefore is he unclean. And
this shall be a perpetual law unto the^. And he yt sprenkled with the spre^klinge
water, shall wash his clothes also. And who so ever touches the spre^klinge
water, shall be unclean until the even. (...) 17. d
And what so ever he touches, shall be unclean: and look what soul he
touches, shall be unclean until the even.

The XX. Chapter.
(...) 3. d (...). 1* f
and the people abode at Cades. And there dyed Miriam, and was buried there.
And the congregation had no water, and they gathered them selves together
against Moses and Aaron, and the people chode with Moses, and said: Would God
yt we had perished, (...)
when our brethren perished before the LORD. Wherefore have ye brought the
congregation of the LORD in to this wilderness, yt we should dye here with
our catell? And wherefore have ye brought us out of Egipte in to this place,
where men can not sow, where are nether fygges, ner vynes, ner pomgranates,
and where there is no water to drink?

And Moses and Aaron went from the congregation unto ye door of ye Tabernacle
of witness, and fell upon their faces. And the glory of the LORD appeared
unto them. And the LORD spoke unto Moses, (...). 17. b (...). 10. a
and said: Take the staff, and gather the congregation together, thou and thy
brother Aaron, and speak unto the rock before their eyes, and it shall give
his water. And thus shall thou provide the^ water out of the rock, and give
the congregation drink, and their catell also.

LORD, as he commanded him, and Moses and Aaron gathered the congregation
together before the rock, and said unto the^: Hear ye rebellions: Shall we
provide you water out of this rock? And Moses lift up his hand, and smote ye
rock with the staff two times. (...). 77. b
Then came ye water out abu^dantly, so yt the congregation drank, and their
catell also.

But the LORD said unto Moses and Aaron: ^eut. 1. f (...) 3^. a
Because ye believed me not, to sanctifye me^ before ye children of Israel, ye
shall not bring this congregation in to the land that I shall give the^. This
is ye water of strife, where the children of Israel strove with the LORD and he
was sanctified upon them.

And Moses sent messaungers from Cades unto ye king of ye Edomites: Iudic. 11.
c.
This word sends the ye Genesis 25. c
brother Israel: Thou know all ye travail that happened unto us, how that
our fathers went down in to Egipte, and how we have dwelt in Egipte a long
time, and how the Egipcians dealte evil with us and or fathers. And we cried
unto ye LORD Number. 21 c 1. Mac. 5. c
O let us go through thy land, we will not go through ye feldes ner vynyardes,
ner drink the water out of the fou^taynes. We will go the hye street, and turn
nether to ye right hand ner to ye left, till we be come past ye borders of
thy country.

But the Edomite answered him: Thou shall not go by me, Eze. ^5. a Abd. 1. b
or I will come against ye with ye sword. The children of Israel said unto
him: We will go ye common hye way, and if we or our catell drink of thy water,
Deuteronomy. 2. a
we will pay for it: we will do nothing, but pass through on foot only. But he
said: Thou shall not go through, And the Edomites came out against them with a
mighty people and a strong hand. Thus ye Edomites denied to grant Israel
passage through the borders of the land. And Israel turned away from them.

And the children of Israel brake up from Number. 33 d
and came with the whole congregation unto mount Hor. And the LORD spoke unto
Moses and Aaron at mount Hor hard upon the coasts of ye land of ye Edomites,
and said: Let Aaron be gathered unto his people: for he shall not come in to ye
land yt I have given unto ye children of Israel, because ye were dishobedient
unto my mouth at the water of strife. Take Aaron and Eleasar and his son, and
bring them up unto mount Hor, and strype Aaron out of his vestimentes, and put
the^ upon Eleasar his son and there shall Aaron be gathered (unto his people)
and dye.

Then did Moses as the LORD commanded him, and they went up unto Mount Hor
in ye sight of the whole congregation. And Moses took Aarons clothes, and put
the^ upon Eleasar his son. Deuteronomy. 10. b and 33. g
And Aaron dyed there, even above upon the mount. And Moses and Eleasar came
down from the mount. And when the whole congregation saw that Aaron was
away, they mourned for him thirty days through out the whole house of Israel.

The XXI. Chapter.
Nu. 33. d
that Israel came in by ye way yt the spies had found out, he fought against
Israel, and took some of them presoners. Then vowed Israel a vow unto ye
LORD, and said: If thou wylt give this people under my hand, I will utterly
destroy their cities. And the LORD herd ye voice of Israel, and delivered
them the Cananites, and they utterly destroyed them with their cities also. Iudic
1. d
And he called the place Horma.

Deuteronomy. 2. a
Then departed they fro mount Hor on ye way toward the reed see, that they
might go about the land of the Edomites. And the souls of the people faynted
by the way and they spoke against God and against Moses: Number 11. d
Wherefore have thou brought us out of the land of Egipte, to slaye us in the
wilderness? For here is nether bred ner water, and our soul lotheth this
light meat.

Than sent the LORD fyrie serpents among the people, which bote the people,
so that there dyed much people in Israel. The^ came they unto Moses, and said:
We have sinned, because we have spoken against the LORD and against the. Exodus
8. b 3. Re. 13. b Act. 8. c
Pray thou unto the LORD, that he take away the serpents from us. And Moses
prayed for the people.



Then said the LORD unto Moses: Make the a brazen serpente, and set it up for
a token. Who so ever is bytten, and looks upon it, shall live. Then made Moses
a serpent of brass, Ioh. 3. b 4. Re. 1^. a
and set it up for a token: and when a serpent had bytten any man, he beheld
the brazen serpente, and recovered.

And the children of Israel departed, and pitched in Oboth. Number. 33. e
And from Oboth they went on, and pitched in Igim by Abarim in the wilderness
over against Moab, on the Eastsyde. From thence departed they, and pitched by
the river of Sared. From th^^ce depa^ted they, and pitched on this side Arnon,
which is in the wilderness, and comes out of the coasts of the Amorites.
For Arnon is the border betwixt Moab and ye Amorites. Wherefore it is spoken in
the book LORD: And go with violence both on the river of Arnon, and on the
founteyne of the river, which boweth downewarde to dwell at Ar, and leans
thereon, to be the border of Moab.

And from thence they came to the well. This is the well, whereof the LORD
spoke unto Moses: gather the people together, I will give them water. Then sange
Israel this song, and they sange one after another over the well: This is the
well, that the princes dygged: the nobles among the people have dug it
through ye teacher and their staves.

And from this wilderness they went un to Mathana, and from Mathana unto
Nahaliel, and from Nahaliel to Bamoth, and from Bamoth unto the valley that
lies in ye field of Moab at the top of Pisga, and turns toward the
wilderness.

And Israel sent messaungers unto Siho^ the king of the Amorrites, and caused
to say unto him: Let me go through ye land, we will not turn in to ye feldes
ner in to the vynyardes: nether will we drink the water of the wells, ye hye
street will we go, till we be past the borders of thy country.

Howbeit Sihon would not give the children

Wherefore it is said in the proverb: Come unto Heszbon, let us build and
prepare ye cite of Sihon. For there is a fire gone out of Heszbon, and a flamme
from the cite of Sihon, which has consumed Ar of ye Mo^bites, and the citisens
of ye top of Arnon. Woe unto the Moab, thou people of Camos

And Moses sent out spies unto Iahesar, and they took the towns belonging
thereto, and conquered the Amorites yt were therein. And they turned, (...). 3. a
and went up the way toward Basan. Then Og the king of Basan went out
against them with all his people, to fight in Edrei. And ye LORD said unto
Moses: Fear him not, for I have given him with his land and people in to thy
hand, and thou shall do with him, as thou dyddest with Sihon the king of the
Amorites, which dwelt at Heszbon. And they smote him, and his sons, and all
his people (so yt there remained none) and conquered the land. Afterward
went ye children of Israel, and pitched in ye field of Moab beyond Iordane by
Jericho.

The XXII. Chapter.


And he sent out messaungers unto (...). 23. b (...). ^3. a
Balaam the son of Beor, which was an interpreter. (The same dwelt by the
water of the land of ye children of his people) that they should call him, and
he caused to say unto him: Behold, there is come out of Egipte, a people,
which covers ye face of ye earth, and lies over against me. Come now
therefore, and curse me this people, for they are to mighty for me, if
peradventure I might be able to smite them, and to drive them out of the land.
For I wot, that whom thou blessest, he is blessed: and whom thou cursest, he
is cursed.

LORD shall say unto me. So ye princes of ye Moabites abode with Balaam.

And God came unto Balaam, and said: What men are these, which are with ye?
Balaam said unto God: Balac ye son of Ziphor the king of the Moabites has
sent unto me: Behold, there is a people come out of Egipte, and covers the
face of the earth, come now therefore, and curse me the^, if peradventure I may
be able to fight with them, and to drive the^ out. But God said unto Balaam:
Go not with them, and curse not that people, for they are blessed.

Then rose Balaam up in the morning, LORD will no^ suffer me to go with you.

And the princes of ye Moabites gat the^ up, came to Balac, and said: Balaam
refuses to come with us. Then sent Balac yet a greater company of princes, and
more honorable the^ they. When they came to Balaam, they told him: Balac ye
son of Ziphor sends ye this word: Oh refuse not to come unto me, for I
will promote the unto hye honor, and will do what so ever thou say unto me.
Come I pray the, curse me this people.

Balaam answered, and said unto ye servants of Balac: Nu. 24. c
If Balac would give me his house full of silver and gold, yet could I not go
beyond ye word of the LORD my God, to do little or great. Nevertheless tarry
ye here this night, yt I may wete, what the LORD will say more unto me. Then
came God to Balaam by night, and said unto him: If the men are come to call
the, get the up then, and go with the^: but what I shall say unto the, that
shall thou do.



Then rose Balaam up in the morning, and LORD stood in the way, to
withsto^de him. But he rode upon his Ass, and two servants with him. And ye
Ass saw ye angel of ye LORD sto^dinge in ye way, and his sword drawn in
his hand. And ye Ass turned a side out of ye way, and went in to the field.
But Balaam smote her, yt she should go in the way.

Then stood the angel of the LORD in ye pathe by the vynyardes, where there
were walls on both the sides. And when ye Ass saw the angel of the LORD,
she wrenshed unto the wall, and thrust Balaams foot unto the wall. And he smote
her again. The^ went the angel of the LORD farther, and stood in a narow
place, where there was no way to turn, nether to the right hand ner to ye
left. And when the Ass saw the angel of the LORD, she fell down under
Balaam. Then was Balaams wrath furious, and smote the Ass with a staff.

LORD the mouth of ye Ass, and she said unto Balaam: What have I done unto
the, that thou have smytten me now three times? Balaam said unto ye Ass:
Because thou have mocked me. Oh yt I had a sword now in my hand, I would kill
the. The Ass said unto Balaam: Am not I thine Ass, which thou have rydden
upon in ye time unto this day? Was I ever wont to do so unto the? He said:
No.

Then opened the LORD the eyes of Balaam, yt he saw ye angel of the LORD
stondinge in ye way, and a drawn sword in his hand. And he enclyned him
self, and bowed down with his face. And the angel of the LORD said unto him:
Wherefore have thou smytte^ thine Ass now three times? Behold, I am come out to
resist ye, for yt way is froward, and contrary unto me. And ye Ass saw me,
and avoided fro me three times: or else if she had not turned aside fro me, I had
slain the, and saved the Ass alive.

LORD: I have sinned, for I wist not, that thou stodest in the way against
me. And now if it displease ye, I will turn again. The angel of ye LORD
said unto him: Go with the me^: but thou shall speak nothing else, then yt I
shall say unto ye. So Balaam went forth with the princes of Balac. When Balac
herd yt Balaam came, he went out to mete him (in the cite of the Moabit^s yt
lies on the coaste of Arnon, which is on ye vttemost border) and said unto
him: Did not I send for yt to call the? Wherefore came thou not then unto me?
Think thou yt I am not able to promote ye unto honor? Balaam answered him:
Lo, I am come unto ye Number. 23. c
But how can I say any thing else, the^ yt God puts in my mouth? yt I must
speak

So Balaam went with Balac, and they came unto the cite on the vttemost border
of his land. And Balac slew oxen and sheep, and sent for Balaam, and for the
p^^^ces that were with him.

The XXIII. Chapter.
ANd in the morning, Balac took Balaam, LORD will mete me, and call me, yt I
may tell the, what so ever he shows me. And he went his way, as he said.

And ye LORD met Balaam. And Balaam said unto him: Seven altares have I
prepared, and offered on every altar a bullock and a ram. The LORD put ye
word in Balaams mouth, and said: Go again unto Balac, and say on this wise.
And when he came again unto him, behold, he stood by his burnt offering,
with all ye princes of the Moabites.

Then took he up his parable, and said: Balac LORD defyeth not? For from ye
top of ye stonye rocks I se him, and from the hills I behold him. Behold,
ye people shall dwell by themselves, and shall not be rekened among the Heithe^.
Who can tell the dust of Jacob, and the nombre of the fourth part of Israel?
My soul die ye death of ye righteous, and my end be as the end of these.

The^ said Balac unto Balaam: What (...)
Must I not keep and speak yt, which the LORD puts in to me mouth? Balac
said unto him: Come with me yet unto another place, from whence thou may se
ye vttemost part of them, and not se them all, and curse me them there.

And he took him up to a fre place, eue^ unto the top of Pisga, and builded
seven altares, and offered on every altar a bullock and a ram. And he said
unto Balac: Stand so by thy burnt offrynge, while I go yonder. And the LORD
met Balaam, and put the word in his mouth, and said: Go again unto Bala^
and say on this wise. And when he came to him again, behold, he stood by his
burnt off^rynge with the princes of the Moabites. And Balac said unto him.
What has the LORD said?

And he took up his parable, and said: Rise up Balac and hear, mark my
testimony with thine ears thou son of Ziphor. ^or. 1. a (...) 10. b
God is not a man yt he should lie, ner a man's child yt any thing should
repent him. Should he say and not do? Should he speak and not make it good?
Behold, I am brought hither to bless, I bless, and can not go back there
fro. There is no weerynesse seen in Jacob, nether LORD his God is with him, and
the kings trompet is among the^. (...). 24. b
God has brought the^ out of Egipte, his strength is as of an Unicorn. For
there is no Sorcerye in Jacob, and no Soyth sayer in Israel. When the time
comes, it shall be said unto Jacob, and to Israel, what God does. Behold,
the people shall rise up as a Lioness, and heue up him self as a Lion. He shall
not lie down, till he eat of the pray, and drink the blood of the slain.

Then said Balac unto Balaam: Thou shall nether curse him ner bless him.
Balaam answered, and said unto Balac: Have I not told the: All yt the LORD
speaks, yt must I do? Balac said unto him: Oh come, I will bring yt to
another place, if it may happly please God, yt thou may curse the^ there.
And he brought him up to the top of mount Peor, yt boweth toward the
wilderness. And Balaam said unto Balac: Build me here seven altares, and
provide me seven bullockes and seven rams. Balac did as Balaam said, and
offered on every altar a bullock vnd a ram.

The XXIIII. Chapter.
LORD, that he should bless Israel, he went not (as he did before) to seek
witches, but set his face straight toward the wilderness, lift up his eyes,
and saw Israel, Number. 2. ^
how they lay acordinge to their trybes, and the sprete of God came upon him,
and he took up his parable, and said: Nu. ^4. c
Thus says Balaam the son of Beor: Thus says the man whose eyes are
opened: Thus says he which hears the words of God, which saw the vision
of ye Almighty: which fell down, and his eyes were opened.

How goodly are thy te^tes O Jacob, and thy habitacions O Israel? Even as the
broad valleys, as the gardens by the waters side, as ye tents which the LORD
has planted, and as the Ceder trees upon ye water. The water shall flow out of
his boket, and his sede shall be a great water. His king shall be Nu. 23. d
God has brought hi^ out of Egipte, his strength is as of an unicorn. He
shall eat up the Heithen his enemies, and grynde their bones to poulder, and
shute through them with his arowes. Ge. 49. ^
He has laid him down as a Lion and as a Lioness. Who will raise him up?
Blessed be he, yt blesses the: and cursed, that curses the.

The^ was Balac furious i^ wrath against Balaam, and smote his hands together,
and said unto him: I have called the, yt thou should curse mine enemies, and
behold, thou have blessed the^ now three times: and now get the hence to ye
place. I thought yt I would promote the unto honor, but the LORD has kept
the back from that worshipe.

Balaam answered him: Told not I thy Nu. 22. c
If Balac would give me his house full of silver and gold, yet could I not go
beyond the word of the LORD, to do either evil or good after mine own
heart: but what ye LORD speaks, that must I speak also. And now behold, for
so much as I go to my people, come therefore, I will show the what this people
shall do unto ye people after this time.

And he took up his parable, and said: Thus says Balaam the son of Beor:
Nu. ^4. ^
Thus says ye man, whose eyes are opened: Thus says he which hears the
words of God, and yt has the knowledge of ye highest, eue^ he yt saw ye vision
of ye Almighty, and fell down, and his eyes were opened: I shall se him, but
not now: I shall behold him, but not nie at hand. Matt. 2. ^
There shall a star come out of Jacob, and a cepter shall come up out of
Israel, 2. Re. ^. ^
and shall smite ye rulers of the Moabites, and overcome all the children of
Seth.

2. Re. ^.
Edom shall be his possession, and Seir

And wha^ he saw ye Amalechites, he took up his parable, and said: Exo. 17*
Amalec the first among the Heithe^, 1. Re. 15.
but at ye last thou shall perish utterly. And when he saw the Kenites, he
took up his parable, and said: Strong is ye dwellinge, and on a rock have
thou put thy nest, nevertheless thou shall be a burninge unto Rain, till Assure
take ye presoner.

And he took up his parable again, and said: Alas, who shall live, wha^ God
does this? And ships out of Citim shall subdue Assure and Eber. He him self
also shall perish utterly. And Balaam gat him up, and departed, and came again
unto his place, and Balac went his way also.

The XXV. Chapter.
^um. 33. ^
which called the people unto the sacrifice of their gods. And the people ate
and worshipped their gods, ^sal. 10^. d ^os. 22. d
and Israel submytted him self unto Baal Peor. Then the wrath of the LORD
waxed whote upon Israel, and he said unto Moses: Take all the rulers of the
people, and hang them up unto the LORD against ye Son, that the terryble
wrath of the LORD may be turned away from Israel. And Moses said unto the
judges of Israel: Every man slaye his captain, that have submytted them selves
unto Baal Peor.

^^ut. 23. c
and joined him self to a Madianitish woman, in ye sight of Moses and of the
whole congregation of ye children of Israel, which weped before the door of ye
Tabernacle of witness. When Phineas ye son of Eleasar the son of Aaron ye
pressed saw yt, Mac. ^. c
he rose up out of the congregation, and took a sword in his hand, and went
after the man of Israel in to the whore house, and thrust the^ through, both the
man of Israel and the woman, eue^ through the belly of her. Then ceased the
plage from the children of Israel, Cor. 10. a
and there were slain in the plage four and twentye thousand.

LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: Phineas the son of Eleasar the son of
Aaron ye pressed, ^cli. 45. c ^ac. ^. f
has turned my wrath away from the children of Israel through his gelousy for
my sake among them, yt I should not consume the children of Israel in my
gelousy. Wherefore saye^ behold, I give him my (...)
covenant of peace, and he shall have it, and his sede after him, eue^ the
covenant of an ever lasting presthode, because he was gelous for his Gods
sake, and made an atonement for the children of Israel.

The man of Israel that was slain with the Madianit^sh woman, was called Simri
the son of Salu, a captain of the house of the father of the Simeonites. The
Madianitish woman also that was slain, was called Coszbi, ye daughter of Zur,
which was a ruler of the people of a kynred among the Madianites.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: Vex the Madianites, and smite
them, (...)
for they have vexed you with their wyles, whereby they have bigyled you through
Peor, and through their sister Coszbi the daughter of a captain of ye
Madianites, which was slain in the day of the plage, for Peors sake, and the
plage came after.

The XXVI. Chapter.
ANd when the giltye blood was shed, LORD said unto Moses and unto Eleasar
ye son of Aaron ye pressed: Take the sum of the whole congregation of the
children of Israel from twentye year and above, after their fathers houses,
(...)
all yt are able to go forth to the war in Israel. And Moses and Eleasar the
pressed spoke unto them (in the field of the Moabites beside Iordane over against
Jericho) namely unto all the^ that were twentye year old and above, as the
LORD commanded Moses. And these are ye children of Israel, that came out of
Egipte.

Ruben ye first borne son of Israel. (...)
The childree^ of Ruben were, Hanoch: of whom comes ye kynred of the
Hanochites. Pallu^ of whom comes the kynred of the Palluites. Hesron: of whom
comes the kynred of the Hesronites. Carmi: of whom comes ye kynred of the
Carmites. These are the kynreds of the Rubenites. And the nombre of the^ was,
three and fourtye thousand, seven hundredth and thirtye. But the children of
Pallu were, Eliab. And the children of Eliab were Nemuel, and Dathan and Abiram.

This is yt Dathan and Abira^, those famous (...)
which stood up against Moses and Aaron in the company of Corah, when they rose
up against the LORD, and the earth opened her mouth, and swalowed the^ with
Corah, wha^ the company dyed, what time as the fire consumed two hundredth and
fiftye men, and they became a toke^. But the children of Corah dyed not.

The children of Simeon in their kynreds were, Nemuel: (...)
of who^ comes the kynred of ye Nemuelites. Iamin: of whom comes ye kynred
of ye Iaminites. Iachin: of who^ comes the kynred of the Iachinites. Sera: of
whom comes ye kynred of the Sarahites. Saul: of whom comes the kynred of
the Saulites. These are the kynreds of the Simeonites, two and xx.M. and two
hundredth.

The children of Gad in their kynreds were Zephon: of whom comes ye kynred of
ye Zephonites. Haggi: of whom comes the kynred of ye Haggites. Suni: of whom
comes ye kynred of ye Sunites. Aseni: of whom comes ye kynred of the
Asenites. Eri: of who^ comes the kynred of the Erinites. Arod: of whom
comes the kynred of the Arodites. Ariel: of whom comes ye kynred of ye
Arielites. These are the children of Gad, in their nombre fourtye thousand and
five C.

(...)
But ye children of Judah in their kynreds, were, Sela: of whom comes the
kynred of the Selanites. Phares: of whom comes the kynred of the Pharesites.
Serah: of whom comes ye kynred of ye Serahites. The children of Phares, were
Hesron: of whom comes the kynred of the Hesronites. Hamul: of whom comes
the kynred of the Hamulites. These are the kynreds of Judah, in their nombre,
six and seuentye thousand and five hundredth.

The children of Isachar in their kynreds were, Thola: of whom comes the
kynred of the Tholaites. Phuua: of whom comes ye kynred of the Phuuaites.
Iasub: of who^ comes the kynred of the Iasubites. Simron: of whom comes the
kynred of ye Simronites. These are the kynreds of Isachar, in nombre, four and
three score thousand, and three hundredth.

The children of Zabulon in their kynreds were, Sered, of whom comes the
kynred of ye Seredites. Elon: of whom comes ye kynred of ye Elonites.
Iahelel: of whom comes the kynred of the Iahelelites. These are ye kynreds of
Zabulon, in their no^bre, three score thousand, and five hundredth.

(...). 17. a
Machir: of whom comes the kynred of the Machirites. And Machir begat Gilead:
of whom comes ye kynred of ye Gileadites. And these are ye children of
Gilead, Hieser: of whom comes the kynred of ye Hieserites. Helech: of whom
comes ye kynred of the Helechites. Asriel: of whom comes the kynred of the
Asrielites. Siche^: of whom comes the kynred of ye Sichemites. Simida: of
who^ comes ye kynred of ye Simidites. Hepher: of whom comes ye kynred of ye
Hepherites. (...). ^7. a ^ar. 8. b
And Zelaphead was ye son of Hepher, and had no sons, but daughters, whose
names were: Mahela, Noa, Hagla, Milca and Thyrza. These are the kynreds of
Manasse, in their nombre, two and fiftye thousand and seven hundredth.

The children of Ephraim in their kynreds were, Suthelah: of whom comes ye
kynred of the Suthelahites. Becher: of whom comes ye kynred of the
Becherites. Thahan: of whom comes the kynred of the Thahanites. The children
of Suthelah were, Eran: of whom comes ye kynred of ye Eranites. These are ye
kynreds of the children of Ephraim, in their nombre, two and thirty thousand
and five hundredth. These are the children of Joseph in their kynreds.

The children of Ben Iamin in their kynreds

The children of Dan in their kynreds were, Suham: of whom comes the children
of ye Suhamites. These are ye kynreds of Dan in their generacions, and they
were all together in nombre, four and threscore thousand and four hundredth.

The children of Asser in their kynreds were, Iemna: of whom comes the kynred
of the Iemnites. Iesui: of whom comes the kynred of the Jesuits. Bria: of
whom comes the kynred of the Bryites. And ye children of Bria, were Heber: of
whom comes the kynred of the Hebrites. Melchiel: of who^ comes the kynred
of the Melchielites. And the daughter of Asser was called Sarah. These are the
kynreds of the children of Asser, in their nombre, three and fiftye thousand
and four hundredth.

The children of Nephtali in their kynreds

This is the sum of the children of Israel: six hundredth thousand, Eccli.
16. ^
a thousand seven hundredth and thirtye.

And ye LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: Unto these shall thou deuyde the
lord to enheritaunce, acordinge to the nombre of ye names. ^um. 32. f ^o^u.
11. d
To many shall thou give the more enheritaunce, and to few the less, unto
every one shall be given acordinge to their nombre: yet shall the land be
divided by lot. Acordinge to ye names of the trybes of their fathers shall they
enheret it: for after the lot shall thou deuyde their enheritaunce, both
betwixt many and few.

And this is the sum of the Levites in their kynreds. Gerson: of whom comes
the kynred of the Gersonites. Kahath: of who^ comes the kynred of the
Kahathites. Merari: of whom comes ye kynred of ye Merarites. These are ye
kynreds of Leui, the kynred of ye Libnites, ye kynred of ye Hebronites, ye
kynred of the Mahelites, ye kynred of the Musites, the kynred of the Corahites.

Exodus 6. c
which was borne him in Egipte: And unto Amram she bare Aaron and Moses, and
Miriam their sister. And unto Aaron were borne Nadab, Leui. 10. a Num^. 3 a
Abihu. Eleasar and Ithamar. As for Nadab and Abihu, they dyed, when they
offered strange fire before ye LORD. And the sum of the^ was three and
twentye thousand, Number. 3. f
all males from five months and above. For they were not nombred among the
children of Israel, for there was no enheritaunce given the^ among the
children of Israel.

This is ye sum of ye children of Israel, who^ Moses and Eleasar the pressed
nombred in the field of the Moabites beside Iordane over against Jericho:
Among whom there was not one of the sum of those children of Israel, Number. 1.
f
whom Moses and Aaron the pressed nombred in the wilderness of Sinai. For ye
LORD said unto the^, Nu. 14. c
yt they should dye in the wilderness. And there was not one of them left,
save Caleb the son of Iephune and Joshua the son of Nun.

The XXVII. Chapter.
Nu. 26 d Nu. 36. a ^osu. 17. a
Zelaphead ye son of Hepher ye son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the
son of Manasse, among the kynreds of Manasse the son Joseph (whose names
were, Mahela, Noa, Hagla, Milca, and Thirza) came and stood before Moses and
Eleasar the pressed, and before the rulers and the whole congregation, even
before the door of ye Tabernacle of witness, and said: Our father is deed in
the wilderness, and was not in the company of them yt rose up against ye LORD
in the congregation of Corah: Nu. 16. a
but dyed in his own sin, and had no sons. Wherefore should or fathers name
perish then among his kynred, though he have no son? Give us a possession
also am^^ge our fathers brethren.

Moses brought their cause before ye LORD. And the LORD said unto him: The
daughters of Zelaphead have spoken right. Thou shall give the^ a possession to
inhere^ among their fathers brethren, and shall turn their fathers
enheritaunce unto them. And say unto the children of Israel: When a man dies
and has no son, ye shall turn his enheritaunce unto his daughter. If he
have no daughter, ye shall give it unto his brethren. If he have no brethren, ye
shall give it unto his fathers brethren. If he have no fathers brethren, ye shall
give it unto his next kynszfolke which belo^ge unto him in his kynred, yt they
may possess it. This shall be an ordinance and a perpetual law unto the
children of Israel, as the LORD commanded Moses.

And the LORD said unto Moses: (...)
Get the up in to this mount Abarim, and behold the lord, which I shall give
unto the children of Israel. And when thou have seen it, thou shall be gathered
unto ye people (...)
as Aaron ye brother was gathered: for ye were dishobedient unto my word in
the wilderness of Zin, in ye strife of the congregation, when ye should have
sanctified me, through the water before them. (...)
This is the water of strife at Cades in the wilderness of Zin.

And Moses spoke unto the LORD and said: O let the LORD God of the spretes
of all flesh set a man over the congregation, which may go in and out before
them, and to lead the^ out and in, yt the congregation of the LORD be not as
the sheep without a shepherde.

And the LORD said unto Moses: (...)
Take unto the Joshua the son of Nun, which is a man in whom is the sprete,
and put thine hands upon him, and set him before Eleasar the pressed, and before
the whole congregation, and give him a charge in their sight, and beutyfye him
with thy bewty, that the whole congregation of the children of Israel may be
obedient unto him. And he shall stand before Eleasar the pressed, which shall a^e
council for him after the manner of the (...)
light, before the LORD. At the mouth of him shall both he and all the
children of Israel with him, and the whole congregation go in and out.

Moses did as the LORD commanded him, and took Joshua, and set him before
Eleasar the pressed, and before all the congregation, and (...)
laid his hands upon him, and gave him a charge, as the LORD said unto
Moses.

The XXVIII. Chapter.
LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: Command ye children of Israel, and say
unto the^: The offering of my bred which is my offering of the sweet sauoure,
shall ye keep in his due season, that ye may offer unto me. (...)
And say unto the^: These are the offerynges that ye shall offer unto the
LORD: Lambs of a year old which are without blemysh, every day two for a
daily burnt offering: the one lamb in the morning, the other at even. And
thereto a tenth deal of an Epha of fine flower for a meat offering, (...)
myngled with beaten oil of the fourth part of an Hin, this is a daily burnt
offering, which ye offered upon mount Sinai, for a sweet sauoure of a sacrifice
unto the LORD: And the drynk offeringe of the same, ye fourth part of an Hin
to a lamb, and this shall be poured in the Sanctuary for a gift unto the LORD.
The other lamb shall thou prepare at eue^ (like as the meat offering in the
morning) and the drynk offeringe thereof, for a sacrifice of a sweet sauoure
unto the LORD.



And on the first day of your months ye shall offer a burnt offering unto
ye LORD: two young bullockes, a ram, seven lambs of a year old without
blemysh, and allwaye three tenth deals of fine flower for a meat offering
myngled with oil unto every bullock: two tenth deals of fine flower for a
meat offering myngled with oil unto the ram: and a tenth deal of fine
flower for a meat offering myngled with oil unto every lamb. This is the
burnt offering of a sweet sauoure, a sacrifice unto ye LORD.

LORD, to the daily burnt offering with his drynk-offerynge.

^xo. 12. c ^eui. 23. a ^eut. 16. a
And on the fourtene day of the first month is the Easter unto the LORD, and
on the fyftene day of the same month is the feast. Seven days shall
vnleuended bred be eaten. The first day shall be an holy conuocacion: No servile
work shall ye do therein, and ye shall offer a burnt offering unto the LORD:
two young bullockes, one ram, Leu^. ^^. ^
seven la^bes of a year old without blemysh, with their meat offering: three
tenth deals of fine flower myngled with oil to either bullock, and two tenth
deals to the ram, and one tenth deal to every lamb among the seven
lambs. And an he goat for a syn offeringe, to make an atonement for you. And
these shall ye offer in the morning, besides the burnt offering, which is a
daily burnt offering. After this manner shall ye offer ye LORD, to the daily
burnt offering, and drynk offering also. And the seventh day shall be called
an holy conuocacion with you: no seruyle work shall ye do therein.

And the day of the first fruits (wha^ ye offer the meat offering of the
month unto ye LORD in your wekes) shall be an holy co^uocacion also: No work
of bondage shall ye do therein. And ye shall offer a burnt offering for a sweet
sauoure unto the LORD: two young bullockes, a ram, Leui. 23* ^
seven lambs of a year old, with their meat offerynges: three tenth deals of
fine flower myngled with oil to every bullock, two tenth deals to the ram,
and one tent deal to every lamb of the seven lambs. And an he goat to make
an atonement for you. This shall ye do, besides ye daily burnt offering with
his meat offering and his drynk offeringe. Without blemysh shall they be all.

The XXIX. Chapter.
ANd the first day of the seventh month Leui. 23* ^
No seruyle work shall ye do therein, for it is the day of your trompet
blowinge. And ye shall offer a burnt offeringe for a sweet sauoure unto the
LORD: a young bullock, a ram, seven lambs of a year old without blemish.
And their meat offeringes: three tenth deals of fine flower myngled with oil to
the bullock, two tenth deals to ye ra^me, and one tenth deal unto every
lamb of ye seven la^bes. An he goat also for a syn offeringe, to make an
atonement for you, beside ye burnt offeringe of ye month and his meat
offeringe, and beside ye daily burnt offering with his meat offering and with
their drink offeringes, acordinge to the manner of the^ for a sweet savor. This
is a sacrifice unto the LORD.

(...). 16. g
The tenth day of this seventh month shall be an holy conuocacion with you also,
and ye shall humble your souls, and do no seruyle work therein, but offer a
burnt offering LORD for a sweet sauoure: a young bullock, a ram, seven
lambs of a year old without blemish, with their meat offeringes: three tenth
deals of fine flower myngled with oil to the bullock, two tenth deals to
the ra^me, and one tenth deal to every one of the seven lambs. And an he
goat for a syn offeringe, beside the syn offeringe of the attoneme^t, and ye
daily burnt offeri^ge with his meat offeringe, and with his drynk offeringe.

(...). 2^. f
The fiftenth day of the seventh month shall be an holy co^uocacion with you, no
seruyle work shall ye do therein, and seven days shall ye keep a feast unto the
LORD. And ye shall offer the LORD a burnt offeringe for a sacrifice of a sweet
sauoure unto the LORD: thirtene young bullockes, two ra^mes, fourtene la^bes
of a year old without blemish, with their meat offerynges: three tenth deals

On the second day, twolue young bullockes, two rams, fourtene lambs of a
year old without blemysh with their meat offeges and drink offerynges to the
bullockes, to the rams and to the lambs in ye nombre of them acordinge to
the manner. And an he goat for a syn offeringe, beside the daily burnt
offeringe with his meat offeringe, and with his drynk offering.

On the third day, eleven bullockes, two rams, fourtene lambs of a year
old with out blemish, with their meat offeringes, and drynk offeringes to the
bullockes, to the rams and to the lambs in their nombre acordinge to the
manner. And an he goat for a syn offering, beside the daily burnt offeringe
with his meat offering and his drynk-offerynge.

On the fourth day, ten bullockes, two

On the sixte day, eight bullockes, two ra^mes, fourtene la^bes of a year
old without blemysh, with their meat offerynges and drynk offeringes to the
bullockes, to the rams, and to the lambs in their nombre acordinge to the
manner. And an he goat for a syn offeringe, beside the daily burnt offeringe
with his meat offering and his drynk offering.

On the seventh day, seven bullockes, two

On the eight day shall ye gather the people together, No seruyle work shall
ye do therein. And ye shall offer a burnt offering for a sacrifice of a sweet
sauoure unto ye LORD. A bullock, a ram, seven lambs of a year old
without blemysh, with their meatofferynges and drynk offerynges to ye bullock
to the ram, and to the lambs in their no^bre ^^ord^nge to the manner. And an
he goat for ^ s^n offeringe, beside the daily burntofferynge with his meat
offering and his drink offering.

These things shall ye do unto ye LORD in your feasts, beside that ye vow
and give of a frewyll for burnt offeringes, meatofferynges, drynk offerynges
and health offeringes. And Moses told the children of Israel all that the
LORD commanded him.

The XXX. Chapter.
ANd Moses spoke unto the rulers of LORD has commanded: (...)
If any man make a vow unto the LORD, or swear an ooth, so that he bind his
soul, he shall not break his word, but do all that is proceaded out of his
mouth.

If a damsel make a vow unto ye LORD, and bind hirself, while she is in her
fathers house, and unmarried, and her vow or bond that she makes over her
soul, comes to her fathers ears, and he hold his peace thereto, the^ all
her vows and bonds yt she has bound her self withal over her soul, shall
sto^de in effect. But if her father forbid her ye same day that he hears
it, the^ shall no vow ner bond that she has bound her self withal over her
soul, be of veil. And the LORD shall be merciful unto her, for so much as her
father forbad her.

LORD shall be gracious unto her.

The vow of a wyddowe, and of her yt is deuorced, all yt she byndeth her self
withal over her soul, shall stand in effect upon her.

LORD shall be gracious unto her. And all vows and oothes yt bind to humble ye
soul, may her huszba^de stablish or break, thus: If he hold his peace
thereto from one day to another, then stablisheth he all her vows and bonds,
yt she has upon her, because he held his peace, the same day yt he herd
the^. But if he disanulle the^ after yt he has herd the^, then shall he take
away her miszdede.

These are the statutes yt the LORD commanded Moses between a man and his
wife, and between the father and his daughter, while she is yet a damsel in
her fathers house.

The XXXI. Chapter.
LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: (...)
Avenge the children of Israel of the Madianites, yt thou may afterward be
gathered unto ye people. The^ spoke Moses unto the people, and said: Harness
some men among you to the war against the Madianites (yt they may avenge ye
LORD upon the Madianites) out of every trybe a thousand, yt out of every
trybe of Israel ye may send some to the battayll. And from among the
thousands of Israel they tok^ one thousand out of every tribe, even twolue
thousand prepared unto the battayll. And Moses sent them with Phineas the
sonn^ of Eleasar the pressed in to the battayll, and the holy vessels and ye
trompettes to blow in his hand.

And they fought against ye Madianites as ye LORD commanded Moses, and slew
all ye males, and the king of the Madianites slew they also among the other
that were slain namely, Eui, Rekem, Zur, Hur and Reba, the five kings of the
Madianites. And they 2. Pet. 2. ^
Balaam the son of Beor with the sword. And ye children of Israel took the
women of the Madianites presoners, and their children: all their catell, all
their substance, and all their goods spoiled they, and all their cities of
their dwellynges and castles burnt they with fire. And they took all ye spoils,
and all yt they could catch men and catell, and brought the^ unto Moses and
to Eleasar the pressed, and to ye congregation of the children of Israel (namely
ye presoners, and the catell yt were taken, and the good that was spoiled) in
to the host in the field of the Moabites, which lies beside Iordane over
against Jericho.

And Moses and Eleasar the pressed and all the captains of ye congregation, Genesis
14* ^
went out of the host to mete the^. And Moses was angry at the officers of
the host, which were captains over thousands and hu^dreds, yt came from the
battayll, and said unto the^: Number. 25 ^ Apo. ^. c
have not they (through Balaams busynes) turned away ye children of Israel to
sin against the LORD upon Peor, and their came a plage over the whole
congregation of ye LORD? Iud. ^1. b
Now therefore slaie all the males among ye children, and kill all ye women yt
have known men and lain with them. But all the women children yt have known no
me^ ner lien with them, keep those alive for your selves. And lodge ye without
the host, Nu. 19. b
all yt have slain any man, or touched the slain, that on the third and
seventh day ye may purify yor selves and those whom ye have taken presoners.
And all the clothes, and all stuff that is made of szkynnes, and all manner
furs, and all vessels of wod shall ye purify.

And Eleasar the pressed said unto ye captains LORD commanded Moses: Gold,
silver brass, iron, tynne and leed, and all that suffers the fire, shall ye
cause to go through the fire, and cleanse it, that it may be purified with ye
sprencklynge water. As for all soch as suffers not the fire, ye shall cause it
to go through ye water, and shall wash yor clothes upon the seventh day. and
the^ shall ye be clean. After that shall ye come in to the hooste.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: Deu 20. b and 22. b Ios. 8. f 2.
Mac. 8. c
Take the sum of the spoil of those that are taken, both of women and of
catell, thou and Eleasar the pressed, and the chief fathers of the congregation,
and give ye half unto those that took the war upon them, and went out to
the battayll, and ye other half to the congregation. And of the LORD one
soul of five hundredth, both of the women, oxen, Asses and sheep: Of their
half part shall thou take it, and give it unto Eleasar the pressed for an Heue
offering unto the LORD. But of the children of Isreal's half part, thou
shall take one head of fyftie, both of the women, oxen, Asses and sheep, and
of all the catell, and shall give them unto the Levites, that wait upon the
habitacio^ of the LORD.

And Moses and Eleasar the pressed did as the LORD commanded Moses. And the
spoil and pray which ye men of war had spoiled, was six hundredth thousand
and five and seuentye thousand sheep, two and seuentye thousand oxen, one and
three score thousand Asses: and the women yt had known no men ner lain with
them, were two and thirty thousand souls.

And the half part which belonged unto LORD had six hundredth, and five and
seuentye sheep. Item six and thirty thousand oxen: whereof the LORD had two
and seuentye. Item thirty thousand and five hundredth Asses: whereof the LORD
had one and three score. Item sixtene thousand souls of women: whereof the
LORD had two and thirty. And Moses gave this heue offering of the LORD unto
Eleasar the pressed, as the LORD commanded him.

As for the other half which Moses divided LORD, as ye LORD commanded Moses.

And the captains over ye thousands of the host, namely they that were over
thousands and over hundreds, came forth unto Moses, and said unto him: Thy
servants have taken ye sum of ye men of war, that were under our hand,
and there lacked not one: therefore bring we a present unto the LORD, what
every one has found of Jewels of gold, cheynes, bracelettes, rings,
earinges, and taches, that our souls may be reconcyled before the LORD.

And Moses and Eleasar ye pressed took of them ye gold of all manner ornaments.
And all the gold of the Heue offering that they Heued unto the LORD, was
sixtene thousand and seven hundredth and fyftye Sycles, of the captains over
thousands and hundreds. For look what every one had spoiled, that was his
own. And Moses with Eleasar the pressed took the gold of the captains over
thousands and hundreds, and brought it in to the Tabernacle of witness for a
remembrance of the children of Israel before the LORD.

The XXXII. Chapter.
THe children of Ruben and the children of Gad had an exceadinge great
multitude of catell, and saw the land of Iaeser and Gilead yt it was a mete
place for catell, and came and spoke unto Moses and to Eleasar the pressed, and
to the captains of the congregation: The land of Atroth, Dibon, Iaesar,
Nimra, Hesz^o^, Eleale, Seban, Nebo, and Beon, which the LORD smote before ye
congregation of Israel, is a mete land for catell, and thy servants have
many catell. And they said morouer: If we have found favor before the, the^
give thy servants this land in possession, and we will not go over Iordane.

Moses said unto them: Your brethren shall go to the war, and will ye tarry
here? Wherefore turn ye ye hertes of the children of Israel, that they should
not go over in to the land that the LORD shall give them* (...)
Thus did your fathers also, when I sent them out from Cades Bernea, to spy
out ye land. And when they were come up to ye river of Escol, and saw ye
land, they turned the hertes of the children of Israel, so yt they would not
into the land which ye LORD would have given them.

And the LORD was wroth at the same time, (...)
and swear, and said: These men yt are come out of Egipte, from twe^tye year
old and above, shall not se the land which I swear unto Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, because they have not wholly followed me: save Caleb ye son of Iephune
ye Renisite, and Joshua ye son of Nun: for they have wholly followed ye LORD.
So the LORD was wroth with* Israel, and let the^ wander in the wilderness
fourtye years, till all ye generation yt had done evil before the LORD, was
consumed.

LORD against Israel. For if ye turn you back from folowinge him, he shall
yet leave them more in the wilderness, and so shall ye destroy all this people.

Then stepte they to him, and said: we will but build shepefoldes here for
our sheep and ca^ell, and cities for or children: As for our selves, we will
go ready armed before the children of Israel, till we have brought them unto
their place: Our children shall remain in the fenced cities, because of ye
indwellers of the land. We will not turn home again, till the children of
Israel have taken every one his inheritance in possession: for we will not
inheret with them beyond Iordane: for or inheritance shall fall unto us upon
this side Iordane Eastwarde.

(...)
If ye will do this* that ye will harness your selves to the war before the
LORD, then go over Iordane before the LORD, who so ever is harnessed among
you, till he have driven out his enemies before his face, and until the land
be subdued before the LORD, then shall ye return, and be vngiltye before the
LORD, and before Israel, and so shall ye have this land in possession before
the LORD. But if ye will not do so, behold, ye shall offend against the
LORD, and be sure, that your sin shall find you out. Build cities now
therefore for your children, and shepefoldes and stalles for your sheep and
catell, and do as ye have spoken.

LORD, as my lord has said.

The^ Moses commanded Eleasar ye pressed and Joshua the son of Nun, and the
chief fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel, and said unto them: If
the children of Gad and the children of Ruben go over Iordane with you, all
prepared to fight before the LORD, Ios. 4. c
and when the land is subdued unto ye^, the^ give them the land of Gilead
(...) possession. But if they go not over with (...) harnes, then shall they
inheret with you in ye l^de of Canaa^.

The children of Gad and the children of Rube^ answered, and said: As ye LORD
has spoken unto ye servants, so will we do: we will go harnessed before the
LORD in to ye land of Canaan, and possess our enheritaunce on this side
Iordane.

So Moses gave unto ye children of Gad Deuteronomy. ^. b Ios. 22. ^. d
and to the half trybe of Manasse the son of Joseph, ye kingdom of Sihon
king of the Amorites and the kingdom of Og the king of Basan, the land with
the cities thereof in all ye coasts of ye country round about. The^ ye
children of Gad builded Dibon, Ataroth, Aroer, Atroth, Sophan, Iaeser, and
Iegabeha, Bethnimra, and Betharan, strong fenced cities, and sheep foldes. The
children of Ruben builded Heszbo^, Eleale, Kiriathaim, Nebo, Baal Meon, and
turned ye names, and Sibamas and gave names unto ye cities which they builded.
And ye children of Machir the son of Manasse went in to Gilead, and
conquered it, and drove out the Amorites yt were therein. Then Moses gave Gilead
unto Machir ye son of Manasse, and he dwelt therein. Iair ye son of Manasse
went and conquered the vyllagies thereof, and called them Hauoth Iair. Nobah
went, and conquered Kena^h, with the towns belonginge thereto, and called it
Nobah, after his own name.

The XXXIII. Chapter.
THese are ye iourneys of the children of Israel, which went out of ye land
of LORD. And these (namely) are the yourneyes of their outgoinge. Exodus 12. f
They departed from Raemses upon ye fiftene day of the first month (even the
morrow after the Easter) through an hye hand, so that all the Egipcians saw,
and buried then their first borne, whom the LORD had slain among them: for
the LORD executed judgment also upon their gods. When they were departed
from Raemses, they pitched in Sucoth. And from Sucoth they departed, and
pitched their tents in Etha^, which lies in ye Exodus 1^. d
From Etham they departed, and abode in the valley of Hiroth (which lies
toward Baal Zephon) and pitched over against Migdol. Exo. 14. a
From Hyroth they departed, Exo. 14. e
and went in through ye mids of the sea in to ye wyldernes, and went three
days yourney in the wilderness of Etham, and pit^hed in Marah. Exo. 15. d
From Marah they departed, and came unto Elim, wh^re there were twolue wells
of water, and seuentye palm trees, and and there they pitched* Exo. 16. a
From Elim they departed, and pitched by the reed see. From ye reed see they
departed, and pitched in the wilderness of Sin. From the wilderness of Sin they
departed, and pitched in Daphka. From Daphka they departed, and pitched in
Alus. From Alus they departed, and pitched in Raphidim, Exo. 17. a
where the people had no water to drink. From Raphidim they departed and
pitched in the wilderness of Sinai.

Exo. 19. a
Number. 10 b Number. 11. g
From the Lustgraues they departed, and pitched in Hazeroth. Nu. 12. b
From Hazeroth they departed, and pitched in Rithma. From Rithma they departed,
and pitched in Rimon Parez. From Rimon Parez they departed, and pitched in
Libna. From Libna they departed, and pitched in Rissa. From Rissa they
departed, and pitched in Kehelatha. From Kehelatha they departed, and pitched
in mount Sapher. From mount Sapher they departed, and pitched in Harada. From
Harada they departed, pitched in Makeheloth. From Makeheloth they departed, and
pitched in Tahath. From Tahath they departed, and pitched in Tharah. From
Tharah they departed, and pitched in Mitka. From Mitka they departed, and
pitched in Hasmona. From Hasmona they departed, and pitched in Mosseroth.

Deuteronomy. 10. b
From Mosseroth they departed, and pitched in Bne Iaekon. From Bne Iaekon they
departed, and pitched in Horgadgad. From Horgadgad they departed, and pitched
in Iathbatha. From Iathbatha they departed, and pitched in Abrona. From Abrona
they departed, and pitched in Ezeon gaber. From Ezeon gaber they departed, and
pitched in ye wilderness of Zin, which is Cades.

Nu. 20. a
From Cades they departed, and pitched at mount Hor, Nu. 20. d Deu. 10. b
on the border of the land of Edom. Then Aaron the pressed went up unto mount
Hor (acordynge to the commandment of the LORD) and died there in the
fourtyeth year, after yt the children of Israel departed out of the land of
Egipte, in the first day of the fifte month, wha^ he was an hundredth and three
and twentye year old. And Arad the king of the Cananites, which dwelt in the
south country of Canaa^ herd yt the children of Israel came.

And from mount Hor they departed, and pitched in Zalmona. From Zalmona they
departed, and pitched in Phimon. From Phimon they departed, (...)
and pitched in Oboth. From Oboth they departed, and pitched in Igim by Abarim
upon the border of the lord of ye Moabites. From Igim they departed, and
pitched in Dib^^ Gad. From Dibo^ Gad they departed, and pitched in Almon
Diblathama. From Almon Diblathama they departed and pitched in the mountains
of Abarim over against Nebo. From the mountains of Abarim they departed, and
pitched in ye field of the Moabites beside Io^dane over against Jericho. From
Beth haiesmoth unto the plain of Sitim lay they in the field of the Moabites.
(...)


And the LORD spoke unto Moses in the field of the Moabites, by Iordane over
against Jericho, and said: Speak to the children of Israel, and say unto
them: Wha^ ye are come over Iordane in the land of Canaan, (...)
ye shall drive out all the inhabiters before your face, and pluck down all
their pilers, and all their images of metal, and destroy all their (...)
hye places: that ye may so take the land in possession and dwell therein For
I have given you the land to enjoy it.

And the land shall ye deuyde out by lot among your kynreds. Unto those
that are many, shall ye deuyde the more: And unto them that are few, shall ye
deuyde the less. Even as the lot falls there unto every one, so shall he
have it, acordinge to the trybes of their fathers.

But if ye will not drive out the inhabiters of ye land before yor face, (...)
then they who^ ye suffer to remain, shall become thorns in your eyes, and
darts in your sides, and shall vex you in the land where ye dwell. Then will
it come to pass, that I shall do unto you even as I thought to do unto them.

The XXXIIII. Chapter.
ANnd the LORD spoke unto Moses, and go through Zimma: and that his out goinge
be from the South unto Cades Barnea, and reach unto Hazor Adar, and go through
Azmona, and stretch out from Azmona unto the river of Egipte, and that the end
thereof be at the great see.

But the West quarter shall be this: namely the great see, let yt be your
border toward the West.



And your East quarter shall ye compass from Hazor Enan unto Sephan, and let
the coaste go down from Sephan and Ribla on the East side of Ain. The^ let it
go down, and reach unto the side of the sea of Chinereth East ward, and come
down by Iordane, so yt the going out of it be the Salt see. Let this be your
land with the borders thereof round about.

LORD has commanded to give unto the nine trybes, and to the half trybe.
(...). 32. f
For the trybe of the children of Ruben after their fathers house, and the
trybe of the children of Gad acordinge to their fathers house, and the half
trybe of Manasse have received their portion. Thus the two trybes and the half
trybe have their enheritaunce already, on this side Iordane, over against
Jericho, Eastwarde.

And the LORD spoke unto Moses, and said: (...). 3. (...) 4. a
These are ye names of the men, which shall deuyde the land among you. Eleasar
the pressed, and Joshua the son of Nun. And the captain of every trybe shall ye
take, to deuyde the land.

LORD commanded, that they should deuyde the inheritance unto the children
of Israel in the land of Canaan.

The XXXV. Chapter.
ANd the LORD spoke unto Moses in Iosu. ^1. a
that they give unto ye Levites of the inheritance of their possession, cities
to dwell in. The suburbs also about the cities shall ye give unto the Levites,
that they may dwell in the cities, and in the suburbs to have their catell,
and substance, and all their beestes.

The suburbs which ye give unto ye Levites, shall reach from the wall of ye
cite outward, a M. cubits round about. Thus ye shall measure without the
cite on ye East side, two thousand cubits: and on ye South side, two
thousand cubits: and on ye West side, two thousand cubits: and on ye North
side, two thousand cubits, so yt the cite be in the mids. This shall be
their suburbs.

Iosu. 20. a
And among the cities which ye shall give

And the LORD talked with Moses and said: Speak to the children of Israel, and
say unto the^: Exo. 21. b Deuteronomy. 19. a
When ye come over Iordane in to ye land of Canaan, ye shall chose out cities
to be fre cities, yt who so co^mytteth slaughter vnawarres, may fly thither.
And soch fre cities shall be among you because of the auenger of blood, that he
which has committed slaughter, dye not, till he stand in judgment before the
congregation. And of these cities which ye shall give, there shall be six fre
cities. Three shall ye give on this side Iordane, and three in the land of Canaan.

These are the six fre cities, both for ye children as dwell among you, yt
who so ever has slain any soul vnawarres, may fly thither.

Exo. 21. b
He yt smyteth any man with an iron weapon, yt he dye, the same is a murthurer,
and shall dye the death. If he cast at him with a stone (wherewith any man may be
slain) yt he dye thereof, then is he a murthurer, and shall dye the death. If he
smite him with an handweapon of wodd (wherewith any man may be slain) that he
dye, then is he a murthurer, and shall dye the death. The auenger of blood shall
bring ye murthurer to death. When he fyndeth him, he shall slaye him. If he
thrust at him of hate, or cast ought at him with laienge of wait, or smite him
of envye with his hand, that he dye, then shall he that has slain him, dye the
death: for he is a murthurer. The auenger of blood shall bring him to death,
as soon as he fyndeth him.

Deu. 19. a
or hurl ought at him without any layenge of wait, or cast at him with a
stone (whereof a man may dye, and saw it not) so yt he dye, and is not his
enemy, nether thought him any evil, the^ shall the congregation judge between
him yt has committed ye slaughter, and the auenger of blood, in soch cases.
And the congregation shall deliver the deed slayer from the hand of ye auenger
of blood, and shall let him come again to the fre cite, whither he was fled:
and there shall he abide unto ye death of the hye pressed, which was anointed
with ye holy oil. But if the deed sleyer go out of the borders of his fre
cite, that he was fled unto, and the auenger of blood find him without ye
borders of his fre cite, and kill him, he shall not be gyltye of blood. For he
should have bydden in his fre cite until ye death of the hye pressed, and after
ye hye prestes death to come again unto the land of his enheritaunce. This
shall be a statute of the law unto you among your posterities in all your
dwellinges.

Deu. 17. b and 19. c
One witness shall not answer over a soul to death. And ye shall receive none
atonement over the soul of the deedslayer (for he is giltye of death) but he
shall dye the death. And ye shall receive none atonement of him, which is fled
to the fre cite, yt he should come again to dwell in the land, till the hye
pressed dye. And defyle not ye ye land wherein ye dwell. For who so is giltye of
blood, defyleth the land: and the land can not be reconcyled from the blood
that is shed therein, but only through the blood of him that shed it. Defyle
not ye the land that ye dwell in, wherein I dwell also. For I am the LORD,
which dwell among ye children of Israel.

The XXXVI. Chapter.
ANd ye chief fathers of the kynred of LORD has (...)
commanded, that ye should give the land by lot unto the children of Israel
to inheret. And thou my lord have commanded through the LORD, (...)
that the enheritaunce of or brother Zelaphead should be given unto his
daughters. Now if any

Moses charged the children of Israel (acordinge LORD) and said: The trybe of
the children of Joseph has said right. This is it that ye LORD commands
the daughters of Zelaphead, and says: (...)
Let them mary as they like best, only that they mary in ye kynred of the
trybe of their father, that the enheritaunce of the children of Israel fall not
from one trybe to another. For every one among the children of Israel shall
cleue to the enheritaunce of the trybe of his father: and every daughter that
possesses any enheritaunce among the trybes of the children of Israel, shall
be married unto one of the kynred of the trybe of her father: (...)
yt every one among the children of Israel may enjoy his fathers
enheritaunce, and that the enheritaunce fall not from one trybe to another: but

As the LORD commanded Moses, eue^ so did ye daughters of ye Zelaphead,
Mahela, Thirza, Hagla, Milca and Noa and were married unto their fathers
brothers sons, of ye kynred of the children of Manasse the son of Joseph.
So their enheritau^ce remained in the trybe of the kynred of their father.

These are the commandments and laws, which ye LORD commanded by Moses
unto the children of Israel, in the field of the Moabites by Iordane over
against Jericho.

The end of the fourth book of Moses, called Numerus.
The fyfth book of Moses, called Deuteronomion.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I. Moses puts the children of Israel in remembrance of the great
benefits that they have received of God, and rebukes them for their
unthankfulness and myszbeleue. Chap. II. They are commanded not to fight
against Seir, the Moabites and Ammonites. But Sihon the king of the Amorrites
is delivered unto them. Chap. III. Og the king of Basan is slain, the land
taken in, and destroyed* Ruben, Gad, and the half trybe of Manasse have their
enheritaunce on this side Iordane. Joshua is ordained in Moses stead. Chap.
IIII. After he has rehearsed unto them the benefits of God, he exorteth them
to keep his commandments, that they forget them not. Fredome for soch as
commit slaughter vnawarres. Chap. V. He rehearses the commandments of God
unto them again, and exorteth them earnestly to keep them. Chap. VI. He
tells them of the statutes and ordinances of God, exortinge them to keep
them, and to teach their children the same. Cahp. VII. They are commanded
(when they come in the lord of Canaan) to make no frendshipe ner to keep
company with the people thereof, but utterly to rote them out, and not to be
afraid of them. Chap. VIII. He exorteth them, not to forget the
commandments of God, but to remember what singular kindness God has showed
them, and from what troubles he has delivered them. And gives the land that
they are to go unto, a good report. Chap. IX. He warns them that they
ascrybe not the goodness that God has done for them, to their own power: for
if he had served them after their own deserving, he had destroyed them
euerychone. Chap. X. He proceadeth forth in tellinge them their wickedness, and
how they departed from Be Chap. XI. Consyderinge the multitude (roth. of the
benefits of God that they had received and the pleasant land that they were
to receive, he exorteth them again to keep Gods commandments. Chap. XII. He
descrybeth unto them again the statutes and ordinances of the LORD. Chap.
XIII. How men shall know false prophets and how they ought to be punyshed.
Chap. XIIII. For so much as they are a clean people of God, they are
commanded to avoyde the customs of the Heythen, as in shauynge their heads,
in eatinge certain mea^es, andc. Chap. XV. Of the seventh year (whereof thou
read also in the XXV. chapter of the third book of Moses) and how the poor
folks and bond men ought to be entreated. Chap. XVI. The feast of Easter,
Whytsondaye, and of tabernacles. Chap. XVII. Certain statutes. The office of
kings and judges. Chap. XVIII. The portion of the Levites. Of the prophet
that is promised unto the people, and how the false prophets may be known.
Chap. XIX. Of the fre cities for the deedslayers. How many witnesses are to be
accepted in a matter, and how the false ought to be punished. Chap. XX. A
godly ordinance concerning war and strykinge of battayll. Chap. XXI. What
ought to be done with one that is found slain in the field, and with a woman
which is taken presoner. Children that will not obey father and mother, are to
be stoned to death. The deed bodies may not hang still upon the tree. Chap.
XXII. Of love toward a man's nehgboure, with diverse other commandments. How
a man shall order himself with his wife, whom he found no maiden. Chap. XXIII.
What they are, that may not come in to the congregation of the LORD, and
other commandments. Chap. XXIIII. Of deuorcement, of the fredome of him that
is new married, with other commandments concerning love toward a man's
neighbor. Chap. XXV. How the judge ought to punyshe, and how one brother
should raise up sede to another Of true weightes and measures, and destroyenge
of Amaleck. Chap. XXVI. Of the first fruits and tithes, how they are to be
brought with praise and thankesuynge unto God. Chap. XXVII. Of the stones to
be set up beyond Iordane, and the commandments of God to be written thereon.
Of the blessinge and cursinge upon the two mountains. Chap. XXVIII. Sweet and
gracious promyses for all soch as love the commandments of God to do them.
Again, Marvelous sore and fearful plages, threatened unto all the^ that
regard not Gods word. Chap. XXIX. The covenant is renewed in the land of
Moab. Moses puts them in mind of the loving benefits of God, that they
may be steadfast in the LORD. Chap. XXX. Of the merciful kyndnesse of God, if
men will harken unto his voice, and convert from their own evil ways. Of his
sore punishment ^f they will not obey. Chap. XXXI. Joshua is given unto the
people, to be their captain in Moses stead. A prophecy that they will forsake
the way of God, and be punyshed therefore. Chap. XXXII. The song of Moses,
which goes up to the mount, and seyth the land of promise, but comes not
in to it. Chap. XXXIII. A sweet blessinge, wherewith Moses blesses the people
before his death. Chap. XXXIIII. Moses goes up to the mount, where he dies.
The children of Israel make lamentacion for him.
The first Chapter.
LORD commanded him, Number. 3^. d
after he had smytten Sihon ye king of the Amorites which dwelt at Heszbon:
and Og the king of Basan, that dwelt at Astaroth, and at Edrei.



On the other side Iordane in ye land of the Moabites, began Moses to
declare this law, and said: The LORD or God spoke unto us upon mount Horeb,
and said: Ye have been long enough upon this mountain, turn you, and
departed hence, that ye may come to the mountains of the Amorites, and to all
their neghbours in ye feldes, upon mountains, and in the valleys toward the
South and toward the sea side, of the land of Canaan: and to mount Libanus,
even unto the great water Euphrates. LORD swear unto yor fathers, Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, ^ene. 15. d and 17. b
that he would give it unto the^, and their sede after them.

Then said I unto you at the same time: I am not able to bear you my self
alone, Exodus 18. c
for the LORD your God has increased you, so that this day ye are as ye
stars of heaven in multitude. (The LORD God of yor fathers make you yet many
thousand times mo, and bless you, as he has promised you.) How can I alone
bear soche co^braunce, and charge, and strife among you? Provide here men of
wyszdome and understanding, soch as are known among your trybes, the^ will I
set to be heads unto you.

Then answered ye me, and said: It is a good thing, that thou say thou will do* Then took I ye heads of your trybes, wise and famous me^, and set
them over you to be heads, over thousands, over hundreds, over fiftye and
over ten: and officers among your trybes.

And I charged your judges at ye same time, and said: Hear your brethren,
and (...)
judge righteously between every man and his brother, and the stranger. Ye
shall know no (...)
let it be brought unto me, yt I may hear it. Thus commanded I you at the
same time, all yt ye should do.

Then departed we from Horeb, and walked through the whole wilderness (which is
great and terryble as ye have seen) by the way to ye mountains of the
Amorites, as the LORD our God commanded us, and came unto Cades Bernea. Then
said I unto you: Ye are come to ye mountains of ye Amorites, which the LORD
or God shall give us. Behold, there the land before the, which the LORD thy
God has given unto the: Go up, and conquer it, as ye LORD God of thy fathers
has said unto the: (...)
fear not, and be not discoraged.

Then came ye all unto me, and said: Let (...)
to spy us out the land, and to bring us word again, by what way we shall
go up, and to what cities we shall come. That pleased me well, and I took twolue
men from among you, of every trybe one. Which when they were departed, and
went up to hye country, and came to the river Escol, they spyed it out, and
took of the fruit of ye land with the^, (...)
and brought it down unto us, and brought us word again, and said: It is
a good land, that the LORD our God has given us.

But ye would not go up, and were dishobedient unto the mouth of the LORD
your God, and murmured in your tents, and said: Because the LORD hates
us, therefore has be brought us out of the land of Egipte, to deliver us in
to the hands of the Amorites, to destroy us. Whither shall we go up? Our
brethren have discoraged our hertes, (...)
and said: The people is greater and of hyer stature the^ we, ye cities are
great, and walled even up to heaven. Morouer we have seen there the children
of Enakim.

LORD your God goes before you, and shall fight for you, like as he dealte
with you in Egipte before your eyes, and in the wilderness: where thou
saw, that the LORD thy God bare the (even as a man bears his son)
through out all the way that ye have walked, till ye came to this place. And
yet for all this ye have not believed on the LORD your God, which went before
you, to search you out a place, where ye should pitch your tents: (...). 9.
c ^od. ^3. d
by night in the fire (to show you the way, wherein ye should go) and on the
day time in the cloud.

When the LORD herd ye voice of yor words, (...)* 94. b (...). 14. c (...)
^6. g
he was wroth, and swore, and said: There shall none of this evil generation
se that good land, which I swear to give unto your fathers, except Caleb the
son of Iephune, (...). 14. b
he shall se it. And unto him will I give the land that he has trodde^ upon,
and to his children, because he has perfectly followed the LORD.

LORD was angrye with me also for your sakes, (...). 20. b (...). c. 34. a
and said: Thou also shall not go in thither. But Joshua ye son of Nun, which
stondeth before the, he shall go in thither: Courage him, for he shall deuyde the
enheritaunce out unto Israel. And your children, (...). 14. d
of who^ ye said they should be a pray, and your sons which this day
understand nether good ner bad, they shall go in thither, unto them will I give
it, and they shall enjoy it. But as for you, turn you, and take your journey
to the wilderness, even the way to the reed see.

(...). 14. f
Then answered ye, and said unto me: We have sinned against ye LORD, we will go
up, and fight, acordinge to all that the LORD has commanded us. Now when ye
had prepared yor selves, every one in his harness, and were at the point to
go up to the mountains, ye LORD said unto me: Speak unto them, yt they go
not up, and that they fight not (for I am not among you) that ye be not
smytten before your enemies. When I told you this, ye would not hear, and
were dishobedient unto the word of the LORD, and were presumptuous, and went
up to ye mountains. Then the Amorites that dwelt upon the mountains, came out
against you, and chaced you, as Bees do, and smote you at Seir, even unto
Horma. Now when ye came again, and wept before the LORD, he would not hear
your voice, and enclyned not his ears unto you. Nu. 20. ^
So ye abode in Cades a long season.

The II. Chapter.
THen turned we us, and took our journey Nu. 21. a
even the way to the reed see (as the LORD said unto me) and compassed mount
Seir a long season. And ye LORD said unto me: Ye have compassed this
mountain now long enough, turn you Northwarde, and commau^de the people, and
say: Ye shall go through ye coasts of your brethren the children of Esau,
which dwell at Seir: and they shall be afraid of you. But take diligente head
to your selves, that ye provoke them not: for I will not give you one foot
breadth of their land. Genesis 36. ^ Mal. 1. a
For mount Seir have I given to the children of Esau to possess. Ye shall bye
meat of them for money, that ye may eat. And water shall ye bye of them for
money, that ye may drink. For the LORD thy God has blessed the in all the
works of thy hondes. He has considered thy iourneyes through this great
wilderness: and this fortye years has the LORD thy God been with the, so
that thou have wanted nothing.

Now when we were departed from or LORD unto me: Iudic. 3. ^
Thou shall not vex the Moabites, ner provoke the^ unto battayll, for I will
not give the of their land to possess. For Ar have I given unto the children
of Lot in possession. Genesis 14. ^
The Emims dwelt there before time, which were a great strong people, and hye
of stature, as the Enakims: and were taken for giauntes, like as ye Enakims.
And ye Moabites called them Emims. Genesis 36. ^
The Horites also dwelt in Seir before time, and ye children of Esau drove them
out, and destroyed them before them, and dwelt in their stead: like as Israel
did in ye lord of his possession, that the LORD gave them.

Get you up now, and go over the river Sared. Nu. 14. c and 26. ^
as the LORD swear unto them. The hand of the LORD also was against them, to
destroy the^ out of the host, till they were consumed.

And when all the men of war were consumed, so yt they were deed among the
people, the LORD spoke unto me, and said: This day shall thou go through the
coast of ye Moabites by Ar, and shall come nigh unto ye children of Ammon, ^
dic. 11. f
whom thou shall not vex ner provoke. For I will not give the of the lord of
the children of Ammon to possess, for I have given it unto the children of Lot
in possession. It was taken for a lord of giauntes also, and giauntes dwelt
therein before time. And ye Ammonites call the^ Samsumims, which was a people
that was great, many, and of hye stature, as the Enakims.

LORD destroyed before the^, and let them possess the same, so that they
dwelt in their stead. ^en. 36. d
Like as he did with the children of Esau, which dwell upon mount Seir, when he
destroyed the Horites before them: and let them possess the same, so that they
have dwelt in their stead unto this day. And the Caphthorims came out of
Caphther, and destroyed ye Auims (yt dwelt at Hazarim even unto Gaza) and there
dwelt they in their stead.

Get you up now, and depart, and go over the river Arnon. Behold, I have
given Sihon ye king of the Amorites at Heszbon in to thy hand: go to and
conquer, and provoke him unto battayll. This day will I begin, so that all
nations under all the heaven, shall fear and dread ye: In so much yt wha^ they
hear of the, they shall tremble and quake for thy coming.

^eu. 20. b
with peaceble words, ^um. 21. c
and caused to say unto him: I will go but through ye lord, I will go a long by
the hye way, I will nether turn to the right hand ner to ye left. Thou
shall sell me meat for money, that I may eat: and water shall thou sell me
for money, that I may drink. Only let me go through by foot, (...). 20. c
as the children of Esau (which dwell at Seir) did unto me: and the Moabites
that dwell at Ar: until I be come over Iordane, in to the land which the
LORD our God shall give unto us.

But Sihon the king at Heszbon would not let us go by him: for the LORD yi
God herdened his mind, and made his heart tough that he might deliver him in
to thy hands, as it is come to pass this day.

And ye LORD said unto me: Behold, I have begone to deliver Sihon with his
land before the: go to and co^quere, and possess his lord. (...)
And Siho^ came out with all his people to fight against us at Iahza. But the
LORD our God delivered him in to our hands, so that we smote him with his
children and all his people.

Then took we all his cities at the same time, and destroyed utterly all the
cities, men, women, and children, and let none remain: save the catell, which
we caught to our selves, and the spoil of the cities that we wanne from
Aroer, which lies upon the river side of Arnon, and from the cite on the river
unto Gilead. There was no cite that could defend it self from us: the LORD
our God delivered us all before us. (...)
But unto the land of the children of Ammon thou came not, ner to all that
was on the river Iabok, ner to ye cities upon ye mountains, ner unto what so
ever the LORD our God forbad us.

The III. Chapter.
ANd we turned us, and went up ye way (...)
And Og ye king of Basan, came out with all his people to fight against us at
Edrei. But the LORD said unto me: Be not afraid of him, for I have delivered
him and all his people with his land in to thy hand: and thou shall do with him,
as thou dyddest with Sihon king of ye Amorites, which dwelt at Heszbon. (...)
Thus ye LORD our God delivered Og ye king of Basan in to our hands also
with all his people: so that we smote him, till there was nothing left over
unto him.

Then wanne we at the same time all his cities, and there was not one cite that
we took not from him, even three score cities, the whole region of Argob in the
kingdom of Og at Basan. All these cities were strong, with hye walls, gates,
and bars, beside many other unwalled towns.

And we utterly destroyed them, as we Deu. (...)
All the cities destroyed we utterly, and the men, women, and children. But all
the catell and spoil of the cities caughte we for our selves.

Thus took we at the same time the land out of the hand of the two kings of
the Amorites beyond Iordane, from the river of Arnon unto mount Hermon (which
the Sidons call Sirion, but the Amorites call it Senir) all the cities upon the
plain, and all Gilead, and all Basan unto Salcha and Edrei, the cities of the
kingdom of Og at Basan. For only Og the king of Basan remained over of the
giauntes. Behold, his iron bed is here at Rabath among the children of Ammon,
nine cubits long, and four cubits broad, after the cubite of a man.

This land conquered we at the same time, from Aroer that lies on ye river of
Arnon. (...). 32 f (...)* 29. b (...)* 1^ a
And unto the Rubenites and Gaddites I gave half mount Gilead with the cities
thereof: but ye remnaunt of Gilead, and all Basan the kingdom of Og, gave I
unto the half trybe of Manasse. The whole region of Argob with all Basan was
called the giauntes land.

Iair the son of Manasse took all the

(...)
And I commanded you at the same time, and said: The LORD your God has
given you this land to take possession of it, Go your way forth therefore
harnessed before your brethren the children of Israel, all LORD your God
have brought yor brethren to rest also as well as you, that they also may
take possession of the land, which ye LORD your God shall give the^ beyond
Iordane: and then shall ye turn again to your own possession, which I have
given you.

(...)
And I warned Joshua at the same time, and said: Thine eyes have seen all that
the LORD your God has done unto these two kings: eue^ so shall the LORD do
also unto all ye kingdoms whither thou go. Fear them not, for the LORD
your God shall fight for you.

And I besoughte the LORD at the same time, and said: O LORD LORD, thou
have begone to show ye servant thy greatness and thy mighty hand. For
where is there a God in heaven and earth, that can do after ye works and after
thy power? O let me go and se yt good land beyond Iordane, yt goodly hye
country, and Libanus.

But the LORD was angry with me for Deu. 1. f and 4. c
but said unto me: Be content, speak no more to me of this matter. Nu. 27. c
Get the up to the top of mount Pisga, and lift up thine eyes toward the
west, and toward the north, and toward the south, and toward ye east: and
behold it with thine eyes, for thou shall not go over this Iordane. And give
Joshua his charge, and courage him, and bold him, for he shall go over Iordane
before the people, Nu* ^4. c Iosu. 14. a
and shall deuyde unto them the land, that thou shall se. Nu. 25. a
And so we abode in the valley over against the house of Peor.

The IIII. Chapter.
ANd now harken Israel unto the ordinances LORD God of yor fathers gives
unto you. Deuteronomy. 12^ d Iosu. 23. b Pro 30. a
Ye shall put nothing unto the word which I command you, nether do ought
there from, that ye may keep the commandments of the LORD your God, which
I command you. Your eyes have seen what the LORD has done with Baal Peor:
all them that walked after Baal Peor, Number. 25. a and 31. c Exo. 3^. f
has the LORD thy God destroyed from among you. But ye that cleue unto the
LORD yor God, are all alive this day. Behold I have taught you ordinances
and laws, soc^ as the LORD my God commanded me, that ye should do eue^ so in
the land, in to ye which ye shall come, to possess it.

Keep them now therefore and do them: Psalm. 1^. b
for that is your wyszdome and understanding in the sight of all nations,
which wha^ they have herd all these ordinances, shall say: O what a wise and
understanding folk is this? and how excellent a people? For where is there so
excellent a nation, that has gods so nigh him, as the LORD our God is nigh
unto us, Psa. 144. ^
as often as we call upon him? And where is there so excellent a nation, that
has so righteous ordinances and laws, as all this law which I lay before
you this day.

Take heed to thy self now, and keep well Deuteronomy. 6. d
And thou shall teach them thy children and thy childers children, the day
wha^ thou stodest before the LORD thy God by mount Horeb, when the LORD said
unto me: Gather me the people together, that I may make them hear my words,
which they shall learn, that they may fear me all the days of their life upon
earth, Ephe* 6. a
and that they also may teach their children.

And ye came nigh, and stood under ye mount. But the mount burnt even unto the
mids of heaven, and there was darkness, clouds, and mist. And ye LORD
spoke unto you out of the mids of the fire. The voice of his words ye herd,
nevertheless ye saw no image, 1. Ioh. 4. b
but herd the voice only. Exo. 20. a
And he declared unto you his covenant, which he commanded you to do, namely,
the ten verses, and wrote them upon two tables of stone. And the LORD
commmau^ded me at the same time, to teach you ordinances and laws that ye
might do thereafter in the land, in to the which ye go to possess it.

LORD spoke unto you out of the fire upon mount Horeb, Deuteronomy. 3. a
that ye destroy not your selves, and make you any image, that is like a man,
or woman, or be upon earth, or fethered foul under the heaven, or worm
upon the ground, or fyszshe in the water under ye earth: Deuteronomy. 17. b Sap. 13.
a Job. 31. c
yt thou lift not up thine eyes toward heaven, and se the Son and the Moon
and the stars, and the whole host of heaven, and be disceaued, and
worship, and serve them: Genesis 1. b 4. Esd. 6. e Mat. 5. e
which the LORD yi God has made to serve all nations under ye whole heaven.

But you has the LORD taken, and brought you out of the iron furnace, Deuteronomy.
6 c and. ^2. b
namely, out of Egipte, that ye should be the people of his enheritaunce, as it
is come to pass this day. And the LORD was angry with me for your sakes,
Nu. 27. c Deuteronomy. 1. f and 3. e
so that he swear, yt I should not go over Iordane, ner come in to that good
land, which the LORD thy God shall give the to enheritaunce. As for me, Deu.
34. a
I must dye in this land, and shall not go over Iordane: But ye shall go over,
and shall have that good lord in possession.

LORD your God, and that ye make no images of any manner of faszhion Exe. 20. a
as the LORD thy God has commanded. For the LORD thy God is a consumynge
fire and a gelous God. Heb. 12. d


If when ye have begotten children, and childers children, and have dwelt in
the land, ye mar your selves, Deuteronomy. ^. d ^ere. 16. b
and make you images of any manner of faszhion, and do evil in the sight of ye
LORD your God, to provoke him: Deut^ 30. d and 3^. g
I call heaven and earth to record over you this day, that ye shall shortly
p^rishe from the land, in to ye which ye go over Iordane to possess it. Ye
shall not dwell long therein, but shall utterly be destroyed. And ye LORD shall
scater you among ye nations and ye shall be left a small people among ye
Heythen, (...)
whyther the LORD shall bring you. There shall ye serve gods, which are ye
works of men's hands, even wodd and stone, which nether se ner hear, ner eat
ner smell.

But if thou seek the LORD ye God there (...)
ye if thou seek him with thy whole heart and with all ye soul. When thou shall
be strately troubled, and wha^ all these things shall come upon the in ye
latter days, then shall thou turn again to ye LORD thy God, and be obedient
unto his voice. For ye LORD ye God is a merciful God, he shall not forsake
the, ner destroy the: nether shall he forget the covenant with thy fathers,
(...)
which he swear unto them.

For axe after the times past, which have been before the, sens the day yt God
created man upon earth, from one end of the heaven unto the other, whether
there was ever any soch great thing done, or any soch like herd, that a
people has herd ye voice of God speak out of the fire (as thou have herd)
and yet lived. Or whether God assaied to go and take unto him a people out of
ye mids of a nation, through tentacions, through tokens, through wonders, through
war, and through a mighty hand, and through a stretched out arm, and through
great visio^s, acordinge unto all as the LORD your God has done with you in
Egipte before thine eyes.

Thou have seen it, yt thou might know LORD is God, (...)
and that there is none other but he only. ^
Out of heaven made he the to hear his voice, that he might nurtoure the: and
upon earth he showed the his great fear, and out of ye fire thou herdest his
words: (...)
because he loved ye fathers, and chose their sede after the^. And he brought
yt out with his presence through his mighty power out of Egipte, to drive out
(before the) nations greater and mighter then thou, and to bring ye in, yt he
might give the their lord to enheritaunce, as it is come to pass this day.

Therefore shall thou know this day, and turn it into thine heart, (...)
that the LORD is God above in heaven, and beneth upon earth, and that there is
no mo. Keep his ornaunces therefore and commandments, which I command the
this day, the^ shall it go well with the and thy children after the, so that thy
life shall long endure in ye land, which the LORD the God gives the thy life
long.

(...)
toward the Son rysinge, yt he might fly thither, which had slain his
neighbor vnawarres, and hated him not a fore time, yt he might fly in to one
of these cities, and live. Bezer in ye wilderness in the plain country among
the Rubenites, and Ramoth in Gilead among ye Gaddites, and Golan in Basan
among the Manassites.

This is the law which Moses laid before the children of Israel: these are
the testimonies, ordinances, and laws, yt Moses spoke unto the children of
Israel (after they were departed out of Egipte) beyond Iordane in the valley
over against the house of Peor, in ye land of Sion king of ye Amorites which
dwelt at Heszbon, (...)
whom Moses and the children of Israel smote after they were departed out of
Egipte, and conquered his land, and the land of Og king of Basan, two kings
of the Amorites which were beyond Iordane toward the Son rysinge from Aroer
(which lies upon ye river side of Arnon) unto mount Sion, which is Hermon: and
all ye plain field beyond Iordane eastwarde unto the sea in ye plain field
under mount Pisga.

The V. Chapter.
(...). 19. a
The LORD our God made a covenant with us at Horeb: he made not this
covenant with our fathers, but with us, that are here this day, and live
every one. He talked with us face to face out of the fire upon the mount. I
stood at the same time betwixt the LORD and you, that I might show you the
word of the LORD. For ye were afraid of the fire, and went not up to the
mount, and he said:

(...). a
I am the LORD thy God, which have brought the out of the land of Egipte, out
of the house of bondage. Thou shall have none other gods in my sight. (...).
4. c
Thou shall make the no graven image of any manner of licknesse of the things
yt are above in heaven, and beneth upon earth, and in the water under (...).
34. a (...) 1. a
For I ye LORD ye God am a gelous God, vysitinge the sin of the fathers upon
the children, unto the third and fourth generation, of the^ yt hate me: and
show mercy upon many thousands yt love me, and keep my commandments.

Thou shall not take ye name of ye LORD ye God in vain: Leu. 24. ^
for ye LORD shall not hold him unguilty, yt takes his name in vain.

Keep ye Sabbath day, Exo. ^^. b
that thou sanctifye it, as the LORD thy God has commanded the. Six days
shall thou labor, and do all thy work, but upon the seventh day it is the
Sabbath of the LORD thy God: No manner work shall thou do in it, thou, and thy
son, and thy daughter, and thy servant, and thy maid, and thine ox, and
thine Ass, and all thy catell, and the stranger which is within thy gates,
that thy servant and thy maid may rest as well as LORD thy God brought the
out from thence with a mighty hand, and a stretched out arm. Therefore has
the LORD ye God commanded yt to keep the Sabbath day.

Honor thy father and thy mother, Exo. 21. b Mat. ^5. a Ephe. 6. a
as the LORD thy God has commanded the that thou may live long upon
earth, and that it may go well with the in the land, which the LORD thy God
shall give the.

Math. 5. c Romans 13. b
Thou shall not kill.

Thou shall not break wedlock.

Thou shall not steal.

Thou shall bear no false witness against thy neighbor.

Thou shall not Romans 7. b and 13 b
lust after ye neghbours wife.

Thou shall not lust after thy neghbours house, land, servant, maid, ox,
Ass, or what so ever he has.

These are the words that the LORD spoke to all your congregation, upon the
mount out of the fire of the cloud and darkness with a great voice, and
added nothing thereto. Exo. ^1. ^
And he wrote them upon two tables of stone, and delivered the^ unto me.

But when ye herd the voice out of the darkness, and saw the mount burn with
fire, ye came unto me all ye rulers among your trybes, and your Elders and
said: Behold, the LORD our God has showed us his glory and his greatness,
and we have herd his voice out of ye fire. This day have we seen, that God
may talk with a man, and he yet live. And now wherefore should we dye, that
LORD our God any more, we should dye. For what is all flesh, that it should
be able to hear ye voice of the living God speaking out of ye fire, as we
have done, and yet live? Go thou and hear all yt the LORD our God says,
and tell us. ^xo. 19. b
All yt the LORD says unto the, that will we hear and do. When the LORD
herd the voice of yor words which ye spoke unto me, he said unto me: I have
herd ye voice of the words of this people, which they have spoken unto ye. It
is all good that they have spoken. ^er. 24. b and 31. f
But who shall give them soch an heart, yt they may fear me, and keep all my
commandments as long as they live, yt it may go well with them, and with
their children for ever? Go and say unto them: Get you in to yor tents
again. But thou shall stand here before me, that I may tell the all the
commandments, and ordinances and laws which thou shall teach them yt they
may do thereafter in the lord, which I shall give the^ to possess. Take heed
now therefore that ye do, as the LORD yor God has commanded you, Deuteronomy. 17. c
and turn not aside nether to ye right hand ner to the lef^e: but walk in
all ye ways which the LORD your God has commanded you, that ye may live,
and that it may go well with you, and yt ye may live long in ye land which
ye shall have in possession.

The VI. Chapter.
LORD yor God has commanded, yt ye should learn them, and do them, in the
land whyther ye go to possess it, Deuteronomy. 10. c
that thou may fear the LORD ye God, and keep all his ordinances and
commandments, which I command the, thou and ye children, and ye childers
children all ye days of your life, that ye may live long. Thou shall hear
(O Israel) and take heed, yt thou do thereafter, yt it may go well with ye, and
that thou may multiplye greatly, as ye LORD God of ye fathers has promised
the a land yt flows with milk and honey. LORD our God is one LORD only.
And thou shall love the LORD thy God with all thy heart, Mat. 22. d Mat. 12 c
Luc. 10. c
with all ye soul, and with all thy might. Deuteronomy. 11. c
And these words, which I commau^de the this day, shall thou take to heart,
and shall whet them upon ye children, and shall talk of them, wha^ thou
syttest in thine house, and when thou walk by the way: when thou lie
down, and wha^ thou rysest up. And thou shall bind them for a sign upon
thine hand, and they shall be a token of remembrance before thine eyes, and
thou shall write them upon the posts of thine house, and upon thy gates.

Now when ye LORD ye God shall bring the in to ye land whereof he swear unto
ye fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and shall give the great and goodly
cities, which thou have not builded: and houses full of all goods, which thou
have not filled: and dug wells which thou have not dug: and vynyardes
and olyue trees, which thou have not planted, so yt thou eatest and art full:
then bewarre that thou forget not the LORD, which brought the out of the land
of Egipte, from the house of bondage: (...)
but thou shall fear the LORD thy God, and him only shall thou serve, and
swear by his name. (...)
And ye shall not follow the other gods of the nations which are about you
(for the LORD thy God is a gelous God in the myddest of the) that the wrath of
the LORD thy God wax not whote over the, (...)
and destroy the from the earth.

Ye shall not tempte ye LORD your God, (...)
^
as ye tempted him at Massa: but keep the commandments of the LORD yor God,
and his witnesses, and his ordinances, which he has commanded the, that thou
may do that which is right and good in ye sight of the LORD, yt thou
may prospere, and yt thou may go in and conquer that good land, which
the LORD swear unto ye fathers, that he may chase out all thine enemies
before the, as the LORD has said.

Now when thy son axeth the todaye (...)
What mean these witnesses, ordinances and laws, that the LORD our God
has commanded you? Then shall thou say unto thy son: We were Pharaos
bondmen in Egipte, and the LORD brought us out of Egipte with a mighty hand,
and the LORD did great and evil tokens and wonders in Egipte upon Pharao and
all his house before our eyes, and brought us from thence, to bring us in and
to give us ye land, that he swear unto our fathers. And therefore has the
LORD commanded us to do acordinge unto all these ordinances, that we might
fear the LORD our God, that we might prospere all the days of our life, as
it is come to pass this day. And it shall be righteousness unto us before the
LORD our God, if we keep and do all these commandments, as he has
commanded us.

The VII. Chapter.
When ye LORD ye God brings the and mightier then thou: (...)
and when the LORD thy God delyuereth the^ before ye, that thou may smite
them, thou shall utterly destroy them, so that thou make no covenant with
them, nor show them favor, and shall make no marriages with them: Ye shall
not give your daughters unto their sons, ner take their daughters unto your
sons. (...)
For they will make your sons depart fro me, to serve strange gods: then
shall the wrath of the LORD wax whote upon you, and destroy you shortly.

(...) 4. b (...) 33. f
But thus shall ye do with them: Ye shall overthrow their altares, break down
their pilers, cut down their groves, and burn their images with fire. For
thou art an holy people unto the LORD thy God. (...)
The has the LORD thy God chosen, that thou should be his own peculier
people, from among all nations that are upon the earth.

LORD had lust unto you and chose you. (For ye were the leest among all
nations) but because he loved you, and that he might keep the ooth, (...)
which he swear unto your fathers, he brought you out with a mighty hand,
and delivered you from the house of bondage, out of the hand of Pharao king
of Egipte.

Thou shall understand now therefore, that the LORD thy God is a mighty and
true God, which keeps covenant and mercy unto them that love him, (...) 20. a
(...) ^4. a
and keep his commandments, even through out a thousand generacions: And
rewards them that hate him, before his face, that he may destroy them: and
will not be long in tarienge to reward them (before his face) that hate him.
Keep now therefore the commandments, and ordinances and laws, which I
command the this day, that thou do thereafter.

(...). 23. c (...). 26. a (...). 2^. a
and do thereafter, then shall the LORD thy God also keep the covenant and
mercy with the, which he swear unto thy fathers: and shall love the, bless the,
and multiplye the: he shall bless the fruit of ye womb, and the fruit of thy
land, thy corn, wine and oil, the fruit of thy kyne, and the fruit of thy
sheep, in the land that he swear unto ye fathers to give the. Blessed shall
thou be above all nations, there shall no unfruitful person be in the, ner
among thy catell. The LORD shall put from the all manner of disease, and shall
bring upon the none of ye evil sicknesses of Egipte, Exo. ^. ^
which thou have seen, but shall put them upon all those that hate the.

Thou shall bring to naught all the nations, LORD thy God shall deliver the.
Thine eye shall not spare them, and their gods shall thou not serve, for that
shall be thy decay. If thou shall say in thine heart: These nations are mo then
I, how ca^ I drive them out? Fear them not. Deu. ^^. a Iosu. ^. a
Remember what the LORD thy God did unto Pharao and to all the Egipcians,
through great tentacions (which thou have seen with thine eyes) through tokens
and wonders, through a mighty hand and a stretched out arm, wherewith the
LORD thy God brought the out. Even so shall the LORD thy God do unto all ye
nations of who^ thou art afraid.

The LORD ye God also shall send hornettes among them, Exo. 23. d and 33. a
Ios. 24 c
until they that remain and hyde them selves from the, be destroyed. Be not
thou afraid of them: for the LORD thy God is in the mids of the, even the
LORD thy God) shall rote out the nations before the by little and little. Thou
can no^ consume them at one time, Exo. 23. d
yt the beestes of the field increase not upon the. The LORD thy God shall
deliver them before the, and shall smite them with a great slaughter, till
they be destroyed. And he shall deliver their kings in to thine hand, Ios.
10.11.12
and thou shall destroy their names from under heaven. There shall no man make
the resistaunce before the, until thou have destroyed them.

The images of their gods shall thou burn with fire, Deuteronomy. 13 c
and shall not desire the silver or gold that is on them Ios. 7. a ^. Ma. 12. f
or to take it unto the, that thou snare not thy self therein: for it is
abhominacion unto the LORD ye God. Therefore shall thou not bring the
abhominacion in to thine house, yt thou be not damned as it is, but shall
utterly defye it, and abhor it, for it is damned.

The VIII. Chapter.
ALl the commandments which I LORD swear unto your fathers: and think
upon all ye way through the which the LORD thy God has led the this fortye
years in the wilderness, Deuteronomy. 13. a Iud. 2. d and 3. a
that he might chasten the, and prove the, to wete whath were in thine heart,
whether thou would keep his comaundeme^tes or no. He chastened the, and let
the hunger, and fed the with Manna (which thou and thy fathers knew not) to
make the know, Exo. 16. d Number. 11. b
that Mat. 4. a Luc. 4. a
man lives not by bred only, but by all that proceadeth out of the mouth of
the LORD. Thy clothes are not waxed old upon the, Deuteronomy. 29. a
and thy fete are not swolle^ this fortye year.

LORD thy God nurtured the. Keep therefore the commandments of the LORD thy
God, that thou walk in his ways, and fear him. For the LORD thy God
brings the in to a good land: A land where in are ryuers of water, Deuteronomy.
11. b
fountaynes and sprynges, which flow by the hills and valleys: A land wherein
is wheat, barlye, vines, fygge trees, and pomgranates: A land wherein grow
Olyue trees and honye: A land where thou shall not eat bred in scarcenes, and
where thou shall lack nothing: A lord where ye stones are iron, Job 28. a
where thou shall dygge brass out of hills: Nu. 13 b 1. Co. 10. a 1. Tim. 4. a
That wha^ thou have eaten and art filled, thou may praise the LORD thy
God, for that good land, which he has given the.

LORD thy God, that thou would not keep his commandments, and his
ordinances, and laws, which I command the this day: that (when thou have
eaten and art filled, and have builded goodly houses, and dwell therein, and
when thy beestes and sheep, and silver, and gold, and all yt thou have,
increases) thine heart rise not then, and thou forget the LORD thy God (which
brought the out of the land of Egipte, Deuteronomy. 31. c Prou. 30. a
from ye house of bondage, and led ye through this great and terrible
wyldernes, where were serpents that spouted fire, Number. 21. a
and Scorpions, and drouth, and where there was no water, and brought the water
out of the hard flynte, and fed the in the wilderness with Manna whereof ye
fathers knew not, that he might chasten the, and prove the) to do the good
afterward) ^. Reg. 2. b
My power and the might of mine own hand has done me all this good: But
that thou think upon the LORD thy God. For it is HE, Eze. 36. c Phil. 2. b
which gives the power to exercise strength, that he may perform the
covenant, which he swear unto thy fathers, as it is come to pass this day.

But if thou shall forget the LORD thy God, Deuteronomy. 4. d
and follow other gods, and serve them, and worshipe the^, I testifye over
you this day, that ye shall utterly perish. Even as the Heythen whom ye LORD
destroys before your face, so shall ye perish also, because ye are not
obedient unto the voice of the LORD your God.

The IX. Chapter.
Hear O Israel, This day shall thou go over Iordane, that thou may come in
to conquer the nations, which are greater and mightier then thou, (...)
great cities, walled up unto heaven, a great people and of an hye stature,
namely the children of Enakim, whom thou have known, and of whom thou have
herd say: Who is able to stand against the children of Enakim? Therefore
shall thou know this day, that the LORD ye God goes before the, a
co^sumynge fire. He shall destroy the^, and shall subdue them before the, and
shall drive them out, and shortly shall he bring the^ to naught, as the LORD
has promised the.

Now when the LORD thy God has expelled them out before the, say not thou
the^ in thine heart: The LORD has brought me in to take possession of this
land for mine own righteousness sake, where as ye LORD yet dryueth out the
Heithen before the, because of their ungodliness. (...)


For thou come not in to take their land in possession, for thine own
righteousness sake, and because of thy right heart: but the LORD dryueth out
these Heythen, for their own ungodliness sake, and that he may perform the
word, which the LORD has sworn unto ye fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

Understand now therefore, that the LORD

Remember and forget not, how thou displeasedest the LORD thy God in the
wilderness. Sense ye day that thou departedst out of the land of Egipte,
till ye came unto this place, have ye been dishobedient unto the LORD.

For in Horeb ye angered the LORD, (...)
so that of wrath he would have destroyed you, when I was gone up to ye mount,
to receive the tables of stone, namely the tables of the covenant (...)
which the LORD made with you, and I abode fortye days and fortye nights upon
the mount, and ate no bred, and drank no water: and the LORD gave me ye two
tables of stone, written with the finger of God, and in them was acordinge to
all the words, (...)
which the LORD said unto you upon the mount out of the fire, in the day of
the gatheringe together.

(...). ^1. d
ye LORD gave me ye two tables of stone, namely ye tables of the covenant,
and said unto me: (...) ^2. b
up, and get ye down quyckly from hence, for thy people whom thou broughtest
out of Egipte, have marred the^ selves, they are soon gone out of the way,
which I commanded them, and have made them a molten image.

And the LORD said unto me: I se this people, that it is a styffnecked
people: let me alone, that I may destroy them, and put out their name from
under heaven. I will make of the a people mightier and greater the^ this is.

(...)
And as I turned me, and went down from the mount which brent with fire, and had
ye two tables of the covenant in both my hands, I looked, and behold, ye had
sinned against ye LORD yor God, so yt ye had made you a molten calfe, and were
soon turned out of ye way which the LORD had commanded you. Then took I the
two tables, and cast them out of both my hands, and brake the^ before your
eyes, and I fell before the LORD (...) 34. d (...) ^4. d
(even as at the first time) fortye days and fortye nights, and nether ate
bred, ner dra^ke water, because of all your sins which ye had sinned, when
ye did soch evil in the sight of the LORD, to provoke him unto wrath. For I
was afraid of the wrath and indignacion, wherewith the LORD was angry with you,
even to have destroyed you. And the LORD herd me at that time also. (...).
1^. b


Morouer the LORD was very angry with Aaron, so that he would have destroyed
him, but I made intercession for Aaron also at ye same time. As for your sin
(namely, the calfe that ye had made) I took it, (...)
and burnt it with the fire, and smote it a sunder, and grynde it in pieces,
even unto dust, and cast the dust in to the broke that descended from the mount.

Ye displeased the LORD also, (...). 11. a
at Tabera, (...). 17. b
and at Massa, (...) 11. g
and at the lustgraues, (...). 13. d
and wha^ he sent you from Cades Barnea, and said: Go up, and conquer the
land which I have given you. And ye were disobedient unto the mouth of the
LORD your God, and believed not on him, and herkened not unto his voice:
(...). 7. f
for ye have been disobedient unto the LORD, as long as I have known you.

LORD fortye days and fortye nights, which I lay there. For ye LORD said,
he would destroy you. But I made intercession unto the LORD, and said: O
LORD LORD, Exo. ^4. a Nu. ^4. b Iosu. 7. b
destroy not ye people and thine enheritaunce, which thou through thy great
power have delivered, and brought out of Egipte with a mighty hand. Remember
thy servants Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Look not upon the stubburnesse, and
ungodliness and sin of this people (that the land wherout thou have
brought us, say not: The LORD was not able to bring them in to the land,
that he promised them, and because he hated them, therefore has he brought
them out, to destroy the^ in the wilderness:) For they are thy people and
thine enheritaunce, which thou have brought out with thy great power, and with
thy stretched out arm.

The X. Chapter.
AT the same time said the LORD unto Exo. 34. a
Hew ye two tables of stone like unto the first, and come up unto me in to the
mount, and make yt an Arc of wod, and in the tables I will write the words,
that were in the first, Exo. 32. ^ Deuteronomy. 9
which thou brakest, and thou shall lay them in the Arc. So I made an Arc of
Fyrre tree, and hewed two tables of stone (like as the first were) and went up
into the mount, and ye two tables were in my hand.

Then wrote he in ye tables (acordinge as the first wrytinge was) the ten
verses, Exo. ^4. d and 24. c
which the LORD spoke unto you out of the fire upon the mountain, at the time
of the gatheringe together. And the LORD gave the^ unto me. And I turned me,
and went down from the mount, and laid the tables in the Arc which I had
made, Deu. 31. f
that they might be there, as the LORD commanded me.

And the children of Israel departed from Nu. 20. d
dyed Aaron, and there was he buried: Nu. 33. d
and Eleasar his son became pressed in his stead.) From thence they departed
from Gadgad. From Gadgad to Iathbath, a land of ryuers of water. Nu. ^.4.1^
At the same season the LORD separated out the trybe of Leui, to bear the
Ark of the LORD'S covenant, and to stand before the LORD, to mynister unto
him, and to praise his name unto this day. Nu. 18. a Iosu. 13. d
Therefore shall the Levites have no portion ner enheritaunce with their
brethren: for the LORD is their enheritaunce, as the LORD thy God has
promised them.

But I tarried upon the mount (like as before) even fortye days and fortye
nights, Deuteronomy. 9. d
and the LORD herd me at that time also, and would not destroy the. But he
said unto me: Up, and get the forth, yt thou may go before the people, yt
they may come in, and co^quere the lord, which I swear unto their fathers to
give them.

LORD thy God of the, Deuteronomy. ^. a Iosu. 22. a
but yt thou fear the LORD thy God, and that thou walk in all his ways, and
love him, and serve the LORD ye God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul:
and yt thou keep the commandments of ye LORD, and his ordinances, which I
command the this day, yt thou may prospere? Behold, Psalm. 25. a Iere.
27. a
the heaven and the heaven of all heavens and the earth, and all yt is therein,
is ye LORDS ye God. Deu. 4. f
Yeth has he had a pleasure unto ye fathers, to love the^: and has chosen
their sede after the^, namely you, above all nations, as it is come to pass
this day.

Deu. ^0. b
and be no more styffnecked. For the LORD yor God is God of all gods, and
LORD over all lords, a great God, mighty and terryble, which regards no
person, and takes no gifts, and does right unto the fatherless and
wedowe, and loves the stranger, to give him fode and raiment. Exodus 22. c
Therefore shall ye love a stranger, for ye your selves also were strangers in
the land of Egipte.

Thou shall fear the LORD thy God, him only shall thou serve, Deuteronomy. 6. c
unto him shall thou cleue Matthew. ^. d
and swear by his name. He is thy praise and ye God, which has done for ye
these great and terryble things, yt thine eyes have seen. Genesis 46. d
Thy fathers went down in to Egipte with seuentye souls, but now has ye LORD
thy God made the Gene. 15. a Deuteronomy. ^^ g
as ye stars of heaven in multitude.

The XI. Chapter.
LORD ye God, and keep his commandments, his ordinances, his laws, and
his precepts all ye life long. And understood this day, that which your
children know not: Which have not seen the nurtoure of the LORD yor God, and
his greatness, and his mighty hand, and his stretched out arm, and his
tokens and acts which he did among the Egipcia^s, unto Pharao the king of
Egipte, and to all his land, and what he did to the power of ye Egipcians, and
unto their horses and charettes, when he brought the waters of the reed see
upon them, Exo. 14 f
as they followed after you, and how ye LORD has brought them to naught unto
this day: and what he did unto you in the wilderness, until ye came unto
this place: Number. 16. c and 26. b
what he did unto Dathan and Abiram the children of Eliab the son of Ruben,
how the earth opened her mouth and swalowed them with their housholdes and
te^tes all their good that they had in the mids among all Israel.

For your eyes have seen the great works of ye LORD, which he has done.
Therefore shall ye keep all the commandments which I command you this day,
that ye (...)
which the LORD swear unto your fathers, to give unto them and to their sede,
eue^ a land that flows with milk and honey: For the land whither thou
come in, to possess it, is not as the land of Egipte, whence ye came out,
where thou sowedest thy sede, and waterdest it at thy foot as a garden of
herbs: but it has hills and valleys, (...)
which drink water of the rain of heaven, a land that the LORD thy God
cares for. And the eyes of the LORD thy God are allwaye therein from the
beginning of the year unto the end,

If ye shall harken therefore unto my commandments, which I command you this
day, yt ye love the LORD your God, and serve him, with all your heart and
with all your soul (...)
then will I give rain unto your lord in due season, early and late, that
thou may gather in thy corn, thy wine and thine oil: and I will give
grass upon thy field for thy catell, that ye may eat and be filled.

But bewarre, yt your heart be not disceaued, LORD wax whote upon you, (...)
and he shut up the heaven, that there come no rain, and the earth give not
her increase, and ye perish shortly from the good lord, which the LORD has
given you.

Put up therefore these my words in your hertes and in your souls, (...)
and bind the^ for a sign upon your hands, yt they may be a token of
remembrance before yor eyes: and teach them your children, so that thou talk
thereof, when thou syttest in thine house, or walk by the way: when thou
lie down, and when thou rysest up: and write them upon the posts of thine
house, and upon thy gates, that thou and thy children may live long in the
land, which the LORD swear unto thy fathers to give them, as long as the
days of heaven endure upon earth.

For if ye shall keep all these commandments which I command you, so that
ye do thereafter, that ye love the LORD your God, and walk in all his ways,
and cleue unto him, then shall the LORD drive out all these nations before
you, so that ye shall co^quere greater and mightier nations then ye your
selves are.

LORD your God shall let the fear and dread of you come upon all ye lands
wherein ye go, like as he has promised you.

(...) ^0. c
Behold, I lay before you this day the blessing and the curse. (...)
The blessing, if ye be obedient unto the commandments of the LORD your
God, which I command you this day. The curse, if ye will not be obedient to
the commandments of the LORD your God, but turn out of the way, which I
command you this day, so that ye walk after other gods, whom ye know not.

When ye LORD ye God has brought the in to the land, whither thou come
in to possess it, (...) 27. b
then shall thou give the blessing upon mount Grisim, and the curse upon mount
Ebal, which are beyond Iordane the way toward the goinge down of the Son,
in the lord of the Cananites, which dwell in ye plain field over against
Gilgal, beside the Oak grove of More. For ye shall go over Iordane, that ye may
come in to take possession of the land, which the LORD your God has given
you, to conquer it, and to dwell therein. Take heed now therefore, that ye do
acordinge unto all the ordinances and laws, which I lay before you this day.

The XII. Chapter.
LORD God of thy fathers has given the to possess, as long as ye live upon
earth. (...). 7. a
Destroy all the places, wherein ye Heithen (who^ ye shall conquer) have served
their gods, whether it be upon hye mountains, upon hills, or among grene
trees. And overthrow their altares, and break down their pilers, and burn
their groves with fire, and hew down the images of their gods, and bring
the names of them to naught out of the same place. Ye shall not do so unto the
LORD your God: but the place ^. Reg. ^ ^. Par. (...)
which ye LORD your God shall chose out of all yor trybes (that he may let
his name dwell there) shall ye seek, and come thither, Deu. 14.^^. c. 16. a
and thither shall ye bring your burntsacrifices, and your other offerynges,
and your tithes and the Heue offerynges of your hands, and your vows, and
your fre will offerynges, and the firstborne of your oxen and sheep: and
there shall ye eat before the LORD your God, 1. Reg. 1.^ and 16. a
and rejoice over all that ye and your houses have given with your hands,
because the LORD thy God has blessed the. Deu. 29. ^
Ye shall do none of the things, yt we do here this day, every man what
seems him good in his own eyes. For ye are not yet come to rest, ner to ye
enheritau^ce which the LORD thy God shall give the.

But ye shall go over Iordane, and dwell LORD your God shall deuyde out unto
you, and he shall give you rest from all your enemies round about, and ye
shall dwell safe. Now when the LORD thy God has chosen a place, to make his
name dwell there, ye shall bring thither all yt I have commanded you, namely,
yor burn sacrifices, your other offerynges, your tithes, the Heue offerynges
of your hands, and all your fre vows, which ye shall vow unto ye LORD:
and there shall ye eat, and rejoice before the LORD your God, ye and your
sons, and your daughters, and your servants, and your maids, and the
Levites that are within your gates, Deuteronomy. 10. ^
for they have no portion ner inheritance with you.

Take heed unto thy self, that thou offer not thy burnt offerynges in what so
ever place thou seyst: but in the place which ye LORD shall have chosen in one
of thy trybes, there shall thou offer thy burnt offerynges, and do all that I
command the. Notwtstondinge thou may kill and eat flesh within all thy
gates, after all the desire of thy soul, acordynge to the blessing of the
LORD thy God, which he has given the: Deuteronomy. 35. ^
both the clean and unclean may eat it, as of the Roo and heart, only the
blood shall thou not eat, but pour it out as water upon the earth.

But within thy gates may thou not eat Deuteronomy. 14. ^
and of thy oil, ner of ye first borne of thine oxen and of thy sheep, or of
any of thy vows which thou have vowed, or of thy frewylofferinges, or Heue
offeringes of thy hands: but before the LORD thy God shall thou eat them, in
the place which the LORD thy God choseth, thou and thy son, and thy
daughter, thy servant, thy maid, and the Leuite that is within ye gates, and
thou shall rejoice before ye LORD thy God, over all yt thou put thine
hand unto. ^ccl. ^. d
And bewarre, that thou forsake not the Leuite, as long as thou lyuest upon
the earth.

But when the LORD thy God shall enlarge thy bordes of thy land (as he has
promised the) and thou say: I will eat flesh (for so much as thy soul longs
to eat flesh) then eat flesh acordinge to all the desire of thy soul. But if
the place that the LORD thy God has chosen (to let his name be there) be
far from the, then kill of ye oxen and of thy sheep, which the LORD has
given the, as he has commanded the, and eat it within thy gates acordinge to
all ye desire of thy soul. Deuteronomy. 15. c
Even as a Roo or Heart is eaten, may thou eat it: both the clean and
unclean may eat it indifferently. Re. 14. c
Only bewarre, that thou eat not the blood: for the blood is the life.
Therefore shall thou not eat the life with the flesh, but shall pour it out like
water upon the earth, yt thou may prospere, and ye children after the, when
thou have done that which is right in the sight of the LORD.

Deu. 14. b ^^d 1^. c
or make a vow, thou shall take it, and bring it unto the place, that the
LORD has chosen, and do thy burnt offerynges with the flesh and blood upon
the altar of the LORD thy God. The blood of thine offrynge shall thou pour
upon the altar of the LORD thy God, and eat the flesh. Take heed, and hear
all these words, which I command the, yt it may go well with the, and thy
children after yt for ever, when thou have done yt which is right and
acceptable in the sight of the LORD thy God.

Deu. 18. b ^osu. 2^. c
When the LORD yi God has roted out the Heithen before the, whither thou
come in to conquer them, and when thou have conquered them, and dwelt in
their land, bewarre then, yt thou fall not in the snare after the^, when they
are destroyed before the: and that thou axe not after their gods, and say:
Eue^ as these nations have served their gods, so will I do also. ^eut. 1^. b
^err. 19. a ^sa. 65. a
Thou shall not do so unto the LORD thy God. For all that is abhominacion unto
the LORD, and that he hates, ye same have they done unto their gods. For
they have burnt even their sons and their daughters with fire unto their
gods.

All that I command you, shall ye keep, that ye do thereafter. (...)
Ye shall put nothing thereto, ner take ought there from.

The XIII. Chapter.
IF there rise up a (...)
prophet or dreamer

For ye LORD your God proves you, (...)
to wete whether ye love him with all your heart, and with all your soul. For
ye shall walk after the LORD your God, and fear him, and keep his
commandments, and harken unto his voice, and serve him, and cleue unto him.
(...)
As for that prophet or dreamer, he shall dye: because he has spoken to turn
you away from the LORD your God (which brought you out of the land of
Egipte, and delivered you from the house of bondage) to thrust the out of the
way, which the LORD thy God commanded the to walk in, and so shall thou put
away the evil from the.

If thy brother, the son of thy mother, Za(...) M(...) L(...)
or the wife in thy bosom, or thy friend which is unto the as thine own
soul, entyse the secretly, and say: Let us go and serve other gods (whom
thou know not, ner yet thy father) which are among the nations round
about you, whether they be nigh unto the or far from the, from the one end
of the earth unto the other: consent not unto him, and herke^ not unto him.
Deuteronomy (...)
Thine eye also shall not pytie him, and thou shall have no compassion upon him,
ner keep him secret, but shall cause him to be slain: thine hand shall be
first upon him, to cause him to be slain, and then the hands of all the
people. He shall be stoned to death, because he went about to thrust the away
from the LORD thy God, which brought the out of the land of Egipte from the
house of bondage: Deuteronomy (...)
yt all Israel may hear, and fear him, and do no more soch evil among you.

If thou hear in any cite which ye LORD thy God has given the to dwell in,
that it is said: There are certain men, the children of Belial, gone out from
among you, and have disceaued the inhabiters of their cite, and said: let us
go, and serve other gods, whom ye know not. Deuteronomy (...)
Then shall thou seek, make search, and enquere diligently.

LORD ye God, that it may lie upon a heap for ever, and never be builded any
more. (...). 7. c (...). 7. a (...). 1^. c
And let nothing of the damned thing cleue unto thy hand, that the LORD
may be turned from the indignacion of his wrath, and grant the mercy, and
have compassion on the, and multiplye the (as he has sworn unto thy fathers)
because thou haS herkened unto ye voice of the LORD thy God, to keep all his
commandments, which I command the this day, so that thou do the thing
which is right in the sight of the LORD thy God.

The XIIII. Chapter.
LORD your God, (...). 10. b
Cut not your selves therefore, and make you no baldness between your eyes
over any deed. For thou art an holy people unto the LORD thy God. ^eut. 7 a
(...) 26. d (...). 19 a
And the LORD has chosen the to be his own peculier people, from among all
the nations that are upon the earth.

Leui. 11. a
Thou shall eat no abhominacion. These are the beestes which ye shall eat:
Oxen, sheep, Goats, Heart, Roo, Bugle, wild goat, Unicorn, Origin, and
Camelion. And every be that deuydeth his clawe, and cheweth cudd, shall ye
eat. Nevertheless these shall ye not eat of them that chewe cudd, and deuyde
not the hoffe in to two claws: The Camel, the hair, and the conye, for
though they chewe cudd, yet deuyde they not the hoffe, therefore shall they be
unclean unto you. The swyne, though he deuyde the hoffe, yet cheweth he not
cudd, he shall be unclean unto you: ye shall not eat of the flesh of the^,
and their deed carcases shall ye not touch.

Leui. 11. b
This is it that ye shall eat of all that is in the waters: All that has
fynnes and scales, shall ye eat. But what so ever has no fynnes ner scales,
that shall ye not eat, for it is unclean unto you.



Ye shall eat of nothing yt dies alone^ thou may give it unto ye
stranger with in ye gate, that he eat it, or sell it to a stranger. For thou
art an holy people unto ye LORD thy God. Exodus 23. and 34. c
Thou shall not sees a kydd, while it yet sucketh his mother.

Thou shall separate out the tithe all the increase of thy sede, Exo. 34. ^
yt comes out of ye field every year: and shall eat it before ye LORD ye
God ( Esa. 65. c
in ye place which He choseth, yt his name may dwell there) namely of ye
tithes of thy corn, of thy wine, of thy oil, and the first borne of thine
oxen, and of thy sheep, yt thou may learn to fear the LORD thy God, all
thy life long.

Deuteronomy. 12. ^ Baruc. 1. ^
But if the way be to much for ye, and LORD thy God has chosen to set his
name there, be to far from the: and thou can not carry it that ye LORD thy
God has blessed the withal, Then give it for money, and take ye money in
thine hand, and go unto the place which the LORD thy God has chosen, and
give the money for all that thy soul desires, whether it be oxe^, sheep,
wine, strong drink, or for what so ever thy soul desires, and eat there
before the LORD thy God, and be merry, thou and thine household, and ye Leuite
that is within thy gates. Thou shall not forsake him, Leui. 1^. ^
for he has no portion nor inheritance with the.

In the third year shall thou bring forth all the tithes of thine increase
of the same year, Deu. 26. c
and shall lay it within thy gates. The^ shall the Leuite (which has no
portion ner enheritaunce with the) and ye stranger, and the fatherless, and
the wedowe, which are within thy gates, come and eat, and fill them selves,
that the LORD thy God may bless the in all the works of ye hands which
thou do.

The XV. Chapter.
IN the seventh year shall thou make Leui. 25. a
This is ye manner of the Fre year. Exo. 22. c Esa. ^^. b
Who so ever le^deth ought with his hand unto his neighbor, shall not require
it of his neighbor or his brother: for it is called the Fre year unto the
LORD. Of a stranger may thou require it: but unto him that is thy brother,
shall thou remytte it. ^ccli. 4. a
There shall be to begge^ among you: for the LORD shall bless ye in the lord
which the LORD yi God shall give ye to inheritance to take it in possession,
only yt thou herke^ unto the voice of the LORD ye God, and keep all these
commandments which I command the this day, that thou may do thereafter.
For the LORD ye God shall bless the, as he has promised the. The^ shall thou
lend unto many nations, and shall borowe of noman. ^xo. 28. b
Thou shall reign over many nations, and noman shall reign over ye.

Ioh. 3. ^
When one of thy brethren is waxed poor in any cite within thy land, which
(...) LORD ye God shall give ye, thou shall not harden thine heart, ner
withdraw thine hand from thy poor brother: but shall open thine hand unto
him, and lend him, acordinge as he has need.

LORD, and it shall be sin unto the: ^o. 1^. b
But thou shall give him, and let it not grieve thine heart that thou geuest him.
For because of it, shall the LORD thy God bless the in all thy works, and in
all that thou put thine hand unto. Mat. 26. a
The land shall never be with out poor, therefore command I the and say,
that thou open thine hand unto thy brother, which is neady and poor in thy
land.

Exo. 21. a Leui. 25. f ^e^. 34. b. c
If thy brother an Hebrew or Hebruesse be sold unto the, he shall serve the six
year, in the seventh year shall thou let him go Fre. And wha^ thou deliuerest
him fre, thou shall not let him go from the emptye, but shall give him of thy
sheep, of thy corn, and of ye wine, so that thou give him of that, which the
LORD thy God has blessed the with all. And remember that thou also wast a
servant in the lord of Egipte, and how that the LORD thy God delivered the,
therefore command I the this thing to day.

Exo. ^1. a
for I love ye and thine house (in so much as he is well at ease with the) then
take a bo^kyn, and bore him through his ear to the door, and let him be thy
servant for ever. And with thy maid shall thou do likewise. And let it not
seem grievous unto the, to let him go fre from the (for he has served the six
years as a dubble hired servant) then shall the LORD thy God bless the in
all that thou do.

All the first borne that come of thine oxen and sheep, yt are males, Exo^* ^
Leu. ^ Nu^ ^
shall thou halowe unto the LORD thy God. Thou shall not plowe with the
firstborne of thine oxe^, and shall not clyppe the firstborne of thy sheep:
Before the LORD thy God shall thou eat the^ every year, (...)
in the place that the LORD choseth, thou and thine household.

^
But if it have a deformyte, so that it is lame or blind, or has any other
evil blemysh, thou shall not offer it unto ye LORD thy God, but shall eat it
within thine own gates) (...)
whether thou be unclean or clean) even as the Roo and Heart. Only se that
thou eat not of the blood thereof, but pour it out as water upon the ground.

The XVI. Chapter.
Observe the month Abib, yt thou offer LORD ye God: (...)
for in the month Abib the LORD thy God brought yt out of Egipte by night.
And for the Easter unto ye LORD thy God, thou shall offer oxen and sheep, in
ye * place which ye LORD shall chose, yt his name may dwell there. Thou shall
eat no leuended bred in yt feast. Seven days shall thou eat the vnleuended
bred of thy tribulacion: For with soroufull haist came thou out of the land
of Egipte, that thou may remember the day of thy departinge out of ye land
of Egipte, all yi life long. In seven days shall there no leue^ded bred be
se^e within all thy coasts: and of the flesh that is offered ye first day at
even, there shall nothing be left over night until the morning.

Thou may not offer Easter with in any of thy gates, which the LORD thy God
has given the: but (...)
in the place which the LORD thy God has chosen, that his name may dwell
there, there shall thou offer LORD thy God has chosen, and then turn the on
the morrow, and go home in to thy tente. Six days shall thou eat vnleuended
bred, and on the seventh day is the gatheringe together of the LORD thy God.
Thou shall do no work therein.

Seven wekes shall thou nombre unto ye, (...)
and begin to nombre when the syccle begins in the corn, and thou shall
keep the Act* ^
Feast of wekes unto the LORD thy God, that thou give a frewyll offering of
thine hand, acordinge as the LORD thy God has blessed the, and shall rejoice
before the LORD thy God, thou and thy son, thy daughter, thy servant, thy
maid, and the Leuite that is within thy gates, ye stranger, the fatherless,
and the wedowe, that are among you, in the place which ye LORD thy God has
chosen, that his name may dwell there. And remember, yt thou wast a servant
in Egipte, so that thou keep and do these ordynaunces.

(...)
Seven days shall thou keep ye feast unto the LORD thy God, in the place that
he has chosen. For the LORD thy God shall bless the in all thy fruits and in
all the works of thine hands. Therefore shall thou be glad.

(...). ^5. b
Three times in the year shall all thy males appear before the LORD thy God (in
the place that he shall chose) namely, in the feast of vnleuended bred, in the
feast of wekes, and in the feast of Tabernacles. He shall not appear empty
before the LORD, but every one after the gift of his hand, acordinge to the
blessinge that the LORD thy God has given the.

The XVII. Chapter.
LORD thy God gives the among thy trybes, yt they may judge the people with
righteous judgment. Thou shall not wrest the law. Thou shall know no person
also, ner take gifts. For (...). ^4. c Re. 8. a Exo. 23. a ^cli. 20. d
gifts blind the eyes of ye wise, and peruerte ye righteous causes. Look what
right is, yt shall thou follow, that thou may live and possess the land,
which the LORD thy God shall give the.

Thou shall plant no grove (of what so ever trees it be) nigh unto the altar
of the LORD thy God, which thou make the. Thou shall set the up no piler,
which ye LORD ye God hates. Reg. 13. c Re. 18. d Leu. 22. c ^eu. 1^. c
Thou shall offer unto the LORD thy God no ox or sheep, that has a blemish
or any evil fauourednesse on it: for that is abhominacion unto the LORD thy
God.

LORD ye God shall give ye) a man or woman, ^xo. 32. f ^ Re. 18. e ^ Re. 10. d
that works wickedness in ye sight of the LORD thy God, so that he
transgresses his couenau^te and goes, and serves other gods, and
worshippeth them, Deuteronomy. 4. ^
whether it be Son or Moan, or any of the hooste of heaven, which I have not
commanded, and it is told the, and thou hear of it, Deuteronomy. 13. ^ and 19. d
Iosu. 7. d
Then shall thou make diligent search therefore. And if thou fyndest that it is
so of a truth, that soch abhominacion is wroughte in Israel, then shall thou
bring forth the same man or ye same woman (which have done soch evil) unto
thy gates and shall stone them to death. Number. 35. ^ Deuteronomy. 19. ^
At the mouth of two or three witnesses shall he dye, that is worthy of death. At
the mouth of one witness shall he not dye. The hands of the witnesses shall be
the first to kill him, and the^ ye hands of all the people, that thou may
put away the evil from the.

If a matter be to hard for the in judgment Deuteronomy. (...) Eccli. 45. ^
then shall thou rise, and go up unto ye place that ye LORD thy God has
chosen: and shall come to the prestes the Levites, and to the judge which
shall be at that time, and shall axe. They shall show the how to judge, Eze. 44. ^
and thou shall do thereafter, as they say unto the, in ye place which the
LORD has chosen: and thou shall take heed that thou do acordinge unto all yt
they teach the. Acordinge to the law yt they teach the, and after the judgment
that they tell ye, shall thou do Deuteronomy. ^. d
so that thou turn not aside from ye same, nether to the right hand ner to
the lefts.

And if any man deal presumptuously, so that he herkeneth not unto the pressed
(which stondeth to do service unto the LORD thy God) or to the Judge, the same
shall dye: and thou shall put away the evil from Israel, that all ye people
may hear, and fear, and be no more presumptuous.

When thou art come in to ye land which the LORD thy God shall give the, and
take it in possession, and dwell therein, and shall say: 1. Reg. 8. ^
I will set a king over me, as all the nations have about me, the^ shall thou
set him to be king over the, whom the LORD thy God shall chose.

One of thy brethren shall thou set to be king over the. Thou may not set
a stranger ^* Reg. 4. c ^. Par. (...)
for as much as ye LORD has said unto you, that from hence forth ye should
come no more this way again.

He shall not have many wynes also, that his heart be not turned away. (...).
11. a (...) Re^ 10. c (...). b
Nether shall he gather him silver and gold to much.

And when he is set upon the seat of his kingdom, he shall take of the prestes
the Levites this second law, and cause it be written in a book, and that
shall he have by him, ^^su. 1. ^
and he shall read therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to
fear ye LORD his God, to keep all the words of this law, all these
ordinances, so that he do thereafter. He shall not lift up his heart above his
brethren, and shall not turn aside from the commandment, nether to the right
hand ner to the left, that he may prolo^ge his days in his kingdom, he and
his children in Israel.

The XVIII. Chapter.
Number. 18. c Deu. 10. b 2. b. 14. c ^zc. 44. d
The offerynges of ye LORD and his enheritaunce shall they eat. Therefore shall
they have no inheritance among their brethren, because the LORD is their
enheritau^ce, as he has said unto the^ This shall be ye prestes duty of the
people, and of the^ that offer, whether it be ox or sheep, so that they give
unto the pressed the shulder and both the chekes, and the breast. And the first
fruits of thy corn, of thy wine and of thy oil, and the first of thy sheep
sheringe. Number. ^. b and 1^. a
For the LORD thy God has chosen him out of all thy trybes, to stand and
mynyster in the name of the LORD, he and his sons all the days of their
life.

If a Leuite come out of any of thy gates or out of any place of all Israel,
where he is a gest, and comes with all the desire of his soul (unto the
place which the LORD has chosen) to mynister in the name of the LORD his
God, like as all his brethren ye Levites, which stand there before the LORD,
the^ shall he have like portion of meat with the other: besides that which he
has of the sold good of his fathers.

LORD thy God shall give ye, Leu. 1^. a and 20. d Deuteronomy. 12. d and 17. b 4. Re.
21. a Iere. 7. a and 19. a
thou shall not learn to do ye abhominacions of these nations, that there be
not found among you, yt makes his son or daughter go through the fire, or a
prophecier, or a choser out of days, or that regards the fowls cryenge, or
a witch, or a coniurer, or soythsayer, or an expounder of tokens, or yt axeth
any thing of the deed.

For who so ever does soch, is abhominacion unto the LORD: and because of soch
abhominacions does the LORD ye God drive the^ out before the. But thou shall
be perfect with the LORD ye God. For these nations whom thou shall conquer,
whom the LORD thy God has given the, harken to the chosers out of days, and
to the soythsayers: but so shall not thou do unto the LORD thy God.

A prophet, like unto me, shall the LORD (...)
and from among thy brethren, ^
unto him shall ye herke^, acordinge as thou desyredest before the LORD thy God
in Horeb, (in the day of ye gatheringe together) and saydest: (...)
Let me hear the voice of the LORD my God no more, and se no more this great
fire, that I dye not. And ye LORD said unto me: They have well spoken. I will
raise them up a prophet from among their brethren like unto the, and will put
my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command
him. (...)
And who so ever will not harken unto my words, which he shall speak in my
name, of him will I require it.

But if a prophet presume to speak ought in my name, (...)
which I have not commanded him to speak: and he that speaks in ye name of
other gods, ye same prophet shall dye. But if thou say in thine heart: How
can I know what word the LORD has not spoken? Even when the prophet
speaks in the name of ye LORD, and the thing follows not, and comes not
to pass, ye same is the word, yt the LORD has not spoken. The prophet has
spoken it presumtuously, therefore be not afraid of him.

The XIX. Chapter.
When ye LORD thy God shall have LORD thy God shall give the, so yt thou have
conquered them, and dwell in their cities and houses, (...)
thou shall appoynte the out three cities in the mids of the lord, yt the
LORD thy God shall give ye to possess. Thou shall prepare the way, and part
the coasts of ye land (which ye LORD thy God shall deuyde out unto the) in to
three parts, that whosoever has committed a slaughter, may fly thither. And
this shall be the cause, (...)
that whosoever has committed a slaughter, may fly thither, and live.

If any man smite his neighbor vnawarres, (...)
and has not hated him in time passed (as when a man goes unto the wod with
his neighbor to hew down timber, and he turns his hand with the axe to hew
down the wod, and the iron slyppeth from the helue, and hytteth his neighbor,
that he dies) the same shall fly in to one of these

And when the LORD ye God enlarges thy borders, as he has sworn unto thy
fathers, and gives the all the lord which he promised thy fathers to give (so
that thou keep all these commandments, and do yt I command the this day,
yt thou love the LORD thy God, and walk in his ways all ye life long) the^
shall thou add yet three cities unto these three, that innocent blood be not
shed in thy land (which the LORD ye God gives the to enheritaunce) and so
blood come upon the.

(...). 14. a
But if any man bear hate against his neighbor, and lays wait for him, and
ryseth against him, and smyteth him that he dye, and flies in to one of these
cities, then shall the Elders of the same cite send thither, and cause him to
be fetched from thence, and deliver him in to the hands of the auenger of
blood, that he may dye: thine eye shall not pity him, and the giltye blood
shall thou put away from Israel, that thou may prospere.

(...). 27. c (...) 24. ^
Thou shall not remove thy neghbours marck, which they of old time have set in
thine enheritaunce, that thou enheretest in the land, which the LORD thy God
has given the to possess it.

(...) d (...). 18. b (...). 8. b (...) a
One witness shall not stand up alone against a man, over any trespace or
sin, what manner of sin so ever it be, yt a man can do, but in the mouth of
two or three witnesses shall every matter be stablished.

(...)
But if an unrighteous witness stand up against any man, to testifye any
trespace upon him, then shall both the men that strive together, stand before
the LORD, before the prestes and Judges, which shall be at the same time.
^^ut. 13. b
And the judges shall make diligent inquisicion: and if the witness be found
false, and has given false witness against his brother, then shall ye do unto
him, even as he thought to do unto his brother: that thou may put away the
evil from the (...)
that other may hear and fear, and take no more upon them to do soch wicked
points among you. Thine eye shall not pity him. Exodus 21. c Leui. 24. d
Math. 5. c
Soul for soul, eye for eye, to the for to the, hand for hand, foot for
foot.

The XX. Chapter.
When thou go out to battayll against Deuteronomy. 7. d
and seyst horses and charettes of the people more then thou, be not afraid of
them: for the LORD thy God which brought ye out of the land of Egipte, is
with the. Now wha^ ye are come nigh unto the battayll, the pressed shall step
forth, and speak to the people, and say unto the^: Hear Israel: Ye go this
day in to the battayll against your enemies, let not yor heart faynte. Fear
not, Deuteronomy. 1^ c Number. 14 a ^. Mac. 4 a
be not afraid, ner a dread of them. Deu. 28. a
For the LORD your God goes with you, to fight for you against your
enemies, yt he may save you.

And the captains shall speak to ye people, and say: Who so has builded a
new house, and has not dedicate it, let him go, and bide in his house, that he
dye not in ye battayll, and another dedicate it. 1. Mac. 3. g
Who so has planted a vynyarde, and has not yet made it comen, let him go,
and bide at home, that he dye not in the battayll, and another make it comen.
Deu. 24. a
Who so has spoused a wife, and has not yet brought her home, let him go, and
bide at home, yt he die not in the battayll, and another bring her home.

And the captains shall speak further unto Iudi^. 7. a
He that fears and has a faynte heart, let him go, and bide at home, that he
make not his brethrens heart fainte also, like as his heart is. And when the
captains have made an end of speakinge unto the people, they shall set the
rulers of the host before the people in the forefronte.

When thou come nigh unto a cite to fight against it, Number. 21. c Deuteronomy. 2. c
thou shall offer them peace If they answer the peaceably, and open unto the,
then shall all ye people yt is found therein, be tributaries unto the, and serve
ye. But if they will not deal peaceably with the, and will war with the, then
besege it: and when the LORD thy God delyuereth it in to thy hand, thou shall
smite all the males that are therein, with the edge of the sword: save the
women and the children. Iosu. 8. a and 11. c
As for the catell, and all that is in the cite, and all the spoil, thou shall
take them unto thy self, and eat the spoil of thine enemies, which the LORD
thy God has given the. Thus shall thou do unto all the cities, that are very
far from the, and are not of the cities of these nations.

But in the cities of these nations, which the LORD thy God shall give the to
enheritau^ce, thou shall leave nothing alive that has breath, but shall
utterly destroy the^, namely ^eut. 31. a ^^su. 6. c (...). 10. c (...). 1. b
Deuteronomy. 7. a
the Hethites, Amorites, Cananites, Pheresites, Heuites, and Iebusites, as the
LORD thy God has commanded the, yt they teach you not to do all ye
abhominacions, which they do unto their gods, and so ye to sin against the
LORD your God.

When thou must lie a long season before a cite, against the which thou make
war to take it, thou shall not destroy ye trees thereof that thou would hew
them down with the axe, for thou may eat thereof: and therefore shall thou not
hew them down. For it is but wodd upon the field, and no man, and can not come
and be bullworkes against the. But the trees which thou know yt me^ eat not
of, those shall thou destroy, and rote out, and make bullworkes thereof,
against the cite that warreth with the, till thou have overcome it.

The XXI. Chapter.
LORD ye God shall give ye to possess it, and lies in ye field, and it is
not known who has slain him, then shall thy Elders and judges go forth, and
meet from the slain unto the cities that lie round about. Look which cite is
the next, ye Elders of the same shall take a yo^ge cow, which has not been
labored, ner has drawn in the yocke, and they shall bring her in to a
valley, where as is nether earinge nor sowinge, and strike of her head there
in the valley.

Then shall the prestes ye children of Leuicome forth. ( Deuteronomy. 17. b Eccli. 45. d
For the LORD thy God has chosen them, to serve him, and to praise his name:
and at their mouth shall all plees and strypes be tried.) And all the Elders of
the same cite shall come forth unto the slain, and LORD) unto thy people of
Israel, who^ thou have delivered, Ionae. 1. c
lay no innocent blood unto thy people of Isreal's charge: then shall they be
reconcyled from the blood. Thus shall thou put away the innocent blood from
the, in that thou do the thing whis is right in the sight of ye LORD.

Wha^ thou go forth to war against thine enemies, and the LORD thy God
delyuereth them in to thine hands, so that thou cariest away their presoners,
and seist among the captyues a bewtyfull woman, and have a desire unto her to
take her to thy wife, the^ bring her home to thine house, and let her shave
her head, and pare her nails, and put of her clothes that she was taken
presoner in, and let her sit in thine house, and mourn for her father and
mother a month long after that lie with her, and mary her, and let her be thy
wife. But if thou have no favor unto her, then shall thou let her go whither
she will, and not to sell her, ner to make cheuesaunce of her, because thou
have dishonored her.

If a man have two wives, (...)
one that he loves, and one that he hates, and they bear him children, both
the beloved and the hated, so that the firstborne be hirs that is hated, and
the time comes that he deals out the inheritance unto his children, then
can he not make the son of ye beloved first borne before the firstborne son
of the hated, but he shall know the son of the hated for ye first son, so
that he give him dubble of all that is at hand: (...)
for the same is ye beginning of his strength, and the firstbyrth right is
his.

(...)
If any man have a stubborn and dishobedient son, which herkeneth not unto
the voice of his father, and mother, and when they teach him nurtoure, will not
follow them, then shall his father and mother take him, and bring him to ye
Elders of their cite, and to the gate of the same place, and say unto the
Elders of the cite: This our son is stobburne and dishobedie^t, and
herkeneth not unto our voice, and is a ryoter and a dronkarde. Then shall all
the men of ye same cite stone him to death: and thus shall thou put away the
evil from the, that all Israel may hear and fear.

If a man have committed a sin yt is worthy of death, and is put to death,
(...)
so that he is hanged on tree, then shall not his body remain all night on tree,
but thou shall burye him the same day ( (...)
For cursed is he of God that is hanged) that thou defyle not thy land, which
the LORD thy God gives the to enheritaunce.

The XXII. Chapter.
IF thou se thy brothers ox or sheep, (...)
thou shall not withdraw thy self from them, but shall bring the^ again
unto ye brother. But if ye brother be not nigh unto the, and thou know him
not, then shall thou take the^ in to thine house, yt they may be with the, till
ye brother axe after them, and then deliver him the^ again. In like manner
shall thou do with his Ass, with his raiment, and with every lost thing of ye
brother, which he has lost, and thou have found it: thou may not withdraw
thy self.

(...)
If thou se thy brothers ox or Ass fallen down by the way, thou shall not
wtdrawe thy self from him, but shall help him up.

(...)
A woman shall not weere yt which pertayneth to a man, nether shall a man put on
woman's rayme^t. For who so ever does soch, is abhominacion unto ye LORD ye God.



When thou buyldest a new house, make a battelment about thy rofe, that thou
lade not blood upon thine house, if any man fall thereof.

(...)
Thou shall not sow thy vynyarde with diverse seeds, that thou halowe not (to
the full offering) the sede which thou have sown, with the increase of the
vynyarde.

Thou shall not plowe with an ox and an Ass together at one time.

(...)
Thou shall not weere a garment, yt is mixte with woollen and lynnen together.

(...)
Thou shall make gardes upon the four quarters of thy garment, wherewith thou
couerest thy self.

If a man take a wife, and hate her when he has lain with her, and lays any
shameful thing unto her charge, and brings up an evil name upon her, and
says: I took this wife, and when I came to her. I found her not a maid.
Then shall the father and mother of the damsel take her, and bring forth the
tokens of the damsels virginite before the Elders of the cite, even unto the
Deu. ^3. c
be cause she has wrought folly in Israel, and played the whore in her fathers
house. And so shall thou put away the evil from the.

If a man be found lienge with a woman that has a married huszbande, Leui. 20.
b
they shall dye both the man, and the woman that he has lien withal. And so
shall thou put away evil from Israel.

If a maid be handfested to any man, and

But if a man get an handfested damsel upon the field, and take her, and lie
with her, then the man that lay with her, shall dye alone, and unto the damsel
thou shall do nothing: for she has done no sin worthy of death. It is like
as if a man rose against his neighbor, and slew him, even so is this also.
For he found her in the field, and the handfested damsel cried, and there was
no man to help her.

If a man find a maid that is not hand fested, and take her, and lie with
her, Exo. 22. c
and be found, then shall he that lay with her, give her father fyf^ie Sycles
of silver, and shall have her to wife, because he has shamed her: he may not
forsake her all his life long.

Noma^ shall take his fathers wife, Leu. 18. a Deu. 26. c
ner uncover his fathers covering.

The XXIII. Chapter.
THere shall none that has his stones Esa. 56. a
come in to the congregation of the LORD. There shall no whores child also
come in to the congregation of ye LORD, no not after ye tenth generacio^, but
shall never come in to ye co^gregacio^ of ye LORD. ^. Esd. 1^. a
The Ammonites and Moabites shall not come in to ye co^gregacio^ of ye LORD, no
not after ye tenth generation, but shall never come in, because they met you
not with bred and water in ye way, wha^ ye came out of Egipte. Number. 22. a Iosu.
24. b
And besides yt, they hi^ed against you Balaa^ ye son of Beor, ye interpreter
out of Mesopotamia, to curse ye. But ye LORD ye God would not hear Balaam,
and turned the curse to a blessing unto the: because the LORD ye God loved
the. Thou shall wysh him nether prosperity ner health all thy life long for
ever. Thou shall not abhor an Edomite: Genesis 2^. c
for he is thy brother.

LORD.

2. Co. 10. a Ephe. 6. b
Wha^ thou go out to fight against thine enemies, keep the from all
wickedness.

If there be any man among you which is unclean, so that any thing is
chanced to him by night, the same shall go out of ye host until he have
bathed himself with water before even: and when the Son is gone down, he
shall come in to the host again.

And without the host thou shall have place to resort unto for necessyte, and
thou shall have a shouell under the gyrdle: and when thou will set ye down
without, thou shall dygge therewith: and when thou have done thine easement,
thou shall cover that which is departed from the. For the LORD thy God walks
in thine hooste, to deliver the, and to give thine enemies before the. Therefore
shall thy hooste be holy, that he se no unclean thing in the, and so turn
himself from the.



Number. ^5. b Deut^ 22. c
There shall be no whore among ye daughters of Israel, nether whorekeper among
the sons of Israel. Mich. 1. b
Thou shall not bring ye hyre of an whore ner the price of a dog in to the
house of the LORD ye God for any manner of vow: for they both are abhominacion
unto the LORD thy God.

Exo. 22. c Leuit. 2^. f ^. Esd. 5. a
Thou shall occupye no usury unto ye brother, nether with money, ner with fode,
ner with any manner thing that usury may be used withal. (Unto a stranger
thou may lend upon usury, but not unto thy brother) yt the LORD thy God
may bless the in all yt thou take in hand, in the lord whither thou
come in to possess it.

LORD ye God, Number. 30. a Eccl^. 5. a Baruc. 6. c Act. 5. a
to shall not be slack to perform it: for the LORD thy God shall require it
of the, and it shall be sin unto the. If thou leave vowinge, then is it no
sin unto the. But that which is proceaded out of ye lyppes shall thou keep,
and do thereafter, acordinge as thou have vowed unto the LORD of a frewyll,
which thou have spoken with thy mouth.

When thou go in to thy neghtours vyniarde, thou may eat of the grapes
acordinge to thy desire, till thou have enough. But thou shall put none in to
thy vessel.

(...)
When thou go in thy neghbours cornefelde, thou may pluck the ears with
thine hand, but with a syccle may thou not reap therein.

The XXIIII. Chapter.
When a man takes a wife, and marieth (...)
and she finds no favor in his eyes because of any uncleanness, the^ shall
he write a byll of deuorceme^t, and give it her in her hand, and send her out
of his house. If when she is gone out of his house, she go, and be another man's
wife, and the same second man hate her also, and write a byll of deuorcement,
and give it her in her hand, and send her out of his house: Or if the same
second man dye, which took her to wife, then her first huszbande that put her
away, may not take her again to be his wife, in so much as she is defiled,
for that is abhominacion before the LORD: that thou make not the land to
sin, which the LORD thy God has given the to enheritau^ce. (...)


When a man has newly taken a wife, he shall not go awarre fare, nether shall
he be charged withal. He shall be fre in his house one year long, that he
may be merry with his wife which he has taken.

Thou shall no take ye nethermost and up permost my* stone to pledge, for he
hat set ye his living to pledge.

If any man be found that steals one of his brethren, from among the
children of Israel, and sets him to pledge, or sells him soch a the^e shall
dye, that thou may put a way the evil from the.

Keep the from the plage of leprosy, that thou (...)
observe diligently and do acordynge unto all that the prestes the Levites
teach the, as I have commanded them, yt shall ye observe and do thereafter.
Remember what the LORD thy God did unto Miriam (...)
by the way, when ye were come out of Egipte.

If thou lendest ye brother any dett, thou shall not go into his house, and
take a pledge, but shall stand without: and he, to who^ thou lendest, shall
bring out his pledge unto shall deliver him his pledge again, when the Son
goes down, that he may sleep in his own raiment, and bless the, so shall
the same be rekened unto the for righteousness before the LORD thy God.

(...). 19. c ^ccli. 7. c ^ob. 4. c
Thou shall not withdraw the hyre of ye nedye and poor among thy brethren, or
stranger that is in thy land, or within thy gates, but shall give him his
hyre the same day, that the Son go not down thereon, for so much as he is
nedye, and his life sustained therewith: that he call not upon the LORD against
the, and it be sin unto the.

The fathers shall not dye for the children, ner the children for the fathers,
but every one shall dye for his own sin.

(...). 11. d (...). 14. a (...). 25. a (...). 18 c ^eut* 17. a (...) 2^* c
Thou shall not wrest the right of the stranger and of the fatherless. And
ye wedowes LORD thy God delivered the from thence, therefore command I the to
do this. ^^uit. 19. c


When thou have reaped down thine harvest in the field, and have forgotten a
shefe in the field, thou shall not turn again to fetch it, but it shall be for
the stranger, ye fatherless and the wedowe, that the LORD thy God may
bless the in all the works of thy hands.

When thou have plucked thine Olyue trees, thou shall not pluck them up clean
afterward: it shall be for the stranger, the fatherless and the wedowe. When
thou have gathered thy vynyarde, thou shall not gather it up clean afterward:
it shall be for the stranger, the fatherless and the wedowe. And thou shall
remember, that thou wast a servant in the land of Egipte: therefore command
I the to do this.

The XXV. Chapter.
^* Cor. 11. a
When they have given him fortye strypes, they shall beat him no more, lest (if
there be mo strypes given him) he be beaten to much, and thy brother be
horrible before thine eyes.

^ Cor. 9 b Timo. 5. c
Thou shall not mosell the mouth of the ox, that treads out the corn.

When brethren dwell together, R^^. 4.
and one of them dye without children, then shall not ye wife of the deed take
a strange man with out, but her kynsman shall go in unto her, Mat. 22 Luc. 20
and take her to wife: and the first son that she bears, shall he set up
after the name of his brother which is deed, that his name be not put out of
Israel.

But if the man will not take his kynswoman,

If two men strive together, and the wife of one run to, to deliver her
huszbande from the hand of him that smyteth him, and put forth her hand, and
take him by the secrets, then shall thou cut of her hand, and thine eye shall
not pity her.

Thou shall not have in ye bagg two manner of weightes, a great and a small.
Nether Leui. 19. ^ Mich. ^. ^
Thou shall have a perfect and just weighte, and a perfect and just measure,
that thy life may be long in the land, which the LORD ye God shall give the.
For who so ever does soch (ye all they that do evil) are abhominacion unto
the LORD thy God. Exo. 1^. c
Remember what the Amalechites did unto the by the way, wha^ ye were departed
out of Egipte, how they buckled with the by the way, and smote thy hynmost,
even all that were feeble, which came after the when thou wast weerye and
fainte, and they feared not God. Now wha^ the LORD thy God brings the, to
rest from all thine enemies round about in the land which the LORD thy God
gives the for inheritance to possess, then shall thou put out the
remembrance of the Amalechites from under heaven. Forget not this.

The XXVI. Chapter.
When thou come in to the land that the LORD thy God shall give manner
(...). 23. c (...) 34. c (...). ^. b
first fruits of the land, that come out of thy ground, which the LORD thy
God gives the, and shall put them in a maunde, and go unto the place which the
LORD thy God shall chose (yt his name may dwell there) and thou shall come
unto the pressed which shall be at that time, and say unto him: I knowledge this
day unto the LORD thy God, that I am come in to the land, which ye LORD
swear unto our fathers to give us. And the pressed shall take the maunde out of
thine hand, and set it down before the altar of the LORD thy God.

LORD thy God: The Syrians would have destroyed my father, ^en. 46. a
which went down in to Egipte, and was a stranger there with a small folk,
and became there a nacio^ great, mighty and full of people. ^xod. 1. b
But the Egipcia^s entreated us evil, and troubled us, and laid an hard
bondage upon us. Then cried we unto ye LORD, the God of our fathers. And the
LORD herd our cryenge, ^xod. 3. b
and looked on our aduersite, labor, and oppression, ^xo. 14. ^
and brought us out of Egipte with a mighty hand, and a stretched out arm,
and with great terryblenesse through tokens and wonders, and has brought us
unto this place and has given us this land, that flows with milk and honey.
Therefore bring I now the first fruits of the land, which the LORD has given
us. And thou shall leave them before the LORD thy God, and give thanks before
the LORD thy God, and rejoice over all the good, that the LORD ye God has
given the, and thine house: thou and the Leuite, and the stranger that is with
the.

When thou have brought together all ye Deu. 14. c
thou shall give it unto the Leuite, to the stranger, to the fatherless* and
to the wedowe, that they may eat within ye gates, and be filled. And thou
shall say before the LORD thy God: Luc. 1^. b
I have brought that hallowed is, out of my house, and have given it unto the
Leuyte, the stranger, the fatherless, and the wedowe, acordinge to all thy
commandment which thou have commanded me. I have not transgressed thy
commandments, ner forgotten them. I have not eaten thereof in my heaviness,
ner taken away thereof in uncleanness. I have not given thereof unto the deed. I
have been obedient unto the voice of the LORD my God, and have done all as he
has commanded me. (...)
Look down from thy holy habitacion, from heaven, and bless thy people of
Israel, and ye land that thou have given us, as thou swarest unto our
fathers, a land that flows with milk and honey.

In the day when the LORD thy God Exo* (...) and (...) De^. (...)
The same day maydest thou a promysse unto the LORD, that he should be thy
God, and yt thou would walk in all his ways, and keep his ordynaunces, his
commandments, and his laws, and to harken unto his voice. Exo. (...) Deu*
(...) and (...)
And the LORD promised the upon the same day, that thou should be his own
peculier people, like as he has said unto the (so yt thou keep all his
commandments) and that he would make the hye in praise name and honor
above all nations which he has made (...)
yt thou may be an holy people unto ye LORD thy God, as he has said unto
the.

The XXVII. Chapter.
ANd Moses with ye Elders of Israel, Io^. (...)
And what time as ye go over Iordane, in to the land yt ye LORD thy God shall
give the, thou shall set up great stones, and plaster them with plaster, and
write upon them all the words of this law: (when thou art come over) yt thou
may come in to the land, which the LORD thy God shall give the, a land yt
flows with milk and honey, as ye LORD God of thy fathers has promised the.

Now when ye go over Iordane, ye shall set up these stones (whereof I command
you this day) upon mount Eball, and plaster them with plaster: (...)
and there shall thou build unto the LORD thy God an altar of stone,
whereupon thou shall lift no iron. Exo. (...)
Of whole stones shall thou build this altar unto the LORD thy God, and
offer burnt offeringes thereon unto the LORD thy God: and thou shall offer
health offeringes, and eat there, and rejoice before the LORD thy God: and
upon the stones thou shall write all the words of this law manyfestly and
well.

And Moses with the prestes and Levites LORD thy God, that thou may be
obedient unto the voice of the LORD thy God, and do acordinge unto all his
commandments and ordinances, which I command the this day.

(...). 11. d (...)* 8. g
And Moses charged the people the same day, and said: These shall stand upon
mount Grisim to bless the people, when ye are gone over Iordane: Simeon, Leui,
Judah, Isachar, Joseph, and Ben Iamin. And these shall stand upon mount Eball to
curse: Ruben, Gad, Asser, Zabulon, Dan and Nephtali. And the Levites shall
begin, and say unto every man of Israel, with a loud voice:

(...). 10. a (...). ^7. a
Cursed be he, that makes any carved Idol or molten image (an abhominacion of
the LORD, a work of the hands of ye craftesman) and puts it in a secret
place. And all the people shall answer and say, Amen.

^xo. 21. b
Cursed be he, that curses his father and mother. And all the people shall
say, Amen.

(...). 1^. c
Cursed be he, yt remoueth his neghbours mark. And all the people shall say,
Amen.

(...). 19. d
Cursed be he, that makes a blind man go out of his way. And all the people
shall say, Amen.

(...). ^4. c
Cursed be he, that wresteth ye right of ye stranger, of the fatherless, and
wedowe. And all the people shall say, Amen.

(...). 18. a (...) ^0. b (...). 22. d
Cursed be he, that lies with his fathers wife, to uncover his fathers
covering. And all the people shall say, Amen.

(...). 22. c ^eui. 20. b
Cursed be he, yt lies with any manner be. And all the people shall say, Amen.

Leui. 18. a ^^ Re. 13. d
Cursed be he, yt lies with his sister, which is the daughter of his father or
of his mother. And all the people shall say, Amen.

Leui. 18. c
Cursed be he, yt lies with his mother in law. And all the people shall say,
Amen.

Cursed be he that slays his neighbor secretly. And all the people shall
say, Amen.

^xo. ^1. b ^eui. 2^* d (...). 19. a (...). 22. b ^ich. 3. c
Cursed be he, that receaueth gifts to slaye the soul of innocent blood. And
all the people shall say, Amen.

(...)
Cursed be he, that contynueth not in all ye words of this law, to do them.
And all ye people shall say, Amen.

The XXVIII. Chapter.
LORD thy God, Leu. ^6. a
to observe and do all his commandments which I command yt this day, then
shall the LORD thy God set ye an hye above all nations upon earth, and all
these blessings shall come upon the, and overtake the, because thou have been
obedient unto the voice of the LORD thy God. Blessed shall thou be in the
town, and blessed in the field. Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, the
fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy catell, and the fruit of thine oxen,
and the fruit of thy sheep. Blessed shall be ye baszkett, and thy stoare.
Blessed shall thou be wha^ thou go in, and blessed when thou go out. Deu.
20. ^
And thine enemies that rise up against the, shall ye LORD cause to be smytten
before thy face. They shall come out against the one way, and fly before the
seven ways.

The LORD shall command the blessing to be with ye in thy cellers, and in
all that thou take in hand, and shall bless the in ye land that the LORD
thy God has given the. The LORD shall set the up to be an holy people unto
himself (as he has sworn unto the) if thou keep the commandments of the
LORD thy God: so that all nations upon earth shall se, that thou art called
after the name of the LORD: and they shall be afraid of you. And ye LORD shall
make ye plenteous in goods, in the fruit of ye womb, in the fruit of thy
catell, and in the fruit of thy ground, in the land that the LORD swear unto
thy fathers, to give the.

Deuteronomy. 11. ^
And the LORD shall open unto ye his Deu. 15. a
And thou shall le^de unto many nations, but thou shall borowe of no man. And
ye LORD shall set the before, and not behind: and thou shall be above only,
and not benethe, if thou be obedient unto the commandments of ye LORD thy
God, which I command the this day to keep and to do them: and if thou Deu.
4. a and 17. c
bow not aside from any of these words, which I command ye this day,
either to the right hand or to the left, yt thou would walk after other
gods to serve them.

But if thou wylt not harken unto the voice of the LORD thy God, Leu. 26. b
to keep and to do all his commandments and ordinances, which I command
yt this day, Bar. 1. b Dan. 9. b
then shall all these curses come upon the, and overtake the. Cursed shall thou
be in the town, and cursed in ye field: cursed shall thy baszket be, and thy
stoare. Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, the fruit of thy land, the
fruit of thine oxen, and the fruit of thy sheep. Cursed shall thou be when thou
go in, and cursed wha^ thou go out. The LORD shall send in to the,
consuminge, and complayninge, and cursynge, in all that thou take in hand to
do, till he have destroyed the and shortly brought to the naught, because of
thy wicked inuencions, in that thou have forsaken me.

LORD shall make the pestylence to bide long with the, till he have consumed
the out of the land, in to the which thou come to possess it. The LORD
shall smite the with swellynge, fevers, heat, burning, venom, drouth, and
palenesse, and shall persecute the, till he have destroyed the. ^eut. 10. c
Thy heaven, that is over thy head, shall be of brass, and the earth under the,
of iron. The LORD shall give thy land dust for rain, and aszshes from heaven
upon the, until thou be brought to naught. The LORD shall cause the be
smytten before thine enemies. Thou shall come out one way against them, and
seven ways shall thou fly before them, and shall be scatered among all the
kingdoms upon earth. Thy carcass shall be meat unto all manner fowls of the
air, and to all the beestes upon earth, and there shall be no man to fraye them
away.

The LORD shall smite the with ye botches of Egipte, with the Emorodes, with
scalle, and maungynesse, that thou shall not be healed thereof. Mich. 3. b Romans
1. c
The LORD shall smite the with madness, blyndnesse and dasynge of heart. And
thou shall grope at the noone day, as ye blind gropeth in darkness, and
shall not prospere in thy way. And thou shall suffer vyolence and wrong all
thy lifelonge, and no man shall help ye. 1. Re. 12. c
Thou shall spouse a wife, but another shall lie with her. Deu. 20. a
Thou shall build an house, but another shall dwell therein. Thou shall plant
a vynyarde, but shall not make it comen.



The LORD shall smite the with a myscheuous botch in ye knees and legs, so
that thou can not be healed, even from the sole of thy foot unto the crown
of thy head*

The LORD shall bring the and thy king (which thou have set over the) unto a
nation, (...)
whom thou know not, nether thy fathers: and there shall thou serve other
geddes, even wodd and stone: and thou shall go to waist, and become a byworde,
and a laughinge stock among all nations, whither ye LORD has carried the.

Thou shall carry out much sede in to ye field, and shall gather but little in:
(...)
for the greshoppers shall destroy it. Thou shall plant vynyardes and dress
the^, but thou shall nether drink of the wine, ner gather of ye grapes: for ye
worms shall consume it. Thou shall have Olyue trees in all ye coasts, but
shall not be anointed with the oil: for thine Olive trees shall be roted out.
Thou shall get sons and daughters, and yet not have them: for they shall be
carried away captive. All thy trees and fruits of thy land shall be marred
with blastinge.

The stranger that is with ye, shall clymme up over the, and be allwaye above
the: but thou shall come down allow, and lie ever beneth. He shall lend unto
the, but thou shall not lend him. He shall be before, but thou shall be behind.

And all these curses shall come upon the, LORD yt God, to keep his
commandments and ordinances, which he has commanded the. Therefore shall
there betokens and wonders upon the, and upon thy sede for ever, because thou
have not served ye LORD thy God with a joyful and good heart, when thou
had abundaunce of all things. And therefore shall thou serve thine enemy,
which the LORD shall send upon the, in hunger and thyrst, in nakedness, and
neade of all thing: and he shall put a yocke of iron upon thy neck, until he
have brought the to naught.

The LORD shall bring a nation upon the from far, (...)
even from the end of ye world, as a flyenge Aegle: a people, whose speech
thou can not understand, an hard favored people, which regard not the
person of the old, ner have compassion on the young. And they shall eat up
ye fruit of thy catell, and the fruit of thy land, till they have destroyed
the, and shall leave the nothing in corn, wine, oil, in the fruit of ye oxen
and sheep, until they have brought the to naught: and shall lay sege unto
the with in all thy gates, till they cast down thy hye and strong walls,
wherein thou trustest through out all thy land. And thou shall be beseged within
all thy ports, through out all thy land which the LORD thy God has given the.

Re. 6. f ^en. 4. b (...). ^. a
Thou shall eat the fruit of thine own body, the flesh of thy sons and of
thy daughters, which the LORD yt God has

If thou will not be diligent to do all the words of this law which are
written in this book, that thou may fear this glorious and fearful name,
even the LORD thy God, then shall the LORD entreat ye wonderously, with
plages upon ye and thy sede, ye with great and continual plages, with evil
and contynuall sicknesses, and shall bring upon ye all ye sicknesses of Egipte
(whereof thou wast afraid) and they shall LORD thy God cause to come upon the,
until he have destroyed the. And there shall be left but a few people of you,
Deuteronomy. 10. d
which before were as the stars of heaven in multitude: because thou have not
herkened unto the voice of the LORD thy God.

And as ye LORD reioysed over you before, to do you good, and to multiplye you,
Iere. 31. ^
eue^ so shall he rejoice over you, to destroy you, and to bring you to
naught, and ye shall be waysted from of the land, whither thou go now to
possess it. For the LORD shall scater the among all nations, from the one
end of the world unto another, and there shall thou serve other gods, whom
thou know not, ner yet* thy fathers, even wodd and stone.

And among those same nations shall thou have no quietness, nether shall the
sole of ye foot have any rest: for the LORD shall give the there a fearful
heart, and dasynge of eyes, and a troubled soul, so that thy life shall ha^ge
before the: Night and day shall thou fear, and shall have no trust in thy
life. In the morning thou shall say: Who shall give me the evening? And at
even shall thou say: Who shall give me the morning? For the very great fear
of thine heart, which shall make the afraid: and for the fight of thine eyes
which thou shall se.

And the LORD shall bring the again in to Egipte by ship fulles, even
through the way whereof I said unto the: Exo. 14. ^
Thou shall se it no more: and there shall ye be sold unto your enemies for
bond servants and bondemaidens, and there shall be no man to bye you.

The XXIX. Chapter.
THese are ye words of the covenant, LORD commanded Moses to make with the
children of Israel in the land of the Moabites, Nu. 21. c
Exo. 19. ^
beside ye covenant which he made with them in Horeb. And Moses called all
Israel, and said unto them: Ye have seen all that the LORD did before your
eyes in the land of Egipte, unto Pharao with all his servants, and all his
land, the great tentacions which thine eyes have seen, that they were great
tokens and wonders. Deu. 10. b Iere. 31. d
And yet unto this day has not the LORD given you an heart that
understands, eyes that se, and ears that hear.

He has caused you to walk fortye years in the wilderness. Deu. ^. a
Your clothes are not waxed old upon you, nether is thy shue waxed old on
thy foot. Ye have eaten no bred, and dronken no wine, ner strong drink, that
ye might know, that he is ye LORD your God.

And when ye came unto this place, Sihon Nu. 81. d.c
and Og ye king of Basan, ^e^. 2. f ^^d ^. a
came out against us unto battayll, and we smote them, and took their land,
and gave it to enheritaunce unto ye Rubenites and Gaddites, and to the half
trybe of the Manassites. Deu. 4. a
Keep now therefore the words of this covenant, and do thereafter, that ye may
have understanding in all that ye do.

Ye stand this day all before the LORD your God, the chief rulers of your
trybes, your Elders, your officers, every man in Israel, your children,
your wives, ye strangers that are in thine host, (...). 9. d
from the hewer of ye wodd unto ye drawer of yt water: that thou should enter
in to the covenant of the LORD thy God, and in to the ooth which the LORD
thy God makes with the this day, that he might set the up this day to be a
people unto himself, and that he might be thy God, as he has said unto the,
^en. 17. a
and as he swear unto ye fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

For I make not this covenant and this ooth with you only, but both with you
yt are here this day, and stand with us before the LORD our God, and also
with them LORD our God, to go and to serve ye gods of these nations: and
lest there be among you some rote, that bears gall and worm wodd: so that
though he hear the words of this curse, he bless him self yet in his heart,
and say: ^ere. 5. b ^oph. 1. c Deu. 12. a
Tush, it shall not be so evil. I will walk after the ^ere. 5. b ^oph. 1. c
Deu. 12. a
meaning of mine own heart, that the dronken may perish with the thyrstie.

Then shall not the LORD be merciful unto him, but his wrath and gelousy
shall smoke over soch a man, and all the curses that are written in this book,
shall light upon him: and the LORD shall put out his name from under heaven,
and shall separate him unto evil out of all the trybes of Israel, acordinge
unto all the curses of the covenant, that is written in the book of this law.

LORD has smytten it) that he has brent up all their land with brymstone
and salt, so yt it cannot be sown, ner is fruitful, nether grows there any
grass therein, (...)
Like as Sodom, Gomor, Adama and Zeboim are over thrown, which the LORD
ouerthrewe in his wrath and anger.

Then shall all nations say: Ie^ ^ 3. (...)
Wherefore has the LORD done thus unto this land? What great wrothfull
displeasure is this? Then shall it be said: Even because they have forsaken
the covenant of ye LORD God of their fathers (which he made with them when he
brought them out of the land of Egipte) and they went, and served other
gods, and worshipped the^, even soch gods as they knew not, and whom he
had not divided unto them. Therefore the wrath of the LORD waxed whote over
this land, to bring upon it all the curses that are written in this book. And
the LORD thrust them out of their land with great wrath, indignacion and
displeasoure and has cast them into another land, as it is come to pass this
day.

These are the (...)
secrets of the LORD our God, which are opened unto us and our children for
ever, yt we should do all the words of this law.

The XXX. Chapter.
NOw when all this comes upon (...)
and thou go in to thine heart, being among the Heithen, whither the LORD
thy God has thrust the, and thou turnest unto the LORD ye God, so that thou
herkenest unto his voice, thou and thy children with all ye heart and with all
thy soul, in all that I command the this day, (...)
then shall the LORD thy God turn thy captiuyte, and have compassion upon the,
and shall gather thy congregation again from among all the nations, whither
the LORD thy God has scatered the.

And though thou werest thrust out unto the vttemost parts of the heaven, yet
shall the LORD thy God gather the from thence, and from thence shall he fetch
the, and shall bring the in to the land, which thy fathers have possessed, and
thou shall enjoy it, and he shall do the good, and multiplye the above thy
fathers.

(...) 10. d
And the LORD thy God shall circumcyse thine heart, and the heart of thy sede,
that thou may love the LORD yt God with all thy heart and with all ye soul,
that thou may live. But all these curses shall the LORD thy God lay upon
thine enemies, and upon them that hate the and persecute the. But thou shall
turn, and harken unto the voice of the LORD, to do all his commandments,
which I command the this day. And the LORD thy God shall make the plenteous
in all the works of thine hands, in the fruit of thy body, in the fruit of
thy catell, in the fruit of thy land to good.

(...)
For the LORD shall turn, to rejoice over the to good, as he reioysed over thy
fathers, so that thou harken unto the voice of the LORD thy God (to keep his
commandments and ordinances, which are written in the book of this law)
and turn unto the LORD thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul.

(...). 10. a
For the commandment which I command ye this day, is not to wonderful for
the, ner to far, ner yet in heaven, that thou neadest to say: Who will go up
for us in to heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it and do it?
Nether is it beyond the sea, that thou neadest to say: Who will go over the sea for us, and fetch it us, that we may hear it, and do it? For the word is
very nigh unto the, eue^ in thy mouth and in thine heart, that thou do it.

(...). 11. d (...). 21. b
Behold, I have laid before you this day, life and good, death and evil. For
I command the this day, to love the LORD thy God, and to walk in his
ways, and to keep his commandments, ordinances, and laws, that thou
may live and multiplye, and that the LORD thy God may bless the in the
land, whither thou go to possess it.



^eu. 4. d ^^d 31. g
I take heaven and earth this day to record over you: I have laid before you
life and death, blessinge and cursinge, that thou may chose life, and that
thou and thy sede may live, yt ye may love the LORD your God, and harken
unto his voice, and cleue unto him: (For he is thy life and thy long age) that
thou may dwell in the land, which the LORD swear unto thy fathers Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, to give them.

The XXXI. Chapter.
ANd Moses went, and spoke these words LORD also has said unto me: Nu. 20.
b
Thou shall not go over this Iordane. The LORD thy God himself shall go
before the over Iordane: and HE himself shall destroy these nations before
the, that thou may conquer them: and Joshua he shall go over before the. Nu.
27. d
as the LORD has said. And the LORD shall do unto them, as he did unto Sihon
and Og the kings of the Amorites and unto their lord, which he destroyed.
Number. 21. d


Deu. 7. a and ^0. c
Now when the LORD shall deliver the^ before you, ye shall do unto them
acordynge unto all the commandments which I have commanded you. Be manly
and strong, LORD thy God himself shall go with the, Iosu. 1. a Heb. 13. a
and shall not fail the, ner forsake the.

And Moses called Joshua, and said unto him before all Israel: Be strong and
bold, Iosu. 1. b ^. Reg. 2. a
for thou shall bring this people in to the land, which the LORD has sworn
unto their fathers to give them, and thou shall part it among them by lot.
But the LORD himself that goes before you, even HE shall be with the, and
shall not fail the, ner forsake the: Fear not, and be not afraid.

And Moses wrote this law, and delivered it unto the prestes the children of
Leui ( Number. 3.^
which bare the Arc of the covenant of the LORD) and unto all the Elders of
Israel.

And he commanded them, and said: 2. Esdr. ^. ^
At the end of seven years, in the time of the Fre year, in the feast of
Tabernacles when all Israel come to appear before the LORD thy God, in the
place that he shall chose, thou shall cause this law to be proclaimed before
all Israel in their ears, namely, before the congregation of the people, both
of men, women, children, and thy strangers which are within thy gates: that
they may hear and learn to fear the LORD their God, and be diligent to do
all the words of this law: and that their children also which know nothing,
may hear and learn to fear the LORD yor God, all your live days which ye
live in the land, whither ye go over Iordane to possess it.

LORD said unto Moses: Behold, thy time is come that thou must die, call
Joshua, and stand in the Tabernacle of witness, that I may give him a charge.
Moses went with Joshua, and stood in the Tabernacle of witness. And the LORD
appeared in the Tabernacle in a cloudy pyler Exo. 3^. b
and the same cloudy pyler stood in the door of the Tabernacle.

And the LORD said unto Moses: Behold, thou shall sleep with ye fathers, and
this people will rise up, and go a whoringe after strange gods of the land
in to the which they come, Reg ^ b
and will forsake me, and break the covenant which I have made with them. And
then shall my wrath wax whote against them, at the same time, and I shall
forsake the^, and hyde my face from them, that they may be consumed. (...). 2.
d
And so when much aduersite and trouble comes upon the^, they shall say: Is
not all this evil come upon me, because God is not with me? But I shall hyde my
face at the same time because of all the evil that they have done, in that
they have turned unto other gods.

^eut. 32. a
song may be a witness unto me among the children of Israel. For I will
bring them in to the land which I swear unto their fathers, that flows with
milk and honey. ^eut. 8. c
And when they eat, and are full and fatt, they shall turn unto other gods,
and serve them, and blaspheme me, and break my covenant.

And so when much myschefe and tribulacion is come upon them, this song shall
answer before them for a witness. It shall not be forgotten out of the mouth
of their sede: for I know their ymaginacion, that they go about even now,
before I bring them in to the land, which I swear unto them.

LORD gave Joshua the son of Nun a charge, and said: ^^su. 1. b (...) 23. c
Reg. ^. a
Be strong and bold, for thou shall bring the children of Israel in to the
land, which I swear unto them, and I will be with the.

Now when Moses had written out all the words of this law in a book, he
commanded the Levites (which bare the Ark of the LORD'S covenant) and said:
Take the book of this law, and lay it by the side of the Arc of the
covenant of the LORD your God, that it may be there a witness against the:
for I know thy stubburnesse and thy hard neck. Behold, (...)
while I am yet alive with you this day, ye have been disobedient unto the
LORD: how much more after my death?

Gather now unto me all the Elders of your trybes, and your officers, yt I
may (...)
and take heaven and earth to record against them. For I am sure that after my
death ye shall mar your selves, and turn aside out of the way, which I
have commanded you: and so shall mysfortune happen unto you her after, because
ye have done evil in the sight of the LORD, in provoking him through the
works of your hands.

So Moses spoke out the words of this song even to the end, in the ears of
all the congregation of Israel.

The XXXII. Chapter.
Harken (O ye heavens) I will speak: and let the earth hear the words of
(...)


(...)
My doctrine drop as does the rain, and my speech flow as does the dew.

Even as the rain upon the grass, and as the drops upon the herb.

For I will call upon the name of the LORD, give ye the glory unto our God.

(...)
Perfect are the works of the Stone, for all his ways are righteous.

God is true, and no wickedness is there in him, righteous and just is he.

The froward and ouerthwarte generation has marred them selves to himwarde
and are not his children, because of their deformyte.

Thankest thou the LORD yi God so, thou foolish and unwise people?

Is not he thy father and thy LORD? Has he not made the, and prepared the?

Remember the days that are past, (...)
considre the years of the generacions before time.

Axe thy father, he shall shewethe: thine elders, they shall tell the.

(...)
When the most Highest divided ye nations and scatred the children of men.

Then set he the borders of the nations

(...)
For the LORDS part is his folk, Jacob is the meetlyne of his enheritaunce.

He found him in the wilderness, even in the dry deserte where he roared.

He led him about, and gave him understanding: He kept him as the aple of
his eye.

As an Aegle stereth up her nest, and flotereth over her young: Even so
stretched he out his feathers, and took him (...) ^9. a
and bare him on his wings.

The LORD only was his gyde, and there was no strange God with him.

He carried him over ye height of the earth, and fed him with the increase of
the field.

(...)
He caused him suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the hard stone.

Butter of the kyne, and milk of the sheep, with the fat of the lambs, and
rams of the sons of Basan, and he goats with the fat of the kydneys, and
wheat: And gave him drink of the very blood of grapes.

(...)
And when he was fat and had enough, he waxed wanton.

He is fat, and thick, and smothe, and has letten God go, that made him, and
despised the rock of his salvation.



(...)
They offered unto field deuels, and not unto their God.

Unto gods whom they knew not, eue^ unto new gods, yt came newly up, whom
their fathers honored not.

Thy rock that begat ye, have thou despised: and have forgotten God that made
the.

And when the LORD saw it, he was moved unto wrath over his sons and his
daughters.

And he said: I will hyde my face from them, I will se what their end shall
be: for it is a froward generation, they are children in whom is no faith.

They have provoked me in it that is not God: with their vanites have they angered
me.

(...). 10. c (...). c
And I again will provoke them, by those that are no people: by a foolish nation
will I anger them.

For the fire is kyndled in my wrath, and shall burn unto ye nethermost hell,
and shall consume the land with the increase thereof, and set the foundacions of
ye mountains on fire.



They shall pyne away through honger, and be consumed of the fevers, and of
bitter sicknesses.

I will send among them ye tethe of beestes, and furious serpents. Iere. 5. b
Joel. ^ a


Without shall the swearde rob them, and fear in the chambers, both the
young man and young woman, the suckynge children with the gray headed man.

I will say: Where are they? I shall make their remembrance to cease from
among men.

If the wrath of the enemies were not gathered, lest their enemies should be
proud, and might say: Our hand is hye, and: The LORD has not done all
this.

For it is a people, wherein is no council, and there is no understanding in
them.

O that they were wise and understood this, that they would consider what
should happen unto them herafter.

How comes it, yt one shall chase a thousand of them, and yt two shall put
ten thousand to flyghte?

Is it not so, even because their rock has sold them, and because the LORD
has given them over?

For our rock is not as their rock, Exo. 14. c 1. Reg. ^. b
of

Their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the feldes of Gomorra: their grapes
are the grapes of gall, they have bitter clusters.

Their wine is the poison of Dragons, and the furious gall of Adders.

Is not this hid with me, and sealed up in my treasures?

Vengeance is mine, Romans ^^. c Heb. 10. d
and I will reward in due season. Their foot shall slide, for the time of
their destruccio^ is at hand, and the thing that is to come upon them, makes
haiste.

For the LORD shall judge his people, ^. Ma. 7. b
and shall have compassion on his servants. For he shall considre that their
power is away, and that it is gone with them, which were shut up and remained
over.

And he shall say: Iere. 1. d
Where are their gods, their rock wherein they trusted?

Of whose sacrifices they ate ye fatt, and drank the wine of their drynk
offeringes? Let them rise up and help you, and be your proteccion.

Se now that I I am, and that there is Deuteronomy. 4. f 1. Reg. 2. b


I can kill and make alive: what I have smytten, that can I heal: Job 10. a
and there is noman able to deliver out of my hand.

For I will lift up my hand to heaven, and will say: I live ever.

If I whet ye edge of my sword, and my hand take hold of judgment, then will
I avenge me on mine enemies, and reward them that hate me.

I will make mine arowes dronken with blood, and my sword shall eat flesh over
ye blood of the slain, and over the captyuite, and in that the enemies head
shall be discovered.

Romans 15. a
Rejoice ye Heythen with his people: for he will avenge the blood of his
servants, and will avenge him on his enemies, and will be merciful unto the
land of his people.

And Moses came and spoke all the words of this song in the ears of the
people, he and Joshua the son of Nun. Now wha^ Moses had made an end of
speakinge all these words unto all Israel, he said unto Deuteronomy. 6. b and 11. c
Take to heart all ye words, which I testifye unto you this day, that ye
command your children, to observe and do all the words of this law. For it
is no vain word unto you, but it is yor life: and this word shall prolonge
your life in ye land, whither ye go ^uer Iordane to conquer it.

And ye LORD spoke unto Moses ye same day, and said: Get the up to this
mount Abarim, upon mount Nebo, which lies in ye land of the Moabites over
against Jericho, and behold the land of Canaan, which I shall give unto the
children of Israel in possession. And dye thou upon the mount, when thou art
come up, and be gathered unto thy people, Nu. ^0. d
like as Aaron thy brother dyed upon mount Hor, and was gathered unto his
people* Because ye trespaced against me among the children of Israel by the
Nu. 20. a
water of strife at Cades in the wilderness of Zin, and sanctified me not
among the children of Israel. For thou shall se the land over against the,
which I give unto ye children of Israel but thou shall not come in to it.

The XXXIII. Chapter.
LORD came from Sinai, Exo. 3. a
Exo. 19. a
and rose up unto the^ from Seir. He appeared fro mount Paran, and came with many
thousand saints. At his right hand is there a law of fire for them: O how
loved he the people? All his saints are in his hand, (...)
they shall set them selves down at thy fete, and receive of thy words. Moses
commanded us the law, which is the enheritaunce of the congregation of Jacob.
And he was in the fullness of the king, and held ye rulers of ye people
together, with the trybes of Israel.

Let Ruben live, and not dye, and his people be few in nombre.

This is the blessing of Judah. And he said: LORD hear the voice of Judah,
and bring him unto his people: Let his hands multiplye him, and let him be
helped from his enemies.

And unto Leui he said: Thy perfectnes (...)
who^ thou have tempted at Massa, when ye strove by the water of strife. (...)
He that says unto his father and to his mother: I se him not: and to his
brother, I know him not: and to his son, I wot not of him, those have
observed thy words, and kept ye covenant: they shall teach Jacob thy
judgments, and Israel thy law: they shall lay incense before thy nose, and
burnt offeringes upon thine altar. LORD, bless thou his power and accept
the works of his hands: smite the loins of them yt rise up against him, and
of them that hate him, that they lift not up them selves.

And to Ben Iamin he said: The beloved of the LORD shall dwell in hope on him:
All the day long shall he wait upon him, and shall dwell between his shulders.

And to Joseph he said: (...)
His londelieth LORD, there are noble fruits of heaven, of the dew, and of the
deep that lies beneth: There are noble fruits of the increase of the Son,
and noble ripe fruits of ye months: And of ye tops of the mountains of
old, and of the hills allwaye, and of the noble fruits of ye earth, and of
(...) fullness thereof. The good will of him (...)
that dwells in the buszshe, come upon the head of Joseph, and (...)
upon ye top of his head that was separated from among his brethren.

His bewtye is as a firstborne ox, and his horns are as ye horns of an
Unicorn: with the same shall he puszshe the nations together, even unto the
ends of the world. These are the thousands of Ephraim, and the thousands of
Manasse.

And unto Zabulon he said: Rejoice Zabulon people unto ye hill, and there shall
they offer ye offeringes of righteousness. For they shall suck the abundaunce of
the sea, and the treasures hyd in the sonde.

And to Gad he said: Blessing have Gad, which makes rowme. He dwells as a
lion, and spoyleth the arm and the top of the head. And he saw his
beginning, that ye heap of the teachers lay hydd there, and came with the
rulers of the people, and executed the righteousness of the LORD, and his
judgment on Israel.

And to Dan he said: Dan a young lion, he shall flow from Basan.

And to Nephtali he said: Nephtali shall have abundaunce of pleasure, and
shall be full of the blessing of the LORD: his possession shall be toward the
west and south. And

There is no God as the God of the just. He that sytteth upon heaven, be thy
help. And his glory is in the clouds, that is the dwelling of God from the
beginnynge, and under the arms of the world. And he shall drive out thine
enemy before the, and say: Be destroyed. (...). ^3. b
And Israel shall dwell safe alone. The eye of Jacob shall be upon ye land where
corn and wine is, heaven also shall drop with dew. Happy art thou Israel,
who is like unto the? O thou people yt art saved by the LORD, which is thy
help, shylde, and the sword of thy glory. Thine enemies shall pyne away, and
thou shall tread upon the height of them.

The XXIIII. Chapter.
(...). 17. c (...). 7. a
upon ye top of mount Pisga over against Jericho. And the LORD showed him
all the land of Gilead unto Dan, and all Nephtali, and the land of Ephraim
and Manasse, and all the land of Judah, unto ye vttemost see, and toward the
south, and the region of the plain of Jericho the cite of the palm trees even
unto Zoar. And the LORD said unto him: This is the land that I swear unto
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and said: I will give it unto thy sede. Thou have
seen it with thine eyes, Nu. 10. b
but thou shall not go over thither.

So Moses ye servant of the LORD died LORD. And he buried him in a valley,
in the land of the Moabites over against the house of Peor. And noman knew of
his grave unto this day. And Moses was an hundredth and twentye year old when
he dyed: his eyes were not dymme, and his chekes were not fallen. And the
children of Israel weped for Moses in ye field of the Moabites thirty days,
and the days of the weeping and mourning for Moses were fulfilled.

And Joshua the son of Nun was filled with ye sprete of wyszdome ( Nu. 27. d
for Moses had LORD commanded Moses. And there arose no prophet more in
Israel, like unto Moses, whom the LORD knew face to face in all tokens and
wonders (which the LORD sent him to do in ye land of Egipte, unto Pharao, and
to all his servants, and his land) and in all this mighty hand and great
visions which Moses did in the sight of all Israel.

The end of the fifte book of Moses, called Deuteronomion.
The second part of the old Testament.

The book of Joshua. The book of the Judges. The book of Ruth. The first book of
the Kings. The second book of the Kings. The third book of the Kings. The
fourth book of the kings. The first book of the Cronicles. The second book of
the Cronicles. The first book of Eszdras. The second book of Eszdras. The book
of Hester.




The book of Joshua.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I. After the death of Moses, God commands Joshua to get him up, and to
go with the people over Iordane in to the land of promise. Chap. II. Two spies
are sent unto Jericho, and Rahab lodges them. Chap. III. Joshua goes forth
with the people unto Iordane: The Levites are ordained to go beforewith the
Arc. The one part of Iordane stondeth still, the other renneth down, and the
people go through it dry shodd. Chap. IIII. Twolue stones does Joshua cause to
be taken out of Iordane, and sets them up at Gilgall for a remembrance.
Chap V. The kings beyond Iordane are afraid. The people in Gilgall are
circumcysed. They eat the Passover and vnleuended bred. Chap. VI. How Jericho
is won and taken. Chap. VII. The Israelites are put to flight before their
enemies, because one of the^ had stolen of it that should have been damned and
utterly destroyed. The trespacer is stoned unto death. Chap VIII. The cite of
Hai is won, the people slain, the king taken alive and hanged, the cite
brent. Joshua buyldeth an altar unto the LORD. The blessings and curses are
red. Chap. IX. The Heythen kings prepare the^ selves against Israel. The
Gabaonites save their lives by craft and suttyltie Chap. X. The Heythen lay
sege to Gabaon, but Joshua helps them, and wynneth a great field, commands
the Son to sto^de still, hangs up five kings, and takes the cities. Chap.
XI. The Heythe^ kings gather the^ selves together against Israel: but they are
discomfited, and their cities won. Chap. XII. The names of the kings whom
Joshua and the Israelites slew, are here rehearsed, even one and thirtye. Chap*
XIII. The remnaunt of the land on this side Iordane. Chap. XIIII. The dealinge
out of the land. Chap. XV. The land that fell unto Judah by lot. Chap. XVI.
The lot of Ephraim. Chap. XVII. The lot and portion of Manasse. Chap. XVIII.
Men are sent out of the seven trybes, to consider the land, and to deal it
out. The portion of Ben Iamin. Chap. XIX. The portion of Simeon, Zabulon,
Isachar, Aser, Nephtali and Dan. Chap. XX. The partinge out of the fre cities.
Chap. XXI. Of the cities and suburbs of the Levites. Chap. XXII. The two
tribes and a half are sen^ home again, with a charge to be diligent in
keeping Gods commandment. Of the altar of witness Chap. XXIII. Joshua
calls the people together before his death, and exorteth them to cleue fast
to the commandments of the LORD. Chap. XXIIII. He calls the people
together i^ Sichem, and rehearceth the benefits of God unto the^. The
covenant with God is renewed. Joshua dies, and so does Eleasar.


The first Chapter.
LORD, spoke the LORD unto Joshua ye son of Nun Moses mynister: My servant
Moses is deed, up now, and go over this Iordane, thou and all this people in to
the land that I have given the children of Israel. ^^ut. 11. d
All the places that the soles of your fete shall tread upon, have I given
unto you, as I said unto Moses: From the wilderness and this Libanus unto the
great water Euphrates: all the land of the Hethites unto the great see
toward the west, shall be your border. There shall noman be able to withstonde
yt all thy life long. (...). 3. d
And like as I was with Moses, so will I be with the also. ^eut. ^1. b ^^b. 13. a
I will not fail the nether forsake the. Be strong and bold: for unto this
people shall thou deuyde ye land, which I swear unto their fathers, to give it
them.

Deu. 31. b
Be strong therefore and very bold, that thou may keep and do every thing
acordinge to the law, that Moses my servant commanded the. Turn not aside
from it, nether to the right hand ner to the left, Deuteronomy. ^. d
yt thou may deal wisely whither so ever thou go. Deuteronomy. 17. d
And let not the book of this law depart out of thy mouth, but exercise thy
self therein day and night, that thou may keep and do every thing
acordinge to it that is written therein: Then shall thou prospere in thy ways,
and deal wisely. Lo, I have commanded the to be strong and bold. Fear not,
and be not afraid: for the LORD thy God is with ye, whither so ever thou
go.

Then commanded Joshua the officers of the people, and said: Go through the
host, and charge ye people, and say: Prepare you vytayles, for over three
days shall ye go over this Iordane, that ye may come in and take possession of
the land, which the LORD your God shall give you.

And to the Rubenites, Gaddites, and to Nu. 32. d
that Moses the servant of ye LORD spoke unto you, and said: The LORD yor
God has brought you to rest, and given you this land. Let your wives and
children and catell remain in ye land, that Moses gave you on this side
Iordane: But ye your selves (as many as be fightinge men) shall go forth before
your brethren in harness, and help them, till the LORD have brought your
brethren to rest also as well as you: that they also may take possession of
the land, which the LORD yor God shall give them: Then shall ye turn again in
to the land of your possession, that ye may enjoy it, which Moses the
servant of the LORD has given you on this side Iordane toward ye East. And
they answered Joshua and said: Deu. 5. ^ 1. Mac 2^ Iere. 42
All that thou have commanded us, will we do: and whither so ever thou sendest
us, we will go thither. Like as we have obeyed Moses, so will we be obedient also
unto the: Only that the LORD thy God be with ye, like as he was with Moses.
Who so ever disobeyeth thy mouth, and herkeneth not unto thy words in all that
thou have commanded us, shall dye: Only be thou strong and bold.

The II. Chapter.
Joshua the son of Nun sent out two Heb. 11. ^ Iac. 2. ^
and came in to ye house of an harlot, called Rahab, and lay there. Then was
it told the king of Jericho: Lo, there are men come in this night from the
children of Israel, to spy the land. Then sent the king of Jericho unto
Rahab, saying: Deliver the men forth that are come unto the in to thy house,
for they are come to spy out the whole land. Now as for the two men, the
woman had hyd them, and said: There came men in unto me in deed, but I knew
not whence they were. And at the shuttinge in of the gate when it was darcke,
they went out, so yt I can not tell whither they be gone: follow soon after
them, for ye shall overtake them. But she had caused them to clymme up unto the
house top, and hyd them under the stalks of flax, that she had prepared her
upon the top of the house. Howbeit the men followed after them in ye way
toward Iordane, even unto the ferye: and when they that followed upon them were
gone forth, the gate was shut.

LORD shall deliver you the land, Deu. 2^. a ^osu. 5. a
for the fear of you is fallen upon us, and all the inhabiters of the land
are discoraged at your coming. For we have herd, how the LORD dried up the
water in the reed see before you, Exo. 14. e
wha^ ye departed out of Egipte: Nu. 21. d
and what ye did unto the two kings of the Amorites, Sihon and Og beyond
Iordane, how ye roted them out, and destroyed them. And sense we herd thereof,
our heart has failed us, nether is there a good stomach more in any man, by
the reason of your coming. For the LORD yor God is both the God above in
heaven and beneth upon earth.

^eu. 10. d
even by the LORD (for so much as I have dealte mercifully with you) that ye
will also show mercy upon my fathers house: and give me a true token, that ye
will let my father live, and my mother, my brethren, and my sisters, and all
that they have, and deliver our souls from death. The men said unto her:
^su. ^. d
If we show not mercy and faithfulness upon the, when the LORD gives us the
land, then let our soul dye for you, so far as thou betrayest not our
deuyce. Then let she them down through the wyndowe by a coarde: for her house
wa^ in the wall of the cite, and in the wall was her dwelling. And she said
unto them: Go your way up to the mountains, lest they mete you that follow
upon you: and hyde your selves there three days, till they be come again yt
follow after you: and then get you your way.



They went on their way, and came to the mountains, and remained there three
days, till they that followed upon them were come again: for they sought them
through every street, and yet they found them not. So the two men turned
again, and departed from the mountains, and passed over (Iordane) and came to
Joshua the son of Nun, and told him every thing, as they had found it, and
they said unto Joshua: The LORD has given us all the land in to our hands,
and all they that dwell in the land, are sore afraid of us.

The III. Chapter.


ANd Joshua rose up early, and they departed LORD your God, and the prestes
from among the Levites bearinge it, depart ye then out of your place, and
follow after (but so, that there be rowme between you and it by two thousand
cubits, and that ye come not nigh it) yt ye may know what way ye should go:
for ye never went that way before.

And Joshua said unto the people: Halowe (...)
for tomorow shall ye LORD bring wondrous things to pass among you. And
unto the prestes he said: Bear ye the Arc of ye covenant, and go before the
people. Then (...)
bare they the Arc, and went before the people. And the LORD said unto
Joshua: This day will I begin to make the great in the sight of all Israel,
that they may know, how that like as I was with Moses, so am I with the also.
And command thou the prestes that bear the Arc, and say: When ye come
before in the water of Iordane, stand still.

LORD your God. He said morouer: By this shall ye perceive, that the living
God is among you, and that he shall drive out before you ye Cananites,
Hethites, Heuites, Pheresites, Girgosites, Amorites and Iebusites. Behold, the
Arc of the covenant of him yt has domynion over all lands, shall go before
you in Iordane. Take now therefore twolue men out of ye trybes of Israel, out of
every trybe one. And when the soles of the fete of the prestes that bear ye
Ark of the LORD the gouernoure of all lands, are set in the water of
Iordane, then shall ye water of Iordane withdraw it self from the water that
flows from above, that it may stand on a heap.

(...)
of the land) then the water that came down from above, stood straight up
upon one heap, very far from the cite of Adom, that lies on the side of
Zarthan: But the water that ran down to the sea (even to the salt see) fell
away, and decreased.

(...). 65. a
So ye people went through over against Jericho. And the prestes that bare the
Ark of the LORD'S covenant, stood dry in ye mids of Iordane, ready
prepared: and all Israel went through dry shod, until ye whole people were
all come over Iordane.

The IIII. Chapter.
LORD said unto Joshua: Take you twolue men, out of every trybe one, and
command them, and say: (...). ^7. a
Take up twolue stones out of Iordane, from the place where the fete of the
prestes stood in their array: and carry them with you, yt ye may leave them in
ye lodginge, where ye shall lodge this night. The^ Joshua called twolue me^ which
were prepared of the children of Israel, out of every trybe one, and said unto
the^: Go your way over before the Ark of the LORD your God in the mids
of Iordane, and take every man a stone upon his shulder, after the nombre of
the trybes of ye children of Israel, yt they may be a token among you. And
when your children axe their fathers here after, and say: What do these
stones there? That ye may then say unto them, how that the water of Iordane
claue in sunder before the Ark of the LORD'S covenant, when it went through
Iordane, and that these stones are set for a perpetual remembrance unto the
children of Israel.

Then did the children of Israel as Joshua LORD had said unto Joshua) 1. Re.
^^. ^
acordinge to the nombre of the trybes of the children of Israel, and brought
the same with them in to the lodginge, and left them there. And Joshua set up
twolue stones in ye mids of Iordane, where ye fete of the prestes stood, that
bare ye Arc of the covenant: and there they be yet unto this day. As for ye
prestes that bare ye Arc, they stood in the mids of Iordane, until all was
performed that the LORD charged Joshua to say unto ye people Deu. 27. ^
acordinge as Moses gave Joshua in commandment. The people also made haist,
and went over. Now when all the people was gone over, the Ark of the LORD
went over also, and the prestes went before the people.

Number 32. ^ Iosu. ^. c
And the Rubenites, and Gaddites, and ye LORD to the battayll, upon ye field of
Jericho. Iosu. 3. c
In that day the LORD made Joshua great in the sight of all Israel: and like
as they feared Moses, so stood they in awe of him, all his life long.

And the LORD said unto Joshua: Command the prestes which bear the Arc of
witness, that they come up out of Iordane. So Joshua commanded the prestes,
and said: Come up out of Iordane. And when the prestes yt bare the Arc of the
covenant of ye LORD were come out of Iordane, and trod with the soles of
their fete upon the dry land, ye water of Iordane came again in to his
place, and flowed (like as before time) upon all his banckes.

It was ye tenth day of the first month, Exo. 1^. ^
When your children axe their fathers herafter, and say: What mean these
stones: Ye shall tell the^, and say: Israel went dry through Iordane, what
time as ye LORD yor God dried up ye water of Iordane before you, until ye
were over: like as the LORD yor God did in the reed see, ^xo. 14. c
which he dried up before us, yt we might go through: that all the people upon
earth might know the hand of the LORD, how mighty it is, to the intent
that ye should allwaye fear the LORD your God.

The V. Chapter.
LORD had dried up the water of Iordane before the children of Israel, till
they were come over ^osu. 2. b
their heart failed them, nether was there any more courage in them at the
presence of the children of Israel.

At the same time said ye LORD unto Joshua: Make the knyues ^xod. 4. c
of stone, and circumcyse the children of Israel again the second time. Then
Joshua made him knyues of stone, and circumcysed the children of Israel upon the
top of the foreszkynnes. And the cause why Joshua circumcysed all the males of
the people yt were come out of Egipte, is this: for all the men of war dyed
in ye wilderness by the way, after they were departed out of Egipte: for all
the people that came forth, were circumcysed.

LORD, like as the LORD swear unto them, (...). 14. d
that they should not se the land, which the LORD swear unto their fathers to
give unto us, even a land that flows with milk and honye: their children
which were come up in their stead, did Joshua circumcyse: for they had the
foreszkynne, and were not circumcysed by the way.

LORD said unto Joshua: To day have I turned ye shame of Egipte away from
you, and the same place was called Gilgall unto this day. And while the
children of Israel lay thus at Gilgall, they kept Easter Exodus 1^. a
the fourtenth day of the month at eue^ in the field of Jericho. And they ate
of the corn of the lord the second day of the Easter: namely, vnleuended
bred, and fyrmentye of yt year, eue^ the same day. And upon the morrow, the
^xod. ^^. f
Manna failed, when they ate of the corn of ye land, so that the children of
Israel had no more Manna, but ate of the corn of the land of Canaan the same
year.

And it fortuned that wha^ Joshua was by Jericho, he lift up his eyes, and was
awarre, that there stood a man against him, and had a naked sword in his
hand. And Joshua went to him, and said unto him: Art thou one of us, or of
our enemies? He said: No, but I am (...)
the prince of the LORDS host, and now am I come. Then fell Joshua down to
the earth upon his face, and worshipped him and said unto him: What says my
LORD unto his servant? And the prince over the LORDS host said unto him:
(...)
Put ye shues of ye fete, for the place whereupon thou stondest, is holy. And
Joshua did so.

The VI. Chapter.
AS for Jericho, it was shut and kept because LORD said unto Joshua: Behold,
I have given Jericho with ye king and men of war thereof, in to ye hand. Let
all the men of war go once round about ye cite, and do so six days. But
upon the seventh day let the prestes take the seven trompettes of the year of
Iubilye before the Arc, and go the same seventh day seven times abou^^ the
cite, and let the prestes blow the trompettes. And when the horn of the year
of Iubilye blows and makes a sound, so that ye hear the trompettes, all
the people shall make a great shoute, then shall the walls of the cite fall
down, and ye people shall fall in, every one straight before him.

Then Joshua the son of Nun called ye LORD. But unto the people he said: Get
you hence, and go round about the cite: and let him that is harnessed, go
before the Ark of the LORD. When Joshua had spoken this unto the people, the
seven prestes bare the seven trompettes of the year Iubilye before the Ark of the LORD, and went and blew the trompettes, and the Ark of the LORD'S
covenant followed after them: and who so was harnessed, went before the
prestes that blewe the trompettes, and the multitude followed the Arc. And all
was full of ye noise of the trompettes. But Joshua commanded the people, and
said: Ye shall make no shoute, ner let your voice be herd, another shall ye
give one word out of your mouth, until the day yt I say unto you: Make a
shoute, then make a shoute.

LORD went once round about the cite, and came agyne in to ye hooste, and
remained therein: for Joshua used to rise up early in the morning. And the
prestes bare the Ark of the LORD: so did the seven prestes bear the seven
trompettes of the year of Iubilye before ye Ark of the LORD, and went and
blewe the trompettes: and who so was harnessed, went before the^, but ye
multitude followed ye Ark of the LORD. And all was full of the noise of the
trompettes.

The second day went they once about the cite also, and came again into
the host. Thus did they six days. But upon the seventh day when the
morning spring arose, they gat them up early, and went after the same manner
seven times about ye cite, so that upon the same one seventh day they went
seven times about the cite.



LORD has delivered you the cite: Howbeit this cite, and all that is therein,
shall be damned unto the LORD: (...). ^. c
only the harlot Rahab shall live, and all that are with her in ye house, for
she hyd the messaungers, whom we sent forth. (...). ^. a
Only bewarre of it that is damned, lest ye damn your selves (if ye take
ought of it which is damned) and make the host of Israel to be damned, and
bring it in to mysfortune. But all the silver and gold, with the orname^tes
of brass and iron, shall be sanctified unto the LORD, that it may come to the
LORDS treasure.

Then made the people a great shoute, and the prestes blewe the trompettes
(for when the people herd the noise of the trompettes, they made a great
shoute) (...)
and the walls fell, and ehe people clymmed up in to the cite, every one
straight before him. Thus they wanne ye cite, and Deuteronomy. ^^. ^
destroyed all that was in the cite with the edge of the sword, both man and
woman, young and old, ox, sheep, and Ass.

But Joshua said unto ye two men which LORD: but Joshua let Heb. 11. ^ Jacob.
^. ^
the harlot Rahab live, with her fathers house, and all that she had: and she
dwelt in Israel unto this day, because she had hyd the messaungers who^ Joshua
sent unto Jericho to spy.

At the same time swear Joshua, and said: ^. Re. 1^. ^
Cursed be that man before the LORD, which sets up this cite of Jericho and
buyldeth it: When he lays ye foundacio^ thereof, let it cost him his first
son: And wha^ he sets up the gates of it, let it cost him his yo^gest
son. Thus the LORD was with Joshua, so that he was spoken of in all lands.

The VII. Chapter.
But the children of Israel had committed Deuteronomy. 7. ^ Iosu. 6. d ^. Ma. 1^. ^
for Achan the son of Charmi the son of Sabdi the son of Serah, of ye
trybe of Judah, took some of it yt was damned. Then was the wrath of the LORD
fearce over the children of Israel.

Now when Joshua sent out men from Jericho unto Hai, which lies beside Bethane^
on ye east side of Bethel, he said unto the^: Go up, and spy the land. And
when they had gone up, and spyed out Hai, they came again to Joshua, and said
unto him: Let not all the people go up, but upon a two or three thousand, that
they may go up and smite Hai, lest all the people weerye themselves there, for
they are but few.

So there went up, of the people upon a three thousand men, and they fled
before the men of Hai, and they of Hai smote upon a six and thyrtie men of
them, and chaced them from the port unto Sebar^m, and smote them down the
way. Then was the heart of the people discoraged, * and became like water. Psa.
^1. b
As for Joshua he rent his clothes, and fell upon his face unto the earth
before the Ark of the LORD, until the eueninge, with the Elders of Israel,
and cast dust upon their heads.

LORD LORD, wherefore have thou brought this people over Iordane, to deliver
us in to the hands of the Amorites to destroy us? O that we had tarried
beionde Iordane, as we began. Oh my LORD, what shall I say, while Israel
turns his back upon his enemies? Wha^ the Cananites hear of this, they shall
compass us round about, ye and rote out our names from of the earth. What
wylt thou do then unto thy great name?

Then said the LORD unto Joshua: Sto^de up, why lie thou so upon thy face?
Israel has offended, and tra^sgressed over my covenant, which I commanded
the^. They have taken also of the thing that was damned, and have stolen, and
dyssembled, and laid it among their ornaments. The children of Israel are
not able to stand before their adversaries, but must turn their backs upon
their enemies: for they are acursed. I will no more be with you from hence
forth if ye put not out the damned from among you.

Re. 16. a
Sanctify yor selves against tomorow for thus says the LORD God of Israel:
^eut. 13. c and 17. b
There is a damned thing in the O Israel, therefore can thou not stand
before thine enemies, till ye put away the damned from among you. And ye
shall rise up early, one trybe after another: and look which trybe so ever the
LORD takes, the same shall come forth, one kynred after another: and look
which kynred the LORD takes, the same shall come forth, one house after
another. And look what house the LORD takes, the same shall come forth, one
householder after another. And who so ever is found in ye curse, the same
shall be burnt in the fire with all that he has: because he has gone beyond
the covenant of the LORD, and committed folly in Israel.

Then Joshua gat him up by times in the morning, and brought forth Israel, one
trybe after another, and ye trybe of Judah was taken. And when he had brought
forth the kynreds in Judah, ye kindred of the Serahites was taken. And when he
had brought forth the kynred of the Serahites, one household after another,
Sabdi was taken. And wha^ he had brought forth his house, one householder after
another, Achan the son of Charmi ye son of Sabdi the son of Serah of the
trybe of Judah, was taken.

And Joshua said unto Achan: My son, give the glory unto the LORD the God of
Israel, and give him the praise, and tell me, what thou have done, and hide
nothing fro me.

Then answered Achan unto Joshua, and LORD God of Israel, thus and thus have I
done: I saw among ye spoils a costly Babilonish garment, and two hundredth
Sycles of silver and a tunge of gold, worth fiftye Sycles in weight, unto the
which I had a lust, and took it: and behold, it is hyd in the ground in my
tente, and the silver under it.

Then Joshua sent messaungers thither, which ran to the tente, and behold, it
was hyd in his tente, and the silver under it. And they took it out of the
tente, and brought it unto Joshua, and to all the children of Israel and poured
it before the LORD. Then Joshua and all Israel with him, took Achan the son
of Serah with the silver, the garment and golden tunge, his sons and
daughters, his oxen and asses, and sheep, and all that he had brought they in
to ye valley of Achor.



And Joshua said: For so much as thou have troubled us, the LORD trouble the
this day. And all Israel stoned him, and burned him with fire with all that he
had. And when they had stoned him, they made over him a great heap of stones,
which remains unto this day. (So the LORD turned from the rigorousnes of
his wrath.) Therefore is the same place called ye valley of Achor unto this day.

The VIII. Chapter.
ANd ye LORD said unto Joshua: Fear (...)
Take all the men of war with the, and rise, and get the up unto Hai.
Behold, I have given in to thy hand, the king of Hai with his people in his
cite and country. And thou shall do with Hai and the king of it, (...)
as thou dyddest with Jericho and the king thereof, saving that ye shall deal
among you their spoil and catell: but set thou a (...)
preuy watch behind the cite.

Then Joshua arose, and all ye men of war, to go up unto Hai: and Joshua chose
thirty thousand fightinge men, and sent them out by night, and commanded
them, and said: Take heed, ye shall be ye preuye watch behind the cite, but go
not to far from the cite, and se that ye be redye altogether. As for me and
all the people that is with me, we will make us to the cite. And when they come
forth against us ( (...)
as before) we will fly before them, that they may follow out after us, till
we have provoked them forth of the cite: for they shall think that we fly
LORD your God shall deliver it in to your hands. But when ye have won the
cite, set fire upon it, doing (...). ^0. c
acordinge unto the word of the LORDE^ Behold, I have commanded you.

So Joshua sent them away, and they went unto the place of the preuy watch,
and lay betwixt Bethel and Hai, on the west side of Hai. But Joshua abode that
night among the people. And in the morning he arose early, and set the people
in order, and went up with the Elders of Israel before the people toward Hai:
and all the men of war that were with him, went up, and gat them forth, and
came over against the cite, and pitched their tents on the north side of Hai,
so yt there was but a valley between him and Hai.



But when the king of Hai saw that, he made haist, and gat him up early, and
the men out of the cite, to mete Israel to ye battayll, with all his people,
even right before the field: for he wist not that there was a preuy watch
behind him on the back side of the cite. But Joshua and all Israel were feeble
before them, and fled by the way to ye wilderness. Then cried all the people
in the

The^ said ye LORD unto Joshua: Reach out the spear that thou have in thine
hand, toward Hai: for I will deliver it in to thy hand. And when Joshua
reached out the spear that was in his hand, toward ye cite, ye hinder watch
brake up out of their place, and ran (when he had stretched out his hand)
and came in to the cite, and wanne it, and made haist, and set fire upon it.
And the men of Hai turned them, and looked behind them, and the smoke of the
cite went up toward heaven, and they had no place to fly unto, nether hither
ner thither: and the people that fled toward the wyldernes turned about, to
follow upon them.

And when Joshua and all Israel saw, yt

But Joshua withdrue not his hand (wherewith Number. ^^. d Deuteronomy. 20. ^ Iosu. 8. a
and 22. b
saving the catell and the spoil of ye cite, did Israel part among
themselves, acordinge unto the word of the LORD, which he commanded Joshua.
And Joshua burned up Hai and made an heap thereof for ever, which is there yet
unto this day. And the king of Hai caused he to be hanged on a tree until the
even.

But wha^ the Son was gone down, Deuteronomy. 20. ^ Iosu. 10. c
he commanded to take his body from the tree, and to cast it under the gate of
the cite, and made upon him a great heap of stones, which is there yet unto
this day.

LORD God of Israel upon mount Ebal acordinge as Moses the servant of ye
LORD commanded the children of Israel, Deu. 27. a ^xo. 20. d
as it is written in the book of the law of Moses even an altar of whole
stone, whereupon there was no iron lifted: and he offered burnt-offeringes and
health offeringes, and there upon the stones he wrote the second law of
Moses, which he wrote before the children of Israel.

And all Israel with their Elders and officers and judges, stood on both the
sides of the Arc, right over against the prestes yt bare the Arc of the
covenant of the LORD, the stranger as well as one of them selves, the one
half beside mount Grysim, and the other half beside mount Ebal, Deu. 27. b
as Moses the servant of the LORD commanded before, to bless the people of
Israel. Afterward caused he to proclaim all the words of the law of the
blessing and cursynge, as it is written in the book of the law. There was not
one word that Moses commanded, but Joshua caused it to be proclaimed before all
the congregation of Israel, and before the weme^, and children, and strangers
which walked among them.

The IX. Chapter.


But when the inhabiters of Gibeon herd, what Joshua had done with Jericho and
Hai, they dealte craftily, went on their way, and made a message, and took
old sackes upon their asses, and old rent wine botels, and old mended shues
upon their fete, and put on old and peced garments, and all ye bred of their
vytayles was hard and moulde, and they went unto Joshua into ye host at
Gilgall, and said unto him, and to every man in Israel: We are come out of a
far country, therefore make now a covenant with us. Then said every man in
Israel unto ye Heuyte: Peradventure thou dwell among us, how can I then
make a covenant with the?

They said unto Joshua: We are ye servants. Joshua said unto them: What are
ye, and whence come ye? They said: Thy servants are come out of a very far
country, because of the name of the LORD thy God: for we have herd the
report of him, and all that he did in Egipte, and all that he did unto the two
kings of the Amorites beyo^de Iordane, Sihon the king at Heszbo^, and Og the
king of Basan, which dwelt at Astaroth. Therefore said our Elders and all the
inhabiters of our country: Take fode with you for your journey, and go mete
them, and say unto them: We are your servants, therefore make now a bond
with us: This our bred that we took out of our houses for our food, was new
when we took or journey toward you: but now lo, it is hard and moulde. And
these bottels filled we new, and lo, they are re^te. And these our clothes and
shues are waxed old, by ye reason of the sore long journey.

Then the captains took their vytayles, and axed not the mouth of the LORD*
(...)
And Joshua made peace with them, and set up a covenant with them, that they
should be saved alive, and the rulers of the congregation swear unto them. But
three days after that they had made a covenant with them, they herd, that
they were their neghbours, and dwelt among them: For as the children of Israel
went forth on their journey, they came on the third day unto their cities,
which are called Gibeon, Caphira, Beeroth, and Cirath Iearim, and smote the^
not, because that the rulers of the congregacisn had sworn unto them by the
name of the LORD the God of Israel.

But when all the congregation murmured against the rulers, all the rulers
said unto the whole congregation: We have sworn unto them by the LORD the
God of Israel, therefore may we not touch them. But this will we do unto them:
Let them live, that there come no wrath upon us, because of the ooth that we
have made unto them.

And the rulers said unto them: Let them live, that they may be (...)
hewers of wodd and bearers of water for the whole congregation, as the rulers
have said unto them. Then Joshua called them, and commened with them, and
said: Wherefore have ye disceaued us, and said, that ye were far from us,
where as ye dwell among us? Therefore shall ye be cursed, so that of you there
shall not cease servants to hew wodd and to bear water for the house of my
God.

They answered Joshua, and said: It was told thy servants, that the LORD
thy God commanded Moses his servant, that he should give you the whole lord,
and that he would destroy all the inhabiters of the land before you: therefore
were we sore afraid of our lives before you, and thus have we done. But now
lo, we are in thy hands: look what thou think good and right to do unto
us, that do.

And he did even so unto them, and delivered them from the children of Isreal's
hand, that they should not slaye them. So upon the same day Joshua made them
hewers of wodd and water bearers for the congregation, and for the altar of
the LORD unto this day, in the place that he shall chose.

The X. Chapter.
(...)
and that they of Gibeon had made peace with Israel, and were come under them,
they were sore afraid. For Gibeon was a great cite, like as one of the kings
cities, and greater then Hai, and all the citesyns thereof were men of arms.
Therefore sent he unto Hoham the king of Hebron, and to Pirea the king of
Iarmuth, and to Iaphia the king of Lachis, and to Debir the king of Eglon,
and caused to say unto them: Come up unto me, and help me, that we may smite
Gibeon, for they have made peace with Joshua and the children of Israel. Then
came the five kings of the Amorites together, and went up, the king of
Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, ye king of Iarmuth, the king of Lachis, the
king of Eglon, with all their armies, and laid sege unto Gibeon, and fought
against it.

LORD said unto Joshua: (...). 1. a
Fear them not, for I have given them in to thy hand. There shall not one of
them be able to stand before the. So Joshua came suddenly upon them, for all
that night went he up from Gilgall. Esa. 28. d
And the LORD discomfyted the^ before Israel, and smote them with a great
slaughter at Gibeon: and they chaced them the way down to Beth Horon, and
smote them unto Aseka and Makeda.

And when they fled before Israel, the LORD caused a great hayle from heaven
to fall upon them, unto Aseka, so that they dyed: and many mo of them dyed of
the hayle, then the children of Israel slew with the sword.

Then spoke Joshua unto the LORD (the same day that the LORD gave over the
Amorites before the children of Israel) and said in the presence of Israel:
Eccli. 46. a
Son, hold still at Gibeon, and thou Moon in the valley of Aialon.

Then the Son held still, and ye Moon stood, until the people had avenged
themselves on their enemies. Is not this written in the book of the righteous?
Thus the Son stood still in the mids of heaven, and dyfferred to go down
for the space of a whole day after. And there was no day like unto this
(nether before ner after) when the LORD herkened unto the voice of one man:
for the LORD fought for Israel. And Joshua went again to Gilgall in to the
te^tes, and all Israel with him. As for the five kings, they were fled, and
had hyd the^ selves in the cave at Makeda.

Then was it told Joshua: We have found

As for you, stand not ye still, but follow after your enemies, and smite
them behind, and let them not come in their cities, for the LORD your God
has delivered the^ in to your hand. And when Joshua and ye children of Israel
had ended the sore great slaughter upon them, so yt they were brought to
naught, the remnaunt of them came in to the strong cities.

So all the people came again to the host unto Joshua to Makeda in peace, and
no man durst move his tunge against the children of Israel. Joshua said: Open
the mouth of the cave, and bring the five king forth unto me. They did so,
and brought the kings unto him out of the cave: the king of Jerusalem, the
king of Hebro^, the king of Iarmuth, the king of Lachis, the king of Eglon.

When these five kings were brought forth unto him, Joshua called every man of
Israel, and said unto the rulers of the men of war that went with him: Come
forth and tread upon the necks of these kings with your fete. And they came
forth, and trod upon their necks with their fete. And LORD do unto all yor
enemies, against whom ye fight.

And Joshua smote them afterward, and put them to death, and hanged them upon
five trees. And they hanged still upon the trees until the evening. Deuteronomy. ^^.
d
But when the Son was gone down, he commanded to take them of from the
trees: and they cast them in the cave, wherein they had hyd them selves, and
before the hole of the cave they laid great stones, which are there yet unto
this day. The same day wanne Joshua Makeda also, and smote it with the edge of
the sword, and the king thereof, and Deuteronomy. 20. c
damned it, and all the souls that were therein, and let none remain escaped:
and did unto the king of Makeda Iosu. 6. c
as he did unto the king of Jericho.

Then Joshua and all Israel with him departed fro Makeda unto Lybna, and fought
against it. (And the LORD gave it with ye king thereof into the hand of
Israel) and smote it and all the souls that were therein, with the edge of the
sword, and let not one remain in it: and did unto the king thereof as he had
done unto the king of Jericho.

LORD delivered Lachis also in to the hand of Israel, so that they wanne it
upon the second day, and smote it with ye edge of the sword, and all the
souls that were therein, acordinge to all as he had done unto Lybna. At the
same time Horam ye king of Gazer went up, to help Lachis. But Joshua smote
him with all his people, till there remained not one.

And Joshua went with all Israel from Lachis, unto Eglon, and laid sege unto
it, and fought against it, and wanne it the same day, and smote it with the
edge of the sword, and damned all the souls that were therein the same day,
acordynge unto all as he had done unto Lachis.

After that went Joshua with all Israel from Eglon unto Hebron, and fought
against it, and wanne it, and smote it with ye edge of the sword, and the
king of it, (...) all the cities thereof, and all the souls (...) were therein,
and let not one remain, aco^^dynge unto all as he had done unto Eg^^^ and
damned it, and all the souls that (...) therein.

Then turned Joshua again with all I^^rael toward Debir, and fought against
(...), and wanne it, with the king of it, and all ye cities thereof, and smote
them with the edg^ of the sword, and damned all ye souls that were therein,
and let not one remain over* Even as he had done unto Hebro^ and L^^^na with
their kings, so did he also unto D^^bir, and the king thereof.

Thus Joshua smote all the land upon the mountains, and toward the south, and
in the low countrees, and by the ryuers, with all their kings, and let not
one remain over and damned all that had breath, * as the LORD God of Israel
had commanded. And Joshua smote them from Cades Bernea unto Gaza, and all the
land of Gosen unto Gibeon, and took all these kings with their lord at one
time: for the LORD God of Israel fought for Israel. And Joshua went again
withal Israel to the tents unto Gilgal.

The XI. Chapter.
When Iabin the king of Asor herd this, he sent unto Iabob the king of Madon
and to the king of Samron, and to the king of Achsaph, and to the kings that
dwelt toward the north upon the mountains, and in the plain on the southsyde
of Cineroth, and in the lo^^ countrees, and in the lordshippes of Dor by the sea side: and to the Cananites toward ye east and west, to ye Amorites,
Hethites, Pheresites, and Iebusites, upon the mountains and to the Heuites,
under mount Hermon in the land of Mispa. These went out with all their
armies, a great people, as many as ye sonde of the sea, and exceadinge many
horses and charettes. All these kings gathered the^ selves, and came, and
pitched together by ye water of Meram, to fight with Israel.

And the LORD said unto Joshua: Fear them not, for tomorow about this time
will I deliver them all slain, before the children of Israel: thou shall lame
their horses, and burn their charettes with fire. (...)
And Ios^^ came suddenly upon them, and all the men of war with him by the
water of Mero^^, and fell upon them. And the LORD delivered them into ye
hands of Israel, and they smote them, and chaced them unto great Sido^ and to
the warm water, and to the plain of Mispa toward ye east: and smote them,
until there remained not one.

Then dealte Joshua with them as ye LORD had said unto him, and lamed these
horses, and brent their charettes. And he turned back at the same time, and
wanne Hasor, and smote ye king of it with the sword (for Hasor was before time
ye head cite of all these kingdoms) and smote all the souls that were therein
with the edge of the sword, and damned it, and let nothing remain that had
breath, and damned Hasor with fire. All the cities of these kingdoms wa^ne
Joshua also, and smote the^ with the edge of the sword, and damned them, (...).
20. c
acordinge as Moses the servant of the LORD commanded.

(...). 31. d
And all the spoils of these cities and the catell, did the children of Israel
deal among them, but smote all the men with the edge of the sword, till they
had destroyed them, and let nothing remain that had breath. As the LORD
commanded his servant Moses, and as Moses commanded Joshua, even so did
Joshua, so that there was nothing undone of all that the LORD commanded Moses.

So Joshua took all this lord upon ye mountains, and all yt lies toward the
south, and all the land of Gosen, and the low country, and the plain field,
and the mountain of Israel with the valley thereof, from the mountain that
parts the land up toward Seir, unto Baalgad, in the plain of mount Libanus
beneth mount Hermon. All their kings took he, and smote them, and put the^ to
death. (...). 23. d
Howbeit he warred a long season with these kings.

(...). 9. a
(except the Heuites, which dwelt at Gibeon) but they wanne them all with
battayll. And this was done so of the LORD that their heart was so hardened, to
come against the children of Israel with battayll, yt they might be damned,
and no favor to be showed unto them, but to be destroyed, ^eu. 20. c
as the LORD commanded Moses.

At the same time came Joshua, and roted out the Enakims from ye mountain, from
Hebron, from Debir, from Anab, from every mountain of Judah, and from every
mountain of Israel, and damned the^ with their cities, and let none of the
Enakims remain in the land of the children of Israel, save at Gasa, 1. Re. 1^
at Ga^th, at Asod, there remained of them.

Thus Joshua conquered all the land acordinge unto all as the LORD said unto
Moses, and gave it unto Israel to enheritaunce, Nu. 26.
unto every trybe his portion, and ye land rested from war.

The XII. Chapter.


THese are ye kings of the land, who^ Nu. 21. c Deuteronomy. 2. ^
Sihon the king of the Amorites, which dwelt at Heszbon, and had dominion from
Aroer that lies by the water side of Arnon, and unto the mids of ye water:
and over half Gilead, unto the water of Iabok, which is the border of the
children of Ammon: and over the plain field, unto the sea of Cynneroth
eastwarde, and unto the sea of the plain field, namely the Salt see toward
the east, the way unto Beth Iesimoth: and from the south beneth by the ryuers
of mount Pisga.

And the border of Og the king of Basan, Nu. 21. c Deuteronomy 3. ^
and dwelt at Astaroth and Edrei, and had the dominion over mount Hermon, over
Salcha, and over all Basan unto the border of Gessuri and Maachati, and of
half Gilead, which was the border of Sihon the king at Hesbon. Moses the
servant of the LORD and the children of Israel smote them. Nu. 32. d and 34.
^ Deuteronomy. 3. ^ Iosu. 13. ^
And Moses the servant of ye LORD gave it unto the Rubenites, Gaddites and to
the half trybe of Manasse in possession.

These are the kings of the lord, whom Joshua and the children of Israel smote
on this side Iordane westwarde, from Baalgad upon the plain of mount Libanus,
unto ye mount that parts the land up toward Seir, and that Joshua gave unto
the trybes of Israel in possession, unto every one his part, what so ever was
in ye mountains, valleys, plain feldes, by the ryuers, in ye wyldernesses
and toward the south, the Hethites, Amorites, Cananites, Pheresites, Heuites,
and Iebusites.

^^su. ^. a (...) 8 a ^osu. 10. a
the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Iarmoth, the king of
Lachis, the king of Eglon, the king of Geser, the king of Debir, the king
of Geder, the king of Horma, the king of Arad, ye king of Libna, the king
of Adulla, the king of Makeda, the king of Bethel, the king of Tapnah, the
king of Hepher, the king of Aphek, the king of Lasaron, the king of Madan,
the king of Hasor, the king of Simron Meron, the king of Achsaph, the king
of Tahenah, the king of Megido, the king of Cades, the king of Iakneam by
Carmel, the king in the lordshippes of Dor, the king of the Heithen at
Gilgall, the king of Thirza. These are one and thirty kings.

The XIII. Chapter.
LORD said unto him: Thou art old and well aged, and there remains yet
much of the land to conquer, namely all Galile of the Philistynes, and all
Gessuri, from Sihor which flows before Egipte, unto the border of Ekron,
northwarde, which is rekened unto the Cananites: five lords of the
Philistynes, namely, the Gasites, the Aszdodites, the Ascalonites, the
Gethites, the Ekronites and the Hauites. But from the north it is all ye land
of the Cananites, and Maara of the Sidonians unto Aphek, even unto the border
of the Amorites. Morouer the land of the Giblites eastwarde, from Baalgad
under mount Hermon, till a man come unto Hamath. All they that dwell upon the
mount, from Libanus unto the warm waters, and all the Sidonians. I will drive
them out before the children of Israel: Only let them be dealte out among
Israel, as I have commanded the.

^^su. 12. b
For the Rubenites and Gaddites with ye half trybe of Manasse, have received
their enheritau^ce, which Moses gave the^ beyond Iordane Eastwarde, Nu. 32. d
acordinge as Moses the servant of the LORD gave them the same, from Ar^er
which lies up by the water side of Arnon, and the cite in the mids of the
water, and all the coaste^ of Medba unto Dibon, and all the cities of Sihon the
king of the Amorites, which, dwelt at Heszbon, (...)
unto the border of the children of Ammon: and Gilead and ye border of Gessuri
and Maachati, and all mount Hermon, and all Basan unto Salcha: all ye kingdom
of Og at Basan, which dwelt at Astaroth and Edrei, that remained yet over of
Raphaim. But Moses smote them and drove them out.

The children of Israel drove not out the Gessurites and Maachathites, but both
Gessur and Maachat dwelt among the children of Israel unto this day. (...)
But unto ye trybe of the Levites he gave no enheritaunce: for the offeringe of
the LORD God of Israel is their enheritaunce, acordinge as he has promised
them.

So Moses gave unto the trybe of ye children (...)
so that their border was Aroer, which lies upon the water side of Arnon, and
the cite in the mids of the same water, with all the plain field unto Medba:
Heszbon, and all the cities thereof which lie in the plain field: Dibon, Bamoth
Baal, and Beth Baal Meon, Iahza, Kedemoth, Mephaath, Kiriathaim, Sibama,
Zeretha Sahar, upon mount Emek, Beth Peor: the ryuers by Pisga, and Beth
Iesimoth, and all the cities upon the plain, and all the realm of Sihon king
of the Amorites, which dwelt at Heszbon, (...)
whom Moses smote with the princes of Madian, Eui, Rekem, Zur, Hur, and Reba,
the mighty men of king Sihon, which were inhabiters of the land. And Balaam
the son of Beor the prophecier, did the children of Israel kill with the
sword among the other that were slain: and the border of ye children of
Ruben was Iordane. This is the enheritaunce of the children of Ruben among
their kynreds, cities and vyllages.

Unto the trybe of the children of Gad This is the inheritance of the children
of Gad in their kynreds, cities and vyllagyes.

(...). 17. a (...). 6. d
Unto the half trybe of the children of Manasse after their kynreds, gave
Moses, so that their border was fro Mahanaim, all Basan, all the kingdom of Og
king of Basan, and all the towns of Iair which lie in Basan, namely three
score cities. And half Gilead, Astaroth, Edrei, the cities of the kingdom of
Og at Basan, unto the children of Machir the son of Manasse. This is the
half portion of the children of Machir after their kynreds.

This is it that Moses dealte out upon the field of Moab beyond Iordane over
against Jericho eastwarde. (...). 1^. b (...) ^8. a
But unto ye trybe of Leui gave Moses no enheritaunce: for the LORD God of
Israel is their enheritaunce, as he has promised them.

The XIIII. Chapter.
(...). 34. c
which Eleasar the pressed, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the chief of the
fathers among the trybes of the children of Israel parted out among them.
(...). 26. f (...) ^3. f
But by lot did they deuyde it out among them, acordinge as the LORD
commanded Moses to give unto the nine trybes and ye half: for unto the two
trybes and the half did Moses give enheritaunce beyond Iordane. (...). 13. b
But unto the Levites he gave no enheritaunce among them. (...). 48 c
For of the children of Joseph there were two trybes, Manasses and Ephraim.
Therefore gave they the Levites no portion in the land, but cities, to dwell
therein, and suburbs for their catell and goods. (...) 35. a
Even as the LORD commanded Moses, so did the children of Israel, and divided
the land.

LORD (...). 14. c
said unto Moses the man of God, concerning me and the in Cades Bernea. I was
fortye year old, when Moses the servant of the LORD (...). 1^. a
sent me out from Cades Bernea, to spy out the land, and I brought him word
again, even as I had it in my heart. Howbeit my brethren that went up with me,
discoraged the heart of the people: but I followed ye LORD my God unto the
vttemost.

LORD my God unto the vttemost. And now has the LORD letten me live, Nu. 14.
c
acordinge as he said. It is now five and forty year sense ye LORD spoke
this unto Moses, wha^ Israel walked in the wilderness. And now lo, this day
am I five and four score year old Eccl. 4^. ^
and am yet as strong to day, as I was in that day when Moses sent me out:
even as my strength was then, so is it now also to fight, and to go out and in.

Give me now therefore this mountain, LORD spoke in that day, and thou
herdest it the same day: for now the Enakims dwell thereon, and it has great
and strong cities: if happly the LORD will be with me, that I may drive the^
out, as he has said. Then Joshua blessed him, 1. Pa^. 7. ^ Iosu. 21. b
and so gave Hebron unto Caleb the son of Iephune. Therefore was Hebron the
enheritaunce of Caleb the son of Iephune the kenisite, unto this day,
because he followed the LORD God of Israel unto the vttemost. Iosu. 15. c
But before time was Hebron called Kiriatharba, and great people were there
among the Enakims. And the lord ceased from war.

The XV. Chapter.
THe lot of the trybe of the children of

But the east border is from the salt see to the vttemost part of Iordane.

The border northwarde, is from the sea it unto ye water of Ensemes, and
comes out unto the ^eg. 1. b
well of Rogell. Then goes it up to the valley of the son of Hinnam, a long
beside the Iebusite that dwells from ye southwarde, that is Jerusalem: and
comes up unto the top of the mount which lies before the valley of Hinnam
from the westwarde, that borderth on the edge of the valley of Raphaim toward
the north.



The weste border is the great see. This is the border of the children of Judah
round about in their kynreds. Caleb the son of Iephune had his portion
given him among the children of Judah (as the LORD commanded Joshua) namely
^^su. 14. d
Kiriatharba of the father of Enak, that is Hebron.

^dic. 1. b
And Caleb drove from thence the three sons of Enak, Sesai, Ahiman, and Thalmas
begotten of Enak. And from thence he went up to the inhabiters of Debir. (As
for Debir, it was called Kiriath Sepher aforetyme.) And Caleb said: (...). 1 c
^e. 17. c ^ar. 12. a
Who so smyteth Kiriath Sepher and wynneth it, I will give him my daughter
Achsa to wife. Then Athniel the son of Kenas the brother of Caleb wanne it:
and he gave him his daughter Achsa to wife.

And it fortuned when they went in, that she was counceled of her houszbande,
to axe a piece of land of her father. And she fell down from the ass. Then
said Caleb unto her: What ayleth the? She said: Give me a blessing, for thou
have given me a south (and dry) land: give me wells of water also. Then gave
he her wells above and beneth.

(...)
These are nine and twentye cities and their vyllages.

But in the low countrees was Esthaol, Zaren, Asna, Saroah, Engannim, Thapna,
Enam, Iarmoth, Adullam, Socho, Aseka, Saaraim, Adithaim, Gedera, Giderothim.
These are fourtene cities and their vyllages.

Zena^ Hadasa, Migdal Gad, Dilean, Mispa,

Libna, Either, Asen, Iephthah, Asua, Nezib, Keila, Achsib, Maresa. These are
nine cities and their vyllages. * Ekron with her daughters and vyllages. From
Ekron unto the sea, all that reaches unto Asdod and the vyllages thereof. Asdod
with the daughters and vyllages thereof. Gasa with her daughters and vyllages
unto the water of Egipte. And the great see is his border.

But upon the mount was Samir, Iatir, Socho, Danna, Kiriath Sanna, that is
Debir: Anab, Esthemo, Annim, Gosen, Holen, Gilo. These are eleven cities and
their (...)
But the Iebusites dwelt at Jerusalem, and the children of Judah could not drive
them away. So the Iebusites remain with the children of Judah at Jerusalem
unto this day.

The XVI. Chapter.
ANd the lot fell unto the children of unto ye coaste of Iaphleti to ye border
of the lower Bethoron, and unto Gaser: and the end thereof is by the great
see. This the children of Joseph (Manasses and Ephraim) received to
enheritaunce.

The Border of the children of Ephraim among their kynreds of their
enheritaunce from the east, was Ataroth Adar unto the upper Bethoron, and goes
out westwarde by Michmethath that lies toward the north, there fetches it a
compass toward

This is the enheritaunce of the trybe of the children of Ephraim among their
kynreds. And all the borders, cities with their vyllages of the children of
Ephraim lay scatred among the enheritaunce of the children of Manasse. And
they drove not out ye Cananites, which dwelt at Gaser. So ye Cananites remained
among Ephraim unto this day, and became tributaries.

The XVII. Chapter.
(...). 48. c
he is Joseph's first son) and it fell upon Machir the first son of Manasse
ye father of Gilead: for he was a man of arms, therefore had he Gilead and
Basan. It fell also unto the other children of Manasse, namely unto ye children
of Abieser, the children of Helek, the children of Asriel, the children of
Sechem, the children of Hepher, and the children of Semida: These are the
children of Manasse the son of Joseph, males, among their kynreds.

(...). 17. a (...) ^6. d
But Zelaphead the son of Hepher the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the
son of Manasse, had no sons, but daughters, and their names are these:
Mahala, Noa, Hagla, Milca, Tirza, and they came before Eleasar the pressed, and
before Joshua the son of Nun, and before the rulers, and said: The LORD
commanded Moses, to give us enheritaunce among our brethren. And so they had
enheritaunce given them among their fathers brethren, acordinge to the
commandment of the LORD.



So (among Isachar and Asser) Manasses had Beth Sean and the towns thereof,

Then spoke the children of Joseph unto Joshua, and said: Wherefore have thou
given me but one portion and one meetlyne of enheritaunce, and I am yet a
great people, as the LORD has blessed me so largely? Then said Joshua unto
them: For so much as thou art a great people, go up therefore in to ye wodd,
and make thy self rowme there in the land of the Pheresites and Raphaim,
seeing mount Ephraim is to narowe for the.

Then said the children of Joseph: We portion, when thou dryuest out the
Cananites, which have yro^ charettes, and are mighty.

The XVIII. Chapter.
LORD God of your fathers has given you? Chose you three men out of every
trybe, yt I may send them, and that they may get them up and go through the
land, and descrybe it acordinge to the enheritaunces thereof, and come unto me.

Deuyde the land in seven parts. Judas shall remain upon his borders of the
south side, and the house of Joseph shall remain upon his borders of the north
part: but descrybe ye the land in seven parts, and bring them unto me, then
shall I cast ye lot for you before the LORD our God. ^^su. 13. d (...) 14. a
For the Levites have no portion among you, but the presthode of the LORD is
their enheritaunce. ^^su 12. b
As for Gad and Ruben and ye half trybe of Manasse, they have received their
enheritaunce beyond Iordane eastwarde, which Moses the servant of the LORD
gave them.

LORD at Silo. So the men departed, and went through the land, and descrybed
it in seven parts upon a letter acordinge to the cities, and came to Joshua in
to the host at Silo. Then Joshua cast the lot over them at Silo before the
LORD, and there distributed the land among the children of Israel, unto
every one his part.

And the lot of the trybe of the children of Ben Iamin fell acordinge to their
kynreds, and the border of their lot went out between the children of Judah and
the children of Joseph. And their border was on ye north quarter of Iordane,
and goes up from the north side of Jericho, and comes up to the mountain
westwarde, and goes out by the wilderness of Bethauen, and goes from thence
toward Lus, even by the south side of Lus (that is Bethel) and comes down
unto Ataroth Adar by the mountain which lies on ye south side of the lowe^
Bethoron. Then howeth it down, and fetches a compass unto the south west
quarter from the mount that lies over against Bethoron toward the south, and
goes out unto Kiriath Baal, yt is Kiriath Iearim, a cite of the children of
Judah. This is the west border.

But the south border is from Kiriath-Iearim

But Iordane shall be the end of the east

The cities of the trybe of the children of Ben Iamin among their kynreds are
these: Jericho, Beth Hagla, Emek Kezi^z, Betharaba, Zemaraim, Bethel, Auim,
Haphar, Aphra, Caphar Amonai, Aphni, Gaba: these are twolue cities and their
vyllages.

Gibeon, Rama, Beeroth, Mispa, Caphira, Moza, Rekem, Ieerpeel, Thareala, Zela,
Eleph, and the Iebusites, that is Jerusalem, Gibeath, Kiriath: these are
fourtene cities and their vyllages. This is the enheritaunce of the children of
Ben Iamin in their kynreds.

The XIX. Chapter.
THen fell the second lot of the trybe (...)
And to their enheritaunce they had Beer Seba, Molada, Hazar Sual, Baala, Azem,
El Tholad, Beth^l, Harma, Ziklag, Betha Markaboth, Hazar Sussa, Beth Lebaoth,
and Saruhen: these are thirtene cities and their vyllages. Ain, Rimon, Either,
Asan: these are four cities and their vyllages. And all ye vyllages that lie
about the cities unto Balath Beer Ramath toward the south. This is the
enheritaunce of the trybe of the children of Simeon in their kynreds: for the
enheritaunce of the children of Simeon is under the portion of the children of
Judah. For so much as the enheritaunce of the children of Judah was to great for
them, therefore inhereted the children of Simeon among their enheritaunce.

The third lot fell upon the children of Zabulon after their kynreds. And the
border of their enheritau^ce was unto Sarid, and goes up westwarde to Mareala,
and bordreth upon Dabaseth, and reaches unto the river that flows over
against Iakneam: and turns from Sarid eastwarde unto the border of Cisloth
Thabor, and comes out unto Dabrath, and reaches up to Iapia, and from thence
goes it westwarde through Githa Hepher, and Itha Kazim, and comes out toward
Rimon, Hamthoar Hanea, and fetches a compass about from the north unto

The fourth lot fell upon the children of Isachar after their kynreds, and
their border was Iesraela, Chessulloth, Sunem, Hapharaim, Sion, Anaharath,
Raabith, Kision, Abez, Kemeth, En Ga^nim, Enhada, Beth Pazez, and bordreth upon
Thabor, Sahazima, Beth Semes, and ye outgoinge of it was at Iordane. These are
sixtene cities and their vyllages. This is the enheritaunce of the trybe of the
children of Isachar in their kynreds, cities and vyllages.

The fifth lot fell upon the trybe of the children of Asser, after their
kynreds. And their border was Helkath, Hali, Beten, Achsaph, Alamelech, Amead,
Miseal, and borderth on Carmel unto the sea, and on Sihor, and Libnath, and
turns toward the east unto Beth Dagon, and bordreth on Zabulon, and on the
valley of Iephtael, and toward the north side of Beth Emek and Negiel: and
comes out unto Cabul on the left side of Ebron, Rehob, Hamon and Cana, unto
great Sidon. And turns toward

These are two and twentye cities and their vyllages. This is the enheritaunce
of the trybe of the children of Asser in their kinreds cities and vyllages.

The syxte lot fell upon the children of Nephtali in their kynreds. And their
border was from Heleph Elon through Zaanaim, Adai Nekeb, Iabne El unto Lakum,
and goes out unto Iordane, and turns westwarde to Asnoth Thabor, and comes
ou^ from thence unto Hukok, and bordreth on Zabulon toward the south, and on
Asser toward the west, and on Judah by Iordane toward the east: and has
strong cities, Zidimzer, Hamath Rakath, Chinnaret, Adama, Rama, Hazor, Kedes,
Edrei, En Hazor, Iereon, Migdal Elhare^, Beth Anath, Beth Sames. These are
nyentene cities and their vyllages. This is the enheritaunce of ye trybe of the
children of Nephtali in their kynreds, cities, and vyllages.

The seventh lot fell upon the trybe of the Iud. 1^. ^
called it Dan, after ye name of their father. This is the enheritaunce of the
trybe of the children of Dan in their kynreds, cities, and vyllages.

And wha^ ye lord was all parted out with the borders thereof, the children of
Israel gave Joshua the son of Nun, an enheritaunce among them, and (acordynge
to the commandment of the LORD) they gave him ye cite that he required,
namely, Io^^* 24. ^
Thimnath Serah, upon mount Ephraim: there builded he the cite, and dwelt
therein.

These are the enheritaunces which Eleasar the pressed and Joshua ye son of Nun,
and the chefest of the fathers among ye tribes, divided out by lot unto the
children of Israel at Silo before the LORD, even before the door of the
Tabernacle of wytnes, and so they ended the deuydinge out of the land.

The XX. Chapter.
LORD spoke unto Joshua, and said: Speak to the children of Israel: Give
among you fre cities, ^xo. 21. b Deuteronomy. 19. c
whereof I spoke unto you by Moses, that a deedsleyer which sleyeth a soul
vnawarres and unwittingly, may fly thither, yt they may be fre among you
from the avenger of blood. And he that flies to one of those cities, shall
stand without before the port of the cite, and show his cause before the
Elders of the cite, then shall they take him to them in to the cite, and give
him place to dwell with them.



Then appointed they Kedes in Galile

These were the cities appointed for all ye children of Israel, and for the
strangers which dwelt among them, that whosoever had slain a soul
vnawarres, might fly thither, that he should not be put to death by the
auenger of blood, till he had stand before the congregation.

The XXI. Chapters.
Number. 35. a
The LORD commanded by Moses, that we should have cities given us to dwell
in, and the suburbs of the same for our catell. Then the children of Israel
gave of their enheritaunce these cities and the suburbs thereof, unto the
Levites, acordynge to the commandment of the LORD.

And the lot fell upon the kynred of the Kahathites, and the children of Aaron
the pressed among the Levites, had by the lot thyrtene cities of the trybe of
Judah, of the trybe of Simeon, and of the trybe of Ben Iamin. The other children
of Kahath of the same kynred, had by the lot ten cities, of the trybe of
Ephraim, of the trybe of Dan, and of the half trybe of Manasse.

But the children of Gerson of the same kynred had by the lot thyrtene cities,
of the

The children of Merari of their kynred had twolue cities, of the trybe of
Ruben, of the trybe of Gad, and of the trybe of Zabulon. So the children of
Israel gave these cities and their suburbs unto the Levites by lot, as the
LORD commanded by Moses.

Of the trybe of the children of Judah, and of the trybe of the children of
Simeon, they gave these cities (which they named by name) unto the children of
Aaron of the kynred of the Kahathites among the children of Leui: for the
first lot was theyrs.

So they gave them Kiriatharba, which was the fathers of Enak, that is Hebren
upon the mount Judah, and the suburbs thereof round about. (...)
But the field of the cite and the vyllages thereof, gave they unto Caleb the
son of Iephune for his possession.

Thus gave they unto the children of Aaron

But of the trybe of Ben Iamin they gave four cities, Gibeon and ye suburbs
thereof, Gaba, and the suburbs thereof, Anathot and the suburbs thereof, Almon
and the suburbs thereof: so that all the cities of the children of Aaron the
pressed were thirtene with their suburbs.

The kynreds of the other children of Kahath the Levites, had by their lot
four cities, of the trybe of Ephraim, and they gave the^ the fre cite of the
deedsleiers, Seche^ and the suburbs thereof upon mount Ephraim Gaser and the
suburbs thereof, Kibzaim and the suburbs thereof, Bethron and the suburbs
thereof.



But unto the children of Gerson among the kynreds of the Levites were given,
Of the half trybe of Manasse two cities, the fre cite for the deedslayer, Gola
in Basan and the suburbs thereof, Beasthra, and the suburbs thereof. Of the
trybe of Isachar four cities, Kision and the suburbs thereof, Dabrach and the
suburbs thereof, Iarmuth and the suburbs thereof, Engannim and the suburbs
thereof. Of the trybe of Asser four cities, Miseal, Abdon, Helkath and Rehob
with the suburbs thereof. Of the trybe of Nephtali three cities, the fre cite
Kedes (for the deedsleyer) in Galile, Hamoth, Dor, and Karthan with the
suburbs thereof: so that all the cities of the kynred of the Gersonites were
thirtene with their suburbs.



Thus the LORD gave the children of Israel all the land, which he had sworn
unto their fathers to give: and they took possession of it, and dwelt therein.
And the LORD gave the^ rest before all those yt were about them ^en. 17. a
like as he swear unto their fathers, and none of their enemies stood against
the^, but all their enmies delivered he in to their hand. And their myssed
nothing of all the good that the LORD had promised unto the house of Israel,
it came every whyt.

The XXII. Chapter.
THen Joshua called ye Rubenites and Number. ^2. ^ Deuteronomy. 3. b Iosu. 1^. a
that Moses the servant of the LORD commanded you, and have herkened unto my
voice in all yt I have commanded you. Ye have not forsaken your brethren a
long season, unto this day, and have waited upon the commandment of the
LORD your God. For so much now as the LORD your God has brought your
brethren to rest, as he promised them, turn you now, and go your way to
your tents in to the land of your possession, which Moses the servant of
the LORD gave you beyo^de Iordane.

But take diligent head now, that ye do acordinge to the commandment and law
which Moses the servant of the LORD has commanded: Deuteronomy. 10. c
That ye love the LORD your God, and walk in all his ways, and keep his
commandments, and cleue

Unto the half trybe of Manasse had Moses given possession at Basan: unto the
other half gave Joshua among their brethren on this side Iordane westwarde.
And when he let them go to their tents and blessed them, he said unto them:
Ye come home again with great good unto your te^tes, with exceadynge much
catell, silver, gold, brass, iron and raiment, Deuteronomy. ^0. b Number. 31. d Iosu.
8. f 1. Re. 30. e
distribute therefore the spoil of your enemies among your brethren.

So the Rubenites, Gaddites, and the half trybe of Manasse returned, and went
from the children of Israel out of Silo (which lies in the land of Canaan) to
go in to the country of Gilead to the land of their possession, that they
might possess it, acordynge to the commandment of the LORD by Moses.

And when they came unto the heaps by Iordane, which lie in the land of
Canaan, of Canaan upon the heaps by Iordane on this side the children of
Israel, they gathered them selves together with the whole congregation at Silo,
to go up against the^ with an army. And (in the mean season) they sent to
them in to the land of Gilead, Phineas the son of Eleasar the pressed, and
with him ten chief princes among the houses of their fathers, out of every
tribe in Israel one. And they came to the children of Ruben, to the children of
Gad, and to the half trybe of Manasse in the land of Gilead, and said:

LORD unto you: Iudi. 20. b
What trespace is this, yt ye have trespaced against the God of Israel, that ye
should turn back from ye LORD this day, to build you an altar, for to
fall away from the LORD?

Number. 25. a
Have we not enough of the wickedness of Peor? from the which we are not yet
cleansed this day, and there came a plage among the congregation of the LORD:
and ye turn you back this day from the LORD, and this day are ye fallen
away from the LORD, that he may be wroth to day or tomorow at the whole
congregation of the LORD.

If the land of your possession be unclean, then come over in to the land
that the LORD possesses, where the dwelling of the LORD is, and take
possessions among us, and fall not away from the LORD and from us, to build
you an altar with out the altar of the LORD our God. Iosu. 7. a
Did not Achan the son of Serah trespace in the thing that was damned, and
the wrath came over ye whole congregation of Israel and he went not down
alone for his myszdede?

LORD, the mighty God the LORD knows, and Israel knows also, if this be
a trangressynge or trespacynge against the LORD, then let it not help us this
day: If we have builded the altar, because we would turn away back from
the LORD, to offer burnt offerynges or meat offeringes thereon, or to make any
deed offerynges upon it, then let the LORD require it: And if we have not done
it rather for very fear of this thing, and said: To day or tomorow might
your children say unto our children:

What have ye to do with the LORD the God of Israel? The LORD has set
Iordane for a border between us and you ye children of Ruben and Gad, ye have
no portion in the LORD: By this should your^ children make our children to
turn away from the fear of the LORD.

Therefore said we: Let us make our children an altar, not for sacrifice, ner
for burnt offeringe, (...)
but that it may be a taken between us and you, and our posterities, that we
may serve the LORD in his sight with our burnt offeringes, deed offeringes,
and other offeringes: and yt your children to day or tomorow neade not to
say unto our children: Ye have no part in the LORD.

And we said: But if they should speak so unto us, or to our posterities to
day or tomorow, then may we say: Behold the symilitude of ye altar of the
LORD, which our fathers made, not for sacrifyce, ner for burnt offering, but
for a witness between us and you.

God forbydde, that we should fall away from the LORD, to turn back from
him this day, and to build an altar for sacrifice, for burnt offeringe and
for any present, without ye altar of the LORD our God, that stondeth before
his Habitacion.

But when Phineas the pressed, and the chief of the congregation, the princes of
Israel which were with him, herd these words, that the children of Ruben,
Gad, and Manasse had spoken, they pleased them well. And Phineas the son of
Eleasar the pressed said unto the children of Rube^, Gad and Manasse: This day
we know, that ye LORD is among us, in that ye have not trespaced against the
LORD in this deed. Now have ye delivered the children of Israel out of the
hand of the LORD.

Then Phineas the son of Eleasar the pressed, and the rulers returned out of
the land of Gilead, from the children of Ruben and Gad, unto ye land of
Canaa^ to the children of Israel, and brought them word again of the matter.

Then were the children of Israel well co^tente with the thing. And they
praised the God of Israel, and said no more that they would go up against them
with an army, to destroy the land that the children of Ruben and Gad dwelt
in. And ye children of Ruben and Gad called the name of the altar: This altar
be witness between us, that the LORD is God.

The XXIII. Chapter.
LORD had brought Israel to rest from all their enemies round about: and
Joshua was now old and well stricken in age, he called all Israel and their
Elders, heads, judges, and officers, and said unto them: I am old and well
aged, and ye have seen all that the LORD your God has done unto all these
nations in your sight. For the LORD your God himself has fought for you.
Behold, I have parted among you ye re^naunt of the nations by lot, unto every
trybe his enheritaunce from Iordane forth, and all the nations whom I have
roted out unto the great see westwarde.

LORD your God shall thrust them out before you, and drive them away from
you, that ye may have their land in possession, as the LORD your God has
promised you. Be strong now therefore, that ye may observe and do all that is
written in the book of the law of Moses: (...)
so that ye turn not aside from it, nether to the right hand ner to the
left: that ye come not among ye remnaunt of these nations, which are with
you: And se that ye make no mention ner (...)
swear by the names of their gods, nether serve them, ner bow your selves
unto them: But cleue unto the LORD your God, as ye have done unto this day:
the^ shall the LORD drive away great and mighty nations before you, like as
there has no man been able to stand before you (...)
One of you shall chase a thousand: for the LORD your God fights for you,
acordinge as he promised you. Take diligent head therefore unto your souls,
that ye love the LORD your God.

(...)
But if ye turn back, and cleue unto these other nations, and make marriages
with them, so that ye come among them, and they among you, be ye sure then,
that the LORD your God shall no more drive out all these nations before you,
(...)
but they shall be unto you a snare and net, and pricks in your sides, and
thorns in your eyes, until he have destroyed you from the good lord, which
the LORD your God has given you.

(...)
this day do I go the way of all the world, and ye shall know even from all
your heart and from all your soul, that there has not failed one word of
all the good that the LORD your God promised you. Now like as all the good is
come that the LORD your God promised you: Deuteronomy. 2^. b
even so shall the LORD cause all evil to come upon you, till he have
destroyed you from this good land, which the LORD your God has given you:
if ye transgress ye covenant of the LORD your God, which he has commanded
you. And if ye go yor way and serve other gods, and worshipe the^, then
shall the wrath of the LORD wax whote over you, and shall shortly destroy
you out of the good land, yt he has given you.

The XXIIII. Chapter.
Joshua gathered all the trybes of Israel LORD the God of Israel: Genesis 11. d
Yor fathers dwelt before time beyo^de ye water, Abraham and Nahor with Tarah
their father and served other gods. Genesis 12. a
Then took I yor father Abraham beyond the water, and caused him to walk in
the land of Canaan, and multiplied his sede, and gave him Isaac, Genesis 21. a
Genesis 25. c Genesis 32. a
and unto Isaac I gave Jacob and Esau, and gave Esau mount Seir to possess G^.
46. a
As for Jacob, and his children, they went down in to Egipte.

Then sent I Moses and Aaron, and plaged Exodus 7.8 9 10 11.
After yt Exodus 14.
brought I you and your fathers out of Egipte. And when ye came to ye see, and
the Egipcians followed upon your fathers with charettes and horse men unto the
reed see, then cried they unto the LORD, which put a darcknesse between you
and the Egipcians, and brought the sea upon them, and overwhelmed them. And
your eyes have seen what I did to ye Egipcians, and ye dwelt in ye wilderness a
long season Number. 21. d
And I brought you in to ye land of the Amorites, which dwelt beionde
Iordane: and wha^ they fought against you, I delivered them in to yor hand,
that ye might have their country in possession, and I destroyed them before
you. Number. 22. a Deuteronomy. 23. a
Then Balac the son of Ziphor the king of the Moabites gat him up, and
fought against Israel: and he sent and bad call Balaam the son of Beor, to
curse you, nevertheless I would not hear him, but I blessed you, and delivered
you out of his hand.

And when ye went over Iordane, and came unto Jericho, the citesyns of Jericho
Exo. 33. a Deu. 7. d
And I sent hornettes before you, which drove them out before you, namely the
two kings of ye Amorites: not through thy sword, ner through thy bow. And I
have given you a land whereupon ye bestowed no labor, Deuteronomy. 6. b
and cities which ye have not builded, that ye might dwell therein, and that ye
might eat of the vynyardes and olyue trees which ye have not planted. Fear
the LORD now therefore, and serve him perfectly and in the truth, 1 Reg 7 a
Tob. 14. c
and let go the gods, whom your fathers served beyond the water and in
Egipte, and serve ye ye LORD.

But if ye like not to serve the LORD, the^ LORD. Then answered the people,
and said: God forbid, that we should forsake the LORD, and serve other
gods. For the LORD our God brought us and our fathers out of the land of
Egipte from the house of bondage, and did soch great tokens before our eyes,
and preserved us all ye way that we went, and among all the nations, whom we
trauayled by. And the LORD thrust out before us all the people of the Amorites
that dwelt in the land. Therefore will we also serve the LORD, for he is our
God.

LORD: for he is an holy God, mighty, and gelous, which spares not your
trangressions and sins. But if ye forsake the LORD, and serve a strange
god, then shall the LORD turn him, Iosu. 23. d
and do you evil, and consume you, after that he has done you good. The
people said unto Joshua: Not so, but we will serve the LORD. Then said Joshua
unto the people: Ye are witnesses over your selves, that ye have chosen you
the LORD, to serve him. And they said: Ye. Then put away from you (said
he) the strange gods yt are among you, and enclyne your heart unto the
LORD the God of Israel. And the people said unto Joshua: We will serve the
LORD our God, and be obedient unto his voice. 4. Re. 23. a
So Joshua made a covenant with the people ye same day, and laid statutes and
laws before them at Sichem.

1. Reg. 7. c
and took a great stone, and set it up there under an oak, which was in ye
Sanctuary of ye LORD, and said unto all the people: Behold, this stone shall
be witness over you: For it has herd all the words of the LORD, which he
has spoken unto us, and shall be a witness over yo^, that ye deny not your
God. So Joshua (...) the people go every one to his enheritau^ce.

And it fortuned after these acts, yt Joshua the son of Nun ye servant of
the LORD dyed, when he was an hundredth and (...) year old, and was buried in
the border (...)
of his enheritau^ce at Thimnath Serah, which lies on the mount Ephraim, on
the northside of mount Gaas. And the children of Israel served the LORD as
long as Iosu^ lived, and the Elders (that lived long after Joshua) which knew
all the works of ye LORD, that he had done unto Israel. (...)
The bones of Joseph, which the children of Israel had brought out of Egipte,
buried they at Sichem, in the piece of the land, (...)
yt Jacob boughte of the children of Hemor ye father of Sichem for an hundredth
pens, and was the enheritaunce of the children of Joseph. Eleasar the son of
Aaron died also, and they buried him at Gibeath, which was Phineas his sons,
that was given him upon mount Ephraim.

The end of the book of Joshua.
The book of the Judges called, Iudicum.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I. Judas is made captain of the p^^ple subdueth, the Cananytes, and
wynneth I^rusalem. Israel roteth not out the Cananites as God commanded them.
Chap. II. The angel of God punysheth the^^, because they co^sente to their
enemies The children of Israel serve Baal, for the which cause God gives them
over in to captiuyte. Chap. III. God punysheth Israel, and yet delyuereth them
wonderously. Chap. IIII. Debbora the prophetisse with B^rach overcomes
Sissara, and delyuereth the people of the LORD. Chap. V. The song of praise
which Debbo^^ and Barach song because of the victory. Chap. VI. For their
sins God gives them over in to the hands of the Madianites, from the which
Gedeon delyuereth them. Chap. VII. How Gedeon parts his host, and
discomfiteth the Madianites. Chap. VIII. Gedeon punysheth the^ at Suchoth,
dies, and is buried. Chap IX. Abimelech seeks the superiorite, slays his
seuentye brethren, wynneth Siche^ and Thebes. Chap. X. Thola and Iai^ rule the
people. The Israelites sin, and are punyshed Chap. XI. Iepthe is made ruler
of the people, and overcomes Ammon in Maspha. Chap XII. The Ephraites rise up
against Iepthe, and there are slain of them two and fortye thousand. Chap.
XIII. The birth of Samson is showed unto his father and mother by an angel.
Chap. XIIII. Samson takes a wife i^ Timnath, renteth a young Lion in pieces,
and puts forth a dark sentence unto his companyons. Chap. XV. How Samson
hurts the Philistynes with the foxes. He slays a thousand me^ with the
cheke bone of an ass. Chap XVI. Samson takes both the ports of the gate of
the cite upon his back, and bears them up to the mount Dalila the harlot
brings him in dotage, so that he tells her his secrets, and is blinded of
his enemies. Chap. XVII. Of Micha and his image andc. Chap. XVIII. Dan sends
out men to spy the lord, which take Michas image, and carry away the pressed.
Chap. XIX. How shamefully the Gabeonites deal with the Levites wife. Chap XX.
How the same sin is punyshed. Chap. XXI. The Ben Iamites obtain wives in
Israel, who^ the Israelites had sworn not to give them.
The first Chapter.
LORD, and said: Who shall go up and be or captain of war against ye
Cananites? The LORD said: Judah shall go up. (...) 13. a
Behold, I have delivered the land in to his hand. Then said Judah unto his
brother Simeon: Go up with me in to my lot, and let us fight against the
Cananites, then will I go again with the in to ye lot: So Simeon went with him.

Now when Judah went up the LORD delivered the Cananites and Pheresites in to
their hands, and they slew te^ thousand me^ at Besek: and they found Adoni
Besek at Besek, and fought against him, and slew the Cananites and
Pheresites. But Adoni Besek fled, and they followed after him: and when they had
overtaken him, they cut of the tho^bes of his hands and fete.

Leu. 24. d Iudic. 15. ^
Now as I have done, so has God rewarded me again. And he was brought unto
Jerusalem, where he dyed.

But ye children of Judah fought against Jerusalem, and wa^ne it, Deu. 20. ^
and smote it with the edge of the sword, and set fire upon the cite. Then
went the children of Israel down, to fight against ye Cananites, yt dwelt
upon the mount, and toward the south, and in the vall^^ (...) Judah went
against the Cananites, which dwelt at Hebron. Iosu. 15. d
(As for Hebron, it was called Kiriatharba before time) and they smote Sesai,
and Achiman, and Thalmai.

And from thence he went against ye inhabiters Iosu. 15. d 2. Par. 12. a 1.
Re. 17. c
He yt smyteth Kiriath Sepher, and wynneth it, I will give him my daughter Achsa
to wife. Then Athniel the son of Kenas, Calebs youngest brother wa^ne it. And
he gave him his daughter Achsa to wife. And it fortuned yt when they went in
she was counceled of her houszbande, to axe a piece of land of her father. And
she fell from the ass. The^ said Caleb unto her: What ayleth ye? She said:
Give me a blessing, for thou have given me a south and dry land, give me
also a watery land. Then gave he her a land that was watery above and beneth.

And the children of ye Kenyte Moses brother Deu. 34. a
palm cite, with the children of Judah in to the wilderness of Judah, that
lies on ye south side of the cite Arad: Nu. 10. d 1. Re. 15. d
and went their way, and dwelt among the people. And Judah went with his
brother Simeon, and they smote the Cananites at Zephath, and damned them, and
called the name of the cite Horma. Number. 21. a
Iosu. 15. a
Judah also wanne Gasa with the borders thereof, and Ascalon with her borders,
and Accaron with the coasts thereof. And the LORD was with Judah, so that he
conquered the mountains: but them that dwelt in the valley could he not
conquer, because they had iron charettes. And acordinge as Moses had said,
they gave Hebron unto Caleb, which drove out the three sons of Enak. Iosu. 14.
d
Howbeit ye children of Ben Iamin drove not out ye Iebusites which dwelt at
Jerusalem, Iosu. 15. g
but ye Iebusites dwelt among the children of Ben Iamin at Jerusalem unto this
day.

Likewise the children of Joseph went up LORD was with the^. Iosu. 16. a
And the house of Joseph spyed out Bethel (which before time was called Lus) and
the watch men saw a man goinge out of the cite, and said unto him: Show us
where we may come in to the cite, Iosu. 2. c
and we will show mercy upon the. And when he had showed them where they
might come in to the cite, they smote ye cite with the edge of the sword: but
they let the man go and all his friends.

Then went the same man up in to ye country of the Hethites, and builded a
cite, and called it Lus, and so is the name of it yet unto this day. And
Manasses Nu. 33 g Iosu. 17. c
(...) not out Beth Sean with the vyllages thereof, ner Thaenah

Iosu. 16. b
In like manner Ephraim drove not out ye Cananites that dwelt at Gaser, but the
Cananites dwelt among them at Gaser.

Zabulon also drove not out the inhabiters of Kitron and Nahalol, but ye
Cananites dwelt among them, and were tributaries.



Nephtali drove not out ye inhabiters of Beth Semes, ner of Beth Anath, but
dwelt among the Cananites which dwelt in the land: howbeit they of Beth Semes
and of Beth Anath were tributaries.

And the Amorites subdued the children of Dan upon the mountain, and suffered
them not to come down in to the valley. And the Amorites began to dwell upon
mount Here Is at Aiolon and at Saalbim. Howbeit ye hand of ye house of Joseph
was to sore for them, and they became tributaries. And the border of the
Amorites was, as a man goes up toward Acrabim, and from the rock, and from
the top.

The II. Chapter.
LORD from Gilgall unto Bochim, and said: I have carried you up hither out of
Egipte, and brought you in to the land that I swear unto your fathers, and
said: Deuteronomy* (...)
I will never break my covenant with you, that ye should make no covenant with
the ^^dwellers of this land, but break down their altares: Nevertheless ye
have not herk^^ed unto my voice. Wherefore have ye done this? Then said I
morouer: I will no^ drive them out before you, that they may^ be a fall unto
you, and their gods a (...). And when ye messaunger of the LORD had spoken
these words unto all the children of Israel, the people left up their voice,
and wept, and called ye name of the place Bochim, and offered there unto the
LORD.

For when Joshua had sent away ye people, and the children of Israel were
gone, every one to his enheritau^ce, for to take possession of the land, (...)
the people served the LORD as long as Joshua lived and ye Elders, which lived
long after Joshua, and yt saw all the great works of the LORD, which he did
for Israel.

Now when Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the LORD, (...)
was deed (when he was an hundredth and ten year old) they buried him in ye
border of his inheritance at Timnath Here Is upon mount Ephraim on the north
side of mount Gaas. And when all the same generation was gathered unto their
fathers, there came up after them another generation, which knew not the LORD,
ner the works that he had done for Israel.

Then wroughte the children of Israel evil before the LORD, (...)
and served Baal^m, and forsook ye LORD the God of their fathers (which
brought them out of the land of Egipte) and followed other gods and the
gods of the nations that dwelt round about them, and worshipped them, and
displeased the LORD: for they forsook ye LORD ever more and more, and served
Baal and Astaroth.

Then ye wrath of the LORD waxed whote upon Israel, and he delivered the^ in
to ye hands of those yt spoiled the^, that they might spoil them, and sold
the^ in to the hands of their enemies round about, and they were not able to
withstonde their enemies any more, but what way so ever they would out, ye
hand of the LORD was against the^ to their hurt (even as the LORD said and
swear unto them) and they were sore oppressed. (...)


Now when the LORD raised them up judges, which helped them out of the hand
of soch as spoiled the^, they followed not the judges nether, but went a
whoringe after other gods, and worshipped them, and were soon gone out of ye
way yt their fathers walked in, to hear the commandments of the LORD, and
did not as they did.

But when ye LORD raised up judges unto them, the LORD was with ye judge, and
helped them out of the hand of their enemies, as long as the judge lived.
^^od. 2. d
For the LORD had pity of their complaynte, which they made over those yt
subdued the^ and oppressed them.

(...)
and marred all more the^ their fathers, so that they followed other gods to
serve them and to bow them selves unto them: they would not fall from their
purposes, ner from their obstinate way.

Therefore waxed the wrath of the LORD allwaie so whote over Israel, that he
said: For so much as the people have transgressed my covenant, which I
commanded their fathers, and follow not my voice, I will from hence forth drive
out none of the Heythen, who^ Joshua left behind him, wha^ he dyed, (...). 8.
a (...) 13. a
that by them I may prove Israel, whether they will keep the way of the LORD,
to walk therein, as their fathers did, or not. Thus the LORD suffered all these
nations, so that in a short time he drove them not out, whom he had not given
over in to Iosuas hand.

The III. Chapter.
LORD suffered to remain, yt by them he might prove Israel, which had no
understanding in the wars of Canaan: only because yt the trybes of the
children of Israel might know and learn to war, which before had no knowledge
thereof, namely: The five lords of ye Philistynes, and all the Cananites, and
Sidonians, and the Hethites yt dwelt upon mount Libanus, fro mount Baal Hermon,
until a man come unto Hemath. The same remained, that Israel might be proved
by them, that it might be known whether they would harken to the
commandments of the LORD, which he commanded their fathers by Moses.

Now when the children of Israel dwelt thus among the Cananites, Hethites,
Amorites, Pheresites, Heuites and Iebusites, ^eut. 7. a (...) 12. a
they took their daughters to wives, and gave their daughters unto their
sons, and served their gods, and wroughte wickedness before the LORD, and
forgot the LORD their God, and served Baalim and Astaroth. Then ye wrath of ye
LORD waxed whote over Israel, and he sold the^ under the hand of Cusan
Risathaim king of Mesopotamia, and so ye children of Israel served Cusan
Risathaim viij. year.

LORD, and the LORD raised the^ up a savior which delivered the^, namely
(...). 1. c
Athniel ye son of Kenas, Calebs youngest brother. And the sprete of the LORD
came upon him, and he was judge in Israel, and went out a war fare. And ye
LORD delivered Cusan Risathaim the king of Syria in to his hand, so yt his
hand was to strong for him. ^. Par. 1^
Then was the land in rest fortye years. And Athniel the son of Kenas dyed.

But the children of Israel did yet more evil before the LORD. Then the LORD
strengthed Eglon the king of ye Moabites against ye children of Israel,
because they wrought wickedness before ye LORD. And he gathered unto him ye
children of Ammon, and the Amalechites, and went and smote Israel, and
conquered the Deuteronomy. ^0*
cite of the palm trees. And the children of Israel served Eglon ye king of
ye Moabites eightene year. The^ cried they unto the LORD. And the LORD
raised the^ up a savior, namely Ehud the son of Gera ye son of Iemini,
which was a man that might do nothing with his right hand.

And wha^ the children of Israel sent a present by him unto Eglon the king of
the Moabites, Ehud made him a two edged dagger of a spanne long, and gyrded it
under his garment upon his right thye, and brought ye present unto Eglon the
king of ye Moabites. As for Eglon, he was a very fat man.

And when he had delivered the present,

And Ehud came in unto him. He sat in a syled Summer perler, which was for him
self alone. And Ehud said: I have somewhat to say unto the of God. The^ rose
he up from his seat. But Ehud put forth his left hand, and took the dagger
from his right thye, and thrust it in to his belly, so yt the hefte went in
also after the blade, and the fatt closed the hefte: for he drue not ye dagger
out of his belly, and ye fylthines departed from him. But Ehud gat him out at
the back door, and put to ye door after him, and lockte it.

Now when he was gone, his servants came in, and saw that the door of the
Summer perler was lockte, and they said: peradventure he is gone to the preuye
in the syled Summer perler.

But when they had waited so long till Behold, then lay their lord deed
upon the earth. As for Ehud, he was gotten away, while they made so long
tarie^ge, and he went over by the Idols, and ran his way unto Seirath.

And when he came in (...)* 10. a
he blewe ye trompet upon mount Ephraim, and the children of Israel went with
him from the mount, and he before them, and he said unto them: Follow me, for
the LORD has delivered the Moabites your enemies in to yor hand. And they
followed him, and wanne ye ferye of Iordane, yt goes toward Moab, and suffered
no man to go over, and at ye same time they smote of the Moabites upon a ten
thousand men, all nobles and men of arms, so that there escaped not one. Thus
were the Moabites brought under the hand of the children of Israel at that
time, and the land was in rest four score years.

Afterward was ^ud. 5. a
Samgar ye son of Anath, which slew six hundredth Philistynes with an oxes
gadd, and delivered Israel also.

The IIII. Chapter.
LORD, when Ehud was deed. And the LORD sold the^ in to the hand of Iabin
the king of the Cananites, which dwelt at Hazor, and the chief captain of his
hooste was Sissera, and he dwelt at Haroseth of the Heythen. And the children
of Israel cried unto the LORD: for he had nine hundredth iron charettes, and
subdued the children of Israel by violence twentye year.

At ye same time was Iudgesse in Israel the prophetisse Debbora, the wife of
Lapidoth, and she dwelt under ye palm of Debbora between Rama and Bethel, upon
mount Ephraim, and the children of Israel came up unto her to the law. She
sent forth, (...). 5. b
and called for Barak the son of Abi Noam of Kedes Nephtali, and said unto
him: Has not ye LORD the God of Israel commanded the: Go thy way, and get
the up unto mount Thabor, and take with the ten thousand men of the children of
Nephtali and Zabulon? For I will make Sissera the chief captain of Iabins host
to come to the unto ye Psalm. ^2. a
water of Cyson, with his charettes and with his multitude, and I will deliver
him in to thy hand. Barak said unto her: If thou will come with me, I will go:
but if thou will not come with me, I will not go.

LORD shall deliver Sissera in to a womans hand. So Debbora gat her up, and
went with Barak unto Kedes. Then Barak called Zabulon and Nephtali unto Kedes,
and went on foot with ten thousand men. And Debbora went with him also. As for
Heber the Kenyte he was departed from the Kenytes from the children of (...)
Hobab Moses brother in law, and had pitched his tent by ye Oak of Zaanaim
beside Kedes.

Then was it told Sissera, yt Barak the son of Abi Noa^, was gone up unto
mount Thabor: and he gathered all his charettes together, nine C. iron
charettes, and all the people yt was with him from Haroseth of the Heythe^,
unto the water Cyson. Debbora said unto Barak: Up, this is the day wherein the
LORD has delivered Sissera in to ye hand: for ye LORD shall go forth before
ye. So Barak went fro mount Thabor, and ye ten thousand men after him.

But the LORD discomfited Sissera with

Iael went forth to mete Sissera, and said unto him: Turn in my lord, turn
in to me, and be not afraid. And he turned in unto her in to the tente, and
she covered him with a garment. He said unto her: I pray ye give me a little
water to drink, for I am a thyrst. (...)
The^ opened she a milk pot, and gave him to drink, and covered him. And he
said unto her: Sto^de in the tente door, and if one come and axe, is there any
man here? say Noman.

Then Iael the wife of Heber took a nale

But wha^ Barak followed after Sissera, Iael went for to mete him, and said
unto him: Come hither, I will shewethe the man, whom thou sekest. And when he
came in unto her, he saw Sissera deed, and the nale stickinge in his temples.
Thus God brought down Iabin the king of the Cananites before the children of
Israel at that time, and the hand of the children of Israel went and subdued
Iabin ye king of the Cananites, till they had roted him out. Then Debbora and
Barac the son of Abi Noam, sange at the same time, and said:

The V. Chapter.
LORD, among soch of the people as be frewyllinge.

Hear ye kings, and harken to ye princes: I will, I will sing to the LORD,
even unto the LORD ye God of Israel will I play.

(...). 19. c ^^ut. 4. b
LORD, when thou wentest out from Seir, and came in from the field of Edom,
ye earth quaked, the heaven dropped, and the clouds dropped with water.

(...). 96. a
The hills melted before the LORD, Sinai before the LORD the God of Israel.

In the time of (...) 3. d
Sanger the son of Anath: In the time of (...). 4. c
Iael the ways failed: and they that should have gone in paths, walked through
crooked ways.

There was scarceness, there was scarceness of houszbande men in Israel,
until I Debbora came up, until I came up a mother in Israel.

God has chosen a new thing. He has overcome ye ports in battayll: and yet
was there seen nether shylde ner spear among fortye thousand in Israel.

LORD.

Ye that ride upon fair Asses, ye that sit in judgment and give sentence, ye
that go by the way, praise the LORD.

Wha^ ye archers cried between ye drawers of water, then was it spoken of ye
righteousness of the LORD, of the righteousness of his huszbande men in Israel:
then ruled the people of the LORD under the gates.

Up Debbora up, get the up, get the up, and rehearse a song. (...). 4. a
Arise Barak, and catch him yt catched the, thou son of Abinoam.

Then had the desolate the rule with the mighty of the people. The LORD had
ye dominion through the giauntes.

(...). 3. d
Out of Ephraim was their rote against Amalek, and after him Ben Iamin in thy
people.

Out of Machir have teachers ruled, and out of Zabulo^ are there become
governors through the wrytinge pen.

And out of Isachar there were princes with Debbora, and Isachar was as Barak
in ye valley, sent with his people on foot: A^ for Ruben, he stood hye in his
own consayte, and separated him self from us.

Why abodest thou betwixt the borders,

Gilead abode beyond Iordane, and why dwelt Dan among the ships? Asser sat
in the haven of the sea, and tarried in his porcions.

But Zabulons people ioperde their life unto death: Nephtali also in the top
of ye field of Merom.

The kings came and fought, then fought ye kings of the Cananites at
Thaanah by the water of Megiddo, but spoil of money brought they not there
from.

From heaven were they foughte^ against, the stars in their courses fought
with Sissera.

The broke Cyson overwhelmed them, the broke Kedumim, ye the broke Cyson. My
soul tread thou upon the mighty.

Then made the horse fete a ruszshinge together, for the great violence of
their mighty horse men.

Curse the cite of Meros (said ye angel LORD) curse the citesyns thereof, be
cause they come not to help ye LORD, to help the LORD to the giauntes.

Blessing among women have Iael the wife of Heber the Kenite: blessinge have
she in the tente among the women.

Iud. 4. c
When he axed water, she gave him milk, and brought forth butter in a
lordlyd^szshe.

She took hold of the nale with her hand, and the smyth hammer with her right
hand, and smote Sissera, cut of his head and pearsed and bored through his
temples.

He bowed him self down at her fete, he fell down, and lay there. He sanke
down, and fell at her fete: when he had soncke down, he lay there destroyed.

His mother looked out at the wyndowe, and cried piteously through the tr^llace:
Why tarieth his charet out so long, that he comes not? Wherefore do the
wheles of his charet make so long tarienge?

The wysest among his ladies answered, and said unto her: Should they not
find and divide the spoil, unto every man a fair maid or two for a pray,
and party colored garments of nedle work to Sissera for a spoil, party
colored garments of nedle work about the neck for a pray?

Thus all thine enemies must perish O LORD: but they that love the, shall be
even as the Son rysinge up in his might.

And the land had peace fortye years.

The VI. Chapter.
LORD, the LORD delivered them under the hand of the Madianites vij. years.
And wha^ the hand of the Madianites was to mighty over the children of
Israel, the children of Israel made them clyffes in ye mountains, and caves
and holds, to defend them selves from ye Madianites. And when Israel sowed
any thing, ye Madianites and Amalechites, and the children toward the south
came up upon them, and pitched their te^tes against them, and destroyed the
increase of the land down unto Gasa, and let nothing remain over of the
beestes in Israel, nether sheep, ner oxen, ner asses. For they came up with
their catell and tents, as it had been a great multitude of greshoppers (so
that nether they ner their camels might be nombred) and fell in to the land,
that they might destroy it. Thus was Israel exceadinge small before the
Madianites. Then cried the children of Israel unto the LORD.

LORD be cause of ye Madianites, ye LORD sent the^ a prophet, which said
unto the^: Thus says the LORD the God of Israel: I carried you out of Egipte,
and brought you out of ye house of bondage, and delivered you from the hand
of the Egipcians, and from the hand of all them that oppressed you, and I have
thrust them out before you, and given you their lord and said unto you: I am
the LORD your God. ^ge. 17. g ^^e. 10. a
Fear not ye the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell: nevertheless
ye have not herkened unto my voice.

And there came an angel of the LORD, and sat him down under an Oak at
Aphra, which belonged unto Ioas the father of ye Esrites, and his son Gedeon
was throsshinge wheat in the barn, that he might fly away before the
Madianites.

LORD, and said unto him: The LORD with ye thou mighty giaunte. But Gedeon
said unto him: Sir, if the LORD be with us, wherefore is all this then happened
unto us? And where are all the wonders, which our fathers told us, and said:
The LORD brought us out of Egipte? But now has the LORD forsaken us, and
delivered us in to the hand of the Madianites.

The LORD turned him unto him, and said: Go thy way in this thy strength,
thou shall deliver Israel out of the hand of ye Madianites. I have sent the.
But he said: My LORD, wherwithall shall I deliver Israel? Behold, my kynred
is the smallest in Manasse, and I am the leest in my fathers house? The LORD
said unto him: I will be with the, so yt thou shall smite the Madianites, even
as though they were but one man.

He said unto him: If I have found grace (...)
Take the flesh and the vnleuended bred, and set it upon the stonye rock that
is here, and pour the broth thereon. And he did so. Then the angel of the
LORD stretched out the staff that he had in his hand, and with the end of
it he touched the flesh and the vnleuended flower: (...)
and the fire came out of the rock, and consumed the flesh and the vnleuended
flower. And the angel of the LORD vanyshed out of his sight.

Now wha^ Gedeon saw that it was an LORD, he said: (...)
O LORD LORD, have I thus seen an angel of ye LORD face to face? The LORD
said unto him: Peace be with the, fear not, thou shall not dye. The^ Gedeon
builded an altar there unto ye LORD, and called it: The LORD of peace. The
same stondeth yet unto this day at Apra, yt belongs unto the father of ye
Esrites.

And in ye same night said ye LORD unto him: Take a fedd bullock from among
thy fathers oxen, and another bullock of seven year old, and break down
the altar of Baall which is thy fathers, and cut down the grove that stondeth
by it, and build thou an altar unto the LORD ye God above upon the top of
this rock, and make it ready, and take the other bullock, and offer a burnt
offering with the wodd of the grove that thou have hewn down. Then took
Gedeon ten men of his servants, and did as ye LORD said unto him: but he
was afraid to do this by day time, for his fathers house and the people in ye
cite, and so he did it by night.

Now when the people in the cite rose up was broken, and the grove hewn down
by it, and the other bullock a burnt offering upon the altar that was
builded, and one said unto another: Who has done this? And when they sought
and made search, it was said: Gedeon the son of Ioas has done it. The^
said the people of ye cite unto Ioas: Bring forth ye son, He must dye,
because he has broken Baals altar, and hewn down the grove thereby. But Ioas
said unto all them that stood by him: Will ye strive for Baal? Will ye deliver
him? He yt stryueth for him, shall dye this morning. If he be God, let him
aue^ge him self, because his altar is broken down. From yt day forth was he
called Ierubaal, because it was said: Let Baal avenge him self, that his
altar is broken down.

LORD endued Gedeon, and he caused the trompet to be blown, and called (the
house of) (...)
Abieser, that they should follow him: and he sent messaungers unto all
Manasse, and called them, yt they should follow him also: and he sent
messaungers likewise unto Asser and Zabulon and Nephtali, which came up to mete
him.



And Gedeon said unto God: If thou will deliver Israel through my hand, as
thou have said, the^ will I lay a flese of woll in the court: if ye dew be
only upon ye flese, and dry upon all the ground, then will I perceive, that
thou shall deliver Israel through my hand, as thou have said. And it came so
to pass. And when he rose up early on the morrow, he wra^ge ye dew out of the
flese, and filled a dyszshe full of water. And Gedeon said unto God (...). 18.
d
Be not wroth at me, that I speak yet this one time. I will prove yet but once
with the flese, let it be dry only upon the flese, and dew upon all the
ground. And God did so the same night: so that it was dry only upon the
flese, and dew upon all the ground.

The VII. Chapter.
THen Ierubaal (that is Gedeon) gat Iud. 6. ^
and all the people that was with him, and pitched their tents beside the well
of Harod, so that he had the host of the Madianites on the north side behind
the hill of More in the valley. But the LORD said unto Gedeon: The people
that be with yt are to many for me to deliver Madian in to their hand, lest
Israel boost them selves against me, and say: My hand has delivered me.
Cause a proclamacion now to be made in the ears of the people, and say: Deu.
20. b 1. Mac. 3. g
He that fears, and is afraid, let him turn back, and get him soon fro
mount Gilead. Then returned there of the people about a two and twenty
thousand so that there was left but ten thousand.

And the LORD said unto Gedeon. The LORD said unto Gedeon: Whosoever
licketh of the water with his tu^ge, as a dog licketh, make him stand aside
and likewise who soever falls down upon his knees to drink. Then was the
nombre of them that had licked out of the hand to the mouth, three hundredth
men. And the LORD said unto Gedeon: Through the three hundredth which have
licked, will I deliver you, and give over the Madianites in to thy hand: As for
the other people, let them go every one unto his place.

And they took vytayles with them for ye people, and their trompettes: but the
other LORD unto him: Up, and go down in to the host, for I have given them
over in to thy hand. But if thou be afraid to go down, then let ye servant
Pura go down with the unto the host, yt thou may hear what they say:
after that shall thou be bold, and thy hand strong, that thou may go
down in to the host.

Than went Gedeon down with his servant unto ye vttemost part of ye
watchme^ of arms yt were in ye host. And ye Madianites and Amalechites, and
all the children of the south, had laid them selves beneth in the valley, as a
multitude of greshoppers, and their Camels were not to be nombred for
multitude, eue^ as the sonde on ye see shore. Now when Gedeon came, behold,
one told another his dream, and said: Behold, I have dreamed a dream: Me
thought a bake^ barlye lofe came rollinge down to ye host of ye Madianites:
and when it came to the tente, it smote it, and overthrew it, and turned it
vpsyde down, so that the tente fell. Then answered the other: That is nothing
else then ye sword of Gedeon the son of Ioas ye Israelite: God has given
over the Madianites with all the host in to his hand.

LORD has delivered ye host of the Madianites in to your hand. And he
divided the three hundredth men in to three parts, and gave every one a trompet
in his hand, and emptye pytchers, and lamps therein, and said unto them: Look
unto me, ^ud. 9. g
and do ye eue^ so, and behold, wha^ I come to the vttemost part of the
host, even as I do, so do ye also. When I blow ye trompet, and all that are
with me, then shall ye blow ye tro^pettes also round about all the host, and
say: Here the LORD and Gedeon. Thus came Gedeon and the three hundredth men
with him unto the vttemost part of ye host (about the time when the mydwatch
begins) and waked up the watchme^, and blewe with the trompettes, and smote
asunder the pitchers in their hands.

So all the three companies blewe with ye LORD and Gedeon. And every one stood
in his place about the host. Then ran all the host, and cried and fled.
And while the three hundredth men blewe the trompettes, ye LORD brought it so
to pass, that ^. Re. 14. c ^. Pa. 20. d
every man's sword in all ye host was against another, and the host fled unto
Bethsitha Zereratha, and unto the border of the plain of Mehohab beside
Tabath. And ye men of Israel of Nephtali, of Asser, and of Manasse cried, and
followed upon the Madianites.

And Gedeon sent messaungers up unto all mount Ephraim, saying: Come down
against the Madianites, and stop the water from them unto Beth Bara and
Iordane. And then cried all they that were of Ephraim, and stopped the water
from them unto Bethbara and Iordane, and took two princes of the Madianites
Oreb and Zeb, and slew Oreb upon the rock of Oreb, and Zeb in the wine press
of Zeb, and followed upon the Madianites, and brought the heads of Oreb and
Zeb, unto Gideon over Iordane.

The VIII. Chapter.
ANd the men of Ephraim said unto (...)
God has delivered ye princes of the Madianites Oreb and Zeb in to your
hand, how could I do that ye have done? Wha^ he had said this, their blast
was swaged from him.

Now when Gedeon came unto Iordane, he went over with the three hundredth me^
that were with him, and they were weery, and followed upon their chase. And he
said unto the men of Sucoth: I pray you give

But the rulers of Sucoth said: Are the hands of Zebea and Salmana in thy
hands already, that we must give bred unto thy men of war? Gedeon said:
Well, when the LORD delyuereth Zebea and Salmana in to my hand, I will
thres^she your flesh with thorns of the wilderness and with breares. And
from thence he went up unto Penuel, and spoke even so unto them. And the me^
of Penuel gave him like answer as they of Sucoth. And he said also unto the
men of Penuel: If I come peaceably again, I will break down this tower.

As for Zebea and Salmana, they were

And Gedeon went up by the way, where they dwell in the tents on the east
side of Nobah and Iakbeha, and smote the host, for the host was careless,
and mystrusted nothing. And Zebea and Salmana fled, but he followed after them,
and took ye two kings of the Madianites Zebea and Salmana, and put all the
host in fear*

Now when Gedeon ye son of Ioas came again from the battayll out of ye east,
he took a lad of the men of Sucoth, and examyned him, which wrote him up the
names of the rulers of Sucoth, and their Elders, eue^ three score and seuentene
men.

(...)
And the tower of Penuel brake he down, and slew the men of the cite.

And he said unto Zebea and Salmana: What manner of me^ were they who^ ye slew
at Thabor? They said: They were even like the, and goodly men, as if they had
been a kings children. He said: They were my brethren, even my mother sons:
As truly as the LORD lives, if ye had lette^ them live, I would not slaye you.



Then said certain in Israel unto Gedeon: Be thou lord over us, thou and thy
son, and thy sons son, for so much as thou have delivered us from ye
hand of ye Madianites. Nevertheless Gedeon said unto them: I will not be lord
over you, nether shall my son be lord over you, but the LORD shall be lord
over you.



Thus were ye Madianites brought down

And Ierubaal the son of Ioas went and dwelt in his house. 4. Re. 10* ^
And Gedeon Had three score and ten sons, which were come out of his thye: for
he had many wives. And his concubyne which he had at Siche^, bare him a son
also, whom he called Abimelech. And Gideon the son of Ioas dyed in a good
age, and was buried at Aphra in ye sepulcre of his father Ioas the father of
the Esrites.

But when Gedeon was deed, the children of Israel turned back, and went
awhoringe after Baalim, and made a covenant with Baal Berith, yt he should be
their God. And ye children of Israel thought not on ye LORD their God, which
had delivered them from the hand of their enemies round about: and they
showed not mercy unto the house of Ierubaal Gedeon, acordinge to all the good
that he had done unto Israel.

The IX. Chapter.
ABimelech the son of Ierubaal, went

Then spoke his mothers brethren all these words for him, in ye ears of all
ye men at Sichem. And their heart enclyned to Abimelech, for they thought: He
is our brother: and gave him three score and ten syluerlinges out of ye house
of Baal Berith. And with 2. Pa^. 21. ^
even three score men and te^ upon one stone. But Iotham the youngest son of
Ierubaal remained over, for he was hydd. And all the men of Sichem, and all the
house of Millo gathered them selves together, and went and made Abimelech
king by the Oak that stondeth at Sichem.

2. Par. 25. c 4. Esd. 4. b
The trees went to anointe a kind over them, and said unto the Olyue tree: Be
thou our king. But the Olyue tree answered them: Shall I go and leave my
fatness (which both God and men commend in me) and go to be puffed up above the
trees? Then said the trees unto the fygge tree: Come thou and be king over us.
But the fygge tree said unto the^: Shall I leave my swetnes and my good fruit,
and go to be puffed up above the trees? Then said the trees unto the vine: Come
thou and be our king. But the vine said unto them: Shall I leave my sweet
wine, which reioyseth God and men, and go to be puffed up above the trees? The^
said all the trees unto the thorn buszshe: Come thou, and be king over us.
And the thorn buszshe said unto the trees: If it be true, yt ye anoynte me to
be king over you, the^ come, and put your trust under my shadow. If no, then
go fire out of the thorn buszshe, and consume ye Ceder trees of Libano^.



If ye have done right now and justly unto Ierubaal and his house this day,
then rejoice over Abimelech, and let him rejoice over you. If no, then go fire
out from Abimelech, and consume the men of Sichem and the house of Millo: And
fire go out also from the men of Sichem, and from the house of Millo, and
consume Abimelech. And Iotha^ (when he had spoken this out) fled, and gat him
out of the way, and went unto Ber, and dwelt there because of his brother
Abimelech.

Esa. 45. a
God sent an evil mind between Abimelech and the men of Sichen (for the men
of Sichem despised Abimelech, and rehearsed the wr^nge done to the sons of
Ierubaal, and their blood, and laid it upon Abimelech their brother which
slew them, and upon the men of Sichem that strengthed his hand thereto, that
he might slaye his brethren.

And the men of Sichem set an hynd^^ watch upon the tops of the mountains,
and spoiled all them that walked nigh them by the way, and it was told
Abimelech. But there came Gaal the son of Ebed and his brethren, and entered
in to Sichem, and the men of Sichem put their trust in him, and went out in to
the field, and gathered their vynyardes, and pressed them, and made a daunse,
and went in to their gods house, and ate and drank, and cursed Abimelech.

And Gaal ye son of Ebed said: Who (...)
Hemor the father of Sichem* Wherefore should we serve him? Would God the people
were under my hand, yt I might put down Abimelech.

And it was told Abimelech: Increace thine hooste, and depart. For Sebul the
chief ruler of the cite, when he herd the words of Gaal ye son of Ebed, he
was wroth fully displeased, and sent message secretly to Abimelech, and caused
to say unto him: Behold, Gaal the son of Ebed and his brethren are come to
Sichem, and make the cite to be against the.

Arise therefore by night, thou and thy people that is with the, and lay wait
for the^ in the field: and tomorow when the Son aryseth, get the up soon,
and fall upon the cite: and if he and the people that is with him come out unto
the, the^ deal with him, as thine hand fyndeth.

Abimelech stood up by night, and all the is Abimelech* that we should serve
him? Is not this ye people, whom thou have refused? Go forth now, and fight
with him.



Gaal went forth before the citesyns of Sichem, and fought with Abimelech.
But Abimelech chaced him, so that he fled, and there fell many slain even unto
the gate of the cite. And Abimelech abode at Aruma. But Sebul drove away Gaal
and his brethren, so that they must not remain at Sichem. Upon the morrow
went the people forth in to ye field. Wha^ this was told Abimelech, he took
the people, and parted them in to three bo^des of men, and waited for the^ in
the field. Now when he saw yt the people went out of the cite, he rose
against the^, and smote them.



When all the men of the tower of Sichem herd this, they went in to a strong
hold of ye house of their God Berith. But when Abimelech herd, that all the
men of the tower of Sichem had gathered the^ selves together, he went up unto
mount Zelmon, and all the people that was with him, and took an axe in his
hand, and hewed down a branch of a tree, and took it up, and laid it upon
his shulder, and said unto all the people that was with him: (...)
As ye have seen me do, make ye haist, and do even so as I. Then all the people
hewed down every one a brau^ch, and followed Abimelech: and they laid them to
the hold, and set fire upon them against them and the hold: and all the men
of the tower of Sichem dyed through the smoke and fire, upon a thousand men and
women.

As for Abimelech, he went unto Thebetz, 2. Re. 11. c
But a woman cast a piece of a mylstone upon Abimelechs head, and brake his
brane pan. Then Abimelech in all the haist, called the servant that bare his
wapen, and said unto him: Draw out thy sword, and kill me, 1. Reg. 11. a 1.
Par. 11. a
that it be not said of me: A woman has slain him. Then his servant thrust
him through, and he dyed. When the Israelites which were with him, saw, yt
Abimelech was deed, they gatt them away every one unto his own place.

Thus God recompensed Abimelech the evil that he had done unto his father,
wha^ he slew his three score and ten brethren: like wise all the evil of the
men of Sichem, did God reward them upon their head: and so the Iud. 9. c
curse of Iotham ye son of Ierubaal came upon them.

The X. Chapter.
AFter Abimelech there rose up another

After him stood up one Iair a Gileadite, and judged Israel two and twentye
year, and has thirty sons, Iud. 1^. c
rydinge upon thirty asses foales: and had thirty cities, whose names are
Hauoth Iair (that is, the cities of Iair) unto this day, and lie in Gilead.
And Iair dyed* and was buried at Camon.

But the children of Israel wrought wickedness LORD, and served Baalim and
Astaroth, and the gods of Siria, and the gods of Sidon, and the gods of
Moab, and the gods of ye children of Ammon, and the gods of the
Philistines, and forsook ye LORD, and served him not. Then was ye wrath of ye
LORD fearce upon Israel, and he gave the^ over under the hand of the
Philistynes, and of the children of Ammo^. And they vexed and oppressed ye
children of Israel eightene year long, all the children of Israel that were
beyond Iordane in the land of the Moabites, which lies in Gilead. The
children of Ammon also went over Iordane, and fought against Judah, Ben Iamin,
and against the house of Ephraim, so that Israel was very sore troubled.

Then cried the children of Israel unto LORD, and said: We have sinned
against the, for we have forsaken our God, and served Baalim. But the LORD
said unto the children of Israel: Did not the Egipcia^s, the Amorites, the
children of Ammon, ye Philistines, the Sidonians, the Amalechites and Maonites
oppress you, and I helped you out of their hand, when ye cried unto me? Yet
have ye forsaken me, and served other gods? Therefore will I help you no more
Deuteronomy. 32. c Iere. 2. d
Go your way, and cry upon the gods whom ye have chosen, let them help you
in the time of your trouble.

LORD: We have sinned, do thou unto us what pleases the, only deliver us at
this time. And they put the strange gods from them, and served the LORD,
And his soul had pytie on the mysery of Israel.

And the children of Ammon called them selves together, and pitched in Gilead:
But the children of Israel gathered them selves together also, and pitched at
Mispa. And ye people of the chefest of Gilead said among them selves: Who so
ever begins to fight against the children of Ammon, shall be head over all
them that dwell in Gilead.

The XI. Chapter.


Now wha^ the children of Ammon fought thus with Israel, the Elders went from
Gilead to fetch Iephthae out of the land of Tob, and said unto him: Come, and
be our captain, and fight against the children of Ammon. But Iephthae said
unto the Eldes of Gilead: Are not ye they that hate me and have thrust me out
of my fathers house, and now come ye to me when ye are in trouble?

The Elders of Gilead said: Therefore come we now again unto the, that thou
may go with us, and fight against the ch^ldren of Ammon, and be our
captain over all that dwell in Gilead. Iephthae said unto the Elders of
Gilead: If ye fetch me again to fight against the children of Ammon, and the
LORD deliver them before me shall I then be your head? The Elders of Gilead
said unto Iephthae: The LORD be hearer between us, if we do not as thou have
said. So Iephthae went with the Elders of Gilead. And the people made him
head and duke over them. And Iephthae spoke all this before the LORD at Mispa.

Then sent Iephthae messaungers to the king of the children of Ammon, and
caused to say unto him: What have thou to do with me, that thou co^mest unto
me to fight against my land? The king of the children of Ammo^ answered
Iephthaes messaungers Because that Israel took away my land (when they
departed out of Egipte) from Arnon unto Iabock, and unto Iordane: give it me
again now therefore peaceably.

But Iephthae sent yet mo messaungers (...)
Israel has taken no land, nether from the Moabites ner from the children of
Ammon: for when they departed out of Egipte, Israel walked through the wyldernes
unto the reed see, and came to Cades, and (...)
sent messaungers to the king of the Edomites, and said: Let me go through thy
land. But the king of ye Edomites would not hear the^. They sent likewise
unto the king of the Moabites, which would not also. Thus Israel abode in
Cades, and compased the lord of the Edomites and Moabites, and came on the
eastsyde of the land of the Moabites and pitched beyond Arnon, and came no^
within the coaste of the Moabites. (...)
For Arnon is the border of the Moabites.

And Israel sent messaungers unto Si^hon the king of the Amorites at Heszbon,
(...)
and caused to say unto him: Let me go through thy land unto my place.
Nevertheless Sihon would not trust Israel to go through the border of his land,
but gathered all his LORD God of Israel gave Sihon with all his people in to
Isreal's hand, so that they slew them. Thus Israel conquered all the land of
the Amorites that dwelt in ye same country. And they took possession of all the
borders of the Amorites, from Arnon unto Iabok, and from ye wilderness unto
Iordane. So ye LORD God of Israel drove away the Amorites before his people
of Israel, and will thou co^quere them? Is it not so, if thy God Camos gave the
ought to possess, would thou not possess it? What so ever the LORD our
God has given us before us to possess, that shall we conquer and take in
possession.

(...). 22. a (...). 23. a
Balac the son of Ziphor, the king of ye Moabites? Did he ever go to law or
fight against Israel? Though Israel have dwelt now upon a three hundredth year
in Hesbon, and in the vyllages thereof, in Aroer and in the vyllages thereof, and
in all the cities that lie by Arnon. Why did not ye rescue it at the same time?
I have not offended the, and thou do me evil to fight against me? The
LORD give sentence this day between Israel and the children of Ammon.

Nevertheless the king of the children of Ammon would not hear ye words of
Iephthae, which he sent unto him. Then came ye sprete of the LORD upon
Iephthae, and he went through Gilea^ and Manasse, and through Mispa which lies
in Gilead, and fro Mispa that lies in Gilead, unto ye children of Ammon.

LORD, and said: (...)
If thou will deliver the children of Ammon in to my hand, what so ever
comes (first) out at the door of my house in my way, when I return again
peaceably from the children of Ammon, that same shall be the LORDS, and I will
offer it for a burtn offering.

So Iephthae went upon the children of Ammon, to fight against them. And ye
LORD gave them in to his hand, and he smote the^ from Ar^er till thou come
unto Minnith, even twentye cities, and unto the plain of ye vynyardes a very
great slaughter, and thus were the children of Ammon subdued before the
children of Israel.

Now when Iephthae came to Mispa unto his house, behold, his daughter went
out to mete him with tabrettes and daunces: and she was his only child, and
he had else nether son ner daughter. And when he saw her, he rent his
clothes, and said: Alas my daughter, thou make my heart soroufull, and
discomfortest me: for I have opened my mouth unto the LORD, and can not call
it again.

She said: My father, if thou have opened thy mouth unto the LORD, then do
unto me as it is proceaded out of ye mouth, LORD has aue^ged the of thine
enemies the children of Ammon. And she said unto her father: Do this for me,
give me leave to go down upon the mountains two months, that I may bewep^
my virginite with my playfeeres. He said: Go thy way. And he let her go two
months. Then went she with her playefeeres, and bewailed her maiden head
upon the mountains. And after two months she came again unto her father.
And he did unto her acordinge as he had vowed. And she had never been in
danger of any man. And it was a custom in Israel, that the daughters of
Israel should go every year, and mourn for the daughter of Iephthae the
Gileadite, four days in the year.

The XII. Chapter.
ANd they of Ephraim made insurreccion, Iud. 8. ^
Wherefore we^test thou to the battayll against the children of Ammon, and have
not called us, that we might go with the? We will burn thy house and the with
fire. Iephthae said unto the^: I and my people had a great matter with ye
children of Ammon, and I cried upon you, but ye helped me not out of their
hands. Now when I saw yt there was no helper, I put Psalm. 118. ^
my soul in my hand, and went against the children of Ammon, and the LORD
delivered them in to my hand. Wherefore come ye up to me, to fight against me?

And Iephthae gathered all the men in

After him judged* Israel one Ebzan of (...) shulders and loins: and went
down, and dwelt in the stone clyffe at Etam. Then went the Philistynes up,
and laid sege unto Judah, and pitched at Lechi. But they of Judah said:
Wherefore are ye come up against us? They answered: we are come up to bind
Samson, yt we may do unto him, as he has done unto us.

LORD came upon him, and the coardes about his arms were like thredes burnt
in the fire, so yt the bonds were lowsed from his hondes.

LORD, and said: Soch great health have thou given by the hand of thy
servant, but now must I dye a thyrst, and fall in to ye hand of ye
uncircumcised. The^ God opened a gome tothe in ye cheke bone, so yt water went
out: and when he drank, his sprete came again, and he was refreszshed.
Therefore unto this day it is yet called ye well of ye cheke bone of him yt
made intercession. And he judged Israel in the time of the Philistynes twe^tye
year.

The XVI. Chapter.


After this he fell in to the love of a woman by ye broke of Sorek, whose name
was Dalila, unto whom the princes of the Philistynes C. syluerlinges. And
Dalila said unto Samson: I pray the tell me, wherein thy great strength is,
and how thou might be bound to be subdued. Samson said unto her: If I were
bound with seven roapes of fresh senowes, which are not yet dried up, I should
be weak, and as another man. The^ the princes of the Philistynes brought up
unto her seven new roapes, which were not yet dried up. And she bound him
therewith. (But there was wait laid for him beside her in the chamber) and she
said unto him: The Pilistynes upon the Samson. Nevertheless he brake the roapes
in sunder, eue^ as a twyned threde breaks, when it has catched the heat of
the fire. And it was not known wherein his strength was.

Then said Dalila unto Samson: behold,

Dalila said unto him: Yet have thou begyled me and dessembled with me: O tell
me yet, wherwithall might thou be bound? He answered her: If thou playtest
seven hayri^ locks of my head together in a fyllet, and fastenest them in
with a nail (I should be weak.) And she said unto him: The Philistynes upon
the Samson. But he awaked out of his sleep, and drue out ye playted hayrie
locks with the nale and the fyllet.

The^ said she unto him: How can thou great strength is. So when she was
every day importune upon him with her words, and would not let him have rest,
his soul was faynte even unto the death, and he showed her his whole heart, and
said unto her: (...). 6. a (...). 1^. a
There came never rasoure upon my head, for I am a Nazaree of God fro my
mothers womb. If I were shaven, my strength should depart fro me, so that I
should be weak, and as all other men. Now when Dalila saw that he had opened
all his heart unto her* she sent and called for the princes of the Philistynes,
and said: Come yet once up, for he has opened his whole heart unto me.

LORD was departed from him. But the Philistynes took him, and put out his
eyes, and brought him down to Gasa, and bound him with fetters, and made him
to grynde in the preson. But the here of his head began to grow again,
where it was shaven of.



LORD, and said: O LORD LORD, think upon me, and strength me but this once
O God I beseke the, yt for both mine eyes I may aue^ge me on the Philistynes.
And he took hold of ye two mydpilers, that the house stood upon and was holden
by, the one in his right hand, and ye other in his left, and said: My soul
dye with the Philistynes, and he bowed him self mightily. Then fell the house
upon the princes and upon all the people that were therein, so that there were
mo of ye slain which dyed in his death, the^ he slew while he lived. Then
came his brethren down and all his fathers house, and took him, and carried him
up, and buried him in the grave of his father Manoah between Zarga and Esthaol.
He judged Israel twentye year.

The XVII. Chapter.
THere was a man upon mount Ephraim, LORD have thou my son. So he gave his
mother the thousand and hundredth syluerlinges again. And his mother said:
That money have I sanctified unto the LORD with my hand for my son, to make a
molten image: therefore I give it the again. Nevertheless he delivered ye money
again unto his mother.

Then took his mother two hundredth syluerlinges, Iud. 18. ^ and ^1. d
At yt time was there no king in Israel, and every man did the thing yt was
right in his own eyes. There was a yo^ge man of Bethleem Judah, among the
kynreds of Judah, and he was a Leuite, and was a stranger there. The same went
out of the cite of Bethleem Judah, to walk whither he could.

And wha^ he came up to mount Ephraim unto the house of Micha, to go on his
journey, Micha axed him: Whence co^mest thou? He answered him: I am a Leuite of
Bethleem Judah, and am walking where I can. Micha said unto him: Tarry with me,
thou shall be my father and my pressed, I will give the every year ten
syluerlinges and thy appointed rayme^t, and meat and drink: and the Leuite
went on. And the Leuite agreed to abide with the man: and he held the young
man, as one of his own sons. And Micha filled the Levites hand, that he
might be his pressed, and so he was in Michas house. And Micha said: I am sure
the LORD will do me good now, that I have a Leuite to my pressed.

The XVIII. Chapter.
^^su. 19. d
for unto that day there was no enheritaunce fallen unto them among the
trybes of Israel. And the children of Dan sent out of their kynreds five
captains (which were men of arms) from Zarga and Esthaol, to spy and search
out the land. And they said unto them: Go your way, and search out the
land. And they came up to mount Ephraim in to ye house of Micha, and tarried
there all night. And while they were there with Michas huszsholde, they knew ye
voice of the young man the Leuite, and said unto him: Who brought ye hither?
What make thou here? and why would thou come hither?

LORD. Then the five men went their way, and came unto Lais, and saw that
the people which was therein, dwelt sure, even as ye Sidonians, at rest, and
careless, and that there was no lord in the land to vex them, and were
far from the Sidonia^s, and had nothing to do with any man.



Then went there thence out of the kynreds of Dan from Zarga and Esthaol, six
hundredth men ready wapened to ye battayll, and went up, and pitched at Kiriath
Iearim in Judah: therefore called they the sam^ place, ye host of Dan, unto this
day, which is behind Kiriath Iearim.

And from thence they went up unto mount

Now wha^ these were come in to Michas

When they were come far now from the children of Dan went on their way.
And Micha, when he saw yt they were to strong for him, turned back, and came
again to his house.

(...). 19. d
and called it Dan, after name of their father Dan, whom Israel begat. And ye
cite was called Lais before time.

And the children of Dan set up the image for them, and Jonathan ye son of
Gerson the son of Manasse, and his sons were prestes among the trybe of ye
Danites, (...). 17. a
unto the time yt they were led away captyue out of the land. And thus they
set among the^ the image of Micha, which he had made, as long as ye house of
God was at Silo.

The XIX. Chapter.


^en. 18. a ^^al. 105. b
Refresh thine heart first with a morsel of bred, and then shall ye go. And they
sat them down, and ate and drunk both together: Then said the damsels father
unto the man: Oh tarry all night, yt we way refresh thine heart. But ye man
arose, and would needs go. And his father in law constrained him to tarry all
night. On the fifth day in the morning he gat him up, and would be gone.
Then said the damsels father: I pray the comfort thine heart, and let us tarry
till ye day be farther past, and so they ate both together.

And the man gat him up, and would go

Now when they were come nigh unto Iebus, the day ^^ll fast away. And ye
servant said unto his master: I pray you go on, and let us turn in to this
cite of the Iebusites, and tarry therein allnight. Not withstondinge

And behold, then came there an old man LORD and no man will harbarow me. We
have straw and proue^der for our asses, and bred and wine for me and thy
handmayden, and for the young man which is with thy servant, so yt we want
nothing.

The old man said: Peace be with the: the house round about, and ruszshed
at ye door, and said unto ye old man, which was the good man of ye house:
Bring out the man which is come in to thy house, that we may know him.

Genesis 19. b
But the good man of the house went forth to them, and said unto them: Oh no
my brethren, do not so wickedly, consideringe this man is come in to my house:
Oh do not soch folly. Behold, I have a daughter yet a virgin, and this man
has a co^cubine, those will I bring forth unto you, that ye may humble them,
and do with them as ye like: but do not soch folly unto this man. Nevertheless
the men would not harken unto him. Then took ye man his concubine and brought
her forth unto them: and they knew her, and dealte shamefully with her all yt
night until the morning. And when the morning

Then came the woman early in the morning, and fell down at the door of the
ma^s house that her lord was in, and lay there till it was light. Now when
her lord rose up in the morning, and opened the door of the house, and went
forth to go on his journey, behold, his concubyne lay at the door of the
house, and her hands upon the thresholde. He said unto her: stand up, let us
go, Nevertheless she gave him no answer. The^ took he her up upon his ass, gat
him up, and went unto his place.

Now when he came home, he took a sword, and held his concubyne, and cut her
with the bones and all in to twolue pieces, and sent them in to all the coasts of
Israel. Who so ever saw it, said: Soch a thing has not been done ner seen,
sense the time that ye children of Israel departed out of the land of Egipte,
unto this day. Now as concerning this, take your advysement, and give yor
council, and show it forth.

The XX. Chapter.
LORD to Mispa: and there came together of all the quarters of the people, and
of all the trybes of Israel in to the congregation of the people of God, four
hundredth thousand footmen that drue out ye sword. But the children of Ben
Iamin herd, how that ye children of Israel were gone up unto Mispa. And the
children of Israel said: Tell us, how happened this evil?

Then answered the Leuite the huszbande of the woman that was slain, and
said: I came to Gibea in Ben Iamin with my concubyne, to tarry there allnight,
then the cyt^* sins of Gibea gat them up against me, and compased me about in
the house by night, and thought to slaye me, and defiled my co^cubyne, so that
she dyed: then took I my co^cubyne, and cut her in pieces, and sent the pieces in
to every country of the inheritance of Israel: for they have done an
abhominacion and folly in Israel. Behold, here are ye children of Israel:
advise you well, and take this matter in hand.

So all the people gat them up as one man,

And the same day were there nombred LORD said: Judah shall begin.

So the children of Israel gat the^ up in ye morni^ge, and pitched over against
Gibea, and every man of Israel went out to fight with Ben Iamin, and set them
selves in array to fight against Gibea. Then fell the children of Ben Iamin
out of Gibea, and slew the same day among Israel two and twentye thousand
to the ground.



LORD until the evening, and axed at the LORD, and said: Shall we go
enymore to fight with our brethren the children of Ben Iamin? The LORD
said: Go up unto them. And when the children of Israel gat them up to the
children of Ben Iamin on ye next day, the Ben Iamites fell out of Gibea
against them the same day, and slew yet eightene thousand of ye children of
Israel to the ground, which all drue the sword.

Then went all the children of Israel up, and all the people, and came to the
house of God, and wept, and tarried there before the LORD, and fasted that
day until the even, and offered burnt offerynges and deed offeringes before
the LORD. And the children of Israel axed at the LORD (the Arc of the
covenant of God was there at that time, and Phineas the son of Eleasar the
son of Aaron stood before him at the same time) and they said: Shall we go
forth any more to fight with our brethren the children of Ben Iamin, or shall
we leave of? The LORD said: Go up, tomorow will I deliver them in to your
hands.



Then all the men of Israel gat them up from their place, and prepared them
selves unto Baal Thamar. And the hinder watch of Israel brake out of their
place, from ye cave of Gaba, and came unto Gibea, twentye thousand chosen men
out of all Israel, so that it was a sore battayll: but they knew not that the
evil should happen unto them. Thus the LORD smote Ben Iamin before the
children of Israel, so that the same day the children of Israel destroyed five
and twentye thousand and an hundredth men in Ben Iamin, which all drue the
sword.

For when the children of Ben Iamin saw that they were smitten, the men of
Israel gave

And they turned them before the men of

When the remnaunt of Ben Iamin saw that, they turned them and fled toward
the wilderness unto the stonye rock of Rimon. But in the same street they
slew five thousand men, and followed upon them unto Gideom, and slew two
thousand of the^: and so there fell the same day of Ben Iamin five and twenty
thousand men which drue ye sword, and were all me^ of arms. Only six
hundredth men turned back, and fled toward the wilderness unto the stonye
rock of Rimon, and abode in the rock of Rimon four months. And the men of
Israel came again to the children of Ben Iamin, and smote them that were in
the cite with ye edge of the sword, both me^ and catell and all that was
found: and what soever was found in the cite, they cast it in to the fire.

The XXI. Chapter.
LORD God of Israel, wherefore is this come to pass in Israel this day? But
on the morrow the people gat the^ up early, and builded there an altar, and
offered burnt offeringes and deed offerynges.

And the children of Israel said: Where is there any man of the trybes of
Israel, that is not come up with the congregation unto the LORD? For there was
a great ooth made, that who so came not up to Mispa unto the LORD, should dye
the deeth. And the children of Israel were sorry for Ben Iamin their brother,
and said: This day is there one trybe less in Israel. How will we do that
the remnaunt may have wives? For LORD, that we will not give the^ wives of
our daughters. And they said: Where is there any man of the trybes of Israel,
that is not come up to the LORD unto Mispa? And behold, there was not one man
of the citesyns of Iabes in Gilead.

Then sent the congregation twolue thousand men of arms thither, and
commanded them, and said: Go your way, and smite the citesyns of Iabes in
Gilead with the sword, the women also and the children, but so that ye do
after this manner: Number. 31. c
Se that ye damn all them that are males, and all the women that have lain
with men. And among the citesins of Iabes in Gilead they found four hundredth
damsels, which were virgins, and had lain with noman: those they brought in to
the host unto Silo, which lies in the land of Canaan.

Then sent the whole congregation, and (...)
which were in the stony rock of Rimo^ and called unto them friendly. (...)
So the children of Ben Iamin came again at the same time, and thy gave them
women which they had of the women of Iabes in Gilead, and found no mo after
that manner. Then were the people sorry for Ben Iamin, that ye LORD had made a
gappe in the trybes of Israel. And the Elders of the congregation said: What
will we do, that the remnaunt may have wives also? for the weme^ in Ben Iamin
are destroyed, and they said: The enheritaunce of them of Ben Iamin that are
escaped, must needs remain, that there be not a trybe destroyed out of Israel:
and we can not give them our daughters to wives. For the children of Israel
have sworn and said: Cursed be he that gives a wife to the Ben Iamites.

And they said: Behold there is a yearly feast of the LORD at Silo, which
lies on the northsyde of the Gods house, and on the eastside of the street as
a man goes from Bethel unto Sichem, and lies on the south side

The children of Ben Iamin did so, and acordinge to their nombre took them
wives from the daunse, whom they caught by violence, and went their way, and
dwelt in their own inheritance, and builded cities and dwelt therein. The
children of Israel also gat them up from thence at the same time, every one to
his trybe and to his kindred, and departed thence, every man to his own
inheritance. (...)
At yt time was there no king in Israel, and every man did ye thing yt was
right in his own eyes.

The end of the book of the Judges, called Iudicum.
The book of Ruth.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I. Elimelech departs from Bethleem with his wife and two sons in to
the land of the Moabites, where the father dies and both the sons. Ruth the
wife of the one son goes home with her mother in law. Chap. II. Ruth
gathers up ears of corn in the field of Boos her houszbandes kynsma^. Chap.
III. Ruth lies her down in the barn at Boos fete, and he gives her good
words, and ladeth her with six measures of barlye. Chap. IIII. Boos marieth
Ruth, which bears him Obed David's graundfather.
The first Chapter.


Then gat she her up with both her sons wives, and went again out of the
lord of ye Moabites (for she had herd in the land of LORD had visited his
people and given them bred) and so she departed from ye place where she was,
and both her sons wives with her. And as they went by the way to come again
in to the land of Judah, she said unto both her sons wives: Go yor way, and
turn back either of you to her mothers house: the LORD show mercy upon you,
as ye have done on the^ yt are deed and on me. The LORD grant you, yt ye
may find rest either of you in her huszba^des house (whom ye shall get) and she
kyssed them.

Then lift they up their voice, and wept, and said unto her: We will go with
the unto ye people. But Naemi said: Turn again my daughters, why would ye go
with me? How can I have children any more in my body, to be your huszbandes?
Turn again my daughters, and go your way, for I am now to old to take an
huszbande.

And though I should say: I hope this LORD is gone forth over me.

Then lift they up their voice, and wept yet more, and Arpa kyssed her mother
in law (and turned back again) but Ruth abode still by her. Nevertheless she
said: Behold, thy sister in law is turned back unto her people and to her
god, turn thou again also after thy sister in law. Ruth answered: Speak not
to me thereof, that I should forsake the, and turn back from the: whither so
ever thou go, thither will I go also: and look where thou abydest, there will
I abide also: Thy people is my people, and thy God is my God. Look where thou
die, there will dye, and even there will I also be buried. The LORD do this
and that unto me, death only shall depart us.

Now when she saw, that she was steadfastly LORD has brought me home again
emptye. Why call ye me then Naemi? wha^ the LORD has brought me low, and
the Almighty has made me sorry?

It was about the time of the beginning of the barlye harvest, when Naemi and
his sons wife Ruth ye Moabitysse, came again from the land of the Moabites
unto Bethleem. There was a kinsman also of ye kynred of Eli Melech Naemis
huszbande, whose name was Boos, which was an honest man.

The II. Chapter.
ANd Ruth the Moabitisse said unto it fortuned that the same field was the
enheritaunce of Boos, which was of the kynred of Elimelech, and behold, Boos
came from Bethleem, and said unto the reapers: The LORD be with you. They
answered: The LORD bless the. And Boos said unto his yongman which had the
oversight of ye reapers. Whose damsel is this? The young man that was set over
ye reapers, answered and said: It is the damsel the Moabitisse, which came
again with Naemi from the

Then said Boos unto Ruth: Hear thou my daughter? Thou shall not come upon
another man's land to gather, and go not away from hence, but tarry with my
da^sels, and look where they reap in ye field, go thou after them: for I have
commanded my servants that no man touch the. And if thou be a thyrst, go thy
way to the vessel and drink, where my servants draw. Then fell she down
upon her face, and bowed her self down to the earth, and said unto him: How
have I found this favor in ye sight, that thou would know me, which am
yet a stranger?

LORD recompense the thy doing, and thy reward be parfecte with the LORD God
of Israel, unto whom thou art come to put thy trust under his wings. She
said: let me find favor (sir) before thine eyes, for thou have comforted
me, and spoken friendly unto thy handmayde^, where as I am not yet like one of
ye handmayde^s.

Boos said unto her: When it is eatinge time, come hither, and eat of the
bred, and dip thy morsel in the vyneger. And she sat her down beside the
reapers. And he set parched come before her, and she ate, and was

So she gathered in the field until even and she shaked out what she had
gathered, and it was almost an Epha of barlye: and she took it up, and came in
to the cite, and showed her mother in law what she had gathered. She took
forth also, and gave her of that which was left, whereof she was satysfyed. The^
said her mother in law unto her Blessinge have the man that has known the,
where thou have gathered and labored this day.

She told her mother in law by whom she had labored, and said: The man's
name, by whom I have wroughte to day, is Boos. Naemi said unto her daughter
in law: The blessing of the LORD have he, for he has not left of to be
merciful unto the living (...)
and to the deed. And Naemi said unto her: The same man belongs (...) to us,
and is our nigh kynsman. Ruth the Moabitisse said: He said morouer unto me:
Thou shall resort un to my servants, till they have made an end of all my
harvest. Naemi said unto Ruth her daughter in law: It is better my daughter,
that thou go forth with his damsels, lest any man withsto^de the in another
field. Thus she kept herself with Boos damsels, so that she gathered until
the barlye harvest and the wheat harvest was out, and came again to her
mother in law.

The III. Chapter.
ANd Naemi her mother in law said unto her: My daughter, I will provide rest
for the, that thou may prospere. Boos our kynsman, by whose damsels thou
have been, casts up barlye now this night in his barn. Bathe thyselfe
therefore, and (...)
moffell the, and put on thy clothes, and go down unto the barn, so yt noma^
know the, till they have all eaten and dronken.

When he lays him down then to sleep, mark ye place where he lies down,
and come thou, and take up the covering at his fete, and lay the down, so
shall he tell the what thou shall do. She said unto her* whatso ever thou
say unto me, I will do it.

She went down to the barn, and did all as her mother in law had commanded
her. And wha^ Boos had eaten and dronke^, his heart was merry, and he came and
laid him down behind a heap of sheues. And she came secretly, and took up
the coueringe at his fete, and laid her down. Now wha^ it was midnight, the
man was afraid, and groped about him, and behold, a woman lay at his fete.
And he said: Who art thou? She answered: I am Ruth thy handmayden, sprede ye
wings over thy ha^dmayden: for thou art the next kynsman.

LORDS blessinge have thou my daughter. Thou have done a better mercy here
after then before, yt thou art not gone after young men, nether rich ner
poor. Fear not now my daughter: All yt thou have said, will I do for the:
for all the cite of my people knows, yt thou art a virtuous woman. Truth it
is now, yt I am a nigh kynsma^, but there is one nyer then I. Tarry thou
allnighte. Tomorow if he take the, well: if he like not to take ye, then will I
take yt my self, as truly as ye LORD lives. Sleep thou till ye morning. And
she slepte at his fete

The IIII. Chapter.
(...) 2^ d (...). 32. b
offreth to sell ye piece of land, yt was our brothers Eli Melech, therefore
thought I to show it before thine ears, and to tell the: If thou will redeem
it, then bye it before the citesyns and before the Elders of my people: but if
thou wylt not redeem it, then tell me, yt I may know: for there is no nigh
kynsma^ except thou, and I next after the.



And the nigh kynsman said unto Boos: Bye thou it, and he put of his shue. And
Boos said unto the Elders and to all the people: Ye are witnesses this day,
yt I have boughte out of the hand of Naemi, all that belonged to Eli Melech,
and all that was Chilions and Mahelons: And Ruth the Moabitisse Mahelons wife,
take I to wife, Deuteronomy. 25. ^
that I may raise up a name unto ye deed in his inheritance, and that his
name be not roted LORD make the woman that comes in to thy house, as Rachel
and Lea ( Ge. 29.3^
which both have builded up the house of Israel) that she may be an ensample
of virtue in Ephrata, and have an honorable name in Bethleem. And thy house be
as ye house of Phares ( Genesis 3^. ^
who^ Thamar bare unto Judah) through the sede, that the LORD shall give the of
this damsel.

So Boos took Ruth, and she became his wife. And when he lay with her, the
LORD granted her yt she conceived, and bare a son. The^ said the women
unto Naemi: Praised be the LORD, which has not suffered

And Naemi took the child, and laid it upon her lap, and became the norse
of it, and her neghbours gave him a name and said: There is a child borne
unto Naemi, and they called his name Obed. The same is the father of Isai,
which is ye father of David.

This is ye generation of Phares. 1. Par. 2. a Matthew. 1. a
Phares begat Hesrom. Hesrom begat Aram. Aram begat Aminadab. Aminadab begatt
Naasson. Naasson begat Salmon. Salmo^ begat Boos. Boos begat Obed. Obed begat
Isai. Isai begat David.

The end of the book of Ruth.
The first book of the kings, otherwise called the first book of Samuel.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I. Of Elcana and his two wives. Unto Anna gives God Samuel, which is
appropriated unto the LORD. Chap. II. The thankful song of Anna. The sons
of Eli do wickedly, their father refourmeth them not, therefore is the presthode
taken from him and his sons. Chap. III. The reuelacion showed unto Samuel,
and unto Eli. Chap. IIII. Israel fights against the Philistynes, loses the
victory, and is smytten the second time. The Philistynes win the Ark of the LORD: The two sons of Eli perish, the father falls down and breaks his
neck. Chap. V. The Philistynes bring the Ark of the LORD in to the temple
of Dagon, which falls down before it. Chap. VI. The Philistynes send the
Arc again unto the people of God, with certain gifts and offerynges. Chap.
VII. The Arc is brought in to Aminadabs house. Samuel exhorts the people to
amendment. Chap. VIII. Samuels sons rule not well. The people desire to have
a king. Chap. IX.X. Saul seeks his fathers asses, and comes unto Samuel,
which (at the commandment of the LORD) anoynteth him king, and shows him
unto the people. Chap. XI. Saul defends Iabes from Nahas the Ammonite. Chap.
XII. Samuel shows his innocence unto the people, and gives them a godly
exho^tacion. Chap. XIII. The Philistynes gather them selves against Israel.
Saul is disobedient unto to the LORD. Samuel reproves him. Chap. XIIII.
Ionathas disco^fiteth the enemies by sotyltie, Saul helps him: the father
would slaye the son, the people deliver him. Chap. XV. Samuel commands
Saul to (...) Amalek and utterly to destroy him* Saul is dishobedient, and
therefore is he deposed from the kingdom. Chap. XVI. David is anointed king.
The evil sprete vexes Saul, David eases him with playenge at the harp.
Chap. XVII. David destroys Goliath the (...) The Philistynes fle. Chap.
XVIII. Ionathas and David are sworn lovers. David behaueth himself wisely in
all things. The people love him. Saul gives him his daughter of purpose, that
the Philistynes might destroy him. Chap. XIX. Saul commands to kill David.
Ionathas gives him warning. David flies his way. His wife delyuereth him.
Chap. XX. David auoydeth from the kings displeasure. Ionathas warns him.
Chap. XXI. David flies unto Noba to the pressed Ahimelech, and eats of the
shewbred. Chap. XXII. David's fre^des help him. Do^g the Edomite slays
Ahimelech and the other prestes of the LORD. Chap. XXIII. Saul lays wait
for David ^^^getteth him out of the way, and the LORD defends him. Chap.
XXIIII. Saul comes into David's hand, which will not slaye him, but cutteth of
a piece of his garment, andc. Chap. XXV. Samuel dies. Nabal displeases David.
Abigail pacifieth him. Chap. XXVI. David fyndeth Saul slepynge, and where as
Abisai would slaye him, he will not suffer him, but takes away his spear and
the cup of water. Chap. XXVII. David flies unto Achis the king at Geth.
Chap. XXVIII. David is made Achis captain. Saul axeth council at the
Sothsayer. Samuel appears unto him and rebukes him. Chap. XXIX. The
Philistynes are not content, that David should be their captain. The king
sends him home again. Chap. XXX. The Amalechites fall upon Sice^ek. David
follows upon them, and recouereth the spoil again. Chap. XXXI. The
Philistynes fihgte against Israel. Saul's sons are slain, and he wounded, and
slays him self.


The first Chapter.
(...). 7. b
whose name was Elcana ye son of Ieroham, ye son of Elihu, ye son of
Tohu, ye son of Zuph, yt was an Ephrate. And he had two wives, ye one was
called Anna, ye other Peninna. As for Peninna, she had children, but Anna had
no children. And ye same man went up from his cite (...). 2^. b (...). 1^. a
at his time, to worship and to offer unto the LORD Zebaoth at Silo. There
were the prestes of the LORD Ophni and Phineas, the two sons of Eli. Now
when it came upon a day that Elcana offered, he gave parts unto his wife
Peninna, and to all his sons and daughters. But unto Anna he gave one deal
heuely, for he loved Anna. Nevertheless (...). 2^. d (...). a
the LORD had closed her womb, and her adversary cast her in the tethe with
her vnfrutefulnes, because the LORD had closed her womb: thus did she every
year, when they went up to the house of the LORD, and thus she provoked her.
So she wept, and ate nothing. But Elcana her huszbande said unto her:
Wherefore wepest thou? and why eatest thou not? And wherefore is thine heart so
grieved? Am not I better unto the then ten sons?

LORD. And she was full of heuyn^^^ in her heart, and prayed unto the LORD,
and wept, and vowed a vow, and said: O LORD Zebaoth, if thou will look upon
the aduersite of thy handmayden, and think upon me, and not forget thy
handmayden, and wilt give thy handmayden a son, I will give him unto the LORD
all his life long, Iud. 13. a Number. ^
and there shall no rasou^e come upon his head.

And wha^ she had prayed long before ye LORD, Eli took head to her mouth, for
Anna spoke in her heart, her lips only moved, but her voice was not herd.
Then thought Eli she had been dronken, and said unto her: How long will thou
be dronken? Let come from the the wine that thou have by the. Nevertheless Anna
answered and said: No my lord, I am a soroufull woman, wine and strong
drink have I not dronken Psalm. 4^.
but have poured out my heart before ye LORD. Count not thy handmayden a
daughter of Belial: for out of my heavy thought and sorrow have I spoken
hitherto.

Eli answered her, and said: Go yi way LORD, they returned, and came home
unto Ramatha.

And Elcana lay with Anna his wife, and the LORD remembered her. And after
certain days, she conceived and bare a son, and called his name Samuel, for
I have desired him (said she) of the LORD. And when the man Elcana went up
with all his houszholde to offer sacrifice and his vow unto the LORD at soch
time as ye custom was, Anna went not up, but said unto her huszbande: (I will
not go up) till ye child be weened: then will I bring him, that he may
appear before the LORD, and co^tynue there Number. ^.
for ever.

Elcana her huszbande said unto her: LORD perform that he has spoken. So
the woman abode, and gave her son suck, till she weened him. And when she
had weened him, she brought him up with her, with three bullockes, with an Ephi
of fine flower, and a bottell of wine, and brought him in to ye house of the
LORD at Silo.

Nevertheless the child was yet but young. And they slew a bullock, and
brought the child unto Eli. And she said: O my lord, as truly as thy soul
lives my lord, I am the woman that stood here by ye, and made intercession
unto the LORD, when I prayed for this child. Now has ye LORD granted me my
peticion, which I desired of him, therefore have I given him over unto the
LORD, as long as he is lent unto the LORD. And they worshipped ye LORD
there.

The II. Chapter.


My heart reioyseth in the LORD, and my horn is exalted in the LORD.

My mouth is opened wide upon mine enemies, for I am glad of thy salvation.

There is no man holy as the LORD, for without the is nothing, and there is
no comfort like unto our God.

Let go yor great boostinge of hye things, let go out of your mouth that
old byworde: for the LORD is a God yt knows all things, and he has set
all works in order.

The bow of the mighty is broken, and the weak are gyrded about with
strength.

They that were filled before, are sold for bred: and they that were hongrie,
are satisfied: until the baren bare seven, and till she that had many
children, was become weak.

^eut. ^2. f (...). 1^. c ^ob* 13. a
The LORD slays, and gives life: he ledeth unto hell, and brings out
again.

The LORD makes poor and makes rich: He brings low and exalts.

^^al. 112. a
He takes up the neady out of the dust, and lifts up ye poor out of the
mire, that he may set them among the princes, and to let them inheret the
seat of honor: for the foundacions and corners of the world are the LORDS,
and he has set the compase of the earth thereon.

He shall preserve the fete of his saints, but ye ungodly shall be put to
syle^ce in darcnesse. ^eut ^. d
For there is no man that can do ought of his own power.

The LORDS enemies shall be put in fear before him, he shall tho^der upon the^
in heaven.

The LORD shall judge the ends of the world, and shall give strength unto his
king, and shall exalte the horn of his anointed.

Elcana went his way to Ramath unto LORDS mynister before Eli the pressed. But
Elis sons were the children of Belial, and knew not the LORD, ner the duty
of the prestes unto the people: but when any man would offer ought, the
prestes boy came, while the flesh was seethinge, and had a three forked
fleshoke in his hand, and thrust it in to the cauldron, or ketell, or pan,
or pot: and look what he drue forth with the fleshoke, that took the pressed
thereof. Thus did they unto all Israel* which came thither unto Silo.

Like wise, or ever they burned the fatt, the prestes lad came, and said unto
him that brought the offering: Give me the flesh, that I may roste it for
the pressed, for he will receive no sodden flesh of ye, but raw. If any man said
then unto him: Let the LORD, for ye people spoke evil of ye meat offering of
ye LORD. But Samuel was a mynister before the LORD, and the child was gyrded
with an over body cote of lynnen. His mother also made him a little cote of
sylke, and brought it up unto him at convenient times, wha^ she went up with
her huszbande to offer ye offering in due season.

And Eli blessed Elcana and his wife, and said: The LORD give the sede of
this woman, for this good that thou have lent unto the LORD. And they went
unto their place. And the LORD vysited Anna, so that she conceived and bare
three sons and two daughters: but the child Samuel grew up with the LORD.

As for Eli, he was very old, and herd LORD to offend. (...)
If any man sin against a man, the judge ca^ redress it. But if any man
sin against ye LORD, who can redress it? Nevertheless they herkened not unto
the voice of their father, for the LORDS will was to slaye them. But the
child Samuel went and grew up, and was accepted of the LORD and of me^.

There came a man of God to Eli, and said unto him: Thus says the LORD:
(...)
and unto thy fathers house I gave all the offeringes of the children of
Israel. Why layest thou thy self then against my sacrifices and meat
offeringes, which I commanded (to offer) in the habitacion: and thou honor
thy sons more then me, that ye might feed your selves with the firstlinges
of all the meat offerynges of my people of Israel?

Therefore says the LORD God of Israel: I have spoken, that thy house and thy
fathers house should walk before me for ever. But now says the LORD: That
be far fro me. But who so ever honors me, him will I honor also: as for
those yt despise (...). 2. d
the time shall come, that I will break thine arm in two, and the arm of thy
fathers house, so that there shall no oldeman be in thy house. And thou shall se
thine adversaries in the habitacion, in all the good of Israel, and there shall
never be old man in thy fathers house. Yet will I not rote out every man of
the fro mine altar, but yt thine eyes may be consumed, and that ye soul may
be sorry: (...). 22. d
and a great multitude of thy house shall dye, when they are come to be men.

And this shall be a token unto the, that shall come upon thy two sons Ophni and
Phineas: They shall both dye in one day. (...). 4. c (...). ^3. c
But unto my self I will raise up a faithful pressed, which shall do acordinge as
it is in my heart and in my soul: unto him will I build a sure house, that he
may allwaye walk before mine anointed. And who so ever remains of thy
house, shall come and worshipe him for a silver penny and for a piece of bred,
and shall say: I pray the leave me to one prestes part, that I may eat a
morsel of bred.

The III. Chapter.
LORD under Eli, the word of ye LORD was dear at the same time, nether was
there any sure and manifest vision. And it fortuned at the same time, that Eli
lay in his place, (...). 4. c
and his eyes began to be dymme, so that he could not se. And Samuel had
laid him down in ye temple of the LORD (where the Ark of God was) before ye
lamp of God was put out. And the LORD called Samuel. He answered: Behold,
here am I. And he ran unto Eli, and said: Behold, here am I, thou have
called me. But he said: I have not called the, go thy way again, and lay
the down to sleep. And he went his way, and laid him down to sleep.

LORD called again: Samuel. And Samuel arose, and went unto Eli, and said:
Behold, here am I, thou have called me. Nevertheless he said: My son, I have
not called the. So thy way again, and lay the down to sleep. As for Samuel,
he knew not the LORD as yet, and the word of ye LORD was not yet showed
unto him. And ye LORD called Samuel ye third time. And he arose, and went
unto Eli, and said: Behold, here am I, thou have called me. Then perceived
Eli yt the LORD called ye child, and he said unto him: Go thy way again,
and lay the down to sleep: and if the LORD call the any more, then say:
Speak LORD, for ye servant hears. Samuel went his way, and laid him
down in his place. The^ came ye LORD, and stood, and called like as before:
Samuel, Samuel. And Samuel said: Speak ( LORD) for thy servant hears. And
the LORD said unto Samuel: Behold, I do a thing in Israel, yt who so ever
shall hear it, both his ears shall glowe. In yt day will I raise up upon Eli
1. Re. 2. g
all yt I have spoken concerning his house. I will take it in hand, and
perform it: for I have told him, yt I will be Judge over his house for ever,
because of the wickedness, yt he knew how shamefully his children behaved
themselves, and has not once looked sowerly thereto. Therefore have I sworn unto
ye house of Eli, yt this wickedness of ye house of Eli shall not be reco^cyled
nether with sacrifice ner with meat offringe for ever. And Samuel lay unto ye
morrow, and opened the doors of the house of the LORD.

But Samuel was afraid to tell the vysion LORD has spoken unto the? hyde it
not fro me. God do this and that unto ye, if thou hyde ought fro me, of all
that he has talked with the. Then Samuel told him altogether, and hyd nothing
from him. He said: It is the LORD, let him do what pleases him.

Samuel grew up, and the LORD was with him, and there fell none of all his
words upon the earth. And all Israel from Dan unto Bersaba, knew yt Samuel
was faithful to be a prophet of the LORD. And the LORD appeared again at
Silo: for the LORD showed him self unto Samuel at Silo, through the word of
the LORD.

The IIII. Chapter.
ANd all Israel spoke of Samuel. And 1. Reg. ^. ^
Help stone: As for the Philistynes, they pitched at Aphek, and prepared them
selves against Israel. And when the battayll began, the host was divided, so
that Israel was smytte^ before the enemies, and in the edge in the field they
slew about a four thousand men. And when the people came in to the host,
the Elders of Israel said: Wherefore has the LORD caused us to be smytten
this day before the Philistynes? Let us take unto us the Ark of the LORD'S
covenant from Silo, and let it come among us, that it may help us from the
hand of our enemies. And the people sent unto Silo, and caused to set thence
the Arc of ye covenant of the LORD Zebaoth, that sytteth upon the Cherubins.
And with the Arc of the covenant of God there were the two sons of Eli,
Ophni and Phineas.

LORD came in to the host, all Israel shouted with a great shoute, so that the
earth sounded withal. But when the Philistynes herd ye noise of ye shoute,
they said: what noise is this of soch great shoutinge in the tents of the
Hebrews? And when they perceived yt the Ark of the LORD was come in to the
host, they were afraid and said: God is come in to the host. And they said
morouer: Woe unto us, for it has not been thus before time. Woe unto us. Who will
deliver us from the hand of these hye gods? These are the gods that smote
Egipte with all manner of plages in the wilderness. Be strong now and manly ye
Philistynes, that ye serve not the Hebrews ^ud. 13. a
as they have served you. Be manly and fight.

^. Re. 2. g
and the two sons of Eli, Ophni and Phineas dyed.

Then ra^ne there one of Ben Iamin out of the fore front of the battayl, and
came unto Silo the same day, and had his clothes rent, and had earth upon his
head. And when he came in, Heli sat upon the seat, that he might look
toward the way: for his heart was fearful about ye Ark of God. And when
the man came in to the cite, he told it forth: and all the cite cried. And
when Eli herd ye noise of the crye^ge, he axed: What noise of busynes is this?
The man came haistely, and told Eli. (As for Eli, he was fourscore and
eightene year old, Reg. ^. a
and his eyes were dymme, so that he could not se.) The man said unto Eli: I
come and am fled this day out of the host. He said: How is it my son?



The V. Chapter.


AS for the Ark of God, the Philistynes LORD. But they took up Dagon, and set
him again in his place. Nevertheless when they rose up early on the next
morrow, they found Dagon lyenge on his face again upon the earth before the
Ark of the LORD: but his head and both his hands hewn of upon the
threszholde, so that the block lay there only. Therefore the prestes of Dagon,
and all they that go in to his house, tread not upon the threszsholde of Dagon
at Aszdod unto this day.

But the hand of the LORD was heavy (...)
Let not the Arc of the God of Israel tarry with us, for his hand is to hard
upon us and upon or god Dagon. And they sent forth and gathered all the princes
of the Philistynes unto them, and said: What shall we do with the Arc of the
God of Israel? Then answered they of Geth: Let the Arc of the God of Israel be
borne about. And they carried the Arc of the God of Israel round about.

LORD, and smote the people of the cite, from the smallest unto the greatest,
and destroyed them in the secret places. Then sent they the Ark of the LORD
unto Ekron. But wha^ the Ark of the LORD came unto Ekron, they of Ekron
cried: They have carried the Ark of God about unto me, to slaye me and my
people.



The VI. Chapter.
LORD in the land of the Philistynes seven months. And the Philistynes
called their prestes and soythsayers, and said: What shall we do with the Ark of the LORD? Show us, where with shall we send it unto her place? They said:
If ye will send away the Arc of the God of Israel, send it not away
emptye, but give a trespace offering: so shall ye be made whole, and ye shall
know, why his hand departs not from you.

They said: What is the trespace offeringe that we shall give him? They
answered: Five hinder parts of gold, and five golden myce, acordinge to the
nombre of the five princes of ye Philistynes. For there has been one manner of
plage upon you all, and upon your princes. Therefore must ye make your hinder
parts of one faszshion and your myce, which have destroyed your land, that
ye may give the God of Israel the honor: peradventure his hand shall be the
lighter upon you and upon your God, and (...). 12. c
did not they let them depart to go their way?

Go to now therefore, and make a new cart, and take two milk kyne, upon ye
which there never came yock, and yocke them to ye cart, and let their calves
tarry behind them at home: and take ye the Ark of the LORD and lay it upon
the cart: and the Jewels of gold that ye give him for a trespace offeringe put
in a coffer beside it, and send it away and let it go. And look well: if it
go the way of her own coaste Beth Semes, the^ has he done us all this great
evil: If no, then shall ye know that his hand has not touched us, but yt it
is happened unto us by chance.

The men did so, and took two young milk kyne, and yocked them to a cart, and
held their calves at home, and laid the Ark of the LORD upon the cart, and
the coffer with the golden myce, and with the images of their disease. And the
kyne went

The Beth Samites were even reapynge down their wheat harvest in the valley,
and lift up their eyes, and saw the Arc, and reioysed to se it. The cart
came in to the field of Joshua the Beth Semite, and there it stood still. And
there was a great stone, and they claue the timber of the cart, and offered the
kyne unto the LORD for a burnt-offerynge.

But the Levites took down the Ark of the LORD, and the coffer that was by
it, wherein the Jewels of gold were, and set the^ upon the great stone. The
men of Beth Semes offered burnt offerynges, and other offerynges also unto the
LORD the same day. And when the five princes of the Philistynes had seen it,
they departed again the same day toward Ekron.

These are the golden diseases, that the LORD: Aszdod one, Gasa one: Ascalon
one, Gath one, and Ekron one: and golden myce, acordynge to the nombre of all
the cities of the Philistynes among the five princes, from the walled cite
unto the vyllage, and unto the great plain field, whereupon they set the Ark of the LORD (which was) unto this day upon the field of Joshua the Beth Semite.

And certain of Beth Sames were slain because they had seen ye Ark of the LORD, and he slew fyftye thousand and seuentye men of the people. Then
mourned the people, because the LORD had done so great a slaughter in the
people. And the men at Beth Semes said: Who may sto^de before the LORD so
holy a God? And to who^ shall he go from us? And they sent messaungers to ye
inhabiters of Kiriath Iearim, saie^ge: The Philistynes have brought the Ark of God again, come down, and fetch it up unto you.

The VII. Chapter.
LORD, and brought it in to ye house of Re. 6. a
Abinadab at Gibea, and they consecrated Eleasar his son, yt he might keep ye
Arc. And from yt day that the Arc of ye LORD abode at Kiriath Iearim, ye
time extended forth so long till it came to twentye years: and all the house
of Israel wept after the LORD.

But Samuel said unto all the house of Israel: (...). 24 c ^ob. 14* c
If ye turn you withal your heart unto the LORD, then put away from you the
strange gods and Astaroth, and direct your heart unto the LORD and ^^ut.
^. c ^at. 4. b
serve him only, so shall be deliver you out of the hand of the Philistynes.
Then the children of Israel put away Baalim and Astaroth from them, and served
the LORD only.

LORD. And they came together unto Mispa, and drue water, and poured it out
before the LORD, and fasted the same day, and there they said: We have
sinned unto the LORD. So Samuel judged the children of Israel at Mispa.

But when the Philistynes herd that ye children of Israel were come together
unto Mispa, the princes of the Philistynes went up against Israel. When ye
children of Israel herd that, they were afraid of ye Philistynes, and said
unto Samuel: Cease not to cry unto the LORD our God for us, yt he may
help us out of the hand of ye Philistynes. ^ccl^. 46 c
Samuel took a fat lamb, and offered an whole burnt offering unto the LORD,
and cried unto the LORD for Israel, and the LORD herd him. And while Samuel
was offering LORD thondred a thonder upon the Philistynes the same day and
disco^fyted the^, so yt they were smytte^ before Israel. The^ went ye men of
Israel forth, and chaced ye Philistynes, and smote them till under Beth Car.
Then took Samuel a stone, and set it up between Mispa and Sen, and called it ye
Help stone, and said: Hither to has the LORD helped us. Re. 4. a
Thus were the Philistynes brought down, and came no more within the border of
Israel. And ye hand of ye LORD was against the Philistynes, as long as
Samuel lived.

LORD.

The VIII. Chapter.
But when Samuel waxed old, he set (...)
took gifts, and wraysted the law. Then all ye Elders in Israel gathered the^
selves together, and came to Ramath unto Samuel, and said unto him: Behold,
thou art waxen old, and thy sons walk not in yt ways, (...)
set a king now over us therefore, to judge us, as all ye Heithe^ have. The^
was Samuel displeased wha^ they said: Give us a king, to judge as. And Samuel
prayed before the LORD.

The LORD said unto Samuel: Harken (...)
For they have not refused the, but me, yt I should not be king over them.
They do unto the as they have done ever, sense the day yt I brought them out
of the land of Egipte unto this day, and ha^ue forsaken me, and served other
gods. Herke^ now therefore unto their voice. Yet testifye unto them, and show
them (...)
the law of the king that shall reign over them.

And Samuel told all the words of the LORD unto ye people, that required a
king of him. This shall be the law of the king yt shall reign over you: (...)
Yor sons shall he take for his charettes, and for horsemen to run before
his charettes, and to be rulers and captains, to be plowemen to till his land
and to be reapers in his harvest, and to make his harness, and soch things as
belong to his charettes. As for yor daughters, he shall (...)
and oyle-gardens shall he take, and give unto his servants: Of your seeds
also and viniardes shall he take the Tithes, and give unto his cha^berlaynes and
servants. And your servants and your maids, and your best young men,
and your asses shall he take, and do his busynes withal. Of your flocks shall
he take the Tithes, and ye shall be his servants. When ye shall cry then at
the same time over your king, whom ye have chosen you, the LORD shall not
hear you at the same time. Nevertheless the people refused to hear the voice
of Samuel, and said: Not so, but there shall be a king over us, yt we may be
as all other Heithe^, yt or king may judge us, and go forth before us, and
govern our wars. The^ herkened Samuel unto all yt ye people said, and
told it before ye ears of the LORD. The LORD said unto the^: Harken thou
unto their voice, and make them a king. And Samuel said unto the men of
Israel: Go your way every one unto his cite.

The IX. Chapter.
(...). 9. a
Cis, the son of Abiel, the son of Zeor, the son of Bethorah, ye son of
Apiah, the son of a man of Iemini, a valeaunt man, which had a son named
Saul, which was so goodly a young man, that there was not a goodlier among the
children of Israel, higher by the head then all the people. Cis the father of
Saul had lost his asses, and he said unto Saul his son: Take one of the
children with the, get the up, go thy way, and seek the asses. And he went
his way through mount Ephraim, and through the lord of Solisa, and found them
not. They went through the lord of Saalim, and there they were not. They
passed through ye lord of Iemini, and found the^ not. But wha^ they came in to
the land of Zuph, Saul said unto the child that was with him: Come, let us
go home again, lest my father let go the asses, and take care for us. He
said: Behold, here is an honorable man of God in this cite, all that he
says, comes to pass. Let us go thither now, perauenture he may show us
our way which we go. But Saul said unto his child: Though we should go,
what bring we the man? For the bred is gone out of or walet, and else have we
no gift to bring the man of God, what have we? The child answered again,
and said: Behold, I have the fourth part of a silver Sycle by me, ye same
will we give the man of God, that he may show us our way.

(Before time in Israel, when a man went LORD, he said: Come, let us go to
the Seer: for they that now are called prophets, were called Seers before
time). Saul said unto his child: Thou have well spoken, come let us go. And
when they went unto the cite where the man of God was, and came up to the
cite, they found damsels which were gone forth to draw water, unto them they
said: Is the Seer here* They answered them and said: Ye. Behold, he is
there, make haist, for he came in to the cite this day, because the people
have a sacrifice to do to day in the hye place. When ye come in the cite, ye
shall find him, before he go up to the hye place for to eat: for the people
will not eat till he come. For he shall bless the offering, then shall they
eat that are called. Therefore go yor way up, for eue^ now shall ye find him

And when they came up to the cite, and 1. Reg. ^5* ^
But the LORD had opened Samuels ear the day before, or ever Saul came, and
said: Tomorow about this time will I send a man unto the out of the lord of
Ben Iamin, him shall thou anoynte to be prince over my people of Israel, that
he may deliver my people from the hand of the Philistynes: for I have looked
upon my people, and their cry is come before me.) Now when Samuel beheld
Saul, the LORD answered him: lo, yt is the man of whom I told the, that he
should reign over my people.

Then came Saul unto Samuel under ye gate, and said: Tell me (I pray the)
where is the Seers house? Samuel answered Saul, and said: I am the Seer. Go up
before me unto the hye place: for ye shall eat with me to day, tomorow will I
let the go, and all that is in thine heart, will I tell the: and as for the
Asses which were lost three days agoo, care not thou for them, for they are
found. And to whom shall belong all that is pleasant in Israel? Shall it not
belong unto the and to all thy fathers house? Saul answered: Am not I a son
of Iemini, Iudi. 20. c 1. Re. 15. d
and of the smallest trybe, and my kynred the leest among all the kynreds of
ye trybe of Ben Iamin? Why speak thou so the^ unto me? Samuel took Saul and
his child and brought them in to the perler where they

And when they were gone down from the hye place unto the cite, he talked with
Saul in the chamber. And they rose up early on the morrow. And when the morning
spring arose, Samuel called Saul in the chamber, and said: Up, yt I may
send the thy way. And Saul gat him up: and they both went forth together, he
and Samuel. And when they came down to the end of the cite, Samuel said unto
Saul: Speak unto ye child, that he go on forth before us, but sto^de thou
still now, that I may shew^ the what God has said:

The X. Chapter.


LORD has anointed the, to be the prince over Deuteronomy. 9. c
his enheritau^ce? When thou go now fro me, thou shall find two men beside
Genesis 35. d
Rachels grave in the coast of Ben Iamin at Zelzah, which shall say unto the:
The asses are found, whom thou wentest to seek: and behold, thy father has
put the asses out of his mind, and takes thought for the, and says: What
shall I do for my son?

And when thou go on forth from thence, thou shall come to the Oak of
Thabor, there shall three men find the, which go up unto God toward Bethel:
one bears three kiddes, another three loaves of bred the third a bottel with
wine: and they shall salute the, and give the two loaves, 1. Reg. ^^. a
where the Philistynes watch is: and wha^ thou come there in to the cite,
there shall mete the a company of prophets coming down from the hye place,
and before them a Psaltery, and tabret, a pype and a harp, and they them
selves prophecienge. And the sprete of the LORD shall come upon the, and thou
shall prophecye with them, and shall be changed in to another man.

When these tokens now come unto the, ^. Re. ^. a ^. Par. ^8. a
then do what so ever comes under thine hand: for God is with the. Thou
shall go down before me unto Gilgall: Behold, thither will I come down unto
the, that thou may offer burnt offerynges and deed offerynges. (...)
Seven days shall thou tarry till I come to the, and show the what thou
should do. And when he turned his shulder to go from Samuel, God changed him
another heart, and all these tokens came the same day.

And when they came unto the hill, behold, (...)
and the sprete of God came upon him, so that he prophesied among them. But
wha^ they which knew him before, saw him that he prophesied with the
prophets, they said all among them selves: What is happened unto the son
of Cis? Is Saul also among the prophets? And one yt was there, answered and
said: Who is their father? (...)
Hereof came the proverb: Is Saul also among the prophets? And wha^ he had
left of prophecienge, he came up to the hill.

Saul's uncle said unto him and to his child: Whither went ye? They answered:
To seek the asses. And when we saw that they were away, we came unto Samuel.
Then said Saul's uncle: Tell me, what said Samuel unto you? Saul answered his
uncle: He told us, yt the asses were found. But of ye kingdom he told him
nothing what Samuel had said.

Samuel called the people together unto LORD to Mispa, and spoke unto the
children of Israel: Thus says ye LORD the God of Israel: I brought Israel
out of Egipte, and delivered you from the hand of ye Egipcians, and from the
hand of all the kingdoms that oppressed you. (...)
But now have ye refused yor God, which has helped you out of all your
sorrows and troubles, and ye have said unto him: Set a king over v^. Well,
stand ye now before ye LORD acordinge to your trybes and kynreds.

Now when Samuel had brought forth all the trybes of Israel, the trybe of Ben
Iamin was taken. And when he had brought forth the trybe of Ben Iamin with his
kynreds, the kynred of Matri was taken, and Saul the son of Cis was taken.
And they sought him, but they found him not.

Then axed they further at the LORD, LORD answered: Behold, he has hyd him
self among ye vessels. Then ran they thither, and fetched him. And when he
stood among the people, he was higher by the head then all the people. And
Samuel said unto all the people: There se ye him whom the LORD has chosen,
for in all the people there is none like him. Then gave all the people a
shoute, and said: (...)
God save the new king.

Samuel told the people all the (...) ^7. d
law of the kingdom, and wrote it in a book, and laid it before the LORD.
And Samuel let all the people go, every one to his own house. And Saul went
home also unto Gibea, and there went with him one part of the host, whose
hertes God had touched. But the children of Belial said: What shall this fellow
help us, (...)
and despised him, and brought him no present. But he made him as though he
herd it no^.

The XI. Chapter.


(...)
Then came the sprete of God upon him, when he had herd these words, and his
wrath was sore moved, and he took a couple of oxen, and hewed them in sunder,
and sent them in to all the coasts of Israel by the messaungers, saying: Who
so ever goes not forth after Saul and Samuel, his oxen shall be thus dealte
withal.

LORD upon the people, so that they went forth like as one man, (...)
and they were told at Basek, and of the children of Israel there were three
hundredth thousand men, and thirty thousand of the children of Judah. And they
spoke unto the messaungers that were come: Say thus to the men of Iabes in
Gilead: Tomorow shall ye have help, when ye Son is at the whotest. When ye
messaungers came and told this to the men of Iabes, they were glad. And the
men of Iabes said: Tomorow will we come forth unto you, that ye may do unto
us, what so ever it pleases you. And on ye next morrow Saul set the people in
three parts, and came into the host about the morning watch, and smote the
Ammonites till the day was at the whotest. As for those yt remained, they were
so scatred, that two of them abode not together.

Then said the people unto Samuel: 1. Re. (...)
Should Saul reign over us? Deliver us here the men, that we may put them to
death. But Saul said: There shall noman dye this day, for to day has the
LORD given health in Israel. Samuel said unto the people: Come, let us go
unto Gilgall, and renew the kingdom there. Then went all the people unto
Gilgall, and there they made Saul king before the LORD at Gilgal, and offered
deed offeringes before the LORD. And Saul with all the men of Israel reioysed
there greatly.

The XII. Chapter.
SAmuel said unto all Israel: Behold, RORDE and his anointed, Eccli. 4^ d
Act. 20. d
if I have taken any man's ox or ass, if I have done any man violence or
wrong, If I have oppressed any man, if I have received a gift of any man's
hand, and kept it secretly, I will restore it you again.

They said* Thou have done us nether violence ner wrong, nether oppressed,
ner taken ought of any man's hand. He said: The LORD be witness against you,
and so be his anointed this day, that ye have found nothing in my hand.
They said: Ye they shall be witnesses. And Samuel said unto the people: The
LORD which made Moses LORD over the righteousness of the LORD, which he has
done for you and your fathers.

Genesis 46. a Exodus 2. d
When Jacob was come in to Egipte, your fathers cried unto the LORD. Exo. 3. b
And he sent Moses and Aaron to bring your fathers out of Egipte, and to
cause them for to dwell in this place.

(...). 4. a
But when they forgot the LORD their God, he sold them under the power of
Sissera, the captain at Hazor (...). 13. a
and under the power of the Philistynes (...). 3. b
and under the power of the king of the Moabites, which fought against them.
But they cried unto the LORD, and said: We have sinned, in that we have
forsaken the LORD, and served Baalim and Astaroth. But now deliver us from the
hand of our enemies, and we will serve the. (...). 6. c
Then the LORD sent Ierubaal, (...). 13. d
Bedan, (...). 11. a
Iephthae, ^. Reg. 7. a
and Samuel, and delivered you from your enemies round about, and caused you
to dwell safe.

^. Reg. 8 a
ye said unto me: Not thou, but a king shall reign over us, where as
notwithsto^dinge your God was your king. Now, there have ye your king,
who^ ye have chosen and desired: for lo, the LORD has set a king over you.
If ye shall fear the LORD now, and serve him, and harken unto his voice, and
not be dishobedient unto the mouth of the LORD, then shall both ye and your
king that reigns over you, follow ye LORD your God. But if ye harken not
unto ye voice of the LORD, but be dishobedient unto his mouth, then shall the
hand of the LORD be against you, and against your fathers.

Stand forth now also, and behold this great thing, that the LORD shall do
before your eyes. Is not now the wheat harvest? Yet will I call upon the
LORD, so that he shall cause it thonder and rain, that ye shall know and se
the great evil, which ye have done in the sight of the LORD, in that ye have
desired to have a king.

And when Samuel called upon the LORD, the LORD caused it to tho^der and
rain the same day.

LORD greatly and Samuel, and they said all unto Samuel: Pray thou unto the
LORD thy God for thy servants, that we dye not: for beside our sins we
have done this evil also, that we have desired unto us a king. Samuel said
unto the people: Fear not, ye have done all this evil in deed. Nevertheless
depart not back from the LORD, but serve the LORD with all your heart, and
go not aside after vanite, for it profyteth you nothing, and can not deliver
you, in so much as it is but a vain thing. Exo 34. b Deuteronomy. 9. ^ Iosu. 7. b
For the LORD shall not forsake his people because of his great names sake:
for the LORD has begone to make you a people unto him self. But God forbid
that I should sin so unto the LORD, to cease from prayenge for you, and
from teachinge you the good and righteous way. Fear ye the LORD therefore,
and serve him faithfully with all yor heart: for ye have seen, how great
things he does unto you. But if ye do wickedly, both ye and your king shall
perish.

The XIII. Chapter.
SAul had been king one year, and (...)
watch, which was at Gibea. That came to ye Philistynes ears. And Saul caused
to blow the trompes in all the land, and to say: Let the Hebrews hear. And
all Israel herd say: Saul has smytten the Philistynes watch, for Israel
stanke before the Philistynes. And all the people cried after Saul unto Gilgal.

Then the Philistynes gathered them selves (...)
Then tarried he seven days acordinge to the time appointed of Samuel. And when
Samuel came not unto Gilgal, the people were scatered abroad from him. Then
said Saul: Bring me hither a burnt offeringe and deed offeringes. And he
offered a burnt offering. But when he had made an end of the burnt offering
behold, Samuel came. Then went Saul forth to mete him, that he might salute
him.

But Samuel said: What have thou done? the face of the LORD: and so I
boldened myself, and offered a burnt offering.

Samuel said unto Saul: Thou have done foolishly, and not kept the
commandment of the LORD thy God, which he commanded the. For (if thou
had not done this) he had prospered thy kingdom upon Israel for ever: but
now shall not thy kingdom continue. (...). ^6. c
The LORD has sought him out a man after his own heart: him has the LORD
commanded to be prince over his people, for thou have not kept yt the LORD
commanded ye. And Samuel arose, and went up from Gilgal unto Gibea Ben Iamin.



But there was not a smyth found in all the lord of Israel: for ye
Philistynes thought: The Hebrews might happly make swerdes and spears. And
all Israel were feign to go down to the Philistynes, when any man had a
plowshare, a mattock, an axe, or a sithe to sharp: and the edges of the
plowshares, and mattockes, and forckes, and axes, were labored, and the
points blont. Now when the day of the battayll came, there was nether sword
ner spear found in the hand of all the people, that was with Saul and
Ionathas: but for Saul and Ionathas his son there was some what found. And ye
Philistynes watch went out over by Michmas.

The XIIII. Chapter.
Re. 13. d
And the people yt were by him, were upon a six hundredth men. And Ahia the
son of Achitob the brother of Icabod, the son of Phineas ye son of Eli ye
pressed of the LORD at Silo, wayre the ouerbody cote. But the people knew not
that Ionathas was gone.

Between the passages where Ionathas sought to go over unto the Phylistynes
watch, there were two hye rocks, the one on the one side, the other on the
other: the one was called Bozez, the other Senne. And ye one lay on the north
side toward Michmas, and the other on the south side toward Gaba. And
Ionathas said unto his wapen bearer: Come, let us go ever to ye watch of these
uncircumcised, peradventure the LORD shall work with us, 2. Par. 14
For it is no hard matter for the LORD to help by many or by few. Then
answered him his wapen bearer: Do all that is in thine heart, go on thy w^rie,
behold, I am with the, even as thine heart will.

Ionathas said: Well than, When we LORD delivered them in to our hand, and
this shall be a token for us. Now when they came both in the sight of the
Philistynes watch, the Philistynes said: Se, Iudi^. 14*
ye Hebrews are gone out of their holes, that they were crepte in to. And the
men in the watch answered Ionathas and his wape^ bearer, and said: Come up to
us, and we will teach you what the matter is. Then said Ionathas to his weapen
bearer. ^. Mac. 4*
Come up after me, the LORD has delivered them into Isreal's hand. And
Ionathas clamme up with hands and fete, and his wapen bearer after him. And
Ionathas smote them down before him, and his wape^ bearer slew behind him,
so that the first slaughter that Ionathas and his wapen bearer did, was upon a
twentye men, with in the length of halue an aker of land, which a pare of oxen
may till in one day.

Iudi 14*
And there came a fearfulnes and flight 1. Re. 13.
destroyers there came a fearfulnes also and flight, so that the land was in a
rumoure, and Iosu. 10. Iud. 4. c
there came a flight through God. And Saul's watchme^ at Gibea Be^ Iamin saw,
that ye multitude gat them away, and ran to and fro.

Saul said unto the people that was with him: Tell and se which of us is gone
away. And when they nombred, behold, Ionathas and his wapen bearer was not
there. Then said Saul unto Ahia: Bring hither the Ark of God (for at that
time was the Ark of God with the children of Israel.) And while Saul was yet
speaking to the pressed, the multitude in the Philistynes host gat up, ran,
and was great. And Saul said unto the pressed: Withdraw thine hand. And Saul
cried, and all the people that was with him, and came to the battayll. And
behold, (...). 7. f ^ Pa. 20. d
every man's sword was against another, and there was a very great rumoure.

The Hebrews also that were with ye Philistynes before, and had gone up with
them in the host on every side, joined them selves unto Israel which were with
Saul and Ionathas. And all the men of Israel which Re. 1^. b
had hyd the^ selves upon mount Ephraim, when they herd that the Philistynes
fled, followed after them in the battayll. Thus ye LORD helped Israel at that
time, and ye battayll lasted unto Bethauen.



Then answered one of the people, and said: Thy father has charged the
people, and said: Cursed be every man that eats ought this day.
Nevertheless the people were faynte. Then said Ionathas: My father has
troubled the land: Se how light mine eyes are become, because I have taisted
a little of this honey. If the people this day had eaten of the spoil of their
enemies that they found, the slaughter should have been greater against the
Philistynes. Yet smote they the Philistynes the same day fro Michmas unto
Aialon, and the people were very weery.

^eui. ^. c ^ud 1^ f
and ate them with the blood. Then was it told Saul: Behold, the people
sin against the LORD, in that they eat blood. He ^ayde: Ye have done
evil: roll unto me now a great stone. And Saul said morouer: Go abroad
among the people, and say unto them, that every one bring me his ox and his
sheep, and slaye them here, that ye may eat, and not to sin against the
LORD with eating of blood. Then brought all the people every one his ox
with his hand the same night, and slew them there. And Saul builded an
altar unto ye LORD. This is the first altar that he builded unto the LORD.

And Saul said: Let us go down after the Philistynes, by night, and spoil
them till it be clear morning, that we let none escape. They answered: Do
what so ever pleases the. But the pressed said: Let us go nigh here unto God.
And Saul axed at God. Shall I go down here after ye Philistines? and will thou
deliver the^ in to Isreal's hand? Nevertheless he answered him not at that time.

Then said Saul: Let all the armies of LORD the God of Israel: Do thou that
right is. The^ was Ionathas and Saul taken: but the people went forth fre.
Saul said: Cast the lot over me and my son Ionathas. So Ionathas was taken.
And Saul said unto Ionathas: Tell me, what have thou done? Ionathas told him,
and said: I taisted a little honey with the staff that I had in my hand, and
behold, must I dye therefore? The^ said Saul: God do this and that unto me,
Ionathas thou must dye the death.

But the people said unto Saul: Should (...)
As truly as the LORD lives, there shall not one here of his head fall upon ye
earth: for with God has he wroughte at this time. So the people delivered
Ionathas, that he dyed not. Then went Saul up from the Philistynes: and the
Philistynes went unto their place.

But when Saul had co^qu^red the kingdom over Israel, he fought against all
his enemies round about, against the Moabites, against the children of Ammon,
against the Edomites, against the king of Zoba, against ye Philistynes: and
whither so ever he turned him, he gat ye victory. And he made an host, and
smote ye (...). 2^. c
Amalechites, and delivered Israel from the hand of all those that spoiled
them.

Saul had these sons: Ionathas, Isui, and Malchisua. And these were ye names
of his two daughters: the firstborne Merob, and ye yo^gest Michol. And Saul's
wife was called Ahinoam, the daughter of Ahimaas. And his chief captains name
was Abner, the son of Ner, Saul's uncle. (...). a (...). 9. a
Cis was ye father of Saul. But Ner ye father of Abner was the son of Abiel.

There was a mighty sore war against the Philistynes, as long as Saul
lived. And where Saul saw a man that was strong and mete for ye war, he
took him to him.

The XV. Chapter.
(...). 9. c
The LORD sent me to anoynte the for to be king over his people of Israel:
hear now therefore the voice of the words of the LORD. Thus says ye LORD
Zebaoth: I have remembered what Amaleck did unto Israel, (...). 17. c (...) 24.
d (...)* 25. c
and how he laid wait for him in ye way, when he went out of Egipte: Go ye
way now therefore, and smite the Amalechites, and damn them with all that they
have, and spare him not: but slaye both man and woman, children and sucklynges,
oxen and sheep, Camels and asses. Saul commanded the people the same, and
nombred them at Talaim, two hundredth thousand footmen, and ten thousand men
of Judah.

And when Saul came to the cite of the Amalechites, he set an hinder watch by
the (...). 10. d (...). 1. d
for ye showed mercy unto all the children of Israel, wha^ they departed out of
Egipte. So the Kenites gat them away from among the Amalechites.

Then smote Saul the Amalechites from Heuila unto Sur (which lies over against
Egipte) and took Agag the king of ye Amalechites alive, and damned all ye
people with the edge of the sword. Nevertheless Saul and the people spared Agag,
and the sheep and oxen yt were good and fat, and the lambs, and all that was
good, and would not damn the^: but look what was foul and nothing worth,
that they damned.

Then came the word of the LORD unto LORD all that night. And Samuel gat
him up early, that he might mete Saul in ye morning. And it was told him,
that Saul was come unto Carmel, Deu. 1^.
and had set him up a piler, and was gone about, and come down to Gilgall.

Now wha^ Samuel came to Saul, Saul said unto him: Blessed be thou unto ye
LORD, I have performed the word of ye LORD. Samuel answered: What cry is
this then of sheep in mine ears, and the cry of oxen which I hear?

Saul said: They have brought them LORD thy God, the other have we damned.
Nevertheless Samuel answered Saul: Let me tell the what ye LORD has said unto
me this night. He said: Say on. Samuel said: 1. Re. 9. c and 10. ^
When thou wast but small in thine own eyes, wast thou not ye head among the
trybes of Israel? and the LORD anointed the to be king over Israel? and ye
LORD sent yt in to the way, and said: Go ye way and damn the sinners the
Amalechites, and fight against them, till thou have utterly destroyed the^?
Wherefore have thou not herkened unto the voice of the LORD, but have turned
thy self to the spoil, and done evil in the sight of the LORD?

Saul answered Samuel: Ye I have herkened LORD, and have gone the way that
ye LORD sent me, and brought Agag the king of the Amalechites, and damned
the Amalechites: but ye people have taken of the spoil, sheep and oxen, and ye
best among the damned, to offer unto ye LORD thy God in Gilgall. Samuel
said: Has the LORD pleasure in sacrifices and burnt offerynges, as in
obeynge the voice of the LORD? Behold, Eccl^. 4
obedience is better then offering, and to harken is better then the fat of
rams. For disobedience is as ye sin of Exo. 22. Deuteronomy. 1^
witchcrafte, and rebellion is as the blasphemy of Idolatrye. In so much now as
thou have refused the word of the LORD, he has refused the also, that thou
should not be king.

Then said Saul unto Samuel: I have LORD and thy word: for I was afraid of
the people, and herkened unto their voice. And now forgive me my sin, and
return with me, that I may worship ye LORD. Samuel said unto Saul: I will
not turn back with ye, for thou have refused the word of the LORD, and the
LORD has refused the also, yt thou should not be king in Israel. And when
Samuel turned him back to go his way, he gat him by ye edge of his garment,
and re^te it. Then said Samuel unto him: The LORD has rent the kingdom of
Israel from ye this day, and given it unto ye neghbor, which is better then
thou. The over wynner in Israel also shall not lie, nether shall he repent: for
he is no man, that he should repent.

LORD thy God. So Samuel turned again after Saul, that Saul might worship
the LORD. But Samuel said: Bring me hither Agag the king of the
Amalechites. And Agag went unto him te^derly. And Agag said: Thus departs
the bytternesse of death. Samuel said: (...) 17. c (...). 14 g
Like as thy sword has made women childlesse, so shall ye mother also be with
out children among women. So Samuel hewed Agag in pieces before ye LORD in
Gilgall.

Re. 17. d
And Samuel departed unto Ramath. But Saul went up to his house at Gibea Saul.
And Samuel saw Saul no more unto the day of his death. Nevertheless Samuel
mourned for Saul, because it repented the LORD, that he had made Saul king
over Israel.

The XVI. Chapter.
LORD said unto Samuel: How long mournest thou for Saul, whom I have
refused, that he should not be king over Israel? Fill thine horn with oil,
go thy way, I will send the to Isai the Bethleemite: for among his sons
have I provided me a king. But Samuel said: How shall I go? Saul shall perceive
it, and shall slaye me. The LORD said: Take the a calfe from the drove, and
say: I am come to do sacrifice unto ye LORD. And thou shall call Isai to ye
sacrifice, so shall I tell the what thou shall do, that thou may anoynte me
him, whom I shall show the. Samuel did as the LORD said, and came to
Bethleem. Then were the Elders of the cite astonnyed, and went forth to mete
him, and said: Re. 2. b
Is thy coming peaceable? He said: Ye. I am come to do sacrifice unto the
LORD. Sanctifye your selves, and come with me to the sacrifice. And he
sanctified Isai and his sons, and called them to the sacrifice.

Now wha^ they came in, he beheld Eliab, LORD. But ye LORD said unto
Samuel: look not upon his countenance, ner upon the tallnesse of his person,
For I judge not after the sight of man. A man has respect unto the thing
that is before his eyes, but the LORD looks upon the heart. Then Isai called
Abinadab, and brought him before Samuel. And he said: This has not the LORD
chosen. Then Isai brought Samma. But he said: This also has not the LORD
chosen. Then brought Isai his seven sons before Samuel. Nevertheless Samuel
said unto Isai: The LORD has chosen none of these.

And Samuel said unto Isai: Are here LORD said: Arise, and anoynte him, that
is he.



The^ took Samuel his oil ho^e, and anointed him among his brethren. And the
sprete of the LORD came upon David from ye day forth. As for Samuel, he gat
him up, and went unto Ramath.

But the sprete of the LORD departed from Saul, and an evil sprete from ye
LORD vexed him. Then said Saul's servants unto him: Behold, an evil sprete
from God vexes the. Let our lord say unto his servants which stand
before him, yt they seek a man which can play upon the harp, and instrumente,
that when the evil sprete of God comes upon the, he may play with his hand,
to ease the withal. Then said Saul unto his servants: Provide me a man,
that can play well upon the instrumente, and bring him unto me.



The XVII. Chapter.


Then stepte there forth from among the Philistynes a stout bold man, named
Goliath of (...)
Gath, six cubits and an hand breath hye, and had an helmet of stele on his
head, and a fast habergion upon him, and the weight of his habergion was five
thousand Sicles of stele, and harness of stele had he upon his legs, and a
shylde of stele upon his shulders: and the shaft of his spear was like a
weuers lome, and the iron of his spear had six hundredth Sicles of iron, and
his wapen bearer went before him.



But David was the son of a man of Ephrata of Bethleem Judah, whose name was
Isai, which had eight sons, and was an old man in Saul's time, and was well
strycken in age among men. And the three eldest sons of Isai were gone with
Saul to the battayll. And there names were these: Eliab the first borne,
Abinadab the second, and Samma the third. But David was the youngest of all.
So when the three eldest were gone with Saul to the battayll, David went again
from Saul, to keep his fathers sheep at Bethleem. But the Philistyne stepte
for^h early in the morning and at even, and stood there fortye days.

Isai said unto David his son: Take

Then David gat him up early in the morning, and committed the sheep to ye
keeper, and took his burden, went his way, as Isai commanded him, and came
to the te^t. And the host was gone forth, and had prepared them selves, and
cried in the battayl: For Israel had set them selves in array, and the
Philistynes were against their host in their array also.

Then left David the vessel that he bare, with the keeper of the stuff, and
ran to the host, and went in, and saluted his brethren. And while he was
yet talking with them, behold, then came up the stout bold man, whose name
was Goliath, the Philistine of Gath, out of the Philistynes host, and spoke
like as before, and David herd it. But every man of Israel, when he saw the
man, fled from him, and was sore afraid of him.

And every man in Israel said: Have ye seen the man coming up hither? For he
is come up hither, to speak diszdanedly unto Israel. And who so ever smyteth
him, him will the king make rich, and give him his daughter, and make his
fathers house fre in Israel.

Then said David unto the men that stood that smyteth this Philistyne, and
turns this shame away from Israel? For what is he this Philistyne this
vncircu^cysed, that defyeth the host of ye living God? Then the people told
him as before. Thus shall it be done unto ye (...) that smyteth him. And Eliab
his greater brother herd him talk with the men, and was very wroth against
David, and said: Wherefore art thou come down? and why have thou left a few
sheep in the wilderness? I know thy presumptuousnesse well enough, and the
wickedness of thine heart: for thou art come down to se the battayll. David
answered: What have I down now? Is there not an occasion? And he turned him
self from him unto another, and spoke acordinge as he had said before. Then
the people answered him like as before.

And when they herd the words which David said, they told them in the
presence of Saul, and he caused him be fetched. And David said unto Saul: Let
no man's heart be discoraged because of him. Thy servant shall go, and fight
with the Philistyne. Nevertheless Saul said unto David: Thou art not able to go
against this Phylistyne to fight with him, for thou art but a child: but this
is a man of war from his youth up.

(...). 14. b (...). 11. f
And when he would have been upon me, I took him by his beerde, and smote him,
and slew him. So thy servant smote both the Lion and ye Bear. Therefore shall
this Philistyne this vncircumcysed be even as one of them: for he has defied
the host of the living God. And David said: The LORD that delivered me from
ye Lion and Beer, shall deliver me also from this Philistyne.

And Saul said unto David: Go thy way, the LORD be with the. And Saul
clothed David with his clothes, and set an helmet of stele upon his head, and
put an habergion upon him. And David girded his sword above his clothes, and
began to go, for he had never been used to it before. Then said David unto
Saul: I can not go thus, for I have not been used to it, and so he laid it
from him, and took his staff in his hand, and chose five slighte stones out of
the river, and put them in the shepardes bag which he had by him, and took a
slynge in his hand, and made him to the Philistyne. And the Philistyne went
forth, and made him to David, and his wapen bea^e^ before him.



Now when the Philistyne looked and saw LORD Zebaoth the God of the host of
Israel, whom thou have despised. This day shall the LORD deliver the in to my
hand, that I may smite the, and take thy head from the, and give the bodies
of the host of the Philistynes this day unto the fowls under the heaven, and
to the wild beestes upon the earth, that all the land may know yt Israel
has a God. And all this congregation shall know, that the LORD saves nether
through sword ner spear: for the battayll is the LORDS, and he shall deliver
you in to our hands.

Now when the Philistyne gat him up, and went forth and drue nigh unto David,
David made haiste, and ran from ye host unto the Philistyne. And David put
his hand in his bagg, and took out a stone, and thrue it with the slynge, (...)
and hytt the Philisty^^ even in the fore head, so that the stone st^cke in
his fore head, and he fell down to the ground upon his face.

So David overcame ye Philistyne with (...)
and took his sw^rde, and drue it out of the sheeth, and slew him, and smote
of his head withal. When the Philistynes saw that the strongest of them was
deed, (...). 7. f
they fled. And the men of Israel and Judah gat the^ up, and cried and followed
upon the Philistynes, till they came unto the valley, and to the Ports of
Ekron. And the Philistynes fell down slain unto Gath and to Ekron. And the
children of Israel turned again from chasynge of the Philistynes, and spoiled
their tents. But David took the head of the Phil^styne, and brought it unto
Jerusalem, as for is armoure, he laid it in his tente.

When Saul saw David go forth against the Philistyne, he said unto (...). 14.
g
Abner his chief captain: Abner, whose son is this child? Abner said: As
truly as thy soul lives O king, I wot not. The king said: Axe the^ whose
son the young man is. Now when David came again from the slaughter of the
Philistyne, Abner took him, and brought him before Saul, and he had the
Philistynes head in his hand. And Saul said unto him: Whose son art thou,
thou young man? David said: I am a son of thy servant Isai the Bethleemite.

The XVIII. Chapter.


^. Re. 21. d (...) ^9. b
Saul has smytten his thousand: but David his ten thousand.

Then was Saul very wroth, and ye word displeased him sore, and he said: They
have ascrybed ten thousand unto David, and but one thousand unto me: what
shall he have more but the kingdom? And from that day forth, Saul looked
sowerly upon David.

The next day after came the evil sprete LORD was with him, and was
departed from Saul. Then Saul put him from him, and set him to be prince over a
thousand men, and he went out and in before the people. And David behaved
himself wisely in all his doings, and the LORD was with him.

Now when Saul saw that he was so 1. Re. 17. c
will I give the to wife: be strong now, and govern the wars of the LORD.
For Saul thought: my hand shall not be upon him, but the hand of ye Pilistynes
Nevertheless David answered Saul: Who am I? and what is my life and the kynred
of my father in Israel, that I should mary the kings daughter?

But when the time came, that Merob ye

And Saul's servants spoke these words the Philistynes, that vengeance may
be taken of the kings enemies. Howbeit Saul thought to cause David be slain
by the hands of the Philistynes. Then his servants told David these words,
and David was content with the matter, to mary the kings daughter.

LORD was with David. And Michol Saul's daughter loved him. Then was Saul the
more afraid, and became his enemy as long as he lived. And when the princes
of the Philistynes went forth, David behaved him self more wisely then all
the servants of Saul in their outgoynge: so that his name was in great
reputacion.

The XIX. Chapter.
Re. 1^. a
Nevertheless Ionathas the son of Saul loved David exceadingly, and told
him, and said: Saul my father goes about to slaye the. Keep the therefore (I
pray the) in the morning and abide in secret, and hyde the. But I will go
forth, and stand beside my father in the field where thou art, and will speak
of the unto my father: and what soever I se I shall bring the word.

And Ionathas reported ye best of David unto Saul his father, and said unto
him: Oh let not the king sin against his servant, for he has not sinned
against the, and his doing is very necessary for the, (...). 12. a ^sal. 118. o
he put his life in his hand also, and smote the Philistyne, and the LORD did
a great health unto all Israel: this have thou seen, and reioysed LORD
lives, he shall not dye. Then Ionathas called David, and told him all these
words, and brought him to Saul, so that he was in presence like as before time.

But there arose a battayll again, and David went forth, and fought against
the Philistynes, and smote a great slaughter, so that they fled before him.
Nevertheless ye evil sprete of the LORD came upon Saul, and he sat in his
house, and had a iauelynge in his hand. But David played upon the instrument
with his hand. And Saul though^ with the iauelinge to stick David fast to the
wall. Howbeit, he went aside from Saul and the iauelynge smote in the wall.
And David fled, and escaped that night.

Notwithstondinge Saul sent his messaungers (...)
Then Michol let him down through the wyndow, so that he went his way, fled,
and escaped. And Mickol took an image, and laid it in the bed, and laid a
goats szkinne at the head of it, and covered it with clothes. Then Saul sent
messau^gers, to fetch David. But she said: He is sick. Nevertheless Saul
sent messaungers to se David, and said: Bring him up to me with the bed, that
he may be slain.

Now when the messaungers came, behold, the image lay in the bed, and a
goats szkynne at the head of it. The^ said Saul unto Michol: Why have thou
begyled me, and let mine enemy go, that he might escape? Michol said unto
Saul: He said unto me: Let me go, or I will kill the. A^ for David, he fled,
and escaped, and came to Samuel unto Ramath, and told him all yt Saul had done
unto him. And he went with Samuel, and they abode at Naioth.

And it was told Saul: Behold, David

When this was told Saul, he sent other messaungers, which prophesied
likewise. Then sent he messaungers the third time, and they in like manner
prophesied. Then went he himself also unto Ramath, and when he came to the
great well which is at Secho, he axed and said: Where is Samuel and David?
Then was it told him: behold, at Naioth in Ramath. And he went thither, even
unto Naioth in Ramath. And ye sprete of God came upon him also, and he went
and prophesied till he came unto Naioth in Ramath. And he put of his clothes,
and prophesied likewise before Samuel, and fell down naked all that day and
all that night. ^e. 10. c
Here of came the proverb: Is Saul also among the prophets?

The XX. Chapter.
LORD lives, and as truly as ye soul lives, there is but one step between
me and death. Ionathas said unto David: I will do for the what so ever thy heart
desires. David said unto him: Behold, tomorow is the new Moan, that I should
sit at the table with the king. Let me hyde my self therefore in the field
unto the (...). a (...) ^3. d
for with me ye servant have thou made a covenant in the LORD. But if there
be any trespace in me, then slaye me thy self, for why would thou bring me
unto thy father?

Ionathas said: That be far from the, that I should perceive my father to
intend any evil against the, and should not tell the. David said: Who shall
bring me word, if thy father give the an hard answer? Ionathas said unto
David: Come, let us go forth in to the field. And they went out both in to ye
field. And Ionathas said unto David:

LORD God of Israel, if I perceive by my father tomorow or on the third day,
that it goes well with David, and send not unto the, and show the before
thine ears, then let the LORD do this and that unto

And the LORD be with the, as he has been with my father. If I do it not,
then do thou no mercy of the LORD on me, while I live, no not when I dye, and
pluck thy mercy fro my house for ever. And when the LORD roteth out ye
enemies of David, every one out of the land, then let David rote out Ionathas
also with his house, and the LORD require it of the hand of David's enemies.

And Ionathas proceaded further, and swear unto David (he loved him so well:
for he loved him even es his own soul) and Ionathas said unto him: Tomorow
is ye new Moan, and thou shall be axed after: for thou shall be wanted where
thou wast wont to sit. But on the third day come down soon, and go in to
ye place where thou hydest the on the worckdaye, and set the down by the stone
of Asel: then will I shute three arowes on yt side, as though I would shute at a
marck: and behold, I will send the boy, and say unto him, Go seek ye arowes.
If I say now LORD lives. But if I say unto the lad: behold, the arowes lie
yonderwarde before the, then go thou thy way, for the LORD has let the go.
1. Re. 20. ^
As for that which thou and I have spoken together, the LORD is between me and
the for ever.

David hid himself in the field. And wha^ the new Moan came, the king sat him
down at the table to eat. When the king had set him down in his place as he
was wont by the wall, Ionathas stood up, but Abner sat him down beside Saul.
And David was myssed in his place. And Saul spoke nothing that day, for he
thought: There is somewhat happend unto him, that he is not clean. On the
second day of the new Moan, when David was myssed in his place, Saul said
unto Ionathas his son: Wherefore is not the son of Isai come to the table
nether yesterdaye ner to day?

Ionathas answered Saul: He prayed me that he might go unto Bethleem, and
said: of thy self and of ye shameful mother. For as long as ye son of
Isai lives upon earth nether thou ner thy kingdom shall prospere. Send now
therefore, and cause him to be fetched unto me, ^. Re. 86. c
for he is a child of death.

Ionathas answered his father Saul and said unto him: Wherefore shall he dye?
what has he done? Then shot Saul the iauelynge at him, that he might smite
him. The^ perceived Ionathas, that his father was utterly determed to kill
David, and he rose up from ye table in a wrothfull displeasure, and ate no bred
yt same second day of the new Moan: for he was vexed because of David, that
his father had done him soch dishonor.



Then Ionathas gave his boy his wape^s and said unto him: Go thy ways, and
carry them in to the cite. And when the boy was gone, David arose from the place
toward the south, and fell upon his face to the ground, and worshipped three
times, and they kissed one another, and wept together. But David most
specially. And Ionathas said unto David: Go thy way in peace: 1. Re. 20. d
What soever we both have sworn and spoken together in the name of the LORD,
the LORD be witness between me and the, between my sede and ye sede for ever.
And Ionathas gat him up, and came in to the cite.

The XXI. Chapter.
1. Re. 14. a
Ahimelech the pressed: The king has committed a matter unto me, and said: Let
noma^ know wherefore I have sent the, and what I have commanded the: for I
have appointed my servants to mete me here and there. 1. Re. 2^. b ^ud. 8. b
If thou have now ought under thy hand, a loaf of bred or five, give me the
same in my hand, or what so ever thou find.

The pressed answered David, and said: I have no comen bred under my hand, but
the holy bred, if the young men have only refrained them selves from women.
David answered the pressed, and said unto him: The women were kept three days
from us when we departed forth, and the young men's vessels were holy. But this
way is unholy, nevertheless it shall be santifyed to day in the instruments.
(...)
Then the pressed gave him of ye holy, in so much as there was none other bred
but the shewbredes, which were taken up before the LORD, that there might be
other fresh bredes set therein the day wha^ he took them away.

But the same day was there a man sp^^red LORD, one of Saul's servants,
named Doeg an Edomite, ye mightiest among Saul's hyrdmen. And David said unto
Ahimelech: Is there not a spear or a sword here under thine hand? I have not
taken my sword and weapens with me: for the kings matter required haist. The
pressed said: The sword of Goliath the Philistyne (...)
whom thou smotest in the Oak valley, is here wrapped in a cloth behind the
ouerbody cote. If thou wylt have it, take it, for here is else none but it.
David said: There is not soch another, give me it.

And David gat him up, and fled from (...)
Saul has smytten his thousand, but David his ten thousand. And David took
these words to heart, and was sore afraid of Achis the king of Gath, and
altered his countenance before them, and showed himself ^s he had been madd
in their hands, and stackered toward the doors of the gate, and his
slauerynges ran down his beerd. Then said Achis unto his servants:
Behold, ye se that the man is out of his wit, why have ye brought him unto me?
Have I to few madd men, that ye have brought this hither to be madd before me?
Should he come in to my house?

The XXII. Chapter.
David went from thence, and fled unto with him upon a four hundredth men.

And David went from thence toward Mispa in the land of the Moabites, and
said unto the king of the Moabites: Let my father and my mother go out and in
among you, till I se what God will do with me. And he left them before the
king of ye Moabites, so that they remained by him, as long as David was in
the castle. Nevertheless the prophet Gad said unto David: Abide not in the
castle, but go yt way, and come in to the land of Judah. Then departed David,
and came into the wodd of Hareth. And Saul herd that David and the men which
were with him, were come forth.

(...)
for so much as my son also has made a covenant with the son of Isai?
There is no man among you that lets it for my sake, or yt opens it unto
mine ears: for my son has stered up my servants against me, that he may
lay wait for me, as it is manifest.

Then answered Doeg ye Edomite which stood beside Saul's servants, and said:
(...)
I saw the son of Isai, that he came unto Nobe, to Ahimelech ye son of
Achitob, which axed council at the LORD for him, and gave him fode, and the
sword of Goliath the Philistyne.



Ahimelech answered the king and said: And who is among all thy servants
like David, which is faithful, and has married the kings daughter, and goes
in thine obedience, and is honorably taken in thine house? Have I begone then
first this day to axe council at God for him? That be far fro me. Let not
the king lay soch to his servants charge in all my fathers house: for thy
servant knew not of all these things nether small ner great. Nevertheless
the king said: Ahimelech thou must dye ye death, thou and all thy fathers
house. And the king said to his footmen that stood by him: Turn you, and
slaye the prestes of the LORD, for their hand is with David also.

Not withstondinge the kings servants LORD, to slaye them. Then said ye
king unto Doeg: Turn the, and slaye the prestes. 1. Reg. 2. g 2. Re. 21. a
Doeg the Edomite turned him, and slew the prestes, so that the same day
there dyed five and four score men, which wayre ouerbody cotes of lynnen. And
Nob the cite of the prestes smote he with the edge of the sword, both men and
women, children and sucklynges, oxen and asses, and sheep.

Nevertheless there escaped a son of Ahimelech (the son of Achitob) whose
name was Abiathar, and fled after David, and told him, that Saul had slain ye
prestes of the LORD. David said unto Abiathar: I knew well the same day
that Doeg the Edomite was there, that he would tell Saul. I am giltye of the
souls of thy fathers house. Abide thou with me, and fear not. He that lays
wait for my life, shall lay wait for thine also, and thou shall be preserved
with me.

The XXIII. Chapter.
ANd it was told David: Behold, the LORD, and said: Shall I go, and smite
these Philistynes? And the LORD said unto David: Go thy way, thou shall
smite the Philistynes, and deliver Cegila. But ye men that were with David,
said unto him: Behold, we are here in fear in Iewry, and shall we go to
Cegila unto the host of the Philistynes? The^ David axed at the LORD again.
And the LORD answered him, and said: Up, get the down to Cegila, for I will
deliver the Philistynes in to thy hand.

So David went with his men unto Cegila, and fought against the Philistynes,
and drove away their catell, and smote them with a great slaughter. Thus David
delivered them of Cegila. For when Abiathar the son of Ahimelech fled unto
David at Cegila, he ba^e down the ouerbody cote with him.

The^ was it told Saul, that David was come to Cegila, and he said: God has
delivered him in to my hand, for he is shut fast in, now that he is come in to
a cite which is kept with gates and bars. And Saul caused for to call all the
people down to ye battaill unto Cegila, yt they might besege David and his
men. But when David perceived yt Saul intended evil against him, he said unto
Abiathar ye pressed: * Bring me hither the ouerbody cote. And David said: O
LORD God of Israel, thy servant has herd, that Saul goes about to come
for to destroy the cite of Cegila for my sake. Shall the citysens of Cegila
deliver me over in to his hands? And shall Saul come down, as thy servant
has herd? Tell thy servant this, O LORD God of Israel. And the LORD said:
He shall come down.

LORD said: Ye. The^ David gat him up with his me^, of whom there were upon
a six hundredth, and walked whither they could. Now when it was told Saul
that David was escaped from Cegila, he let his journey stand. As for David, he
remained in the wilderness in the castle, and abode upon the mount in the
wilderness of Siph. But Saul sought him as long as he lived. Nevertheless God
gave him not in to his hands. And David saw, that Saul was gone forth to seek
after his life. But David was in the wilderness of Siph, in the wodd.

Then Ionathas the son of Saul gat him up, and went unto David in to the
wod, and strengthed his hand in God, and said unto him: Fear not, my father
Saul's hand shall not find ye: and thou shall be king over Israel, so will I
be the next unto the. 1. Re. 18. a and 20. b
And they made a covenant both together before the LORD. And David remained
in the wodd. As for Ionathas, he went home again.

But the Par. 2. c
Siphites went up to Saul unto Gibeath, and said: Is not David hyd with us in
the castle in ye wodd, upon mount Hachila, which lies on the right hand of
the wilderness? Let the king come down now therefore acordinge to all the
desire of his heart, and we will deliver him in to the kings hand. Then said
Saul: Blessed be ye of the LORD, that ye have had pytie upon me: Go your way
now therefore, and be sure, that ye may know and se in what place his fete
have been, and who has seen him there: for it is told me, that he is full of
sotiltye. Look well and spy out all the places, where he hydeth him, and come
again to me, when ye are sure, and I will go with you. If he be in the land,
I will enquere after him among all the thousands in Iud^.

Then gat they them up, and went their way unto Siph before Saul. But David
and his men were in the wyldernes of Mao^, even in the field on the right
hand of the wilderness. Now when Saul went thither with his men to seek him,
it was told David and he gat him down to the rock, and abode in the
wilderness of Mahon. When Saul herd that, he followed after David in the
wilderness of Mahon. And Saul with his men went on the one side of the hill:
David with his men on ye other side of ye hill. But when David made haist to
escape from Saul, Saul with his men compased about David and his men, that he
might take the^. (...)
Nevertheless there came a messau^ger unto Saul, and said: Make haist and come,
for the Philistynes are fallen in to the land. The^ Saul turned him from
chacynge of David, and went against the Philstynes. Therefore is ye place
called (...)
Sela Mahelkoth. And David went up from thence, and abode in the castle at En
Gaddi.

The XXIIII. Chapter.
NOw when Saul came again from the Philistines, it was told him: Behold,
David is in the wyldernes of Engaddi. And Saul took three thousand chosen men
out of all Israel, and went to seek David with his men upon the stony rocks
of the wild goats. And when he came to the sheep foldes by ye way, there was
a cave, and Saul went in to (...)
cover his fete. But David and his men sat behind within the cave.

Then said David's men unto him: Lo, this is the day, whereof the LORD thy God
has said unto the: Behold, I will deliver thine enemy in to thy hand, that
thou may do with him what it pleases the. And David stood up, and cut of the
typpe of Saul's garment quyetly. Nevertheless it smote him afterward in his
heart, because he had cut of the typpe of Saul's garment, and said unto his men:
The LORD let that be far fro me, that I should do it, and lay my hand upon
my lord the LORDS anoyntd: for he is ye anointed of the LORD. And David
withelde his servants with words, and suffered the^ not to rise up against
Saul.

But when Saul gat him up out of the cave, and was goinge his way, David rose
up also after him, and went out of the cave, and cried behind Saul, and
said: My lord the king. And Saul looked behind him. And David bowed down
his face to the earth, and worshipped, and said unto Saul: Why herkenest thou
unto the words of men, that say: David seeks thy mysfortune? Behold, thine
eyes se this day that the LORD gave the in to my hand in the cave, and I was
counceled to slaye the: Nevertheless LORDS anointed. Behold, my father the
typpe of thy garment in my hand, that I would not slaye the, when I cut of the
typpe of thy garment. Know and se, yt there is no evil ner trespace in my
hand: nether have I offended the, and thou folowest after my soul, to take it
away. The LORD shall be judge between me and the, and avenge me on the, but my
hand shall not be upon the, acordinge as it is said after the old proverb:
Ungodliness comes of the ungodly: but my hand shall not be upon the. Whom
persecutest thou O king of Israel, whom persecutest thou? a deed dog? a flee?
The LORD be judge, and give sentence between me and the, and consider it, and
defend my cause, and deliver me from thy hand.

(...) 26. c
Is not this thy voice my son David? And Saul lift up his voice, and wept,
and said unto David: Thou art more righteous then I: for thou have recompe^sed
me good, but I have rewarded the evil. And this day have thou showed me how
thou have done me good, for so much as ye LORD has delivered me in to thy
hand, and thou nevertheless have not slain me. What is he, which if he find
his enemy, wyllet him go in a good way? The LORD reward the good for yt
thou have done unto me this day? Behold now, I know that thou shall be
king, and the kingdom of Israel stondeth in thy hand: swear now therefore
unto me by the LORD, yt thou shall not rote out my sede after me, nether
destroy my name out of my fathers house. And David swear unto Saul. Then went
Saul home, but David gat him up with his men unto the castle.

The XXV. Chapter.


Now when David herd in the wyldernes yt Nabal clypped his sheep, he sent out
ten young men, and said unto them: Go up unto Carmel, and when ye come to
Nabal, salute him friendly on my behalf, and say: Good luck, peace be with the
and thine house, and with all yt thou have. I have herd say that thou have
sheep clyppers. Now ye shepherdes whom

And wha^ David's young men came, and spoke all these words on David's behalf
unto Nabal, they left of. But Nabal answered David's servants, and said:
What is he yt David? and who is the son of Isai? There are many servants
now yt run away from their masters. Should I take my bred, water and flesh,
that I have slain for my clyppers, and give it unto me^ whom I know not
whence they are?

The^ David's young me^ turned their way again. And when they came again unto
him, they told him all these words. The^ said David unto his men: Every man
gyrde his sword about him. And every one gyrde his sword about him. And
David gyrde his sword about him also, and there went up after him upon a
four hundredth men, but two hundredth remained with the stuff.

Nevertheless Abigail Nabals wife told as we kept the sheep by them. Take heed
now therefore, and look well what thou do, for there is surely a mysfortune
at hand against our lord, and against all his house. And he is a man of
Belial, to whom no man darre say any thing. Then Abigail made haist, and took
two hundred loaves of bred, and two botels of wine, and five sheep ready
dighte, and five measures of firmentye, and an hundredth frayles of rasens, and
two hundredth frayles of fygges, and laid them upon asses, and said to her
young men: Go ye your way before me, behold, I will come after. And she told
Nabal her housba^de nothing thereof. And as she rode upon the ass, and went
down in the shadow of ye hill, behold, David and his me^ met her down, so
that she came upon them.



But now my lord, as truly as the LORD lives, and as truly as thy soul
lives, the LORD has kept the back, yt thou should not come against
blood, and he has delivered thine hand.

LORD make my lord, which fights the fight of the LORD, and no evil
shall be found in the all thy life long. And if any man rise up to persecute
yt, and to lay wait for thy soul, then shall the soul of my lord be bound
in the bundell of ye living, even with the LORD thy God. But ye soul of
thine enemies shall be turned back with the slynge. When the LORD therefore does
all this good for my lord (which he has promised the) and commands yt to
be his Duke over Israel, then shall it be no stomblinge block ner occasiion of
falling unto my lords heart, that thou have not shed blood without a cause,
and avenged thy self, then shall ye LORD do good unto my lord, and thou shall
think upon thy hand maiden.

Then said David unto Abigail: Blessed LORD God of Israel, which has sent
the to mete me this day: and blessed be thy speech, and blessed be thou, which
have kept me back this day, that I am not come against blood, to avenge me
with mine own hand. Verily (as truly as the LORD the God of Israel lives,
which has hyndred me that I should do the no evil.) If thou had not met
me in all the haist, Nabal should not have had left him until ye light
morning, so much as one that makes water against the wall. So David took of
her hand what she had brought him, and said unto her: Go up in peace unto ye
house: behold, I have herkened unto ye voice, and accepted thy person.

But when Abigail came to Nabal, behold, he had prepared a feast in his house
like a kings feast, and his heart was merry, for he was very dronken. And she
told him nothing, nether small ner great until ye clear morning. But when
it was day, and the wine was come from Nabal, his wife told him these things.

Then was his heart deed in his body, so that he became even as a stone: and
over ten days the LORD smote him, so yt he dyed. When David herd that Nabal
was deed, he said: Blessed be ye LORD which has avenged my rebuke on Nabal,
and preserved his servant from evil. And the LORD has rewarded Nabal that
evil upon his head.

And David sent, and caused to talk with Abigail, yt he might take her to
wife. And when David's servants came to Abigail unto Carmel, they spoke unto
her, and said: David has sent us unto the, that he may take ye to wife. She
rose up, and worshipped upon her face unto the earth, and said: behold, here
is thy handmayde, that she may do service unto the servants of my lord, and
to waszshe their fete. And Abigail made haist, and gat her up, and rode upon an
ass, and five maidens that were under her, and went after David's messaungers,
and became his wife. David took Ahinoam of Iesrael also, and they both became
his wives. But Saul gave Michol his daughter the wife of David unto Phalti ye
son of Lais of Gallim.

The XXVI. Chapter.
(...) ^5. d
Is not David hyd upon the hill of Hachila, which lies over against the
wilderness? Then Saul gat him up, and went down to the wilderness of Siph,
and three thousand chosen men of Israel with him, to seek David in the
wilderness of Siph, and pitched upon the hill of Hachila, which lies by the
way before the wilderness. But David remained in the wyldernes, and when he
saw that Saul came after him in to the wilderness, he sent out spies, and knew
of a suertie, that he was come in deed.

And David gat him up, and came to the place where Saul had pitched his te^t,
and saw the place where Saul lay with his chief captain (...). 14. g
Abner ye son of Ner: for Saul lay in the tent, and the host about him.
Then answered David, and said unto Ahimelech the Hethite, and to Abisai the
son of Ieru Ia ye brother of Ioab: Who will go down with me to Saul in to the
host? Abisai said: I will go down with the.

LORD, and remain vngiltye? David said morouer: As truly as the LORD
lives, if ye LORD him self smite him not, or except his time come that he
dye, or that he go in to the battayll and perish, the LORD let it be far
fro me, that I should lay my hand on the LORDS anointed. Take ye spear now
therefore at his head, and the cup of water, and let us go. So David took ye
spear and the cup of water at Saul's head, and they went their way. And
there was no man yt saw it, ner perceived it, nether awaked, but they slepte
every one, for there was a deep sleep fallen upon them from the LORD.

Now when David was come over on ye LORD lives 1. Re. ^0.
ye are the children of death, because ye have not kept your lord the LORDS
anointed. Behold now, where is ye kings spear, and the cup of water that
was at his head.

Then knew Saul the voice of David, and said: 1.2 c. 24. ^
Is not that thy voice my son David? David said: It is my voice my lord the
king. And he said morouer: Why does my lord so persecute his servant? What
have I done? and what evil is there in my hand? Yet let my lord the king
hear but the words of his servant? If ye LORD provoke the against me, let
there be smelled a meat offering: but if the children of men do it, cursed be
they before the LORD, because they have thrust me out this day (that I should
not dwell in the LORDS inheritance) and say: Go yt way, and serve other
gods. So fall not now my blood upon the earth from the face of the LORD.
For the king of Israel is gone forth to seek a flee, as a partriche is followed
on upon the mountains.

And Saul said: I have sinned: Come again David my son, I will do the no more
hurt, because my soul has been dear in ye sight this day. Behold, I have
done foolishly and very unwisely. David answered and said: Behold, here is
the kings spear, let one of the young men come over here and fetch it. But
the LORD shall reward every one acordinge to his righteousness and faith, for
ye LORD delivered yt this day into my hand: nevertheless I would not lay my
hand upon the LORDS anointed. And as ye soul has been greatly reputed in my
sight this day, so let ye LORD repute my soul in his sight, and deliver me
from all trouble. Saul said unto David: Blessed be thou David my son, thou
shall do it, and be able. But David went his way, and Saul turned again unto
his place.

The XXVII. Chapter.


And David said unto Achis: If I have found grace in thy sight, then let
there be given me a place in one of the cities of the land, that I may dwell
therein. Wherefore should thy servant dwell in the kings cite with the? Then
Achis gave him Siclag the same day. Therefore belongs. Siclag to the kings
of Judah unto this day. The time that David dwelt in the land of the
Philistynes, is four months.

Re. 15. b
Amalechites: for these were the inhabiters of this land of old, as thou
come to Sur unto the lord of Egipte. But wha^ David smote ye land, ^eu.
20. c
he let nether man ner woman live, and took the sheep, oxen, asses, Camels and
raiment, and returned and came to Achis. So when Achis spoke: Whither fell ye
in to day? David said: Toward the south part of Judah, toward ye south
part of the Ierahmielites, and toward the south part of the Kenites. But
David let nether man ner woman come living unto Geth, and thought: They
might peradventure speak and report against us: thus did David, and this was
his manner as long as he dwelt in ye land of the Philistynes. Therefore Achis
gave credence unto David, and thought: he has made him self stynke before
his people of Israel, therefore shall he be my servant for ever.

The XXVIII. Chapter.
(...)
As for Samuel, he was deed, and all ye people had mourned for him, and buried
him in his cite Ramath. (...)
So Saul had driven the soythsayers and expounders of tokens out of ye land.
Now when the Philistynes gathered them selves together, and came and pitched
their tents at Sunem, Saul gathered all the people together, and they pitched
at Gilboa. But when Saul saw the host of the Philistynes, he was afraid, and
his heart was discoraged, and he axed council at the LORD. But ye LORD gave
him no answer, nether by dreams, ner by the (...)
light, ner by prophets.

The^ said Saul unto his servants: Seek LORD, and said: As truly as the
LORD lives, there shall no harm happen unto the for this. Then said ye
woman: Whom shall I bring up unto the He said: Bring me up Samuel.

Now when ye woman saw Samuel, she

Samuel said unto Saul: Why have thou disquyeted me, to cause me be brought
up* Saul said: I am sore troubled, the Philistynes fight against me, and God
is departed fro me, and gives me no answer, nether by prophets ner by
dreams: therefore have I called the, yt thou might show me, what I LORD is
departed from the, and is become thine enemy? The LORD shall do unto the even
as he spoke by me, (...) ^5. f
and shall pluck the kingdom out of thy hand, and give it unto David thy
neighbor, because thou have not herkened unto the voice of the LORD, ner
performed the displeasure of his wrath against Amalek. Therefore has the LORD
done this now unto the. Morouer the LORD shall deliver Israel with the also in
to the hands of the Philistynes: (...). ^1. a
tomorow shall thou and thy sons be with me. And the host of Israel shall the
LORD deliver in to the hands of the Philistynes. Then fell Saul immediately
unto the earth, for he could not stand, and was sore afraid at these words
of Samuel, so that there was no more strength in him: for he had eaten no bred
all that day and all that night.



And he rose up from ye ground, and sat upon the bed. The woman had a fat
calfe at home, so she made haist, and killed it, and took meell and did kneet
it, and baked sweet cakes, and brought them forth before Saul, and before his
servants. And when they had eaten, they stood up, and went their way yt
night.

The XXIX. Chapter.
(...). 13. c
Nevertheless the princes of ye Philistynes were wroth at him, and said unto
him: Let the man turn back again, and abide in his place, 1. Re. 27*
which thou have appointed him, that he go not down with us to ye battle, and
become our adversary in ye field. For wherein could he better do his lord a
pleasure, the^ in the heads of these men? Is not this David, of whom they
sunge in the dance: 1. Re. 18. and 21. d
Saul has smytte^ his thousand, but David his ten thousand? Then Achis
called David, and said unto him: As truly as the LORD lives, I take the for
an honest man, and thy out going and ingoynge with me in ye host pleases me
well, and no evil have I marked in the, sense ye time that thou came to me
unto this day. But thou please not the princes. Return now therefore, and go
ye way in peace, that thou do no evil in the sight of the princes of ye
Philistynes.

David said: What have I done, and what

The XXX. Chapter.
NOw when David came to Siclag the people was in great heaviness, every one over
his sons and daughters.

LORD his God, and said unto Abiathar ye pressed the son of Ahimelech: ^. Re.
23. b
Bring me hither the ouerbody cote. And when Abiathar had brought the
ouerbody cote unto David, David axed at the LORD, and said: Shall I follow
upon the men of war, and shall I overtake them? He said: Ye, follow upon
them, thou shall overtake them, and shall rescue the pray. Then went David his
way, and the six hundredth men that were with him. And when they came to the
river of Besor, some stood still. But David and the four hundredth men followed
after: As for the two hundredth men that stood still, they had been slow to go
over the river of Besor.

And they found a man of Egipte upon the field, him they brought unto David,
^^ou. 25. d
and gave him bred to eat, and water to drink, and gave him a quantite of
fygges, and two quantities of rasyns. And when he had eaten, his sprete came to
him again: for in three days and three nights he had eaten no bred, and drunk
no water.



David said unto him: Will thou bring me down to these men of war? He
sayde^ Swear unto me by God, yt thou shall not slaye me, ner deliver me in to
my masters hand, and I will bring the down to these me^ of war. And he
brought the^ down, and behold, they were scatred upon all ye ground,
eatinge and drinking, and keeping holy day, and were making merry chere,
because of all the great spoils that they had taken out of the land of the
Philistynes and of Judah.



And when David came to the two hundredth men, which had been slow to follow
after David, and abode at the river of Besor, they went forth to mete David,
and the people yt was with him. And David came to the people, and saluted them
friendly.

Then answered soch men as were evil and Belials men (among them that had
gone with David) and said: Seeing they went not with us, they shall have none of
the spoils that we have rescued: but let every man took his wife and his
children and be going.

Then said David: Ye shall not do so (my brethren) with that which ye LORD
has given us, and has preserved us, and delivered these men of war (which
were come against us) in to our hands. Who should co^sente unto you herin?
like as the portion is of them that went down to the battayll, so shall ye
portion be of them also that a bode with the stuff, and shall be divided a like.

From that time forth has this been an LORD, namely unto them of Bethel, unto
them at Ramath in the south, unto them at Iathir, unto them at Aroer, unto them
at Siphamoth, unto them at Eschemoa, unto them at Rachal, unto them in the
cities of the Ierahmielites, unto them in the cities of the Kenites, unto them
at Horma, unto the^ at Borasan, unto the^ at Atach, unto them at Hebron, and
unto all the places where David had walked with his men.

The XXXI. Chapter.
But ye (...)
Philistynes fought against

Then said Saul unto his wape^bearer* Draw out thy sword, and thrust it
through me, that these uncircumcised come not and slaie me, and make a laughinge
stock of me, Nevertheless his wapenbearer would not, for he was sore afraid.
Then took Saul ye sword, and fell therein. Now when his wapenbearer saw that
Saul was deed, he fell also upon his sword, and dyed with him. Thus dyed Saul
and his three sons, and his wapenbearer, and all his men together the same
day.

When ye men of Israel which were beyond the valley, and beyond Iordane,
saw, yt the men of Israel were fled, and that Saul and his sons were deed,
they left ye cities, and fled also. Then came the Philistynes, and dwelt
therein.

(...). 11. b
On the next day came the Philistynes to spoil ye slain, and found Saul
and his three sons lyenge upon mount Gilboa, and smote of his head, and took
of his harness,

When they of Iabes in Gilead herd, what the Philistynes had done unto Saul,
they gat them up, as many as were men of arms, and went all the night, and
took ye body of Saul, and the bodies of his sons from ye wall of Bethsan,
brought the^ to Iabes, (...)
and brent them there, and took their bones, and buried them under ye tree at
Iabes, and fasted seven days.

The end of the first book of the kings, otherwise called the first book of
Samuel.
The second book of the kings, otherwise, called the second book of Samuel.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I. The death of Saul is showed unto David, which mourns for him. Chap.
II. David is anointed king of the men of Judah. Abner goes about to make
Iszboseth Saul's son king of Israel. Chap. III Discord betwixt the house of
David and Saul. Abner lies with Saul's concubyne, is reproved therefore, and
falls unto David Ioab stycketh Abner. Chap. IIII. Iszboseth is stick^e of
traitour^ whom David puts to death. Chap. V David takes in all the
kingdom, and overcomes the Philistynes on eu^ry side. Chap. VI. David
causes the Ark of the LORD to be carried out of Abinadabs house in to the
house of Obed Edo^. Vs^ is punyshed for touching it. David carries it in to
his cite. Chap. VII. David is forbydde^ to build an house unto the LORD, unto
whom he gives thanks. Chap. VIII. David subdueth the Philistynes and other
(...) about him. Chap. IX. David shows favor to Saul's kindred, and does
the^ good for Ionathas sake. Chap. X. David sends messaungers to the king of
the Ammonites, which puts the^ to shame: wherefore David goes against them,
and wynneth the victory of them two times. Chap. XI. David commits aduoutry
with Bethseba, and causes her huszba^de be slain. Chap. XII. The prophet
Nathan rebukes David, which knowlegeth his sin, and requires mercy. His
son dies. Chap. XIII. Ammon defyleth Thamar, therefore Absalom slays him.
Chap. XIIII. Ioab reconcyleth Absalom unto his father with suttyltie. Absalom
sends for Ioab, and because he comes not to him, he burns up his corn.
Chap. XV. Absalo^ seeks his fathers kingdom. David flies with his men. Chap.
XVI David gives Siba all the good of Mephiboseth: Semei curses and
blasphemeth David. Absalom lies with his fathers concubynes. Chap. XVII. The
LORD turns the council of Achitophel. The council of Chusa^ goes forth.
Chap. XVIII. David's host wynneth the victory. Absalom is slain David his
father is soroufull. Chap. XIX. Ioab rebukes the king for his mourning.
Israel flies in to their te^tes. Judah cleueth unto David. Semei and
Mephiboseth obtain favor. Barsillai shows the king great fendshippe.
Chap. XX. Seba makes an vproure, and deuydeth Israel from David. Ioab stycketh
Amasa. Ioab follows upon Seba, and lays sege unto him in Abela. Chap. XXI. A
great honger. Saul's children are given unto the Gibeonites. David fights
against the Philistynes. Chap. XXII. David prayseth the LORD with a song of
thankesgeuynge, because he delivered him out of the hand of Saul and other
enemies. Chap. XXIII. The last words of David. The names of the Worthies are
rehearsed. Chap. XXIIII. David no^breth the people, and displeases the LORD,
which plageth his land with the pestilence.
The first Chapter.
Re. 30. d
and had remained two days at Siclag, behold, on the third day there came a
man out of Saul's host, with his clothes rent, and earth upon his head. And
when he came unto David, he fell down to the ground, and worshipped. David
said unto him: Whence come thou? He said unto him: Out of the host of
Israel am I fled. David said unto him: Tell me, what is the matter? He said:
the people is fled from the battayll, and many of the people are fallen: Ye
and Saul also is deed and his son Ionathas. David said unto the young man
that brought him this word: How know thou that Saul and Ionathas his son
are 1. Reg. 3. f and. 13. f
and rent them, and so did all the me^ that were with him, and mourned, and
wept, and fasted until the even, over Saul and Ionathas his son, and over
the people of the LORD, and over the house of Israel, because they were fallen
through the sword.

LORDS anointed to destroy him? And David said unto one of his young men:
Come hither, and slaye him. And he smote him that he dyed. Then said David
unto him: Thy blood be upon thine own head. Mat. 1^. d Luc. 19. b
For thy mouth has spoken against thyselfe and said: I have slain the
anointed of the LORD. And David mourned this lamentacion over Saul and
Ionathas his son, and commanded to teach the children of Judah the bow.
Behold, it is written in the book of the righteous.

The Eldest in Israel are slain upon the height of the. How are the Worthies
fallen?

(...)
Tell it not at Gath: speak not of it in ye streets at Ascalon: lest the
daughters of ye Philistynes rejoice, lest the daughters of ye vncircumcysed
tryumphe.

Ye mountains of Gelboa, nether dew

(...)
The bow of Ionathas failed not, and (...)
the sword of Saul came not again void from the blood of the slain, and
from the fat of the giauntes.

Saul and Ionathas lovely and pleasant in their life, and in their deeth were
not parted asunder: lighter then Aegles, and stronger then lions.

Ye daughters of Israel weep over Saul which clothed you with purple in
pleasures, and decked you with Jewels of gold on your garments.

How are the Worthies fallen so in the battayll? Ionathas is slain upon ye
height of the.

I am sorry for the my brother Ionathas: thou have been very lovely unto me: Thy
love has been more special unto me, then the love of women.

How are the Worthies fallen, and ye weapens destroyed?

The II. Chapter.
AFter these acts David (...)
axed at the LORD, and said: Shall I go up in to one of the cities of Judah?
And the LORD said unto him: Go up. David said: Whither? He said: Unto
Hebron. So David went thither with his two wives, Ahinoam the Iesraelitisse,
and Abigail Nabals wife of Carmel. And David brought up the men that were him
also, every one with his household, and they dwelt in the cities of Hebron. And
ye men of Judah came, and there they anointed him king over the house of Judah.

And wha^ it was told David, (...)
that they of Iabes in Gilead had buried Saul, he sent messaungers unto them,
saying: Blessed be ye of the LORD, that ye have done soch mercy upon your
lord Saul, and have buried him. The LORD therefore show mercy now and
faithfulness upon you. And because ye have done this, I also will do you good.
Let your hand now therefore be comforted, and be ye strong: for though Saul
your lord be deed, yet has the house of Judah chosen me to be king over them.

(...)
The time yt David was king at Hebron over the house of Judah, was seven year
and six months long.

And Abner the son of Ner went forth with the servants of Iszboseth the
son of Saul, out of ye host unto Gibeon. And Ioab the son of Zeru Ia went
forth with David's servants, and they met together by the pole at Gibeon, and
these lay on the one side of the pole, the other on the other side. And Abner
said unto Ioab: Let the young me^ get them up, and play before us. Ioab
said: Let them arise. Then gat they them up, and went in nombre twolue of Ben
Iamin on Iszboseth Saul's sons side, and twolue of David's servants. And
every one gat another by the head, and thrust his sword in his side, and fell
together: therefore is the place called Helkath hazurim (that is, the field of
the Worthies) which is at Gibeon.



Then Abner thrust him in with a spear in to his belly, so that the spear
went out behind him. And there he fell and dyed before him: and who so came
to the place where Asahel lay deed, stood still there. But Ioab and Abisai
followed upon Abner, till the son went down. And when they came to ye hill
of Amma, which lies before Giah, by ye way to the wilderness of Gibeon, the
children of Ben Iamin gathered them selves together behind Abner, and grew to
a multitude, and stood upon the top of an hill.

And Abner called unto Ioab, and said:

Abner and his men went all that same night over the plain field, and passed
over Iordane, and walked through all Bithron, and came to the tents. Ioab
turned him from Abner, and gathered all ye people together. And of David's
servants there myssed nynetene men, and Asahel. But David's servants had
smytten so among Ben Iamin and the men of Abner, that three hundredth and
threscore men were deed. And they took up Asahel, and buried him in his fathers
grave at Bethleem. And Ioab with his men went all that night: and at the
break of the day they came unto Hebron.

The III. Chapter.
ANd there was a long battayll between

Now when it was war between the house of Saul and the house of David, Abner
strengthed Saul's house. And Saul had had a concubyne, whose name was Rispa the
daughter of Aia. And Iszboseth said unto

Then was Abner very wroth at these words of Iszboseth, and said: Am I a
dogs head then, that I against Judah do mercy unto the house of Saul thy
father, and unto his brethren and kynsfolkes? and have not delivered the into
ye hand of David, and thou layest a trespace to my charge this day for a
woman's sake? God do Abner this and that, if I do not ^. Reg. ^^. f and 16. c
as the LORD has sworn unto David, that the kingdom may be taken from the
house of Saul, and ye seat of David set up over Israel and Judah, from Dan unto
Berseba. Then could he not answer him one word again, he feared him so.

And Abner sent messaungers unto David, saying: Whose is the land? And said:
Make thy covenant with me. Behold, my hand shall be with the, to turn all
Israel unto the.

^. Re. 1^. g
Give me my wife Michol, whom I married with an hundredth foreszkinnes of the
Philistynes. Iszboseth sent, and caused for to take her from the man 1. Re. 25.
g
Palthiel the son of Lais. And her huszbande went with her, and wept
behind her unto Bahurim. Then said Abner unto him: Turn back again, and go
thy way. And he turned back again.

And Abner talked with the Elders in Israel, and said: Your minds have been
set before time and long a goo upon David, that he might be king over you, do
it now therefore, for ye LORD has said of David: I will deliver my people of
Israel by the hand of David my servant, from the hand of the Philistynes,
and from the hand of all their enemies.



So David let Abner go from him in peace. And behold, David servants and
(...) came from the men of war, and brought^ a great spoil with them. And
Abner wa^ not now with David at Hebron, for he had sent him from him, so that
he was gone his way in peace.

But when Ioab and all the host with him was come, it was told him that Abner
the son of Ner came to the king, and how he had sent him from him, so that
he was gone his way in peace. Then went Ioab in to the king, and said: What
have thou done? Behold, Abner came to the, why have thou sent him from the,
that he is gone his way? Know thou not Abner the son of Ner? For he came
to the to disceaue the, that he might know thy outgoynge, and ingoynge, and
to spy out all that thou do. And when Ioab went out from David, he sent
messau^gers after Abner, to fetch him again from Boharsira, and David knew^
not thereof. Now when Abner came again unto Hebron, Ioab brought him in to ye
mids under ye gate, to talk with him secretly, and thrust him there in to ye
belly that he dyed, because of his brother Asahels blood.

When David knew of it thereafter, he said: I am vngiltye, and so is my
kyngdodome for ever before the LORD concerning the blood of Abner ye son
of Ner: but upon the head of Ioab fall it, and upon all his fathers house, and
in the house of Ioab there cease not one to have a renninge issue and a
leprosy, and to go upon a staff, and fall through the sword, and to have
scarnesse of bred. Thus Ioab and his brother Abi^a^ slew Abner, (...)
because he had slain their brother Asahel in the battaill at Gibeon.

David said unto Ioab and to all ye people yt was with him: Rent your
clothes, and gyrde sack cloth about you, and make lamentacion for Abner. And
the king went after the Bear. And when they buried Abner at Hebron, the king
lift up his voice, and wept beside Abners grave, and all the people wept
also.

And the king mourned for Abner, and said: Abner is not deed as a fool
dies. Thy hands were not bound, thy fete were not vexed with fetters, thou
art fallen as a man falls before wicked unthrifts. The^ all the people
bewailed him yet more.

Now when all the people came in to eat with David, while it was yet hye day,
David swear, and said: God do this and that unto me, if I taist either bred or
ought else before the Son go down. And all ye people knew it, and it pleased
them well all that ye king did in the sight of all the people. And all the
people and all Israel perceived the same day, that it came not of the king,
that Abner the son of Ner was slain. And the king said unto his
servants: Know ye not that this day a prince and a great man is fallen in
Israel? As for me, I am yet but tender and anointed king. But the men the
children of Zeru Ia are to hard for me. The LORD recompense him that does
evil, acordinge to his wickedness.

The IIII. Chapter.


LORD avenged my lord the king of Saul and his sede.

LORD lives, which has delivered my soul out of all trouble, (...). 1. c
I took him yt brought me word and said: Saul is deed, and he thought he had
been a good messaunger, and at Siclag I put him to death, unto whom I should
have given a reward for his message. And these ungodly persons have slain a
righteous man in his own house upon his bed. Ye should not I require his
blood of your hands, and take you away from ye earth? And David commanded
his young men, which slew them, and smote of their hands and fete, and hanged
them up by ye pole at Hebron. But the head of Iszboseth took they, and buried
it ^. Reg. ^. f
in Abners grave at Hebron.

The V. Chapter.
ANd all the trybes of Israel came to 1. Par. 1^. ^
Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh. And before time wha^ Saul was king
over us, thou leddest Israel out and in. So the LORD has said: Thou shall
keep my people of Israel, and shall be the duke over Israel. And all the Elders
in Israel came to ye king unto Hebron. And king David made a covenant with
them at Hebron before ye LORD. And they anointed David to be king over
Israel. Thyrtie year old was David when he was made king, and reigned fortye
years. ^. Re. ^. ^
At Hebron reigned he seven years and six months over Judah: but at
Jerusalem he reigned three and thirty years over all Israel and Judah.

And the king went with his men to 1. Pa. ^^. ^
Who so ever smyteth the Iebusites, and optayneth the perquellies, the lame and
the blind, which (Iebusites) David's soul hates. Hereof comes the proverb:
Leui. ^1. ^
Let no blind ne^ ^ame come in to the house. So David dwelt in ye castle, and
called it the cite of David. And David builded round about fro Millo and
within. And David grew, and the LORD the God Zebaoth was with him.

And Hiram the king of Tire sent messaungers 1. Pa^. 15. ^
and Ceder trees for walls, and Carpenters, and Masons, to build David an
house. And David knew, that the LORD had confyrmed him king over Israel, and
exalted his kingdom for his people of Isreal's sake. And David took yet mo
wives and concubynes at Jerusalem, after he was come from Hebron, and there
were yet mo sons and daughters borne unto him. 1. Par. ^. ^
And these are the names of them that were borne unto him at Jerusalem: Samma
Sobab, Nathan, Solomon, Iebehar, Elisua, Nepheg, Iaphia, Elisama, Eliada,
Eliphalet.

And when the Philistines herd that David was anointed king over Israel, they
went up all to seek David. When David perceived that, he went down in to a
castle. But the Philistynas came and scatered them selves beneth in the valley
of Rephaim. ^. Re 23. a ^ Re 2 a and. 5. d
And David axed at the LORD, and said: Shall I go up against the Philistynes?
and wylt thou deliver them in to my hand? The LORD said unto David: Go up, I
will deliver the Philistynes in to thy hand.

LORD has divided mine enemies, even as the waters part asunder: therefore is
the same place called Baal Prazim. And they left their images there, but David
and his men carried the^ away.

Nevertheless the Philistynes went up again, and scatered them selves beneth
in the valley of Rephaim. And David axed at the LORD. The LORD said: Thou
shall go up, but compase them behind, that thou may be upon them over
against the Peertrees: and when thou hear upon the top of the Peertrees,
the sound of the goinge be bold, for then is the LORD gone forth before the,
to smite the host of the Philistines David did as the LORD commanded him and
smote the Philistynes from Geba, till thou come unto Gaser.

The VI. Chapter.
1. Par. 14. a
and gat him up, and went with all the people that was with him of the (...)
of Judah, to fetch up the Ark of God from thence: whose name is: The name of
the LORD Zebaoth dwells thereon between the Cherubins. 1. Reg. 6. c
And they caused the ark of God to be carried upon a new cart, 1. Reg. 7. a
and fetched it out of ye house of Abinadab, which dwelt at Gibea. Vsa and Ahio
the sons of Abinadab drove ye new cart. And when they brought it with the
Arc from the house of Abinadab which dwelt at Gibea, Ahio went before the
Arc: and David and all the house of Israel played before the LORD, with all
manner of instruments of Pine tree, with harpes, and Psalteries, and tabrettes,
and belles, and Cymbals.

1. Pa. 14. b
And when they came to the barn floor (...)
and held the Ark of God, for the oxen went out aside. Then waxed the wrath
of the LORD fearce against Vsa, and God smote him there because of his
presumpcio^, so th^^ he dyed there beside the Ark of God. Th^^ was David sorry,
because the LORD had made soch a rent upon Vsa, and he called the same place
Perez Vsa unto this day. And David feared the LORD the same day, and said:
How shall the Ark of the LORD come unto me? And he would not let it be
brought to him in to the cite of David, but caused it be brought in to ye
house of Obed Edom the Gathite. And when the Ark of the LORD had continued
three months in the house of Obed Edom the Gathite, the LORD blessed him and
all his house.

And it was told king David, that the LORD had blessed the house of Obed
Edo^ and all that he had because of the Ark of God. (...)
Then went he, and fetched up the Ark of God out of ye house of Obed Edom in
to the cite of David with joy. And wha^ they were gone six steps in with
the Ark of the LORD, they offered an ox and a fat sheep. And David daunsed
with all his might before the LORD, and was girded with an ouerbody cote of
lynne^. And David with all Israel brought up ye Ark of the LORD with
tabrettes and trompettes.

And when the Ark of the LORD came in to the cite of David, Michol the
doughte of Saul looked out at a window, and saw king David leaping,
sprynginge and dau^synge before the LORD, and despised him in her heart. But
when they brought in ye Ark of the LORD, they set it in her place in the
mids of the Tabernacle, which David had pitched for it. And David offered
burnt offerynges and deed offeryges before ye LORD. And when David had made an
end of offering the burnt offerynges and deed offerynges, he blessed the
people in the name of the LORD Zebaoth, and dealte out unto all the people,
and to the multitude of Israel, both to man and woman, unto every one a cake of
bred, and a piece of flesh, and a meece of potage. Then went all the people
their way, every one unto his house.

When David came again to bless his house, Michol the daughter of Saul went
forth to mete him, and said: How glorious has the king of Israel been to
day, which has uncovered himself before the mayde^s of his servants, like
as the rascal people discover them selves. But David said unto Michol: I will
play before ye LORD, which has chosen me before ye father, and before all his
house, because he has commanded me to be the prince over the people of the
LORD, even over Israel, and yet will I be vyler then so, and will be low in
mine own sight: and with the maidens whereof thou have spoken, will I be
honored. As for Michol the daughter of Saul, she had no child unto the day
of her death.

The VII. Chapter.
(...). 18. a
and the LORD had given him rest from all his enemies on every side, he said
unto the prophet Nathan: Behold, I dwell in a house of Cedre, and the Ark of God dwells among the curtaynes. Nathan said unto the king: Go thy way,
what so ever thou have in thine heart, yt do: for the LORD is with the. But the
same night came ye word of the LORD unto Nathan, and said: Go and speak to
my servant David: Thus says ye LORD: Shall thou build me an house to dwell
in? I have dwelt in no house sense the day that I brought the children of
Israel unto this day, but have walked in the Tabernacle and Habitacion,
whither so ever I went with the children of Israel. Did I ever speak to any
of the trybes of Israel (whom I commanded to keep my people of Israel) and
said: Wherefore do ye not build me an house of Ceder wodd?

LORD Zebaoth: (...). 16. c
I took the from the pasture when thou wentest behind the sheep, yt thou
should be ye prince over my people of Israel, and have been with the whither so
ever thou wentest, and have roted out all thine enemies before the, and have
made the a great name, acordinge to the name of the great men upon earth. And
for my people of Israel I will appoynte a place, and will plant them, that
they may remain there, no more to be removed, and yt the children of wickedness
oppress them no more, like as before, and sense the time that I ordained Judges
over my people of Israel. And I will give the rest from all thine enemies. And
the LORD shows the, that the LORD will make the a house.

(...). 5. a (...). 8 c (...) 1^1. b
Now when ye time is fulfilled yt thou shall sleep with thy fathers, I will after
ye raise up thy side, which shall come of thy body: his kingdom will I
stablishe, he shall build an house for my name, (...). 33. c
and I will stablyshe ye seat of his kingdom for ever. (...)
I will be his father, and he shall be my son. 3. Re. 11* Psalm. 88. ^
When he does a trespace, I will reprove him with the rodd of men and with the
plages of ye children of men: But my mercy shall not be withdrawn from him, as
I have with drawn it from Saul, who^ I have taken away before the. As for ye
house and thy kingdom, it shall be stablished for ever before the, and thy
seat shall endure fast for evermore.

When Nathan had told all these words and all this vision unto David, king
David came and sat him down before the LORD, and said: O LORD God, who am
I? and what is my house, yt thou have brought me thus far? This O LORD God
have thou thought to little also, but have spoken of the house of thy servant
yet long for to come. O LORD God, is that the law of men?

And what shall David speak unto the? LORD God, for thy words sake and
acordinge to ye heart have thou done all these great things, yt thou might
show the^ unto thy servant. Therefore art thou greatly magnified O LORD God:
Deu. 32. ^
for there is none like the, and there is no God but thou, acordinge unto all
that we have herd with or ears. Deu. 4. a
For where is there a people upon earth as thy people of Israel? For whose sake
God went to deliver him a people, and to make him self a name, and to do them
soch great and terrible things in thy lord before ye people, Exo. 14. ^
whom thou have delivered unto thy self from Egipte, from the people, and from
their gods. And thy people of Israel have thou prepared the to be a people
unto thine own self for ever, and thou O LORD art become their God.

Stablish now ye word therefore for ever LORD God) which thou have spoken over
thy servant and over his house, and do acordinge as thou have said. So shall
thy name be great for ever, so that it shall be said: The LORD Zebaoth is the
God over Israel, and the house of thy servant David shall be made sure before
the. For thou LORD Zebaoth, thou God of Israel have opened the ear of thy
servant, and said: I will build the an house. Therefore has ye servant
found his heart, to pray this prayer unto the. Deu. 32. f
Now LORD God thou thy self art God, and thy words shall be the truth. Thou
have spoken soch good over thy servant. Begin now therefore, and bless ye
servants house, that it may be before the for ever, for thou LORD God thine
own self have spoken it: and with thy blessing shall thy servants house be
blessed for ever.

The VIII. Chapter.
Par. 19. d
and discomfited them, and took the brydell of bondage out of the Philistynes
hand. Nu. 24. d
He smote the Moabites also to the ground, so that he brought two parts of
them to death, and let one part live. Thus the Moabites were subdued unto
David, so yt they brought him gifts.

David smote Hadad Eser also the son of Rehob king of Zoba, when he went to
fetch his power again at ye water Euphrates. And of them took David a
thousand and seven hundredth horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen, and lamed
all the charettes, save an hundredth which he kept behind. But the Siryans
came from Damascon to help Hadad Eser king of Zoba. And David smote two and
twentye thousand men of the Syrians, and laid people unto Damascus in Syria.

Thus was Syria subdued unto David, so that they brought him gifts: for ye
LORD helped David whither so ever he went. And David took ye shyldes of
gold, which Hadad Esers servants had, and brought them to Jerusalem. But
from Bethah and Berothai ye cities of Hadad Eser took David very much brass.

^. Par. 19. b
When Thoi the king of Hemath herd, that David had smytten all the power of
Hadad Eser, he sent his son Ioram unto David to salute him friendly, and to
bless him, because he had foughten with Adad Eser and smytten him (for Thoi
had war with Hadad Eser) and had Jewels with him of silver, of gold, and of
brass: which king David hallowed also unto ye LORD, with the silver and gold
which he sanctified unto the LORD from all the Heythe^, whom he subdued, from
Siria, fro Moab, from the children of Ammon, from the Philistynes, from Amalek,
from the spoil of Hadad Eser ye son of Rehob king of Zoba.

^. Par. 19. c
and smote eightene thousand of ye Sirians in ye Salt valley. And he laid
people in all Edomea, Genesis 25. c Nu. 24. d
and all Edem was subdued unto David: for the LORD helped David, whither so
ever he went. Thus was David king over all Israel. And he executed iudgmente
and righteousness unto all ye people. ^. Re. 20. d
Ioab ye son of Zeru Ia was captain over the host. Iosaphat the son of
Ahilud was Chaunceler. Zadok the son of Achitob, and Ahimelech the son of
Abiathar were prestes. Seraia was Scrybe. Benaia the son of Ioiada was over
ye Chr^thians and Plethians. And the sons of David were (...)
prestes.

The IX. Chapter.
ANd David said: Remains there (...)
Siba, whom they called unto David, and the king said unto him: Art thou
Siba? He said: Ye thy servant. The king said: Is there yet any man of
Saul's house, yt I may do the mercy of God upon him? Siba said unto the king:
(...)
There is yet a son of Ionathas, lame on his fete. The king said unto him:
Where is he? Siba said unto ye king: Behold, he is at L^dober in ye house of
(...)
Machir ye son of Ammuel. The^ sent king David thither, and caused for to
fetch him from Lodaber out of ye house of Machir the son of Ammuel.

Now when Mephiboseth the son of

Then the king called Siba ye servant of Saul, and said unto him: All yt
has belonged unto Saul and to all his house, have I given to thy lords son.
Till his land for (...)
and was lame on both his fete.

The X. Chapter.
(...) 20. a
and his son Hanun was king in his stead. Then said David: I will do mercy
upon Hanun the son of Nahas, as his father did mercy upon me. And so he sent,
and comforted him by his servants over his fathers death. Now when David's
servants came in to the land of the children of Ammon, the mighty men of
the children of Ammon said unto Hanun their lord: Thynkest thou it is for the
honor of ye father in ye sight, yt David has sent comforters unto the? Has
he not sent his servants unto ye (thynkest thou) to spy and search out the
cite and to overthrow it?



When the children of Ammon saw that they stynked in the sight of David, they
sent and hired the Sirians of the house of Rehob, and the Sirians at Zoba even
twentye thousand footmen, and from the king of Maecha a thousand men, and
from Istob twolue thousand men. When David herd that, he sent Ioab with all
the host of ye men of war. And the children of Ammon went forth, and
prepared them selves to ye battayll before the intraunce of the gate. But the
Siryans of Soba, of Rehob, of Istob and of Maecha were alone in the field.

LORD do what pleases him.

And Ioab made him forth with the people that was with him, to fight against
the Syrians: and they fled before him. And when the children of Ammon saw that
the Syrians fled, they fled also before Abisai, and went in to the cite. So
Ioab turned again from the children of Ammon, and came to Jerusalem. And when
the Syrians saw yt they were smytten before Israel, they came together.

And Hadad Eser sent and brought out ye

The XI. Chapter.


ANd when ye year came about what 1. Par. 21.
David sent Ioab and his servants with him, and all Israel, to destroy the
children of Ammon, and to lay sege unto Rabba: but David abode at Jerusalem.

And about the eue^tyde it fortuned that David arose from his restinge place,
and went up to ye top of the kings palace, and from ye top he saw a
woman Exo. 2. a Susan. c
waszshinge her self, and the woman was of a very fair bewtye. And David
sent, and caused to axe what woman it was, and said: Is not that Bethseba the
daughter of Eliam the wife of V^ias the Hethite? And David sent messau^gers,
and caused for to fetch her. And wha^ she was come in unto him, he lay with
her. Nevertheless she hallowed her self from her uncleanness, and turned a gain
unto (...) house. And the woman was with child, and sent, and caused to tell
David and to say: I am with child. David sent unto Ioab (saye^ge:) Send me
Vrias ye Hethite. And Ioab sent Vrias unto David. And when Vrias came to him,
David axed him if it stood well with Ioab, and with the people and with the
battayll.





Then sent Ioab, and caused to tell ye king all the matter concerning the
battayll, and commanded the messaunger, and said: When thou have told ye
king all the matter concerning the battle, and seist that he is wroth, and
if the king say unto the: Wherefore came ye so nigh the cite with the battle?
Know ye not how they use to shute from the wall? Iud. 9. h
Who smote Abimelech the son of Ierubaall? Did not a woman cast a piece of a
mylstone upon him from the wall, so that he dyed at Thebez? Why came ye so nigh
the wall? Then shall thou say^: Thy servant Vrias the Hethite is deed also.

The messaunger went his way, and came

David said unto the messaunger: Thus shall thou say unto Ioab: Let not yt
vex the, for the sword consumes now one now another. Go forth with the
battayll against the cite, that thou may destroy it, and comfort the men.
And when Vrias wife herd that Vrias was deed, she mourned for her huszbande.
But wha^ she had made an end of mourning, David sent, and caused her be
fetched unto his palace, and she became his wife, and bare him a son.
Nevertheless this deed yt David did, displeased the LORD.

The XII. Chapter.
ANd the LORD sent Nathan unto

The^ was David wroth with great displeasure LORD lives, the man that has
done this, is the child of death. (...)
The sheep also shall he make good four fold, because he has done soch a
thing, and not spared it.

Then said Nathan unto David: Thou art even the man. Thus says the LORD the
God of Israel: (...)
I have anointed the to be king over Israel, and delivered the out of the
hand of Saul, and have geven the yi lords house, and his wives in to thy
lap, and the house of Israel and Judah have I given the: and if that be to
little, I will yet do this and that for the also. Wherefore have thou then
despised the word of the LORD, to do soch evil in his sight? Vrias the
Hethite have thou slain with the sword: His wife have thou taken to be thy
wife, but him have thou slain with ye sword of the children of Ammon.

LORD: Behold, (...) c (...). 16. d
I will raise up evil of thine own house, and will take thy wives before
thine eyes, and will give them unto thy neighbor, so that he shall lie with thy
wives by Son light. For thou have done it secretly, but I will do this in the
sight of all Israel, and by Son light.

Then said David unto Nathan (...) 47. c ^0, a
I have sinned unto the LORD. Nathan said unto David: So has the LORD also
taken away thy sin, thou shall not dye. But for so much as thou through this
deed have caused the enemies of the LORD to blaspheme, ye son that is borne
unto the, shall dye the death. And Nathan went home. As for the child which
Vrias wife bare unto David, the LORD smote it, so that it was deedsicke.

LORD, and worshipped.

LORD may be gracious unto me, that the child may live. Eccli. 38.
But now that it is deed, wherefore should I fast? Can I fetch it again? I shall
go unto it, but it shall not come again unto me. And when David had comforted
Bethseba his wife, he went in unto her, and lay with her. 1. Par. 3. a Matt
1. a
And she bare a son, whom he called Solomon. And the LORD loved him. And he
put him under the hand of Nathan ye prophet, which called him Iedidia because
of the LORD.

So Ioab fought against Rabba of ye 1. Par. 21. 2
I have fought against Rabba, and have won the water cite also. Gather thou
therefore the residue of the people together, and lay sege to ye cite, and
win it, that I win it not, and have the name thereof. So David gathered all
ye people together, and went, and fought against Rabba, and wanne it, and
took their kings crown from his head (which in weight had a talente of
gold, and precious stones) and was set upon David's head, and very much spoil
carried he out of the cite. As for the people that was therein, he brought the^
forth, and laid them under iron sawes and hokes and wedges of iron, and burned
the^ in tyle ouens. Thus did he unto all the cities of the children of Ammon.
Then returned David and all the people unto Jerusalem again.

The XIII. Chapter.
ANd it: fortuned after this, that Absalom

Ionadab said unto him: lay the down when thy father comes to look how
thou do, say unto him: Oh let my sister Thamar come, that she may feed me,
and make a meece of meat before me, that I may se it, and eat it of her
hand. So Ammon laid him down, and made him sick. Now wha^ the king came in
to look how he did, Ammon said unto the king: Oh let my sister Thamar come,
and make me a syppynge or two, and that I may eat it of her hand^. Then sent
David for Thamar in to the house, and said unto her: Go thy way to thy
brother Ammons house, and make him a meece of meat. Thamar went unto her
brother Amons house, but he lay in his bed. And she took flower, and mixte it,
and dighte it before his eyes, and made him a syppynge. And she took the meece
of meat, and poured it out before him: but he would not eat.



And when she brought it unto him yt he might eat, he took hold of her, and
said unto her: Come my sister, lie with me. Nevertheless she said: Oh no my
brother, force me not: for so do they not in Israel, do not thou soch folly.
Whither shall I go with my shame? And thou shall be as one of the unwise in
Israel. But speak unto the king, he shall not withholde me from the.

Genesis 34. a Leui. 18. a
and forced her, and lay with her. And Ammon hated her exceadingly, so that
the hate was greater then the love was before. And Ammon said unto her: Up,
and get the hence.

She said unto him: This evil that thou thrustest me out, is greater then the
other, that thou have done unto me. Nevertheless he herkened not unto her, but
called his boy that served him, and said: Put away this woman fro me, and
lock the door after her. And she had a party garment on: for soch garments
wayre ye kings daughters while they were virgins.

And wha^ his servant had put her forth, and lockte the door after her, Thamar
strowed aszshes upon her head, and rent the party garment which she had upon
her, and laid her hand upon her head, and went on, and cried. And her
brother Absalom said unto her: Has thy brother Ammon been with the? Now hold
thy peace my sister, it is thy brother, and take not the matter so to heart.

So Thamar remained a wyddowe in brother Absaloms house. And when king David
herd of all this, he was very sorry. As for Absalom, he spoke nether evil ner
good to Ammon: but Absalom hated Ammon, because he had forced his sister Thamar.

After two years had Absalom sheep clyppers at Baal Hazor, which lies by
Ephraim. And Absalom called all the kings children, and came to the king, and
said: Behold, thy servant has sheep clyppers, let it please ye king with
his servants to go with his servant. But the king said unto Absalom: No
my son, let us not all go, lest we be to chargeable unto the.

And he would needs have had him to go, howbeit he would not, but blessed him.
Absalom said: Shall my brother Ammon go with us then? The king said unto him
Wherefore shall he go with the? Then was Absalom so importune upon him, that he
let Ammon and all the kings children go with him.

But Absalom commanded his young men, and said: Take heed when Ammon is merry
with wine (and I say unto you: Smite Ammon, and slaye him) that ye be not
afraid: for I have commanded you, be strong, and play the men. So Absaloms
young men did unto Ammon, as Absalom had commanded them. Then stood all the
kings children up, and every one gat him up upon his Mule, and fled. And while
they were yet on their way, the rumoure came to king David, that Absalom had
slain all the kings children, so that not one of them was left.

Then stood the king up, and rent his clothes, and laid him down upon the
earth, and all his servants that stood about him, rent their clothes. Then
answered Ionadab ye son of Simea David's brother, and said: Let not my lord
think that all the young men the kings children are deed, but yt Ammon is
deed only: for Absalom has kept it in him self sense the day that he
forced his sister Thamar. Therefore let not my lord the king take it so to
heart, that all the kings children should be deed, but that Ammon is deed only.



The king and all his servants wept also very sore. But Absalom fled, and
went unto Thalmai the son of Ammihud king of Gesur. As for David, he
mourned for his son every day. When Absalom was fled and gone unto Gesur, he
was there three year. And king David ceased from goinge out against Absalom,
for he had comforted him self over Ammon that he was deed.

The XIIII. Chapter.


And when the woman of Thecoa would speak with the king, she fell upon her
face to the ground, and worshipped, and said: Help me O king. The king
said unto her: What ayleth the? She said: I am a wedowe, a woman that
mourns, and my huszba^de is deed. And thy handmayde had two sons, which
strove together in the field: and while there was noman to part the^ a sunder,
the one smote the other, and slew him.

And behold, all the whole kynred ryseth up against thy handmayden, and say:
(...) 19. c
Deliver him which has smytten his brother, that we may kill him, for the
soul of his brother whom he has slain, and that we may destroy the heir
also. And thus are they minded to put out my spark, which yet is left, that
there should no name ner any thing else remain over unto my huszba^de upon
earth.

LORD his God, that there be not to many auengers of blood to destroy, and
that they bring not my son to naught. He said: 1. Re. 14. g
As truly as the LORD lives, there shall not one here of thy son fall upon
the earth. And the woman said: Let thy handmayde speak somewhat to my lord
the king. He said: speak on. The woman said: Wherefore have thou devised
soch a thing against the people of God? And how happens it that the king
speaks soch, to make himself guilty, and causes not his outlawe to be
brought again? For we all dye the death, and as the water that sinketh in to
the earth, which is not taken up. ^ze. 18.
And God will not take away the life, but vnbethynketh himself, yt even the
very outlawe be not clean thrust out from him.

Thus am I come also to speak this to 2. Re. 19.
for my lord the king is as an angel of God, so that he can hear good and
evil, therefore shall the LORD thy God be with the.

The king answered and said unto the woman: Keep nothing fro me that I axe
the. The woman said: Let my lord the king speak on. The king said: Is not
the hand of Ioab with the in all this? The woman answered and said: As truly
as thy soul lives (my lord O king,) there is else noman nether at the right
hand ner at ye left, but even as my LORD the king has said, for thy
servant Ioab has commanded me, and he himself has taught thy handmayden
all these words, that I should turn this matter of this faszshio^, this has
Ioab thy servant done. But my lord is wise, as the wyszdome of an angel of
God, so that he knows all things upon earth.

Then said the king unto Ioab: Behold, and bring the child Absalom again.

Then fell Ioab upon his face unto the ground, and worshipped, and thanked the
king, and said: This day does thy servant perceive, that I have found
grace in thy syghte my lord the king, in that the king does as his servant
has said. So Ioab gat him up, and went unto Gesur, and brought Absalom to
Jerusalem. But the king said: Let him go again in to his house, and not se
my face. Thus Absalom came again to his house, and saw not ye kings face.

But in all Israel there was not so fair, and so marvelous goodly a man, as
Absalom. From the sole of his foot unto the top of his head there was not
one blemysh in him. And when his head was rounded (that was commonly every
year, for it was to heavy for him, so that it must needs have been rounded) the
here of his head weyed two hundredth Sicles after ye kings weight. And unto
Absalom there were borne three sons and one daughter, whose name was Thamar,
and she was a woman of a fair bewtye: So Absalom abode two year at Jerusalem,
and saw not the kings face.

And Absalom sent for Ioab, that he

Then Ioab gat him up, and came to Absalom in to the house, and said unto him:
Wherefore have thy servants set fire upon my piece of land? Absalo^ said unto
Ioab: Behold, I sent for the, and caused to say unto the: Come hither, that I
may send the to the king, and to say: Wherefore came I from Gesur? It were
better for me that I were there yet. Let me therefore se the kings face. But if
there be any trespace in me, then put me to death. And Ioab went in to the
king, and told him. And he called Absalom, to come in to the king, and he
worshipped upon his face to the grounge before the king. And the king kyssed
Absalom.

The XV. Chapter.
ANd after this it fortuned that Absalom

And Absalom said: O who sets me to be judge in ye land, that every man
which has a plee or matter to do in ye law, might come to me, that I might
help him to right And when any man came to him to do worship and to do him
obeisaunce, he put forth his hand, and held him and kyssed him. After

After fortye years said Absalom unto the king: I will go and perform my
vow at Hebron, which I made unto the LORD. For thy servant made a vow, (...)
when I dwelt at Gesur in Siria, and said: When ye LORD brings me again to
Jerusalem, I shall do a Gods service unto the LORD. The king said unto him:
Go thy way in peace. And he gat him up, and went unto Hebron.

But Absalom had sent out spies in all the trybes of Israel, saying: When ye
hear the noise of the trompe, say: Absalom is made king at Hebron. There
went with Absalom two hundredth men called from Jerusalem, but they went on
symply, and knew not of the matter. Absalom sent also for Achitophel (the
Gilonyte) David's counceler, out of his cite Gilo. Now when he did

Then came one which told David, and said, that the heart of every man in
Israel followed Absalom. David said unto all his servants that were with him
at Ierusasem: Up, let us fle, for here shall be no escapynge for us before
Absalom.

Make haist that we may be going, lest he overtake us and catch us, and drive
some mysfortune upon us, and smite the cite with the edge of the sword. Then
said the kings servants unto him: Look what my LORD ye king choseth,
behold, here are thy servants. And the king went forth on foot with all his
household. (...)
But ten concubynes left he to keep the house.



And the king said unto (...)
Ithai ye Gethite: Why go thou also with us? Turn back, and bide with the
king, for thou art a stranger: get the hence again unto thy place. Thou
came yesterdaye, and to day thou iuperdest to go with us: As for me, I will
go whither I can: turn thou back again, and mercy and faithfulness happen
unto thy brethren with the Ithai answered, and said: (...) 1. c
As truly as the LORD lives, and as truly as my lord the king lives, look
in what place my lord the king shall be, (whether it chance to life or death)
there shall thy servant be also.



And behold, Sadoc was there also, and all the Levites that were with them,
and they bare ye Arc of the couenu^at of God, and set it there. And Abiathar
went up, till all the people came out of the cite. But the king said unto
Sadoc: Bring the Ark of God in to the cite again. If I shall find grace
before the LORD, he shall fetch me again, and shall let me se it, and the
house of it. But if he say thus: I have no pleasure to ye, behold, here am I,
let him do with me as it pleases him.

(...)
Seer, turn again to ye cite with peace, and Ahimaas thy son with the and
Ionathas the son of Abiathar: behold, I will tarry in the plain of the
wyldernes, till the message come from you, and tell me. So Sadoc and Abiathar
brought the Ark of God again to Jerusalem, and remained there.

But David went up to mount Olyuete and wept, and his head was covered. And
all the people that was with him, had every man his head covered and went on
and wept. And when it was told David, that Achitophel was in the co^federacy
with Absalom, he said: LORD turn thou Achitophels council to foolishnes.

And when David came up to the top of the mount, where the use was to
worship God, Chusai the Arachite met him with his cote rent, and earth upon
his head. And David said unto him: If thou go with me, thou shall be
chargeable unto me: but if thou go again in to the cite, and say unto
Absalom: I am thy servant O king even as I was thy fathers servant, so will
I now be thy servant, 2. Re. 17. a and b. c
Then shall thou bring Achitophels council to naught. So is Sadoc and
Abiathar ye prestes with the, and all that thou hear out of the kings
house, tell it unto Sadoc and Abiathar the prestes. Behold, their two sons
are with the^: Ah^maas the son of Sadoc, and Ionathas the son of Abiathar,
by them may thou send me word what thou hear. So Chusai David's friend
came in to the cite. And Absalom came to Jerusalem.

The XVI. Chapter.
ANd when David was gone a little ^. Re. ^. b
all that Mephiboseth has, shall be thine. Siba said with reverence, Let me
find grace in thy sight my lord

But when king David came to Bahurim, behold, there went out a man of the
kynred of the house of Saul, (...)
whose name was Semei the son of Gera, which went forth and Exo. 22. d
cursed, and caststones at David, and at all king David's servants and all
the people and all the mighty men men were at his right hand and at his
left. Thus said Semei when he cursed: Get the forth, get the forth thou
bloody hounde, thou man of Belial. The LORD has rewarded the for all the
blood of the house of Saul, yt thou becamest king in his stead. Now has the
LORD given the kingdom in to ye hand of Absalom thy son, and behold, now
stickest thou in thine own myschefe, for thou art a bloody hounde.

But Abisai the son of Zeru Ia said unto the king: Shall this deed dog
curse my lord the king? I will go and take the head away from him. The king
said: Ye children of Zeru Ia, what have I to do with you? Let him curse on, for
the LORD has commanded him: Curse David. Who can say now: Why do thou so?

LORD has commanded him: 3. Re. 2. g
peradventure the LORD shall consydre my aduersyte, and recompense me good for
his cursynge this day. So David went on his way with his men. But Semei
went on by the mount beside him, and cursed, and caststones at him, and threw
clottes of earth.

And the king came in and all the people that was with him, weery, and
refreshed him self there. But Absalom and all the people of the men of Israel
came to Jerusalem and Achitophel with him. When Chusai the Arachite David's
friend came in to Absalom, he said unto Absalom: God save the king God save
the king.

LORD choseth, and this people, and all the men in Israel, his will I be, and
bide with him. Secondly, whom should I serve? Should I not do service before
his son? Like as I have served in the presence of thy father, so will I do
service before the also.

And Absalom said unto Achitophel: Give us your council what we shall do?
Achitophel said unto Absalom: 2. Re. 12. c and 15. c
Go lie with thy fathers concubynes, whom he has left to keep the house, so
shall all Israel hear that thou have made thy father to stynke, and the hand
of all them that are with ye, shall be the bolder. Then made they a tente unto
Absalom The houses
upon the house top. And Absalom lay with his fathers concub^^^ in the
sight of all Israel.

At that time when Achitophel (...) council, that was even as if a man (...)
council at God: So were all the councels of Achitophel both with David and
(...) Absalom.

The XVII. Chapter.
ANd Achitophel said unto Absalom I will chose out twolue thousand (...), and
will get me up, and pursue (...) by night, and fall upon him when he is feeble
and weery: When I vex him the^, so that all the people which is by him,
flies, I will (...) the king only, and bring all the people unto the again.
So when every man is brought unto the as thou desyrest, then shall all the
people be in peace. Absalom though^ that good, and so did all the Elders in
Is^rael. But Absalom said: I pray you call Chusai the Arachite also, and let
us hea^^ what he says thereto. And wha^ Chusai came in to Absalom, Absalom
said unto him: Thus has Achitophel spoken, Say thou now, shall we do it or
not?

Then said Chusai unto Absalom: It is no good council yt Achitophel has
given at this time. And Chusai said morouer: Thou know thy father well and
his men, that they are strong and of a wrothfull stomach, even (...)
as a Beer that is robbed of her young ones in the field, Thy father also is a
man of war, and will not be neclige^t with the people. Behold, he has now
peradventure hyd himself in some cave or in some place. If it came to pass
then that it chanced evil at the first, and there should come a rumor and
say: There is a slaughter done in the people that followed Absalo^: the^ should
every man be discoraged, which else is valeaunt, and has a heart like a lyo^:
for all Israel knows that thy father is strong, and that all they which be
with him, are mighty men.

But this is my counsel, that thou gather together all Israel from Dan unto
Berseba in nombre as the sonde of the Sea, and go thou thine own person among
them, then will we fall upon him in what place we find him, and will ouerwhelme
him even as the dew falls upon the earth, so that we shall not leave one of
him and of all his men. But if he resort in to a cite, then shall all Israel
cast roapes about the same cite, and draw it in to the river, so that there
shall not one stone of it be found

Then said Absalom and every man in Israel: The council of Chusai the
Arachite is better then Achitophels council.

(...)
But the LORD brought it so to pass, that ye good council of Achitophel was
hyndred, that the LORD might bring evil upon Absalom.

(...)
And Chusai said unto Sadoc and Abiathar the prestes: Thus and thus has
Achitophel counceled Absalom and the Elders in Israel: but so and so have I
counceled. Send now therefore in all the haist, and tell David, and say: Abide
not all night in the plain field of the wyldernes, but get the over, that the
king be not swalowed up, and all the people that is with him. As for Ionathas
and Ahimaaz, they stood by the well of Rogel, and a damsel went thither and
told them. They went on their way, and told king David, for they durst not
be seen to come in to the cite.

But a lad saw them, and told Absalom. Nevertheless they went on their way,
and came to a man's house at Bahurim, which had a well in his court, and they
went down in to it. And the woman took and spread a covering over the wells
mouth, and strowed firmentye corn thereon, that it was not perceived. Now when
Absaloms servants came to the woman in to the house, they said: where is
Ahimaaz and Ionathas? The woman said unto them: They are gone over the little
water.



Then David gat him up, and all the people that was with him, and passed over
Iordane till it was clear morning. And there was not one, but he went over
Iordane.

When Achitophel saw that his counsel went not forth, he sadled his ass,
gat him up, and went home in to his cite and put his house to point, and
hanged him self, and dyed, and was buried in his fathers grave.

And David came to Mahanaim, and Absalom went over Iordane, and all the men of
Israel with him. And Absalom had set Amasa

When David was come to Mahanaim, 1. Re. 11. a
Nahas of Rabbath of the children of Ammon, and 2. Reg. ^. a
Machir the son of Ammiel of Lodebar, and 2. Re. 19 f 3. Reg. 2. b
Barsillai a Gileadite of Roglim brought bedstuffe, tapestrie work, basens,
earthen vessel, where, barley, meel, parched corn, beenes, otemeell, rise,
honey, butter, sheep and fat oxen unto David, and to ye people that was with
him, for to eat: for they thought, The people shall be hongrie, weerye and
thirstye in the wyldernes.

The XVIII. Chapter.
ANd David mustred the people yt was ^ Re. 2. b
Ithai the Gethite. And the king said unto the people: I will go forth with
you also. Nevertheless the people said: Thou shall not go forth, for though we
fle, or die half of us they shall not regard us. For thou art as ten thousand
of us. Therefore is this better that thou may help us out of the cite. The
king said: Look what ye are content withal, that will I do. And the king
stood in the gate, and all the people went forth by hundreds and by
thousands. And ye king commanded Ioab and Abisai, and Ithai, and said:
Entreat me the young man Absalom gently. And all the people herd it, wha^ the
king commanded all the captains concerning Absalom. And when the people

And Absalom met David's servants, and rode upon a Mule. And when the Mule
came under a great thick Oak tree, his head took hold on the Oak, and so
hanged he between heaven and earth, but the Mule ran away from under him.
When a certain man saw that, he told Ioab, and said: Behold, I saw
Absalom hang upon an Oak tree. And Ioab said unto the man yt told it him:
Behold, saw thou that, why smotest thou him not there to the ground? so
would I have given the of mine own behalf ten syluerlynges and a gyrdell.



The man said unto Ioab: If thou had

Then took Ioab three spears in his hand, and thrust Absalom through ye heart,
while he was yet alive upon the Oak. And ten yo^ge men Ioabs weapenbearers,
came about him, and smote him to death. Then blewe Ioab the trompe, and
brought the people again, that they should follow no more upon Israel. For
Ioab would favor the people. And they took Absalom, and cast him in the wod
in to a great pytt, and laid a great heap of stones upon him. And all
Israel fled, every one unto his tente.



Ahimaas the son of Sadoc said: Let me run now, and bring the king
word, that the LORD has gotten him right from the hand of his enemies. But
Ioab said: Thou shall bring no good tidinges to day another day shall thou
bring him word, and not to day, for the kings son is deed But unto Chusi
said Ioab: Go thou thy way, and tell the king what thou have seen. And Chusi
did his obeysau^ce unto Ioab, and ran. Ahimaas the son of Sadoc said
again unto Ioab: What and I ran also? Ioab said: What will thou run my
son? Come hither, thou shall bring no good tydinges. (He answered:) What and
I ran yet. He said unto him: Run on ye way then. So Ahimaas ran the
straight way, and came before Chusi.

As for David, he sat between the two gates. LORD thy God, which has given
over ye men that lift up their hands against my LORD the king.

The king said: Goes it well with the LORD has executed right for the
this day, from the hand of all them that rose up against the. But the king
said unto Chusi: Goes it well with the young man Absalom? Chusi said: Even
so go it with all the enemies of my lord the king, and with all them that rise
up against the to do evil, as it goes with the young man. Then was the king
soroufull, and went up in to the perler upon the gate, and wept, and as he
went, he said thus: O my son Absalo^, my son, my son Absalom, would God
yt I should dye for the. O Absalom my son, my son.

The XIX. Chapter.
ANd it was told Ioab: behold, ye king away, when they are fled in a
battayll. As for the king, he had covered his face, and cried loud, and
said: Oh my son Absalom, Absalom my son, my son.

But Ioab came to the king in to the house, and said: This day have thou
shamed all thy servants (which have delivered thy soul this day, and the
souls of thy sons, of thy daughters, of thy wives, and of thy co^cubynes) in
that thou love them that hate the, and hate those that love ye. For to day
thou show thyselfe, that thou carest not for the captains and servants:
For I perceive this day, that if Absalom only were alive, and we all deed
this day, thou would think it were well.

LORD, if thou go not forth, there shall not be left the one man this night:
this shall be worse unto yt, then all the evil that happened the sense ye youth
up hither to. The^ the king gat him up, and sat in the gate. And it was said
unto the people: behold, the king sytteth in the gate. Then came all the
people before ye king. But Israel was fled every one unto his tent.

And all the people strove in all the trybes of Israel, and said: The king
ryd us from the hand of our enemies, and delivered us from the hand of the
Philistynes, and was feign to fle out of the lord for Absalom. So Absalom whom
we had anointed over us, is deed in the battayll. Why are ye so still now, that
ye fetch not the king again?



And he bowed the heart of all the men of Iud^ as of one man. And they sent unto
ye king: Come again, thou and all thy servants: So the king came again.
And when he came unto Iordane, ye men of Judah were come to Gilgal, for to go
down to mete the king, that they might bring ye king over Iordane. And
Semei the son of Gera the son of Iemini, which dwelt at Bahurim, made
haist, and went down with ye men of Judah to mete king David, and there were
with him a thousand me^ of Ben Iamin. 2. Re. 16. ^
Siba also the servant of the house of Saul with his fyftene sons and twenty
servants, and gat them through Iordane and passed over ye fery, that they
might bring over the kings household, and to do him pleasure.

But Semei the son of Gera fell down 2. Re. 16. ^
in the day when my lord the king went out of Jerusalem: and let not ye
king take it to heart, for thy servant knows that he has sinned. And
behold, this day am I come the first among all the house of Joseph, for to
go down to mete my lord the king.

Nevertheless Abisai the son of Zeru Ia answered and said: And should not
Semei dye therefore, seeing he has cursed ye anointed of ye LORD? But David
said: 2. Re. 16. b Mat. 16. c
What have I to do with you ye children of Zeru? Ia, that ye will become Satan
unto me this day? Should any man dye this day in Israel? Thynkest thou that I
know not, yt I am become king over Israel this day? And ye king said unto
Simei: Thou shall not dye? And the king swear unto him.

Mephiboseth the son of Saul came Genesis 33. b 2. Re. 14. a Hest. 15. b
But my lord ye king is an angel of God, and thou may do what pleases
the. For all my fathers house was nothing, but people of death before my lord
ye king. 2. Re. 9. b
And yet have thou set thy servant among them that eat at ye table. What
other righteousness have I, that I should cry any more unto the king? The
king said unto him: What speak thou yet more of thy matter: I have said:
Thou and Siba part the land between you. Mephiboseth said unto the king:
Let him take it all, in as much as my lord ye king is come home in peace.

^. Re. 17. c
the same had provided ye king of fode while he was at Mahanaim, for he was a
very noble man. And the king said unto Barsillai: Thou shall go over with me,
I will take care for the with mine own self at Jerusalem. But Barsillai said
unto the king: What have I yet to live, that I should go up to Jerusalem with
the king? This day am I four score year old. How should I know what is
good or evil, or taist what I eat or drink, or hear what the Musicians do
sing? Why should thy servant be chargeable first unto my lord the king? thy
servant shall go a little with the king over Iordane. Why will the king
recompense me after this manner? Let thy servant turn back again, that I
may dye in my cite beside my father and my mothers grave. Behold, there is
thy servant Chimeam, let him go over with my lord the king, and do unto him
what pleases the.



And behold, the^ came all the men of Israel unto the king, and said unto
him: Why have our hrethren the men of Judah stolen the away, and have
conveyed ye king and his household over Iordane, and all David's men with him?
Then answered they of Judah unto them of Israel: The king is of our nigh
kynred, why are ye angry therefore? Think ye that we have received any fode or
gifts of the king? Then answered they of Israel unto them of Judah, and said:
We have ten times more with the king and with David, the^ thou, why have thou
regarded me then so lightly, that ours were not the first to fetch our king
again? But they of Judah spoke harder then they of Israel.

The XX. Chapter.
THere was a famous man of Belial (...)
We have no portion in David, ner inheritance in ye son of Isai: let every
get him to his tent, O Israel. Then fell every man in Israel from David, and
followed Seba the son of Bichri. But the men of Judah cleued unto their king
from Iordane unto Jerusalem. When David came home to Jerusalem, he took the ten
concubynes ( (...)
wh^m he had left to kep^ the house) and put them in a hold to be kept, and
made prouysion for them: but he lay not with them, and so were they shut up
unto their death, and lived wedowes.

And ye king said unto Amasa: Call (...) all the men of Judah together against
the third day, and be thou here present also. And Amasa went to call Judah
together. And he was slack to come at ye time which he had appointed him. And
David said unto Abisai: Now shall Seba the son of Bichri do us more harm
then Absalom. Take thou ye

But when they were by the great stone at Gibeon, Amasa came before them. As
for Ioab, he was gyrded above his garment which he had on, and upon it he had a
sword gyrded, which hanged by his thye in the sheeth, and went easily out and
in, and fell from him. And Ioab said unto Amasa: Peace be with the my brother.
And Ioab took Amasa by the beerde with his right hand, to kiss him. And
Amasa took no head unto ye sword in Ioabs hand, and he thrust him therewith in
to the belly, yt his bowels ran out upon the earth, and he thrust at him no
more. And so he dyed.

Ioab and his brother Abisai followed upon Seba ye son of Bichri. And one of
Ioabs servants stood by him, and said: What is he this yt would be against
Ioab to please David, and to be with David in Ioabs stead? As for Amasa, he
lay rolled in the blood in ye mids of the street. But (...) one saw that
all the people stood there still, he removed Amasa from the street unto the
field, and cast a clothe upon him, for so much as he saw, that who so ever
came by him, stood still. Now when he was put out of the way, every man went
after Ioab, to follow upon Seba the son of Bichri.

And he went through all ye trybes of Israel unto Abel Beth Maacha, and all the
best chosen men gathered them selves together, and followed after him, and came
and beseged him at Abel Beth Maacha, and made a bank about to cite hard on
ye wall. And all the people that was with Ioab, laid to their ordinance, and
would have cast down the wall.

Then cried there a wise woman out of ye cite: Hear, hear, say unto Ioab
that he come hither, I will speak with him. And wha^ he came to her, the woman
said: Art thou Ioab? He said: Ye. She said unto him: Hear the words of
thy handmayden. He said: I hear. She said: The comonsayenge was sometime: Who
so will axe, let him axe at Abel, and so came it to a good end. LORD?

Ioab answered and said: That be far, that be far fro me, that I should
swalowe up and destroy. The matter is not so, but a certain man of mount
Ephraim named Seba the son of Bichri, has lift up him self against king
David, deliver him only, and I will depart from the cite. The woman said unto
Ioab: Behold, his head shall be cast unto the over the wall. And the woman
came in to all the people with her wyszdome. And they smote of the head of
Seba the son of Bichri, and cast it unto Ioab. Then blewe he the trompe, and
they departed from the cite, every one unto his tent. But Ioab came again to
Jerusalem unto the king.

(...)
Ioab was captain over all the host of Israel: Benaia ye son of Ioiada was
over the Chrethians and Plethians: Adoram was rent gatherer: Iosaphat the son
of Ahilud was Chaunceler: Seia was the scrybe: Sadoc and Abiathar were the
prestes: Ira also ye Iairite was David's pressed.

The XXI. Chapter.
LORD. And the LORD said: Because of Saul and be cause of that bloody
household (...). 22. d
yt he slew the Gibeonites. Then the king caused for to call the Gibeonites,
and spoke unto them. (As for the Gibeonites, they were not of ye children of
Israel, but a remnaunt of the Amorites: howbeit ^osu. 9. c
the children of Israel had sworn unto the^, and Saul sought for to smite
them in his gelousy, for the children of Israel and Judah.) Then said David to
the Gibeonites: What shall I do unto you? And where withal shall I make the
atonement, that ye may bless ye enheritaunce of ye LORD? The Gibeonites
said unto him: It is not for gold and silver that we have to do with Saul and
his house, nether have we ought to do for to slaye any man in Israel.

He said: What say ye then, that I shall LORD at Gibea of Saul the chosen of
the LORD. The king said: I will give them. Howbeit the king spared
Mephiboseth ye son of Ionathas ye son of Saul, because of the ooth of the
LORD yt was between them: 1. Re. 18. a 20. b. 23. c
namely, between David and Ionathas the son of Saul. But the two sons of
Rispa ye daughter of Aia, whom she had borne unto Saul, Armoni and Mephiboseth,
And the five sons of Michol the daughter of Saul, whom she bare unto Adriel
the son of Barsillai the Mahalothite, did the king take, and gave them in to
the hands of ye Gibeonites, which hanged the^ up upon the mount before the
LORD.

So these seven fell at one time, and dyed

And David went and took the bones of Saul and the bones of Ionathas his son
from ye citesens at Iabes in Gilead (which they 1. Re. ^1. c
had stolen from ye street at Bethsan, where ye Philistynes had hanged the^,
what time as the Philistynes had smytten Saul upon mount Gilboa) and brought
them up from thence, and gathered them together with the bones of them that were
hanged. And the bones of Saul and of his son Ionathas buried they in ye land
of Ben Iamin, beside ye grave of his father Cis. So after this was God at one
with the land.

But there arose war again of ye Philistynes against Israel. And David went
down and his servants with him, and fought against the Philistynes. And
David was weery, and Ieszbi of Nob (which was one of the children of Rapha, and
the weight of his spear was three C. weight of brass, and had a new harness
upon him) thought to smite David. Nevertheless Abisai the son of Zeru Ia
helped him, and smote the Philistyne to death. Then swear David's men unto him,
and said: ^. Re. 18. a
Thou shall no more go forth with us unto the war, that the lantern in Israel
be not put out.

Par. ^1. a
Afterward there arose yet war at Nob with the Philistynes. Then Sibechai
the Husathite smote Saph, which also was one of the children of Rapha.

And there arose yet war at Gob with the Philistynes. Then Elhanan the son
of Iaere Orgim a Bethleemite smote Goliath the Gethite, which had a spear,
whose shaft was like a weeuers lome.

And there arose yet war at Gath, where there was a co^tencious man, which
had six fyngers on his hands, and six toes on his fete, that is four and
twenty in the nombre, and he was borne also of Rapha. And when he spoke
despitefully unto Israel, Ionathas ye son of Simea David's brother smote him.
These four were borne unto Rapha at Gath, and fell through the hand of David
and of his servants.

The XXII. Chapter.
LORD, what time as the LORD had delivered him from the hand of all his
enemies, and from the hand of Saul, and he said.

The LORD is my stony rock, and my castle, and my delyuerer.

God is my strength, in him will I put my trust: my shylde and the horn of my
salvation, my defense and my refuge, my Savior, thou shall help me from
violent wrong.

Psalm. 17. a
I will call upon the LORD with praise, so shall* I be delivered fro mine enemies.

For the sorrows of death co^pased me, and the brokes of Belial made me afraid.

The pains of hell came about me, and the snares of death had overtaken me.

LORD, ye even my God called I upon, and so he herd my voice from his holy
temple, and my co^playnte (came) in to his ears.

The earth trembled and quaked, the foundacions of the heaven shoke and moved,
be cause he was wroth.

Smoke went up from his nose, and consumynge fire out of his mouth, coals were
kyndled thereof.

He bowed the heavens and came down, and it was dark under his fete.

He sat upon Cherub and did fly, and appeared upon the feathers of the wind.

He made darkness his pauylion round about him, thick water in the clouds of
ye air.

At the brightness of him were the fire coals kyndled.

The LORD thondered from heaven, and the Highest put forth his voice.

He shot his arowes, and scatered them: he lightened, and discomfited them.

The pourynges out of the Sea were seen, LORD, and at the breath of the sprete
of his wrath.

He sent down from above, and received me, and drue me out of many waters.

He delivered me fro my strong enemy, from them that hated me, for they were
to mighty for me.

They ouertoke me in the time of my trouble, but the LORD was my succoure.

He brought me forth in to liberty: he delivered me, because he had a favor
unto me.

The LORD shall reward me after my righteousness, and acordinge to the clennes
of my hands shall he recompense me.

For I have kept ye way of the LORD, and have not been ungodly against my
God.

For I have an eye unto all his laws, and have not put his ordinances fro me.

Therefore will I be perfect unto him, and will eshue mine own wickedness.

So shall ye LORD reward me after my righteousness, acordinge to the cle^nes of
my hands in his eye sight.

With the holy shall thou be holy, and with the perfect thou shall be perfect.

With the clean thou shall be clean, and with the froward thou shall be
froward.

For thou shall save the poor oppressed people, and shall set thine eyes
against the proud to bring them down.

For thou O LORD art my lantern. The LORD shall light my darkness.

For in ye I shall disco^fite an host of men, and in my God I shall leap over
the wall.

LORD are tried in the fire: he is a shylde for all the^ that put their trust
in him.

For where is there a God, except ye LORD? Or who has any strength without
our God?

God has stre^gthed me with power, and made plain a perfect way for me.

He has made my fete like hearts fete, and has set me up an hye.

He teaches my hands to fight, and bends the stele bow with mine arms.

And thou have given me the shylde of ye health, and with ye loving correccion
shall thou multiplye me.

Thou have enlarged my goinge under me, and mine ankles have not slyded.

I will follow upon mine enemies, and destroy the^: and will not turn back
again, till I have brought them to naught.



Thou have girded me with strength to ye battayll, and have subdued them under
me yt rose up against me.

Thou have made mine enemies to turn their backs upon me, that I might
destroy them that hate me.

They shall cry, but there shall be no Savior: ye even unto the LORD, but he
answers them not.

I will beat them as small as the dust of the earth: even as ye claye of the
streets will I make them thynne, and sprede them out abroad.

But me shall thou deliver from the stryuynges of the people, and shall keep me
to be ye head of the Heythen: A people whom I have not known* shall serve me.



The strange children are waxen old, and are shut up in their presons.

The LORD lives, and blessed be my God, and magnified be the strength of my
health.

God seyth that I be avenged, and subdueth the people unto me.

He brings me out fro mine enemies: and from them yt rise up against me,
shall thou exalte me, and from ye cruel man shall thou deliver me.

(...). 15. a
For this cause will I give thanks unto the among the Heythen, and sing
praises unto thy name.

Which does great health for his king, and shows mercy unto David his
anointed, and to his sede for evermore.

The XXIII. Chapter.
THese are the last words of David: LORD has spoken by me, and the
vtteraunce thereof is done through my tunge. He said: The God of Israel has
spoken unto me, the strength of Israel, the gouernoure among men, the
righteous gouernoure in the fear of God. As the light is in ye morning when
the Son aryseth, so that for the brightness thereof no cloud remains: and
as the grass looks upon the earth through the rain, even so shall my house be
with God. 2. Re. 7. c
For he has made an everlasting covenant with me, well appointed on every
side and sure. For this is all my health and pleasure, that it shall grow. But
the Belial shall be utterly and clean roted out as the thorns, which me^ take
not in their hands. And they yt touch them, shall destroy them with yrons and
spears: and in the fire shall they be brent, that they may be brought to
naught.

These are the names of David's Worthies: 1. Par. 12. ^
the chefest among three, which lift up his spear, and slew eight hundredth
at one time.

After him was Eleasar the son of Dodi the son of Ahohi among the three
Worthies with David, when they spoke despytefully to the Philistynes, and were
gathered together to the battayll, and the men of Israel went up. Then stood
he up and smote the Philistynes, till his hand was so weery that it cromp^ed
with the sword. And the LORD gave a great victory at the same time, so that
the people turned after him to spoil. After him was Samma the son of Age ye
Hararite. Wha^ the Philistynes had gathered themselves in a company, and in the
same place there was a piece of lord full of small corn, and the people fled
before the Philistynes, the^ stood he in the mids of ye piece of land* and
delivered it, and smote ye Philistynes. And God gave a great victory.

And these three pryncipall among thirty, 1. Par. 12. c
in to the cave of Adullam, and the host of ye Philistynes lay in ye valley
of Rephaim. But David was at the same time in the castle, and ye Philistynes
people lay at Bethleem. And David was desirous, and said: Would God yt some
man would fetch me a drink of water out of the well at Bethleem under the
gate. The^ brake the three Worthies in to the host of the Philistynes, and drue
of the water out of the well at Bethleem under ye gate, and carried it and
brought it unto David: nevertheless he would not drink it, but offered it unto
the LORD, and said: The LORD let this be far fro me, that I should do it.
Is it not the blood of the men that ioperded their lives, and went thither?
And he would not drink it. This did the three Worthies.

^. Par. 12. c ^. Re. 21. d
Abisai ye brother of Ioab the son of Zeru Ia was one also chief among three.
He lift up his spear and smote three hundredth, and was an awncient man among
three, and the noblest among three, and was their ruler. But he came not unto
the three. ^. Par. 12. ^
And Benaia the son of Ioiada, the son of Ishail (a man of great acts of
Cabzeell) smote two mighty giau^tes of ye Moabites, and went down, and slew
a lion at a well in the snow time. He smote also a fair goodly man of Egipte,
which had a spear in his hand. But he went down to him with a staff, and
took the spear out of the Egipcians hand by violence, and slew him with his
own spear. This did Benaia the son of Ioiada, and was a famous man among
three Worthies, and more honorable then the thirty, but he came not unto the
three. And David made him of his secret counsel.

Asahel the brother of Ioab is among ye thirty: Elham his uncles son at
Bethleem. Samma the Haradite, Elika the Haradite, Helez the Paltite, Ira the
son of Tekoite, Abiser the Anthothite, Mebunai the Husathite, Zalmon the
Ahohite, Maherai the Netophatite, Ithai the son of Ribai of Gibea of the
children of Ben Iamin, Benaia the Pirgathonite, Hidai of the broke of Gaas,
Abialbon the Arbathite, Asmaueth the Bahumite, Eliaheba the Baalbonite. The
children of Iasen and Ionathas: Samma the Hararite, Eliphelet the son of
Ahaszbai ye son of Maechathi, Eliam the son of Achitophel ye Gilonite,
Hesrai of Carmel, Paerai the Arbite, Iegael the son of Nathan of Soba* Bani
the Gadite, Zeleg the Ammonite, Naharai the Beerothite, the weapen bearer of
Ioab the son of Zeru Ia, Ira the Iethrite, Gareb the Iethrite, Vri^s the
Hethite. These are altogether seven and thirty.

The XXIIII. Chapter.
ANd the LORD was wrothfully displeased (...)
and moved David among them, because he said: Go, nombre Israel and Judah. And
the king said unto Ioab ye chief captain of his host: Go about in all the
trybes of Israel, from Dan unto Berseba, and nombre the people, that I may
know how many they be. Ioab said unto the king: The LORD thy God add unto
this people an hundredth times as much as it is now, that my lord the king
may se his eyes lust thereon. But why has my lord the king a desire to this
thing? Nevertheless the kings word prevailed against Ioab and the captains
of the host.

So Ioab and ye captains of the host went forth from the king, to nombre
the people of Israel, and passed over Iordane, and pitched at Aroer, at the
right hand of the cite which lies in ye river of Gad, and C. thousand
strong men, that drue out the sword: and in Judah five hundredth thousand men.
And after that the people was nombred, David's heart smote him self. And David
said unto ye LORD: I have sinned sore, that I have done this. And now LORD
take away the trespace of thy servant. For I have done very unwisely.

And when David rose up in the morning, LORD came unto the prophet Gad,
David's Seer, and said: Go and speak unto David. Thus says the LORD* I
bring the three things, chose the one of them, that I may do it unto the. Gad
came unto David, and told him, and said unto him: Will thou that seven year
derth shall come in to thy land? Or that thou be feign to fly before thine
adversaries three months, and they to persecute the? Or that there be
pestilence three days in the land? Take aduysement therefore and se, what
answer I shall bring again unto him yt sent me.

David said unto Gad: I am in extreme trouble. (...)
Nevertheless (if it may be) let me rather fall in to ye hands of the LORD
(for his mercy is great) I will not fall in to the hands of men.

LORD sent pestilence in to Israel from the morrow unto the time appointed, so
that there dyed of the people from Dan unto Berseba, three score and ten
thousand men. And when the angel stretched his hand over Jerusalem to
destroy it, the LORD repented over the evil, and said unto the angel: It
is enough, hold now thy hand. The angel of the LORD was beside the barn of
Arafna the Iebusite. But when David saw the angel that smote the people, he
said unto the LORD: behold, It is I that have sinned, I have done the
trespace: As for these sheep, what have they done? Oh let thy hand be against
me and against my fathers house.

And Gad came to David at the same time, and said unto him: Go up, and set up
an altar unto the LORD in ye barn of Arafna the Iebusite. So David went up
as Gad said, and as the LORD had commanded. LORD, that the plage may
cease from the people.

But Arafna said unto David: Let my lord the king take it, and offer what
pleases him. Behold, there is an ox for a burnt offering, and sleddes, and
vessels of oxen to the wodd. All this gave Arafna unto the king. And Arafna
said unto ye king: The LORD thy God make the accepted unto him. Nevertheless
ye king said unto Arafna: Not so, but I will bye it of the for as much as it
is worth. For I will not offer burnt offerynges unto ye LORD, of yt which I
have for naught. So David boughte the barn and the ox for fiftye Sicles of
silver, and builded an altar there unto the LORD, and offered burnt offerynges
and deed offerynges. And the LORD was merciful unto ye land, and ye plage
ceased from the people of Israel.

The end of the second book of the kings, otherwise called the second book
of Samuel.
The third book of the kings.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I* Adonias seeks his fathers kingdom, Solomon is ordained king. Chap.
II. David before his death exhorts Salomo^ to godlynes. Adonias, Ioab and
Semei are put to death. Abiathar is deposed from the presthode. Chap. III.
Salomo^ optayneth wyszdome of God. The wise sentence of Solomon between the two
women that strove for the child. Chap. IIII. The descripcion of Salomons
kingdom, and of his wyszdome. Chap. V. Hiram the king of Tire sends Solomon
conning craftesmen to build the Temple. Chap. VI. The descripcion of the time
wha^ Solomon began to build the Temple, and how it was builded. Chap. VII.
Solomon buyldeth himself an house of the timber of mount Libanus. Chap. VIII.
The Ark of the LORD is brought in to Salomons temple. The thankesgeuynge and
prayer of Solomon. Chap. IX. The LORD appears unto Solomon, which gives
Hiram twenty cities andc. Chap. X. Queen Saba hearing of Salomons wyszdome,
comes to Jerusalem. Chap. XI. Solomon displeases God with the love of
Heythenysh women. God deuydeth his kingdom, he dies. Chap. XII. Roboam
follows young council, and makes the people to cleue to Jeroboam, which
sets up Idolatry with the two golden calves. Chap. XIII. Jeroboam despises
the prophet of the LORD, is punyshed, and received to grace again. A Lion
slays the dishobedient prophet. Chap. XIIII. Jeroboam dies, his son Nadab
is king. Of Roboams dominion. Chap. XV. Abia reigns in Judah, after hi^
reigns Asa, which has war with Baasa the king of Israel, After him
reigns Iosaphath: and Baesa dies. Chap. XVI. Ella reigns in stead of his
father Baesa. Simri slays him, and takes the kingdom. The people are
divided. Achab is king. Chap. XVII. A great drouth and derth in Elias time.
The LORD fedeth him through the Ravens, and by the wedowe at Sarepta. Chap.
XVIII. Elias comes again unto Achab. All Baals prestes are slain. Chap.
XIX. Iesebel threateneth Elias, he flies, and is fed and strengthed by the
angel. The LORD talks with him upon mount Horeb* Eliseus is called. Chap.
XX. Benadab the king of Siria fights against Samaria and Israel, is overcome
and discomfited. Chap. XXI. Achab oppresses Naboth for his vynyarde. Elias
rebukes him. Chap. XXII. Iosaphat ande Achab help one another to fight. The
prophet Micheas warueth them.
The first Chapter.


Adonias ye son of Hagith lift up him self, and said: I will be king. And
he prepared him charettes and horsemen, and fyftie men to be renners on foot
before him. And his father reproved hi^ not therefore, so much as to say:
Wherefore do thou so? And he was a man of a very fair bewtye Reg. 3. a
and he had begotten him next after Absalo^. And his matter stood by Ioab ye
son of Zeru Ia and by Abiathar the pressed, which helped Adonias. But Sadoc the
pressed, and Benaia the son of Ioiada, and Nathan the pressed and Semei and Rei,
and David's Worthies were not with Adonias.

^su. 15. b (...)* 1^. c
well of Rogel, he called all his brethren the kings sons, and all the men
of Judah the kings servants. But the prophet Nathan and Benaia, and the
Worthies, and his brother Solomon called he not. Then said Nathan unto
Bethseba Salomons mother: Have thou not herd yt Adonias is king, and our
lord David knows not thereof? Come now therefore, I will give the council,
that thou may deliver thy soul and the soul of thy son Solomon. Come now
and go in to king David and say unto him: Have not thou my lord the king
sworn and said unto thy handmayden: Solomon thy son shall be king after
me, and he shall sytt upon my seat? Why is then Adonias made king? Behold,
while thou art yet there, and talkest with the king, I will come in after the,
and tell forth thy tail. And Bethseba went in to the king to ye chamber. And
the king was very old. And Abisag of Sunem served the king. And Bethseba
bowed hirselfe, and worshipped the king.

The king said: What will thou? She LORD thy God: Thy son Solomon shall be
king after me and sit upon my seat. But now lo, Adonias is king, and my
lord the king knows it not. He has offered oxen and fat catell, and many
sheep, and has called all the kings sons, and Abiathar the pressed, and Ioab
the chief captain. But thy servant Solomon has he not bydden. Nevertheless
thou my lord art king, the eyes of all Israel look unto the., that thou
should show them who shall sit upon the seat of my lord the king after
the. And wha^ my lord the king slepeth with his fathers then shall I and my
son Solomon be feign to be sinners.

But while she yet spoke to the king, the prophet Nathan came, and she told
ye king: behold, there is the prophet Nathan. And when he came in before the
king, he worshipped the king upon his face to the ground, and said My lord
O king, have thou said: Adonias shall be king after me, and sit upon my
seat? For he is gone down this day, and has offered oxen, and fat catell,
and has called all the kings sons, and the captains, and the pressed
Abiathar. And behold, they eat and drink before him, and say: God save the
king Adonias. But me

The king answered and said: Call Bethseba unto me. And she came in before
the king. And when she stood before the king, the king swear and said: As
truly as the LORD lives (which has delivered my soul out of trouble,) I will
do unto the this day, even as I swear unto the by the LORD the God of Israel,
so that Solomon thy son shall be king after me, and he shall sit pon my seat
in my stead-

Then Bethseba bowed her self with her face to the ground, and thanked the
king and said: God save my lord king David for evermore. And the king
said: Call me the pressed Sadoc and the prophet Nathan, and Benaia the son of
Ioiada.

And when they came in before the king, the king said unto them: Take your
lords servants with you, and set my son Solomon upon my Mule, and carry him
down to Gihon: and let Sadoc ye pressed and the prophet Nathan, anoynte him
there to be king over Israel, and blow the trompe, and say: God save king
Solomon, and go ye up after him: and when he comes, he shall sit upon my
seat, and be king in my stead: for I have ordained him to be prince over
Israel and Judah. Then answered Benaia the son of Ioiada unto the king, and
said: Amen. The LORD God of my lord the king say thus also. As the LORD
has been with my lord the king, so be he with Solomon also, that his seat
may be greater then the seat of my lord king David.

Then went they down, the pressed Sadoc and the prophet Nathan, and Benaia the
son of Ioiada, and the Chrethians, and Plethians, and set Solomon upon king
David's Mule, and brought him to Gihon. And Sadoc the pressed took the oil horn
out of the Tabernacle, and anointed Solomon. And they blewe the trompe: And all
ye people said: God save king Solomon.



And Adonias said: Come in, for thou art a valeaunt man, and bryngest good
tydinges. Ionathas answered and said unto Adonias: Alas, or lord king David
has made Solomon king, and has sent with him Sadoc the pressed, and the
propheth Nathan, and Benaia the son of Ioiada, and the Chrethians and
Plethians, and they have set him upon the kings Mule: and Sadoc ye pressed with
the prophet Nathan has anointed him king at Gihon, and from thence are they
gone up with joy, that the cite range with all: that is the noise that ye have
herd.

LORD God of Israel, which this day has made one to sit upon my seat, that
mine eyes have seen it.

Then were they afraid, and gatt them up all that were called by Adonias, and
so they departed every man his way. But Adonias was afraid of Solomon, and
gat him up, and went his way, and took hold of ye horns of ye altar. And
it was told Solomon: behold, Adonias fears king Salomo^, and behold, he
takes hold of the horns of ye altar, and says: Let ki^ge Salomo^ swear
unto me this day, that he shall not slaye his servant with the sword.
Solomon said: If he will be an honest man, there shall not one here fall from
him upon the earth: but if there be evil found in him, he shall dye. And
king Salomo^ sent, and caused him to be fetched Exo. 21. b
from the altar. And when he came, he fell down before king Solomon. But
Solomon said unto him: Go ye way in to thy house.

The II. Chapter.
NOw when the time came that David Iosu. 2^. d
I go the way of all the world, Be thou strong therefore, and show thyselfe
a man, and keep the watch of the LORD thy God, that thou walk in his ways,
and hold his ordinances, his commandments, his laws, and his testimonies,
Deuteronomy. ^7. d
as it is written in the law of Moses, that thou may be wise in all that
thou do, and whither so ever thou turnest the: that the LORD may raise up
his word, which he has spoken over me, and said: If thy children keep their
way and walk before me faithfully and truly and with all their heart and
withal their soul, the^ shall there never fail the a man upon the seat of
Israel.

Thou know well also what Ioab the son of Zeru Ia has done unto me, what
he did unto the two chief captains of Israel, 2. Re. 3. e
Abner the son of Ner, and 2. Re. 20. ^
Amasa the son of Iether, whom he slew and shed the blood of war wha^ it
was peace, and put the blood of war upon his girdel yt was about his
loins, and in his shues that were upon his fete: Do thou acordynge to thy
wyszdome, that thou bring not his graye here down to the grave in peace.

And to the children of Barsyllai the Gileadite, thou shall show mercy, that
they may eat at thy table. For so joined they the^ selves unto me, when I
fled before thy brother Absalom. And behold, thou have with the 2. Re. 16. b
Semei the son of Gera the son of Iemini of Bahurim, which cursed me with
very bitter and shameful cursings, what time as I went to Mahanaim. Yet 2 Re
19. d
came he down to mete me at Jordan, where I swear unto him by the LORD, and
said: I will not slaye the with the sword. But suffer not thou him to be
vngiltye, for thou art a wise man, and shall well know what thou ought to do
unto him, that thou may bring his graye here down to the grave with blood.

Act. 2. c and 13. d
So David slepte with his fathers, and was buried in the cite of David. The
time that David was king over Israel, is forty year. 2. Reg. 5. a
Seven years was he king at Hebro^ and three and thirty year at Jerusalem.
And Solomon sat upon the seat of David his father, 1. Pa. 30. e
and his kingdom was made very sure.

But Adonias the son of Hagith came in to Bethseba Salomons mother. And she
said: Is thy coming peaceable? He spoke: Ye, and said: I have somewhat to
^aye to the. She said: Say on. He said: LORD.

Now desire I one peticion of the, Make not my face ashamed. She said unto
him: Say on. He said: Speak unto king Solomon (for that is: He shall not
deny the thy pe^icion.
he shall not shame thy face) that he may give me Abisag to wife. Bethseba
said: Well, I will speak to the king for the.

And Bethseba came in to king Solomon to speak with him. And the king stood
up, and went to mete her, and worshipped her, and sat him down upon his
seat. And there was a chair set for the kings mother, so that she sat at his
right hand. And she said: One peticion desire I of the make not my face
ashamed. The king saydt: Axe O my mother, I will not shame thy face. She said:
Let Abisag of Sunem be given thy brother Adonias to wife.

(...)
and has Abiathar the pressed, and Ioab the son of Zeru Ia. And the king
swear by the LORD, and said: God do this and that unto me, Adonias shall have
spoken this against his life. And now as truly as the LORD lives which has
ordained me, and made me to sit upon the seat of my father David, and has
made me a house ( (...)
acordynge as he said) this day shall Adonias dye.

And king Solomon sent thither by Benaia the son of Ioiada, which smote him
that he dyed. And to the pressed Abiathar said ye king: Go thy way unto
Anathoe to thy land, for thou art a man of deeth. Nevertheless I will not
slaye the this day for thou have borne the Ark of the LORD God before my
father David, and have suffered also where my father suffered.

Thus Salomo^ put forth Abiathar, that he must no more be the pressed of the
LORD, that the word of the LORD might be fulfilled, (...)
which he spoke over the house of Eli at Silo.

And this rumoure came before Ioab: for Ioab cleued unto Adonias, and not unto
Solomon. Then fled Ioab in to the Tabernacle of the LORD, and took hold of
the horns of the altar. And it was told king Solomon, that Ioab was fled in
to the Tabernacle of the LORD, and behold, he stondeth at the altar.

Then sent Solomon Benaia the son of Ioiada, and said: Go slaye him. And
when Benaia came to the Tabernacle of the LORD, he said unto him: Thus says
the king: Come forth. He said: No, I will dye here. And Benaia told this unto
the king again. and said: Thus has Ioab spoken, and thus has he answered
me.

The king said unto him: Do as he has spoken, and slaye him, and bury him,
that thou may put fro me and my fathers house the blood which Ioab has
shed with out a cause, and that the LORD may recompense him his blood upon
his head, because he smote two men, which were more righteous and better then
he, and slew them with ye sword that my father David knew not of: namely,
(...)
Abner ye son of Ner the chief captain over Israel, and Amasa the son of
Iether ye chief captain over Judah yt their blood may be recompensed upon ye
head of Ioab and of his sede for ever: (...)
but David and his sede, his house and his seat have peace for evermore of the
LORD.

(...)
Sadoc ye pressed did the king set in the stead of Abiathar.

And the king sent, and caused for to call Semei, and said unto him: Build
the an house at Jerusalem, and dwell there, and depart not from thence, nether
hither ner thither. In what day so ever thou departest forth, and go over
ye broke Cedron, be thou sure, that thou shall dye the deeth: thy blood be
upon thy head. Semei said unto the king: This is a good meaning, as my
lord the king has said, so shall thy servant do. So Semei dwelt at
Jerusalem a long season. But after three year it fortuned that two servants
ran away from Semei unto Achis the son of Maecha king of Gath.

And it was told Semei: behold, thy servants are at Gath. Then Semei gat
him up, and sadled his ass, and went unto Gath to Achis, for to seek his
servants. And wha^ he came thither, he brought his servants from Gath.

LORD, and assured the, and said: Look what day so ever thou departest out
and go hither or thither, be sure that thou shall dye the death? And thou
saydest unto me: I have herd a good meaning. Why have thou not kept the then
acordinge to the ooth of the LORD, and commandment that I commanded the?

And the king said unto Semei: Thou remembrest all ye wickedness, which thy
heart knows (...)
that thou dyddest unto my father David. The LORD has recompensed ye thy
wickedness upon thy head. And king Solomon is blessed, and the seat of David
shall be stablished before ye LORD for ever. And the king commanded Benaia ye
son of Ioiada, which went forth, and smote him that he dyed. And the
kingdom was stablished by Salomons hand.

The III. Chapter.
LORDS house, and the walls round about Jerusalem. But the people offered
yet upon the hye places: for as yet there was no house builded unto the name of
the LORD unto that time. But Solomon loved the LORD, and walked after the
ordinances of David his father: except only that he offered and brent incense
upon the hye places.

2. Par. 1. a
And the king went unto Gibeon, to do sacrifice there: for that was a goodly
hye place. And Solomon offered a thousand burnt offerynges upon the same
altar. 3. Reg. 9. a
And the LORD appeared unto Solomon at Gibeon in a dream of the night, and
God said: Axe what I shall give ye. Salomo^ said: Thou have done great mercy
unto my father David thy servant. Like as he walked before the in faithfulness
and righteousness, and in a true heart with the, and this great mercy have thou
laid up for him, and given him a son to sit upon his seat, as it is now
come to pass.

Sap. 9. a
Now LORD my God, thou have made

This pleased the LORD well, that Solomon axed soch a peticion. And God said
unto him: For so much as thou axest this, and desyrest not long life, nether
riches, nether ye souls of thine enemies, but vndersto^dinge to hear
judgment, behold, therefore have I done acordynge to thy words. Eccle. 1. c
Behold, I have given the an heart of wyszdome and understanding, so that soch
one as thou has not been before the, nether shall rise up after the.

Ye and that thou have not prayed for, have I given the also, namely, riches,
and honor, so that among the kings in ye time there is not soch one as
thou. And if thou will walk in my ways, so that thou keep mine ordinances
and laws, ^. Re. 15. a
as David thy father has walked, then will I give the a long life.

And when Solomon awaked, behold, 2. Par. 1. b
and he came to Jerusalem, and stood before the Ark of the LORD'S covenant,
and offered burnt offerynges, and health offeringes, and made a great feast
unto his servants.

At the same time came there two harlottes unto ye king, and stood before him.
And the one woman said: Oh my lord, I and this woman dwelt in one house, and
I was delivered of a child in the house with her: and on the third day after
that I was delivered, she was delivered of a child also. And we were together,
so yt there was no stranger in ye house, but we two: and this woman's son
died in the night (for she smoored him in the sleep) and she rose up in the
night, and took my son fro my side (where thy handmayde slepte,) and laid
it in her arm, and her deed son laid she in mine arm. And when I rose up
in the morning to give my son suck, behold, he was deed. But in the
morning I looked well, and behold, it was not my son, whom I had borne.



Then said the woman whose son lived, unto ye king: (for her motherly heart
was kyndled with pite over her son) Oh my lord, give her the child alive,
and kill it not. But the other said: Let it nether be mine ner thine, but let
it be parted. Then answered the king, and said: Give this woman the living
child, and slaye it not, for she is his mother. And all Israel herd of this
judgment that the king had given: and they feared the king, for they saw
that ye wisdom of God was in him to keep judgment.

The IIII. Chapter.


And Solomon had twolue officers over all Israel, which made prouysion of fode
for the king and his house: One had a month long in ye year to make
prouysion: The son of Hur upon mount Ephraim. The son of Deber at Macaz and
at Saalbaim, and at Bethsames, and at Elon, and Beth Hana^. The son of Hased
at Aruboth, and had thereto Socho and all the land of Hepher. The son of
Abinadab all ye lordshippe at Dor: and had Taphat Salomo^s daughter to wife.
Baena ye son of Ahilud at Thaenach and at Magiddo, and over all Beth Sean,
which lies beside Zarthana under Iesrael from Beth Sean unto the plain of
Mehelo, till the other side of Iakmeam. The son of Geber at Ramoth in Gilead:
he had the towns of Iair the son of Manasse in Gilead, and had ye coasts of
Argob which lies in Basan, even three score great walled cities, and with
brazen bars. Ahinadab ye son of Iddo at Mahanaim. Ahimaas in Nephtali: and
he also took Basmath Salomons daughter to wife. Baena the son of Husai in
Asser and at Aloth. Iosaphat the son of Paruha in Isachar. Semei the son of
Ela in Ben Iamin. Geber the son of Vri in the land of Gilead, in the land
of Sihon king of the Amorites, and of Og the king in Basan. One officer was
in the same land. As for Judah and Israel, they were in nombre as the sonde of
the sea, and ate and drunk, and were merry. (...)
Thus was Salomo^ lord over all the kingdoms (from the water of the land of
the Philistynes, unto the border of Egipte) which brought him gifts, and
served him as long as he lived.

And Solomon had daily to his vytayles thirtye quarters of fine meel, three
score quarters of other meel, ten fat oxen, and twenty small catell, and an
hundredth sheep, beside hearts and Roes, and wild goats, and fat capons, and
fowls. For he had the lordshippe of all the land on this side the water, from
Tiphsa unto Gasa, and over all ye kings on this side ye water: and had peace
of all his subjects round about, so that Judah and Israel dwelt safe, every
one under his vine, and under his fig tree, from Dan unto Berseba, as long as
Solomon lived.

And Salomo^ had fortye thousand cart his month, and myssed not: Barlye also
and straw for the horses and coursers, and brought them unto the place where
ye king was, every one after his charge.

(...). 1. c
And God gave Solomon marvelous great wyszdome and understanding, and a large
heart, as the sonde that lies upon ye See shore: so that the wyszdome of
Solomon was greater then the wyszdome of all the children toward the south and
of all ye Egipcians. And he was wyser then all men, ye wyser then Ethan the
Esrahite, Heman, Chalcal, and Darda, the sons of Mahol: and had a great name
among all the Heythe^ on every side. And he spoke three thousand (...)
proverbs, and his (...)
songs were a thousand and five. And he spoke of trees, from ye Ceder of
Libanus unto the Isope yt grows out of ye wall: he talked also of catell, of
fowls, of worms, of fiszshes. And there came of all nations to hear ye
wyszdome of Solomon, and there came of all the kings of ye earth, which had
herd of his wyszdome.

The V. Chapter.
(...). 3. c (...). 2. a (...) 23. b (...)
loved David as long as he lived. (...). 3. c (...). 2. a (...) 23. b (...)
And Solomon sent unto Hiram, saying: (...). 3. c (...). 2. a (...) 23. b (...)
Thou know that my father might not build an house unto the name of the
LORD his God, because of the war that was about him, until the LORD
delivered them under the soles of his fete: But now has the LORD my God given
me rest on every side, so that there is no adversary ner evil hynderaunce:
Behold, I am therefore aduysed to build an house unto the name of the LORD my
God, acordinge as the LORD spoke unto David my father, and said: (...) 7. c
Thy son, whom I shall set upon thy seat in thy stead, shall build an house
unto my name. Command therefore that they hew me down Ceders out of Libanus,
and that thy servants be with my servants, and the reward of thy
servants will I give the, what so ever thou shall axe: for thou know, yt
with us there is no man which can hew timber as the Sidonians.

LORD this day, which has given David a wise son over this great people.
And Hiram sent unto Solomon, saying: I have herd what thou have sent unto me:
I will do acordinge unto all thy desire with Ceders and Pyne trees. My
servants shall bring them down from Libanus unto ye See, and I will make
them to flote upon the Sea, unto the place which thou shall show me, and there
will I cause them to aryue, and thou shall make the^ to be fetched. But thou
shall fulfill my desire also, and give fode unto my household folks. So Hira^
gave Solomon Ceders and Pyne trees acordinge to all his desire. But Solomon
gave Hiram twentye thousand quarters of wheat to eat for his household, and
twe^tye quarters of beaten oil. This gave Solomon yearly unto Hiram.

And the LORD gave Solomon wyszdome, 3. Re. 4 a and 12. c
Adoniram was over the outchosynge.

And Solomon had three score thousand and ten that bare burdens, and four
score thousand that hewed timber upon the mount, beside Salomons chief
officers, which were ordained over the work: namely three thousand and three
hundredth, which ruled ye people that labored there in the work. And ye king
commanded, that they should break out great and costly stones, namely
frestone, for the foundation of the house. And Salomons masons, and Hirams, and
they that were in those coasts, hewed out and prepared tymbre and stones to
the buyldinge of the house.

The VI. Chapter.
IN the four hundredth and four score 2. Par. 3. a Act. 7. f
in the fourth year of the reign of Solomon over Israel, in the month Sif
(yt is the second month) was the house builded unto the LORD. This house
that king Solomon builded unto ye LORD, was three score cubytes long, twenty
cubytes broad, and thirty cubits hye. And he builded a Ioh. 10. c Act. 3. b
and 5. b
Porche before the temple of twentye cubytes long after the breadth of the
house, and ten cubits broad before the house. And in ye house he made
wyndowes, which might be opened and shut with lyddes.

And round about by the wall of ye house he builded a compase, so yt it went
both about the temple and the quere, and made his outward wall round about.
The nether most stacion was five cubytes wide, and ye myddest six cubits
wide, and the third seven cubits wide. For he laid balkes round about the
house, that they touched not ye wall of the house.



But on the right side of the mids of the house there was a door, so yt they
might go up to the myddest stacion by a turn grese, and from the myddest
stacion unto ye third. Thus builded he the house, and fynished it, and syled
ye house both above and by the walls with Ceder wodd. He builded a galery also
above upon the whole house five cubytes hye, and covered the house with Ceder
timber.

And the word of the LORD came unto Solomon, and said: Let this be the house
yt thou buyldest. If thou shall walk in mine ordinances, and do acordinge to
my laws, and keep all my commandments, to walk therein, then will I
stablyszshe my word with ye, ( ^. Re. 7. b
as I said unto David thy father) and will dwell among the children of
Israel, and will not forsake my people of Israel.



And behind in the house he builded a wall of Ceder timber twentye cubytes
long, from the floor unto the rofe. And there on the ynsyde builded he the
quere for the most holy. But the house of the temple before the quere was
fortye cubits long: on the ynsyde was the whole house of Ceder with thrown
knoppes and flowers, so that there was no stone seen. As for the quere, he
prepared it on the ynsyde of the house, that the Arc of the covenant of the
LORD might be set therein. And before the quere (which was twentye cubits
long, twentye cubytes broad, and twentye cubytes hye, and ouerlayed with pure
gold) he syled the altar with Ceder.



(...)
He made also in the quere two Cherubins ten cubits hye of Olyue tree. One
wynge of either of the Cherubs had five cubytes, so that from the edge of his
one wynge to the edge of his other wynge there were ten cubytes. Even so had
the other Cherub ten cubits also, and both the Cherubs were of one measure and
of one quantity so yt either Cherub was ten cubits hye. And he put the
Cherubins within in the house. And the Cherubins spread forth their wings, so
that the wynge of the one touched the one wall, and the other Cherubs wynge
touched the other wall. But in the mids of ye house the one wynge ^^uched
another. And he ouerlayed the Cherubins with gold.

And on all the walls of the house round

And he builded a court also within with three rows of fre stone, and with one
row of plain Ceder timber.

In the fourth year in the month Sif, was the foundation of the LORDS house
laid: and in the eleventh year in the month Bull (that is the eight month)
was the house fynished as it should be, so that they were seven year a
buyldinge of it.

The VII. Chapter.
But Solomon was a buyldinge his

And he made a porche with pilers which was fiftye cubits long, and thirty
cubits broad, and yet a porche before it with pilers and with a great post. He
made a porche also unto ye kings seat (wherein ye judgment was kept) and made
it to be the porche of judgment, and syled it with Ceder from the pauement unto
the pauement again, and his own house wherein he dwelt, in ye back court made
between ye house and the porche like (...). 3. a
whom Solomon had taken to wife.

All these were costly stone hewn after ye measure, cut with sawes on every
side, from the ground unto the rofe: and without the great court also. As
for the foundacions, they were costly and great stones, ten and eighte cubits
great: and costly fre stones thereon acordinge to ye measure, and Ceders. But
the great court round about had three rows of fre stone, and one row of
plain Ceders: Even so also the court by ye houof the LORD within, and the
porch by the house.

And king Solomon sent to fetch one (...). 2. c
Hiram of Tire a wedowes son, of the trybe of Nephtali, and his father had
been a man of Tire, (...)
which was a conning man in metal, full of wyszdome, understanding and
knowledge to work all manner of metal work. When he came to king Solomon, he
made all his work, (...)
and made two brazen pilers, either of them eightene cubits hye: and a threde
of xij. cubits was the measure about both ye pilers: and he made two



And it stood upon twolue bullockes, whereof three were turned toward the north,
three toward the west, three toward the south, and three toward the east, and
the lauer above thereon, so that all their hinder parts were within under the
lauer: whereof the thickness was an handbreth: and the edge of it was like the
edge of a cup, and as a floured rose, and it contained two thousand A Bat^^^
was a certayn^ measur^ of liqu^^re.
Battes.

And he made ten brazen seats, every one four cubits long and broad, and
three cubits hye. The seat was made so, that it had sides between the ledges.
And on the sides between the ledges there were lions, bullockes and Cherubins.
And on ye ledges which were above and beneth the lions and bullockes, were the
sides made so, that they were set downwardes. And every stole had four brazen
wheles with brazen axeltrees. And upon the four corners there were proppes
molten, every one over against another, underset unto the kettell.

And the soket upon the stole was a cubyte

And on the soket above upon the seat a cubyte and an half round about,
there were ledges and sides hard on the seat. And on the plat of the same
sides and ledges, he caused to carue Cherubins, lions and palm trees, one by
another round about thereon. After this manner made heten molte^ seats, one
manner of measure and widenes was in all.

And he made ten copper kettels, so that on the right hand toward the south.

And Hiram made pottes also and shouels and basens, and so fynished he all the
work, that king Solomon caused to be made in the house of the LORD: namely
ye two pilers, and the round knoppes above upon the two pilers, and the two
wrythen ropes to cover the two round knoppes upon the pilers. And the four
hundredth pomgranates on the two wrythen ropes, ever two rows of pomgranates
unto every rope, to cover the two round knoppes upon the pilers. And the ten
seats, and ten kettels thereon, and the lauer, and twolue bullockes under ye
lauer. And the pottes, shouels and basens. And all the ornaments which Hiram
made unto king Solomon for the house of the LORD, were of pure metal. In the
country by Iordane, caused the king them to be molten in thick earth, between
Sucoth and Zarthan. And Solomon let all the apparel be vnweyed, because the
metal was so much.

Morouer Solomon made all the apperell that belonged unto the house of the
LORD: namely a golden altar, a golden table that the shewbred lay on, five
candelstickes on the right hand, and five candelstickes on the left (before
the quere) of pure gold, with flowers, lamps and snoffers of gold, thereto flat
pieces, charges, basens, spones and censours of pure gold. And the hokes of ye
doors on the insyde of the house in the most holy, and in the doors of the
house of the temple of the LORD were of gold.

Thus all the work that king Solomon made in ye house of the LORD, was
fynisshed. ^. Par. 5. a
And Solomon brought in that his father David had sanctified, of silver and
gold and ornaments, and laid it among the treasures of the house of the
LORD.

The VIII. Chapter.
LORD, ^. Re. ^. d
out of the cite of David, that is Sion. And there resorted unto king Solomon
all the men in Israel, at the feast in the month Ethanim, that is ye seventh
month. And when all ye Elders of Israel came, the prestes took the Ark of the LORD, and brought it up, and the Tabernacle of witness, and all the
ornaments of the Sanctuary that were in the Tabernacle. This did the prestes
and the Levites. And king Solomon and all the congregation of Israel yt were
gathered unto him, went with him before the Arc, and offered sheep and
bullockes, so many, that they could not be nombred ner told.

So the prestes brought the Ark of the LORD'S covenant unto her place, even
in to ye Quere of the house in the most holy under ye wings of the Cherubins.
For ye Cherubins spread out their wings in the place where the Arc stood, and
covered the Arc and the staves thereof from above. And the staves were so
long, that ye knoppes of them were seen from the Sanctuary before ye quere,
but on the outsyde were they not seen, and they were there unto this day.

And in the Arc there was nothing, but (...)
which Moses had laid therein at Horeb, when ye LORD made a covenant with the
children of Israel, what time as they were departed out of the land of Egipte.

But when the prestes went out of the Sanctuary, a cloud filled the house of
the LORD, so yt the prestes could not stand and execute the office for the
cloud: for the glory of the LORD filled the LORDS house. Then said Solomon:
(...)
The LORD said, that he would dwell in a dark cloud. I have builded an
^ouse, to be an habitacion unto the: a seat, yt thou may dwell there for
ever. And ye king turned his face, and blessed all the congregation of Israel.
And all the congregation of Israel stood, and he said:

Praised be the LORD God of Israel, which promised by his mouth unto my father
David, and by his hand has fulfilled it, and said: (...)
Sense the day yt I brought my people of Israel out of Egipte, have I chosen
no cite among all the trybes of Israel, to build me an house, that my name
might be there. (...)
But David have I chosen, to be over my people of Israel.

And in deed my father David was minded LORD God of Israel: nevertheless the
LORD said unto my father David: Where as thou wast minded to build an house
unto my name, thou have done well, that thou art so aduysed. Howbeit thou shall
not build the house, but thy son which shall come out of thy loins, he shall
build an house un to my name. And the LORD has performed his word that he
spoke: For I am come up in my father David's stead, and sit upon the seat of
Israel, as the LORD said: and have builded an house unto the name of the
LORD God of Israel: and there have I ordained a place for the Arc, wherein is
the LORDS covenant, which he made with our fathers, when he brought them
out of ye land of Egipte.

And Solomon stood before the altar of the LORD in the presence of the whole
congregation of Israel, and held out his hands toward heaven, and said:
(...)
O LORD God of Israel, there is no god like the, nether above in heaven, ner
beneth upon earth, thou that kepest covenant and mercy for all thy servants
that walk before ye with all their heart, thou that have kept promise with my
father David thy servant: With thy mouth thou saydest it, and with thy hand
have thou fulfilled it, as it is come to pass LORD God of Israel make good
unto my father David ye servant, that which thou have promised him, and said:
(...)
Thou shall not want a man before me to sit upon the seat of Israel, if thy
children keep their way, so yt they walk before me like as thou have walked
before me. Now thou God of Israel, let ye word be verified, which thou have
promised unto my father David thy servant.

For thynkest thou yt God dwells upon earth? (...)
Behold, the heavens and the heavens of all heavens may not contain the: how
should then this house do it, that I have builded? But turn the unto the
prayer of thy servant, and to his supplicacion (O LORD my God) that thou
may hear the thankesgeuynge and prayer, which thy servant makes before
the this day, so that thine eyes be open over this house night and day, even
over this place (whereof thou saydest: (...)
My name shall dwell there.) That thou may hear the prayer which thy
servant makes in this place, and hear the intercession of ye servant and of
thy people of Israel, which they shall make here in this place of thy
habitacion in heaven: and when thou hear it, be gracious.

(...). d (...). 22. b
and takes upon him an ooth wherewith he byndeth himself, and ye ooth comes
before thine altar in this house, then hear thou in heaven, and se that thy
servants have right, to condemn the ungodly, and to bring his way upon his
own head, and to justify the righteous, to give him acordinge to his
righteousness.

^eu. ^0. a
When thy people of Israel is smytten before their enemies (while they have
sinned against the) and if they turn unto the and knowledge thy name, and make
their prayer and intercession unto the in this house, the^ hear thou them in
heaven, and be merciful unto the sin of thy people of Israel, and bring
them again into the land, yt thou have given unto their fathers.

^. Re. 1^
When the heaven is shut up, so yt it rayneth not (for so much, as they have
sinned against the) and if they make their prayer in this place, and knowledge
thy name, and turn from their sins wha^ thou troublest them, hear thou them
then in heaven, and be merciful unto the sins of thy servants, and of thy
people of Israel, that thou may show them the good way, wherein they should
walk, and let it rain upon the land that thou have given thy people to
inheritance.

When a derth, or pestilence, or drouth, or Esa. 36. b
whether it be any other men or thy people of Israel (which the^ are aware of
their plage) every one in his heart, and spredeth out his hands unto this
house: Hear thou then in heaven in the seat where thou dwell, and be
merciful, and se that thou give every one acordinge as he has walked, like as
thou know his heart (for thou only know the heart of all the children of
men) that they may allwaye fear the, as long as they live in the land,
which thou have given unto our fathers.

Ioh. 12. e Acto. ^. c
And when any stranger, that is not of thy people of Israel, comes out of a
far country for thy names sake (for they shall hear of thy great name, and
of thy mighty hand, and of thy outstretched arm) and comes to make his
prayer in this house, hear thou him then in heaven, even in the seat of thy
dwelling, and do all for the which that stranger calls upon the, that all
the nations upon earth may know thy name, and that they may fear the, as
thy people of Israel do: and that they may know, how that this house which I
have builded, is named after thy name.

When thy people go forth to the battayll Dan. 6. b
and shall pray unto the LORD toward the way of the cite which thou have
chosen, and toward the house that I have builded unto thy name, hear thou
then their prayer and peticion in heaven, and execute judgment for them.

When they sin against the (for ^cle. 7. c ^oh. 1. b
there is no man that synneth not) and thou be wroth, and deliver the^ unto
their enemies, so that they carry them away captyue in to the enemies land
far or nigh, and if they remember them selves in the land where they are
captyue, and turn, and make their intercession unto the in the land of their
captyuite, and say: We have sinned, and done amysse, and have been ungodly,
and so turn unto ye with all their heart, and with all their soul in the lord
of their enemies (which led them away captyue) and make their prayer unto the
toward the way of their land, that thou have given unto their fathers, even
toward the cite which thou have chosen, and toward the house that I have
builded unto thy name: then hear thou their prayer and supplicacion in heaven,
^^os 9. b
from the seat of thy dwelling, and execute judgment for them, and be
merciful unto thy people that have sinned against the, and unto all their
trespaces, wherewith they have transgressed against the, ^sd. 1. a
and grant the^ mercy in the sight of them which led them away presonners,
that their enemies may be merciful unto them: for they are thy people, (...)
19. a
(for thou O LORD LORD) have sundered them out to be an inheritance unto thy
self, from among all the nations upon earth, acordinge as thou saydest by
Moses thy servant, when thou broughtest our fathers out of Egipte.

Par. 7. a
And wha^ Solomon had ended all this prayer and peticion before the LORD, he
rose up from the altar of the LORD, and left of from knelynge and holding
out of hands toward heaven, and stood and blessed all the congregation of
Israel with loud voice, and said: Praised be the LORD which has given rest
unto his people, acordinge as he said. There has not one failed of all his
good words, which he spoke by his servant Moses. The LORD our God be with
us, as he has been with our fathers, and forsake us not, nether withdraw his
hand from us, but bow our hertes unto him, that we may walk in all his
ways, and keep his commandments, ordinances and laws, which he commanded
our fathers. And these words wherewith I have made my peticion before the
LORD, come nigh unto the LORD our God day and night, that he may execute
judgment for his servant and for his people of Israel, every one at his time:
that all nations LORD is God, and that there is none other. And let your heart
be perfect with the LORD our God, to walk in his statutes, and to keep his
commandments, as it is this day.

And the king with all Israel his people offered sacrifice before the LORD.
And Solomon offered deed offerynges (which he offered unto the LORD) two and
twenty thousand oxen, and an hundredth and twenty thousand sheep. So the king
and all the children of Israel dedicated the house of the LORD. The same day
did the king dedicate the myddelmost court, which was before the house of the
LORD: that he might there perform the burnt offerynges, meat-offerynges,
and the fat of the deed offerynges: for the brazen altar that stood before ye
LORD, was to little for the burnt offerynges, meat offerynges, and for the fat
of the deed offerynges.

And at the same time made Solomon a solemn feast, and all Israel a great
congregation with him, from the border of Hemath unto the river of Egipte,
before the LORD our God, seuendayes, and yet seven days, that were fourtene
days. And on the eight day he let the people go. And they blessed the king,
and went unto their tents reioysinge and with a merry heart, because of all the
good that the LORD had done unto David his servant, and to his people of
Israel.

The IX. Chapter.
ANd when Solomon had fynished ye LORD, and the kings house, (...)
and all that his desire and pleasure was to make, ye LORD appeared unto him
the second time, (...)
even as he appeared unto him at Gibeon. And the LORD said unto him: I have
herd thy prayer and peticion, that thou have made before me, and have
sanctified this house which thou have builded, that I may set my name there
for ever: and mine eyes and my heart shall be there allwaye. And if thou walk
before me (as thy father David walked) with a perfect and a true heart, so that
thou do all that I have commanded the, and keep mine ordinances and laws,
then will I stablish the ^eate of thy kingdom over Israel for ever, acordinge
as I promised thy father David, and said: (...)
Thou shall not want a man from the seat of Israel.

(...). b (...) 7. a
And the house that I have hallowed unto my name, will I put away fro my face.
And Israel shall be come a byworde and fabell among all nations, and so shall
this hye house: so that every one yt goes by, shall be astonyed, and make an
hyssynge, and say: (...). 29. d (...) 22. b
Wherefore has the LORD done thus unto this land and to this house? Then shall
it be answered: Because they forsook ye LORD their God, (which brought their
fathers out of the land of Egipte) and have received other gods, and
worshipped them, and served them. Therefore has ye LORD brought all this evil
upon them.

(...)
wherein Solomon builded the two houses, the LORDS house and the kings house,
(...)
where unto Hiram the king of Tire brought Salomo^ Ceder trees and Pyne trees,
and gold after all his desire, then gave king Solomon unto Hiram twentye
cities in the country of Galile. And Hiram departed from Tire to vyset the
cities which Solomon had given him, and they pleased him not, and he said:
What manner of cities are these (my brother) that thou have given me? And he
called them the land of Cabul unto this day. And Hiram sent unto the king,
six score hundredth weight of Gold. And the same is the sum of the tax,
that king Solomon raised to the buyldinge of the house of the LORD, and his
own house, and Millo, and the walls of Jerusalem, and Hasor, and Megiddo, and
Gaser.



And all the remnaunt of the people of the Amorytes, Hethites, Pheresites,
Henites and Ie^usites, which were not of the children of Israel, their children
which they left behind them in the land (whom the children of Israel could
not utterly destroy) those did Solomon make tributaries unto this day.

Leui. 25
But of the children of Israel he made no bondmen, but let them be men of
war, and his servants, and princes, and knights, and over his charettes
and horsemen. And

And Pharaos daughter went up from the cite of David, in to her house 1. Re. 9.
which he had builded for her. 2. Reg. 5.
Then builded he Millo likewise. And three times in the year did Solomon offer
burnt offerynges and deed offerynges upon the altar 7. Par. 4.
that he had builded unto the LORD, and burnt incense upon it before the
LORD, and so was the house ended and fynished.

1. Re. 22 2. Par. 8.
And Solomon made ships also at Ezeon Geber, which lies by Eloth beside the
Reed See shor^ in ye land of the Edomites. And Hiram sent his servants by
ship, which were shipmen, and had experience of the Sea, with Salomons
servants, and they came unto Iere. 10.
Ophir, and fetched from thence one and twenty score hundredth weight of gold,
and b^ought it unto Solomon.

The X. Chapter.
ANd when king Salomons fame of LORD came to the ears of the Queen of rich
Arabia, 2. Par. 9. Mat. 1^. d
she came to prove him with dark sentences. And she came to Jerusalem with a
marvelous great train, with camels which bare spyces, and much gold, and
precious stones And when she came in to king Solomon, she spoke unto him all
that was in her heart. And Solomon told her every thing, and the king had
nothing in secret, but he told it her. But when the Queen of rich Arabia
saw all the wyszdome of Solomon, and the house that he had builded, and the
meats of his table, and the dwellinges of his servants, and the offices of
his ministers, and their garments, and his butlers and the burnt offerynges
which he offered in the house of the LORD, she wondered exceadingly, and could
no longer refrain, but said unto the king: It is true that I have herd in
my land of thy behauoure

Thou have more wyszdome and good, the^ the fame is that I have herd. Happy
are thy people and thy servants, that allwaie stand before the, and hear
thy wyszdome. Praised be the LORD thy God, which had soch a pleasure unto the,
that he set the upon the seat of Israel: because he has allwaye loved Israel,
and has set the to be king, that thou should mantayne justice and equity.

And she gave the king six score hundredth weighte of gold, and very much
spyce, and precious stones. There came never so much spyce thither, as the
Queen of rich Arabia gave unto king Solomon. And Hirams ships, ^. Re. 9. ^
which carried gold out of Ophir, brought marvelous much costly timber and
precious stones from Ophir. And of that costly timber the king caused to make
pilers in the house of the LORD, and in ye kings house, and harpes and
Psalteries

The gold that came to Solomon in one year, was nine and thyrtie score
hundredth weighte, besides that which came of chapmen, merchants and
Apotecaries, and of the next kings, and of the mighty men in the land. And
king Solomon caused to make two hundredth spears of beaten gold, six
hundredth pieces of gold put he to every spear: and three hundredth shyldes of ye
best gold, even three pound of gold upon every shylde. And the king put them
in the 1. Re. 7. a
house of the wod of Libanus.



(...)
Thus was king Solomon greater in riches and wyszdome, then all the kings upon
earth: And all the world desired to se Solomon, that they might hear the
wyszdome which God gave him in his heart. And they brought him yearly every man
his present, vessels of silver and gold, raiment and harness, spyces, horses
and Mules. And Solomon brought charettes and horsemen together, so that he had
a thousand and four hundredth charettes, and twolue thousand horsemen: and
those he put in ye charet cities, and with the king at Jerusalem.

And the king brought it to pass, that there was as much silver at Jerusalem
as stones: and as many Ceders as there were wild fig trees in the valleys.
And Salomo^s horses were brought out of Egipte, and from Kena: for the kings
merchants fetched them from Kena for money. And a charet came up out of
Egipte for six hundredth Sycles of Silver, and an horse for an hundredth and
fyftye. Thus were they brought also unto all the kings of the Hethites and to
the kings of Siria by their hands.

The XI. Chapter.
But king Solomon loved many out (...)
Pharaos daughter, and women of Moab, of Ammo^, of Edom, of Sidon, and of Heth,
even of those nations, that the LORD spoke of unto the children of Israel: Go
not ye unto them, (...)
and let not them come unto you: they shall surely bow your hertes after their
gods: Unto these did Solomon enclyne with affeccion. And he had seven
hundredth women to wives, and three hundredth concubynes, and his wives turned his
heart aside. And when he was now old, his wives bowed his heart after strange
gods, so that his heart was not whole with the LORD his God, as was the heart
of David his father.

So Solomon walked after Asta^oth the god of the Sidonians, and after Malcom
the abhominacion of the Ammonites. And Solomon did yt which displeased the
LORD, and followed not ye LORD to ye vttemost as did his father David. The^
builded Salomo^ an hie place unto Chamos the abhominacio^ of ye Moabites (upon
the mount that lies before Jerusalem) and unto Moloch the

Thus did Solomon for all his outla^dish wives, which brent incense, and offered
unto their gods. But the LORD was wroth at Solomon, because his heart was
turned aside from ye LORD God of Israel, (...)
which had two times appeared unto him, and commanded him, that he should not
walk after other gods: and yet kept he not that the LORD commanded him.
Therefore said the LORD unto Solomon: For so much as this is done with the,
and have not kept my covenant and mine ordinances, which I commanded the,
therefore will I also pluck thy kingdom from the, and give it unto thy
servant: Neruertheles in ye time will I not do it, for thy father David's sake,
but from the hand of thy son will I pluck it. Howbeit I will not pluck ye
kingdom clean away. One trybe will I give unto thy son, for David my
servants sake, and for Ierusalems sake which I have

And the LORD raised up an adversary unto Solomon, even Hadad the Edomite of
the kings sede, which was in Edom. For when David was in Edom, and Ioab the
chief captain went up to bury the slain, he smote all the males in Edom.
(For Ioab remained there six months and all Israel, till he had roted out all
ye males that were in Edom.) Then fled Hadad, and certain men of ye Moabites
with him, of his fathers servants. As for Hadad, he was a young man.

And they gat them up fro Madian, and came unto Paran, and took men with them
out of Paran, and came in to Egipte unto Pharao the king of Egipte: which gave
him an house and certain vytales appointed, and gave him a country. And Adad
found great favor in the sight of Pharao, so that he gave him to wife even
the sister of his own wife Thaphenes the Queen. And Thaphenes sister bare him
Genubath his son, and Thaphenes norished him up in Pharaos house, in so much
that Genubath was in Pharaos house among Pharaos

Now wha^ Hadad herd in Egipte, that David was fallen on slepte with his
fathers, and yt Ioab the chief captain was deed, he said unto Pharao: Let me
go in to my country. Pharao said unto him: What lackest thou with me, that
thou will go in to thy country? He said: Nothing, but yet let me go.

God raised him up another adversary also, one Reason the son of El Iada,
which fled from his lord Hadad Eser king of Zeba, and gathered men against
him, and was a captain of the men of war when David slew them: and they
went unto Damascus and dwelt there, and reigned at Damascus, and he was
Isreal's adversary as long as Solomon lived. This is the harm yt Hadad
suffered: therefore had he evil will at Israel, and was king over Israel.

Morouer Jeroboam the son of Nebatan

But at the same time it fortuned, that Jeroboam went out from Jerusalem, and
the prophet Ahias of Silo found him by the way, and he had a new cloak upon
him, and they two were alone in the field. And Ahia took hold of the new cloak
yt he had on, and rent the same in to twolue pieces, and said unto Jeroboam:
Take thou ten pieces unto the.

For thus says the LORD God of Israel: Behold, even thus will I rent the
kingdom from the hand of Salomo^, and will give the ten trybes. One trybe
shall he 2. Par. 7. ^
which I have chosen out of all the trybes of Israel: for they have forsaken me,
and worshipped Astaroth the god of the Sidonians, Chamos the god of the
Moabites, and Malco^ the god of the children of Ammon, and have not walked in
my ways, to fulfill my pleasure, mine ordinances, and laws, as did David his
father.

Notwithstondynge I will not take the whole kingdom from out of his hand, but
will make him a prince as long as helyueth for my servant David's sake, whom I
did chose, which kept my commandments and ordinances. 3. Re. 12. c
From out of the hand of his son will I take the kingdom, and will give ten
trybes unto the, and one unto his son, 3. Re. 15. a Psalm. 131. b
that David my servant may allwaye have a lantern before me in the cite of
Jerusalem, which I have chosen, that I may set my name there. Therefore will I
take the now, to raygne over all that thine heart desires, and thou shall be
king over Israel.

What more there is to say of Solomon, and all that he did, and his wyszdome,
it is written in the Cronicles of Solomon. The time that Solomon was king at
Jerusalem over all Israel, is fortye year. And Solomon fell on sleep with his
fathers, and was buried in the cite of David his father, and Roboam his son
was king in his stead.

The XII. Chapter.
2. Pa. 10. a
And when Jeroboam ye son of Nebat herd that, while he was yet in Egipte 3.
Re. 11 g
(whither he was fled for Solomon) he came again out of Egipte. And they sent
for him, and called him. And Jeroboam with all the congregation of Israel came
and spoke to Roboam, and said: Thy father made our yock to hard: therefore
make thou now the hard bondage and the sore yock lighter, and we will submytte
our selves unto the. He said unto them: Go your way unto the third day,
and then come to me again. And the people went their way.

And Roboam the king held a council with the Elders that stood before
Salomo^ his father while he lived, and he said: What is your council, that
we may give this people an answer? They said unto him: If thou do this
people a pleasure to day, and follow their mind, and hear them, and give
them good words, then shall they be obedient unto the as long as thou live.
Nevertheless he forsook the council that ye Elders had given him, and axed
council at the young men which were grown up with him, and stood before him.



So upon the third day came Jeroboam with all the people unto Roboam, as ye
king had appointed and said, come to me again on the third day. And the
king gave the people an hard rough answer, and forsook the counsel that the
Elders had given him, and talked with them after the council of the young men,
and said: My father made your yock sore, but I will make it yet sorer upon
you. My father correct you with scourges, but I will nourtoure you with
scorpio^s. Thus the king followed not the peoples mind, for he was turned so
from the LORD, that he might stablish his word (...)
which he spoke by Ahias of Silo unto Jeroboam the son of Nebat.

But when all Israel saw that the king (...)
What portion have we then in David or inheritance in the son of Isai? Get
the to thy tents O Israel. Look thou now to thy house thou David. So Israel
went unto their tents. As for Roboam, he reigned but over ye children of
Israel, which dwelt in the cities of Judah. And when king Roboam sent thither
Adoram the rentgatherer, all Israel stoned him to death. But king Roboam
strengthed himself, and gat him up into a charet, to fle unto Jerusalem. Thus
departed Israel from the house of David unto this day.

Now when all Israel herd, that Jeroboam was come again, they sent for to
call him to the whole congregation, and made him king over all Israel. And no
man followed the house of David, save only the tribe of Judah. (...)
And when Roboam came to Jerusalem, all the house of Judah and the trybe of Ben
Iamin (even an hundredth and four score thousand chosen men of arms) gathered
themselves together to fight against ye house of Israel, and to bring the
kingdom again unto Roboam ye son of Salomo^.

But the word of God came to Semeia to Roboam the son of Solomon king of
Judah, and to all ye house of Judah and Ben Iamin, and to the other people, and
say: Thus says the LORD: Ye shall not go up and fight against your
brethren the children of Israel. Let every man go home again, for this is my
deed. And they herkened unto the word of the LORD, and turned back, to go
their way, as the LORD said. But Roboam builded Sichem upon mount Ephraim,
and dwelt therein, and departed thence, and builded (...)
Penuel.

Ieroboa^ thought in his heart: The kingdom shall fall again now unto the
house of David, if this people go up to offer in the LORDS house at Jerusalem,
and so shall the heart of this people turn to their lord Roboam king of Judah,
and the^ shall they slaye me, and fall again to Roboam king of Judah. And the
king held a council (...)
and made two golden calves, and said (...) 32. b
there is thy God (O Israel) which brought ye out of Egipte. And the one set
he at Bethel, and the other in Dan. And this deed turned to sin, for the
people went before the one unto Dan.

He made an house also in the hye places, (...) 3. a (...) ^7. g
and made prestes of the smallest in the people, which were not of the children
of Leui. And upon the fiftene day of the eighte month he made an holy day,
like as the solemn feast in Judah, and offered upon the altar. Thus did he at
Bethel, in doing sacrifice unto the calves which he had made, and at Bethel he
ordained the prestes of the hye places that he had made: and offered upon the
altar (which he had made) at Bethel, the fiftene day of the eight month,
which he invented of his own heart. And he made the children of Israel an holy
day, and went up to the altar to burn incense.

The XIII. Chapter.
LORD) unto Bethel, and Jeroboam stood by the altar to burn incense. And he
cried against the altar through the word of the LORD, and said: O altar,
altar, thus says the LORD: Behold, there shall be borne unto ye house of
David a son, Josias by name Re. ^3. ^
which on the shall offer the prestes of the hye places, that burn incense upon
the, and men's bones shall he burn on the. And he gave a wonder token the same
day, and said: This is the token, that the LORD has spoken it, behold, the
altar shall ryue, and the aszshes, that are thereon, shall be poured out.

But when the king herd the word of the man of God, that cried against the
altar at Bethel, he stretched out his hand by ye altar, and said: Lay
hondes on him. And his hand that he stretched out, wythered, and he could not
draw it unto him again. And ye altar roue, and the aszshes were poured out
from the altar, acordinge to the wonder token that the man of God had given by
the word of the LORD.

And the king answered, and said unto Exodus ^. b 9. f. 10. c Number. 21 b Act. 8.
c
O pray the face of the LORD thy God, and make intercession for me, that my
hand may be restored unto me again. Then prayed the man of God unto the face
of the LORD. And the kings hand was restored him again, and became as it
was before. And the king said unto the man of God: Come home with me, and
dyne, and I will give the a reward.

But the man of God said unto the king: If thou geuest me half thy house, I
will not come with the: for in this place will I nether eat bred, ner drink
water. For thus am I commanded, and thus is it said unto me by the word of
the LORD: Thou shall eat no bred, and drink no water, nether return the
way that thou wentest.

And he departed another way, and returned

He said unto him: Come home with me, LORD: Thou shall nether eat bred
there, ner yet drink water, nether shall thou go again by the way which thou
wentest. He said unto him: I myself am a prophet as well as thou, and an
angel has spoken with me by ye word of the LORD, and said: Bring him
again with the, that he may eat bred, and drink water. But he lied unto
him, and brought him again, so that he ate bred, and drank water in his
house.

And when they sat at the table, the word of the LORD came to the prophet
that had brought him again, and cried unto the man which was come from Judah,
and said: LORD: Because thou have been dishobedient unto the mouth of ye
LORD, and have not kept the commandment that the LORD thy God commanded
the, but have turned back, and have eaten bred, and drunk water in ye place,
whereof he said unto the: Thou shall nether eat bred ner drink water,
therefore shall not thy body come in to thy fathers grave.

And when he had eaten bred and dronke^ the ass was sadled unto the prophet
whom he had brought again. 3. Re 20. f
And wha^ he was gone, a lion found him by the way, and slew him, and his
body was cast in ye way. And the ass stood by him, and the lion stood by the
body. And wha^ men went by, they saw the body cast in the way, and the lion
stondynge beside the body, and came and told it in the cite, where the old
prophet dwelt.

LORD, therefore has ye LORD delivered him unto the Lion, which has rent
him, and slain him, acordynge to the word that the LORD spoke unto him. And
he said unto his sons: Saddell me the ass. And when they had sadled it, he
went, and found his body cast in the way and the ass and the lion stondynge
beside ye body. The lion had eaten nothing of the body, nether had he torn
the ass. Then took the prophet the deed coarse of the man of God, and laid it
upon the ass, and brought it again in to the cite of the old prophet, to
mourn, and to burye him.

4. Re. 24 d
For it shall come to pass, that he cried (through the word of the LORD)
against Bethel, and against all ye houses of the hye places, which are in the
cities of Samaria.

Howbeit after this act did not Ieroboa^ turn from his evil way, but was
perverted, and made prestes of the hye places, eue^ of the smallest of the
people: Look whom it pleased him, his hands he filled, and he was pressed of the
hye places. And this turned to sin unto the house of Ieroboa^, to destroy
him and to bring him to naught.

The XIIII. Chapter.
AT the same time was Abia the son (...)
which promised me yt I should be king over this people: and take with the ten
loaves of bred and cakes, and a cup with honey, and go to him, that he may
tell the how it shall go with the child. And Ieroboams wife did so, and gat her
up, and went unto Silo, and came in to the house of Ahias. But Ahias could
not se, for his eyes were dymme for age. Nevertheless the LORD said unto
Ahias: Behold, Ieroboams wife comes, to axe a matter at the for her son,
for he is sick. Speak thou therefore unto her thus and thus Now when she came
in, she showed hirselfe strange. But when Ahias herd the noise of her fete
going in at the door, he said: Come in thou wife of Ieroboa^. Why show
thou thy self so strange? I am sent unto ye an hard messaunger.

Go thy way and tell Jeroboam: Thus LORD God of Israel: (...)
I have exalted the from among the people, and set the to be prince over my
people of Israel, and have rent the kingdom from the house of David, and
given it the. But thou have not been as my servant David, which kept my
commandments, and walked after me with all his heart, so that he did only ye
thing that was right in my sight: and thou have done worse then all they
that have been before the: thou have gone thy way and made the other gods,
and molten images, to provoke me unto wrath, and have cast me behind thy back.

Behold therefore, I will bring mysfortune upon the house of Jeroboam, and will
rote out from Jeroboam eue^ him that makes water against the wall, the
presoner and forsaken in Israel: and the posterite of ye house of Jeroboam will
I swepe out, as donge is swepte out, till he be clean brought to naught. (...)
He that dies (of Jeroboam) in the cite, the dogs shall eat him up. But him
yt dies in the field, shall the fowls of the air eat up, for the LORD has
spoken it.

LORD God of Israel, in Ieroboams house. (...). 15. c
But the LORD shall raise him up a king, which shall rote out ye house of
Jeroboam in that day. And what is it, yt is now in hand all ready? And the
LORD shall smite Israel, like as a read is moved in the water: and shall rote
out Israel from this good land, that he gave unto their fathers, and shall
scater them beyond the water, because they have made their groves to provoke
the LORD unto wrath. And Israel shall be given over because of the sin of
Jeroboam, which has sinned him self, and made Israel to sin.

(...). 14. c
acordinge to ye word of the LORD, which he spoke by his servant Ahia ye
prophet. (...)
What more there is to say of Jeroboam, how he fought and reigned, behold,
it is written in the Cronicles of the kings of Israel. The time that Jeroboam
reigned, was two and twentye year. And he slepte with his fathers. And Nadab
his son was king in his stead.

Roboam ye son of Solomon was king in Judah. (...). 12. c
One and fortye year old was Roboam wha^ he was made king, and seuentene
year reigned he at Jerusalem, in the cite yt the LORD had chosen out of all
ye trybes of Israel, to set his name there. His mothers name was Naemaan
Ammonitisse. And Judah did yt which displeased the LORD, and provoked him to
indignacion more the^ all yt their fathers had done with their sins which they
did: for they likewise builded them hye places, pilers, and groves upon every
hye hill, and among all grene trees. There were whoremo^gers also, and they
did all ye abhominacio^s of ye Heythe^, whom ye LORD drove out before the
children of Israel.

(...). 12. a
But in ye fifth year of king Roboam went Sisack ye king of Egipte up
against Jerusalem, and took the treasure out of ye house of the LORD, and out
of the kings house, and all that might be gotten, and took all the shyldes of
gold, (...). 1^. c (...). 9. b
which Solomon caused to be made. In stead whereof ye king Roboam caused for
to make shyldes of stele, and committed them under the hands of the chief
fotemen, which kept the door of the kings house. And as often as the king
went in to ye house of the LORD, the footmen bare them, and brought them
again in to the foot men's chamber.

What more there is to say of Roboam, and all that he did, behold, it is
written in the Cronicles of the kings of Judah. But between Roboam and Jeroboam
there was war as long as they lived. And 2. Par. 12.
Robobam slepte with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the cite of
David. And his mothers name was Naema an Ammonitisse. And his son Abia was
king in his stead.

The XV. Chapter.
IN the eightenth year of king Ieroboa^ 2. Par. 13. ^
was Abia king in Judah, and reigned three year at Jerusalem. His mothers name
was. 2. Par. 11.
Maecha, the daughter of Abisalom, and he walked in all the sins of his
father, which he had done before him, and his heart was not perfect with the
LORD his God, as was the heart of David his father. 3. Reg. 11.
For because of David's sake did the LORD his God give him a lantern at
Jerusalem, so yt he raised his son after him, and manteyned him at Jerusalem,
because David did the thing yt was right in ye sight of the LORD, and
departed not from all that he commanded him as long as he lived (saving in
the matter with 2. Re. 11. a
Vrias ye Hethite). But there was war between Roboam and Jeroboam, as long
as he lived.

What more there is to say of Abia, and all that he did, behold, it is
written in the Cronicles of the kings of Judah. There was war also between
Abia and Jeroboam. And Abia slepte with his fathers, and they buried him in the
cite of David. And Asa his son was king in his stead. 2. Par. 14. a
In LORD, as did his father David. And he removed ye 3. Re. 22. g
who remongers out of the land, and put down all the Idols that his fathers
had made. 2. Par. 15. d
He put his mother from the mynistracion, that she had made unto Miplezeth in
ye grove. And Asa roted out her Miplezeth, and brent it in the broke Cedron:
but the hye places put he not down. Yet was the heart of Asa perfect with the
LORD as long as he lived. And the silver and gold, and vessels that his
father had hallowed, and soch as was sanctified unto ye house of the LORD, that
brought he in. And there was war between Asa and Baesa the king of Israel,
as long as they lived.

^. Par. 16. a
and builded Rama, that no man should go out and in of Asas side the king of
Judah. Then took Asa all the silver and gold that was left in the treasure of
the house of the LORD, and in the treasure of the kings house, and delivered
it in to his servants hands, and sent it unto ^ Re 10* a
Benadab the son of Tabrimon the son of Hesion king of Siria, which dwelt
at Damascon, and let say unto him: There is a covenant between me and the,
and between my father and thy father: therefore send I the a present of silver
and gold, that thou should break the covenant which thou have with Baesa
the king of Israel, that he may depart fro me.

Benadab agreed unto king Asa, and sent his captains against the cities of
Israel, and smote Iion and Dan, and Abel Beth Maecha, and all Cineroth with the
whole land of Nephtali. Wha^ Baesa herd that, he left of from buyldinge Rama,
and went again unto Thirza.



What more there is to say of Asa, and of all his power, and all that he did,
and of ye cities which he builded, behold, it is written in the Cronicles of
the kings of Judah: saving that in his old age he was diseased in his fete.
And Asa slepte with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the cite of
David his father. 2. Par. 17. a
And Iosaphat his son was king in his stead.

LORD, and walked in the way of his father, and in his sins, wherewith he
made Israel to sin. Howbeit Baesa the son of Ahia of the house of Isachar
conspired against him, and smote him at Gibbethon, which was the Philistynes:
for Nadab and all Israel laid sege to Gibbethon. So Baesa slew him in the
third year of Asa king of Judah, and was king in his stead. (...)
Now when he was king, he smote all the house of Jeroboam, and let nothing of
Jeroboam remain that had breath, till he had destroyed it, acordynge to ye
word of the LORD, which he spoke by his servant Ahia of Silo, because of
Ieroboams sins which he did, and made Israel sin withal: even with ye
provoking wherewith he displeased the LORD God of Israel.

What more there is to say of Nadab, and

In the third year of Asa king of Judah was Baesa ye son of Ahia king over
all Israel at Thirza four and twentye year, and did that which was evil in
the sight of the LORD, and walked in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sins,
wherewith he made Israel to sin.

Nevertheless the word of the LORD came unto Iehu the son of Hanani against
Baesa, and said: For so much as I lifted the out of the dust, and made the
prince over my people of Israel, and thou walk in the way of Jeroboam, and
make my people over Israel for to sin, to provoke me unto wrath through
their sins, behold, therefore will I take away the posterite of Beasa, and
the posterite of his house, and will set thine house even as the house of (...)
He that of Baesa dies in the cite, the dogs shall devour him: and who so
being of him dies in the field, the fowls of the air shall eat him up.

What more there is to say of Baesa, and what he did, and of his power,
behold, it is written in ye Cronicles of the kings of Israel. And Baesa
slepte with his fathers, and was buried at Thirza: and his son Ella was king
in his stead. And the word of ye LORD came by the prophet Iehu the son of
Hanani, over Baesa, and over his house, and against all the evil that he did
in the sight of ye LORD, to provoke him unto wrath through the works of his
hands: so that he became as the house of Jeroboam, and because he slew (...)
this man.

The XVI. Chapter.
IN the six and twentieth year of Asa charettes co^spyred against him. As for
Ella, he was at Thirza, drank and was dronke^ in ye house of Arza the ruler of
Thirza. And Simri came in, and slew him in the seven and twentieth year of
Asa king of Judah, and was king in his stead. (...)
And when he was king, and sat upon his seat, he smote all the house of
Baesa, and left not so much as one to make water against ye wall: his blood
auengers also and his friends. (...)
Thus did Simri destroy all the house of Baesa, acordinge to the word of the
LORD, which he spoke over Baesa by the prophet Iehu, because of all the sins
of Baesa and of Ella his son, which they did, and made Israel for to sin,
to provoke the LORD God of Israel unto wrath through their vanities. What more
there is to say of Ella, and all that he did, behold, it is written in the
Cronicles of the kings of Israel.

^ Re. 9. f
But when Simri saw yt the cite should be won; he went in to the palace in
the kings house, and brent it with ye kings house, and dyed because of his
sins which he had committed, in that he did evil in the sight of the LORD,
and walked in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sins which he did, wherewith he
made Israel to sin.

What more there is to say of Simri, and how he conspired, behold, it is
written in ye Cronicles of the kings of Israel. At the same time were ye
people divided in two parts: the one part held with Thibni the son of
Ginath, that they might make him king:

In ye one and thirtieth year of Asa king of Judah, was Amri king over Israel
twolue years, and reigned at Thirza six years. He boughte the mount of
Samaria of Semer for two hundredth weight of silver, and builded upon the mount,
and called the cite which he builded, after ye name of Semer ye owner of ye
mount of Samaria. And Amri did that which was evil in ye sight of the LORD,
and was worse then all they that were before him, and walked in all ye ways of
Jeroboam ye son of Nebat, and in his sins, wherewith he made Israel to
sin, so that they provoked the LORD God of Israel unto wrath in their
vanities. What more there is to say of Amri, and all that he did, and his
power that he exercysed, behold, it is written in the Cronicles of the kings
of Israel. And Amri slepte with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria, and
Achab his son was king in his stead.

In the eight and thirtieth year of Asa king LORD, more the^ all they yt
were before him. And he thought it but a small matter to walk in the sins
of Jeroboam the son of Nebat: Deuteronomy. 7. a
and took Iesabel the daughter of Eth Baal king of Sidon to wife, and went
and served Baal, and worshipped him. And unto Baal he set up an altar in Baals
house, which he builded him in Samaria, and made a grove: so that Achab did
more to provoke the God of Israel unto wrath, then all the kings yt were
before him in Israel.

At ye same time did Hiel of Bethel build Jericho: Iosu. 6. e
It cost him his first son Abiram, yt he laid ye foundation: and his youngest
son Segub, yt he set up the ports: Acordinge to the word of the LORD,
which he spoke by Joshua the son of Nun.

The XVII. Chapter.
ANd Elias ye Theszbite one of the inhabiters 3. Re. 18 f 4. Re. 3. c Jacob. 5.
c Luc. 4. c
As truly as the LORD God of Israel lives, whose servant I am, there shall
nether rain ner dew come this year, except I speak it.

And the word of the LORD came unto him, and said: Get the hence, and turn
the toward the east, and hyde the bythe river Crith, which is over against
Iordane, and thou shall drink of the river: and I have commanded the ravens,
that they shall feed the there. He departed, and did acordinge to the word of
the LORD, and went his way, and sat him down by the river Crith, which is
over against Iordane. And the raue^s brought him bred and flesh in the
morning and in the evening, and he drank of the river.

And it fortuned after cerayne days, that the river was dried: up for there
was no rain in the lord. Then came ye word of ye LORD unto him, and said:
(...). 4. c
Get ye up, and go unto Sarepta, which lies by Sido^: for there have I
commanded a wedowe to make prouysion for the.

LORD ye God lives, I have no bred, but an handful of flower in a pitcher,
and a curtesy oil in a cruse: and behold, I have gathered up one or two
sticks, and will go and prepare it for me and my son, that we may eat and
dye.

Elias said unto her: Fear not, go thy way, and do as thou have said: yet
make me first a morsel of bred thereof, and bring it me forth: and afterward
shall thou make it for ye and thy son. For thus says ye LORD God of
Israel: The meell in the pitcher shall not be spent, and the oil in ye cruse
shall not fayll, unto the day yt the LORD shall cause it for to rain upon
earth. She went and did as Elias said. And he ate, and she also, and her
house a certain season. The meel in the pitcher was not mynished, and the oil
in the cruse failed not, acordinge to the word of ye LORD which he spoke by
Elias.

LORD, and said: O LORD my God, have thou dealt so evil with the wedow with
whom I dwell, yt thou would slaye her son? And Eccli. 48. a
he stretched out him self over the child three times, and called upon the
LORD, and said: O LORD my God, let the soul of this child come again in
to him. And the LORD herd the voice of Elias. And the soul of the child
came again unto him, and he reuyued. And Elias took the child, and brought
him down from the chamber in to the house and delivered him unto his mother,
and said: Behold, thy son lives. And the woman said unto Elias: Now know
I, that thou are a man of God, and that the word of the LORD is in thy mouth
of a truth.

The XVIII. Chapter.
ANd after a long season came ye word LORD unto Elias in the third year,
and said: (...)
Go thy way, and show ye self unto Achab, yt I may cause it for to rain
upon earth. And Elias went to show him self unto Achab. But there was a
great derth i^ Samaria. And Achab called Abdia his chief officer: (As for
Abdia, he feared ye LORD greatly: for wha^ Iesabel roted out ye prophets of
ye LORD, Abdia took an C. prophets, and hyd them in caves, here fiftye, and
there fiftye, and provided for them with bred and water.) Achab now said unto
Abdia: Go through the land unto all the wells of water and ryuers, if happlye
we may find hay, and to save ye horses and mules, yt all the catell perish
not. And they parted the^ selves in to the land, to go through it. Achab
departed the one way alone, and Abdia ye other way alone.

Now when Abdia was on ye way, Elias met him. And when he knew him, he fell
down upon his face, and said: Art not thou my lord Elias? He said: ye, go
thy way, and tell ye lord: behold, Elias is here. But he said: What have I
offended, that thou will deliver thy servant in to the hands of Achab, that
he may slaye me? As truly as the LORD thy God lives, there is no people ner
kingdom, but my lord has sent thither to seek the. And when they said: He
LORD: behold, Elias is here. Now when I were gone from the, the sprete of the
LORD should take ye away, I can not tell whither: and if I then came and
told Achab, and found the not, he should slaye me: But thy servant fears
the LORD from his youth up. Has it not been told my lord what I did, when
Iesabel slew the prophets of the LORD, how that I hyd an hundredth of the
LORDS prophets, here fiftye, and there fiftye in the caves, and provided for
them with bred and water? And thou say now: Go thy way, tell thy lord:
Elias is here, that he may slaye me. Elias said: As truly as ye LORD Zebaoth
lives, before whom I sto^de, I will show my self unto him this day. Then
went Abdia to mete Achab, and told him. And Achab went for to mete Elias.

And when Achab saw Elias, Achab said unto him: Art thou he that troublest
Israel? He said: I trouble not Israel, (...). 4. c
but it is thou and thy fathers house, because ye have forsaken the
commandments of the LORD, and walk after Baal. Go to, send forth now, and
gather me all Israel together unto mount Carmell, and the four hundredth and
fiftye prophets of Baal, and the four hundredth prophets of ye grove, which
eat of Iesabels table. So Achab sent unto all the children of Israel, and
gathered the prophets together unto mount Carmell.

Then stepte Elias unto all the people, and said: How long halte ye on both
ye sides? If the LORD be God, the^ walk after him: but if Baal be he, the^
follow him. And the people gave him no answer. The^ said Elias unto the
people: I only am left a prophet of ye LORD: but Baals prophets are four
C. and fifty me^. Give us now two bullockes, and let them chose one bullock,
and hew him in pieces, and lay him upon the wod, and put no fire thereon: so
will I take ye other bullock, and lay him upon the wod, and put no fire thereon
also: call ye then upon the name of yor god, and I will call upon the name of
the LORD: look which God now answers with fire, let the same be God. And all
the people answered and said: That is right. And Elias said unto Baals
prophets: Chose ye one bullock, and do ye it first (for ye are many) and call
ye upon the name of your god, and lay no fire thereon.



Then said Elias unto all the people: Come hither all ye people unto me. And
when all ye people came to him, he repaired ye ^ Re. 14. c
altar of the LORD yt was broken, Iosu. 4 b
and took twolue stones acordinge to the nombre of ye trybes of the children of
Jacob (unto whom the word of the LORD spoke, and said: Genesis 3 and 35.
Thy name shall be Israel) and of ye stones he builded an altar in the name of
the LORD, and made a pytt round about the altar, like two forowes in the
corn land, and prepared the wod, and hewed ye bullock in pieces, and laid him
upon the wod, and said: Fetch four



And when the time was to offer ye meat offering, Elias stepte forth, and
said: O LORD God of Abraham, of Isaac and of Israel, let it be known this
day, that thou art God in Israel, and I thy servant, and that I have done all
this acordinge unto ye word. Hear me O LORD, O hear me, yt this people may
know, how that thou art the LORD God, that thou may afterward turn their
hertes. Iud. 6. d Eccli* 4^ 2. Mac. 1.
Then fell down the fire of the LORD, and consumed the burnt offeringe, the
wodd, the stones and the earth, and licked up the water that was in the pytt.
When all the people saw that, they fell upon their faces, and said: The LORD
is God, ye LORD is God. Elias said unto them: Deuteronomy. 12. ^ and 17. b
Lay hands upon Baals prophets, yt none of them escape. And they took them.
And Elias brought them down unto ye broke Cyson, and slew the^ there.

And Elias said unto Achab: Go up, eat there goes up a little cloud out of
the sea, like a man's hand. He said: Go up, and say unto Achab: Bind ye
charet, and go down, yt the rain overtake the not. And or a man could turn
him, the heaven was black with clouds and wind, and there came a great rain.
But Achab rode his way, and departed unto Iesrael. And the hand of ye LORD
came upon Elias, and he gyrde his loins, and ran before Achab, till he came
unto Iesrael.

The XIX. Chapter.
LORD, take my soul, for I am no better then my fathers. And he laid him
down and slepte under the Juniper tree.

And behold, ye angel touched him, and said unto him: Stand up, and eat.
And he looked about him, and behold, at his head there was a bred baken on
the coals, and a cruse with water. And when he had eaten and dronke^, he laid
him down again to sleep.

LORD, came again the second time, and touched him, and said: Stand up,
and eat, for thou have a great way to go. And he arose, and ate and dra^ke,
and went on through the strength of that meat ^xo. 34. d ^att. 4. a
fortye days and fortye nights, eue^ unto Horeb ye mount of God: and there he
came to a cave, and abode there all night. And behold the word of the LORD
came to him, and said unto him: What do thou here Elias? He said: I have
been zealous for the LORD God Zebaoth: for the children of Israel have forsaken
thy covenant, and broken down thine altares, and slain thy prophets with
the sword, and I am left only, and they seek to take away my life. He
said: Go forth, and stand upon the mount before the LORD. And behold, the
LORD went over: and a great mighty wind, which roue the mountains, and
brake the hard stones, came before the LORD, but the LORD was not in the
wind. After the wind came there an earthquake, but the LORD was not in the
earthquake.

And after the earth quake there came a LORD was not in the fire. And after
the fire came there a still soft hyssinge. When Elias herd that, he covered
his face with his cloak, and went forth, and stood in the door of the cave.
And behold, there came a voice unto him, and said: What have thou here to do
Elias?

He said: I have been zealous for the LORD God Zebaoth: (...)
for the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, broken down thine
altares, slain ye prophets with theswerde, and I only am left, and they seek
to take away my life. But the LORD said unto him: Go ye way again through
the wyldernes unto Damascon, and go in, (...)
and anoynte Hasael king over Siria, (...)
and Iehu the son of Nimsi king over Israel, and Eliseus ye son of Saphat
of Abel Mehola to be prophet in ye stead. And it shall come to pass, yt, who
so escapes the sword of Hasael, Iehu shall slaye him, and who so escapes ye
sword of Iehu, Eliseus shall slaye him. (...)
And I will reserve

And he departed thence, and found Elizeus ye son of Saphat, plowinge with
twolue yocke of oxen before him, and he himself was among the twolue. And
Elias went unto him, and cast his cloak upon him. And he left the oxen, and
ran after Elias, and said: (...)
Let me kiss my father and my mother, and so will I follow the. And he said
unto him: Go thy way, and come again, for I have some what to do with the.
And he ran again from him, and took a yock of oxen, and offered it, and sod
ye flesh with the wod of the oxen plowes, and gave it unto the people to eat,
and gat him up, and followed Elias, and mynistred unto him.

The XX. Chapter.
ANd (...)
Benadab ye king of Siria gathered

And the messaungers came again, and said: Thus says Benadab: For so much
as I have sent unto the, saying: Thy silver and thy gold, thy wives and thy
children shall thou give me, tomorow about this time will I send my servants
unto the, yt they may search thine house and the houses of thy subjects: and
look what pleasant thing thou have, yt shall they take in their hands, and
carry it away. So the king of Israel called all ye Elders of the lord, and
said: Mark well and se, what myschefe this man seeks: He sent unto me for my
wives and children, for silver and gold, and I have not said him nay. Then
said all the Elders and all the people unto him: Thou shall not co^sente ner
agree unto him. And he spoke unto Benadabs messau^gers, Say unto my lord ye
king: All ye things wherefore thou dyddest send unto me ye servant at ye
first, will I do, but this can I not do. And ye messaungers went, and told
this again. The^ sent Benadab unto him saye^ge: The gods do this and yt unto
me, if the dust of Samaria shall be enough, for every one of my people to bring
me an handful thereof. But ye king of Israel answered, and said: Tell him,
Let not him yt puts on ye harnes, make his boast like him yt has put it of.
Wha^ Benadab herd yt (eue^ as he was drynkinge with the kings in ye pauylion)
he said unto his servants: Set yor selves in array. And they set the^ selves
in araie against ye cite.

And behold, there came a prophet unto Achab ye king of Israel, and said:
Thus says the LORD: Have thou seen all this great multitude? Behold, this
day will I deliver the^ in to ye hand, so yt thou shall know, how yt I am ye
LORD. Achab said: LORD: Even by the young men of the rulers of the land. He
said: Who shall order the battayl? He said: Thou. Then mustered he the young
men of the rulers of the land, and there were two hundredth and two and thirty
of them: and after the^ mustured he of the whole people of all the children of
Israel, seven thousand men, and they went out in the noone day. As for
Benadab, he drank and was dronken in the pauylion with the two and thirty
kings which were come to help him. And the young men of the rulers of the
land went forth first.

Benadab sent forth, and they brought him word, and said: There come men out
of Samaria. He said: Take them alive, whether they be come forth for peace, or
for war. But when the land rulers young men were gone forth, and the host
behind them, every one smote him yt came in his way. And the Sirians fled,
and Israel followed after them. And Benadab the king of Syria escaped with
horses and horsemen. And the king of Israel went forth, and smote horses and
charettes, and did a great slaughter on the Syrians.

Then came there a prophet unto the king

But let us fight with them on the plain, and thou shall se that we shall
overcome them. Do thus, put away the kings every one from his place, and set
dukes in their steades, and appoynte the an host as was that which thou have
lost, and horses and charettes as the other were, and led us fight against the^
in the plain, and thou shall se that we shall have the victory. He consented
unto their voice, and did so.

Now when the year was gone about, Benadab appointed the Sirians, and went
up toward Aphek, to fight against Israel, and the children of Israel
mustured, and provided them selves with vytailes, and went to mete them, and
pitched their te^tes over against them, like two little flocks of goats but
the land was full of the Syrians.

And there came a man of God, and said LORD: Because the Syrians have said,
that the LORD is a God of the mountains and not a God of the valleys,
therefore have I given all this great heap in to thy hands, that ye may
know how that I am ye LORD. And they pitched their tents right over against
them seven days. But upon ye seventh day they went together in to the
battayll: and the children of Israel smote of the Sirians an hundredth thousand
footmen in one day, and the remnaunt fled to Aphek in to the cite, and the
wall fell upon the other seven and twenty thousand men. And Benadab fled also
unto the cite in to a little chamber.

Then said his servants unto him: Behold, we have herd that the kings of
the house of Israel are merciful kings, Let us therefore put sack cloth about
our loins, and halters about our necks, and go forth to the king of
Israel, peradventure he shall let ye soul live.

And they put sack cloth about their loins, and halters about their necks,
and came to the king of Israel, and said: Benadab thy servant says unto
the: O let my soul live. He said: if he be yet alive, he is my brother. And
the men took him shortly at his word, and expounded it for them selves and
said: Ye Benadab is thy brother. He said: Come and bring him. The^ went
Benadab forth unto him, and he caused him to sit upon the charet, and said
unto him: The cities that my father took from thy father, will I give the
again. And make thou streets for thyselfe at Damasco^, as my father did at
Samaria, so will I let the go with a bond of peace. And he made a covenant
with him, and let him go.

Then spoke there a man among the children of the prophets unto his neighbor
by the word of the LORD: I pray the smite me. But he refused to smite him.
Then said he unto him, because thou have not herkened unto the voice of the
LORD, behold, therefore shall there a lion smite the, when thou go fro me^
^. Re 13. c
And when he went from him, a lion found him, and slew him.



Then put he the aszshes from his face in all the haist. And the king of
Israel knew him, that he was one of the prophets. And he said unto him: Thus
says the LORD: Because thou have let the damned man go, therefore shall thy
soul be for his soul, and thy people for his people. And the king of Israel
departed unto his house, being troubled in his mind and full indignacion, and
came to Samaria.

The XXI. Chapter.
LORD let that be far fro me, (...)
that I should give ye my fathers heretage. Then came Achab home, being moved
and full of indignacion, because of the word that Naboth the Iesraelite had
spoken unto him, and said: I will not give the my fathers inheritance. And he
laid him down upon his bed, and turned his face aside, and ate no bred. Then
Iesabel his wife came in to him and said unto him: What is ye matter, that thy
sprete is so co^bred, and that thou eatest no bred? He said unto her: I have
spoken unto Naboth the Iesraelite, and said: Give me thy vynyarde for money:
or if it please yt, I will give the another for it. But he said: I will not
give the my vynyarde.

Then said Iesabel his wife unto him:

And the Elders and rulers of his cite, which dwelt in his cite, did as Iesabel
had commanded them, acordynge as she had written in the letter that she sent
unto them and they proclaimed a fast, and caused Naboth to sit above among the
people. Then came the two men of Belial, and stood before him, and testyfyed
against Naboth in ye presence of the people, and said: Naboth has blasphemed
God and the king.

Then brought they him out of the cite, and stoned him to death. And they sent
Iesabel word, saying: Naboth is stoned and put to death. Wha^ Iesabel herd
that Naboth was stoned and deed, she said unto Achab: Up, and take possession
of the vynyarde of

But the word of the LORD came to Elias the Theszbite, and said: Get the up,
and go down to mete Achab the king of Israel, which is at Samaria: behold,
he is in Naboths vynyarde, in to the which he is gone down to take possession
of it, and talk thou with him, and speak: Thus says the LORD: Thou have
slain, and taken in possession. And thou shall talk morouer unto him, and
say: Thus says the LORD: (...). 22. f
Even in the place where the dogs licked up Naboths blood, shall the dogs
lick thy blood also. And Achab said unto Elias: Have thou ever found me
thine enemy? He said: Ye, I have found the, because thou art even sold to
do evil in the sight of the LORD. Behold, Re. ^. b (...) 1. ^
I will bring mysfortune upon the, and take away thy posterite, and will rote
out from Achab, even him that makes water against the wall, and him that is
shut up and left behind in Israel: and thy house will I make as the house of
Jeroboam ye son of Nebat, and as the house of Baesa the son of Ahia,
because of ye prouocacion wherwhith thou have provoked me unto wrath, and made
Israel to sin.

LORD also and said: Re. 9. b
The dogs shall devour Iesabel in ye field of Iesrael. Re. 14. b (...). 16. a
Who so of Achab dies in ye cite, him shall the dogs eat up: and who so
dies in the field, the fowls under the heaven shall eat him up. So clean
(...). 1. b
sold to do myschefe in ye sight of the LORD has no man been, as Achab: for
his Iesabel has so disceaued him, and he makes him self a great
abhominacion, that he goes after Idols, acordi^ge unto all as did the
Amorites, (...)
whom the LORD expelled before the children of Israel.

But when Achab herd these words, he re^te his clothes, and put a sack cloth
on his body, and fasted, and slepte in sack cloth, and went about hanginge
down his head. And the word of the LORD came to Elias the Theszbite, and
said: Have thou not seen how Achab humbles him self before me? For so much
now as he hu^bleth him self in my sight, I will not bring that plage while he
lives: but by his sons life will I bring mysfortune upon his house.

The XXII. Chapter.
ANd there passed over three years, that there was no war between the Sirians
and Israel. ^. Par. ^^. a
But in the third year went Iosaphat the king of Judah down to the king of
Israel. And the king of Israel said unto his servants: Know ye not yt
Ramoth in Gilead is ours? and we sit still, and take it not out of the hand
of the king of Syria. And he said unto Iosaphat: Will thou go with me to the
battaill unto Ramoth in Gilead? Iosaphat said unto the king of Israel: I will
be as thou my people as thy people, and my horses as thy horses. And Iosaphat
said unto ye king of Israel: ^. Re. 23. ^ 2. Re. 2. a and 2^. a
3. Re. 1^. ^
Axe this day at the word of the LORD. Then the king of Israel gathered the
prophets about a four hundredth men, and said unto them: Shall I go unto
Ramoth in Gilead to fight, or shall I let it alone? They said: Go up, ye LORD
shall deliver it in to ye kings hand. But Iosaphat said: Is there not one
prophet here more of ye LORD, that we may axe at him?

The king of Israel said unto Iosaphat LORD: but I hate him, for he
prophecieth me no good, but evil. Iosaphat said: Let not the king say so.
Then called the king of Israel a chamberlayne, and said: Bring hither soon
Micheas the son of Iemla. As for the king of Israel and Iosaphat ye king of
Judah, they sat either of them upon his seat, arrayed in their garments in the
place at ye door of the port of Samaria, and all ye prophets prophesied
before the^. And Sedechias the son of Cnaena had made him horns of iron, and
said: Thus says the LORD: With these shall thou puszshe at ye Syrians, till
thou bring them to naught And all the prophets prophesied likewise, and
said: Go up unto Ramoth in Gilead, thou shall prospere right well, and the
LORD shall deliver it in to the kings hand. And the messaunger that went to
call Micheas said unto him: Behold, The words of ye prophets are with one
acorde good before the king, let thy word therefore be as their word, and
speak thou good also.

Micheas said: As truly as the LORD lives, look what the LORD says unto
me, LORD shall give it in to the kings hand. But the king said unto him
again: I charge yt that thou say no other thing unto me but the truth, in
the name of ye LORD. He said: I saw all Israel scatred abroad upon the
mountains, as the sheep that have no shepherde. And the LORD said: Have
these no lord? Let every one turn home again in peace. Then said ye king
of Israel unto Iosaphat: Told not I ye that he would prophecye me no good, but
evil?

He said: Hear now therefore the word LORD: ^. Pa. 18. c
I saw the LORD sit upon his seat, and all the host of heaven sto^dinge by
him at his right hand and at his left. And the LORD said: Who will disceaue
Achab to go up, and fall at Ramoth in Gilead. And one said this, another that.
Then went there forth a sprete, and stood before the LORD, and said: I will
disceaue him. The LORD said unto him: Wherewith? He said unto him: I will go
forth, and be a false sprete in the mouth of all his prophets. He said: Thou
shall disceaue him, and shall be able: go forth and do so. Behold now, ^ze.
14. b
the LORD has given a false sprete in ye mouth of all these ye prophets, and
the LORD has spoken evil over the. Then stepte forth Sedechias the son of
Cnaena, and smote Micheas upon the cheke, and said: What, is the sprete of the
LORD departed fro me, to speak with the? Micheas said: Behold, thou shall
se it in yt day, when thou shall go from one chamber to another to hyde the.

The king of Israel said: Take Micheas, and let him remain with Amon the
ruler of the cite, and with Ioas the kings son, LORD spoken through me. And
he said: harken to all ye people.

So the king of Israel and Iosaphat ye king of Judah went up unto Ramoth in
Gilead. And the king of Israel said unto Iosaphat: Change thy clothes, and
come in to ye battayll in thine araie. The king of Israel changed his clothes
also, and went in to the battayll. But the king of Siria commanded the
rulers of his charettes (of whom there were two and thirty) and said: Ye shall
fight nether against small ner great, but only against the king of Israel.
And when the rulers of the charettes saw Iosaphat, they thought it had been
the king of Israel, and fell upon him with fightinge. But Iosaphat cried. So
when the rulers of the charettes saw that it was not ye king of Israel, they
turned back from him.

(...)
ye dogs licked his blood (but the harlottes waszshed him) acordinge to the
word of ye LORD which he spoke.

What more there is to say of Achab, and all yt he did, and of the Yuery house
which he builded, behold, it is written in the Cronicles of the kings of
Israel. So Achab slepte with his fathers, and his son Ahasia was king in his
stead.

(...)
And Iosaphat the son of Asa was LORD, yet put he not away ye hie places,
and ye people offered and brent in ce^se yet upon the hye places, and he had
peace with the king of Israel.

What more there is to say of Iosaphat and the might that he exercised, and
how he fought, behold, it is written in the Cronicles of the kings of Judah.
(...)
He put out of the land also the whoremongers that yet were left, which
remained over in the time of his father Asa. And at that time there were no
kings in Edom. And Iosaphat had caused to make ships upon the Sea, which
should go to fetch gold in Ophir, but they went not: for they were broken at
Ezeon Gaber. At that time said Ahasia the son of Achab unto Iosaphat: Let my
servants pass with thy servants in the ships. But Iosaphat would not.
And Iosaphat slepte with his fathers, and was buried in ye cite of David. And
Ioram his son was king in his stead.

The end of the third book of the kings.
The fourth book of the kings.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I. Of the reign of Ochosias (otherwise called Ahasia) and of Ioram his
brother and how the fire consumed the two captains with their men. Chap. II.
Elias is taken up in a fyrie charet. Eliseus receaueth the sprete of Elias,
makes the bitter water sweet, and curses the mysnurtoured children. Chap.
III. Of Ioram and Iosaphat, and of their war, and what Eliseus said unto
them Chap. IIII. Eliseus helps the woman that was in dett, and for another
woman which had no children, he optayneth one of God: which child being deed
he rayseth up again. Chap. V. Naaman the chief captain of Siria is cleansed
from his leprosy, and Gehasi Eliseus servant is made leporous. Chap. VI. The
iron swymmeth in the water. The king of Siria fights against Israel. His
servants which go about to take Eliseus, are smytten with blyndnes. A great
honger in Samaria. Chap. VII. Of the four lepers which came in to the tents
of the Syrians, and how vytayles began to be good chepe. Chap. VIII. Of the
seven year derth. Benadab is sick, and areth counsel at Eliseus. Of Ochosias
the son of Ioram. Chap. IX. Of Iehu, how he was anointed king over Israel,
and how he roted out the houof Achab and of Iesabel. Chap. X. The heads of
Achabs seventy sons are brought unto Iehu. Of Ochosias brethren Iehu
slays Baal prestes. Chap. XI. Atalia destroys all the kings sede, save
Ioas which escapes, and is made king by Ioiada the pressed. Chap. XII. Ioas
rules well while Ioiada is alive, but evil after his death. Chap. XIII. Of
the kings Ioachias, Ioas and Jeroboam, and how the deed that was laid in
Eliseus grave, reuyued. Chap. XIIII. Of Ioas, Amasias, Jeroboam and Azarias.
Chap. XV. Of Azarias the Leper, and of his son Ionathas. Of Zacharias the
king of Israel. Of Sellum, Manahem, Pacea, Romelia. And how Teglatphalasser
co^quererh the cities of Judah* Chap. XVI. Of Achas, Resin, and Ezechias. Chap.
XVII. Of Osea, how Salmanasar came upon him, and conquered, and carried the
people away captyue. And how God punyshed those that came in their stead.
Chap. XVIII. Of the good king Ezechias, and how Sennacherib troubles him.
Chap. XIX. Ezechias sends unto Esaias, which comforreth him. God defends
Ezechias, and delyuereth him. Chap. XX. Ezechias is deed sick, but Esaias at the
commandment of the LORD, promyseth him to live yet fyftene year. Chap. XXI.
Of the reign of the ungodly king Manasses, how he lived and how he dyed Of
his son Amon. Chap. XXII. Of the reign of that noble and virtuous king
Josias, and of his goodly acts. Chap. XXIII How Josias caused the book of the
covenant to be red unto all the people, and sets up the true honor of God
again Of Ioachas his son. Chap. XXIII. How Nabuchodonosor comes upon king
Ioachim, and carries away Ioachim his son unto Babylon. Chap. XXV.
Nabuchodonosor lays sege to Jerusalem, wynneth it, sets fire on it, and
caryeth away the king and the people presoners unto Babylon.
The first Chapter.
AHasia the son off Achab LORD, and walked in the way of his father and of
his mother, and in the way of Jeroboam ye son of Nebat, which made Israel
for to sin. And served Baal, and worshipped him, and displeased the LORD God
of Israel, eue^ as his father did. The Moabites also fell away from Israel,
when Achab was deed.

And Ochosias fell through ye grate in his chamber at Samaria, and was deed
sick, and sent messaungers, and said unto them: Go your way, and axe
council at Beelzebub the god of Ekron, whether I shall recover from this
sickness. But the angel of ye LORD said unto Elias the Theszbite: Up, and
go mete the messaungers of the king of Samaria, LORD: Thou shall not come
from the bed whereon thou lie, but shall dye the death.

And Elias went his way. And wha^ ye messaunges came to Ochosias again, he
said unto the^: Why come ye again? They said unto him: There came up a man
in our way, and said unto us: Go again to the king that has sent you, and
say unto him: Thus says the LORD: Is there no God in Israel, yt thou
sendest to axe counsel at Beelzebub ye god of Ekro^? Therefore shall thou not
come from ye bed whereon thou lie, but shall dye the death. He said unto
them: What manner of man was it that met you, and said this unto you? They
said unto him: He had a rough here upon him, and a letheren gyrdell about his
loins. He said: It is Elias the Theszbite.

^uc. 9. f
Then fell there fire from heaven, and consumed him and his fyftye. And again
he sent another captain over fyftye unto him, with his fyftye, which answered,
and said unto him: Thou man of God, thus says the king: Come down in all
the haist. Elias answered, and said: If I be a man of God, ye fire fall down
from heaven, and consume the and thy fyftye. Then fell the fire of God from
heaven, and consumed him, and his fyftye. Again, he sent unto him the third
captain over fyftye, with his fyftie.

LORD unto Elias: Go down with him, and fear him not. And he gatt him up,
and went down with him unto ye king.

And he said unto him: Thus says the LORD: Because thou have sent forth
messau^gers, and caused to axe council at Beelzebub the god of Ekron, as
though there were no God in Israel to axe counsel at his word, therefore shall
thou not come from the bed whereon thou have laid the, but shall dye ye death.
So he dyed, acordynge to the word of the LORD which Elias said. And Ioram
(his brother) was king in his stead in the second year of Ioram the son
of Iosaphat king of Judah: for he had no son.

What more there is to say of Ochosias, what he did, behold, it is written in
the Cronicles of the kings of Israel.

The II. Chapter.
LORD was minded to take up Elias in the tempest, Elias and Eliseus went from
Gilgall. And Elias said to Eliseus: Tarry thou here I pray the, for the LORD
has sent me unto Bethel. But Eliseus said: As truly as the LORD lives, and
as truly as thy soul lives, I will not forsake the. And when they came down
unto Bethel, the prophets children that were at Bethel, went forth to
Eliseus, and said unto him: Know thou not, that the LORD will take thy
lord away from thy head this day? He said: I know it well, hold ye your
peace.

And Elias said unto him: Eliseus, tarry thou here I pray the, for the LORD
has sent me unto Jericho. Nevertheless he said: as truly as the LORD
lives, and as truly as thy soul lives, I will not forsake the

And when they came unto Jericho, the LORD will take ye lord away from thy
head this day? He said: I know it well, hold ye yor peace. And Elias said
unto him: I pray the tarry here, for ye LORD has sent me unto Iordane. But he
said: As truly as the LORD lives, and as truly as thy soul lives, I will
not forsake the. And they went both together. But fyftye men of ye prophets
children went forth, and stood over against the^ a far of: but they both
stood by Iordane. Then took Elias his cloak, and wrapped it together, and smote
the water, which divided it self on both the sides, so that they went dry
shod through it. And when they were come over, Elias said unto Eliseus: Axe
what I shall do for the, before I be taken away from the. Eliseus said: That
thy sprete may be upon me to speak twyse as much.

He said: Thou have desired an hard (...)
And so went Elias up to heaven in the storm. But Eliseus saw it, and cried:
My father, my father, the charetman of Israel and his horsemen. And he saw him
no more.

And he took hold of his clothes, and rent them in two pieces, and took up
Elias cloak that was fallen from him, and turned back, and stood by the shore
of Iordane, and took the same cloak of Elias which was fallen from him, and
smote it in the water, and said: Where is now the LORD God of Elias? And he
smote it in to the water, and then parted it asunder on both the sides, and
Eliseus went through.

LORD has taken him, and cast him upon some mountain or in some valley. But
he said: Send them not. Nevertheless they constrained him, till he was
ashamed, and said: Let them go. And they sent fiftye men, which sought him
three days: but they found him not, and came again unto him. And he abode at
Jericho, and said unto them: Told not I you, that ye should not go? And the
men of the cite said unto Eliseus: Behold, there is good dwelling in this
cite, as my lord seyth, but the water is evil, and the land unfruitful.

LORD: I have healed this water: from hence forth shall there no deed ner
vnfrutefulnes come of it. So the water was healed unto this day, acordinge to
the word of Eliseus which he spoke.

And he went up toward Bethel. And as he was going up by the way, there
came little boys out of the cite, and mocked him, and said: Come up here thou
balde head, come up here thou balde head. And he turned him about. And wha^
he saw them, he cursed them in the name of the LORD. Then came there two
Beeres out of the wod, and tente two and fortye of the children. From thence
went he up unto mount Carmel, and from it turned he back to Samaria.

The III. Chapter.
LORD, but not as his father and his mother: for he put away ye pilers of
Baal, which his father caused to make. Nevertheless he cleued unto ye sins of
Ieroboa^ ye son of Nebat, which made Israel for to sin, and departed not
there from.

Mesa ye king of the Moabites had many sheep, and paid tribute unto the king
of Israel with the woll of an hundredth thousand la^bes, and of an hundredth
thousand ra^mes. 4. Re. 1. a
But when Achab was deed, the king of ye Moabites fell away from the king of
Israel. At ye same time went king Ioram from Samaria, and mustered all
Israel, and sent unto Iosaphat king of Judah, saying: The king of the
Moabites is fallen away fro me, come thou with me to fight against ye Moabites.
He said: I will come up, 3. Re. 22. a
I am even as thou, and my people as ye people, and my horses as thy horses.
And said morouer: Which way will we go up? He said: by the

So the king of Israel, the king of Judah, and the king of Edom went forth.
And when they had gone about seven days journey, ye host and the catell yt
were among the^ had no water. Then said the king of Israel: Alas, the LORD
has called these three kings, to deliver the^ into the hand of the Moabites.
But: Iosaphat said: 3. Re. 22. a
Is here no prophet of ye LORD, yt we may axe counsel at ye LORD by him?
Then answered one of ye king of Isreal's servants, and said: Here is Eliseus
ye son of Saphat, which poured water upon Elias hands. Iosaphat said: The
word of ye LORD is with him. So the king of Israel and Iosaphat, and ye
king of Edom went down unto him.

But Eliseus said unto the king of Israel: LORD has called these three
kings, to deliver them in to the hands of the Moabites. Eliseus said: As
truly as the LORD Zebaoth lives, before whom I sto^de, if I regarded not
Iosaphat the king of Judah, I would not regard the, ner set ought by ye. So
bring me now a mynstrell. And when the mynstrell played upon the instrument,
the hand of the LORD came upon him. And he said: Thus says the LORD: Make
pittes by this broke. For thus says the LORD: Ye shall se nether wind ner
rain, yet shall the broke be full of water, that ye and your housholdes and
your catell may drink. Ye and that is but a small thing in the sight of
the LORD. And the Moabites Deu. 20. c
and shall fell down all the good trees, and stop all the wells of water and
all the good feldes shall ye make waist with stones.

On the morrow, when the meat offering is offered, behold, there came water ye
way from Edom, and filled ye land with water. But when the Moabites herd, yt
the kings came up to fight against the^, they called all ye harnessed men,
and their rulers, and stood on ye border. And when they rose early in ye
morning, and the Son went up upon ye water, the Moabites thought the water
over against the^to be eue^ as reed as blood, and they said: It is blood, ye
kings have destroyed them selves with the sword, and one has smytten another.
Now Moab get the up to the spoils. But when they came to the tents of Israel,
the Israelites gat up, and smote the Moabites, and they fled before them.



But wha^ the king of ye Moabites saw yt the battayll was to strong for him,
he took to him seven C. men, which drue ye sword, to fall upon the king of
Edom: nevertheless they were not able. Then took he his first son, which
should have been king in his stead, and offered him for a burnt offering upon
the wall. Then came there a great wrath over Israel, that they departed from
him, and turned again in to their land.

The IIII. Chapter.
LORD. Now comes the man that he was detter unto, and will take away both
my children to be bond servants. Eliseus said unto her: What shall I do
forth? Tell me, what have thou in the house? She said: Thy handmayden has
nothing in the house but a pitcher with oil. He said: Go yt way, borowe
without of all thy neghboures emptye vessels, and that not a few, and go in,
and shut ye door behind the with thy sons, and pour of it in to all ye
vessels: and when thou have filled them, deliver them forth.

She went, and shut the door unto her with her sons, which brought her the
vessels, and so she poured in. And when the vessels were full, she said unto
her son: Bring me yet one vessel. He said unto her: There is not one
vessel more here. Then stood ye oil still. And she sent, and told the man of
God. He said: Go thy way, sell the oil, and pay the creditour: but live
thou and ye sons of the resydue.

And it fortuned at ye same time, that Eliseus went unto Sunem. And there was
a rich woman, which held him to eat with her: and as he passed often through yt
way, he went in unto her: and ate with her. And she said unto her huszbande:
Behold, I perceive that this is an holy man of God which goes ever through
this way, let us make hi^ a little chamber of boordes, and set a bed, a table,
a stole and a candelsticke therein, that when he comes unto us, he may
resort thither.

And it fortuned upon a time, that he came in, and laid him down in the
chamber, and slepte therein. And he said unto Gehasi his child: Call this
woman of Sunem. And wha^ he had called her, she stood before him. He said unto
him: Speak thou unto her, behold, thou have mynistred unto us in all these
things, what shall I do for the? Have thou any matter to be spoken for to the
king, or to the chief captain of the host? She said: Idwell among my
people. He said: What have thou then to do? Gehasi said: Alas, she has no
son, and her huszba^de is old. He said: Call her. And wha^ he had called
her, she stood at the door. And he said: (...)
About this time if ye fruit can live, thou shall enbrace a son. She said:
Alas, no my lord, thou man of God, lie not unto thy handmayden. And the woman
conceived, and bare a son about the same time, wha^ the fruit could live,
acordynge as Eliseus had said unto her.

But when ye child was grown, it fortuned,

So she went, and came to the man of God unto mount Carmell. Wha^ the man of
God saw her over against him, he said unto his child Gehasi: Behold, the
Sunamitisse is there, run now and mete her, and axe her if it go well with
her, and her huszbande and her son. She said: Well. But when she came to the
man of God upon ye mount, she held him by his fete. And Gehasi stepte to her,
to put her away. But ye man of God said: Let her alone, for her soul is in
heaviness, and the LORD has hyd it fro me, and not showed it me. She said:
When desired I a son of my lord? Said I not, yt thou should not mock me?

(...)
If any man mete the, salute him not: and if any man salute the, thank him
not, and lay thou my staff upon ye childs face. But the childs mother
said: As truly as the LORD lives, and as truly as ye soul lives, I will
not leave the. Then gat he up, and went after her. As for Gehasi, he went
before them, and laid the staff upon the childs face, but there was nether
voice ner feeling. And he went again to mete him, and showed him, and said:
The child is not risen up.

And when Eliseus came in to the house, behold, ye child lay deed upon his
bed. And he went in, and shut the door on the^ both, and made his prayer unto
the LORD, and went up, and laid him self upon the child, and laid his
mouth upon the childs mouth, and his eyes upon his eyes, and his hands upon
his hands, and so stretched him self forth upon him, so yt the childs body
was warm. And he rose up, and went in to the house once hither and thither,
and went up, and laid him self a long upon him. Then nesed the child seven
times, and afterward the child opened his eyes. And he cried upon Gehasi, and
said: Call the Sunamitisse. And when he had called her, she came in unto him.
He said: Take there thy son. Then came she, and fell at his fete, and
worshipped unto the ground, and took her son, and went forth.



There came a man from Baal Salisa, and brought the man of God bred of the
first fruits, namely twentye barlye loaves, and new corn in his garment. But
he said: Give it unto ye people, that they may eat. His mynister said: Ioh.
6. ^
How shall I give an hundredth men of this? He said: Give it unto the people,
that they may eat. For thus says the LORD: They shall eat, and there shall
be left over. And he set it before them, so that they ate, and there left
over, acordinge to ye word of the LORD.

The V. Chapter.
NAaman the chief captain of the LORD gave health unto Syria) and he was a
mighty man, but a leper. And there had men of war fallen out of Syria, and
carried away a little damsel out of the land of Israel: the same was in service
with Naama^s wife, and said unto her mastresse: O that my master were with the
prophet at Samaria, he would heal him from his leprosy.

Then went he in to his lord, and told him, and said: Thus and thus has
the damsel of the land of Israel spoken. The king of Syria said: Go thy way
then, and I will writ a letter unto the king of Israel.

And he went, and took with him ten hundredth

When this letter comes unto the, behold, thou shall understand yt I have
sent my servant Naaman unto the, that thou may heal him of his leprosy.

And when the king of Israel red the letter, he rent his clothes, and said:
Am I God then, that I can kill and quycke^ again, yt he sends unto me, to
heal the man from his leprosy? Considre and se, how he seeks an occasion unto
me.

When Eliseus the man of God herd, yt the king of Israel had rent his
clothes, he sent unto him, saying: Why have thou rent thy clothes? Let him
come to me, that he may know, yt there is a prophet in Israel.

So Naaman came with horses and charettes, house. Then sent Eliseus a
messaunger unto him, saying: Go thy way, and waszshe the seven times in
Iordane, so shall thy flesh be restored the again, and be cleansed. Then was
Naaman wroth, and went his way, and said: I thought he should have come
forth unto me, and to have sto^de here and to have called upon the name of the
LORD his God, and to have touched the place with his hand, and so to have put
away the leprosy. Are not ye waters of Amana and Pharphar at Damascon better
then all the waters in Israel, yt I might waszshe me therein and be cle^sed? and
he turned him, and went his way in displeasure. Then his servants gat the^
to him, and said: Father, if the prophet had commanded the any great thing,
should thou not have done it? much more the^ if he say unto the: Wasshe the,
and thou shall be clean. Then went he down, and waszshed him self in
Iordane seven times (as the man of God said) and his flesh was restored him
again, even as the flesh of a young child Luc. 4 c
and he was cleansed.

1. Re. 13 b Dan. 5. ^
As truly as the LORD lives, before whom I stand, I will not take it. And he
would needs have him to take it, but he would not. Then said Naaman: Might
there not a burden of this earth be given unto ye servant, as much as two
Mules may bear? For thy servant will no more do sacrifice and offer burnt
offerynges un to other gods, but unto the LORD, That the LORD may be
gracious unto thy servant, if I worship in the house of Rimmon, wha^ my
lord goes there in to ye house to worship, and leans upon my hand. He
said unto him: Go thy way in peace.

And as he was gone from him a field breadth in the land, Gehasi the servant
of Eliseus ye man of God thought: behold, my lord has spared Naama^ this
Syrian, so that he has not taken from him yt which he brought: As truly as ye
LORD lives, I will ru^ne after him, and take somthinge of him.



And when they were gone their way, he stood before his lord. And Eliseus
said un to him: Whence come thou Gehasi? He said: Thy servant went
nether hither ner thither. But he said unto him: Went not my heart with the,
when the man turned back from his charet to mete the* Now thou have taken the
silver and the raiment, olyue trees, vynyardes, sheep, oxen, servants and
maidens. But the leprosy of Naaman shall cleue unto the and to thy sede for
ever. (...)
Then went he forth from him leporous as snow.

The VI. Chapter.
THe children of ye prophets s^yde un

And the king of Syria warred against

The^ was ye king of Syrias heart vexed therefore, and called his servants,
and said unto them: Will ye not tell me, which of thou lie. He said: Go
your way the^ and look where he is, that I may send, and cause him be
fetched. And they showed him and said: Behold, he is at Dothan. The^ sent he
thither horses and charetes, and a great power. And wha^ they came thither by
night, they compased the cite about. And the mynister of the man of God arose
early to get him up. And as he went forth, behold, there lay an host of men
about ye cite with horses and charettes.

(...)
Fear not, for there are mo of them yt are with us, then of those that are
with them. And Eliseus prayed and said: LORD open his eyes, yt he may se.
Then the LORD opened ye childs eyes, yt he saw, and behold, ye mount was
full of fyrie horses and charettes round about Eliseus. And wha^ they came
down unto him, Eliseus made his prayer, and said: LORD smite this people with
blyndnes. (...). 1^. c
And he smote the^ with blyndnes acordinge to the word of Eliseus. And Eliseus
said unto them: This is not ye way nor the cite, follow me, I will bring you
to the man whom ye seek. And he brought them unto Samaria.

LORD open these men's eyes, yt they may se. And the LORD opened their eyes,
yt they saw, and behold, they were in the mids of Samaria. And when the
king of Israel saw them, he said unto Eliseus: My father, shall I smite the^?
He said: Thou shall not smite the^: look whom thou take with thy sword and
bow, smite those. Set bred and water before them, that they may eat and
drink, and let them depart unto their lord. The^ was there a great dinner
prepared. And when they had eaten and dronken, he let them go to depart unto
their lord. From that time forth came the men of war of the Syrians no more
in to the land of Israel.

(...)
Cab of doves donge worth five silver pens. And when the king of Israel went
unto the wall, a woman cried unto him and said: Help me my lord O king. He
said: If the LORD help the not, wherewith shall I help the? with ye barn or
with the wine press? And the king said unto her: What ayleth ye? She said:
This woman said unto me: Give us ye son, that we may eat him, tomorow will
we eat my son. So we sod my son, and have eaten him, and I said unto her
on ye third day: Give us thy son and let us eat him, but she has hyd him
away.

When the king herd the woman's words, 3. Re. 19. ^ and 20. b
God do this and that unto me, if the head of Eliseus the son of Saphat shall
this day stand upon him. As for Eliseus, he sat in his house, and the Elders
sat by him. And he sent a man before him, but or ever the messaunge came to
him, he said un to ye Elders: Have ye not seen how this child of murthure
has sent hither, to take away my head? Take heed, when the messaunger
comes, yt ye hold him at the door. Behold, ye noise of his lords fete
follows him. While he was thus talking with them, behold, ye messaunger came
to him, and said: Behold, this evil comes of ye LORD, and what more shall
I look for of the LORD?

The VII. Chapter.
ELiseus said: Hear the word of the LORD. Thus says the LORD: 4. Re. 7. ^
Tomorow about this time shall a buszshel of fine meel be sold for one Sycle,
and two buszshels of barley for one Sycle under the port of Samaria. Then a
knight (upon whose hand the king leaned) answered the man of God, and said:
And though the LORD made wyndowes in heaven, how could soch a thing come to
pass? He said: Behold, thou shall se it with thine eyes, and shall not eat
thereof.

And there were four leporous men at ye door before the port, and one said
unto another: Why tarry we here while we dye? Though we thought to come in to
the cite, yet is there derth in ye cite, and there should we be feign to dye.
And if we tarry here, we must dye also. Let us go now, and fly unto the host
of the Syrians. If they let us live, we shall live: if they slaye us, then are
we deed. And so they gat them up early, to come unto the host of the Syrians.
And when they came to the vttemost end of ye tents, behold, there was no
body.

2. Mac. 5. a ^sa. 1^. a
For the LORD had made the Syrians the Hethites, and the king of the Egipcians
against us, to come upon us. And they gat them up, and fled early in the
twylight, and left their bothes, and horses and Asses in the tents as they
stood, and fled every man where he might save his life.



And when they came, they cried at the port of the cite, and told them, and
said: We came to the tents of the Sirians, and behold, there is no man
there, nether yet any man's voice, but horses and asses bound, and the bothes
as they stand. Then cried ye porters and told it within in ye kings house.
And the king arose in the night, and said unto his servants: I will tell
you how ye Syrians deal with us: they know yt we suffer honger, and are gone
out of the te^tes, to hyde them selves in the field, and think thus: when they
go out of the cite, we will take them alive, and come in to the cite. Then
answered one of his servants, and said: Let us take the five horses that
remain, which yet are left in the cite (behold, these are left therein for
all ye multitude in Israel, which is destroyed) let us send these and se. The^
took they two charettes with ye horses. And the king sent them unto the tents
of the Syrians, and said: Go your way and se.

4. Re. 7 a
acordinge to the word of the LORD. But the king appointed the knight (upon
whose hand he leened) to be at the gate, and the people trod upon him, so
that he dyed, even as the man of God said, when the king came down unto him.
And it came to pass even as ye man of God told the king, wha^ he said:
Tomorow about this time shall two buszshels of barlye be sold for one Sycle,
and a buszshel of fine meel for one Sycle under the gate at Samaria. And the
knight answered the man of God, and said: Behold, though ye LORD made
wyndowes in heaven, how could soch a thing come to pass? Nevertheless he
said: Behold, with thine eyes shall thou se it, and shall not ^^te thereof.
And even so fortuned it unto him, for the people trod upon him in the gate, yt
he dyed.

The VIII. Chapter.
ELiseus spoke unto the woman, (...)
whose LORD shall call for a derth, which shall come in to the land seven
year long. The woman gat her up, and did as the man of God said, and went
with hi^ household, and was a stranger in the land of the Philistynes seven
year. But when the seven years were ended, the woman came again out of the
Philistynes lord, and went forth to cry upon the king for her house and
land. The king spoke unto Gehasi the servant of the man of God, and said:
Tell me all the great acts that Eliseus has done. And while he was telling
the king how he had made one that was deed, to live again, behold, the woman
whose son he had caused to reuyue, came even in the mean season, and cried
unto the king for her house and land. Then said Gehasi: My lord O king,
this same is the woman, and this is her son, whom Eliseus restored unto life
again. And the king axed ye woman, and she told him. Then the king
delivered her a chamberlayne, and said: Restore her again all that is hirs,
and all the increase of the land, sense the time that she left the land
until now.

(...)
And Eliseus came to Damascon, and Benadab LORD by him, and say: May I
recover from this sickness? Hasael went for to mete him, and took rewards
with him, and of all the goods at Damasco^, as much as fortye Camels might
bear. And when he came, he stood before him, and said: Thy son Benadab the
king of Syria has sent me unto the, saying: May I recover from this sickness?

Eliseus said unto him: Go yi way and tell him: Thou shall recover. But the
LORD has showed me, yt he shall dye ye death. And the man of God looked
earnestly, and made a troublous countenance, and wept. The^ said Hasael:
Wherefore wepeth my lord? He said: I know what evil thou shall do un to the
children of Israel. Thou shall burn their strong cities with fire, and slaye
their young men with the sword, and kill their young children, and ryppe up
their women with child.

(...)
The LORD has showed me, yt thou shall be king of Syria. And he went his
way from Eliseus, and came to his lord, which said unto him: What says
Eliseus unto the? He said: He told me, Thou shall recover. But on the next
day he took ye bed covering, and dypte it in water, and spread it over him,
and he dyed, and Hasael was king in his stead.

In the fyfth year of Ioram the son of Achab king of Israel, was Ioram ye
son of Iosaphat king of Judah. (...). 2^. a
Two and thirty year old was he wha^ he was made king, and reigned eighte
year at Jerusalem, and walked in the way of the kings of Israel, as the
house of Achab did (for Achabs daughter was his wife) and he did yt which was
evil in ye sight of the LORD. Nevertheless the LORD would not destroy Judah
for his servant David's sake, Re. 7. c
as he promised him, to give him ever a lantern among his children.

* At ye same time fell ye Edomites away from Judah, and made a king over them
selves: ye cause was this, Ioram had gone through

What more there is to say of Ioram, and all yt he did, heholde, it is written
in the Cronicles of the kings of Judah. And Ioram fell on sleep with his
fathers, and was buried with his fathers in ye cite of David, Par. 22. a
and Ochosias his son was king in his stead.

In the twolueth year of Ioram the son of Achab king of Israel, was
Ochosias ye son of Ioram king in Judah. Two and twentye year old was
Ochosias when he was made king, and reigned one year at Jerusalem. His
mothers name was Atalia the daughter of Amri king of Israel, and he walked in
the way of the house of Achab, and did that which was evil in the sight of ye
LORD, even as did the house of Achab: for he was son in law in the house of
Achab. And he went with Ioram the son of Achab in to the battayll against
Hasael ye king of Syria unto Ramoth in Gilead, but ye Syrians smote Ioram. 4.
Re. 9.
Then Ioram the king turned back, to be healed at Iesreel of ye wounds,
wherewith the Syrians had wounded him at Ramoth, wha^ he fought with Hasael
king of Syria. And Ochosyas ye son of Iora^ king of Judah, came down to
viset Ioram the son of Achab at Iesreel, for he lay sick.

The IX. Chapter.
ELiseus the prophet called one of the 4. Re. 4.
and take this cruse of oil with the, and go unto Ramoth in Gilead: and wha^
thou co^mest thither, thou shall se there one Iehu, ye son of Iosaphat the
son of Nimsi, and go in, and bid him stand up among his brethren, and
bring him in to the ynmost chamber, ^ Re. 19.
and take thou ye cruse of oil, and pour it upon his head, and say: Thus
says the LORD: I have anointed the to be king over Israel: and thou shall
open the door, and fly, and not tarry. And the prophets young man, the child
went his way unto Ramoth in Gilead. And when he came in, behold, the
captains of the host sat there, and he said: I have somewhat to say unto the
O captain. Iehu said: Unto whom among us all? He said: Even unto the o
captain.

Then stood he up, and went in. So he LORD God of Israel: I have anointed yt
to be king over the LORDS people of Israel, and thou shall smite thy lord
Achabs house, ^. Re. 21.
that I may avenge the blood of my servants the prophets, and the blood
of all the LORDS servants, from the hand of Iesabel, that all the house of
Achab may periszshe. And I will rote out from Achab, 1. Re. 25. 3. Re. 14.
even him that makes water against the wall, and the closed up and the
desolate in Israel: and the house of Achab will I make even as the house of
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and as the house of Baesa the son of Ahia, and
ye dogs shall eat up Iesabel upon the field at Iesrael, and noman shall
burye her. 3. Re. 21.
And he opened the door, and fled.

And wha^ Iehu came forth to his lords well? Wherefore came this madd fellow
unto the? He said unto them: Ye know the man well, and what he has spoken.
They said* That is not true, but tell thou us. He said: Thus and thus has he
spoken unto me, and said: Thus says the LORD: I have anointed the to be
king over Israel. Then made they haist, and every one took his garment and
laid them under him in manner of a judges seat, and blewe the trompet, and
said: Iehu is made king. So Iehu the son of Iosaphat the son of Nimsi,
made a confederacion against Ioram. As for Iora^ he lay before Ramoth in
Gilead with all Israel against Hasael the king of Syria. ^. Re. 8. d
But Ioram the king was turned back, yt he might be healed of the wounds
wherewith the Syrians had wounded him, wha^ he fought with Hasael the king of
the Syrians.





Then turned Ioram his hand and fled, and said unto Ochosias: There is
treason Ochosias. But Iehu took his bow, and sho^ Ioram between the arms,
that the arowe went through his heart, and he fell down in his charet. And Iehu
said unto Bidekar the knight: Take and cast him in the piece of land of
Naboth the Iesraelite: for I remember sense thou rodest with me in a charet
after Achab his father, that the LORD would lay this heavy burden upon him. I
LORD) I will recompense the yt blood of Naboth and of his children, even in
this piece of land. Take him now and cast him in to that piece of land, (...)
acordynge to the word of the LORD.

When Ochosias the king of Judah saw this, he fled by the way unto ye garden
house. But Iehu followed after him, and commanded to smite him also upon his
charet in the going up toward Gur, which lies by Ieblaam: and he fled unto
Megiddo, and dyed there. And his servants caused him to be carried unto
Jerusalem, and there they buried him in his own grave with his fathers in the
cite of David. Ochosias reigned over Judah in ye eleventh year of Iora^ ye
son of Achab. And when Iehu came to Iesrael, and Iesabel herd thereof, she
colored her face, and decked her head, and looked out at the wyndowe. And when
Iehu came under the gate, she said: (...)
Prospered Symri well that slew his lord?

And he lift up his face to the wyndow, (...)
for she is a kings ^oughter. Nevertheless when they went in to burye her,
they found nothing of her, but the szkull and the fete, and the palms of her
hands. And they came again and brought him word. He said: This is even it
that the LORD spoke by his servant Elias the Theszbite, and said: (...)
In the field of Iesrael shall the dogs eat Iesabels flesh. So the deed
carcass of Iesabel became even as donge in the field of Iesrael, so yt a man
could not say: This is Iesabel.

The X. Chapter.
AChab had three score and ten sons (...)
And Iehu wrote a letter, and sent it to Samaria, unto the rulers of the cite
Iesrael, even unto the Elders, and to Achabs tuters, saying these words: When
this letter comes unto you with whom are your lords sons, charetes, horses,
strong cities, and ordinance, look which is the best and most righteous
among your lords sons, and set him upon his fathers seat, and fight for
your lords house.

Nevertheless they were sore afraid, and said: Behold, two kings were not
able to stand before him, how will we then endure? And they that were over the
house and over the cite, and the Elders and tuters sent unto Iehu, saye^ge: We
are thy servants, we will do all that thou say unto us: We will make no man
king, do thou what pleases the. Then wrote he the second letter unto them
with these words: If ye be mine, and harken unto my voice, then take the
heads of the men your lords sons, and bring me them tomorow by this time
unto Iesrael.



And on the morrow when he went forth, he stood, and said unto all the people:
Are ye righteous? Behold, I have made an appoyntme^t against my lord, and
slain him, who has slain all these then? Understand ye now therefore, that
there is not fallen upon the earth one word of the LORD, which he spoke
against the house of Achab: and the LORD has done, even Re. 21. c
as he said by his servant Elias. So Iehu smote all the remnaunt of the house
of Achab at Iesrael, all his great men, his kynsfolkes, and his prestes, till
there was not one left over. And he gat him up, went his way, and came to
Samaria.



And when he went from thence, he found Ionadab ye son of Ier. 2^. a
Rechab, which met him, and saluted him. And he said unto him: Is thine heart
right, as mine heart is with thine heart? Ionadab said: Ye. If it be so (said
he) then give me thy hand. And he gave him his hand. And so he caused him to
sit beside him in the charet, and said: Come with me, and se my zele for the
LORD. And they carried him with him upon his charet. And when he came to
Samaria, he smote all that remained of Achab at Samaria, till he had destroyed
him, acordynge to the word of the LORD, 3. Re. 21. c
which he spoke unto Elias.

And Iehu gathered all the people together, 3. Re. 16. ^
Achab did Baal but little service, Iehu will serve him better. Call unto me now
therefore all Baals prophets, all his servants and all his prestes, that
there be none wantynge, for I have a great sacrifyce to do unto Baal. Who so
ever is myssed, shall not live. But Iehu did it craftily, that he might
destroy all the mynisters of Baal. And Iehu said: Sanctify ye feast unto
Baal, and proclaim it. And Iehu sent in to all Israel, and caused all Baals
ministers to come, so that there was noma^ left behind, which came not. And
they came in to Baals house, so that the house of Baal was full from one corner
to another.

Then said he unto him that had the rule of the vestrye. Bring forth raiment
for all Baals mynisters. And he brought forth the raiment. And Iehu went in
to Baals house with Ionadab the son of Rechab, and said unto Baals
mynisters: Search and se that there be not here among you any mynyster of the
LORD, but only Baals mynisters.



And when they came in to offer sacrifyces your hands, then shall the same
man's soul be for his soul. Now wha^ he had made an end of the burnt
offering, Iehu said unto the fotemen and knights: Go in, and smite every
man, let noman go forth. And they smote the^ with the edge of the sword. And
the footmen and knights threw the^ away and went unto the cite of Baals
house, and brought forth the piler in ye house of Baal, and brent it, and brake
down Baals pyler with the house of Baal, and made a preuy house thereof unto
this day. ^hus Iehu destroyed Baal out of Israel. But Iehu left not of from
the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat (which caused Israel to sin)
namely, from the golden calves at Bethel and at Dan. And the LORD said unto
Iehu: Because thou have been wyllinge to do that which was right in my sight,
and have done unto Achabs house all that was in my heart, ^. Re. 15. b
therefore shall thy children sit upon ye seat of Israel unto the fourth
generation.

LORD God of Israel with all his heart: for he left not of from the sins of
Jeroboam which made Israel to sin. At the same time began the LORD to be
grieved at Israel. ^. Re. ^ a
For Hasael smote them in all the borders of Israel from Iordane Eastwarde, and
all the land Gilead of the Gaddites, Rubenites and Manassytes, from Aroer that
lies on the river by Arnon, and Gilead and Basan.

What more there is to say of Iehu, and all that he did, and all his power,
behold, it is written in the Cronicles of the kings of Israel. And Iehu fell
on sleep with his fathers, and they buried him in Samaria. And Ioahas his son
was king in his stead. The time that Iehu reigned over Israel, is eight and
twentye years at Samaria.

The XI. Chapter.
^. Pa. 22. d
gat her up, and destroyed all the kings sede. But Ioseba king Iorams
daughter the sister of Ochosias, took Ioas the son of Ochosias and stale him
away with his norse in the chamber from among the kings children which were
slain, and she hyd him from Athalia, so that he was not slain. And he was hyd
with her in the house of the LORD six years. But Athalia was queen in the
land.

Pa. 24. a
Nevertheless in the seventh year sent Ioiada, and took the rulers over hu^dreds
with the captains and footmen, and caused the^ to come to him in to the house
of the LORD and made a covenant with them, and took an ooth of them in the
house of the LORD, and showed them the kings son, and commanded them, and
said: This is it that ye shall do: One third part of you which enter on the
Sabbath, shall keep the watch in the kings house, and one third part shall be
at the port of Sur, and one third part shall be at ye port which is behind
the footmen, and ye shall keep the watch at the house of Massa. But two parts
of you all that LORD about the king and ye shall get you round about ye
king and every one with his weapen in his hand: and who so ever comes
within ye wall, let him die, so that ye be with the king, wha^ he goes out
and in.

And the rulers over the hundreds did all as Ioiada the pressed had commanded
them, (...)
and took unto them their men which entered upon the Sabbath, with those that
went of on the Sabbath, and came to Ioiada ye pressed. And the pressed gave the
captains spears and shyldes which had been king David's, and were in the
house of the LORD. And the footmen stood about the king, every one with his
weapen in his hand, from the corner on the right side of the house unto the
corner of the left side, even unto the altar and to the house. And he
brought forth the kings son, and set a crown upon his head, and took the
(...)
witness, and made him king, and they were glad, and clapped their hands
together, and said: God save the king.

(...)
And when Athalia herd the noise of LORD, and looked, and behold, the king
stood by the piler, as the use was, and the syngers and tro^pettes by the
king: and all the people of ye lord were glad, and blewe with trompettes. But
Athalia rent her clothes, and said: Vproure, vproure. Nevertheless Ioiada ye
pressed commanded ye rulers over hundreds, which were appointed over the host,
and said unto them: Bring her without the wall, and whosoever follows her,
let him dye of the sword (for the pressed had said, that she should not dye in
the house of the LORD.) And they laid hands upon her, and she went in by
the way where the horses go in to ye kings house, and there was she slain.

Then made Ioiada a covenant between LORD and the king, (...)
and the people, yt they should be the people of the LORD. Likewise also
betwixt the king and ye people. Then went all the people of the land in to
the house of Baal, and brake down his altares, and destroyed his images right
well. And Mathan the pressed of Baal slew they before the altar: And the pressed
appointed the officers in the house of the LORD, and took the rulers over
hundreds, and the captains, and the footmen, and all ye people of the land,
and brought the king down from the house of the LORD, and came the way
from the port of the footmen unto the kings house, and he sat upon the
kings seat. And all the people of the lord were glad, and the cite was at
rest. As for Athalia, they slew her with the sword in ye kings house. And
Ioas was seven year old, when he was made king.

The XII. Chapter.
(...). ^4. a
and reigned fortye year at Jerusalem. His mothers name was Zibea of Bersaba.
And Ioas did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, as long as
Ioiada ye pressed taught him. But they put not down ye hye places: for the
people offered and brent incense yet upon the hye places.

And Ioas said unto the prestes: All the money that is sanctified to be
bestowed upon ye house of the LORD, namely the money yt every man gives unto
the treasury, and ye money that every man gives for his soul, and all the
money that every man gives of a fre heart, to be bestowed on the house of the
LORD, let the prestes take it unto them, every one his portion: with that
shall they repair the decay in the house of the LORD, where they find that
there is any decay.

But when ye prestes repaired not the decay in the house unto the three and
twe^tieth year of king Ioas, Ioas the king called Ioiada the pressed with the
other prestes, and said unto them: Wherefore do ye not repair the decay in
the house?



Then Ioiada the pressed took a chest, and bored an hole above therein, and set it
on the right hand beside the altar, at the entering in to the house of the
LORD. And the prestes that kept the thresholde, put all the money therein that
was brought unto the house of the LORD. When they saw then that there was
much money in the chest, 4. Re. 22. a
ye kings scrybe came up with the hye pressed, and bound the money together,
and told it as much as was found in the house of the LORD. And so the ready
money was given unto them that wrought and were appointed to the house of the
LORD, and they gave it forth to the carpenters and to the^ that builded and
wroughte in the house of the LORD, namely, to the dawbers and masons, and to
them that boughte timber and frestone, to repair the decay in the house of
the LORD and all that they found to have need of repayringe in the house.

Howbeit there were no silver chargers, flat pieces, basens, trompettes, ner any
other vessel of gold and silver made on the house of the LORD, of the money
that was brought unto the LORDS house: but it was given unto the workmen to
repair the decay in the house of the LORD therewith. The men also that the
money was delivered unto, for to give the workmen, neded not to make any
acomptes, but did their busynes upon credence. But the money of trespace
offerynges and sin offerynges was not brought unto the house of the LORD:
for it was the prestes.

At the same time went Hasael the kynof LORD, and in the kings house, and
sent it unto Hasael the king of Syria. And so he departed from Jerusalem.

What more there is to say of Ioas, and all that he did, it is written in the
Cronicles of the kings of Judah. And his servants made insurreccion and
conspyred, and smote him in the house of Millo, at the going down unto Silla.
For Iosebar the son of Simeath, and Iosabad the son of Somer his servants
smote him to death: and he was buried with his fathers in the cite of David.
And Amasias his son was king in his stead.

The XIII. Chapter.
IN ye XXIII. year of Ioas the son of Israel at Samaria, seuentene year:
and did yt which was evil in the sight of the LORD, and walked after the
sins of Jeroboam ye son of Nebat (which caused Israel to sin) and left
not of from them. And ye wrath of the LORD waxed whote upon Israel, and he
delivered them over under the hand of Hasael king of Syria, and under the
hand of Benadad the son of Hasael, as long as they lived.

And Ioahas besoughte the face of the LORD. And the LORD herd him, for he
considered the myserie of Israel, how the king of Syria oppressed them. And ye
LORD gave Israel a savior, which brought them out of the power of the
Syrians, so yt the children of Israel dwelt in their tents, like as before time.

4. Re. 8. b
for the king of Syria had destroyed them, and made them as the dust in the
barn.

What more there is to say of Ioahas, and all that he did, and his power,
behold, it is written in the Cronicles of the kings of Israel. And Ioahas
fell on sleep with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria, and Ioas his son
was king in his stead.

LORD, and departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat,
which made Israel for to sin, but walked in them. What more there is to say
of Ioas, and what he did, and his power, how he fought with Amasias king of
Judah, behold, it is written in the Cronicles of the kings of Israel. And Ioas
fell on sleep with his fathers, and Jeroboam sat upon his seat. And Ioas was
buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel.

As for Eliseus, he fell in to a sickness, whereof he dyed. And Ioas the king of
Israel came down unto him, and wept for him, and said: 4. Re 2. c
My father, my father, the charet man of Israel, and his horsemen. Eliseus said
unto him: Take the bow and the arowes And when he had taken the bow and the
LORD, one arowe of salvation against the Syrians: and thou shall smy^^ the
Syrians at Aphek, till they be brought to naught.

And he said: Take ye arowes. And wh^^ he had taken them, he said unto the
king of Israel: Smite the earth. And he smote three times and stood still. Then
was them* of God wroth at him, and said: If thou had smytten five or six
times, thou should have smytten ye Syrians, till thou had dest utterly
brought them to naught. But now shall thou smite them three times.

When Eliseus was deed and buried, the men of war of the Moabites fell in to
the land the same year. And it fortuned yt they buried a certain man. But
wha^ they saw the men of war, they cast the man in to Eliseus grave. (...)
And when he was therein, and touched Eliseus bones, he reuyued, and stood upon
his fete.

So Hasael the king of Syria oppressed Israel, as long as Ioahas lived. But
the LORD was gracious unto them, and had mercy upon them, and turned him to
them for his couenauntes sake, with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and would not
destroy the^ (...)
nether did he cast them out from his presence unto this hour.

And Hasael the king of Syria dyed, and Benadad his son was king in his
stead. But Ioas turned back, and took out of the hand of Benadad the son
of Hasael the cities which he had taken in battaill out of the hand of his
father Ioahas: Three times did Ioas smite him, and brought the cities of Israel
again.

The XIIII. Chapter.
IN the second year of Ioas ye son (...)
five and twenty year old was he, when he was made king, and reigned nine
and twentye year at Jerusalem. His mothers name was Ioadan of Jerusalem. And
he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD: yet not as his father
David, but even as his father Ioas did so did he also: for ye hye places were
not put down, but the people offered and brent ince^se yet upon the hye places.
Now when he had gotten the power of the kingdom, he smote his servants ^ Re.
12. d
which had smytte^ the king his father: but the children of ye deed slayers
slew he not, acordinge to yt which is written in the book of the law of
Moses, where the LORD has commanded and said: (...). 24. c (...). 31. d
(...). 18. c
The fathers shall not dye for the children, and the children shall not dye for
the fathers: but every one shall dye for his own sin.

(...). 25. c
Then sent Amasias messaungers unto Ioas the son of Ioahas the son of Iehu
king of Israel, saying: Come hither, let us se one another. But Ioas ye king
of Israel sent unto Amasias the king of Judah, saying: The hawthorne that is
in Libanus, sent to the Ceder tree in Libanus, saying: Give thy daughter unto
my son to wife. But a wild be of the field ran over ye hawthorne, and
trod it down. Thou have smytte^ the Edomites, therefore is thine heart waxen
proud: Take the praise, and bide at home: why stryuest thou for mysfortune, yt
thou may fall, and Judah with the? Howbeit Amasias consented not.

LORD, and in ye treasures of the kings house, and the children also to
pledge, and departed again to Samaria.

What more there is to say of Ioas, what he did, and of his power, and how he
fought with Amasias the king of Judah, behold, it is written in the Cronicles
of the kings of Israel. And Ioas fell on sleep with his fathers, and was
buried at Samaria among ye kings of Israel. And Jeroboam his son was king
in his stead.

2. Par. ^
And all the people of Judah took Asarias in his sixtenth year, and made him
king in stead of Amasias his father. He builded 4. Re. ^
Eloth, and brought it again unto Judah, after that the king was fallen on
sleep with his fathers.

In the fyftenth year of Amasias the son of Ioas king of Judah, was Jeroboam
the son of Ioas king over Israel at Samaria, one and fortye year. And he
did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, and departed not from all
the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which caused Israel for to sin.

But the borders of Israel brought he LORD God of Israel, which he spoke by
his servant Ion. 1. a
Jonas ye son of Amithai the prophet, which was of Iosu. 19
Gath Epher. For the LORD considered the miserable affliccion of Israel, how
that even they which were shut up and desolate, were away, and that there was
no helper in Israel. 4. Re. 1^ Osc. 1. a
And the LORD said not that he would destroy the name of Israel from under
heaven. And he helped the^ by Jeroboam the son of Ioas.

What more there is to say of Jeroboam, and all that he did, and of his power,
how he fought, and how brought Damascon and Hemath again unto Judah in
Israel, behold, it is written in the Cronicles of the kings of Israel. And
Jeroboam fell on sleep with his fathers, with the kings of Israel. And
Zacharias his son was king in his stead.

The XV. Chapter.
IN the seven and twentieth year of Jeroboam 2. Par. 2^
was sixtene year old when he was made king, and reigned two and fyftye
year at Jerusalem. His mothers name was Iechalia of Jerusalem. And he did
right in the sight of the LORD, acordinge to all as did Amasias his father,
saving that they put not down the hye places. For the people did sacryfice
and brent incense yet upon the hye places. Howbeit the LORD smote the king,
so that he was leper unto his death, Leui. 1^.
and dwelt in a frye house. But Iotham the kings son ruled the house, and
judged the people in the land.

What more there is to say of Asarias, and all yt he did, behold, it is
written in the Cronicles of the kings of Judah. And Asarias fell on sleep with
his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the cite of David, and Iotham
his son was king in his stead.

LORD, even as his fathers did. He departed not from ye sins of Jeroboam the
son of Nebat, which caused Israel for to sin. And Sellum the son of Iabes
conspyred against him, and smote him in the presence of ye people, and slew
him, and was king in his stead. What more there is to say of Zacharias,
behold, it is written in the Cronicles of the kings of Israel. Re. 10. e
And this is it, yt the LORD said unto Iehu: Thy children shall sit upon the
seat of Israel until the fourth generation. And even so came it to pass.

Some read: * Vsia.
Asarias king of Judah, and reigned one month at Samaria. For Menahem the
son of Gadi went up from Thirza, and came to Samaria, and smote Sellum the
son of Iabes at Samaria, and slew him, and was king in his stead.

What more there is to say of Sellum, and of his sedicion which he stered up,
behold, it is written in the Cronicles of the kings of Israel. At the same
time did Manahem smite Tiphsa, and all yt were therein, and the coasts thereof
from Thirza, because they would not let him in, and smote all their women with
child, and rypte them up.

LORD. As long as he lived, departed he not from ye sins of Jeroboam the
son of Nebat, which caused Israel for to sin. And Phul the king of Assiria
came in to the lord. And Manahem gave unto Phul a thousand talentes of silver
to hold with him, and to confirm him in the kingdom. And Manahem raised up a
tax in Israel upon the richest, fiftye Sycles of silver upon eueryman, to give
unto ye king of Assiria. So the king of Assiria went home again, and tarried
not in the land.

What more there is to say of Manahem, and all yt he did, behold, it is
written in the Cronicles of the kings of Israel. And Manahem fell on sleep with
his fathers. And Pecahia his son was king in his stead.

In the fiftieth year of Asarias king of LORD: for he departed not from the
sins of Jeroboam ye son of Nebat, which caused Israel for to sin. And
Pecah the son of Romelia his knight conspyred against him, and smote him at
Samaria in ye palace of the kings house with Argob and Ariah, and fiftye men with
him of ye children of Gilead, and slew him, and was king in his stead. What
more there is to say of Pecahia, and all that he did, behold, it is written
in the Cronicles of the kings of Israel.

In the two and fiftieth year of Asarias king of Judah, began Pecah the
son of Romelia to reign over Israel at Samaria, twentye year, and did that
which was evil in the sight of ye LORD: for he departed not from the sins
of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which caused Israel for to sin.

In the time of Pecah the king of Israel,

And Osea the son of Ela conspyred against Pecah the son of Romelia, and
slew him, and was king in his stead in the twe^tieth year of Iotham the
son of ^
Osias. What more there is to say of Pecah, and all that he did, behold, it
is written in the Cronicles of the kings of Israel.

In the second year of Pecah the son LORD, acordinge unto all as did Osias
his father* saving that he put not down the hye places: for the people offered
and brent incense yet upon the hye places. He builded the hye poet of the
house of the LORD. What more there is to say of Iotham, and all that he did,
behold, it is written in the Cronicles of the kings of Judah.

At ye same time began ye LORD to send Rezin ye king of Syria, and Pecah
ye son of Romelia in to Judah. And Iotham fell on sleep with his fathers, and
was buried with his fathers in the cite of David his father. And Achas his son
was king in his stead.

The XVI. Chapter.
(...). ^8. a
was Achas the son of Iotham king of Judah. Twe^tye year old was Achas wha^
he was made king, and reigned sixtene year at Jerusalem, and did not yt which
was right in the sight of ye LORD his God, as did David his father: for he
walked in the way of the kings of Israel, (...). 1^. b ^ Re. ^^.^
Ye and caused his son to go through the fire, after the manner of the
abhominacions of the Heythen, whom the LORD drove away before the children of
Israel. And he did sacrifice, and brent incense upon the hye places, and upon
all hills, and among all grene trees. (...). 7. a
Then went Rezin the king of Syria, and Pecah the son of Romelia king of
Israel up to Jerusalem to fight against it, and laid sege to Achas: but they
could not win it. At the same time did Rezin the king of Syria, bring
(...). 14 d
Eloth again unto Syria, and thrust ye Jews out of Eloth. But the Syrians
came and dwelt therein unto this day.

LORD, and in the treasures of ye kings house, and sent a present to ye king
of Assiria. (...) 8. a
And ye king of Assiria consented unto him, and went up to Damascon, and
wanne it, and carried them away unto Cira, and slew Rezin. And king Achas
went to Damascon for to mete Teglatphalasser ye king of Assiria. And wha^ he
saw an altar yt was at Damascon, king Achas sent a patron and symilitude of
ye same altar unto the pressed Vrias, even as it was made. And Vrias the pressed
builded an altar, and made it acordinge as king Achas had sent unto him from
Damascon, till Achas ye king came from Damascon.

LORD, put he away, so that it stood not between the altar and the house of
the LORD, but set it in the corner on the north side of the altar.

And Achas the king commanded Vrias ye pressed, and said: Upon the great
altar shall thou kyndle ye burnt offrynge in the morning, and the meat
offrynge in the evening, and the kings burnt offrynge and his meat offrynge,
and the burnt offrynge of all the people in the land, with their meat offrynge
and drynk offrynge. And all the blood of the burnt offerynges, and all the
blood of the other offrynges shall thou sprenkle thereon: but with the brazen
altar will I deuyse what I can. Vrias the pressed did all acordinge as Achas the
king commanded him.

And king Achas brake down the seats, and put away the 3. Re* 7. c
ketell from above, and took the lauer from the brazen bullockes that were
there under, and set it upon ye pauement of stone. And the pulpit for the
Sabbath which they had builded in the house, and ye entrye of the kings house
turned he unto the house of the LORD, for the king of Assirias sake.

What more there is to say of Achas, what he did, behold, it is written in ye
Cronicles of the kings of Judah. And Achas fell on sleep with his fathers, and
was buried with his fathers in the cite of David. And Ezechias his son was
king in his stead.

The XVII. Chapter.
IN the twolueth year of Achas the LORD, but not as ye kings of Israel yt
were before him. Against him did Salmanasar ye king of Assiria come up. And
Oseas was subject unto him, and gave him trybutes. But wha^ the ye king of
Ass^ria perceived yt Oseas had conspyred and sent messaungers to Sua ye king
of Egipte, and paid not trybute yearly to ye king of ye Assirians, he beseged
him and put him in preson. 4. Re. 18. b
And the king of Assiria went up in to all the land and to Samaria, and
laid sege unto it three year. Esa. 8. a
And in the nyenth year of Oseas did ye king of Assiria win Samaria, 4. Es.
1^. c
and carried Israel away in to Assiria, and set them at Halah and at Habor by
the water Gosan, and in the cities of the Meedes.

For when the children of Israel sinned against LORD their God (yt brought
the^ out of ye land of Egipte, from the hand of Pharao king of Egipte) and
served other gods: and walked after the customs of the Heythe^, whom the
LORD had driven out before the children of Israel, and did as the kings of
Israel, and provoked ye LORD their God, and did secretly the things that were
not right in the sight of ye LORD their God: namely in that they builded
them hye places in all cities, both in castles and strong cities, and set up
pilers and groves, upon all hye hills, and among all grene trees, and brent
incense there in all ye hye places, even as did the Heythen, whom the LORD had
cast out before them, and wroughte wicked things, wherewith they provoked the
LORD unto wrath, and served the Idols, whereof the LORD said unto them: ^eut.
4 e
Ye shall not do soch a thing.

LORD testified in Israel and Judah by all the prophets and Seers, saying:
^^re. 25 a
O turn again from your evil ways, and keep my commandments and
ordynaunces, acordinge to all ye law which I gave unto your fathers, and that
I sent unto you by my servants the prophets: they would not harken, Deuteronomy.
^1. f Mal 3. b
but herdened their necks, acordinge to the hardneck of their fathers, which
believed not on the LORD their God. Ye they despised his ordinances and his
covenant which he made with their fathers, and his testimonies which he
witnessed among them, and walked in their own vanities, and became vain
folowinge the Heythen, which dwelt round about them, concerning whom the
LORD had commanded them, that they should not do as they did. Nevertheless
they forsook all the commandments of the LORD their God ^. Re. 12. d
and made them two molten calves and groves, and worshipped all the host of
heaven, and served Baal, and Deu. 18. b
caused their sons and daughters to go through the fire, and meddled with
soythsayers and witches, and gave them selves over to do that which was evil
in the sight of the LORD, to provoke him unto wrath.

LORD very wroth at Israel, and put them away from his presence, so yt there
remained nomo ^. Re. 12. c
but only ye trybe of Judah. Nether did Judah keep the commandments of the
LORD their God, but walked after the customs of Israel, which they did.
Therefore did ye LORD cast away all ye sede of Israel, and troubled them, and
delivered them in to the hands of the spoylers, till he had cast them out of
his presence: for Israel was divided from the house of David. And they made
the^ a king, one Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which turned Israel back from ye
LORD, and caused the^ to sin so sore. Thus walked the children of Israel in
all ye sins of Jeroboam, which he had done, and departed not from them,
until ye LORD put Israel out of his presence, acordinge as he had spoken by
all his servants (...)
So Israel was carried away out of their own land to Assiria unto this day.

The king of Assiria caused men to come from Babylon, from Cutha, from Aua,
from Hemath and Sepharuaim, and caused the^ to inhabit ye cities in Samaria in
stead of the children of Israel. And they took possession of Samaria, and
dwelt in ye same cities. But wha^ they began to dwell there, and feared not
ye LORD, the LORD sent lions among the^, which slew them. And they caused
it be said unto ye king of Assiria: The Heythe^ whom thou have brought
hither, and caused them to inhabit the cities of Samaria, know not the law
of ye God of the land. Therefore has he sent lions among them, and behold,
they slaye the^, because they know not the ordinance of the God of the land.

The king of Assiria commanded and said: LORD. But every people made the^
gods, and put the^ in the houses upon ye hye places, which the Samaritanes
had made, every people i^ their cities wherein they dwelt. They of Babilo^ made
Sochoth Benoth. They of Chut made Nergel. They of Hemath made Asima. They of
Aua made Nibehas and Tharthak. They of Sepharuaim burnt their sons unto
Adramelech and Anamelech ye gods of the^ of Sepharuaim.

And while they feared ye LORD, they made prestes in ye hye places of ye
lowest among them, and put them in ye houses of ye hye places: thus they
feared ye LORD, and served ye gods also, acordinge to ye custom of every
nation, from whence they were brought. And unto this day do they after ye
old fashion, so yt they nether fear ye LORD, ner yet keep their own
ordinances and laws, after the law and commandment that the LORD
commanded the children of Jacob, (...)
unto whom he gave ye name of Israel, and made a covenant with them, and
commanded them, and said: (...)
Fear none other gods, and worshipe them not, and serve them not, and offer
not unto them* but the LORD which brought you out of the lord of Egipte,
with great power and outstretched arm, Him fear, him worship, and unto him
do sacrifice: and the statutes, ordinances, law and commandment which he
has caused to be written unto you, those se that ye keep, that ye allwaye do
thereafter, and fear none other gods. And forget not the covenant which he
has made with you, lest ye fear other gods. But fear ye LORD your God,
he shall deliver you from all your enemies. Nevertheless they would not harken,
but did after their old custom.

Thus these Heythen feared the LORD, and served their Idols also, and so did
their children and childers children likewise. Eue^ as their fathers have done
before them, so do they unto this day.

The XVIII. Chapter.
(...). 29. a
reigned Ezechias ye son of Achas king of Judah. And he was five and twenty
year old when he was made king, and reigned nine and twentye year at
Jerusalem. His mothers name was Abi the daughter of Zachary. And he did that
which was right in the sight of the LORD, acordinge unto all as did David
his father. (...). 7. a (...). 25. a
He put away the hye places, and brake down the pilers, and roted out the
groves, and brake the brazen serpente (...). 21. a
which Moses had made. For unto that time had the children of Israel brent
ince^se unto it. And it was called Nehusthan. He put his trust in the LORD God
of Israel, so that after him there was not his like among all the kings of
Judah nether had been before him. He cleued unto the LORD, and departed not
back from him, and kept his commandments, which the LORD had commanded
Moses. And the LORD was with him. And whither so ever he went forth, he (...)
He smote the Philistynes also unto Gasa, and their borders, from the castles
unto the strong cities.

In the fourth year of Ezechias king of Judah (yt was the seventh year of
Oseas the son of Ela king of Israel) came Salmanasar the king of Assiria up
against Samaria, ^ Re. 17. a
and laid sege unto it, and wanne it after three years in the sixte year of
Ezechias, that is in the nyenth year of Oseas king of Israel, the^ was
Samaria won. And the king of Assiria carried Israel away unto Assiria, and
set them at Halah and Habor by the water Gosan, and in the cities of the
Meedes. And all because they herkened not unto the voice of the LORD their
God, and had transgressed his covenant: And as for all that Moses the servant
of the LORD had commanded the^, they had nether herkened unto any of those,
ner done them.

In the fourte^th year of king Ezechias 2. Par. 32. Eccli. 48. ^sa. 36. a
and conquered the^. Then sent Ezechias the king of Judah to ye king of
Assiria unto Lachis, saying: I have offended, turn back fro me: look what
thou layest unto me, I will bear it. The^ the king of Assiria laid unto
Ezechias the king of Judah, three hundredth talentes of silver, and thirty
talentes of gold. 4. Re. 1^
So Ezechias gave all ye silver yt was found in ye house of the LORD, and in
the treasures of ye kings house. At ye same time brake Ezechias the king of
Judah the doors of the temple of ye LORD, and the plates of gold which he him
self had caused to lay over the^, and gave the^ unto the king of Assiria.

And the king of Assiria sent Thartan, 2. Par. 32
and the chief chamberlayne, and the chief butler from Lachis to king Ezechias
with a great power unto Jerusalem. And they went up: and when they came
there, they stood still at the condyte by the over pole, which lies in the
way upon the fullers land, and called unto the king. The^ came there forth
unto them Eliachim the son of Helchias the steward, and Sobna the scrybe,
and Ioah the son of Assaph the Secretary.

And the chief butler said unto the^: Tell LORD our God. Is not that he,
whose hye places and altares Ezechias has taken down, and said unto Judah and
Jerusalem: Before this altar which is at Jerusalem, shall ye worship?

Make a multitude now therefore unto my lord the king of Assiria, and I will
give ye two thousand horses, let se if thou be able to man them: how will thou
then endure before the smallest prince of my lords subjects? And trustest
thou unto Egipte because of the charettes and horsemen? But think thou that I
came up hither without ye LORD to destroy these cities? The LORD has
commanded me: Go up in to that land and destroy it.

LORD, saying: The LORD shall deliver us, and this cite shall not be given in
to the hands of ye king of Assiria. Follow not ye Ezechias, for thus says
the king of Assiria:

LORD shall deliver us. ^sa. 10. b
Have the gods of the Heythen delivered every one his land from the hand of
the king of Assiria? Where are the gods of Hemath and Arphad? Where are the
gods of Sepharuaim Hena and Iua? Have they delivered Samaria fro my hand?
Where is there one god among the gods of all lands, which has delivered
his land fro my hand? that the LORD should deliver Jerusalem fro my hand.

As for the people, they held their peace, and gave him no answer: for the
king had commanded and said: Answer him nothing. Then came Eliachim the
son of Helchia ye steward, and Sobna the scrybe, and Ioah the son of
Assaph the Secretatary unto Ezechias with rent clothes, and told him the
words of the chief butler.

The XIX. Chapter.
When Ezechias ye king herd this, (...)
and put on a sackcloth, and went in to ye house of the LORD, and sent
Eliachim the steward and Sobna the Scrybe with the Eldest prestes, clothed in
sackcloth, unto the prophet Esaias ye son of Amos, and they said unto him:
Thus says Ezechias: This is a day of trouble, and of defiaunce and
blasphemy. The children are come to the birth, and there is no strength to be
delivered of them. If happly the LORD thy God will hear all the words of ye
chief butler, whom his lord the king of Assiria has sent, to blasphemy ye
living God, and to defye him with soch words as the LORD thy God has herd,
therefore lift thou up thy prayer for the remnaunt, which are yet left behind.

And wha^ king Ezechias servants came LORD: Fear not thou the words yt
thou have herd, wherewith the king of Assirias servants have blasphemed me.
Behold, I will put him in another mind, so yt he shall hear tydinges, and go
again in to his own country, (...)
and in his own land will I cause him to fall through the sword.

And when ye chief butlar came again, he found the king of Assiria fightinge
against Libna: for he had herd that he was departed from Lachis. And he herd
of Taracha the king of the Morians: Behold, he is gone forth to fight with
the. Then turned he back, and sent messaungers to Ezechias, and caused to say
unto him: Let not thy God disceaue the, on whom thou trustest and say:
Jerusalem shall not be given in to the hand of the king of Assiria. Behold,
thou have herd what the kings of Assiria have done unto all lands, and how
they damned them, and shall thou be delivered? Have ye gods of ye Heithen
delivered the^, whom my father destroyed, as Gosan, Haran, Reseph, and the
children of Eden which were at Thalassar? Where is ye king of Hemath, ye king
of Arphad, and ye king of ye cite Sepharuaim, Hena and Iua?

And when Ezechias had received the letters LORD, and laid them abroad before
the LORD, and made his prayer before the LORD, and said: O LORD God of
Israel, thou that syttest upon the Cherubins, thou only art God among all ye
kingdoms of the earth, thou have made heaven and earth. Enclyne thine ear O
LORD, and hear: open thine eyes, and behold, and hear the words of
Sennacherib, which has sent hither to blaspheme the living God. It is true (O
LORD) that the kings of Assiria have destroyed the Heythen and their land
with the sword, and have cast their gods in the fire: for they were not
Gods, but ye work of men's hondes, wodd and stone, therefore have they
destroyed them. But now O LORD help thou us out of his hand, that all the
kingdoms upon earth may know, that thou LORD art God alone.

LORD God of Israel: Where as thou have made thy prayer unto me concerning
Sennacherib ye king of Assiria, I have herd it. This is it that the LORD
has spoken against him: He has despised ye and mocked the O virgin thou
daughter Sion: he has shaken his head at the O daughter Jerusalem. (...). 1.
b (...) ^5. d (...) 9. a
Whom have thou despised and blasphemed? Over whom have thou lift up thy
voice? Eue^ against ye holy one in Israel have thou lift up thine eyes: thou
have blasphemed ye LORD by thy messaungers, and said: Through the multitude of
my charettes have I gone up to the tops of the mountains, upon the sides of
Libanus. I have hewn down his hye Ceders and his chosen Pyne trees, and am
come to the vttemost habitacion of the wod of Carmel that belongs unto it. I
have dygged and drunk up the strange waters, and with ye soles of my fete
have I dried up the Sea.

(...). ^6. a
and shall be as the grass upon the field, and as ye grene herb and hay upon
the house tops, that wythereth before it be grown up. I know thy habitacion,
thy out and ingoynge, and that thou ragest against me. For so much then as thou
ragest against me, and seeing thy presumpcion is come up to mine ears,
therefore will I put a ring in thy nose, and a bridle bytt in thy lips, and
will bring the again, even the same way thou came.

LORD Zebaoth shall bring this to pass.

Therefore thus says the LORD concerning ye king of the Assyrians: He shall
not come in to this cite, and shall shute no arowe therein, nether shall there
come any shylde before it, nether shall he dygge any back about it, but shall
go again the way that he came, and shall not come in to this cite, says the
LORD: and I will defend this cite, to help it for mine own sake, and for my
servant David's sake.

And in the same night went the angel LORD, and smote in the host of the
Assyrians, an hundredth and five and four score thousand men. And when they
gatt them up in the morning, behold, all lay full of deed coarses. Tobi. 1. d
So Sennacherib the king of Assyria brake up, and departed, and returned, and
abode at Niniue. And as he worshipped in ye house of Nesrach his god, his own
sons Adramalech and Sarazer smote him with the sword, and fled in to ye
land of Ararat. And Asarhadon his son was king in his stead.

The XX. Chapter.
AT that time was Ezechias deedsicke. 2. Par. 32. ^ Esa. 38. a
Thus says ye LORD: Set thine house in order for thou shall dye and not
live. And he turned, his face to the wall, and prayed unto ye LORD, and said:
Remember (O LORD) that I have walked faithfully before the, and with a
perfect heart, and have done yt which is good in thy syghte. And Ezechias wept
sore. But when Esaias was not gone out of half the cite, ye word of ye LORD
came to him, and said: Turn back, and tell Ezechias ye prince of my people:
Thus says ye LORD God of thy father David: I have herd thy prayer, and
considered ye tears. Behold, I will heal ye: on the third day shall thou go
in to ye house of the LORD, and fiftene years will I add unto ye life, and
will deliver the and this cite from the king of Assyria, and this cite will I
defend for mine own sake, and for my servant David's sake. And Esaias said:
Bring hither a quantite of fygges. And when they brought them, they laid
them upon the sore, and it was healed.

LORD will heal me, and that I shall go up in to the house of ye LORD on the
third day? Esaias said: This token shall thou have of the LORD, that the
LORD shall do acordynge as he has said. Shall the shadow go ten degrees
forward, or shall it turn ten degrees backwarde? Ezechias said: It is an easy
thing for the shadow to go ten degrees downewarde, yt is not my mind: but
that it go ten degrees backwarde. Then cried the prophet Esaias unto the LORD,
Eccli. 48 e
and the shadow went back ten degrees in Achas Dyall, which he was descended
before.

At the same time Merodach Baladan the son of Baladan king of Babylon, Esa
39 a
sent letters and presents unto Ezechias, for he had herd that Ezechias had
been sick. And Ezechias reioysed with them, and showed them all the house of
rotes, the silver, gold, spyces, and the best oil, and the house of
ordinance, and all that was found in his treasures. There was nothing in his
house and in all his domynion, but Ezechias showed it them.

LORD: Behold, 4 Re. 24. c and* 2^. b Iere. 32. c
the time comes, that it shall all be carried away unto Babylon, and
whatsoever thy fathers have laid up unto this day, and there shall nothing
be left, says the LORD. Dan. 1. a
Ye and the children which come of the, whom thou shall beget, shall be taken
away, to be chamberlaynes in the king of Babilons palace. Ezechias said unto
Esaias: It is good that the LORD has spoken. And he said morouer: Let there be
peace yet and faithfulness in my time.

What more there is to say of Ezechias, and all his power, and what he did,
and of the pole and water condyte, where by he conveyed water in to the cite,
behold, it is written in the Cronicles of the kings of Judah. 2. Par. 32. f
And Ezechias fell on sleep with his fathers, and Manasses his son was king
in his stead.

The XXI. Chapter.
MAnasses was twolue year old, (...)
and reigned five and fyftye year at Jerusalem. His mothers name was Hephziba.
And he did that which was evil in ye sight of the LORD (even after the
abhominacio^s of the Heithen, whom the LORD expelled before the children of
Israel) and waxed fro ward, (...)
and builded up the hye places which his father Ezechias had destroyed, and
set up Baals altares, and made groves (as Achab the king of Israel did) and
worshipped all the host of heaven, and served them. And builded altares in the
LORDS house, whereof the LORD said: I will set my name at Jerusalem. And in
both the courts of the house of the LORD builded he altares unto all the
host of heaven. And (...)
caused his son to go through the fire, and regarded birds cryenge and
tokens, and maynteyned soythsayers, and expounders of tokens, and so much did
he of this which was evil in the sight of the LORD, that he provoked him unto
wrath.

A grove Idol also which he had made, LORD said unto David and to Solomon his
son: In this house, and at Jerusalem ( (...)
which I have chosen out of all the trybes of Israel) will I set my name forever,
and will not cause ye foot of Israel to be removed any more from the land,
which I gave unto their fathers, ye so that they observe and do acordynge unto
all that I have charged them, and after all the law that my servant Moses
commanded them. Nevertheless they would not harken, but Manasses disceaued
them, so yt they did worse then the Heithen, whom the LORD expelled before ye
children of Israel.

Then spoke the LORD by his servants the prophets, and said: Because that
Manasse the king of Judah has gone these abhominacions, which are worse then
all ye abhominacions that the Amorites have done which were before them, and
has caused Judah also to sin against their God, therefore thus says the
LORD God of Israel: (...)
Behold, And ye remnaunt of mine inheritance will I cast out, and seater them
abroad, and will deliver them in to the hands of their enemies, to be spoiled
and rent of all their enemies: because they have done yt which is evil in my
sight, and have provoked me unto wrath, sense the day that I brought their
fathers out LORD.

What more there is to say of Manasses, and all that he did, and his sins
which he committed, behold, it is written in the Cronicles of the kings of
Judah. And Manasses fell on sleep with his fathers, and was buried in the garden
beside his house, namely, in the garden of Vsa, and Amon his son was king in
his stead.

(...). 33. d
Two and twentye year old was Amon when he was made king, and he reigned two
year at Jerusalem. His mothers name was Mesumeleth, ye daughter of Harus of
Iatba, and he did evil in the sight of the LORD, LORD the God of his
father, and walked not in the way of the LORD.

And his servants conspyred against Amon, and slew the king in his house.
But the people of the land slew all them yt had co^spyred against king Amon.
And the people of the land made Josias his son king in his stead. As for
other things that Amon did, behold, they are written in the Cronicles of the
kings of Judah. And he was buried in his grave in Vsas garden. And Josias his
son was king in his stead.

The XXII. Chapter.
(...). 34* a
and reigned one and thirty year at Jerusalem. His mothers name was Iedida
the daughter of Adaia of Bascath, and he did that which was right in ye sight
of the LORD, and walked in all ye way of David his father, and turned not
aside, nether to the right hand ner to the left.

^. Par. 34.
And in the eightenth year of king Josias, the king sent Saphan ye son of
Asalia the son of Mesulam the scrybe, in to ye house of the LORD, and said:
^. Re. 12. b
Go up to Helchias the hye pressed, that the money that is brought unto ye house
of ye LORD (which the tresholde kepers have gathered of ye people) may be
delivered unto them, that they may give it to the workmen which are appointed
in the house of the LORD, and to give it unto the laborers in the house (yt
they may repair the decay of the house) namely, unto the carpenters, and
buylders, and masons, and to them yt bie timber and fre stone for the
repairinge of the house: but so yt there be no accomptes taken of them
concerning the money, that is under their hand, but yt they deal withal
upon credence.

And Helchias ye pressed said unto Sapha^ 2. Pa. 34. ^
I have found the book of the law in the house of the LORD. And Helchias
gave the book unto Saphan, that he might read it. And Saphan the scrybe bare
it unto the king, and brought him word again, and said: Thy servants have
gathered together ye money yt was found in the house, and have delivered it
unto the workme^, which are appointed in ye house of the LORD. And Saphan the
scrybe told the king and said: Helchias the pressed has delivered me a book,
and Saphan red it before the king.

But when the king herd the words of the book of law, he rent his clothes.
And the king commanded Helchias the pressed, and Ahicam the son of Saphan,
and Achbor the son of Michaia, and Saphan the scribe, and Asaia ye kings
servant, and said: Go yor way and axe council at the LORD for me, Iere.
21. ^
for the people, and for all Judah, concerning the words of this book that is
found: for LORD that is kyndled over us, because or fathers have not herkened
unto the words of this book, to do all that is written unto us therein.

Then went Helchias the pressed, and Ahicam, Achbor, Saphan and Asaia unto Hulda
the prophetisse ye wife of Sellu^ the son of Thecua the son of Harham the
keeper of ye clothes, and she dwelt at Jerusalem in the second port, and they
spoke unto her. And she said unto them: Thus says ye LORD God of Israel:
Tell the man that sent you unto me, Thus says the LORD: Behold, I will
bring evil upon this place, and the inhabiters thereof, even all the words of
ye law which the king has caused to be red, because they have forsaken me,
and brent incense unto other gods, to provoke me unto wrath with all the
works of their hands. Therefore is my wrath kindled against this cite, and
shall not be quenched.

LORD: Thus says the LORD God of Israel: Because thine heart is not departed
from the words which thou have herd, and have humbled thyselfe before the
LORD, to hear what I have spoken against this place and the inhabiters thereof
(how that they shall become a very desolacion and curse) and have rent thy
clothes, and wept before me, I have herd it, says the LORD: 4. Re. 23. f
therefore will I gather the unto thy fathers, so yt thou shall be put in to thy
grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not se all the evil that I will bring
upon this place. And they brought the king word again.

The XXIII. Chapter.


^. Par 34. f
and the king went up in to the house of the LORD, and all the men of Judah,
and all the inhabiters of Jerusalem with him, the prestes and prophets and all
the people both small and great, ^. Esd 8. a
and all the words of the book of the covenant that was found in the house
of the LORD, were red in their ears. And the king stood upon a piler, and
made a covenant before the LORD, ^su. 24. ^
that they should walk after the LORD, and to keep his commandments,
witnesses, and ordinances with all their heart and with all their soul, yt
they should set up the words of this covenant, which are written in this
book. And all the people entered in to the covenant.

And the (...) commanded Helchias the hye pressed, and ^he prestes of the
second course, and the kepers of the thresholde, yt they should put out of the
temple all the vessels which were made for Baal, and for the grove, and for all
the host of heaven, and he brent them without Jerusalem in the valley of
Cedron, and the dust of them was carried unto

And he put down the ^ph 1. a
Kemurims, who^ the kings of Judah had founded, to burn incense upon the hye
places, in the cities of Judah, and about Jerusalem. He put down also them
that brent incense unto Baal, to the Son, and the Moon, and the twolue
tokens, and to all ye host of heaven. And the grove caused he to be carried
from the house of the LORD out of Jerusalem in to ye valley of Cedron, and
brent it in the valley of Cedron, and made it to dust, and cast the dust upon
the graves of ye comen people. And he brake down the whorekepers houses which
were by the house of the LORD, wherein the women made mansions for the grove.

And he caused all the prestes for to come out of the cities of Judah, and
suspended ye hye places, where the prestes brent incense, from Geba unto
Berseba. And brake down the hye places in the ports, that were at ye door of
the gate of Joshua ye shreue of the cite, at the left hand as one goes to the
cite port. Yet had not the prestes of the hye places offered upon the altar of
the LORD at Jerusalem, but ate vnleuended bred among their brethren.

He suspended (...)
Tophet also in the valley LORD, beside the chest of Netham Melech the
chamberlayne which was at Paruarim, and the charettes of the Son brent he
with fire, and the altares upon the rofe of Achabs perler, which the kings of
Judah had made. And the altares (...)
which Manasses had made in the two courts of the house of the LORD, did the
king break down. And rannefrom thence, and cast the dust of them in to the
broke Cedron.

And the hye places that were before Jerusalem on the right hand of Mount
Mashith (...)
which Solomon the king of Israel had builded unto Astaroth the abhomynacion
of Sidon, and to Camos the abhominacion of Moab, and to Malcom the abhominacion
of the children of Ammon, those did the king suspende, and brake the pilers,
and roted out the groves, and filled their places with men's bones.

And (...)
the altar at Bethel, and the hye about, and saw the graves that were upon
the mount, and caused the bones to the fetched out of the graves, and brent
them upon the altar, and suspended it, acordinge to the word of the LORD,
(...)
which the man of God cried out, that told this before.

And he said: What titell is this, that I se here? And the men of the cite
said unto him: It is the grave of the man of God, which came from Judah, and
cried out this that thou have done against ye altar of Bethel. And he said:
Let him lie, no man touch his bones. Thus were his bones delivered with the
bones of the prophet that came from Samaria.

LORD unto wrath) and did with them acordinge to all as he had done at Bethel.
And all ye prestes of the hye places that were there, offered he up upon the
altares, and (...)
so brent he men's bones thereon, and came again to Jerusalem.

(...)
And the king commanded the people, and said: Keep Easter unto the LORD
your God, (...)
as it is written in the book of this covenant. For there was no Easter so
kept as this, sense the time of the Judges which judged Israel, and in all the
times of the kings of Israel, and of the kings of Judah: but in the eightenth
year of king Josias, was this Easter kept unto the LORD at Jerusalem.

And Josias expelled all soythsayers, expounders of tokens, images and Idols,
and all the abhominacions which were seen in the land of Judah and at
Jerusalem, that he might set up the words of the law, which were written in
the book, that Helchias ye pressed found in the house of ye LORD.

LORD with all his heart, with all his soul, and with all his strength, acordinge
to all the law of Moses. And after him came there not up soch another. Yet
turned not the LORD from the indignacion of his great wrath, wherewith he was
displeased over Judah, because of all the prouocacion wherewith Manasses had
provoked him. And ye LORD said: (...) ^4. a
I will put Judah out of my presence also, even as I have put away Israel: and
this cite which I have chosen, will I cast out, namely, Jerusalem, and the house
whereof I said: My name shall be there. What more there is to say of Josias, and
all that he did, behold, it is written in the Cronicles of the kings of Judah.

In his time went Pharao Necho ye king of Egipte up against the king of
Assyria by the water Euphrates. ^. Par. 35. a
But king Josias went against him, and dyed at Megiddo, wha^ he had seen him.
And his servants carried him deed from Megiddo, and brought him to Jerusalem,
and buried him in his grave. And the people of the land took That is *
Iechonias.
Ioahas the son of Josias, and anointed him, and made him king in his
fathers stead.

Three and twentye year old was Ioahas LORD, even as his fathers had done.
But Pharao Necho took him presoner of Reblatha in the land of Hemath, yt he
should not reign at Jerusalem: and raised a tax upon the land, an hundredth
tale^tes of silver, and one talente of gold. And Pharao Necho made Eliachim ye
son of Josias king in his father Josias stead, and turned his name Ioachim.
Iere. 22. b
But Ioahas took he, and brought him in to Egipte where he dyed. And Ioachim
gave the silver and gold unto Pharao, yet taxed he the land, yt he might give
ye silver acordynge to Pharaos commandment. Every one among the people in ye
land taxed he after his abilite in silver and gold, to give it unto Pharao.
Five and twentye year old was Ioachim when he was made king, and reigned
eleven years at Jerusalem. His mothers name was Sebida ye daughter of Pedaia
of Ruma, and he did evil in the sight of the LORD, even as his fathers had
done.

The XXIIII. Chapter.
IN his time came up Nabuchodonosor LORD sent men of war upon him out of
Chaldea, out of Syria, out of Moab, and from among the children of Ammon, and
caused the^ for to come in to Judah, to destroy it acordinge to the word of
the LORD, which he spoke by his servants the prophets. It fortuned eue^ so
unto Judah, 4. Re. 23. ^
acordynge to ye word of the LORD, that he would put them away from his
presence, because of ye sins of Manasses which he did, and because of the
innocent blood that he shed. And he filled Jerusalem with innocent, blood,
therefore would not the LORD be reconcyled.

What more there is to say of Ioachim, the Cronicles of the kings of Judah.
And Ioachim fell on sleep with his fathers. And Iere. 36. d
Ioachim his son was king in his stead. And the king of Egipte came no more
out of his land: for the king of Babylon had conquered all that was the king
of Egiptes, from the river of Egipte unto ye water Euphrates. Eightene year
old was Ioachim when he was made king, and reigned three months at
Jerusalem. His mothers name was Nebustha the daughter of Elnathan of Jerusalem.
And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, even as his father had done.



4. Re. 20 c Esa. 29. b
And he took forth from thence all the treasure in the house of the LORD, and
in ye kings house, and brake all the golden vessel yt Solomon the king of
Israel had made in the house of the LORD (acordynge as the LORD had said)
and carried away all Jerusalem, all the rulers, all the mighty men, even ten
thousand presoners, and all the carpenters, and all the smithes, and left
none behind but the poor people of the land.

Deu. 28. d Ier. 24. a
And he carried Ioachim away unto Babylon, and the kings mother, the kings
wives, and his chamberlaynes: and ye mighty men of the land led he away
presoners also from Jerusalem unto Babylon, and seven thousand of the best
men, and a thousand carpenters and smythes, and all the strong men of war.
Ier. 37. a
And the king of Babylon made Matania his uncle king in his stead, and
turned his name Sedechias.

Ier. 52. a
One and twentye year old was Sedechias, when he was made king, and reigned
eleven year at Jerusalem. His mothers name was Amithal the daughter of Ieremia
of Libna. And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, eue^ as Ioachim did: for
thus fortuned it unto Jerusalem through the wrath of the LORD, till he had cast
them out from his presence. And Sedechias fell away from the king of Babylon.

The XXV. Chapter.


ANd it fortuned, that in ye nyenth year of his reign, upon the tenth day of
the tenth month, (...)
Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon came with all his power against Jerusalem.
And they laid sege unto it, and builded strong holds round about it. Thus
was the cite beseged unto the eleventh year of king Sedechias. But on ye
nyenth day of the fourth month was the honger so strong in the cite, (...)
that the people of the land had nothing to eat. And the cite was broken up,
and all the men of war fled in the night by the way of the port between the
two walls, which goes to the kings garden. But the Caldees lay about the
cite. And he fled by the way to the plain field. Nevertheless the power of the
Caldees followed after the king, and took him in the plain field of Jericho:
and all the men of war that were with him, were scatered abroad from him. And
they took the king, and led him up to the king of Babylon unto Reblatha. (...)
And he gave judgment upon him. And they slew Ezechias children before his
eyes, and put out Sedechias eyes, and bound him with cheynes, and carried him
unto Babylon.

Upon the seventh day of the fyfth monet, that is the ninetenth year of
Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, came Nabusaradan the chief captain the king
of Babilons servant, unto Jerusalem, and brent ye house of the LORD, and the
kings house, and all the houses at Jerusalem, and all the great houses brent
he with fire. And all the power of the Caldees which was with the chief
captain, brake down the walls round about Jerusalem. As for the other
people that yet were left in the cite, and were fallen unto the king of
Babylon, and the other comen people, Nabusaradan the chief captain carried them
away. And of the poorest people did the chief captain leave in ye land to be
wynegardeners and plowmen.

But the brazen pilers in the house of the LORD, and the seats, and the
brazen lauer that was in the house of the LORD, did ye Caldees break down,
and carried the metal unto Babylon. And the pottes, shouels, fleshokes, spones,
and all ye brazen vessel that was occupied in the service, carried they away.
And ye chief captain took away ye censors and basens yt were of gold and
silver, two pilers, one lauer, and the seats yt Solomon had made for ye house
of the LORD. The metal of all these ornaments could not be weyed. (...) 7. b
Eightene cubytes hye was one piler, and ye knoppe thereon was of brass also,
and three cubytes hye: and the rope and the pomgranates upon the knoppe round
about, were all of brass. After the same manner was the other piler also with
the rope.

(...) 2. b
But over the remnaunt of the people in the land of Judah, whom Nabuchodonosor
the king of Babylon left behind, he set Godolias ye son of Ahicam ye son
of Saphan. Now wha^ all the captains of the soudyers, and the men herd, that
the king of Babylon had made Godolias gouernoure, they came to Godolias unto
(...)
Mispa, namely, Ismael ye son of Nathanias, and Iohanna ye son Carea, and
Seraia ye son of Tanhometh the Netophatite, and Iesanias ye son of Maechati
with their men. And Godolias swear unto them and to their men, and said unto
them: (...) 4^. c
Fear not ye ye officers of the Caldees, tarry in the land, and submytte your
selves unto the king of Babylon, and ye shall prospere. (...). 41. a
But in the seventh

Howbeit in the seven and thirtieth year after that Ioachim the king of Judah
was carried away on the seven and twenty day of the twolueth month,
Euilmerodach the king of Babylon in the first year of his reign, lift up
the head of Ioachim ye king of Judah out of preson, and spoke louyngly unto
him, and set his trone above ye trones of ye kings that were with him at
Babylon, and changed the clothes of his captiuyte. And he ate allwaye before
him as long as he lived. And he appointed him his portion, which was ever
given him daily of the king, as long as he lived.

The end of the fourth book of the kings.
The first book of the Cronicles, called Paralipomenon.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I.II. A rehearsynge of the generacions. Chap. III. Of David and his
sons. Chap. IIII. A register of the children of Judah. Chap. V. A register of
the children of Simeo^. Chap. VI. A register of the Rubenites. Chap. VII. A
register of the children of Leui. Chap. VIII. Of the children of Isachar and
Ben Iamin. Chap. IX. Of the trybe of Ben Iamin. Chap. X. The nombre of the
Israelites, that were carried away unto Babylon. Chap. XI. The battayll of the
Philistynes against Saul and his sons. Chap. XII. How David was anointed
king, and of his kingdom. Chap. XIII. Of David's worthy men of war, which
came unto him out of all the trybes. Chap. XIIII. How the other trybes were
called, and how they fetched away the Arc. Chap. XV. Hiram sends timber
unto David. Of David's wives. He overcomes the Philistynes. Chap. XVI. David
appoynteth the Levites to bear the Arc. Chap. XVII. The Arc is set in the
Tabernacle, with sacrifice and thankesgeuynge. Chap. XVIII. God forbyddeth
David to build the temple. Chap. XIX. David subdueth the enemies on every
side. Chap. XX. Hanun the king of Amon deals shamefully with David
servants, that come to comfort him. Chap. XXI. Of certain batels which
David wins with worshipe. Chap. XXII. David nombreth the people, and
displeases the LORD, which punysheth the people for his sake. Chap. XXIII.
David prepares timber and stone, gold and silver for the buyldinge of the
temple. Chap. XXIIII.XXV. David in his age before his death, appoynteth the
offices in the house of God. Chap. XXVI. The office of the children of Asaph,
Heman, and Iedithun. Chap. XXVII The office of the porters. Chap. XXVIII. The
office of the captains among the trybes. Chap. XXIX. The words of David to
the captains, to the people and to Solomon. Chap. XXX. How David talks of
buyldi^ge the temple, and what the princes give there to.
The first Chapter.
Gene 5. a
Mahalaleel, Iared, Henoch, Mathusalah, Lamech, Noe, Sem, Ham and Iaphet.

Gen 10. a
The children of Iaphet are these: Gomer, Magog, Madai, Iauan, Tubal, Mesech
and Thiras. The children of Gomer are these: Ascenas, Riphat Togarma. The
children of Iauan are these: Elisa, Tharsisa, Chitim and Dodanim.

The children of Ham are these: Chus, Misraim, Phut and Canaan. The children of
Chus are these: Seba, Heuila, Sabtha, Reyma and Sabthecha. The children of
Reyma are these: Sheba and Dedan. Chus, begat Nemr^^, yt began to be mighty
upon earth. Misraim begat Ludim, Enanim, Lehabim, Napthuhim, Pathrusim, and
Casluhim: of whom came the Philistynes and Caphthorims. Canaan begat Sidon his
first son: Heth, Iebusi, Amori, Girgosi, Heui, Arki, Sim, Aruadi, Zemari and
Hemathi.



Gene* 11. b
Sem, Arphachsad, Salah, Eber, Peleg, Regu, Serug, Nahor, Terah, Abram, that is
Abraham. The children of Abraham are these: Isaac and Ismael. This is their
generation: Genesis 25. b
The first son of Ismael: Nebaioth, Cedar, Abdeel, Mibsam, Misma, Duma, Masa,
Hadad, Thema, Iethur, Naphis and Kedma. These are the children of Ismael.



(...)
The children of Seir are: Lothan, Sobal, Zibeon, Ana, Dison, Ezer, Disan. The
children of Lothan are: Hori and Hom^^ and Thimna was the sister of Lothan. The
children of Sobalare: Aluan, Manahath* Ebal, Sephi, Onam. The children of
Zibeon are: Aia and Ana. The children of Ana, Dison. The children of Dison are:
Hamran, Eszban, Iethran and Charan. The children of Ezer are: Bilhan, Se^uan
and Acan. The children of Disan are: Vz and Aran.

These are the kings which reigned is the lord of Edom, or ever there reigned
any king among the children of Israel: Bel^ the son of Beor, and the name
of his cite was Dinhaba. And when Bela dyed, Iobab the son of Serah of Bosra
was king in his stead. And when Iobab dyed, H^sam out of ye land of the
Themanites was king in his stead.

When Husam dyed, Hadad the son of Bedad (which smote the Madianites in the
field of ye Moabites) was king in his stead, and the name of his cite was
Auith. When Hadad dyed, Samla of Masrek was king in his stead. When Samla
dyed, Saul of Rehobeth by the water side, was king in his stead. When Saul
dyed, Baal Hauan the son of Achbor was king in his stead. When Baal Hauan
dyed, Hadad was king in his stead, and the name of his cite was Pagi, and his
wives name was Mehetabeel the daughter of Matred, and daughter of Mesahab.

But when Hadad dyed, there were princes at Edom: Prince Thimnah, prince Alua,
prince Ietheth, prince Ahalibama, prince Ela, prince Pinon, prince Kenas*
prince Theman, prince Mibzar, prince Magdiel, prince Iram. These are the
princes of Edom.

The II. Chapter.
THese are the children of Israel: Ruben, Simeon, Leui, Judah, Isachar, Zabulon,
Dan, Joseph, Be^ Iamin, Nephtali, Gad and Aser. (...)
The children of Judah: Er, Onan and Sela: these three were borne unto him of ye
daughter Sua ye Cananitisse. Howbeit ye first son of Judah was wicked before
ye LORD, and therefore he slew him. But (...)
Thamar his sons wife bare him Phares and Zarah, so yt all ye children of
Judah were five.

(...) ^4. d
The children of Phares are, Hesrom and Hamuel. The children of Zarah are,
Simri, Ethan, Heman, Chalcol, Dara, which all are five in nombre. The children
of Charmi are, (...)
Achan, which troubled Israel, wha^ he sinned in the thing that was damned.
The children of Ethan: Asaria.

The children which were borne unto Hesrom, are: Raia, Thalubai. (...)
Ram begat Aminadab. Aminadab begat Naasson the prince of the children of Judah.
Naasson begat Salmon. Salmon begat Boos. Boos begat Obed. Obed begat Isai. (...)
Isai begat Eliab his first son, Abinadab the second, Samma the third,
Nathanael the fourth, Raddai ye fifth, Ozem ye sixte, David ye vij. And their
sisters were Zeruia and Abigail.

(...)
The father of Amasa was Iether an Ismaelite.

Caleb the son of Hesrom begat Asuba ye woman, and Ierigoth. And these are
the same woman's children: Ieser, Sobab, and Ardon. But wha^ Asuba dyed, Caleb
took Ephrat, which bare him Hur. (...)
Hur begat Vri. Vri begat Bezaleel.

Afterward lay Hesrom with ye daughter of Machir the father of Gilead, and he
took her wha^ he was three score year old, and she bare him Segub. Segub begat
Iair, which had three and twentye cities in the land of Gilead. And he took out
of the same Iesur and Aram the towns of Iair, and Kenath with the vyllages
thereof, three score cities. All these are the children of Machir ye father of
Gilead. After ye death of Hesrom in Caleb Ephrata, left Hesrom his wife unto
Abia: which (wife) bare him (...)
Ashur ye father of Thecoa.

Ierahmeel the first son of Hesrom had children: the first Ram, Buna, Oren
and Ozem and Ahia. And Ierahmeel had yet another wife, whose name was Athara,
she is ye mother of Onam. The children of Ram the first son of Ierahmeel are,
Maaz, Iamin and Eker.



The children of Caleb the brother of Ierahmeel are, Mesa his first son,
which is the father of 1. Re. 23. ^
Siph, and of the children of Maresa the father of Hebron.

The children of Hebron are, Corah, Thapuah,

Epha Calebs concubyne bare Haram, Mosa and Gases. Haram begat Gases. The
children of Iahdai are, Rekem, Iotham, Gesan, Pelet, Epha and Saaph. Maecha
Calebs concubyne bare Seber and Thirhena. And she bare Saaph also ye father of
Madmanna, and Scheua the father of Machbena, and the father of Gibea. But Iosu.
15. d Iud. 1. c
Achsa was Calebs daughter.

These were the children of Caleb: Hur ye first son of Ephrata, Sobal the
father of Kiriath Iearim, Salma ye father of Bethleem, Hareph ye father of Beth
Sader. And Sobal the father of Kiriath Iearim had sons, namely the half
kynred of Manuhoth.

The kynreds at Kiriath Iearim were ye Iethites, Puthites, Sumathites and
Misraites. From these came forth the Zaregathites and Esthaolites. The children
of Salma are Bethleem and the Netophathites the crown of the house of Ioab,
and the half of the Manahites of the Zareite. And ye kynreds of the scrybes
which dwelt at Iabes, are ye Thireathites, Simeathites, Suchothites, Iud. 1. d.
these are the Kenites, yt came of Hamath the father of Beth Rechab.

The III. Chapter.
Reg* ^. a
The first son, Amnon of Ahinoam the Iesraelitisse: the second, Daniel of
Abigail the Carmelitisse: the third, Absalom ye son of Maecha ye daughter of
Thalmai king of Gesur: the fourth, Adonias the son of Hagith: the fifth,
Saphathia of Abital: the sixte, Iethream of his wife Egla. These six were
borne unto him at Hebron, for he reigned there vij. year and six months.
But at Jerusalem reigned he three and thirty year.

Reg. ^. c
And these were borne unto him at Jerusalem: Simea, Sobab, Nathan, Re. 12. c
Salomo^: these four of Bethseba ye daughter of Ammiel. And Iebear, Elisama,
Eliphalet, Noga, Nepheg, Iapia, Elisama, Eliada, Eliphelet, these nine. These
all are ye children of David, beside those yt were the children of ye
co^cubynes. Re. 13. a
And Thamar was their sister.

Iat. 1. a
whose son was Asa, who son was Iosaphat, whose son was Ioram, whose
son was Ahasia, whose son was Ioas, whose son was Amasias, whose son
was Asaria, whose son was Iotham, whose son was Achas, whose son was
Ezechias, whose son was Manasses, whose son was Amon, whose son was
Josias. The sons of Josias were: ye first, Iohanna: the second, Ioachim: the
third, Sedechias: the fourth, Sallum. The children of Ioachim were, Iechonias,
whose son was Sedechias.

^att. 1. b
Selathiel, Malchiram, Phadaia, Semeazar, Iekamia, Hosanna, Nedabia. The
children of Phadaia were: Zorobabel and Simei. The children of Zorobabel were:
Mesullam and Hanania, and their sister Selomith, and Hasuba, Ohel, Barachias,
Hasadia, Iusab Hases, these five. The children of Hanania were: Platia and
Iesaia, whose son was Rephaia, whose son was Arnan, whose son was Obedia,
whose son was Sachania. The children of Sachania were: Semaia. The children
of Semaia were: Hatus, Iegeal, Bariah, Nearia, Saphat and Sesa, these six. The
children of Nearia were: Elioenai, Ezechias and Asrika^, these three. The
children of Elioenai were: Hodaia, Eliasib, Platia, Akub, Iohanna, Delaia and
Anani, these seven.

The IIII. Chapter.
Genesis ^8. a
Charmi, Hur and Sobal. Rehoia the son of Sobal begat Iahath. Iahath begat
Ahumai and Lahad. These are the kynreds of the Zaregathites, Elle ye father of
Etha^, Iesreel, Iesma, Iedbas and their sister was called Hazelelponi: and
Penuel the father of Gedor, and Eser the father of Husa. These are the children
of Hur the first son of Ephrata ye father of Bethleem.

(...)
Ashur ye father of Thecoa had two wives, Hellea and Naera: and Naera bare
Ahusam, Hepher, Thennu, and Ahastari: these are the children of Naera. The
children of Hellea were: Zereth, Iezohar and Ethnan. Chos begat Anub and
Hazobeba, and the kynred of Aharhel the son of Harum. Iaebes was more
honorable then his brethren, and his mother called him Iaebes, for she said: I
have borne him with trouble.

And Iaebes called upon the God of Israel, and said: (...)
If thou will bless me, and increase the borders of my land, and if thy hand
be with me, and thou deliver me from evil, yt it trouble me not. And God
caused it for to come that he axed.

Chalub the bro^her of Suah begat Mehir:

And Meonothai begat Aphra. And Saraia begat Ioab the father of Geharasim: for
they were carpenters. The children of Caleb the son of Iephune were: Iru, Ela
and Naam. The children of Ela were: Kenas. The children of Iehaleleel were:
Siph, Sipha, Thiria, and Asarieel. The children of Esra were: Iether, Mered,
Epher and Ialon, and Thahar with Miriam, Samai, Ieszbah the father of Esthemoa,
and his wife Iudi Ia bare Iered the father of Geder, Heber the father of Socho,
Iekuthiel ye father of Sanoah: these are the children of Bithia the daughter of
Pharao, which Mar^d took.

The children of the wife Hodia the sister of

The children of Simon were: Amnon, Rimna and Benhanan, Thiflon. The children
of Iesei were: Soheth, and Ben Soheth.

The children of Sela ye son of Judah were: Er, ye father of Lecha. Laeda the
father of Maresa, and the kynred of ye lynnen weuers in ye house of Aszbea: and
Iokim, and the men of Cosebo, Ioas and Seraph, which were householders in Moab,
and dwelt at Lahem and Hadebarim Athikim. These were potmakers, and dwelt
among plants and hedges, beside the king in his busynes, and came and dwelt
there.

The V. Chapter,
(...)
Iamin, Iarib, Serah, Saul: whose son was Sallum, whose son was Mipsam,
whose son was Misma. The children of Misma were, Hamuel, whose son was
Sachur, whose son was Simei. Simei had sixtene sons and six daughters, and
his brethren had not many children. And all their kynred multiplied not as the
children of Judah. But (...). 19. a
they dwelt at Berseba, Molada, Hazar Sual, Bilha, Ezem, Tholad, Bethuel,
Harma, Ziclag, Beth Marchaboth, Hazarsussim, Beth Birei, and Saraim: these were
their cities until ye time of king David. And their towns, Etam, Ain,
Rimmon, Tochen, Asan, these five cities, and all the vyllages that were about
these cities, until Baal, this is their habitacion and their kynred among
them.



And they went forth, that they might come unto Gedor to the east side of the
valley, to seek pasture for their sheep. And found fat and good pasture, and a
land large on both the sides, quyete and rich: for they of Ham dwelt there
before time.



There went of them also (of the children of Simeon) five hundredth men unto
mount Seir, with their rulers: Platia, Nearia, Rephaia and Vsiel, the children
of Iesei, and smote the remnaunt of the Amalechites (which were escaped) and
dwelt there unto this day.

The VI. Chapter.
Genesis 49. Exo. 6. b Nu. 26. a
because he defiled his fathers bed, therefore was his first byrthrighte given
unto the children of Joseph the son of Israel, and he was not rekened to ye
first byrthrighte: for unto Judah which was mighty among his brethren, was
given the pryncipalite before him, and the first byrthrighte unto Joseph. The
children now of Ruben the first son of Israel are these: Hanoch, Pallu,
Hesron and Charmi.

The children of Iohel were, Semaia, whose son was Gog, whose son was
Semei, whose son was Micha, whose son was Reaia, whose son was Baal,
whose son was Beera, 4. Re. 15
whom Teglatphalasser the king of Assiria carried away presoner. He was a
prince among the Rubenites. But his brethren among his kynreds (wha^ they
were rekened among their generation) had Ieiel and Sacharia to their heads.

And Bela the son of Asan the son of Sema, the son of Joel, Iosu. 13. c
dwelt at Aroer, and until Nebo and Baal Meon. And dwelt toward ye East, as
one comes to the wyldernes by ye water Euphrates: Nu. 32. a
for their catell were many in the land of Gilead.

And in ye time of Saul they fought against

But the children of Gad dwelt over against them in ye country of Basan, until
Salcha. Joel the chefest, and Sapham the second, Iaenai and Saphat at Basan.
And their brethren of the house of their fathers were, Michael, Mesullam, Seba,
Iorai, Iaecan, Sia and Eber, these seven.

These are the children of Abihail the son of Huri, the son of Iaroah, the
son of Gilead, the son of Michael, the son of Iesisai, ye son of Iahdo,
the son of Bus. Ahi the son of Abdiel, the son of Guni was a ruler in ye
house of their fathers, and they dwelt at Gilead in Basan, and in ye vyllages
thereof, and in all the suburbs of Saron, unto the vttemost parts thereof. All
these were rekened in the time of Iotham the king of Judah, and of Jeroboam the
king of Israel.

The children of Ruben, the Gaddites and Nodab helped them, and delivered ye
Agarites in to their hands, and all that was with them: for they cried unto God
in ye battle. And he herd them, because they put their trust in him. And they
carried away their catell, five thousand Camels, two hundredth and fyftie
thousand sheep, two thousand Asses, and an hundredth thousand souls of men.
For there were many wounded, for why? the battayll was of God. And they dwelt
in their stead, until the time that they were carried away presoners.

Iosu. 1^. d
from Basan forth until Baal Hermon and Seuir, and mount Hermon: for they were
many. And these were ye heads of the house of their fathers, Epher, Iesei,
Eliel, Asriel, Ieremia, Hodaneia, Iahdiel, mighty valeaunt men, and awncient
heads in the house of their fathers.

^. Re. 1^. d
And wha^ they sinned against ye God of their fathers, and went awhorynge
after the gods of the people of the land, (whom God had destroyed before
them) the God of Israel stered up the sprete of Phul the king of Assiria, and
the sprete of Teglatphalassar the king of Assiria, and led away the
Rubenites, Gaddites, and ye half trybe of Manasses, and brought the^ un
Halah, and Habor, and Hara, and to the water of Gosan unto this day.

The VII. Chapter.
^en. 46. b
The children of Kahath were, Amram, Iezeher, Hebron and Vsiel. The children of
Amram were, Aaron, Moses and Miriam. The children of Aaron were, Nadab, Abihu,
Eleasar and Ithamar. Eleasar begat Phineas. Phineas begat Abisua. Abisua begat
Buki. Buki begat Vsi. Vsi begat Serahia. Serahia begat Meraioth. Meraioth begat
Amaria. Amaria begat Achitob. Achitob begat Sadoc. Sadoc begat Ahimaas. Ahimaas
begat Asaria. Asaria begat Iohanan. Iohana^ begat ^. Par. 26. c
Asaria: for he was pressed in the house yt Solomon builded at Jerusalem. Asaria
begat Amaria. Amaria begat Achitob. Achitob begat Zadock. Zadock begat Sallum.
Sallum begat ^. Re. 22. b
Helchias. Helchias begat Asaria. Asaria begat ^. Re. 25. c
Seraia. Seraia begat Iosedec. But Iosedec was carried away wha^ the LORD
caused Judah and Jerusalem to be led away captyue by Nabuchodonosor.

The children of Leui are these: Gerson, Kahath and Merari. These are the names
of the children of Gerson: Libni and Semei. The names of the children of Kahat
are these: Amram, Iezohar, Hebron and Vsiel. The names of the children of
Merari are: Maheli and Musi. These are the kynreds of the Levites among their
housholdes.

Gersons son was Libni, whose son

The children of Elkana were, Ama (Saul. sai and Ahimoth, whose son was
Elkana, whose son was Elkana of Zuph, whose son was Nahath, whose son was
Eliab, whose son was Ieroham, whose son was Elkana, whose son was Samuel.
Whose first borne sons were Seni and Abija.

Meraris son was Maheli, whose son was Libni, whose son was Simei, whose
son was Vsa, whose son was Simea, whose son was Haggia, whose son was
Asaia.

These are they whom David appointed to sing in the house of the LORD, where
the Arc rested, and they mynistred before the habitacion of the Tabernacle of
witness with synginge, until Solomon had builded the house of the LORD at
Jerusalem, and they stood after their manner in their office. And these are they
yt stood and their children. Of ye children of Kahath was Heman ye synger, the
son of Joel, the son of Samuel, the son of Elkana, the son of Ieroham,
ye son of Eliel, the son of Thoah, the son of Zuph, the son of Elkana,
the son of Mahath, the son of Amasai, the son of Elkana, the son of
Iohel, the son of Asaria, the son of Sophonias, the son of Thahath, the
son of Assir, the son of Abijasaph, the son of Corah, the son of
Iezehar, the son of Kahath, the son of Leui, the son of Israel.

And his brother Assaph stood at his right

Their brethren the children of Merari, stood on the left hand, namely, Ethan
the son of Kusi, the son of Abdi, the son of Malluch, the son of
Hasabia, the son of Amazia, the son of Helchia, ye son of Amzi, the son
of Bani, the son of Samer, the son of Maheli, the son of Musi, the son
of Merari, the son of Leui.

As for their brethren the Levites, they were given to all the offices in the
habitacion of the house of the LORD: but the office of Aaron and his sons
was to kyndle the fire upon the altar of burnt offerynges, and upon the altar
of incense, and to all the busynes in the most holy, and to make atonement for
the people, acordinge as Moses ye servant of God commanded.

These are the children of Aaron: Eleasar his son, whose son was Phineas,
whose son was Abisua, whose son was Buki, whose son was Vsi, whose son
was Serahia, whose son was Meraioth, whose son was Amaria, whose son was
Achitob, whose son was Sadoc, whose son was Ahimaas.

(...). 14. d (...)* ^1. b
And they gave the^ Hebron in the land of Judah, and the suburbs of the same
round about. But the field of ye cite and the vyllages thereof, gave they unto
Caleb the son of Iephune. Thus gave they unto the children of Aaron these fre
cities, Hebron and Libna with their suburbs, Iather, and Esthemoa, Hilen,
Debir, Asan and Bethsemes, with their suburbs. And out of the trybe of Ben
Iamin, Geba, Alemeth and Anathot with their suburbs, so yt all the cities in
their kindred were thirtene. The other children of Kahath of their kynred, had
out of ye half trybe of Manasses, ten cities by lot. The children of Gerson of
their kynred, had out of ye trybe of Isachar, and out of the trybe of Asser,
and out of the trybe of Nephtali, and out of the trybe of Manasses in Basan,
thirtene cities. The children of Merari of their kynred, had by lot out of the
trybe of Ruben, and out of the trybe of Gad, and out of the trybe of Zabulon,
twolue cities.

And unto ye Levites gave the children of Israel cities with their suburbs,
namely by lot, out the trybe of the children of Judah, and out of the trybe of
the children of Simeon, and out of the trybe of the children of Ben Iamin, even
those cities, which they appointed (...). ^1. c
But the kynreds of the children of Kahath had the cities of their borders out
of the trybe of Ephraim.

So gave they now unto the^ (namely unto the kynred of the children of Kahath)
ye fre cities, Sichem upon mount Ephraim, Geser, Iakmeam, Bethoron, Aialon, and
Gath Rimon with their suburbs. And out of ye half trybe of Manasses, Aner and
Bileam with their suburbs. But unto the children of Gerson they gave out of
the kynred of the half trybe of Manasses, Gola^ in Basan and Astharoth with
their suburbs. Out of the trybe of Isachar, Kedes, Dabrath Ramoth, and Anem
with their suburbs. Out of the trybe of Asser, Masal, Abdo^, Hikoh and Sehob,
with their suburbs. Out of the trybe of Nephtali, Kedes in Galile, Ha^mon and
Kiriathaim with their suburbs. Unto the other children of Merari gave they out
of the trybe of Zabulon, Rimano and Thabor with their suburbs. And beyo^de
Iordane over against Jericho eastwarde beside Iordane out of the trybe of
Ruben, Bezer in the wilderness, Iahza, Kedemoth and Mepaath with their suburbs.
Out of the trybe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead, Mahanaim, Heszbon and Iaeser with
their suburbs.

The VIII. Chapter.
THe children of Isachar were, Thola, 2. Re. ^^.
in nombre in the time of David, two and twentye thousand and six hundredth.
The children of Vsi were, Iesrahia. The children of Iesrahia were, Michael, and
Obedia, Joel and Iesia: all these five were heads. And with them among their
kynred in the house of their fathers there were ready harnessed men of war to
the battayll, six and thirty thousand: for they had many wives and children.
And the mighty men of their brethren in all the kynreds of Isachar, were seven
and four score thousand, and were all nombred.

The children of Ben Iamin, were, Bela,

The children of Becher were, Semira, Ioas Elieser, Elioenai, Amri, Ieremoth,
Abia, Anathot and Alameh, all these were the children of Becher, and were
rekened in their kinreds after the heads in the house of their fathers,
valeaunt men, twenty thousand, and two hundredth. The children of Iedieel were
Bilhan. The children of Bilhan were, Ieus, Ben Iamin, Ehud, Cnaena, Sethan,
Tharsis and Ahisahar, all these were the children of Iedieel, heads of the
fathers, valeaunt men, even seuentene thousand, which went forth to the war
for to fight. And Supim and Hupim were the children of Ir. But Husim were the
children of Aher.

The children of Nephtali were: Iahziel, Guni, Iezer and Sallum, Genesis 30. b
the children of Bilha.

The children of Manasses are these: Esriel, whom his concubyne Aramiel did
bear. ^osu. 17. a
But (first) begat he Machir the father of Gilead. And Machir gave wives unto
Hupim and Supim, and their sisters name was Maecha. His second sons name was
Zelaphehad. Number. 26 d ^7. a. 36. a
And Zelaphehad had daughters. And Maecha ye wife of Machir bare a son whose
name was Phares, and his brothers name was Sares, and his sons were Vlam and
Rakem. Vlams son was Bedam. These are the children of Gilead ye son of
Machir the son of Manasses. And his sister Molecheth bare Ishud, Abieser and
Mahela. And Semida had these children: Ahean, Sichem, Likhi and Aniam.



And he went in to his wife, which conceived, and bare a son, whom he called
Bria, because of the aduersite that was in his house. His daughter was Seera,
which builded the lower and upper Bethoron, and Vsen Serea. Whose son was
Rephad and Reseph, whose son was Thelah, whose son was Thahan, whose son
was Laedan, whose son was Ammihud, whose son was Elisama, whose son was
Nun, whose son was Joshua.

And their substance and dwelling was, Bethel and the vyllages thereof, and
toward the East side of Naeran, and toward the westparte of Geser and ye
vyllages thereof. Sechem and her vyllages unto Aia and her vyllages. And by the
children of Manasses, Bethsean and ye vyllages thereof, That nach and the
vyllages thereof, Dor and the vyllages thereof. In these dwelt the children of
Joseph the son of Israel.

The children of Asser were these: Iemna, Iesua, Iesui, Bria and Serah their
sister. The children of Bria were, Heber and Malchiel, this is ye father of
Birsauith. Heber begat Iaphet, Somor, Hothan, and Sua their sister. The
children of Iaphlet were, Passach, Bimehal and Asuath, these were the children
of Iaphlet. The children of Somer were Ahi, Rahag, Iehuba, and Aram. And the
children of his brother Hele^ were, Zophah, Iemna, Seles and Amal. The children
of Zophah were, Suah, Harnepher, Sual, Beri, Iemra, Bezer, Hod, Sama, Silsa,
Iethran and Beera. The children of Iether were, Iephune, Phispa and Ara. The
children of Vlla were Arah, Haniel and Rizia.

All these were the children of Asser, heads in the house of their fathers,
chosen out, valeaunt men, and heads among the princes, and were mustered to
the war for to fight, in their nombre, six and twentye thousand men.

The IX. Chapter.
BEn Iamin begat Bela his first son, Aszbal the second, Ahrah ye third,
Noah the fourth, Rapha the fyfth. And Bela had children: Gera, Abihud, Abisua,
Neman, Ahoah, Gera, Sphuphan and Huram.

These are Ehuds children, which were heads of the fathers among the citesyns
at Geba, and went away unto Manahath, namely Naeman, Ahia and Gera, the same
carried them away, and begat Vsa and Ahihud. And Seharaim (when he had sent
the^ away) begat children in the land of Moab of Husim and Baera his wives.
And of Hodes his wife begat he Iobab, Zibea, Mesa, Malcham, Ieus, Sachia, and
Mirma, these are his children, heads of the fathers.

Of Husim begat he Ahitob and Elpaal. The children of Elpaal were: Eber, Miseam
and Samed. The same builded Ono and Lod and the vyllages thereof. And Bria and
Sama were heads of the fathers among the citesyns at Aialon. These chaced
away the^ of Gath. His brethren Sasak, Ieremoth, Sebadia, Arad, Ader, Michael,
Iespa and Ioha, these are the children of Bria. Sebadia Mesullam, Ezechi,
Heber, Iesmerai, Ieslia, Ioab, these are ye children of Elpaal. Iakim Sichri,
Sabdi, Eloenai, Zilthai, Eliel, Adaia, Braia and Simrath, these are the
children of Semei. Iespan, Eber, Eliel, Abdon, Sichri, Hanan, Hanania, Elan,
Enthothia, Iephdeia and Penuel, these are the children of Sasak. Samserai,
Seharia, Athalia, Iaeresia, Elia and Sichri, these are, the children of
Ieroham. These are the heads of the fathers of their kynreds, which dwelt at
Jerusalem.

(...)
But at Gibeon dwelt, the father of Gibeon, and his wives name was Maecha, and
his first son was Abdon, Zur, Cis, Baal, Nadab, Gedor, Ahio and Secher.
Mikloth (...)
Cis begat Saul. Saul begat Ionathas, Melchisua, Abinadab and Esbaal. The son
of Ionathas was Meribaal. Meribaal begat Micha. The children of Micha were:
Pithon, Melech, Thaerea and Ahas. Ahas begat Ioadda. Ioadda begat Alemeth,
Asmaneth and Simri. Simri begat Moza. Moza begat Binea, whose son was Rapha,
whose son was Eleasa, whose son was Azel. Azel had six sons, whose names
were: Esricam, Bochru, Iesmael, Searia, Abadia, Hanan, all these were the
sons of Azel.

The children of Esek his brother were: Vlam his first son, Ieus the second,
Elipelet the third. The children of Vlam were valeaunt men, and could handell
bows, and had many sons, and sons sons an hundredth and fiftye. All these
are of the children of Ben Iamin.

The X. Chapter.
(...)
Namely of the children of Phares of the son of Judah, was Vthai the son of
Ammihud the son of Amri, the son of Imri, the son of Bani. Of Soloni,
Asaia ye first son, and his other sons. Of the children of Serah, Ieguel
and his brethren, six hundredth, four score and ten.

(...). 11. b
Of the children of Ben Iamin, Sallu ye son of Mesullam, the son of Hodauia,
ye son of Hasnua. And Iebneia the son of Ieroham. And Ela the son of Vsi
the son of Michri. And Mesullam the son of Sephatia the son of Reguel the
son of Iebneia. And their brethren in their kinreds nine hundredth and six
and fyftye. All these were heads of the fathers in the house of their fathers.

Of the prestes: Iedaia, Ioiarib, Iachim, 2. Esd. 11. c
the son of Meraioth, the son of Achitob, prince in the house of God. And
Adaia the son of Ieroham, the son of Pashur, the son of Malchia. And
Maesai the son of Adiel the son of Iachsera, the son of Mesullam, the
son of Messylemeth, the son of Immer. And their brethren heads in the
house of their fathers a thousand, seven hundredth and three score valeaunt men
in executynge the office in the house of God.

Of the Levites of the children of Merari, Semaia the son of Hasub, 2. Esd.
11. c
the son of Asrikam, the son of Hasabia. And Bakbakar the carpenter and
Galal. And Mathania ye son of Micha ye son of Sichri, the son of Assaph.
And Obadia the son of Semaia, the son of Galal, ye son of Elkana, which
dwelt in the vyllages of the Netophatites.

The porters were: Sallum, Acub, Talmon, Ahiman, with their brethren, and
Sallum 2. Esd. 11. c
for hither to had the children of Leui kept the watch at the eastsyde of the
kings gate by armies. And Sallum the son of Core, the son of Abiassaph,
the son of Corah, and his brethren of his fathers house.

The Corahytes were in the work of the service, to keep the thresholdes of the
Tabernacle: and their fathers in the host of the LORD, to keep the intraunce.
Phineas the son of Eleasar was the prince over them, because the LORD had
been with him before. Sacharia the son of Meselemia was keeper at the door of
the Tabernacle of witness.

All these were chosen out to be kepers of the thresholdes even two hundredth
and twolue. These were nombred in their vyllages. And David and Samuel the Seer
founded them through their faith, that they and their children should keep the
house of the LORD, namely to keep the watch of ye house of the Tabernacle.

These dorekepers were appointed toward the four wyndes, toward the East,
toward Number. 3. ^
toward ye South. But their brethren were in their vyllages, that they might
come allwaye on the seventh day to be with them: for unto these four manner of
chief dorrkepers were the Levites committed. And they had the oversight of the
chestes and treasures in ye house of God.

In the night season also remained they about the house of God: for their
duty was to give attendaunce to open every morning. And some of them had the
oversight of the mynistrynge vessel: for they bare the vessel out and in. And
some of the^ were appointed over the vessel, and over all the holy vessel,
over the fine wheat flower, over ye wine, over the oil, over the
frankencense, over the sweet odoures: but some of ye prestes children made the,
Exo. 30. d
incense.

Unto Mathithia one of the Levites the first son of Sallum the Corahite, were
ye pannes committed. And certain of the Kahathites their brethren were
appointed over the shewbred, to prepare it every Sabbath day.



1. Par. 9. d
At Gibeon dwelt Ieiel the father of Gibeon, his wives name was Maecha, and his
first son Abdon, Zur, Cis, Baal, Ner, Nadab, Gedor, Ahaio, Sacharia, Mikloth.
Mikloth begat Simeam. And they dwelt also about their brethren at Jerusalem
among theirs. Ner begat Cis, Cis begat Saul, Saul begat Ionathas, Malchisua,
Abinadab, Esbaal. The son of Ionathas was Meribaal. Meribaal begat Micha. The
children of Micha were, Pithon, Melech and Thaherea. Ahas begat Iaera, Iaera
begat Alemeth, Asmaueth and Simri. Simri begat Moza. Moza begat Binea, whose
son was Raphaia, whose son was Eleasa, whose son was Azel. Azel had six
sons, whose names were: Asrikam, Bochru, Iesmael, Searia, Obadia, Hanan.
These are the children of Azel.

The XI. Chapter.
1. Re. 31. a
And they of Israel fled before the Philistynes, and ye wounded fell upon mount
Gilboa. And the Philistynes followed upon Saul and his sons, and smote
Ionathas, Abinadab and Malchisua ye sons of Saul. And the battayll was sore
against Saul. And the archers came upon him, so that he was wounded of the
archers Then said Saul unto his weapenbearer: Draw out thy sword, and thrust
it through me, that these vncircumcysed come not, and deal shamefully with me.
Nevertheless his weapenbearer would not, for he was sore afraid. Then took Saul
his sword, and fell therein. When his weapenbearer saw that Saul was deed, he
fell upon his sword also, and dyed.

Thus died Saul and his three sons, and all his household together. And when
the men of Israel which were in ye valley, saw, that Saul and his sons were
deed, they left their cities and fled: and the Philistynes came and dwelt
therein.

On the morrow came the Philistynes to spoil the slain, and found Saul, (...)
and his sons lyenge upon mount Gelboa, and stryped him out, and took his
head, and his harness, and sent it about in to ye land of the Philistynes,
and caused it to be showed before their Idols and the people. And his weapens
laid they in the house of their god, and styckte up his head upon the house
of Dagon.

But when all they of Iabes in Gilead herd of every thing, that the
Philistynes had done unto Saul, they gat them up (as many as were men of arms)
and took the body of Saul and of his sons, and brought them unto Iabes, and
buried their bones under the Oak at Iabes, and fasted seven days.

Thus dyed Saul in his trespace which he committed against the LORD, because
(...)
he kept not the word of the LORD: (...)
and because he axed council at the soythsayer, and axed not at the LORD,
therefore slew he him, and turned the kingdom unto David.

The XII. Chapter.
ANd all Israel resorted to David unto Hebron, and said: Behold, (...)
we are ye bone and thy flesh. And before time when Saul reigned, thou leddest
Israel out and in. So the LORD thy God has said unto the: Thou shall keep my
people of Israel, and thou shall be the prince over my people of Israel. And
all the Elders of Israel came to the king unto Hebron. And David made a
covenant with them at Hebron before the LORD. And they anointed David to be
king over Israel (...)
acordynge to the word of the LORD by Samuel.

And David and all Israel went unto Jerusalem, that is Iebus: for the
Iebusites dwelt in the lord. And the citesyns of Iebus said unto David: Thou
shall not come in hither. Howbeit David wa^ne ye castle of Sio^. which is ye
cite of David. And David said: (...)
who so ever smyteth ye Iebusites first, shall be a prince and captain. The^
Ioab ye son of Zer^ia clymmed up first, and was made captain. LORD Zebaoth
was with him.

These are ye chief among ye mighty me^ of David, which dealt valeauntly with
him in his kingdom with all Israel, to make him king, acordinge to the word of
ye LORD over Israel. And this is ye nombre of David's mighty men: Iesabeam the
son of Hachmoni the chefest among thirty. He lift up his spear, and smote
three C. at one time.

After him was Eleasar the son of Dodo the Ahohite, and he was among the
three mighty. This man was with David wha^ they blasphemed, and the Philistynes
gathered the^ selves there to ye battle. And eue^ there* was there a piece of
land full of barley, and the people fled before the Philistynes. And they stood
in the mids of the land, and rescued it, and smote the Philistynes. And the
LORD gave a great health.

(...). 23. c
But the Philistynes host lay in the valley of Rephain. As for David, he was
in the castle. And the Philistynes people were then at Bethleem. And David was
desirous, and said: O that some would give me to drink of the water out of
the well at Bethleem under the gate. The^ brake those three in to the
Philistynes host, and drue of the water out of the well at Bethleem under the
gate, and carried it, and brought it unto David. Nevertheless he would not
drink it, but poured it unto the LORD, and said: God let this be far fro
me, yt I should do it, and drink the blood of these men in ye parell of their
life: for with the parell of their life have they brought it: therefore would
he not drink it. This did the three Worthies.

Abisai the brother of Ioab, he was the chefest among three. And he lift up
his spear, and smote three hundredth. And he was famous among three, and before
the third, more honorable then the two, yet came he not unto the three.

Benaia the son of Ioiada the son of 2 Re. 23 ^
was a man of great acts. He smote two lions of the Moabites. And he went
down, and smote a lion in the mids of a well in the time of snow. He smote
a man of Egipte also, which was five cubits great of stature, and had in his
hand a spear like a weuers lome. Yet went he down to him with a staff, and
took the spear out of his hand, and slew him with his own spear, This did
Benaia the son of Ioiada, and was a famous man among three Worthies, and most
awncient among thirty. But unto the three came he not. Howbeit David made him
of his secret council.

The valeaunt Worthies are these: Asahel the brother of Ioab, Elhanam his
Uncles son of Bethleem, Samoth the Harodite, Helez the Pelonite, Ira the
son of Ekes the Thecoite, Abraser the Anathothite, Sibechai the Husathite,
Ilai the Ahohite, Matheraithe Netophatite, Heled ye son of Baena ye
Netophatite, Ithai ye son of Ribai of Gibeath of the children of Ben Ianim,
Benaia the Pirgathonite, Hura of the broke of Gaas. Abiel the arbathite,
Asmaneth the Baherunite, Eliahba the Saalbonite. The children of Hasem ye
Gisonite, Ionathas the son of Sage the Hararite, Ahiam the son of Sachar
the Hararite, Eliphal the son of Vr, Hepher the Macherathite, Ahia the
Pelointe, Hezro of Carmel,

Tha XIII. Chapter.
THese also came to David unto Siclag when he was yet kept aside be 1. Re. 27.
a
(...) they were like wise among the worthies ye helped in the battayll, and
could handle bows with both their hands, and could cast stones, and shute
arowes with the bow.

Of Saul's brethren which were of Ben Iamin: The chefest Ahieser and Ioas ye
children of Samaa the Gibeathite. Iesiel and Pelet the children of Asmaueth.
Baracha and and Iehu the Anthothite. Iesmaia the Gibeonite, valeaunt among
thirty and over thirty. Ieremia, Iahasiel, Iohanan, Iosabad the Gederathite.
Eleusai, Ierimoth, Bealia, Samaria, Saphatia the Harophite, Elkana, Iesiia,
Asareel, Iasabeam ye Korahyte, Ioela and Sabadia the children of Ieroham of
Gedor.

Of the Gaddites resorted there unto David to the castle in the wilderness,
mighty Worthies and men of arms, which handled spears and swerdes, and had
faces like lio^s, and were as swifte as the Roes upon ye mountains.

There came of the children of Ben Iamin also and of Judah unto the castle of
David. But David went forth unto them, and answered and said unto them: If ye
come to me in peace, and to help me, my heart shall be with you. But if ye come
upon disceate, and to be mine adversaries (where as there is yet no vnrighte in
me) the God of our fathers look upon it, and rebuke it. Nevertheless the sprete
endued Amasai the captain among

And of Manasses there fell certain unto David, when he came to the battayll
with the Philistynes against Saul, and helped them not, ^. Re. 29. a
for the princes of ye Philistynes counceled to let him go from them, and
said: If he fell unto his lord Saul, it might cost us our necks. Now wha^
he departed unto Siclag, there fell unto him of Manasses, Adna, Iosabad,
Iediael, Michael, Iosabad, Elihu, Zilthai, heads over thousands in Manasses.
And they helped David against the men of war: for they were all valeaunt
Worthies, and were captains over the host. And every day came there some to
David, to help him, till there was a great host as an host of God.

And this is the nombre of the heads harnessed unto the war, which came to
David unto Hebron, for to turn the kingdom of Saul unto him, acordynge to the
word of the LORD.

The children of Judah, which handled spears and swerdes, were six thousand,
and eight

Of ye children of Ephraim, twenty thousand and eighte hundredth valeaunt men
of arms, and famous in the house of their fathers. Of the half trybe of
Manasses, eightene thousand, named by name, to come and make David king. Of
the children of Isachar (which were men of understanding, when need required
to know what Israel should do) two hundredth captains, and all their brethren
followed their word. Of Sabulon, soch as went forth in the host to ye war,
ready with all manner of weapens for the battayll, fyftye thousand, being of
one mind to keep them selves in order.

Of Nephtali, a thousand captains, and with them soch as handled shylde and
spear, seven and thyrtie thousand. Of Dan, ready harnessed to the battayll,
eight and twentye thousand, and six hundredth. Of Asser, soch as went forth
in ye host, ready harnessed to the battayll, fortye thousand. From beyond
Iordane, of the Rubenites, Gaddites and the half trybe of Manasses, with all
manner of weapens to the battayll, an hundredth and twentye thousand.

All these men of war, ready harnessed to the battayll, came with a whole
heart unto Hebron, to make David king over all Israel. And all Israel beside
were of one heart, that David should be made king. And there were they with
David three days, eating and drinking: for their brethren had prepared for
them. And soch neghbour^ as were about them until Isachar, Zabulon and
Nephtali, brought bred upon Asses, Camels, Mules and oxen to eat: meel, fyges,
rasens, wine, oil, oxen, sheep, very many: for there was joy in Israel.

The XIIII. Chapter.
(...). 6. a
and with all the princes, and said unto all the congregation of Israel: If it
like you, and if it be of the LORD our God, let us send forth on every side
to our other brethren in all the countrees of Israel, and to the prestes and
Levites in the cities where they have suburbs, yt they may be gathered
together unto us, and let us fetch the Arc of our God again unto us: for by
Saul's time we axed after it. The^ said the whole congregation, that the same
should be done, for it pleased all the people well.

So David gathered all Israel together from Sihor of Egipte, till a man come
unto Hemath, to fetch the Ark of God from Kiriath Iearim. And David went up
with all Israel to Kiriath Iearim, which lies in Judah, to bring from thence the
Ark of God the LORD, that sytteth upon the Cherubins, where the name is
named: and they caused the Ark of God to be carried upon a new cart from the
house of Abinadab.



But when they came to the barn floor of Chidon, Vsa stretched out his hand
to hold the Arc: for the oxen went out aside. Then waxed the wrath of the
LORD fearce over Vsa, and smote him, because he stretched out his hand to the
Arc, so yt he dyed there before God. The^ was David sorry, because ye LORD had
made soch a rent upon Vsa, and called the place Perez Vsa, unto this day. And
David stood in fear of God the same day, and said: How shall I bring ye Ark of God unto me? Therefore would he not let ye Ark of God be brought unto him
in to ye cite of David, but carried it in to ye house of Obed Edom the Gathite.
So the Ark of God abode with Obed Edom in his house three months. And ye
LORD blessed Obed Edoms house and all that he had.

The XV. Chapter.
Reg. 5. c
unto David and Cedre timber, and masons and carpenters, to build him an house.
And David perceived, that the LORD had confirmed him king over Israel: for
his kingdom increased for his people of Isreal's sake. And David took yet mo
wives at Jerusalem, and begat yet mo sons and daughters. And the names of
them yt were borne unto him at Jerusalem, are these: Sammua, Sobab, Nathan,
Solomon, Iebehar, Elisua, Elipalet, Noga, Nepheg, Iaphia, Elisamma, Baal Iada,
Eliphalet.

And when the Philistynes herd that LORD said unto him: Go up, and I will
deliver them into thy hand. And when they were gone up to Baal Prasim, David
smote them there. And David said: God has divided mine enemies through my
hand, even as the water parts asunder: therefore called they the place Baal
Prasim. And there left they their gods. Then Deuteronomy. 7
commanded David to burn them with fire.

But the Philistynes gat them thither again, 2. Reg. 5.
and scatered them selves beneth in ye valley. And David axed council at God
again. And God said unto him: Thou shall not go up behind them, but turn
the from them, that thou may come upon the^ over against the Peertrees. So
when thou hear above upon the Peertrees the noise of the going, go thou
forth then to the battle: for God is gone forth then before the to smite the
host of the Philistynes. And David did as God commanded him. And they smote
the host of the Philistynes from Gibeon forth unto Gaser. And David's name was
noysed out in all lands. And the LORD caused ye fear of him to come upon all
the Heythen.

The XVI. Chapter.
ANd he builded him houses in the cite Number. 4.
for them has the LORD chosen to bear the Ark of the LORD, and to mynister
unto him for ever. Therefore gathered David all Israel together unto Jerusalem,
to bring up the Ark of the LORD unto the place which he had prepared for it.

And David brought the children of Aaron and the Levites together. Of the
children of Kahath: Vriel the chief with his brethren, an C. and twentye. Of the
children of Merari: Asaia the chief with his brethren, two C. and twentye. Of the
children of Gerson: Joel the chief with his brethren, an C. and thirty. Of ye
children of Elizaphan: Semaia the chief with his brethren, two hundredth. Of the
children of Hebron: Eliel the chief, with his brethren, four score. Of the
children of Vsiel: Amminadab the chief, with his brethren, an hundredth and
twolue.

LORD God of Israel, to the place yt I have prepared for it. Pa^. 4. b
For before when ye were not there, the LORD our God made a rent among us,
because we sought him not, as we should have done. So ye prestes and the
Levites hallowed themselves, yt they might bring up the Ark of the LORD God
of Israel. And the children of Leui bare the Ark of God the LORD upon their
shulders with the staves thereon, ^xo 25 b
as Moses commanded acordinge to ye word of the LORD.

And David sp^ke unto ye rulers of ye Levites, that they should ordeyne some of
their brethren to be syngers with psalteries, harpes and loud instruments,
and Cimbales, to sing loud with joy.



And Barachias and Elcana were the dorekepers of the Arc. But Sachamia,
Iosaphat, Nathaneel, Amasai, Zacharias, Benaia, Elieser the prestes, blewe the
trompettes before ye Ark of God. And Obed Edom and Iehia were dorekepers of
the Arc.

So David and the Elders of Israel, and LORD out of the house of Obed Edom with
joy. And when God had helped the Levites yt bare the Ark of the LORD'S
covenant, there were offered seven bullockes and seven ra^mes, And David had a
lynne^ garment upon him, and so had all the Levites yt bare the Arc, and ye
syngers, and Chenania the master of Music with the syngers. David had an
ouerbody cote of lynnen upon him also.

Thus all Israel brought up the Arc of the covenant of the LORD with mirth,
with trompettes, tabrettes, and loud Cymbales, with psalteries and harpes. Now
when the Arc of the covenant of the LORD came in to the cite of David,
Michol ye daughter of Saul looked out at awyndowe: and wha^ she saw king David
daunsynge and playenge, she despised him in her heart.

The XVII. Chapter.
ANd wha^ they brought in the Arc of (...)
that David had pitched for it, and offered burnt offerynges and thank
offerynges before God. And wha^ David had ended the burnt offerynges and thank
offerynges, he blessed the people in the name of the LORD, and distributed
unto every man in Israel (both unto man and woman) a cake of bred, and a piece
of flesh and a meece of potage.

And he appointed before the Arc of ye LORD certain Levites to mynister,
that they should give praise, thanks and loauinges unto the LORD God of
Israel: namely Assaph the first, Zacharias the second, Ie^el, Semiramoth,
Iehiel, Mathithia, Eliab, Benaia, Obed Edom and Iehiel, with psalteries and
harpes. But Assaph with loud Cymbales. Benaia and Iehasiel the prestes with
tabrettes, allwaye before the Arc of ye covenant of God.

At the same time ordained David first of LORD by Assaph and his brethren.

O give thanks unto the LORD, (...)
call upon his name, tell the people what things he has done.

O let your songs be of him: praise him, and let your talking be of all his
wondrous works.

Give his holy name a good report: let ye heart of them rejoice, that seek the
LORD.

O seek the LORD and his strength, seek his face evermore.

Remember his marvelous works that he has done, his wonders, and the
iudgme^tes of his mouth.

Ye sede of Israel his servant, ye children of Jacob his chosen.

He is the LORD our God, his iudgme^tes are in all lands.



(...)
Which he made with Abraham, and (...)
his ooth unto Isaac.

And he (...)
comfirmed the same unto Jacob for a perpetual law, and to Israel for an
everlasting covenant.

And said: Unto the will I give ye land of Canaan, ye metelyne of yor
inheritance.

Wha^ they were yet but small and few in no^bre, and strangers in the same
land.

And they went from one nation to another, and from one realm to another
people.

He suffered no man to hurt them, and reproved even kings for their sakes.

(...)
Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm.

(...) 95. a
O sing unto ye LORD, let all ye earth be telling of his salvation from day
to day.

Declare his holiness among the Heythe^, and his wondrous works among ye
people.

For the LORD is great, and can not worthily be praised, and more to he had
in awe then all gods.

As for all the gods of the Heythe^, they are but Idols: (...)
but it is the LORD that made the heavens.



Ascrybe unto the LORD ye kynreds of nations: ascrybe unto the LORD worshipe
and strength.

Ascrybe unto the LORD the honor of his name: bring presents, and come
before him, and worshipe ye LORD in ye bewtye of holiness.

Let the whole earth sto^de in awe of him: he has made the compase of the
world so fast, that it can not be moved.

Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad: and let it be told among
the Heythen, that the LORD reigns.

Let the Sea make a noise, and the fullness thereof: let the field be joyful,
and all that therein is.

Let all the trees in the wod leap for joy before the LORD, for he comes
to judge the earth.

O give thanks unto the LORD, for he is gracious: and his mercy endures for
ever.

And say: Help us O God our Savior, and gather us together, and deliver us
from the Heythen, that we may give thanks unto ye holy name, and sing
praises unto the in thy Psalms.

Praised be the LORD God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting: and let
all people say, Amen, And: Praise be unto the LORD.

So he left Assaph and his brethren there LORD, to mynister allwaye before
the Arc, every day his day work. But Obed Edom and their brethren, eight
and threscore, and Obed Edom the son of Iedithun, and Hossa, to be door
kepers. And Sadoc ye pressed, and his brethren the prestes, left he before the
habitacion of the LORD upon the hye place at Gibeo^, to offer burntsacrifices
daily unto the LORD upon the altar of burnt offerynges in the morning and
in the evening, as it is written in the Exo. 29. ^ Nu. 28. a
law of the LORD, which he commanded unto Israel. And with them Heman and
Iedithun, and ye other chosen, which were named by name to give thanks unto
the LORD, because his mercy endures for ever. And with them Heman and
Iedithun to stryke upon the tabrettes and Cymbales, and the musical
instruments of God. As for the children of Iedithun, he made them dorekepers.
So all the people departed, every one to his house: and David returned also to
bless his house.

The XVIII. Chapter.
IT fortuned wha^ David dwelt in his 2. Re. 7. a
he said unto ye prophet Nathan: Behold, I dwell in a house of Ceder, and the
Arc of the covenant of the LORD is among the curtaynes.

Nathan said unto David: Whatsoever is in thine heart, that do: for God is with
ye. But the same night came ye word of God unto Nathan, and said: Go and
speak to David my servant: Thus says the LORD: Thou shall not build me an
house to be an habitacio^: for I have dwelt in no house sense the day that I
brought forth the children of Israel, unto this day: But where the Tabernacle
and habitacion has been, there have I been where so ever I have walked in all
Israel. Spoke I ever to any of the Judges in Israel (whom I commanded to keep
my people) and said: Wherefore do ye not build me an house of Cedre timber?

LORD Zebaoth: I took the from the pasture behind the sheep, that thou
should be the prince over my people, and have been with the whither so ever
thou we^test, and have roted out all thine enemies before the, and have made
the a name, acordinge to the name of the great men that are upon earth. And
for my people of Israel, I will appoynte them a place, and will plant them,
that they may dwell there, and no more to be removed. And the children of
wickedness shall oppress them no more, like as before time, when I commanded the
Judges over my people of Israel. And I will subdue all thine enemies, and do
declare unto the, that the LORD will build the an house.

^ Re. 7. c Psalm. 111. b
But when thy days are fulfilled, that thou departest hence with ye fathers, I
will after the raise up ye sede, which shall be eue^ one of thy sons: his
kingdom will I stabliszshe, he shall build me an house, and I will make his
seat sure for ever. I will be his father, and he shall be my son. And I will
not withdraw my mercy from him, as I have withdrawn it from him that was
before the: But I will set him in my house and in my kingdom for ever, so that
his seat shall be sure for evermore.

LORD, and said: O LORD God, who am I? and what is my house, yt thou have
brought me thus far? And this (O God) have thou thought yet to little, but
have spoken of thy servants house yet long for to come. And thou LORD God
have looked down upon me from above, even as one man looks upon another. What
more shall David say unto the, yt thou bryngest ye servant to soch honor?
Thou know thy servant O LORD, for thy servants sake and acordinge to thy
heart have thou done all these great things, that thou might show all
great things unto thy servant. LORD, Deuteronomy. 32. f
there is none lykel the, and there is no God but thou, of whom we have herd
with our ears. And Deuteronomy. 4. a
where is there a people upon earth as thy people of Israel, where God went to
deliver him a people, and to make him self a name through great and terrible
things, to cast out the Heythen before thy people, whom thou have delivered
out of Egipte? and ye people of Israel have thou made ye people for ever, and
thou LORD art become their God.

Now LORD, let the word be verified LORD Zebaoth, the God of Israel is the
God in Israel, and that the house of thy servant David may be stablyszshed
before the: for thou LORD have opened the ear of ye servant, that thou will
build him an house. Therefore has thy servant found (confydence) to make his
prayer before the. Now LORD, thou art God, and have promised soch good unto
thy servant. Begin now to bless the house of thy servant, that it may be
evermore before the: for look what thou blessest (O LORD) the same is blessed
for ever.

The XIX. Chapter.
AFter this smote David the Philistynes, (...)
and took Gath and the vyllages thereof out of the hand of the Philistynes. He
smote the Moabites likewise, so that the Moabites were subdued unto David, and
gave him trybute. He smote Hadad Eser also ye king of Zoba in Hemath, when he
went to set up his power by the water Euphrates.

And David took from him a thousand charettes, seven thousand horsemen, and
twe^tye thousand footmen. And David lamed all the charettes, and kept an
hundredth charettes over. And the Syria^s came from Damascon, to help Hadad
Eser the king of Zoba. Howbeit David smote two and twenty thousand of the
same Syrians, and laid men of war at Damascon in Syria, so that the Syrians
were subdued unto David, and brought him trybute. For the LORD helped David,
whither so ever he went.

And David took the shyldes of gold, yt (...)
whereof Solomon made the brazen lauer, and pilers, and brazen vessels.

And wha^ Thogu the king of Hemath herd, (...)
yt David had smytten all ye power of Hadad Eser, he sent his son Hadora^
unto king David, to salute him and to bless him, because he had foughte^ with
Hadad Eser, and smytte^ hi^ (for Thogu had war with Hadad Eser) and all the
same vessels of gold, silver and of brass, did king David consecrate unto
the LORD, with the silver and gold that he had taken from the Heythe^,
namely, from the Edomites, Moabites, Ammonites, Philistynes, and Amalechites.

(...). 8. c
and laid me^ of war in Edomea, so that all the Edomites were subdued unto
David: for ye LORD helped David, whither so ever he went.

Thus David reigned over all Israel, and executed judgment and righteousness
unto all the people. Ioab the son of Zeru Ia was captain over the host.
Iosaphat the son of Ahilud was Chaunceler. Sadoc the son of Achitob, and
Ahimelech ye son of Abiathar, were prestes. Sauesa was Scrybe. Benaia the
son of Ioiada was over the Chrethians and Plethians. (...). 8. c
And David's sons were chief at ye kings hand.

The XX. Chapter.
(...). 10. a
and his son was king in his stead. Then said David: I will do mercy upon
Hanun the son of Nahas, for his father did mercy upon me: and so he sent
messaungers to comfort him over his father. And wha^ David's servants came in
to the land of the children of Ammon unto Hanun to comfort him, the princes
of the children of Ammon said unto Hanun: Think thou that David honors
thy father in thy sight, that he has sent co^forters unto the? Ye his
servants are come unto the, to search and to overthrow, and to spy out the
land. Then took Hanun the servants of David, and shoue them, and cut the
half of their garments of, eue^ by the loins, and so let the^ go. And they
went their way, and sent men to tell David.

When the children of Ammon saw, that they stynked in ye sight of David, both
Hanun and the children of Ammon sent a thousand tale^tes of silver, to hyre
charettes and horsemen out of Mesopotamia, out of Maecha and out of Zoba: and
hired two and thirty thousand charettes, and ye king of Maecha with his
people, which came and pitched their tents before Medba. And the children of
Ammon gathered them selves together out of their cities, and came to the
battayll. When David herd that, he sent Ioab thither with all the host of the
men of arms. And the children of Ammon were gone forth, and prepared them
selves to the battayll before the gate of the cite. But the kings yt were
come, kept them aside in the field.

Now wha^ Ioab saw that the battayll LORD do what pleases him. And Ioab made
him forth with ye people that was with him, to fight against ye Syrians: and
they fled before him. And when the children of Ammon saw yt the Syrians fled,
they fled also before Abisai his brother, and went in to the cite. And Ioab
came to Jerusalem.

But when the Syrians saw that they

The XXI. Chapter.
ANd when ye year came about, what 2. Re. 11 ^
Ioab brought the power of the host, and destroyed the land of the children
of Ammon, and came and laid sege unto Rabba. But David abode at Jerusalem. 2.
Re. 1^ ^
And Ioab smote Rabba, and brake it down. And David took their kings crown
from his head, and found the weighte of a talent of gold thereon, and
precious stones. And it was set upon David's head. And very much spoil carried
he out of the cite. As for the people that were therein, he brought the^ forth,
and parted them in sunder with sawes, and hokes and betels of iron. Thus did
David unto all ye cities of the children of Ammon. And David departed again,
with the people unto Jerusalem.



The XXII. Chapter.
(...). 24. a
And David said unto Ioab and to ye rulers of the people: Go yor way, nombre
Israel from Berseba unto Dan, and bring me the nombre of the^, that I may
know it. Ioab said: The LORD make his people an hundredth times mo then they
are now. But my lord O king, are they not all my lords servants? Why does
my lord then axe thereafter? Wherefore shall there a trespace come upon Israel?

Nevertheless the kings word prevailed against Ioab. And Ioab went forth, and
walked through all Israel, and came to Jerusalem, and delivered unto David ye
nombre of the people that was told. And of all Israel there were a thousand
times a thousand, and an hundredth thousand men, that drue out the sword: and
of Judah four hundredth thousand and seue^tye thousand men, which drue out the
sword. As for Leui and Ben Iamin, he nombred them not among these: for the
kings word was abominable unto Ioab.

LORD spoke unto Gad David's Seer, and said: Go speak to David, and say:
Thus says the LORD: Three things lay I before the, chose ye one of them, yt
I may do it unto the. And wha^ Gad came to David, he spoke unto him: Thus
says the LORD: Chose ye either three year derth, or three months to fly
before thine adversaries, and before the sword of thine enemies, yt it may
overtake the: or three days ye sword of the LORD, and pestilence in the
land, yt the angel of the LORD may destroy in all ye coasts of Israel.
Look now what answer I shall give unto him yt sent me. David said unto Gad: I
am in great trouble: yet will I rather fall in to ye hand of the LORD, for
his mercy is exceadynge great, and I will not fall in to the hands of men.

Then did the LORD cause pestilence to LORD considered, and he repented of
the evil, and said un to the angel ye destroyer: It is enough, hold now thy
hand.

The angel of the LORD stood beside ye barn of Arnan ye Iebusite. And David
lift up his eyes, and saw the angel of ye LORD stondinge between heaven and
earth, and a naked sword in his hand stretched out over Jerusalem. Then David
and ye Elders being clothed with sack cloth, fell upon their faces. And David
said unto God: Am not I he that caused the people to be nombred? I am he that
has sinned and done evil: as for these sheep, what have they done* LORD my
God, let thine hand be against me and against my fathers house, and not
against thy people to plage them.

And the angel said unto Gad, that he LORD. But wha^ Arnan turned him, and
saw the angel (and his four sons with him) they hyd themselves: for Arnan
throszshed wheat.

Now when David came to Arnan, Arnan looked, and was aware of David, and went
forth out of the barn, and worshipped David with his face to the ground. And
David said unto Arnan: Give me rowme in the barn, to build an altar unto
the LORD therein: for ye full money shall thou give it me, that the plage may
cease from the people.

But Arnan said unto David: Take it unto the, and let my lord the king do as
pleases him. Behold, that ox give I for a burnt offering, and those vessels
to the ox, and wheat for the meat offering, I give it all. Nevertheless the
king said unto Arnan: Not so, but for ye full money will I bye it: for that
which is thine will not I take for the LORD, and offer a burnt offering for
naught.

LORD, and offered burnt offerynges and slain offerynges. And when he called
upon the LORD, he herd him through the fire from heaven upon ye altar of the
burnt offering. And ye LORD said unto the angel, that he should put his
sword in to his sheeth.

At the same time wha^ David saw, that the LORD had herd him upon the corn
floor of Arnan ye Iebusite, he did sacrifice there. For ye habitacion of ye
LORD which Moses had made in the wyldernes, and the altar of burnt
offerynges, was at that time in the hye place at Gibeon. But David could not
go thitherto seek God before it, for he feared the sword of the LORDS angel.
And David said: (...). 3. a
Here shall be ye house of God ye LORD, and this the altar of burnt offerynges
for Israel.

The XXIII. Chapter.
LORD, shall be great, that his name and praise may be exalted in all lands,
therefore will I provide for him. So David made great prouysion before his death.

LORD God of Israel, and said unto him: My son, (...). 7. a
I was minded to build an house unto the name of the LORD my God, but the
word of ye LORD came unto me, and said: Thou have shed much blood, and
strycken many battayls, therefore shall thou not build an house unto my name,
for as much as thou have shed so much blood upon the earth before me. Behold,
the son which shall be borne unto the, shall be a quyete man: and I will cause
him to be in rest from al his enemies on every side, for his name shall be
Solomon: for I will give peace and rest upon Israel as long as he lives. He
shall build an house unto my name. He shall be my son, and I will be his
father. And I will stablyshe ye seat of his kingdom upon Israel for ever.

Now my son, the LORD shall be with LORD thy God, acordynge as he has
spoken of the. The LORD also shall give the wyszdome and understanding, and
shall commytte Israel unto the, that thou may keep the law of the LORD thy
God. But then shall thou prospere, if thou take heed to do after the ordynaunces
and laws which the LORD commanded Moses unto Israel. Be strong, and take a
good courage unto the, fear not, and be not faint hearted. Behold, I have in my
pouerte provided for the house of the LORD, an hundredth thousand talentes of
gold, and a thousand times a thousand talentes of silver, and brass and
iron without nombre: for there is so much of it.

And tymbre and stone have I prepared, thou may get more thereof. Thou have
many workmen also, mesons and carpenters in stone and timber, and all manner of
men that have understanding in all work off gold, silver, brass, and iron
without nombre. Yet get the up, and be doing, and the LORD shall be with the.

And David commanded all the rulers LORD your God with you, and has given
you rest on every side? for he has delivered the inhabiters of the land in to
your hands, and the land is subdued before the LORD and before his people.
Give over your heart now therefore and your soul, to seek the LORD your God,
and get you up, and build a Sanctuary unto the LORD God, that the Arc of the
covenant of the LORD and the holy vessels of God, may be brought in to the
house, which shall be builded unto the name of the LORD. So David made Solomon
his son king over Israel, when he himself was old, and had lived enough.

The XXIIII. Chapter.
LORD, and six thousand officers and Judges, and four thousand porters,
and four thousand that song praises unto ye LORD with instruments, which
he had made to sing praise with all.

And David made the ordinance among the children of Leui, namely among
Gerson, Kahath and Merari. The Gersonites were: Laedan and Simei. The children
of Laedan: the first, Iehiel, Sethan, and Joel, these three.

The children of Simei were: Salomith, Hasiel and Haran, these three. These were
the chief among the fathers of Laedan. These also were the children of Simei:
Iahath, Sina, Ieus and Bria, these four were Simeis children also. Iahath was
the first, Sina the second. As for Ieus and Bria, they had not many children,
therefore were they counted but for one fathers house.

^xod. 6. c ^. Pa^. 7. ^
The children of Kahath were: Amram, Iezehar, Hebron and Vsiel, these four.
The children of Amram were: Aaron and Moses. ^xo. 29. a
As for Aaron, he was separated, to be sanctified for the Most holy, he and his
sons for ever, to burn incense before the LORD, and to mynister and bless
in ye name of the LORD for evermore. And the children of Moses the man of God
were named among ye trybe of the Levites. Exodus 2. d
The children of Moses were Gerson and Elieser.

The children of Gerson, the first was Sebuel. The children of Elieser, the
first was Rehabia and Elieser had none other children. But ye children of
Rehabia were many there over. The children of Iezehar were: Salomith the first.
The children of Hebron were: Ieria the first, Amaria the second, Iahasiel the
third and Iakmeam ye fourth. The children of Vsiel were: Micha the first and
Iesia the second.

LORD (...)
from thirty year old and above. For David said: The LORD God of Israel
has given his people rest, and shall dwell at Jerusalem for ever.

Among ye Levites also were the children (...)
that they neded not to bear ye Habitacion with all the vessels of their
office, but acordinge to ye last words of David, yt they should stand under
the hand of the children of Aaron, to mynister in the house of the LORD in
the court, and to the chestes, and for purifyenge, and to all manner of
sanctifyenge, and to every work of the office in the house of God. And for ye
shewbred, for the fine flower, for the meat offrynge, for the vnleuended
wafers, for the pannes, for ye fryenge, and for all manner of weight and
measure. And in the morning to stand for to give thanks and to praise the
LORD, and in the evening likewise. And upon all Sabbathes, Newmones and
feasts to offer all the burnt offerynges unto the LOROE, acordinge to the
nombre and order, allwaye before the LORD: to wait upon the Tabernacle of
witness and of the Sa^ctuary, and upon their brethren the children of Aaron,
to mynister in the house of the LORD.

The XXV. Chapter.
THis was ye ordinance of the children (...)
The children of Aaron were, Nadab, Abihu, Eleasar and Ithamar. But Nadab and
Abihu dyed before their fathers, and had no children. And Eleasar and Ithamar
were prestes. And David ordered them after his manner: Sadoc out of the children
of Eleasar, and Ahimelech out of the children of Ithamar, acordinge to their
nombre and office. And there were mo chief strong men found among the
children of Eleasar, then the children of Ithamar. And he ordained them after
this manner: namely, sixtene out of ye children of Eleasar to be rulers through
out their fathers house: and eight of the children of Ithamar through out their
fathers house. Nevertheless he ordained them by lot, because that both the
pryncipall of the children of Eleasar and of Ithamar were in ye Sanctuary, and
chief before God. And the Scrybe Semeia the son of Nethaneel one of the
Levites, wrote them up before ye king and before the rulers, and before Sadoc
the pressed, and before Ahimelech ^he son of Abiathar, and before the chief of
the fathers among the prestes and Levites: namely one fathers house for
Eleasar, and the other for Ithamar.

(...)
Abia, the nyenth upon Iesua, the tenth upon Sechania, the eleventh upon
Eliasib, the twolueth upon Iakim, the thirtenth upon Hupa, the fourtenth upon
Iesebeab, the fiftenth upon Bilga, the sixtenth upon Immer, the seuententh upon
Hesir, the eightenth upon Hapizez, the nyententh upon Pethahia, the twentieth
upon Ieheszkel, the one and twentieth upon Iachin, the two and twentieth upon
Samul, the three and twentieth upon Dalaia, ye four and twentieth upon Maasia.
This is their course after their office, to go in to the house of the LORD,
acordinge to their manner under their father Aaron, as the LORD God of Israel
commanded him.

Of the children of Leui among the children of Amram, was Subael. Among the

The children of Vsiel were: Micha. Among the children of Micha was Samir. The
brother of Micha was Iesia. Among the children of Iesia was Zacharias. The
children of Merari were: Maheli and Musi, whose son was Iaesia. The children
of Merari of his son Iaesia were: Soham, Sacur and Ibri. Maheli had Eleasar:
for he had no sons. Of Cis, the children of Cis were: Ierahmeel and Musi. The
children of Musi were, Maheli, Eder and Ieremoth. These are the children of ye
Levites through out ye house of their fathers. And the lot was cast for them
also beside their brethren the children of Aaron, in the presence of king
David and Sadoc and Ahimelech, and before the chief fathers among the prestes
and Levites, as well for the leest brother as for the chefest among the
fathers.

The XXVI. Chapter.
LORD. Of Heman: The children of Heman were Bukia, Mathania, Vsiel, Sebuel,
Ierimoth, Hanania, Hanani, Eliatha, Gilthi, Remamthieser, Iaszbaksa, Mallothi,
Hothir and Mehesioth. All these were the children of Hema^ the kings Seer in
the words of God to lift up the horn: for God gave Heman fourtene sons and
three daughters.

All these were under their fathers Assaph LORD with Cymbales, Psalteries and
harpes, acordynge to the office in the house of God beside the king. And their
nombre with their brethren, which were taught in the song of the LORD (every
one having understanding) was two hundredth and eight and four score. And
they cast the Pro. 16. d
lottes over their office, for the leest as for the greatest, for the master as
for the scolar.

And the first Lot fell upon Joseph which was of Assaph: the second upon
Gedolia with his brethren and sons, of whom there were twolue. The third upon
Sacur with his sons and brethren, of who^ there were twolue. The fourth upon
Iezri with his sons and brethren, of whom there were twolue. The fyfth upon
Nethania with his sons and brethren, of whom there were twolue. The syxte
upon Anania with his sons and brethren of whom there were twolue. The
seuente^th upon Iaszbekasa with his sons and brethren of whom there were
twolue. The eightenth upon Hanani with his sons and brethren, of whom there
were twolue. The nyententh upon Mallothi with his sons and brethren, of whom
there were twolue. The twentieth upon Eliatha with his sons and brethren, of
whom there were twolue. The one and twe^tieth upon Hothir with his sons and
brethren of whom there were twolue. The two and twentieth upon Gidalthi with
his sons and brethren, of whom there were twolue. The three and twentieth upon
Mehesioth with his sons and brethren of whom there were twolue. The four and
twe^tyeth upon Romamthieser with his sons and brethren, of whom there were
twolue.

The XXVII. Chapter.




This is the ordinance of the dorekepers among the heads of the valeaunt men
in the office beside their brethren, to mynister in the house of the LORD. And
the lot was cast for the small as for ye great through out the house of their
fathers at every door. The lot toward the East fell upon Meselemia. And the
lot was cast for Zacharias his son, which was a man of prudent council, and
unto him it fell toward the North: But unto Obed Edom toward the South, and
to his sons beside the house of Esupim. And unto Supim and Hossa toward the
West by the gate of Salechet in the street of the burnt offeringes, where the
tabernacles stand together.

Toward the East were there six of the

Of the children of Laedan, the children of the Gersonites. Of Laedan were
these the heads of the fathers, namely ye Iehielites. The children of the
Iehielites were, Setha^ and his brother Joel over the treasures of the house of
the LORD. Among the A^^amites, Iezeharites, Hebronites and Vsielites, was
Sebuel the son of Gerson the son of Moses, prince over the treasures. His
brother Elieser had a son Rehabia, whose son was Iesaia, whose son was
Iora^, whose son was Sichri, whose son was Selomith: the same Selomith and
his brethren were over all the treasures of the things that were hallowed,
which king David hallowed, and the pryncipall of the fathers among the rulers
over thousands and over hundreds, and rulers in the host (of wars and
spoils had they hallowed it, to repair LORD) and over all yt Samuel the Seer,
and Saul the son of Cis, and Abner the son of Ner, and Ioab the son of
Zer^ Ia had hallowed: whatsoever was sanctified, it was under the hand of
Se^^mith and his brethren. Among the Iezeharites was Chenaia with his sons
for the work without over Israel, officers and Judges. Among the Hebronites
was Hasabia and his brethren, valeaunt men, a thousand and seven hundredth,
over the offices of Israel on this side Iordane westwarde for all manner work
of the LORD, and to serve the king.

But among the Hebronites was Ieria the chefest among the Hebronites of his
kindred among the fathers. And search was made among them, and in the fortieth
year of king David there were found valeau^t men at Iaeser in Gilead, and
their brethren mighty men, two thousand and seven hundredth pryncipall
fathers, and David set the^ over the Rubenites, Gaddites, and over the half
trybe of Manasses, for all soch busynes as belonged unto God and the king.

The XXVIII. Chapter.


Over the first course of the first month, was Iasebeam ye son of Sabdiel,
and under his course were four and twentye thousand. Of the children of
Phares was the pryncipall among all the chief captains in the first month.

Over the course of the second month was Dodaithe Ahohite, and Mikloth was
the prince over his course. And under his course were four and twentye
thousand.

The third pryncipall captain of the third month, was Benaia the son of
Ioiada ye pressed, and under his course were four and twentye thousand. (...)
This is yt Benaia the Worthy among thirty and above thirty, And his course
was under his son Ammi Sabad.

The fourth in ye fourth month was Asahel the brother of Ioab, and Sabadia his
son after him, and under his course were four and twentye thousand.



The sixte in the sixte month, was Ira ye son of Ickes the Thec^ite, and
under his course were four and twentye thousand.

The seventh in the seventh month, was Helez the Pelonite of the children of
Ephraim, and under his course were four and twe^tye thousand.

The eight in the eight month, was Sibechai the Husathite of ye Sarehites, and
under his course were four and twentye thousand.

The nyenth in the nyenth month, was Abieser the Anthothite of the children of
Iemini, and under his course were four and twe^tye thousand.

The tenth in the tenth month, was Maherai the Netophatite of the Serahites,
and under his course were four and twentye thousand.

The eleventh in the eleue^th month, was Benaia the Pirgathonite of the
children of Ephraim, and under his course were four and twentye thousand.

The twolueth in the twolueth month was Heldai ye Netophatite of Athniel, and
under his course were four and twentye thousand.

Over the trybes of Israel were these: Among

But David took not the nombre of them that were twentye year old and there
under: for the LORD had promised to multiplye Israel as the stars of the
szkie. 1. Par. 22. a
Howbeit Ioab the son of Zeruia had begone to nombre them, and performed it
not: for there came wrath upon Israel for the same cause, therefore came not the
nombre in to ye Cronicles of king David.

Over the kings treasures was Asmaueth

Over the Camels was Obil the Ismaelite. Over the asses was Iehethia the
Meronothite. Over the sheep was Iasis the Hagarite. All these were rulers over
king David's goods. Jonathan David's uncle was of the council a wise man and a
scrybe. And Iehiel* the son of Hachmoni was with the kings children. 1. Re.
^6. d
Achitophel also was of the kings council. Husai the Arachite was the kings
friend. After Achitophel was Ioiada ye son of Benaia and Abiathar. As for
Ioab, he was the kings chief captain of war.

The XXIX. Chapter.
^ Re. 7. a
I was minded to build an house, where the Arc of the covenant of the LORD
should rest, and a footstool for the fete of our God, and prepared my self
for to build, 1. Par. 23. b
But God said unto me: Thou shall not build an house unto my name, for thou
art a man of war, and have shed blood.

1. Re. 16. a
Now has the LORD God of Israel chosen me out of all my fathers house, yt I
should be king over Israel: for Ge. 49. b 1. Pa^. 6. a
Judah has he chosen to be the Prince, and in the house of Judah among my
fathers children has he had pleasure unto me, to make me king over all
Israel: and among all my sons (for the LORD has given me many sons) he
has chosen Solomon my son, to sit upon the seat of the kingdom of the
LORD over Israel, and has said unto me: 1 Par. 18. b 2. Par. 6. b
Solomon thy son shall build me an house and my courts: for I have chosen
him to be my son, and I will be his father, and will stablishe his kingdom
for ever, if he be constant to do after my commandments and laws, as it is
this day. Now in the sight of all Israel the congregation of the LORD, and in
the ears of our God, se that ye observe and seek all the commandments of
the LORD yo God, that ye may possess this good land and that ye and your
children may have ye inheritance thereof for ever.

LORD searches all hertes, and understands all thoughts and ymaginacions
If thou seek him, thou shall find him: but if thou forsake him, he shall
refuse the for ever. Take heed now, for the LORD has chosen the, to build an
house to be the Sa^ctuary: be strong, and make it.

And David gave Solomon his son ^ patron of the Porche, and of his house,
and of the celles and perlers and ynnermer cha^bers, and of the house of the
Mercyseate, and of all that he had in his mind, namely of the court of the
LORDS house, and of all the oratories round about the treasures in ye house
of God, and of the treasures of soch things as were hallowed, of the
ordinances of the prestes, and Levites, and of all ye business of the offices
in the house of the LORD.

Gold (gave he him) after ye gold weigh^ for all manner of vessels of every
office, and all silver ornaments after the weight for all manner of vessel of
every office: and weigh^ for the golden candilstickes and golden lamps, for
every candilstycke and his lamps his weight: likewise for the silver
candilstickes gave he the weight to the candilsticke and his lamps, acordynge
as was required for every candilstycke. He gave gold also for ye tables of the
shewbred, for every table his weight* and silver likewise for the silver
tables. And pure gold for the fleshokes, b^sens and censors: and for the
golden cups, unto every cup his weight: and for the s^uer cups, unto
every cup his weighte and for the altar of incense his weighte, of the most
pure gold.

And a patron of the charett of the golden Cherubins, that they might sprede
out them selves, and cover the Arc of the covenant of the LORD. All this is
given me in wrytinge of the hand of the LORD, to make me understand all the
works of the patron.

And David said unto Salomo^ his son: Be thou manly and strong, and make
it, fear not, and be not fayntharted, the LORD God my God shall be with the,
and shall not withdraw his hand, ner fail the, till thou have fynished every
work for the service in the house of the LORD. Behold, the courses of the
prestes and Levites to all the offices in the house of God are with the in
every work, and are willinge, and have wisdom to all the offices: and so have
the princes and all the people for every thing that thou have to do.

The XXX. Chapter.
ANd king David said unto all the congregation: God has chosen Solomon one
of my sons, which yet is young and tender. But the work is great: for it is
not a man's palace, but the LORD Gods. Yet have I after all my abilite prep^red
unto the house of God, gold for the vessels of gold, silver for them of
silver, brass for them of brass, iron for the^ of iron, wod for them of wod,
Onix stones, set Rubyes, and stones of diverse colors, and all precious
stones, and Marble stones in multitude. Besides this, for the good will yt I
have to the house of God, I have of mine own proper good three M. tale^tes of
gold of Ophir, and seven M. tale^tes of pure silver, which I give unto the
holy house of God, beside all yt I have prepared, to ouerlaye ye walls of the
house, yt the same which ought to be of gold, may be of gold: and that it
which ought to be of silver, may be of silver: and for all manner of work by
the hand of the craftesmen. And who is now fre wyllinge, to fill his hand
this day unto the LORD?

LORD, under the hand of Iehiel the Gersonite.

And ye people were glad that they were fre wyllinge: for they gave it with a
good will (even with all their heart) unto the LORD. And David also ye king
reioysed greatly, and praised God, and said before the whole congregation:
Praised be thou O LORD God of Israel our father, unto the belongs worship
and power, glory, victory and thanks: for all that is in heaven and earth, is
thine: thine is ye kingdom, and thou art exalted above all princes. Thine are
riches and honor before ye, thou reignest over all, in thy hand consists
power and might, in thy hand is it to make every man great and strong.

(...). 47. b (...). 11. c
For we are but pilgrems and strangers before the, as were all our fathers.
Our life upon earth is as a shadow, and here is no abydinge. O LORD our
God, all this abundaunce that we have prepared to build the an house unto thy
name, came of thy hand, and is thine altogether. I know my God, that thou
tryest the heart, and that vnfaynednes is acceptable unto the: therefore have I
given all this with an unfeigned heart, eue^ with a good will, and now have I had
joy to se thy people (which here are present) offer with a fre will unto the.
O LORD God of our fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, keep thou evermore soch
purposes and thoughts in ye hertes of thy people, and prepare thou their
hertes unto the. And grant

And David said unto the whole congregation: O praise the LORD yor God. And
all the congregation praised ye LORD God of their fathers, and bowed them
selves, and worshipped the LORD and then the king, and offered sacrifices unto
the LORD. And on ye next morrow offered they burnt offerynges, a M. bullockes,
a M. ra^mes, a M. la^bes with their drynk offerynges, and plenteously offered they
among all Israel. And they ate and drank the same day before the LORD with
great joy, and made Solomon the son of David king ye second time, and
anointed him to be ye prince for the LORD, ^. Reg. ^
and Sadoc to be the pressed.

3. Re. 2. ^
Thus sat Solomon upon the seat of ye LORD, king in his fathers stead, and
prospered. And all Israel obeyed him, and all ye rulers and mighty men, and
all king David's children submytted themselves unto king Solomon. And ye LORD
made Solomon excellent and great in ye sight of all Israel, 3. Re. 4
and gave him soch a glorious kingdom, as none had before him over Israel.

So had David now been king over all Israel. And ye time that he was king
over Israel, is fortye years: At Hebron reigned he seven year, and at
Jerusalem three and thirty year, and dyed in a good age, full of days, riches
and honor. And Solomon his son was king in his stead.

These acts of king David (both ye first and last) behold, they are written
among the acts of Samuel the Seer, and among the acts of the prophet
Nathan, and among the acts of Gad the Seer, with all his kingdom, power and
times which passed under him, both upon Israel and upon all the kingdoms of
the earth.

The end of the first book of the Cronicles.
The second book of the Cronicles, called Paralipomenon.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I. Of the kingdom of Solomon, to whom the LORD appears, and Solomon
makes his prayer unto him. Chap. II. How Solomon deuyseth to build the temple
of the LORD. Chap. III. How he begins to build, and after what faszshion.
Chap. IIII. Of the ornaments of the temple. Chap. V. The Arc is brought in
to the temple, etc. Chap. VI. Solomon speaks unto the people prayseth God,
and beseketh him to hear soch as make their prayer in the temple. Chap. VII.
The fire comes from heaven, and consumes the sacrifice. The king and the
people offer. The LORD appears unto Solomon, and promyseth to hear him.
Chap. VIII. Solomon buyldeth cities, and subdueth the Heythen. Of his captains
and of his wife. Chap. IX. The Queen of Saba brings presents unto Solomon,
and receaueth gifts of him. Solomon dies. Chap. X. Roboam oppressynge the
people, makes them to fall away from him. Chap. XI. The LORD will not suffer
Roboam king of Judah and Be^ Iamin to fight against Israel. He buyldeth
cities. Chap. XII. Roboam forsakes the law of the LORD. The king of Egipte
comes upon him. The LORD delyuereth him. Chap. XIII. Of Abia and Jeroboam
and their wars. Chap. XIIII. XV. Of king Asa. Chap. XVI. Baesa comes up
against Asa, which agrees with him, therefore is he rebuked. Chap. XVII. Of the
reign of Iosaphat. Chap. XVIII. Iosaphat makes frendshippe with Achab, and
helps him to fight. Chap. XIX. Iehu rebukes Iosaphat for helping the
ungodly. Iosaphat amendeth, and lives well. Chap. XX. The Moabites and
Ammonites with the Syrians and Edomites go forth against Iosaphat, which
prays unto God, and he helps him. Chap. XXI. Iosaphat dies. Ioram his
son is made king, slays his brethren, and forsakes the LORD. Edom
falls away from Judah. God punysheth Ioram. Chap. XXII. Ochosias is made
king, and takes part with Achabs son. Chap. XXIII. Ioiada makes Ioas
king, and commands to slaye Athalia. Chap. XXIIII. While Ioiada lives,
king Ioas does well, but after his death he forsakes the LORD: And because
Zacharias reproves him, he commands to stone him to death. His own
servants kill him upon his bed. Chap. XXV. Of king Amasias, which smyteth
the Edomites. He worshippeth their Idols, therefore the prophet reproves him.
He will needs fight with the king of Israel, which overcomes him and takes
him. Chap. XXVI. Of king Osias other wise called Vsia or Azarias: of his
buyldinges, and how he became leper for his presumpcion. Chap. XXVII. Of
Iothams reign, of his buyldinges, and of his wars. Chap. XXVIII. Of the
wicked king Achas. Chap. XXIX.XXX.XXXI. Of the verteous king Ezechias, and of
his noble acts. Chap. XXXII. Sennacherib lays sege to Jerusalem, Ezechias
comfort the people. Sennacherib threateneth, but the LORD delyuereth Judah.
Ezechias is sick and recouereth. Chap. XXXIII. Of the reign of Manasses, and
of his amendment from his wickedness. Of king Ammon his son. Chap.
XXXIIII.XXXV. Of the reign and most virtuous acts of king Josias, and of his
death. Chap. XXXVI. Three months reigns Ioachas, after whom reigns
Eliachim other wise called Ioachim, whom Nabuchodonosor carries unto Babylon,
and in his stead reigns Ioachim his son, which also is led away captain
unto Babylon. Sedechias is made king, and at the last carried away presoner
with all the people, and Jerusalem destroyed.
The first Chapter.
ANd Solomon the son of David was stablyshed in his kingdom, (...)
and the LORD his God was with him, and made him exceadinge great. And
Solomon spoke unto all Israel, to the captains over thousands and over
hundreds, to the Judges, and to all ye princes in Israel, and to the chefest
fathers, so that they went (Solomon and the whole congregation with him) unto
the hye place which was at Gibea: (...)
for there was ye Tabernacle of ye witness of God, (...)
which Moses the servant of the LORD had made in ye wilderness. (...)
For David had brought up the Ark of God from Kiriath Iarim, when he had
prepared for it: for he had pitched a tent for it at Jerusalem. As for ye
brazen altar (...)
which Bezaleel the son of V^^ the son of Hur had made, it was there before
the habitacion of the LORD: and Solomon and the congregation sought God. And
Solomon offered a thousand burntofferynges upon the brazen altar that stood
before the Tabernacle of witness.

In the same night appeared God unto Solomon, and said unto him: Axe, what
shall I give the? And Solomon said unto God: Thou have done great mercy unto
my father David, and have made me king in his stead. Now LORD God, let ye
word that thou have p^omysed unto my father David, be verified, (...)
for thou have made me king over a people, which is as many in no^bre as the
dust upon the earth. Grant me wyszdome therefore and knowledge, yt I may go
out and in before this people: for who is able to judge this great people of
thine?

Then said God unto Solomon: For so much as thou art so minded, and have not
desired riches ner good, ner honor, ner the souls of thine enemies, ner long
life, but have required wyszdome and knowledge, to judge my people, over whom I
have made the king, wyszdome therefore and knowledge be given the. Morouer,
riches and good and honor will I give the, so that soch one as thou has not
been before the among the kings, nether shall be after the.

(...)
and reigned over Israel. And Solomon gathered him charettes and horsemen, so
that he had a thousand and four hundredth charettes, and twolue thousand
horsemen: and those appointed he to be in the charet cities, and with the king
at Jerusalem. And the king brought it so to pass, that there was as much
silver and gold at Jerusalem as stones: and as many Ceders, as the Molberyes
trees, that are in the valleys. And there were horses brought unto Solomon out
of Egipte, and the kings merchants fetched them from Kena for money. And
they came up, and brought out of Egipte a charet for six hundredth silver
pe^s, and an horse for an hundredth and fiftye. Thus brought they also unto all
the kings of the Hethites, and to the kings of ye Syrians.

The II. Chapter.
LORD, and an house for his kingdom: and told out three score and ten
thousand men to bear burdens, and four score thousand that hewed timber
upon the mount, and three thousand and six hundredth officers over them. (...).
5. a
And Solomon sent unto Hiram the king of Tire, saying: As (...)
thou dyddest with my father, and sendedst him Ceder trees, to build an house
for to dwell in (even so do thou with me also.) Behold, I will build an house
unto the name of the LORD my God, to sanctify it, for to burn good incense
before him, and allwaye to prepare ye shewbred, and burnt offerynges in the
morning and in the evening, on the Sabbathes and New mones, and solemn
feasts of ye LORD our God evermore for Israel.

And the house that I will build, shall be

Se^de me now therefore a wise man to work with gold, silver, brass, iron,
scarlet, purple, yalow sylke and soch one as can grave carved work with the
wise men that are with me in Iewry and Jerusalem, whom my father David
ordained. And send me timber of Ceder, pyne tree and costly wodd from Libanus:
for I know that ye servants can hew timber upon Libanus. And behold, my
servants shall be with ye servants, to prepare me much timber: for the house
that I will build, shall be great and marvelous goodly.

And behold, I will give unto the carpenters

Then said Hiram the king of Tire by wrytinge, and sent it unto Solomon:
Because the LORD loves his people, therefore has he made ye to be king over
them. And Hiram said morouer: Praised be ye LORD God of Israel, which made
heaven earth, that he has given king David a wise and prudent son, and soch
one as has understanding to build an house unto the LORD, and an house for
his realm. Therefore send I now a wise man that has understanding, 3. Re. ^.
b
even Hiram Abi (which is the son of a woman of the daughters of Dan, and

And Solomon nombred all the strangers in the land of Israel, acordinge to
the nombre when David his father nombred them: and there were found an
hundredth and fiftye thousand, three thousand and six hundredth. And of the
same he made three score and ten thousand bears of burdens, and four score
thousand hewers upon ye mount, and three thousand and six hundredth overseers,
which held ye people at their work.

The III. Chapter.
LORD at Jerusalem upon the mount Moria, ^. Par. ^2. d
that was showed unto David his father, which David had prepared for the rowme,
upon the corn floor of Arnan the Iebusite. In the second day of the second
month in the fourth year of his reign began he to build. And so laid
Solomon the foundation to build the house of God: first the length three score
cubytes, the breadth twentye cubits: and the Porche before the wydenes of the
house, was twentye cubits long, but the height was an hundredth and twentye,
and he ouerlayed it on the ynsyde with pure gold.

But the great house syled he with Pyne tree, and ouerlayed it with the best
gold, and made palm trees and thrown work

He made also the house of the Most holy, whose length was twentye cubits
acordinge to the wydenesse of the house: and the breadth of it was twentye
cubits likewise, and he ouerlayed it with the best gold by six hundredth
talentes. And for nales he gave fiftye Sicles of gold in weight, and over
laid the chambers with gold. He made also in the house of the most holy, two
Cherubins of carved work, and ouerlayed them with gold: and the length on the
wings of the Cherubins, so that one wynge had five cubytes, and touched the
wall of the house: and the other wynge had five cubytes also, and touched the
wynge of the other Cherub.



He made a veil also of yalow sylke, scarlet, purple and lynworke, and made
Cherubins thereon. And before the house he made two pilers five and thirty
cubits long, and the knoppes above thereon, five cubytes. And he made thrown
work for the quere, and put it above upon the pilers: and made an hundredth
pomgranates, and put them on the wrythren work. And he set up the pilers
before the temple, the one on the right hand, and the other on the left: and
that on the right hand called the Iachin, and it on the left hand called he
Boos.

The IIII. Chapter.
HE made a brazen altar also, twentye cubytes long, and twentye cubytes
broad, and ten cubits hye. (...)
And he made a molten lauer ten cubits wide from the one side to the other
round about, and five cubytes hye. And a metelyne of thirty cubits might
comprehend it about. And images of Bullockes were under it. And about the
lauer (which was ten cubits wide) there were two rows of knoppes, yt were
molten withal.

It stood so upon the bullockes, that three were turned toward the north, three
toward the west, three toward the south, and three toward the east, and the
lauer above upon them, and all their hinder parts were on the ynsyde. The
thickness of it was an hand breadth, and the edge of it was like the edge of a
cup, and as a floured rose. And it contained three thousand Batthes.

And he made ten kettels, whereof he set five on the right hand and five on
the left, to waszshe in them soch things as belonged to the burnt offering,
that they might thrust them therein: but ye lauer (made he) for for the prestes
to wash in.

Ten golden candelstickes made he also as they ought to be, and set them in the
temple: five on the right hand, and five on the left. And made ten tables,
and set them in the temple: five on the right hand, and five on the left.
And made an hundredth basens of gold. He made a court likewise for the
prestes, and a great court, and doors in the court, and ouerlayed ye doors
with brass. And the lauer set he on the right side toward the south east.
And Hiram made cauldrous, shouels and basens.

So Hiram fynished the work which he made for king Solomon in the house of
God: namely the two pilers with the roundels and knoppes above upon both the
pilers, and both the wrythen ropes to cover both the roundels of ye knoppes
above upon the pilers, and the four hundredth pomgranates on both the wrythe^
ropes, two rows of pomgranates on every rope, to cover the roundels of the
knoppes that were above upon the pilers.

LORD. In the coaste of Iordane did the king cause them to be molten in
thick earth between Suchoth and Zaredatha.

And Solomon made all these vessels which were so many, that the weight of ye
metal was not to be sought out. And Salomen made all the ornaments for the
house of God: namely, the golden altar, the tables and the shewbreds thereon,
the candelstickes with their lamps of pure gold, to burn before the Quere
acordinge to the manner: and the flowers and the lamps and the snoffers were of
gold, all these were of pure gold.

And the knyues, basens, spones and pottes, were of pure gold. And the
intraunce and his doors within unto the Most holy, and the doors of the house
of the temple were of gold. Thus was all ye work fynished, which Solomon made
in the house of the LORD.

The V. Chapter.
(...)
namely, silver and gold, and all manner of ornaments, and laid them in the
treasures of the house of God. (...)
The^ gathered Solomon all the Elders in Israel together, all ye heads of the
trybes, princes of the fathers among the children of Israel unto Jerusalem, to
bring up the Arc of the covenant of the LORD out of the cite of David, that
is Sion. And there resorted unto the king all the men in Israel at the feast,
that is in the seventh month, and all ye Elders in Israel came.

And ye Levites took the Arc, and brought it up with the Tabernacle of
witness, (...)
and all the holy vessels that were in the Tabernacle: and ye prestes and
Levites brought them up. As for king Solomon and all the congregation of
Israel that was gathered unto him before the Arc, they offered sheep and oxen,
so many, that no man could nombre ner reken them.

Thus the prestes brought the Arc of ye LORD unto her place in to the quere
of the house, even in to ye Most holy under the wings of the Cherubins, so
that the Cherubins spread out their wings over the place of the Arc: and the
Cherubins covered the Arc and the staves thereof from above. And the staves
were so long, yt the knoppes of them were seen from the Arc before the quere,
but on the outsyde were they not seen. And it was there unto this day. And
there was nothing in the Arc, save the two tables, which Moses put therein at
Horeb, when the LORD made a covenant with the children of Israel, what time
as they were departed out of Egipte.

And when the prestes went out of the Sanctuary (for all ye prestes that were
found, sanctified them selves, because the courses were not kept) the Levites
with all those that were under Asaph, Heman, Iedithun LORD.

And when the voice arose from ye trompettes, cymbales and other instruments
of music, and from praysinge the LORD (because he is gracious, and because
his mercy endures for ever) the house of the LORD was filled on the ynsyde
with a cloud, so yt the prestes could not stand to mynister for the cloud:
for the glory of the LORD filled the house of God.

The VI. Chapter.
THen said Solomon: The LORD 3. Reg. ^.
that he would dwell in a darck cloud: I have builded an house to be an
habitacion unto the: and a seat, yt thou may dwell there for ever. And the
king turned his face, and blessed all the congregation of Israel: for the
whole congregation of Israel stood, and he said: Praised be the LORD God of
Israel, which promised by his mouth unto my father David, and with his hand
has fulfilled it, wha^ he said: 2. Re. 7. (...). Re. 8. c
Se^ce the time that I brought my people out of the land of Egipte, I have
chosen no cite in all ye trybes of Israel, to build an house for my name to be
there, nether have I chosen any man to be prince over my people of Israel. ^.
Par. 7. c
But Jerusalem have I chosen, for my name to be there: and David have I elect,
to be prince over my people of Israel.

LORD God of Israel, the LORD said unto David my father: Where as thou wast
minded to build an house unto my name, thou have done well: howbeit thou shall
not build the house, but thy son which shall come out of thy loins, shall
build the house unto my name.

Thus has ye LORD now performed his word, that he spoke: for I am come up
in my father David's stead, and sit upon the seat of Israel, even as the LORD
said, and have builded an house unto the name of ye LORD God of Israel, and
in it have I put ye Arc, wherein is the covenant of ye LORD, which he made
with the children of Israel.

LORD in the presence of the whole congregation of Israel, and spread out his
hands: for Solomon had made a brazen pulpit, and set it in the mids of the
court, five cubits long, and five cubits broad, and three cubits hye: upon
the same stood he, and fell down upon his knees in the presence of the whole
congregation of Israel, and held out his hands toward heaven and said: ^.
Reg. 8. c
O LORD God of Israel, there is no god like the, nether in heaven ner upon
earth, thou that kepest covenant and mercy for thy servants, that walk
before the with all their heart. Thou have kept promise with my father David thy
servant: With thy mouth thou saydest it, and with thy hand have thou
fulfilled it, as it is come to pass this day. Now LORD God of Israel, make
good unto my father David yi servant, that which thou have promised him, and
said: Thou shall not want a man before me, to sit upon the seat of Israel: if
thy children keep their way, so yt they walk in my law, like as thou have
walked before me: Now LORD God of Israel, let yi word be verified, which thou
have promised unto David thy servant.

^sa. 66. a ^re. 23. d ^cto. 7. e
Beholholde, the heaven and ye heavens of all heavens may not co^teyne the:
how should then this house do it, which I have builded? But turn the unto the
prayer of thy servant, and to his supplicacio^ (O LORD my God) that thou
may hear the thankesgeuynge and prayer, which thy servant makes before
the, so that thine eyes be open over this house day and night, even over this
place (wherein thou saydest thou would set thy name) that thou may hear
the prayer, which thy servant shall make in this place. Hear now therefore the
intercession of thy servant and of thy people of Israel, what so ever they
shall desire in this place: hear thou it from the place of thy habitacion,
eue^ from heaven: and when thou hear it, be merciful.

When any man synneth against his neighbor, and an ooth be put upon him which
he ought to swear, and the ooth comes before thine altar in this house,
then hear thou from heaven, and se yt thy servant have right, so that thou
reward the vngod^y, and recompense him his way upon his own head, and to
iustifye the righteous, and to give him acordinge to his righteousness.

When thy people of Israel is smytte^ before their enemies (while they have
sinned against the) and if they turn unto the, and knowledge thy name, and make
their prayer and intercession before the in this house, the^ hear thou them
from heaven, and be merciful unto the sin of thy people of Israel, and
bring them again in to the land, yt thou have given them and their fathers.

(...)
When the heaven is shut up, so that it rain not (for so much as they have
sinned against the) and if they make their prayer in this place, and knowledge
thy name, and turn from their sins (when thou have brought them low) hear
thou them then in heaven, and be merciful unto the sin of thy servants,
and of thy people of Israel, that thou may teach them the good way wherein
they should walk, and let it rain upon thy land which thou have given thy
people to possess.

When a derth, or pestilence, or drouth, ^^^blastinge, or greshopper or
catirpiller, is in the land: Or when their enemy lays sege to their ports
in the lord, or when any other plage or disease happens, who so ever the^
makes his prayer or peticion among any manner of men, or among all thy people
of Israel, if any man feel his plage and disease, and spredeth out his hands
unto this house, hear thou then from heaven, even from ye (...)
seat of thy habitacion, and be merciful: and give every man acordinge to all
his ways, in so much as thou know his heart (for thou only know the heart
of the children of men) that they may fear the, and all way walk in thy
ways, as long as they live in the land, which thou have given unto our
fathers.

And when any stranger which is not of thy people of Israel, comes out of a
far country because of thy great name, and mighty hand, and out stretched
arm, and comes to make his prayer in this house, hear thou him then from
heaven, even from the seat of thy habitacion: and do all for ye which that
stranger calls upon the, that all the nations upon earth may know thy
name, and fear the, as thy people of Israel do: and that they may know, how
yt this house which I have builded, is named after thy name.

When thy people go forth to ye battayll against their enemies, the way that
thou shall send them, and shall pray unto the (...) 6. b
toward the way of this cite which thou have chosen, and toward the house
that I have builded unto thy name, hear thou the^ their prayer and peticion
from heaven, and help them to their right.

(...). 1. b
for there is no man that synneth not) and thou be wroth at them, and give them
over before their enemies, so that they carry them away captyue in to a country
far or nigh, and if they turn within their hertes in the land where they are
presoners, and so convert, and make their intercession unto the in the land
of their captiuyte, and say: We have sinned, and done amysse, and have been
ungodly: and so turn them selves unto ye with all their heart and with all
their soul in the land of their captiuyte, wherein they are presoners: and
make their prayer toward the way of their own land, which thou gave unto
their fathers, and toward the ci^e which thou have chosen, and toward the
house that I have builded unto thy name: then hear thou their prayer and
supplicacion from heaven, even from the seat of thy dwelling, and help them
to their right, and be merciful unto thy people that have sinned against the.
My God, let thine eyes now be open, and let thine ears give head unto prayer
in this place. (...) ^31. a
Arise now O LORD God unto thy restinge place, thou and the Arc of thy
strength. Let thy prestes O LORD God be clothed with health, and let thy
sayentes rejoice over this good. LORD God, turn not away the face of thine
anointed: think upon the mercies of thy servant David.

The VII. Chapter.
ANd wha^ Salomo^ had ended his prayer, LORD filled the house, so that ye
prestes could not go in to the house of the LORD, while ye glory of the LORD
filled ye LORDS house. And all the children of Israel saw the fire fall
down, and the glory of the LORD over the house: and they fell on their knees
with their faces to the ground upon the pauement, and worshipped, and gave
thanks unto the LORD, because he is gracious, and because his mercy endures
for ever. As for the king and all the people, they offered before the LORD.

For king Solomon offered two and twe^tye thousand bullockes, and an hundredth
thousand and twentye thousand sheep, and so both the king and all the people
dedicated the house of God.

But the prestes stood in their watches, and LORD, which king David had
caused to make for to give thanks unto the LORD, (because his mercy endures
for ever) with psalms of David through their hand. And the prestes blewe
trompettes over against them, and all Israel stood.

And Solomon hallowed the myddelmost court, which was before the house of the
LORD, for there prepared he the burnt offerynges and the fat of the slain
offeringes: for the brazen altar that Solomon made, might not conteyne all the
burnt offeringes, meat offerynges, and the fat.

1. Mac. 4.
And at the same time held Solomon a feast seven days long, and all Israel
with him a very great congregation, from Hemath unto the river of Egipte, and
on the eight day held he a conuocacion. For the dedicacion of the altar
held they seven days, and the feast seven days also.

But on the three and twentyeth day of the seventh month he let the people go
unto their tents joyful and with merry hertes because of all the good, that
the LORD had done unto David, unto Salomo^, and to his people of Israel.

*Thus fynished Salomo^ the house of ye LORD, and the kings house, and all yt
came in his heart to make in the house of the LORD, and in his own house,
prosperously. And the LORD appeared unto Solomon in the night season, and
said unto him: I have herd thy prayer ^. Par. ^.
and chosen this place unto my self for an house of sacrifyce.

Behold, when I shut the heaven so yt it rain not, or command the
greshopper to consume the land, or cause a pestilence to come among my
people, to humble my people, which is named after my name: and if they pray,
and seek my face, and turn from their evil ways, the^ will I hear them from
heaven, and will forgive their sin, and heal their land. So shall mine eyes
now be open, and mine ears shall be attente unto prayer in this place. Thus
have I now chosen this house, and sanctified it, that my name may be there for
ever: and mine eyes and my heart shall allwaye be there.

^ome (...) them.
you out of my land that I have given you: and this house which I have
sanctified unto my name, will I cast away out of my presence, and give it over
to be a byworde and fabell among all nations. And every one that goes by,
shall be astonnyed at this hye house, and shall hysse at it, and say: ^eu. 2^.
d (...). 22. a
Wherefore has the LORD dealte thus with this land and with this house? Then
shall it be said: Even because they have forsaken the LORD God of their
fathers (which brought them out of the land of Egipte) and have cleued unto
other gods, and worshipped them, and served the^: therefore has he brought
all this evil upon the^.

The VIII. Chapter.
LORD and his own house) he builded the cities also which Hiram gave unto
Solomon, and caused the children of Israel to dwell therein. And Solomon went
unto Hemath Zoba, and made it strong, and builded Thadmor in the wyldernes,
and all the cornecyties which he builded in Hemath. He builded the upper and
lower Bethoron likewise, so that they were strong cities with walls, ports and
bars. And Baelath, and all the cornecites which Solomon had, and all the
cities of the charettes and of the horse men, and all that Solomon had lust to
build, both at Jerusalem and upon Libanus, and in all the land of his
domynion.

All the remnaunt of the people of the Hethites, Amorites, Pheresites, Heuites
and Iebusites, which were not of the children of Israel, and their children
which they had left behind them in the land, (whom the children of Israel
had not utterly destroyed) those did Solomon make trybutaries unto this day.
As for the children of Israel, Solomon made no bondmen of them unto his work,
but they were men of war, and chief captains, and over his charettes and
horsemen. And the chief of king Salomons officers were two hundredth and fyftie,
which ruled the people.

And Solomon caused Pharaos daughter to be fetched up out of the cite of David,
in to the house that he had builded for her: for he said: My wife shall not
dwell in the house of David the king of Israel, for it is sanctified, in as
much as ye Ark of the LORD is come in to it.

Then offered Solomon burnt offerynges LORD upon the LORDS altar, which he
had builded before the porche, every one upon his day to offer after the
commandment of Moses, on the Sabbathes, Newmones and at the appointed seasons
of the year, even three times, namely in ye feast of vnleuended bred, in the
feast of wekes, and in the feast of Tabernacles.

And he set the prestes in order to their ministracion (...)
acordynge as David his father had appointed, and the Levites in their offices,
to give thanks and to mynister in the presence of the prestes, every one upon
his day. And the dorekepers in their courses, every one at his door, for so
had David the man of God commanded.

And they departed not from the kings LORDS house was laid, till it was
fynished, so that the house of the LORD was all prepared.

Then went Solomon unto Ezeon Geber, (...)
and unto Eloth by the Sea side in the land of Edomea. And Hiram sent him
ships by his servants which had knowledge of the Sea, and they went with
Salomo^s servants unto Ophir, and fetched from thence four hundredth and
fyftye talentes of gold, and brought it unto king Solomon.

The IX. Chapter.
(...)
she came with a very great tryne to Jerusalem (with Camels that bare spyces
and gold, and precious stones) to prove Solomon with dark sentences. And when
she came unto Solomon, she spoke unto him all that she had devised in her
mind. And the king told her all her matters, and Solomon had nothing in
secret, but he told it her.

And when the Queen of rich Arabia saw the wyszdome of Solomon, and ye house
that he had builded, the meats of his table, the dwellinges of his servants,
ye offices of his mynisters and their garments, and his butlers and their
apparel, and his parler where he went up in to the house of the LORD, she
could no longer refrain. And she said unto the king: It is true that I have
herd in my land of thy behave our and of thy wyszdome: howbeit I would not
LORD thy God, which had soch pleasure unto the, that he has set the upon his
seat to be king unto the LORD thy God. Because thy God loves Israel, to set
them up for ever, therefore has he ordained yt to be king over them, that thou
should maintain justice and equity.

And she gave ye king an hundredth and twentye talentes of gold, and very much
spyce and precious stones. There were no mo soch spyces as these that the Queen
of rich Arabia gave unto king Salomo^. And Hirams servants and the
servants of Solomon, which brought gold from Ophir, brought costly timber
also and precious stones.

LORD, and the kings house, and harpes and psalteries for the Musicians.
There was no soch timber seen before in the land of Judah. But king Solomon
gave the Queen of rich Arabia all that she desired and axed, and much more
then she had brought unto the king. And she returned, and departed in to her
land with her servants.

The gold that was brought unto Solomon in one year, was six hundredth and
six and three score talentes, besides that ye chap men and merchants
brought. And all the kings of the Arabians, and the lords in ye land
brought gold and silver unto Solomon. Of the which king Solomon made two
hundredth spears of beaten gold, so yt six hundredth pieces of beaten gold
came upon one spear: and three hundredth shildes of beaten gold, so that three
hundredth pieces of beaten gold came to one shylde: and the king put the^ in
the house of the wod of Libanus.

And the king made a great seat of

And all king Salomons drinking vessels were of gold, and all the vessels of
the house of the wod of Libanus, were of pure gold: for silver was rekened
nothing in Salomons time. For the kings ships went upon the Sea with the
servants of Hira^, and came once in three year, and brought gold, silver,
Yuery, Apes and Pecockes.

Thus was king Solomon greater then all the kings upon earth, in riches and
wisdom. And all the kings of ye earth desired (to se) Salomons face, and to
hear his wisdom, which God had given him in his heart. And they brought him
yearly every man his present: Jewels of silver and gold, rayme^t, harness,
spyces, horses and Mules.

And Solomon had four thousand charethorses, ^. Re. 4. ^
and put them in the charetcities, and with the king at Jerusalem. And he was
lord over all the kings from the water unto the land of the Philistynes, and
to the coaste of Egipte. And the king brought it so to pass, that there was
as much silver at Jerusalem as stones: and as many Ceders, as there were
Molbery trees in the valleys. And there were horses brought unto him out of
Egipte, and out of all countres.

What more there is to say of Solomon, both of his first and of his last,
behold, it is written in the Cronicles of the prophet Nathan, and in the
prophecies of Ahia of Silo, and in ye acts of Ieddithe Seer against Ioroboa^
ye son of Nebat. And Salomo^ reigned at Jerusalem over all Israel forty
years. And Solomon fell on sleep with his fathers, and was buried in the cite of
David his father. And Roboa^ his son was ki^ge i^ his stead.

The X. Chapter.
^. Re. 12. a
to make him king. And when Ieroboa^ the son of Nebat herd that, which was
in Egipte ( ^. Re. ^^. g
whither he was fled for king Solomon) he came again out of Egipte. And they
sent for him and called him. And Jeroboam came with all Israel, and spoke to
Roboam, and said: Thy father made or yocke grievous: make thou lighter now ye
hard bondage of thy father, and ye heavy yocke that he laid upon us, and we
will submytte our selves unto the. He said unto them: Come to me again over
three days. And ye people went their way.



Now when Jeroboam and all the people came to Roboam on the third day
(acordynge as ye king said: Come to me again on the third day) the king
gave the^ an hard answer. And Roboa^ the king forsook ye council of the
Elders, and spoke unto the^ after ye young men's council, and said: If my
father have made yor yock to heavy, I will make it yet heuyer. My father
chastened you with scourges, but I will beat you with scorpio^s. Thus the king
followed not ye peoples mind: for so was it determined of God, yt ye LORD
might stablishe his word, ^. Re. 11. e
which he spoke by Ahia of Silo, unto Ieroboa^ ye son of Nebat. But when all
Israel saw that the king would not consent unto them* ye people answered the
king, and said: What portion have we then in David, or inheritance in the
son of Isai? Let every man of Israel get him to his tent. Look thou now to
thy house David. And all Israel went unto their tents, so that Roboam reigned
but over the children of Israel that dwelt in the cities of Judah. And Roboam
sent forth Adoram the rent gatherer, but the children of Israel stoned him to
death. And king Roboa^ strengthed himself upon his charet, to fly unto
Jerusalem. Thus fell Israel away from the house of David unto this day.

The XI. Chapter.
ANd when Roboam came to Ierusasalem, he gathered together the house of Judah
and Ben Iamin (even an hundredth and four score thousand chosen men of arms)
to fight against Israel, that they might bring the kingdom again unto
Roboam. But ye word of the LORD came to Semaia the man of God, and said:
Speak to Roboam the son of Solomon king of Judah, and to all Israel yt are
in Judah and Ben Iamin, and say: Thus says the LORD: Ye shall not go up, ner
fight against your brethren: let every man go home again, for this is my
deed. They herkened unto the words of ye LORD, and went not forth against
Ieroboa^. As for Roboa^, he dwelt at Jerusalem, and builded up the strong
cities in Judah, namely Bethlee^, Etan, Tekoa, Bethzur, Socho, Adulla^, Gath,
Maresa, Siph, Adoraim, Laches, Aseka, Z^rega, Aialon, and Hebron (which were
the fensed cities in Judah and Ben Iamin) and he made them strong, and set
princes therein, and provided them of vytayles, oil and wine, and in all cities
prepared he shildes and spears, and made them very strong. And Judah and Ben
Iamin were under him.

The Prestes and Levites also came unto him out of Israel and from all the
borders thereof, And left their suburbs and possession, and camt to Judah unto
Jerusalem: for Jeroboam and his sons expelled them, that they should not
execute the office of ye presthode unto ye LORD. But for himself he founded
prestes to ye hye places, and to field deuels and calves, which he caused to
make. And after them came there men out of all the trybes of Israel, which gave
over their hertes to seek ye LORD God of Israel, and came to Jerusalem for to
offer unto the LORD God of their fathers. And so strengthed they ye kingdom
of Judah, and ma^tayned Roboam the son of Solomon three year long: for they
walked in ye way of David and Solomon three years.

And Roboam took Mahelath ye daughter of Ieremoth ye son of David to wife,
and Abihail the daughter of Eliab ye son of Isai, which bare him these
sons: Ieus, Semaria and Saham. After her took he Maecha the daughter of
Absalom, which bare him Abia, Athai Sisa and Selomith. But Roboam loved Maecha
the daughter of Absalom better then all his wives and concubynes: for he had
eightene wives and three score co^cubynes, and begat eight and twentye sons,
and three score daughters. And Roboam set Abia the son of Maecha to be head
and prince among his brethren: for he thought to make him king: for he was
wise, and more mighty then all his sons in all the countrees of Judah and Ben
Iamin, and in all the strong cities. And he gave them plenteousnes of fode,
and desired many wives.

The XII. Chapter.
LORD and all Israel with him. And in the fyfth year of Roboam went Sisack
the king of Egipte up against Jerusalem (for they had transgressed against the
LORD) with a thousand and two hundredth charettes, and with three score
thousand horsemen, and the people were innumerable that came with him out of
Egipte, Libya, S^chim and out of Ethiopia, and he wanne the strong cities that
were in Judah, and came to Jerusalem.

Then came Semaia ye prophet unto Roboam and to ye rulers of Judah (which were
gathered together at Jerusalem for Sisack) and said unto them: Thus says ye
LORD: Ye have left me, therefore have I left you also in Sisacks hand. The^
the rulers in Israel with the king submytted them selves, and said: The LORD
is righteous.

LORD saw yt they humbled themselves, ye word of the LORD came to Semaia,
and said: They have humbled them selves, therefore will I not destroy them, but
I will give them a little delyueraunce, that my indignacion fall not upon
Jerusalem by Sisack: for they shall be subdued unto him, yt they may know what
it is to serve me, and to serve the kingdoms of the world.

Thus went Sisack the king of Egipte up to Jerusalem, and took the treasures
in the house of the LORD, and the treasures in the kings house, and carried
all away, and took the shyldes of gold 3. Par. 9. b
that Solomon caused to make: in stead whereof king Roboa^ made shyldes of
stele, and committed the^ unto the chief fotemen, which kept the door of the
kings house. And as often as the king went in to the house of the LORD, ye
footmen came and bare them, and brough^ them again in to ye foot men's
chamber. And for so much as he submytted himself, ye wrath of ye LORD turned
from him, so that all was not destroyed: for there was yet some good in Judah.

Thus was Roboam the king stablished 2. Par. 7. b
which the LORD had chosen out of all the trybes of Israel, to set his name
there. His mothers name was Naemaan Ammonitisse: and he did evil, and prepared
not his heart to seek the LORD.

These acts of Roboam, both first and last, are written in the acts of Semaia
the prophet, and of Iddo the Seer, and are noted, and so are the wars that
Roboam and Jeroboam had together as long as they lived. And Roboam fell on
sleep with his fathers and was buried in the cite of David, and Abia his son
was king in his stead.

The XIII. Chapter.
IN the eightenth year of king Jeroboam,

And Abia gatt him up upon the hill Zemaraim, which lies upon mount Ephraim
and said: Harken unto me thou Jeroboam and all Israel: Know ye not that the
LORD God of Israel has given David ye kingdom of Israel for ever, unto him
and his sons with a Salt covenant? But Ieroboa^ the son of Nebat, the
servant of Solomon David's son, gat him up and fell away from his lord. And
there resorted unto him vagaboundes and children of Belial, and have strengthed
them selves against Roboa^ the son of Salomo^: for Roboam was but young and
of a fearful heart, and could not resist them.

Now think ye to set your selves against LORD among the sons of David,
for so much as there is so great a multitude of you, and have ye golden calves
^. Re. 12. d
yt Jeroboam made you for gods. ^. Pa. 11 d
Have ye not expelled the prestes of the LORD the children of Aaron and the
Levites? and have made you prestes of your own, even as the people of the
lands? Who so ever comes to fill his hand with a young bullock and seven
rams, shall be priest unto them that are not gods.

But with us is ye LORD our God, who^ we forsake not: and the prestes that
minister unto the LORD, the children of Aaron and the Levites in their
business, and every morning and every evening kyndle they the burnt offerynges
unto the LORD, and the sweet incense, and prepare the shewbred upon the pure
table, and the golden candilsticke with his lamps, to be kyndled every
evening: for we wait upon the LORD our God.

Number. 10. a
blowynge trompettes, to trompe against you. Ye children of Israel, fight not
against the LORD God of yor fathers: for ye shall not prospere.

Nevertheless Jeroboam made a preuy watch on every side, to come upon them
behind, so that they were before Judah, and ye preuy watch behind. Now wha^
Judah turned them, behold, there was battayll before the^ and behind. Then
cried they unto ye LORD, and the prestes tromped with the trompettes, and wha^
every man in Judah gave a shoute, God plaged Jeroboam and Israel before Abia and
Judah. And the children of Israel fled before Judah, and God gave them in to
their hands, so that Abia and his people did a great slaughter upon them, and
there fell wounded of Israel five hundredth thousand chosen men.

LORD God of their fathers. And Abia followed upon Jeroboam, and wanne cities
from him, Bethel with the vyllages thereof, Iesana with her vyllages, and Ephron
with the villages thereof, so that Jeroboam came no more to strength, as long as
Abia lived. And the LORD smote him that he dyed.

Now when Abia was strengthed, he took fourtene wives, and begat two and
twentye sons and sixtene daughters. What more there is to say of Abia, and
of his ways and his doings, it is written in the storye of the prophet Iddo.
And Abia fell on sleep with his fathers, and they buried him in (...) cite of
David: and Asa his son was (...) in his stead. In his time was the land
(...) rest ten years.

The XIIII. Chapter.
ANd Asa did that which was good^ right in the sight of the LORD his God, and
put away the strange ^^tares, and the hye places, and brake the p^lers, and
hewed down the groves, and said unto Judah, that they should seek the LORD
God of their fathers, and to do after ye law and commandments. And the hye
places and images put he away out of (...) the cities of Judah: and the
kingdom ha^ rest before him. And he builded strong cities in Judah, while the
land was in quietness, and while there was no war against him (...) the same
years: for ye LORD gave him rest.

And he said unto Judah: Let us build up these cities, and fense them round
abo^te with walls, and towers, with ports and bars, while the land is yet
with us: for we have sought the LORD our God, and he has given us rest on
every side. So they builded, and it went prosperously with the^* And Asa had
an host of me^ which bare s^^des and spears, out of Judah three C. thousand,
and out of Ben Iamin two hundredth and fo^re score thousand, that bare shyldes
and could shute with bows, and all these were mighty strong men.

But Serah the Moryan came out against the^ with an host of a thousand times a
thousand, and with three hundredth charettes, and came unto Maresa. And Asa
went forth against him. And they prepared them selves to the battayll in the
valley Zephat^ beside Maresa. And Asa called upon ye LORD his God and said:
(...)
LORD, it is no difference with ye, to help by few or by many. Help us O
LORD our God: for our trust is in the, and in thy name are we come forth
against this multitude. LORD our God, let no man prevail against the.

And the LORD smote the Moria^s before Asa and before Judah, so that they fled.
And Asa with ye people that was by him, followed upon them unto Gerar. And the
Moria^s fell, so that none of them remained alive, but were smytten before the
LORD and before his host. And they carried exceadinge much spoil from thence.
And he smote all the cities about Gerar, for a fearfulness of the LORD came
upon them. And they spoiled all the cities, for there was much spoil in them.
They smote the tents of the catell also, and took many sheep and Camels, and
came again to Jerusalem.

The XV. Chapter.
ANd the sprete of God came upon Asarias the son of Obed, which went forth
to Asa, and said unto him: Hear me Asa and all Judah and Ben Iamin: The LORD
is with you, while ye are with him: and if ye seek him, he wylbe found of you.
But if ye forsake him, he shall forsake you also. Nevertheless there shall be many
days in Israel, that (...)
there shall be no true God, no pressed to teach, and no law. And when they turn
in their trouble unto the LORD God of Israel, and seek him, he shall be found.
At that time shall it not be well with him that goes out and in: for there
shall be great vproures upon all them yt dwell on the earth. For one people
shall all to smite another, and one cite another: for God shall vex them with all
manner of trouble. But be ye strong, and let not your hands be feeble: for
your work has his reward.

LORDS altar, which stood before the porche of the LORD. And all Judah and
Ben Iamin gathered them selves together, and the strangers with them out of
Ephraim, Manasses and Simeon: for there fell many unto him out of Israel, when
they saw that the LORD his God was with him. And they resorted unto Jerusalem
in the third month of the fyftenth year of the reign of Asa, and the same
day offered they unto the LORD of the spoil that they had brought, seven
hundredth oxen, and seven thousand sheep.

LORD God of their fathers, with all their heart and with all their soul. And
who so ever would not seek ye LORD God of Israel, should dye, both small and
great, both man and woman: and they swear unto the LORD with loud voice,
with shoutinge, with trompettes and with shawmes. And all Judah were glad over
the ooth: for they had sworn with all their heart, and they sought him with a
whole will: and he was found of them, and the LORD gave them rest on every
side.



The XVI. Chapter.
IN the six and thirtieth year of ye 3. Re. 15. c
went Baesa the king of Israel up against Judah, and builded Rama, to let Asa
the king of Judah, yt he should not go out and in: But Asa took forth the
treasure in the house of the LORD, and the silver and gold in the kings
house, and sent it unto Benadad ye king of Syria, which dwelt at Damascon, and
caused to say unto him: There is a covenant between me and the, between my
father and thy father, therefore have I sent ye silver and gold, that thou
may break ye covenant with Baesa the king of Israel, that he may depart
fro me,

Benadad herkened unto king Asa, and sent his host against the cities of
Israel, which smote Eio^, Dan and Abel Maim, and all the corn cities of
Nephtali. When Baesa herd that, he left of from buyldinge Rama, and ceased
from his work. But king Asa took all Judah unto him, and carried away ye
stones and timber (wherewith Baesa builded) and he builded Geba and Mizpa
withal.

At the same time came Hanani the Seer LORD thy God, therefore is the power of
the king of Syria escaped thy hand. 2. Par. 14. c
Were not the Moryans and Lybians a great multitude with exceadinge many
charettes and horsemen? Yet gave the LORD them in to thy hand, when thou
dyddest put thy trust in him: for the eyes of the LORD look round about all
lands, to strength them yt are in him with all their heart. Thou have done
unwisely, therefore shall thou have war from hence forth. But Asa was wroth at
ye Seer, and put him in preson: for he murmured with him over this thing. And
Asa oppressed certain of the people at ye same time.

These acts of Asa both first and last, be hold, they are written in the book
of ye kings of Judah and Israel. And Asa was diseased in his fete in the nine
and thirtieth year of his reign, and endured there over. Eccli. 3^. b
Nether sought he the LORD in his sickness, but trusted unto Phisicians.
Thus fell Asa on sleep with his fathers, and dyed in the one and fortieth year
of his reign, and was buried in his own sepulcre which he had caused to be
graven for him self in the cite of David. And they laid him upon his bed,
which was filled with sweet odoures and all manner of spyces (made after ye
Apotecaries craft) and made a very great burning.

The XVII. Capter.
LORD was with Iosaphat: for he walked in the old ways of his father David,
and sought not Baalim, but the God of his father, and walked in his
commandments, ^ not after the works of Israel: therefore did the LORD
stablyshe the kingdom in his hand. And all Judah gave presents unto Iosaphat,
and he had great riches and worship. And when his heart was coraged in the
ways of the LORD, he put down still the hye places and groves out of Judah.

LORD with them, and went about in all ye cities of Judah, and taught the
people.

And the fear of the LORD came upon all ye kingdoms in the countrees that
lay about Judah, so yt they fought not against Iosaphat. And the Philistynes
brought presents and trybute of silver unto Iosaphat. And the Arabians
brought him seven thousand and seven hundredth rams, and seven thousand and
seven hundredth he goats. Thus increased Iosaphat, and grew ever greater. And
he builded castles and corn cities in Judah. And did much in the cities of
Judah, and had valeaunt and mighty men at Jerusalem.

LORD, and with him were two hundredth thousand valeaunt men. Of the children
of Ben Iamin was Eliada a mighty man, and with him were two hundredth thousand
ready with bows and shyldes. Next unto him was Iosabad, and with him were an
hundredth and four score thousand harnessed men of war. All these ^^^ted
upon the king, besides those that the king had laid in the strong cities
thor^^ out all Judah.

The XVIII. Chapter.
ANd Iosaphat had great riches and worship, and made frendshippe (...)
Achab. (...)
And after two years went he down to Achab unto Samaria. And Achab caused
many sheep and oxe^ to be slain for him and for ye people that were with him.
And he counceled him to go up unto Ramoth in Gilead. And Achab the king of
Israel said unto Iosaphat the king of Judah: Go with me unto Ramoth in Gilead.
He said unto him: I am as thou, and my people as thy people, we will go with
the unto the battayll.

But Iosaphat said unto the king of Israel: Axe council (I pray the) this
day at the word of the LORD. And the king of Israel gathered the prophets
together, even four hundredth men, and said unto them* Shall we go to the
battayll unto Ramoth in Gilead, or shall I let it alone? They said: Go up, God
shall deliver it into the kings hand. But Iosaphat said: Is there not ye^ one
prophet of the LORD here, yt we may axe at him? The king of Israel said
unto Iosaphat: There is yet one man, at whom we may axe of ye LORD: but I
hate him, for he prophecieth me no good, but allwaye evil, namely Micheas the
son of Iemla. Iosaphat said: Let not the king say so. And the king of
Israel called one of his chamberlaynes, and said: Bring hither soon Micheas
the son of Iemla.

And the king of Israel, and Iosaphat the king of Judah, sat either of them
upon his seat, arrayed in their garments. Even in the place at the door of the
port of Samaria sat they, and all ye prophets prophesied before them. And
Sedechias the son of Cnaena had made him horns of iron, and said: Thus
says the LORD: With these shall thou puszshe at the Syrians, till thou
bring them to naught. And all the prophets prophesied likewise, and said:
Go up unto Ramoth in Gilead, and thou shall prospere, and ye LORD shall deliver
it in to the kings hand.

And the messaunger that went to call Micheas, spoke unto him, and said:
Behold, ye words of the prophets are with one acorde good before the king:
let thy word (I pray the) be as one of theirs, and speak thou good also. But
Micheas said: As truly as the LORD lives, look what my God says unto me,
yt will I speak. And when he came to the king, the king said unto him:
Micheas, should we go unto Ramoth in Gilead to the battayll, or should we let
it alone? He said: Go up, and ye shall prospere. It shall be given you in your
hands. But ye king said unto him: I charge ye yet again, that thou tell me
nothing but ye truth in the name of the LORD.

LORD said: Have these no lord? Let every one turn home again in peace.
The^ said the king of Israel unto Iosaphat: Did not I tell the, yt he would
prophecy me no good, but evil?

And he said: Therefore hear ye the word of the LORD: (...)
I saw the LORD sit upon his seat, and all the host of heaven stondinge at
his right hand and at his left. And the LORD said: Woe will disceaue Achab
the king of Israel, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth in Gilead? And when
one said thus, another so, there came forth a sprete, and stood before ye
LORD, and said: I will disceaue him. The LORD said unto him: Wherewith? He
said: I will go forth, and be a false sprete in the mouth of all his
prophets. And he said: Thou shall disceaue him, and shall be able: go thy
way, and do so. Behold now, (...). 4. b
the LORD has given a false sprete in the mouth of all these thy prophets,
and the LORD has spoken evil against the.

LORD departed fro me, to speak through the? Micheas said: Behold, thou
shall se it, when thou come in to ye ynmost chamber to hyde the. But the
king of Israel said: Take Micheas, and let him remain with Amon the ruler of
the cite, and with Ioas the son of Melech, and say: Thus says the king:
Put this man in preson, and feed him with bred and water of trouble, till I come
again in peace. Micheas said: If thou come again in peace, then has not
the LORD spoken through me. And he said: Harken to all ye people.

So the king of Israel, and Iosaphat ye

Now when the rulers of the charrettes saw Iosaphat, they thought: It is ye
king of Israel, and they went about to fight against him. But Iosaphat
cried, and the LORD helped him. And God turned them from him: for when the
rulers of the charettes saw that it was not ye king of Israel, they turned
back from him. But a certain man bended his bow hard, and shot the king of
Israel between the mawe and the longes. The^ said he unto his charet man:
Turn thine hand, and carry me out of the host, for I am wounded. And the
battayll was sore the same day. And the king of Israel stood upon his charet
against the Syrians until the evening, and dyed wha^ the Son went down.

The XIX. Chapter.
But Iosaphat the king of Judah came LORD? And for this cause is ye wrath upon
the from the LORD: nevertheless there is some good found in the, that thou
have put the groves out of the land, and have prepared thine heart to seek God.
So Iosaphat abode at Jerusalem.

And he went again among the people, LORD God of their fathers. And he set
Judges through out the land, in all the strong cities of Judah, and a certain
in every cite. And said unto the Judges: Take heed what ye do: for ye execute
not the judgment of man, but of the LORD, and he is with you in judgment:
therefore let the fear of the LORD be with you, and bewarre, and do it: for
with the LORD our God there is no unrighteousness, ner respect of persons,
ner acceptinge of gifts.

LORD, and over the matter of the law, and caused them to dwell at Jerusalem,
and commanded them, and said: Se that ye do thus in the fear of the LORD,
in faithfulness and in a perfect heart. In all causes that come unto you from
your brethren (which dwell in their cities) between blood and blood, between
law and commandment, between statutes and ordinances ye shall inform them,
yt they sin not against the LORD, and so the wrath to come upon you and
your brethren. Do thus, and ye shall not offend.

Behold, Amaria the pressed is chief over you in all causes of ye LORD: so is
Sabadia the son of Ismael prince in the house of Judah in all the kings
matters: Ye have officers likewise the Levites before you. Take a good courage
unto you, and be doing, and the LORD shall be with the good.

The XX. Chapter.


And Iosaphat was afraid, and set his face to seek ye LORD, and caused a fast
to be proclaimed in all Judah. And Judah came together to seek the LORD. And out
of all ye cities of Judah came they to seek the LORD. And Iosaphat stood among
ye congregation of Judah and Jerusalem in the house of ye LORD before the new
court, and said:

O LORD God of our fathers, art not thou God in heaven, and have domynion in
all the kingdoms of the Heythen? And in thy hand is strength and power, and
there is no man that can withsto^de the. Have not thou or God expelled the
inhabiters of this land before thy people of Israel? and have given it unto
the sede of Abraham thy lover for ever? so that they have dwelt in it, and have
builded the a Sanctuary unto ye name therein, (...)
thou would not suffer the children of Israel to go, when they went out of
the land of Egipte, but they were feign to depart from the^, and not to
destroy them: and behold, they deal contrarely with us, and come to thrust
us out of the inheritance, that thou have given us in possession. O our God,
wylt thou not judge them? For in us is no strength to withstonde this great
multitude that comes against us. We know not what we should do, but our
eyes look unto the. And all Judah stood before the LORD, with their children,
wives and sons.

But upon Iehasiel the son of Zacharias, LORD in the mids of the
congregation, and said: Give head all thou Judah, and ye inhabiters of
Jerusalem, and thou king Iosaphat: Thus says the LORD unto you: Be not ye
afraid, nether fear ye this great multitude: for it is not ye that fight,
but God. Tomorow shall ye go down unto the^. And behold, they go up by Sis,
and ye shall find them at the reed see by the broke before the wyldernes of
Ieruel: for ye shall not fight in this cause. Do ye but step forth, and
stand, and se the health of the LORD that is with you. Fear not O Judah and
Jerusalem, and be not afraid, tomorow go ye forth against them, and the LORD
shall be with you.

The^ Iosaphat bowed him self with his face to the earth, and all Judah, and the
inhabiters of Jerusalem fell before the LORD, and worshipped the LORD. And
the Levites of ye children of the Kahathites and of the children of the
Corahites arose to praise the LORD God of Israel with loud voice on hye. And
they gat them up early in ye morning, and went forth by the wilderness of
Thekoa.

And when they were going out, Iosaphat LORD yor God, and ye shall be safe:
and give credence unto his prophets, and ye shall prospere. And he gave
council unto ye people, and appointed the syngers unto ye LORD, and them that
gave praise in the bewtye of holiness, to go before the harnessed me^, and to
say: O give thanks unto the LORD, for his mercy endures for ever. And when
they began to give thanks and praise, (...). 7. f (...). 14. c
the LORD caused the hinder watch that was come against Judah, to come upon the
children of Ammon, Moab and them of mount Seir, and they smote them. Then stood
the children of Ammon and Moab against them of mount Seir, to damn them, and
to destroy them. And when they had destroyed them of mount Seir, one helped
another to destroy them selves also. And when Judah came to Mispa unto the
wyldernes, they turned them toward the multitude, and behold, the deed bodies
lay upon the earth, so that none was escaped.

LORD. Therefore is the place called the valley of blessinge unto this day.

So every man of Judah and Jerusalem turned back again, and Iosaphat before
them, to go to Jerusalem with joy: for ye LORD had given them gladness on
their enemies. And they entered in to Jerusalem with psalteries, harpes and
trompettes unto the house of the LORD. And there came a fear of God over all
the kingdoms in the lands, when they herd that the LORD had fought against
ye enemies of Israel. Thus was ye kingdom of Iosaphat in quyetnes, and God
gave him rest on every side.

LORD: saving that ye hye places were not put down, for the people had not
yet prepared their heart to the God of their fathers. What more there is to say
of Iosaphat, both the first and the last, behold, it is written in the acts
of Iehu ye son of Hanani, which he noted up in the book of the kings of
Israel.

^ Re. ^^. g
Afterward did Iosaphat the king of Judah agree with Ahasia the king of Israel,
which was ungodly in his doings. And he agreed with him to make ships, for
to go upon the sea. And they made the ships at Ezeon Gaber. But Elieser the
son of Dodana of Maresa prophesied against Iosaphat, and said: Because thou
have agreed with Ahasia, therefore has the LORD broken thy works. And so ye
ships were broken, and might not go upon the Sea.

The XXI. Chapter.
ANd Iosaphat fell on sleep with his fathers, 3. Re. 2^
and was buried with his fathers in the cite of David, and Ioram his son was
king in his stead. And he had brethren the sons of Iosaphat: Asaria,
Iehiel, Zacharias, Asaria, Michael and Sephatia. All these were the children of
Iosaphat king of Judah. And their father gave them many gifts of silver, gold
and Jewels, with strong cities in Judah. But the kingdom gave he unto Ioram: for
he was the first borne.

But when Ioram came up over his fathers kingdom, and had gotten the power of
it, he slew all his brethren with the sword, and certain rulers also in
Israel. 4. Re. ^^
Two and thirty year old was Ioram when he was made king, and reigned eight
year at Jerusalem, and walked in the way of ye kings of Israel, even as the
house of Achab did (for Achabs daughter was his wife) and he did that which was
evil in the sight of the LORD.

Nevertheless ye LORD would not destroy 2. Re. ^^
which he made with David, and acordinge as he had said, yt he would give him
and his children a lantern for evermore.

At ye same time fell ye Edomites away from Judah, and made a king over them
selves: for Ioram had gone over with his captains and all the charettes with
him, and had gotten him up in the night season, and slain the Edomites on
every side, and the rulers of the charettes: therefore fell ye Edomites away
from Judah unto this day. At ye same time fell Lybna away from him also:
because he forsook the LORD God of his fathers. He made hye places also on the
mountains in Judah, and caused them of Jerusalem to go awhorynge, and disceaued
Judah.

But there came a wrytinge unto him from LORD God of thy father David: Because
thou have not walked in the ways of thy father Iosaphat, nether in ye ways of
Asa the king of Judah, but walk in the way of the kings of Israel, and
make Judah and them of Jerusalem to go awhorynge after the whordome of the
house of Achab, and have slain thy brethren also of thy fathers house, which
were better the^ thou. Behold, the LORD shall smite the with a great plage on
thy people, on thy children and thy wives, and on all thy substance. But thou
thy self shall have much sickness in thy bowels, till thy bowels go forth
from day to day for very disease.

LORD raised up against Ioram, the sprete of the Philistynes, and Arabians,
which lie beside the Morians, and they went up in to Judah, and waysted it, and
carried away all the substance that was found in the kings house, and his
sons, and his wives, so yt there was not one son left him, save Ioahas his
yo^gest son. And after all this did ye LORD smite him in his bowels, with
soch a sickness as could not be healed. And while that endured from day to
day, when the time of two years was expyred, his bowels went from him with his
sickness, and he dyed in evil diseases.

And they made not a burninge over him, as they did unto his fathers. Two and
thirty year old was he wha^ he was made king, and reigned eight year at
Jerusalem, and walked not well. And they buried him in the cite of David, but
not among the sepulcres of the kings.

The XXII. Chapter.
(...). 8 d
for the men of war that came with the host of the Arabians, had slain all ye
first, therefore reigned Ochosias the son of Ioram king of Judah. Two and
fortye year old was Ochosias when he was made king, and reigned one year at
Jerusalem. His mothers name was Athalia the daughter of Amri. And he walked
also in ye ways of the house of Achab: for his mother entysed him so yt he was
ungodly. Therefore did he evil in ye sight of the LORD, even as ye house of
Achab: for they were his council geuers after his fathers death, to destroy
him, and he walked after their council.

(...)
Asarias the son of Ioram king of Judah went down to vyset Ioram ye son
of Achab at Iesreel, which lay sick: For it was ordained of God unto
Ochosias, that he should come to Ioram, and so to go forth with Ioram against
Iehu ye son of Nimsi, (...)
whom the LORD had anointed to rote out the house of Achab.

Now when Iehu would be aue^ged of ye (...)
And he sought Ochosias, and they ouertoke him, wha^ he had hyd him at
Samaria: and he was brought unto Iehu, which slew him, and they buried him,
for they said: He his the son of Iosaphat, which sought ye LORD with all
his heart. And there was no man more of the house of Ochosias that might be
king.

When Athalia the mother of Ochosias (...)
and destroyed all the kings sede in the house of Judah. But Iosabeath ye
kings sister took Ioas ye son of Ochosias, and stale him away from among
the kings children yt were slain, and put him with his norse in a chamber.
Thus Iosabeath king Iorams douhgter, the wife of Ioiada the pressed, hyd him
from Athalia, so yt he was not slain: for she was Ochosias sister. And he was
hyd with them in the house of God six years, for so much as Athalia was queen
in the land.

The XXIII. Chapter.
But in the seventh year was Ioiada (...)
and took the rulers over hundreds: namely Asaria ye son of Ieraham, Ismael
ye son of Iohanan, Asaria ye son of Obed, Maeseia ye son of Adaia, and
Elisaphat ye son of Sichri with him, in to the covenant: and they went
about in Judah, and brought ye Levites together out of all the cities of Judah,
and the chief fathers of Israel, to come unto Jerusalem. And all the
congregation made a covenant with the king in the house of God, and he said
unto them: Behold, the kings son shall be king, (...)
eue^ as the LORD spoke concerning the children of David.

This is it therefore yt ye shall do: The third LORD, and that no man go in to
the house of the LORD, except the prestes and Levites that mynister there,
they shall go in: for they are hallowed. And let all ye people wait upon the
LORD. And the Levites shall get them round about ye king, every one with his
weapen in his hand. And who so else goes in to ye house, let him dye. And they
shall be with the king wha^ he goes out and in.

(...). 17. d
witness, and made him king. And Ioiada with his sons anointed him, and
said: God save the king.

LORD, and looked: and behold, ye king stood in his place at ye intraunce,
and the rulers and trompettes about ye king: and all the people of the land
were glad, and blewe the trompes, and there were syngers yt could play with all
manner of musical instruments. But she re^te her clothes, and said: Sedicion,
sedicion. Nevertheless Ioiada ye pressed gat him forth with the captains over
hundreds and rulers of the host, and said unto them: Bring her forth between
ye walls, and who so ever follows her, shall be slain with ye sword: for the
pressed had commanded, that she should not be slain in ye house of the LORD.
And they laid hands on her. And when she came at the intraunce of the
horsgate of the kings house, they put her to death there.

LORD. The went all the people in to the house of Baal and destroyed it, and
brake down his altares and images, and slew Mathan the pressed of Baal before
the altar. And Ioiada appointed ye officers in the house of the LORD among
the prestes and Levites (...)
whom David had ordained for ye house of the LORD, to offer burnt sacrifices
unto ye LORD, as it is written in the (...)
law of Moses: with joy and songs made by David. And ye porters set he at ye
gates of ye house of ye LORD, yt none should enter, which were defiled with any
manner of thing.

And he took the captains over hu^dreds and the mighty men and lords of ye
people, and all the people of the land, and brought the king down from the
house of the LORD, and brought him through the hye port of the kings house,
and caused the king sit upon the seat royal. And all the people of the lord
were glad, and the cite was at rest. But Athalia was slain with the sword.

The XXIIII. Chapter.
IOas was seven year old when he 4. Re. 12. ^
and reigned forty year at Jerusalem. His mothers name was Zibea of Berseba.
And Ioas did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, as long as Ioiada
the pressed lived. And Ioiada gave him two wives, and he begat sons and
daughters. Afterward devised Ioas to renew the house of the LORD, and
gathered together the prestes and Levites, and said unto the^: Go forth un to
all the cities of Judah, and gather the money of all Israel, to repair ye house
of God yearly, and do it right soon: but the Levites made no haist.

Then the king called Ioiada the pryncipall, and said unto him: Why lokest
thou not unto the Levites, yt they bring in from Judah and Jerusalem, Ex. 50. b.
the colleccion which Moses the servant of the LORD appointed to be gathered
among Israel for the Tabernacle of witness? For yt ungodly Athalia and her
sons have waisted the house of God: and all that was hallowed for the house of
the LORD, have they bestowed on Baalim.

Then commanded the king to make a LORD: and caused it to be proclaimed in
Judah and Jerusalem, that they should bring in to the LORD, the colleccio^,
which Moses the servant of God appointed unto Israel in ye wilderness. The^
were all ye rulers glad, and so were all ye people, and brought it, and cast it
in to the chest, till it was full.

And when the time was yt the Levites should bring the Arc at ye kings
commandment (when they saw yt there was much money therein) then came the
kings scrybe, and he yt was appointed of the chief pressed, and emptyed the
chest, and carried it again in to his place. Thus did they every day, so that
they gathered much money together. And ye king and Ioiada gave it unto ye
workmasters of ye house of the LORD, and they hired masons and carpenters to
repair the house of ye LORD, and men that could work in iron and brass, to
repair the house of ye LORD.

And the laborers wrought, so that ye repairinge their hand, and they set the
house of God in his bewtye, and made it strong. And when they had performed
this, they brought the resydue of the money before the king and Ioiada, whereof
there were made vessels for the house of the LORD, vessels for the
ministracion and burnt offeringe, spones and ornaments of gold and silver.
And they offered burnt offerynges allwaye in the house of the LORD, as long as
Ioiada lived.

And Ioiada waxed old, and had lived long enough, and dyed, and was an
hundredth and thirty year old when he dyed: and they buried him in the cite
of David, among the kings, because he had done good unto Israel, and toward
God and his house. And after the death of Ioiada, came the rulers in Judah, and
worshipped the king.

LORD God of their fathers, and served ye groves and images. Then came ye
wrath of the LORD upon Judah and Jerusalem because of this trespace of theirs.
Yet sent he prophets, unto the^, yt they should turn unto the LORD, and they
testified unto the^: but they would not hear.

And the sprete of God came upon ^at. 23 c
Zachary the son of Ioiada the pressed, which stood over ye people, and said
unto the^: Thus says God: Wherefore do ye transgress the commandments of
the LORD, which shall not be to yor prosperity: for ye have forsaken ye LORD,
therefore shall he forsake you. Nevertheless they conspyred against him, and
stoned him at ye kings commandment in ye court of the house o^ the LORD.
And Ioas ye king thought not on the mercy yt Ioiada his father had done for
him, but slew his son. Notwithstondinge wha^ he dyed, he said: The LORD
shall look upon it, and require it.

LORD a very great power in to their hand: because they had forsaken ye
LORD God of their fathers. They executed judgment also upon Ioas. And when
they departed from him, they left him in great sicknesses.

Nevertheless his servants conspyred against him (because of the blood of the
children of Ioiada the pressed) and slew him upon his bed, and he dyed, and they
buried him in the cite of David, but not among the sepulcres of the kings.
They that conspyred against him, were these: Sabad ye son of Simeath the
Ammonitisse, and Iosabad the son of Simrith the Moabitisse. As for his
sons, and the sum that was gathered under him, and the buyldinge of the
house of God behold, they are written in the storye in the book of the kings.
And Amasias his son was king in his stead.

The XXV. Chapter.
Five and twentye year old was Amasias LORD, but not with a whole her. Now
when his kingdom was in strength, he slew his servants which had slain the
king his father. But their children slew he not, for so is it written in the
book of the law of Moses, (...)
where the LORD commands, and says: The fathers shall not dye for the
children, nether shall the children dye for the fathers: but every one shall die
for his own sin.

And Amasias brought Judah together, and set them after the fathers houses,
after the rulers over thousands and over hundreds among all Judah and Ben
Iamin, and nombred them from twentye year old and above, and found of the^
three hundredth thousand chosen men, which were able to go forth to the war,
and carried spears and shyldes. And out of Israel appointed he an hundredth
thousand strong men of war for an hundredth talentes of silver.

But there came a man of God unto him, LORD is not with Israel, nether with
all the children of Ephraim. For if thou come to show ye boldness in the
battaill, God shall make the fall before thine enemies. For God has power to
help, and to cause for to fall. Amasias said unto the man of God: What shall
be done then with ye hundredth talentes yt I have given ye soudyers of Israel?
The man of God said: The LORD has yet more the^ this to give the. So Amasias
separated out the men of war which were come to him out of Ephraim, yt they
should departed unto their place. Then waxed their wrath very whote against
Judah, and they went again unto their place in wrothfull displeasure. And
Amasias stre^gthed himself, and carried out his people, and went forth in to
the Salt valley, and smote ten thousand of the children of Seir.

And the children of Judah took ten thousand of the^ alive, whom they brought
up to the top of a mountain, and cast the^ down headlinges from the top
of the mount, so that they all to barst in sunder. But ye children of the men
of war whom Amasias had sent away again (that they should not go to the
battayll with his people) fell in to the cities of Judah, from Samaria unto Beth
Horon, and smote three thousand of me^, and took much spoil.

LORD very wroth at Amasias, and sent unto him a prophet, which said unto
him: Why sekest thou the gods of the people, which could not deliver their
folk from ye hand? And when he talked with him, the king said unto him:
Have they made ye of the kings council? Cease, why will thou be smytten?
Then the prophet ceased, and said: I perceive, that the LORD is minded to
destroy ye, because thou have done this, and herkenest not unto my council.

(...). 14. b
And Amasias ye king of Judah took counsel, and sent unto Ioas the son of
Ioahas ye son of Iehu, king of Israel, saye^ge: Come, let us se one another.
But Ioas the king of Israel sent unto Amasias ye king of Judah, saying: The
hawthorne in Libanus sent unto ye Cedre tree in Libanus, saye^ge: Give thy
daughter unto my son to wife. But a wild be in Libanus ran over ye haw
thorn, and trod it down. Thou think: Behold, I have smytten the
Edomites, therefore is thine heart proud to boaste. Now bide at home: why
stryuest thou after mysfortune, that thou may fall and Judah with the?

Nevertheless Amasias consented not: for so was it brought to pass of God, yt
they might be given in to the hands of the enemies, because they sought the
gods of ye Edomites. Then went Ioas the king of Israel up, and they saw
one another, he and Amasias the king of Judah, at Beth Semes which lies in
Judah. But Judah was smytte^ before Israel, and they fled every one unto his tent.



What more there is to say of Amasias (both the first and last) behold, it is
written in ye book of the kings of Judah and Israel. And from the time forth
that Amasias departed from the LORD, they conspyred against him at Jerusalem.
But he fled unto Lachis. The^ sent they after him unto Lachis, and slew him
there. And they brought him upon horses and buried him beside his fathers in
the cite of Judah.

The XXVI. Chapter.
THen all the people of Judah took Osias, 4. Re. 15.
and made him king in stead of his father Amasias. He builded Eloth, and
brought it again unto Judah, after that the king was fallen on sleep with his
fathers. Sixtene year old was Osias when he was made king, and reigned two
and fifty year at Jerusalem. His mothers name was Iechalia of Jerusalem. And
he did right in the sight of the LORD, as his father Amasias had done, and
sought God as long as Zacharias lived, which taught in the visyons of God:
and as long as he sought the LORD, God made him to prospere.

For he went forth, and fought against the Philistynes, and brake down ye
walls of Gath, and the walls of Iabne, and the walls of Aszdod, and builded
cities about Aszdod, and among the Philistynes. For God helped him against
the Philistines, against the Arabians, against them of Gur Baal, and against
the Meunites. And ye Ammonites gave Osias presents, and his name came in to
Egipte: for he was exceadinge strong. And Osias builded towers at Jerusalem
upon the cornerporte, and on the valley gate, and on other corners, and made
them strong. He builded castles also in the wilderness, and dygged many
wells: for he had many catell, both in the medewes and in the playnes,
huszbandmen also and wynegardeners on the mountains and on Carmel: for he
delyted in huszbandaye.

And Osias had an host of men of war of the chief fathers among the strong
me^ of war, was two thousand and six hundredth. And under the hand of the
host three hundredth thousand, and seven thousand and five hundredth mete for
the battayll, in the strength of an army to help the king against the
enemies. And Osias prepared for all the host, shyldes, spears, helmettes,
brestplates, bows and slyngstones. And at Jerusalem he made ordinance
co^ningly, to be upon the towers and in the pynnacles, to shute arowes and
great stones. And the fame of him came far abroad, because he was specially
helped, till he became mighty.

LORD his God, and went in to the temple of the LORD, to burn incense upon
the altar of incense. But Asarias the pressed went after him, and four score
prestes with him, valeaunt men, and withstode king Osias, and said unto him:
(...). 18. a
It belongs not unto thy office (Osias) to burn incense unto the LORD, but
unto the prestes belongs it, even unto the children of Aaron, which are
hallowed to burn incense. Go forth out of the Sanctuary: for thou offendest,
and it shall be no worship unto the before God the LORD.

(...) 4^. b
And while he murmured with the prestes, the leprosy spronge out of his
foreheade in the presence of the prestes in the house of the LORD before the
altar of incense. And Asarias the chief pressed turned his head toward him,
and so did all the prestes, and behold, he was leper in his foreheade. And
they put him out from thence. Ye he made haist himself to go forth, for his
plage came of the LORD. Thus became Osias ye king a leper unto his death, and
dwelt full of leprosye in a fre house: for he was put out of the house of the
LORD. But Ioram his son had the oversight of the kings house, and judged
the people in the l^nde.

What more there is to say of Osias (both first and last) Esaias the son of
Amos has written it. And Osias fell on sleep with his fathers, and they buried
him with his fathers in the piece of ground beside ye kings sepulcres: for
they said: He is leporous. And Iotham his son was king in his stead.

The XXVII. Chapter.
^ Re. 15. f
and reigned sixtene year at Jerusalem. His mothers name was Ierusa the
daughter of Sadoc: and he did right in the sight of the LORD as did Osias
his father: saving yt he went not in to the temple of the LORD, and the
people yet marred them selves. He builded the hye port of the house of ye
LORD, and on the wall of Ophel builded he much, and builded the cities upon
the mountains of Judah, and in the woddes builded he castles and towers.

And he fought with the king of the children LORD his God.

What more there is to say of Iotham, and all his wars, vnd his ways,
behold, it is written in ye book of the kings of Israel and Judah. Five and
twentye year old was he when he was made king, and reigned sixtene year at
Jerusalem. And Iotha^ fell on sleep with his fathers, and they buried him in the
cite of David, and Achas his son was king in his stead.

The XXVIII. Chapter.
AChas was twentye year old when (...)
and reigned sixtene year at Jerusalem, and did not that which was right in
the sight of the LORD, as did David his father, but walked in the ways of
the kings of Israel, and made molten images unto Baalim, and brent incense in
the valley of the children of Hennon, and bre^t his own sons in ye fire,
(...)
after the abhominacions of the Heithen, who^ the LORD expelled before the
children of Israel. And he did sacrifice and brent incense upon the hye places
and upon the hills, and among all grene trees.

Therefore did the LORD his God deliver him in to the hand of the king of
Syria, so that they smote him, and carried away a great multitude of his men
presoners, and brought them to Damascon. He was given also under the hand of
the king of Israel, so yt he did a great slaughter upon him. For Pecah the
son of Romelia smote in Judah an hundredth and twentye thousand in one day
(which all were valeaunt men) eue^ because they had forsaken ye LORD God of
their fathers. And Sichri a mighty man of Ephraim slew Maeseia ye kings
son, and Asri^am the prince of the house, and El^ana the next unto the
king. And the children of Israel carried of their brethren presoners two
hundredth thousand, women, sons and daughters, and took a great spoil from
them, and brought the spoil unto Samaria.

LORD, whose name was Obed, which went out to mete ye host that came to
Samaria, and said unto them: Behold, because the LORD God of your fathers
is wroth at Judah, therefore has he given them over in to your hands: but ye
have slain them so abhominably, that it is come unto heaven. Now think ye to
subdue the children of Judah and Jerusalem, to be bondmen and bond maidens unto
you. Is not this a trespace then with you against the LORD yor God? Harken now
unto me, and send ye presoners hence again, whom ye have carried away from
your brethren: for the wrath of ye LORD is fearce over you.

Then gat up certain of the chief of the children of Ephraim, Asarias the
son of Iohanan, Barachias the son of Mesillemoth, Ezechias the son of
Sallum, and Amasa ye son of Hadlai, against them yt came from ye battayll,
and said unto them: Ye shall not bring the presoners in hither, for your
mind is but to make us trespace before the LORD, to make our sins and
offenses the greater: for the trespace is to much already, and the wrath is
fearce over Israel. So the host left the presoners and the spoil before ye
rulers and before the whole congregation.

(...)
At the same time sent king Achas unto the kings of Assure, yt they should
help him. And the Edomites came again, and smote Judah, and carried some away
captyue. The Philistynes also fell in to the cities in the plain, and toward
ye south part of Judah, and wanne Beth Semes, A^alon, Gederoth, and Socho with
the vyllages thereof, Timna with the vyllages thereof, and Gimso with the vyllages
thereof, and dwelt therein. For ye LORD subdued Judah for Achas sake ye king of
Judah, because he made Judah naked, and rebelled against the LORD. And
Teglatpilnesser the king of Assure came against him, and beseged him, and he
was not mighty enough for him.

For Achas spoiled the house of the LORD, LORD even in his trouble, and did
sacrifyce unto the gods of them of Damascon, which had smitten him, and
said: The gods of the kings of Syria help them, therefore will I offer unto
them, that they may help me also, where as the same yet were a fall unto him
and to all Israel.

And Achas gathered the vessels of ye house of God together, and brake the
vessels in ye house of God, and ^. Pa. ^^.
shut the doors of the house of ye LORD, and made him altares in all corners
at Jerusalem, and every where in the cities of Judah made he hye places to burn
incense unto other gods, and provoked ye LORD God of his fathers unto wrath.

What more there is to say of him and of all his ways (both first and last)
behold, it is written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel. And Achas
fell on sleep with his fathers, and they buried him in ye cite of Jerusalem:
for they brought him not among the sepulcres of the kings of Israel. And
Ezechias his son was king in his stead.

The XXIX. Chapter.
EZechias was five and twentye year old when he was made king, and reigned
4. Re. 1^. ^
His mothers name was Abia ye daughter of Zachary. And he did that which was
right in the sight of the LORD, as did his father David. 2^ Pa. ^^.
He opened the doors of ye house of the LORD in the first month of ye first
year of his reign, and made them strong, and brought in the prestes and
Levites, and gathered them together unto the East streate and said unto them:
Harken unto me ye Levites, sanctifye your selves now, yt ye may halowe the
house of the LORD God of yor fathers, and put fylthines out of the Sanctuary:
for our fathers have trespaced, and done yt which was evil in the sight of
the LORD our God, and have forsaken him. For they turned their faces from the
habitacio^ of ye LORD our God, and turned their backs on it, and shut the
doors of the Porche, and put out the lamps, and brent no incense, and offered
no burntsacrifyces in the Sanctuary unto the God of Israel.

Therefore is the wrath of the LORD has given them over to be scatred abroad,
desolate and to be hyssed at, as ye se with yor eies^ For behold, even for the
same cause fell our fathers through the sword, our sons daughters and wives
were carried away captyue. Now am I minded to make a covenant with the LORD
God of Israel, yt he may turn away from us his wrath and indignacion. Now my
sons, be not ye negligent: ^um. 18. a
for the LORD has chosen you to sto^de before him, and to be his mynisters
and to burn incense unto him.

Then rose the Levites: Mahath the son of Amasai, and Joel the son of
Asaria of the children of the Rahathites. Of the children of Merari: Cis the
son of Abdi, and Asaria the son of Iehaleleel. Of the children of the
Gersonites: Ioah the son of Simma, and Eden the son of Ioah. And of the
children of Elizaphan: Simri and Ieiel. And of the children of Assaph: Sachary
and Mathania. And of the chidren of Heman: Iehiel and Simei. And of the
children of Iedithun: Semaia and Vsiel.

LORD, to cleanse the house of ye LORD. And the prestes entered within in the
house of the LORD to purifye, and put out all the uncleanness that was found in
the temple of the LORD, in the court of the LORDS house: and the prestes
took it up, and carried it out in to the broke Cedron. The first day of the
first month began they to sanctifye them selves, and on the eight day of
the month went they in to the porche of the LORD, and hallowed the house of
ye LORD eight days, and fynished it on the sixtenth day of the first month.

And they went in to the king Ezechias, and said: We have cleansed all the
house of the LORD, the altar of burnt offerynges, and all his vessels, the
table of the shewbred and all the apparel thereof: and all the ornaments that
king Achas cast away wha^ he was king, what time as he transgressed, those
have we prepared and hallowed. Behold, they are before the altar of the LORD.

LORD, and they brought seven bullockes, seven rams, seven lambs, and
seven he goats to be the syn offering, for the Sanctuary, and for Judah. And
he spoke unto the prestes the children of Aaron, that they should offer upon
the altar of the LORD.

So they slew the bullockes, and the prestes took the blood, and sprenkled it
upon ye altar: and slew the rams, and sprenkled the blood upon the altar:
and slew the la^bes, and sprenkled the blood upon the altar. And ye goats
to ye syn offering brought they before the king and the congregation, and
laid their hands upon them: and the prestes slew them, and sprenkled their
blood upon the altar to make attoneme^t for all Israel: for the king
commanded to offer burntsacrifyces and sin offeringes for all Israel.

And he set the Levites in the house of the LORD with Cymbales, Psalteries and
harpes, (...)
as David had commanded, and Gad the kings Seer, and the prophet Nathan for
it was the commandment of the LORD by his prophets. And the Levites stood
with the musical instruments of David, and the prestes with the trompettes.
And Ezechias commanded them to offer burntsacrifyces upon the altar. And
about the time that the burntsacrifyce began to be offered the song of the
LORD began also, and ye trompettes, and diverse instruments of David the
king of Israel and all the congregation gave praise and thanks: and the song
of the Musicians, and ye blowynge of the trompetters, endured all till the
burnt offering was fynished.

Now when the burnt offering was performed, the king and all they that were
with him, bowed them selves, and gave praise and thanks. And Ezechias the
king with the rulers commanded the Levites to praise the LORD with the songs
of David and Assaph the Seer. And they gave praise till they were joyful, and
they bowed them selves, and worshipped.

And Ezechias answered and said: Now LORD step forth, and bring hither ye
sacrifyces and thank offerynges unto the house of the LORD. And the
congregation brought sacrifyces and thank offerynges, and every man of a fre
wyllinge heart brought burnt offerynges. And the nombre of the burnt offerynges
that the congregation brought, was three score bullockes and ten, an hundredth
ra^mes, and two hundredth lambs, and all these for the burnt offering unto the
LORD, and they sanctified six hundredth bullockes, and three thousand sheep.

But the prestes were to few, and could not pluck of the skynnes of all the
burnt offerynges, therefore took they their brethren the Levites, till the work
was fyniszhed, and till the prestes were hallowed (for the Levites are easier to
be hallowed then the prestes) and many of the burnt offerynges were with the fat
of the thank offerynges and drynk offerynges to the burntsacrifices. Thus was
the ministracion of the house of the LORD prepared. And Ezechias reioysed with
all the people, that they were prepared with God: for it was done right
haistely.

The XXX. Chapter.
LORD at Jerusalem, to keep easter unto the LORD God of Israel. And the king
held a council with his rulers, and all the congregation at Jerusalem, (...).
9. b
to keep Passover in the second month: for at that time they could not keep
it, because the prestes were not sanctified enough, and the people were not yet
come together unto Jerusalem. And it pleased the king well and all the
congregation. And they appointed it to be proclaimed through out all Israel from
Berseba unto Dan, that they should come to keep Passover unto the LORD God of
Israel: for they were not many to keep it as it is written.

And the posts went with the letters from the hand of the king and of his
rulers through out all Israel and Judah, at ye kings commandment, and said:
Ye children of Israel, turn you unto the LORD LORD God of their fathers, and
he gave the^ over in to desolacion as ye se your selves. Be not ye hardnecked
now as were your fathers, but offer your hand unto the LORD, and come to
his sanctuary, which he has sanctified for ever, and serve the LORD your
God, and so shall the indignacion of his wrath turn away from you. For if ye
turn unto the LORD, then shall your brethren and children have mercy in the
sight of them which hold them in captiuyte, that they may come again in to
this land: (...). 34. c
for the LORD your God is gracious and merciful, and shall not turn away
his face from you, if ye convert unto him.

And the posts went from one cite to LORD. And there came together unto
Jerusalem a great people, to keep the feast of vnleuended bred in the second
month, a very great congregation.

And they gat them up, and put down ye 2. Pa. 27. d
altares that were at Jerusalem, and all the incense put they away, and cast
it in to the broke Cedron, and slew the Passover on the fourtenth day of the
second month. And ye prestes and Levites were ashamed, and hallowed them
selves, and brought the burnt offerynges to the house of the LORD, and stood
in their ordinance, as it was acordinge, after the law off Moses the man of
God. And the prestes sprenkled the blood from the hand of the Levites: for
there were many in the congregation which were not sanctified, therefore did the
Levites kill Passover for them which were not cleansed, that they might be
sanctified unto the LORD.

There were many people also of Ephraim, LORD, which is gracious, shall be
merciful unto all them that prepare their hertes unto God, to seek the LORD
God of their fathers, though they be not cleansed after the holy purificacion.
And the LORD herd Ezechias, and healed the people. Thus the children of
Israel that were found at Jerusalem, held ye feast of vnleuended bred seven
days with great joy. And the Levites and prestes praised the LORD every
day with the loud instruments of the LORD. And Ezechias spoke hertely unto
all ye Levites, which had good understanding in the LORD, and they ate the
feast seven days, and offered tha^k offerynges, and gave thanks unto ye LORD
God of their fathers.

And all the congregation devised to keep bullockes, and seven thousand sheep.
But the rulers gave an Heue offeringe for ye congregation, even a thousand
bullockes, and ten thousand sheep. And many of the prestes sanctified them
selves.

And the whole congregation of Judah reioysed, the prestes and Levites, and all
the congregation that came out of Israel, and the strangers that were come out
of the land of Israel, and they that dwelt in Judah, and great joy was there
at Jerusalem: for sense the time of Solomon the son of David the king of
Israel, was there no soch (joy) at Jerusalem. And the prestes and Levites
stood up and blessed the people, and their voice was herd, and their prayer
came in to his holy habitacion in heaven.

The XXXI. Chapter.


But Ezechias set the prestes and Levites in their ordinances, every one after
his office, both the prestes and Levites, for the burntsacrifices and thank
offerynges, to mynister, to give thanks and praise in the gates of the host
of the LORD. And the king gave his portion of his substance for the burnt
offerynges in the morning and evening, and for the burnt offerynges of the
Sabbath, and of the newmone and of the feasts, as it is written in the law of
the LORD.

LORD. And wha^ ye word came forth, the children of Israel gave many first
fruits of corn, wine, oil, honey, and allmaner increace of the field, and
brought in much of all manner tithes. And the children of Israel and Judah which
dwelt in the cities of Judah, brought the tithes also of oxen and sheep, and
the tithes of soch things as were sanctified, which they had hallowed unto the
LORD their God, and made here an heap, and there an heap. In the third
month began they to lay upon heaps, and in the seventh month did they
fynishe it.

And wha^ Ezechias with the rulers went LORD, and his people of Israel. And
Ezechi^s axed the prestes and Levites concerning the heaps. And Asaria the
pressed the chief in the house of Sadoc, said unto him: Sense the time that they
began to bring the Heue offerynges in to ye house of the LORD, we have
eaten, and are satisfied, and yet is there left over: for the LORD has
blessed his people, therefore is this heap left over. Then commanded the
king, that they should prepare chestes in the house of the LORD. And they
prepared them* and put in the Heue offerynges, and tithes and that which was
hallowed, faithfully.

And the ouersighte of the same had Chanania the Leuite, and Simei his brother
the second, and Iehiel, Asasia, Naglath, Asahel, Ierimoth, Iosabad, Eliel,
Iesmachia, Mahath and Benaia, ordained of the hand off Chanania and Simei his
brother, acordinge to the commandment of king Ezechias. But Asaria was
prince in the house of God. And Core ye son of Iemna the Leuite the power of
the Eastgate was over the frewyllinge gifts of God (which were given for Heue
offerynges unto the LORD) and over the Most holy. And under his hand were,
Eden, Miniamin, Iesua, Semaia, Amaria, and Sachania in the cities of the
prestes upon credence, that they should give unto their brethren acordinge to
their courses, to the leest as to the greatest.

And unto them that were counted for LORD, every one upon his day to their
office in their attendaunces after their courses. And they that were rekened
for prestes in the house of their fathers, and the Levites from twentye year
and above, in their attendaunces after their courses. And they that were
rekened among their children, wives, sons and daughters among the whole
congregation: for that which was hallowed, sanctified they upon credence. There
were men also named by name among Aarons children the prestes upon the feldes
of the suburbs in all ye cities, that they should give porcions unto all the
men children among the prestes, and to all them that were nombred among the
Levites.

Thus did Ezechias in all Judah, and did that which was good, right and true in
the sight of the LORD his God. And in all the busynes that he took in hand
concerning the service of the house of God, acordinge to the law and
commandment, to seek his God, that did he with all his heart, and therefore
prospered he well.

The XXXII. Chapter.
(...). 18. c
and went in to Judah, and pitched before the strong cities, and thought to
pluck them unto him. And when Ezechias saw that Sennacherib came, and that
his face stood to fight against Jerusalem, he devised with his rulers and
mighty men, to cover the waters of the wells that were without the cite, and
they helped him: and there gathered together a great people, and covered all
ye wells and water brokes in the mids of the land, and said: Lest the
kings of Assure find much water wha^ they come. And he took a courage unto him,
and builded all the walls where they were in decay, and made towers thereon,
and builded yet another wall without, and strengthed Millo in the cite of
David. And made much ordinance and shyldes, and set captains of war over
the people.

(...)
fleshly arm, but with us is the LORD our God, to help us and to fight for
us. And ye people trusted unto the words of Ezechias king of Judah.

(...)
Afterward sent Sennacherib the king of Assure his servants unto Jerusalem
(for he lay before Lachis, and all his host with him) to Ezechias ye king of
Judah, and to all Judah that was at Jerusalem, saying: Thus says Sennacherib
ye king of Assure: Wherein put ye your trust ye that dwell in the beseged
Jerusalem? Ezechias disceaueth you, that he may deliver you unto death, ho^ger
and thyrst, and says: The LORD our God shall deliver us from the hand of
the king of Assure. Is it not Ezechias, that has put away his hye places and
altares, and said unto Judah and Jerusalem: Before one altar shall ye
worship, and burn incense thereon?



His servants also spoke yet more against the LORD God, and against his
servant Ezechias. And he wrote a letter to blaspheme the LORD God of Israel,
and spoke of him, and said: Like as the gods of the Heythen in their lands
have not been able to deliver their people from my hand, even so shall not the
God of Ezechias deliver his people fro my hand.

And the cried with loud voice in the

But contrary wise the king Ezechias and the prophet Esaias the son of Amos
prayed, and cried unto heaven. And the LORD sent an angel, which destroyed
all the mighty men of the host, and the princes and rulers in ye tents of
the king of Assure, so that he departed again with shame in to his own land.
4. Re. 19. b
And when he went in to his gods house, they yt came of his own body, slew
him there with the sword. Thus the LORD, helped Ezechias and them at
Jerusalem, out of the hand of Sennacherib ye king of Assure, and of all other,
and mayntayned the^ from all on every side, so yt many brought presents unto
the LORD to Jerusalem, and Jewels unto Ezechias the king of Judah. And
afterward was he exalted in the sight of all Heythen.

At ye same time was Ezechias deedsicke, LORD, which made him promise, 4. Re.
20. a Esa. 28. a
and gave him a wondertoken. But Ezechias reco^pensed not acordinde as was
given unto him, for his heart was lifted up: therefore came the wrath upon him,
and upon Judah and Jerusalem. Nevertheless Ezechias humbled him self because his
heart had been exalted, with them at Jerusalem: therefore came not the wrath of
the LORD upon them, while Ezechias lived.

And Ezechias had very great riches and worship, and made him treasures of
silver, gold, precious stones, spyces, shyldes, and all manner costly vessel,
and corn houses for the increace of corn, wine and oil, and stalles for all
manner catell, and foldes for the sheep, and builded him cities, and had many
catell of sheep and oxen: for God gave him very much good.

Deuteronomy. ^. a
to be tempted, that it might be known what soever was in his heart.

What more there is to say of Ezechias, and of his mercifulnes, behold, it is
written in the vision of the prophet Esaias the son of Amos, and in the book of
the kings of Judah and Israel. And Ezechias fell on sleep with his fathers, and
they buried him over the sepulcres of the children of David, and all Judah and
they of Jerusalem did him worship in his death: and Manasses his son was
king in his stead.

The XXXIII. Chapter.
4. Re. 21. a
and reigned five and fiftye year at Jerusalem, and did that which was evil
in the sight of the LORD (even after the abominacions of the Heythen, whom
the LORD expelled before the children of Israel) and turned back, and builded
the hye places, ( 4. Re. 18. a
which his father Ezechies had broken down) and set up altares unto Baalim,
and made groves, and worshipped all the host of heaven, and served them. He
builded altares also in ye LORDS house, whereof the LORD had said: 2. Par. 7.
c
At Jerusalem shall my name be for ever. And unto all the host of heaven builded
he altares in both the courts of ye house of the LORD. And in the valley of
the son of Hennon caused he his own sons to go through the fire, and chosed
days, and regarded byrdescryenge, and witches, and founded soythsayers and
expounders of tokens, and did much that was evil in the sight of the LORD to
provoke him unto wrath.

Carved images also and Idols (which LORD said unto David and to Solomon his
son: In this house at Jerusalem which I have chosen out of all the trybes of
Israel, will I set my name for ever and will no more let the foot of Israel remove
from the land that I appointed for their fathers, so far as they observe to
do all yt I have commanded them, in all the law, statutes and ordinances by
Moses. But Manasses disceaued Judah and them of Jerusalem, so that they did
worse then the Heythen, whom the LORD destroyed before the children of Israel.
And the LORD spoke unto Manasses and his people, and they regarded it not.

Therefore did the LORD cause the rulers (...)
And when he was in trouble, he made intercession before the LORD his God, and
humbled him self greatly before the God of his fathers, and prayed and
besoughte him. Then herd he his prayer, and brought him again to Jerusalem
to his kingdom. And Manasses knew that the LORD is God.

Afterward builded he ye vttemost wall of the cite of David, on the west side
of Gihon by the broke, and at the intraunce of the Fyshgate, and round about
(...)
Ophel, and made it very hye. And laid captains in ye strong cities of Judah,
and put away ye strange gods and Idols out of ye house of ye LORD, and all
the altares which he had builded upon the mount of the house of the LORD, and
in Jerusalem, and cast them out of the cite, and builded the altar of the
LORD, and offered slain offerynges and thank-offerynges thereon, and commanded
Judah, that they should serve the LORD God of Israel. Nevertheless though the
people offered unto the LORD their God, yet offered they upon the hye places.

What more there is to say of Manasses LORD God of Israel, behold, they are
among the acts of the kings of Israel. And his prayer and intercession, and
all his sin and offense, and the rowmes wherein he builded the hye places and
groves and founded ydols, before he humbled himself, behold, they are written
among the acts of the Seers. And Manasses fell on sleep with his fathers, and
they buried him in his house, and Amon his son was king in his stead.

Two and twe^tye year old was Amon wha^ he was made king, and reigned two
year at Jerusalem, and did evil in the sight of the LORD, as Manasses his
father had done. And Amon offered unto all the Idols that his father Manasses
had made and served the^. Yet did not he humble himself before the LORD, as
Manasse his father had submitted himself: but Amon trespaced ever more and
more. And his servants co^spyred against him, and slew him in his house.
Then smote the people in the land all them that had conspyred against king
Amon. And the people in the land made Josias his son king in his stead.

The XXXIIII. Chapter.
(...). 22. a
and reigned one and thirtye year at Jerusalem, and did that which was right
in the sight of the LORD, and walked in the ways of David his father, and
turned not aside, nether to the right hand ner to the left. For in the eight
year of his reign wha^ he was yet but a child, he began to seek the God of
his father David: and in the twolueth year began he to cleanse Judah and
Jerusalem from the hye places and groves, and carved Idols, and molten images:
and caused the altares of Baalim to be broken down before him, and the images
that were thereon, hewed he down. And ye groves and carved Idols and molte^
images brake he in pieces, and made them to dust, and scatred it upon the graves
of them that had offered unto them. And the bones of the prestes brent he upon
the altares, and so cle^sed he Judah and Jerusalem, and in ye cities of
Manasses, Ephraim, Simeon, and unto Nephtali in their wyldernesses on
euerysyde. And wha^ he had broken down the altares and groves, and smytten the
Idols in pieces, and hewed down all the images in all the land of Israel, he
came again to Jerusalem.

(...). ^2. a
he sent Saphan the son of Asalia and Maeseia the Shreue of the cite, and
Ioath the son of Ioahas the Chaunceler, to repair the house of the LORD his
God. And they came to Hechias ye hye pressed, and there was delivered unto them
the money that was brought unto the house of God, which the Levites (that
kept the threshouldes) had gathered, of Manasses, Epraim, and of all the
residue in Israel, and of all Judah and Ben Iamin, and of them that dwelt at
Jerusalem, and they delivered it unto the hands of the work men in the house
of the LORD, and gave it unto those that wrought in the house of the LORD,
where it was in decay, yt they should repair it. And the same gave it forth
unto the carpenters and buylders, to bye fre stone and hewn timber for the
balkes in the houses, which the kings had destroyed. And the men labored
faithfully in the work.

And over them were ordained, Iahath LORD, Helchias the pressed found the book
of the law of the LORD given by Moses. And Helchias answered, and said unto
Saphan the Scrybe: 4. Re. 22. b
I have found the book of the law in ye house of ye LORD. And Helchias
delivered the book unto Saphan. And Saphan bare it unto the king, and brought
ye king word again, and said: All that was given under the hands of thy
servants, that make they: and ye money that was found in ye house of the
LORD, have they gathered together, and delivered it unto ye officers, and to
the workmen. And Saphan the Scrybe told the king, and said: Helchias the
pressed has delivered me a book.

And Saphan red therein before the king. LORD for me and for the remnaunt in
Israel, and for Judah, concerning these words of the book that is found. For
great is the indignacion of the LORD that is gone forth over us, because our
fathers have no^ kept the word of the LORD, to do acordinge as it is written
in this book. Then went Helchias (with the other that were sent from the
king) unto the prophetisse Hulda the wife of Sallum the Son of Thecoath the
son of Hafra the keeper of the clothes, which dwelt at Jerusalem in the
second part, and they spoke this unto her.

LORD God of Israel: Tell the man yt sent you unto me: Thus says ye LORD:
Behold, I will bring plages upon this place and the inhabiters thereof, eue^
all the curses which are written in the book, that was red before the king of
Judah: because they have forsaken me, and bre^t ince^se unto other gods, to
provoke me with all the works of their hands. And my indignacion shall go
forth upon this cite, and shall not be quenched.

And after this manner shall ye say unto the king of Judah, that sent you to axe
council at the LORD: Thus says ye LORD God of Israel concerning the
words that thou have herd: Because thine heart is moved, and because thou have
humbled thy self in the sight of God, when thou herdest his words against
this place and the inhabiters thereof, and have submytted thy self before me,
and rent thy clothes, and wept before me, therefore have I herd the, says ye
LORD. Behold, I will gather the unto thy fathers, and thou shall be laid in
thy grave with peace, so yt thine eyes shall not se all the evil that I will
bring over this place, and the indwellers thereof. And they brought the king
word again.

4. Re. 23. a
And the king went up in to the house of the LORD, and all the men of Judah
and inhabiters of Jerusalem, the prestes, the Levites, and all the people both
small and great: and all the words in the book of the covenant that was
found in the house of the LORD, were red in their ears. And ye king stood
in his place, and made a covenant before the LORD, that they should walk
after the LORD, to keep his commandments, his testimonies, and his statutes
with all their heart and with all their soul, to do acordinge unto all the
words of the covenant that are written in this book.

And there stood all they that were found at Jerusalem and in Ben Iamin. And
ye inhabiters of Jerusalem did acordinge to the covenant of God the God of
their fathers. And Josias put away all abhominacions out of all the lands
that were the children of Isreal's, and caused all them that were found in
Israel, to serve the LORD their God. (...)
As long as Josias lived, departed they not from the LORD the God of their
fathers.

The XXXV. Chapter.
ANd Josias kept Passover unto the LORD at Jerusalem, and slew the (...)
and set the prestes in their offices, and strengthed them to their
mynistracion in the house of the LORD, and said unto the Levites that taught
in all Israel, and were sanctified unto ye LORD: Put the holy Arc in the
house that Solomon ye son of David king of Israel did build. (...)
Ye shall bear it no more upon your shulders. Se that ye serve now the LORD
your God, and his people of Israel, and prepare the house of your fathers in
your courses, as it was appointed by David the king of Israel, and by Salomo^
his son: and stand in the Sanctuary after ye course of the fathers houses
among your brethren the children of the people, And after the course of the
fathers houses among the Levites, and kill Passover, sanctifye and prepare
your brethren, that they may do acordinge to the word of the LORD by Moses.

And Josias gave lambs and young kyddes which were males, to the Heue
offering

Thus was the Gods service prepared, and the prestes stood in their place, and
the Levites in their courses acordinge to the kings commandment. And they
killed the Passover, and the prestes took it off their hands, and sprenkled
it: and the Levites took the skynnes off them, and removed the burnt offering
there from, to give it among the porcions of the fathers houses in the
multitudes of their congregation to offer unto the LORD, (...). 1. a
as it is written in ye book of Moses, Even so did they with the oxen also. And
they dighte the Passover at the fire (...). 1^. b
acordinge to the law. And that which was hallowed, dighte they in pottes,
kettels, and pannes, and made haist for the common people. Afterward prepared
they for them selves also and for ye prestes: for the prestes the children of
Aaron were occupied in the burnt offerynges and fat until the night. Therefore
must the Levites prepare for them selves and for the prestes the children of
Aaron.

And the syngers the children of Asaph (...)* ^6.^7
David's commandment) and Asaph and Heman, and Iedithim the kings Seer, and
the porters at all the gates. And they departed not from their office. For the
Levites their brethren prepared for them. Thus was all the Gods service
prepared the same day, that the Passover might be kept, and the
burntsacrifices offered upon the altar off the LORD acordinge to the
commandment of king Josias.

So the children of Israel that were at hand, held Passover at that time,
and the feast of vnleuended bred, seven days. Senc^ ye time of Samuel the
prophet, was no Passover kept in Israel like this: and no king of Israel had
holde^ soch a Passover as Josias did, and the prestes, Levites, all Judah, and
soch as were found of Israel, and the inhabiters of Jerusalem. In the
eighte^th year of the reign of Josias was this Passover kept.

After this, when Josias had prepared

And All Judah* and Jerusalem mourned for Josias, and Jeremy bewailed Josias,
and all the synginge men and women, spoke their lame^tacions over Josias unto
this day, and made a custom thereof unto this day. Behold, it is written
also among the Lamentacions. What more there is to say of Josias, and his
mercy acordinge to the scripture in the law of the LORD, and of his acts
(both first and last) behold, it is written in the book of the kings of
Israel and Judah.

The XXXVI. Chapter.
ANd the people of the land took Ioahas 4. Re. 23. ^ ^. Esd. 1. d
and made him king in his fathers stead at Jerusalem. Three and twentye year
old was Ioahas when he was made king, and reigned three months at Jerusalem.
For the king of Egipte deposed him at Jerusalem, and condemned the land in an
hundredth talentes of silver, and one talent off gold. And the king of Egipte
made Eliachim his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem, and turned his name
Ioachim. But Necho took his brother Ioahas, and carried him in to Egipte.

Five and twentye year old was Ioachim wha^ he was made king, and reigned
eleue^ year at Jerusalem, and did that which was evil in the siighte of the
LORD his God. 4. Re. ^4 ^
And Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon went up against him, and bound him
with cheynes, to carry him unto Babylon. And Nabuchodonosor brought certain
vessels of ye house of the LORD unto Babylon, and put them in his temple at
Babylon. What more there is to say of Ioachim, and off his abhominacions which
he did, and that were found in him, behold, they are written in the book of
the kings of Israel and Judah. And Ioachim his son was king in his stead.

Eight year old was Ioachim when he LORD. But wha^ the year came about,
Nabuchodonosor sent thither, and caused him be fetched unto Babylon with the
costly vessels and Jewels of the house of the LORD, and made Sedechias his
brother king over Judah and Jerusalem.

Iere. 52. a 4. Re. 24 d
One and twentye year old was Sedechias when he was made king, and reigned
eleven year at Jerusalem, and did that which was evil in the sight of the
LORD his God, and submytted not himself before the face of the prophet
Jeremy, which spoke out of the mouth of the LORD. He fell away also from
Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon (which had taken an ooth of him by God) and
was styfnecked, and hardened his heart, that he should not convert unto the
LORD God of Israel. And all ye chief among the prestes, and the people,
multiplied their sins, acordinge to all the abhominacions of the Heythen, and
dyfyled the house of the LORD, which he had sanctified at Jerusalem.

^ere. 25. a
And the LORD God of their fathers sent unto them early by his messaungers (for
he spared his people and his habitacion) but they laughed the messaungers of
God to scorn, and despised his words, and had his prophets in derision, so
long till the indignacion of the LORD increased over his people, and there
was no remedy of healinge. 4. Re. ^5. a
For he brought the king of the Caldees upon them, and caused for to slaye
all their young men with the sword in the house of their Sanctuary, and spared
nether young manner virgin, nether aged ner grau^d father, but gave them all in
to his hand. And all the vessels in the house of God, great and small, the
treasures in the house of ye LORD, and the treasures of the king and of his
princes, all this caused he to be carried unto Babylon. And they brent the house
of God, and brake down the wall of Jerusalem, and all the palaces thereof brent
they with fire, so that all the costly ornaments of it were destroyed.

^ere. 25. b
that ye word of the LORD by the mouth of Jeremy might be performed, even
until the land had enough of her Sabbathes: for all the time of the
desolacion was it Sabbath, until the seuentye years were fulfilled.

1. Esd. 1. a 3. Esd. 2. a
But in the first year of Cyrus the king of Persia (that the word of the
LORD spoken by the mouth of Jeremy might be fulfilled) the LODDE raised up
the sprete of Cyrus the king of Persia, that he caused it be proclaimed through
out all his empire, ye and by wrytinge also, saying: Thus says Cyrus the
king of Persia: The LORD God of heaven has given me all the kingdoms in the
land, and has commanded me to build him an house at Jerusalem in Judah. Who
soever now among you is of his people, the LORD his God be with him, and let
him go up.

The end of the second book of the Cronicles.
The first book of Esdras.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I. Cyrus (otherwise called Cores) the king of Persia, gives the Jews
lyco^ce to go again to Jerusalem, and to build it. Chap. II. The nombre of
them that went up from Babylon unto Jerusalem. Chap. III. The people resort
to Jerusalem, the prestes build the altar, keep the feasts and sacrifices,
and prepare to build the temple. Chap. IIII. The Heythen would build with
them: and because they are not suffered, therefore labor they (with their
council and letters) to hinder the buyldinge of the temple. Chap. V. In this
time prophesied Aggeus and Zachary. The officers of the Heythen forbid the
buyldinge, and hinder it. Chap. VI. Darius renueth the commandment of Cyrus,
and gives the Jews lyce^ce to build the temple. Chap. VII. Artaxerses
sends Eszdras unto Jerusalem with a charge unto the officers beyond the
water. Chap. VIII. The nombre of them that went up with Eszdras unto
Jerusalem. Chap IX. Eszdras is sorry that the people have myxte them selves with
the Heythenish women. Chap. X. They make a covenant to put away their
Heythenish wives.


The first Chapter.
LORD spoken (...)
by the mouth of Jeremy might be fulfilled) the LORD stered up the sprete of
Cyrus king of Persia, yt he caused it be proclaimed through out all his empire,
ye and by wrytinge also, saying: Thus says Cyrus the king of Persia: The
LORD God of heaven has given me all the kingdoms in the land (...). 4^. a
and has commanded me to build him an house at Jerusalem in Judah. Who soever
now among you is of his people, the LORD his God be with him, and let him go
up to Jerusalem in Judah, and build the house of the LORD God of Israel. He is
ye God that is at Jerusalem. And who so ever remains yet in any manner of
place (where he is a stranger) let the me^ of his place help him with silver
and gold, with good and catell of a good frewill, for the house of God at
Jerusalem.

LORD at Jerusalem. And all they that were about them, strengthed their hand
with vessels of silver and gold, with good and catell, and Jewels, besides
that which they gave of their own frewill. And king Cyrus brought forth the
vessels of the LORDS house, ^* Pa. ^6. c (...). 1. a
which Nabuchodonosor had taken out of Jerusalem, and put in his gods house.
But Cyrus ye king of Persia brought the^ forth by Mithredath the treasurer,
and nombred the^ unto Seszbazar the prince of Judah. And this is the nombre of
them: thirtye basens of gold, and a thousand basens of silver, and nine and
twentye knyues, thirtye cups of gold, and of other silver cups four
hundredth and ten, and of other vessels a thousand. So that all the vessels
both of gold and silver, were five thousand and four hundredth. Seszbazar
brought them all up, with them that came up out of the captiuyte off Babylon
unto Jerusalem.

The II. Chapter.
THese are the children of the land that twentye: the men of Bethel and Ai,
two hundredth and three and twentye: the children

The prestes. The children of Iedaia of the house of Iesua, nine hundredth and
three and seuentye: the children of Iemmer, a thousand and two and fiftye: the
children of Pashur, a thousand and two hundredth, and seven and fortye: the
children of Harim, a thousand and seuentene.

The Levites. The children of Iesua and Cadmiel of the children of Hodauia,
four and seuentye. The syngers, the children of Asaph, an hundredth and eight
and twentye. The children of the dorekepers. The children of Sallum, the
children of Ater, the children off Talmon, the children off Acub, the children
off Hatita, and the children off Sobai: altogether an hundredth and nine and
thirtye.



The children of Salomons servants. The children of Sotai, the children of
Sophereth, the children of Pruda, the children of Iaela, the children of
Darcon, the children of Giddell, the children of Sephatia, the children of
Hattil, the children of Pochereth of Zebaim, the children of Ami. All the
Nethinims and the children off Salomons servants were altogether, three
hundredth and two and nyentye.

And these went up also, Mithel, Melath, Thel, Harso, Cherub, Addon and Immer.
But they could not show their fathers house ner their sede, whether they were
of Israel. The children of Delaia, the children of Tobias, the children of
Necoda, six hundredth and two and fiftye.

And of the children of the prestes. The children of Habaia, the children of
Hacom, the children of Barsillai, which took one of the daughters of Barsillai
the Gileadite to wife, and was counted among the same names: these sought the
register of their birth, and found none, therefore were they put from the
presthode. And Hathirsatha said unto them, that they should not eat of the
most holy, till there rose up a pressed with the (...)
light and perfectness.

The whole congregation as one man,

And certain of the chief fathers, when they came to the house of the LORD at
Jerusalem, they were well minded unto the house of God, that it should be set
in his place, and gave after their abilyte unto the treasure of the work, one
and three score thousand guldens, and five thousand pound of silver, and an
hundredth prestes garments. So the prestes and the Levites, and certain of ye
people, and the syngers, and the po^ters, and ye Nethinims dwelt in their
cities, and all Israel in their cities.

The III. Chapter.
ANd when the seventh month came, (...)
the people came together even as one man, unto Jerusalem. And there stood up
Iesua the son of Iosedec and his brethren the prestes, and Zorobabel the
son of Saalthiel and his brethren, and builded the altar of the God of
Israel, to offer burnt offerynges thereon, as it is written in the law of Moses
the man of God, and the altar set they upon his sokettes (for there was a
fearfulnes among them because of the nations and lo^des) and offered burnt
offeringes thereon unto ye LORD (...)
in the morning and at even. And held the feast of Tabernacles (...)
as it is written, and offered burntsacrifices daily after the nombre as
acordinge was, every day his sacrifice. Afterward the daily burntofferynges
also, and of the new Mones and of all the feast days of the LORD that were
hallowed, and allmaner of fre wyllinge offeringes, which they did of their own
fre will unto the LORD.

(...)* 5.^
Upon the first day of the seventh month began they to offer burnt
sacrifices unto the LORD. But the foundation of the temple of the LORD was
not yet laid. Nevertheless they gave money unto ye masons and carpenters, and
meat and drink and oil unto them of Zidon and of Tire, to bring the^ Cedre
tymbre from Libanus by See unto (...)
Ioppa, acordinge to the commandment of Cyrus the king of Persia.

In the second year of their coming unto the house of God at Jerusalem in
the second month, began Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, and Iesua the
son of Iosedec, and the remnaunt of their brethren the prestes and Levites,
and all they that were come out of the captiuyte unto Jerusalem, and appointed
the Levites from twentye year old and above, to se that the work of the
house of the LORD went forward. And Iesua stood with his sons and
brethren, and Cadmiel with his sons, and the children of Judah, to furthur the
workmen of the house of God, namely the children of Henadad with their children
and their brethren the Levites.

LORD, the prestes stood in their array, with trompettes. And the Levites the
children of Asaph with Cimbales, to praise ye LORD (...) 17* b
with the Dytie of David king of Israel. And they sunge together, geuynge
praise and thanks unto ye LORD, because he is gracious, and because his mercy
endures for ever upon Israel. And all the people shouted land in praysinge
the LORD, because the foundation of ye house of the LORD was laid.
Nevertheless many of the old prestes and Levites and awncient fathers, which
had seen the house before in his foundation, and this was now before their eyes,
wept loud. But many shouted with joy, so that the noise gave a great
sound, in so much that the people could not know ye joyful sound for the
noise of the wepinge in the people: for the people shouted loud, so that the
noise was herd far of.

The IIII. Chapter.
But when the adversaries of Judah LORD God of Israel, they came to Zorobabel
and to the pryncipall fathers, and said unto them: We will build with you: for
we seek the LORD your God like as ye do. And we have done sacrifice unto him,
4. Re. 17. c
sense the time that Assar Hadon the king of Assure brought us up hither. But
Zorobabel and Iesua and the other awncie^t fathers of Israel, answered them: It
is not mete for us and you to build the house of our God, but we will build
alone unto the LORD God of Israel, 1. Esd. 1. a
as Cyrus the king of Persia has commanded us.

Then the folk of the land hyndered the people of Judah, and made them afraid
to build, and hired councelers aganst them and hyndered their deuyce, as long
as Cyrus the king of Persia lived, until the reign off Darius king off
Persia. But when Ahasuerus was king, in the beginning off his reign wrote
they unto him a complaynte against them of Judah and Jerusalem.

And in the time of Artaxerses, wrote Bisellam,

We Rehum the chaunceler, and Simsai the scribe, and other of the council of
Dina, off Arphasath, off Tarplat, off Persia, off Arach, of Babylon, of Susan,
of Deha, and of Elam, and other of the people 4. Re. 17. c
whom the great and noble Asnaphar brought over, and set in the cities of
Samaria, and other on this side the water, and in Canaan. And this is ye sum
of the letter that they sent unto king Artaxerses:

Thy servants the men on this side the made up again, the^ shall not they
give tribute, toll, and yearly custom, and their deuyce shall do ye king
harm. But now that we all are thereby which destroyed the temple, we would no
longer se the kings dishonor. Therefore sent we out, and caused the king to
be certified thereof: That it may be sought in ye Cronicles of thy
progenitors, and so shall thou find in the same Cronicles, and perceive, that
this cite is sedicious and noisome unto kings and lands, and that they cause
other also to rebel of old, and for the same cause was this cite destroyed.
Therefore do we certify the king, that if this cite be builded, and the walls
thereof made up, thou shall keep nothing on this side the water by the reason
of it.



Now wha^ king Artaxerses letter was red before Rehum the chaunceler and
Simsai the Scrybe and their council, they went up in all the haist to
Jerusalem unto the Jews, and forbad them with the arm and auctorite. Then
ceased the work of the house of God at Jerusalem, and continued so unto the
second year of Darius king of Persia.

The V. Chapter.
Agg. 1 c
and Iesua the son of Iosedec, and began to build the house of God at
Jerusalem, and with them the prophets of God which strengthed the^. At the
same time came to the^ Thathnai the debite on this side the water, and Sethar
of Bosen, and their councelers, and said thus unto them: Who has commanded
you to build this house, and to make up the walls thereof? Then told we them
the names of the men, that made this buyldinge. But the eye of their God came
upon the Elders of the Jews, that they were not inhibyte, till the matter was
brought before Darius, and till there came a wrytinge thereof again.

This is the sum of the letter yt Thathnaithe Debyte on this side the water,
and Sethar of Bosen, and their councellers of Apharsach (which were on this
side the water) sent unto king Darius. And these are the words that they sent
unto him: Unto

But they answered us with these words, and said: We are the servants of the
God of heaven and earth, and build the house yt was builded many years agoo,
(...)
which a great king of Israel builded and set up. Howbeit when our fathers
provoked the God of heaven unto wrath, (...)
he gave them over in the hand of Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon the
Caldee, which brake down this house, and carried ye people away unto Babylon.

(...)
Nevertheless in the first year of Cyrus (...)
and delivered them unto Seszbazer by name, whom he made Debyte, and said unto
him: Take these vessels, go thy way and bring them unto the temple at
Jerusalem, and let the house of God be builded in his place. Then came the same
Seszbazar, and laid ye foundation of the house of God at Jerusalem. Sense that
time has it been in buyldinge, and yet is it not fynished. If it please ye
king now, let there be search made in ye kings treasure house which is at
Babylon, whether it have been king Cyrus commandment, that the house of God
at Jerusalem should be builded: and send us ye kings mind concerning the
same.

The VI. Chapter.


Get you far from them therefore, thou Thathnai Debyte beyond the water, and
Sethar of Bosen, and your councelers which are beyond the water. Let them
work in ye

And if they have need of calves, lambs, or goats for the burnt offrynge unto
ye God of heaven, wheat, salt, wine and oil, after the custom of the prestes
at Jerusalem, there shall be given them daily as is acordinge: and se that this
be not done neclige^tly, that they may offer sweet sauoures unto ye God of
heaven, and pray for the kings life, and for his children. This commandment
have I given. And what man so ever he be that alters these words, there shall
a balke be taken from his house, and set up, and he shall be hanged thereon, and
his house shall be prysed for the deed.



Then Thathnai ye Debyte beyond ye water, and Sethar of Bosen with their
councelers (to whom king Darius had sent) did their diligence. And ye Elders
of the Jews builded, and they prospered through the prophecienge of Aggeus the
prophet and Zachary the son of Iddo: and they builded, and set up the work,
acordinge to the commandment of the God of Israel, and after the
commandment of Cyrus, Darius and Artaxerses kings of Persia. And they
performed the house unto the third day of the month Adar, that was the
sixte year of the reign of king Darius.

2. Par. 7.
And the children of Israel, the prestes, the Levites, and the other children of
ye captyuite held the dedicacion of the house of God with joy, and offered at
the dedicacion of the house of God, an hundredth calves,

And the children of the captyuite held Passover upon the fourtenth day of
the first month: for ye prestes and Levites had purified them selves, so yt
they were all clean as one man, and killed Passover for all the children of
the captyuite, and for their brethren the prestes, and for them selves. And the
children of Israel which were come again out of captiuyte, and all soch as had
separated them selves unto them from the fylthinesse of the Heythen in the
land, to seek the LORD God of Israel, ate and held the feast of vnleue^ded
bred seven days with joy: for the LORD had made them glad, and turned the
heart of the king of Assure unto the^, so that their hands were strengthed in
the work of the house of God, which is ye God of Israel.

The VII. Chapter.
AFter these acts in the reign of Artaxerses ^. Esd. ^. a
there went up from Babylon, Eszdras the son of Seraia, the son of Asaria,
the son of Helchias, the son of Sallum, the son of Sadoc, the son of
Achitob, the son of Amaria, the son of Asaria, the son Meraioth, the
son of Serahia, ye son of Vsi, the son of Buki, the son of Abisua, the
son of Phineas, the son of Eleasar, the son of Aaron the chief pressed,
which was a quycke scrybe in the law of Moses, (...) 20. a
which the LORD God of Israel did give. And ye king gave him all that he
required, acordinge to the hand of the LORD his God upon him.

And there went up certain of the children of Israel, and of the prestes, and
of the Levites, of the syngers, of the porters, and of the Nethinims unto
Jerusalem, in the seventh year of king Artaxerses. And they came to Jerusalem
in the fifth month, that is the seventh year of the king. For upon the first
day of the first month, devised he to go up from Babylon: and on ye first
day of the fifth month came he to Jerusalem, acordinge to the good hand of
God upon him: For Eszdras prepared his heart to seek the law of the LORD, and
to do it, and to teach the precepte and judgment in Israel.

LORD and of his statutes over Israel. Unto Eszdras the pressed and scrybe in
the law of the God of heaven, peace and salutacion. I have commanded, that
all they of the people of Israel, and of the prestes and Levites in my realm,
which are minded of their own good will to go up to Jerusalem, that they go
with the, being sent of the king and of the seven lords of the council, to
vyset Judah and Jerusalem, acordinge to the law of God, which is in thy hand:
And that thou should take with the, silver and gold, which the king and the
lords of his council give of their own good will unto the God of Israel
(whose habitacion is at Jerusalem) and all the silver and gold that thou can
find in all ye country of Babylon: with it that the people and prestes give of
their own good will unto the house of God at Jerusalem.



And what so ever thing more shall be needful for the house of thy God, which
is necessary for the to spend, let the same be given out of the kings
chamber. I king Artaxerses have commanded all the treasurers beyond the
water, yt look what so ever Eszdras the pressed and scrybe in the law of the God
of heaven, requires of you, that ye fulfill the same diligently, until an
hundredth tale^tes of silver, and till an hundredth quarters of wheat, and till
an hundredth Batthes of wine, and till an hundredth Batthes of oil, and salt
without measure. Whatsoever belongs to the law of the God of hea^uen, let
the same be done with diligence for the house of the God of heaven, that there
come no wrath upon the kings realm and his children.

And known be it unto you, that ye shall have no auctorite to require taxinge
and custom, and yearly rentes upon any of the prestes, Levites, syngers,
porters, Nethinims and mynisters in ye house of this God. But thou Eszdras
(after the wyszdome of ye God that is in thy hand) set thou judges and
arbiters, to judge all the people that is beyond Iordane, even all soch as
know the law of thy God: and them that know it not, those se that ye teach.
And who so ever will not diligently fulfill the law of thy God, and the kings
law, shall have his judgment for the deed, whether it be unto death, or to be
banyshed, or to be condemned in good, or to be put in preson.

Praised be the LORD God of our fathers, which so has inspyred ye kings
her^ to garnysh the house of God at Jerusalem: and has enclyned his mercy unto
me in the presence of the king, and his councelers, and before all the kings
hye estates. And I was comforted (acordinge to the hand of the LORD my God
over me) and so gathered I the heads of Israel together, yt they might go up
with me.

The VIII. Chapter.
THese are the heads of their fathers that were named, which went up with me
from Babylon, what time as king Artaxerses reigned. Of the children of
Phineas, Gersom: of the children of Ithamar, Daniel: of the children of David,
Hattus: of the children of Pareos, Zachary, and the men children nombred with
him, an hundredth and fiftye. Of the children of Pahath Moab, Eleoenai the son
of Serahia, and with him two hundredth males.

Of the children of Sechania, the son of Iehasiel, and with him three hundredth
males. Of the children of Adin Ebed, the son of Jonathan, and with him fifty
males. Of the children of Elam, Iesaia the son of Athalia, and with him
seventy males. Of the children of Sephatia, Sebadia the son of Michael, and
with him four score males.

Op the children of Ioab, Obadia the son of Iehiel, and with him two hundredth
and eightene men children. Of the children of Selomith, the son of Iosiphia,
and with him an hundredth and three score males.



And when I looked among the people and the prestes, I found no Levites there.
The^ sent I Elieser, Ariel, Semaia, Elnathan, Iarib, Elnathan, Natha, Zachary
and Mesullam the rulers, and Ioiarib and Elnathan the teachers, and those sent
I unto Iddo ye chefest at Casiphia, that they should fetch us mynysters for the
house of our God, and I told them what they should say unto Iddo and to his
brethren the Nethinims at Casiphia.



And even there at the water beside Ahena, caused I a fasting to be proclaimed,
yt we might humble our selves before our God, to seek of him a right way
for us, and our children and all our substance. For I was ashamed to require
of the king, soudyers and horsemen, to help us against the enemy in the way.
For we had said unto the king: The hand of our God is for the best upon all
them that seek him, and his violence and wrath upon all them that forsake him.
So we fasted, and sought this at our God, and he herd us.

LORD, therefore are the vessels holy also, and so is the silver and gold that
is given of a good will unto the LORD God of your fathers: Watch ye therefore
and keep it, till ye weye it down before the chief prestes and Levites, and
awncient fathers of Israel at Jerusalem in the chestes of the house of the
LORD. Then took the prestes and Levites that weyed silver and gold and
vessel, to bring it to Jerusalem unto ye house of our God.

So we brake up, from the water of Ahena

And the children of the captiuyte, which were come out of preson, offered burnt
offeringes unto ye God of Israel: twolue bullockes for all Israel, six and
nynetye rams, seven and seuentye lambs, and twolue goats for a syn
offering, all to the burnt offeringe of the LORD. And they delivered the
kings commyssion unto the kings officers, and to the Debytes on this side the
water. And they promoted the people and the house of God.

The IX. Chapter.
When all this was performed, the rulers came to me, and said: The in the
lands as touching their abhominacions, namely of the Cananites, Hethites,
Pheresites, Iebusites, Ammonites, Moabites, Egipcians, and Amorites. Deuteronomy. 7. a
and 12. d ^osu. 23. c ^udic. 3. a
For they have taken the daughters of the same, and their sons, and have
myxte the holy sede with ye nations in the lands: and the hand of the rulers
and lords of council has been principal in this trespace.

When I herd this, I rent my clothes and my raiment, and plucte out the here
of my head and of my beerd, and sat mourning. And there resorted unto me all
soch as feared the word of the LORD God of Israel because of the great
transgression. And I sat mourning until the evening sacrifyce. LORD my God,
and said:

My God, I am ashamed, and darre not lift up mine eyes unto the my God: for
our wickednesses are grown over our head, and our trespaces are waxen
great unto ye heaven. Sense the time of our fathers have we been in great
trespace unto this day, Deu. 28. d
and because of our wickednesses have we and or kings been delivered in to
the hand of ye kings of the nations, in to the sword, in to captiuyte, in to
spoil, and in to confusion of face, as it is come to pass this day.

But now is there a little and sodane graciousnes LORD our God, so that some
of us are escaped, that he may give us a nail in his holy place, that our
God may light our eyes, and give us a little life in our bondage. For we are
bondmen, and or God has not forsaken us though we be bondmen, and has
enclyned mercy unto us in the sight of the kings of Persia, that they should
give us life, and promote the house of our God, and to set up the desolacion
thereof, and to give us an hedge in Judah and Jerusalem.

O our God, what shall we say now after this? that we have forsaken thy
commandments, which thou have commanded by thy servants the prophets,
and said: The land wherein ye shall come to possess it, is an unclean land
through the fylthines of the people of the lands, in their abhominacions
wherewith they have made

And after all this that is come upon us (because of our evil deeds and
great trespace) thou our God have spared our wickednesses, and have given us
a delyueraunce as it is come to pass.

As for us, we have turned back, and have let go thy commandments, to make
contracte with the people of these abhominacions. Will thou then be wroth at
us, till we be utterly consumed, so that nothing remain, and till there be no
delyueraunce? O LORD God of Israel, thou art righteous, for we remain yet
escaped, as it is this day. Behold, in thy presence are we in our trespace,
for because of it is there no stondinge before the.

The X. Chapter.
ANd when Eszdras prayed after this manner and knowleged, wept, and lay LORD
our God, in that we have taken strange wives of all the people of the land.
Now there is hope yet in Israel co^cerninge this, therefore let us make a
covenant now with our God, that we shall put away all the wives (and soch as
are borne of them) acordynge to the council of ye LORD, and of them that
fear the commandment of our God, yt we may do acordynge to the law. Get
the up therefore, for the matter belongs unto the. We will be with the, be of
good comfort, and do it.

Then rose Eszdras, and took an ooth of the rulers, prestes and Levites, and of
all Israel,

And they caused a proclamacion be made through out Judah and Jerusalem, unto all
the children which had been in captivity, yt they should gather them selves
together unto Jerusalem: And that who soever came not within three days
acordinge to the deuyce of the rulers and Elders, all his substance should be
forfett, and he put out from the congregation of the captive.

(...). 7. a (...). 3. a
Ye have transgressed, yt ye have taken strange wives, to make the trespace of
Israel yet more: confess now therefore unto ye LORD God of your fathers, and
do his pleasure, and separate your selves from the people of the land, and
from ye strange wives. The^ answered all the congregation, and said with
loud voice: Let it be done as thou have said. But the people are many, and it
is a raynye wether, and they cannot sto^de here without, nether is this a work
of one day or two, for we are many yt have

Then were appointed Jonathan the son of Asahel and Iehasia the son of
Thecua over this matter. And Mesullam and Sabthai the Levites helped them. And
the children of the captiuyte did even so. And Eszdras the pressed, and ye
awncient fathers through the house of their fathers, and all that were now
rehearsed by name, separated the^ selves, and sat them down on the first day
of the tenth month, to exame^ this matter. And on ye first day of ye first
month brought they the matter to a conclusion, concerning all the men yt had
taken strange wives.



Of Israel. Among the children of Pareos, Ramia, Iesia, Malchia, Meiamin,
Eleasar, Malchia and Benaia. Among ye children of Elam, Mathania, Zachary,
Iehiel, Abdy, Ieremoth and Elia. Among the children of Sathu, Elioenai,
Eliasib, Mathania, Ieremoth, Sabad and Asisa. Among the children of Bebai,
Iohanan, Hanania, Sabai and Athlai. Among the children of Bani, Mesullam,
Malluch, Adaia, Iasub, Seal and Ieremoth. Among the children of Pahath Moab,
Adna, Chelal, Benaia, Maesea, Mathania, Bezaleel, Benui and Manasse. Among the
children of Harim, Elieser, Iesia, Malchia, Semaia, Simeon, Be^ Iamin, Malluch
and Samaria. Among the children of Hasum, Mathnai, Mathatha, Sabad, Eliphelet,
Ieremai, Manasse and Simei. Among the children of Bani, Maedai, Amram, Huel,
Benaia, Bedia, Chelui, Naia, Meremoth, Eliasib, Mathania, Mathnai, Iaesau,
Bani, Benui, Simei, Selemia, Nathan, Adaia, Machnadbai, Sasai, Sarai, Afareel,
Selemia, Samaria, Sallum, Amaria, and Joseph. Among the children of Nebo,
Ieiel, Mathithia, Sabad, Sebina, Iaddai, Joel, and Benaia. All these had taken
strange wives. And among the same wives there were some, that had borne
children.

The end of the first book of Eszdras.
The second book of Esdras, otherwise called the book of Nehemias.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I. Nehemias mourns for the captiuyte of the people. Chap. II. Nehemias
optayneth license of the king Artaxerses (otherwise called Arthasastha) to go
unto Jerusalem. Chap. III. Of buyldinge the cite. Chap. IIII. The officers go
about to hinder the buyldinge. The Jews watch, and prepayre the^ selves to
build and to fight. Chap. V. Nehemias reproves usury. Chap. VI. The officers
go about to kill Nehemias. Chap. VII. The nombre of them that depart from
Babylon. Chap. VIII. In the feast of the Tabernacles reads Eszdras the book
of the law. Chap. IX. The law is red before the people, which are exhorted
unto godliness. Chap. X. They renew the covenant with the LORD, and seal
it. Chap. XI. How the people are sundered out, some to dwell at Jerusalem, and
some in the cities without. Chap. XII. The names of the prestes and Levites
that went up with Zorobabel. Of the dedicacion of the wall at Jerusalem. Chap.
XIII. They separate the strangers from among the people of God. The portion
of the Levites is appointed, and the Sabbath renewed.
The first Chapter.
^. Re. 25. b
The walls of Jerusalem are broken down, and the ports thereof are brent with
fire.

Wha^ I herd these words, I sat me down and wept, and mourned two days,
and fasted and prayed before the God of heaven, and said: O LORD God of
heaven, thou great and terrible God, ^xo. 20. a and 34. a ^eut. 7. b
thou yt kepest covenant and mercy for them yt love the and observe thy
commandments: let ye ears mark, and let thine eyes be open, yt thou may
hear the prayer of ye servant* which I pray now before ye day and night
for the children of Israel thy servants, and knowledge the sins of the
children of Israel, which we have committed against the.

^eut. 30 a
If ye tra^sgresse, then will I scater you abroad among the nations. But if ye
turn unto me, and keep my commandments and do them: though ye were cast out
unto the vttemost part of heaven yet will I gather you from thence, and will
bring you from thence, eue^ unto the place, that I have chosen for my name to
dwell there. They are thy servants, and thy people, whom thou have delivered
through thy great power and mighty hand. O LORD, let thine ears mark the
prayer of thy servant, and the prayer of thy servants, whose desire is to
fear thy name, and let thy servant prospere this day, and grant him mercy
in the sight of this man: for I was the kings b^t^ar.

The II. Chapter.
IN the month Nisan of the twentieth

And ye king said unto me, and so did the

But when Saneballath the Horonite, and before the Dragon well, and to the
Dongporte, and considered ye walls of Jerusalem that were broken down, and
the ports thereof consumed with the fire. And I went over unto ye Well port,
and to the kings condyte, and there was no rowme for my be, yt it could go
under me. Then went I on in the night by the broke side, and considered ye
wall, and turned back, and came home again to ye valley port.



But when Saneballat ye Horonite, and Tobias the servant of ye Ammonites, and
Gosem the Arabian herd it, they laughed us to scorn, and despised us, and
said: What is this that ye do? Will ye fall away again from the king? Then
answered I them, and said: The God of heaven shall cause us to prospere: for we
his servants are gotten up, and are buyldinge. As for you, ye have no porcio^
ner right, ner remembrance in Jerusalem.

The III. Chapter.
(...)
tower of Hananeel. Next unto him builded ye men of Jericho. And beside him
builded Sachur the son of Imri. But the Fyshporte did the children of Senaa
build, they covered it, and set on the doors, locks and bars of it. Next
unto him builded Meremoth the son of Vria the son of Hacoz. Next unto him
builded Mesullam ye son of Barachias ye son of Mesesabeel. Next unto him
builded Sadoc ye son of Baena. Next unto him builded they of Thecoa. But
their great me^ put not their necks to ye service of their lord.



The valley gate builded Hanum, and the

After him builded the Levites, Rehum unto the turnynge, and unto the corner.

After him builded Palal the son of Vsai, over against the corner and the hye
tower, which lies out over from the kings house, beside the court of the
preson. After him Pedaia the son of Pareos (As for ye Nethinims they dwelt in
Ophel, unto ye Watergate, toward the east where ye tower lies out) After him
builded they of Thecoa ye other piece over against ye great tower, yt lies
outward, and unto the wall of ^. Pa. 33. c
Ophel.



The IIII. Chapter.


LORD which ought to be feared, and fight for yor brethren, sons,
daughters, wives, and houses. Nevertheless when or enemies herd

And I said unto the pryncipall men, and rulers, and to ye other people: The
work is great and large, and we are separated upon the wall one far from
another. Look in what place now ye hear the noise of ye trompe, resort ye
thiter unto us. (...)
Our God shall fight for us, and we will be labouri^ge in ye work. And the
half part of the^ held ye spears from ye morninge spring, till ye stars
came forth. And at ye same time said I unto ye people: Every one abide with
his servant at Jerusalem, yt in the night season we may give attendaunce to
ye watch, and to labor on the day time. As for me and my brethren, and my
servants, and ye men of the watch behind me, we put never of our clothes,
so so much as to wash our selves.

The V. Chapter.
ANd there arose a great complaynte for our lands and vynyardes. Now are
our brethrens bodies as our own bodies, and their children as our children:
else should we subdue our sons and daughters unto bondage, and some of our
daughters are subdued already, and no strength is there in our hands, and
other men shall have our lands and vynyardes.

But when I herd their complaynte and soch words, it displeased me sore, and
I aduysed so in my mind, yt I rebuked the councelers, and the rulers, and
said unto them: (...)
Will ye require usury one of another? And I brought a great congregation
against them, and said unto them: We (after our abilyte) have boughte our
brethren the Jews, which were sold unto the Heythen. And will ye sell your
brethren, whom we have boughte unto us? Then held they their peace, and could
find nothing to answer.

And I said: It is not good that ye do. LORD. And the people did so.

(...)
And from the time forth that it was 2. Esd. 1.3. ^


The VI. Chapter.
ANd when Saneballat, Tobias and Gosem the Arabian, and the other of

Then sent Saneballat his servant unto me the fifth time, with an open letter
in his

Now shall this come to the kings ears: come now therefore, and let us take
our council together. Nevertheless I sent unto him, saying: There is no soch
thing done as thou say: thou have feigned it out of thine own heart. For
they were all minded to make us afraid, and thought: They shall withdraw
their hands from the work, yt they shall not labor. Howbeit I stre^gthed my
hand the more.

And I came unto ye house of Semaia ye son of Delaia the son of
Mechetabeel, and he

For I perceived, that God had not sent him: Yet spoke he prophecye upon me,
nevertheless Tobias and Saneballat had hired him for money. Therefore took he
the money, that I should be afraid, and so to do and sin, that they might
have an evil report of me, to blaspheme me. My God think thou upon Tobias
and Saneballat, acordynge unto these their works, and of ye prophet Noadia,
and of the other prophets, yt would have put me in fear



The VII. Chapter.


And my God gave me in my heart, that I gatherd together the pryncipall men and
ye people, to nombre them, and I found a register of their nombre, ^ Esd. 2. a
which came up before out of the captiuyte (whom Nabuchodonosor ye king of
Babilo^ had carried away) and dwelt at Jerusalem and in Judah, every one unto
his cite, and were come with Zorobabel, Iesua, Nehemias, Asaria, Raamia,
Naheman, Mardachai, Bilsan, Mispereth, Bigeuai, Nehum and Baena.



The children of Hasum, three hundredth and

The prestes. The children of Iedaia of

The Levites. The children of Iesua of Cadmiel among the children of Hodua,
four and seuentye. The syngers. The children of Assaph, an hundredth and eight
and fortye. The porters were: The children of Sallum, the children of Ater, the
children of Talmon, the children of Acub, the children of Hatita, the children
of Sobai, altogether an hundredth and eight and thirtye.

The Nethinims. The children of Ziha, ye children of Hasupha, the children of
Tabaoth, the children of Ceros, the children of Sia, ye children of Padon, the
children of Libana, the children of Hagaba, the children of Salmai, the
children of Hanan, the children of Giddel, the children of Gahar, the children
of Reaia, the children of Rezin, the children of Necoda, the children of Gasam,
the children of Vsa, the children of Passeah, the children of Bessai, the
children of Megunim, the children of Nephusim, the children of Bachuc, the
children of Hacupha, the children of Harhur, the children of Bazlith, the
children of Mehida, the children of Harsa, the children of Barcos, the children
of Sissera, the children of Thamah, the children of Neziah, ye children of
Hatipha.



And these went up also: Michel, Mela, Thel, Harsa, Cherub, Addo^, Immer: but
they could not show their fathers house ner their sede, whether they were of
Israel. The children of Delaia, ye children of Tobia, and the children of
Necoda, were six hundredth and two and fortye. And of the prestes were, the
children of Habaia, the children of Hacoz, the children of Barsillai, which
took one of ye daughters of Barsillai the Gileadite to wife, and was named
afther their name. These sought the register of their generation, and when
they found it not, they were put from ye presthode. And Hathirsatha said unto
them, yt they should not eat of ye most holy, till there came up a pressed with ye
light and perfectness.



And certain of the awncie^t fathers gave unto the work. Hathirsatha gave to
the treasure a thousand guldens, fifty basens, five hundredth and thyrtie
prestes garments. And some of the chief fathers gave unto ye treasure of the
work, twe^tye thousand guldens, two thousand and two hundredth pound of
silver. And the other people gave twe^tye thousand guldens, and two thousand
pound of silver, and seven and threscore prestes garments. And the prestes
and Levites, the Porters, the syngers, and the other of the people, and the
Nethinims, and all Israel, dwelt in their cities.

The VIII. Chapter.
NOw when the seventh month drue LORD commanded Israel. Deu. 31. c 4. Re.
2^. ^
And Eszdras the pressed brought ye law before the congregation both of men and
women, and of all that could understand it, upon the first day of the
seventh month, and red therein in the street that is before the Watergate, from
ye light morning until the noone day before men and women and soch as could
understand it: and the ears of all the people were inclyned unto the book of
the law. And Eszdras the scrybe stood upon an hye pulpit of wod, which they
had made for the preaching, and beside him stood Mathithia, Sema, Anania Vria,
Ezechias, and Maescia on his right hand: And on his left hand stood Pedaia,
Misael, Malchia, Hasum, Haszbadana, Zachary and Mesullam.

And Eszdras opened ye book before all ye LORD the great God. And all the
people answered Amen, Amen, with their hands up, and bowed the^ selves, and
worshipped ye LORD with their faces to the ground. And Iesua, Bani, Serebia,
Iamin, Acub, Sabthai, Hodaia, Maescia, Celita, Asaria, Iosabad, Hanam, Plaia,
and the Levites, caused ye people to give head unto the law, and the people
stood in their place. And they red in the book of the law of God distinctly
and planely, so that men understood the thing that was red. And Nehemias
(which is Hathirsatha) and Esdras the pressed and scrybe, and the Levites yt
caused the people to take heed, said unto all the people: This day is holy
unto the LORD your God: be not ye sorry therefore, and weep not. For all ye
people wept, wha^ they herd the words of the law.

LORD, be not ye sorry therefore: for the joy of the LORD is your strength.
And the Levites stylled all the people, and said: Hold your peace, for the
day is holy, vex not ye your selves. And all the people went their way to
eat and drink, and to send pa^te unto other, and to make great mirth, for
they had understand the words that were declared unto them.

And on the next day were gathered together the chief fathers among all the
people, and the prestes and Levites, unto Esdras the scrybe, that he should
teach them ye words of the law. And they found written in the law, Leui.
23. f
how that the LORD had commanded by Moses, that the children of Israel should
dwell in bothes in the feast of the seventh month. And so they caused it be

And ye people went up, and fetched the^, and made them bothes, every one upon
the rofe of his house, and in their courts, and in the courts of the house of
God, and in the street by the Watergate, and in the street by Ephraims port.
And all the congregation of them that were come again out of the captyuite,
made bothes, and dwelt therein: for sense the time of Joshua the son of Nu^
unto this day, had not the children of Israel done so, and there was very
great gladness. And every day from the first day unto the last, red he in
the book of the law of God. And seven days held they the feast, and on the
eight day the gatherynge together, acordynge unto the manner.

The IX. Chapter.
LORD their God four times on the day, and they knowleged, and worshipped
the LORD their God four times on the day. And the Levites stood on hye,
namely Iesua, Bani, Cadmiel, Sebania, Buni, Serebia, Bani, and Chenani, and
cried loud unto the LORD their God. And the Levites, Iesua, Cadmiel, Bani,
Hasabenia, Serebia, Hodia, Sebania, Pethahia, said: Stand up, praise the
LORD our God for ever: and let thanks be given unto the name of thy glory,
which excels all thankesgeuynge and praise. LORD, thou art alone, thou have
made heaven, and the heaven of all heavens, with all their host, the earth and
all that therein is, the Sea and all that is therein: thou geuest life unto all,
and ye host of heaven bow themselves unto the. Thou LORD God, that have
chosen Abra^, and brought him out of Vr in Chaldea, (...)
and called him Abraham, and found his heart faithful before the, (...)
and made a covenant with him, to give unto his sede the land of the
Cananites, Hethites, Amorites, Pheresites, Iebusites, and Girgosites, and have
made good thy words: for thou art righteous (...)
And have considered the mysery of our fathers in Egipte, and herd their
complainte by the reed See, and showed tokens and wonders upon Pharao, and on
all his servants, and on all his people of his land: for thou knew yt
they were presumptuous and cruel against them, and so made thou (...)
the a name as it is this day. And the reed See partedst thou in sunder before
them, so that they went through the mids of the Sea dry shod: and their
persecuters threwest thou in to the deep as a stone, in the mighty waters, and
leddest them on the day time in a cloudy pyler, and on the night season in a
piler of fire, to show them light in the way yt they went.

Thou came down also upon mount Sinai, (...)
and gave them right judgments, true laws, good commandments and
statutes, and declared unto them thy holy Sabbath, and commanded them
precepts, ordinances, and laws, by Moses thy servant: and (...)
gave them bred from heaven when they were hongrye, and (...)
brought forth water for them out of the rock when they were thyrstye: and
promised them, (...)
that they should go in, and take possession of the land, where over thou
had lift up thine hand for to give them.

Nevertheless our fathers were proud and hardnecked, so that they followed not
ye commandments, and refused to hear, and were not myndefull of the wonders
yt thou dyddest for them: but became obstynate and heady, in so much that they
turned back to their bondage in their dishobedience. But thou my God forgauest,
and wast gracious, merciful, pacient, and of great goodness, and forsokest
them not. (...)* ^2. b
And though they made a molten calfe (and said: This is thy God, that brought
the out of the land of Egipte) and did great blasphemies, yet for sokest thou
them not in the wyldernes, acordinge to thy great mercy. (...)
And ye cloudy piler departed not from them on ye day time to lead them the
way, nether the piler of fire in the night season, to show them light in the
way that they went.

(...)
and withheldest not thy Manna from their mouth, (...)
and gave the^ water wha^ they were thirsty. Fortye years long made thou
prouysion for them in the wilderness, so that they wanted nothing: (...)
their clothes waxed not old, and their fete swelled not. And thou gave the^
ki^gdomes and nations, and partedst the^ acordinge to their porcions, so that
they possessed (...)
the land of Sihon king of Heszbon, and the land of Og ye king of Basan.
(...)
And their children multiplyedst thou as the stars of heaven, and broughtest
the^ in to the land whereof thou had spoken unto their fathers, that they
should go in to it, and have it in possession.

And ye children went in, and possessed the land, (...)* ^3.4
and thou subdudest before the^ the inhabiters of the land, even the
Cananites, and gave them in to their hand, and their kings and ye people of
the land, yt they might do with them what they would. And they wanne their
strong cities, and a fat land, and took possession of houses yt were full of
all manner goods, wells dygged out, vynyardes, oylgardens, and many fruitful
trees: and they ate and were filled, and became fat, and lived in wealth through
thy great goodness. Nevertheless they were disobedient, and rebelled against
the, and cast thy law behind their backs, (...). 1^. b
and slew thy prophets (which exhorted them so earnestly, that they should
co^uerte unto the) and did great blasphemies. Therefore gave thou them over
in to the hand of their enemies that vexed them.



Notwithsto^dinge they were proud, and herkened not unto thy commandments,
but sinned in thy laws (which a man should do, and live in them) and turned
their shulder away, and were styffnecked, and would not hear. And many years
dyddest thou forbear them, and testified unto them through ye sprete, even by
the office of ye prophets, and yet would they not hear. Therefore gave thou
the^ in to ye hand of ye nations in the lands. But for thy great mercies
sake thou have not utterly consumed them, nether forsaken them: for thou art a
gracious and merciful God.

Now our God, thou great God, mighty

And in all this made we a sure covenant, and wrote it, and let or princes,
Levites and prestes seal it.

The X. Chapter.
THe sealers were: Nehemias (that is) Pashur, Amaria, Malchia, Hattus, Sebania,
Malluch, Harim, Meremoth, Obadia, Daniel, Sinthun, Baruch, Mesullam, Abia,
Meiamin, Maasga, Bilgai and Semaia: these were prestes.

The Levites were: Iesua ye son of Asania, Binui among the children of
Henadad, Cadmiel. And their brethren: Sechania, Hodia, Celita, Plaia, Hauan,
Micha, Rehob, Hasabia, Sachur, Serebia, Sebania, Hodia, Bani and Beninu. The
heads of the people were: Pareos, Pahath Moab, Elam, Sathu, Bani, Buni, Asgad,
Sebai, Adonia, Bigenai, Adiu, Ater, Hezechias, Asur, Hodia, Hasum, Bezai,
Hariph, Anathot, Neubai, Magpias, Mesullam, Hesir, Mesesabeel, Sadoc, Iaddua,
Platia, Hanan, Anaia, Hoseia, Hanania, Hasub, Halohes, Pilha, Sobek, Rehum,
Hasabna, Maeseia, Ahia, Hanan, Anan, Malluch, Harim and Baena.

And the other people, the prestes, Levites, Porters, syngers. Nethinims, and
all they that had separated them selves from ye people in the lo^des unto the
law of God, with their wives, sons and daughters, as many as could
understand it, and their lords that had rule of them, received it for their
brethren.

^osu. 24 e ^. Par. 15. c
And they came to swear, and to bind them selves with an ooth to walk in
Gods law, which was given by Moses the servant of God, that they would
observe and do acordinge unto all the commandments, judgments and statutes
of the LORD our God: Deuteronomy. 7. a
and that we would not give our daughters unto the people in the lord, nether
to take their daughters for our sons. ^. Esd. 13. c
And if ye people of the lord brought ware on the Sabbath, and all manner of
vytayles to sell, that we would not take it of them on the Sabbath and on the
holy days. Leui. 25. a Deuteronomy. 15. a
And that we would let the seventh year be fre concerning all manner of charge.



And we cast the lot among the prestes, Levites and the people, for offering
of ye wod, to be brought unto ye house of or God from year to year, after the
houses of our fathers, that it might be brent at times appointed, upon the
altar of the LORD our God, as it is written in the law: and yearly to
bring the firstlinges of or land, and the firstlinges of our fruits of all
trees, year by year, unto ye house of the LORD: and the firstlinges of our
sons, and of our catell, as it is written in the law: and the firstlinges o
lord unto the Levites, yt the Levites might have the tithes in all the cities
of our mynistracion.

And the pressed the son of Aaron shall with the Levites have also of the tithes
of ye Levites, so that the Levites shall bring up the tithes of their tithes
unto the house of our God to the chest in ye treasure house. For the children
of Israel and the children of Leui shall bring up the Heue offerynges of the
corn, wine and oil unto the chestes, there are the vessels of the Sanctuary,
and the prestes yt mynister, and the porters and syngers, yt we forsake not the
house of our God.

The XI. Chapter.
ANd the rulers of the people dwelt at

These are the heads of the land that dwelt at Jerusalem. In the cities dwelt
Judah every one in his possession yt was in their cities, namely Israel, the
prestes, Levites, ye Nethinims, and the children of Salomons servants. And at
Jerusalem dwelt certain of the children of Judah and of Ben Iamin.

Of the children of Judah: (...)
Athaia the son of Vsia ye son of Zachary, the son of Amaria, the son
of Sephatia, the son of Mahelaleel, of the children of Phares. And Maeseia
the son of Baruch, the son of Chal Hose, the son of Hasaia, the son of
Adaia, the son of Ioiarib, the son of Zachary, the son of Siloni. All the
children of Phares that dwelt at Jerusalem, were four C. and eight and three
score valeaunt men.

These are the children of Ben Iamin: Sallu (...)
the son of Pedaia, the son of Colaia, ye son of Maeseia, the son of
Ithiel, ye son of Iesaia. And after him Sabai, Sallai: nine hundredth and
eight and twentye. And Joel the son of Sichri had the oversight of them: and
Judah ye son of Hasnua over the second part of the cite.

(...)
Of the prestes there dwelt: Iedaia ye son of Ioiarib, Iachin. Seraia the
son of Helchias ye son of Mesullam, the son of Sadoc, the son of
Meraioth, the son of Achitob, was prince in the house of God: and his
brethren that performed the work in ye house: of whom there were viij. C. and
xxij. And Adaia the son of Ieroham, the son of Plalia, the son of Amzi,
the son of Zachary, the son of Pashur and his brethren, chief among the
fathers: of whom there were two hundredth and two and fortye. And Amassai the
son of Asariel the son of Ahusai, the son of Mesillemoth, the son of
Immer: and his brethren were valeaunt men, of whom there were an hundredth and
eight and twentye. And their ouerseer was Sabdaiel the son of Gedolim.

(...). 1^. b
the son of Asrikam, the son of Hasabia, the son of Bunni: And Sabthai
and Iosabad of the chief of the Levites, in the outward busynes of ye house of
God. And Mathania the son of Micha, the son of Sabdi, the son of Assaph,
which was the pryncipall to begin the thankesgeuynge unto prayer. And
bacbuchia ye second among his brethren, and Abda the son of Sammua, the
son of Galal, the son of Iedithun. All the Levites in the holy cite were
two hundredth and four and four score. (...) 1^. c
And ye porters Acub and Talman, and their brethren yt kept the ports, were
an hundredth and two and seuentye. As for the residue of Israel, the prestes and
Levites, they were in all the cities of Judah, every one in his inheritance.

And the Nethinims dwelt in Ophel: and Zipha and Gispa belonged unto the
Nethinims. The ouerseer of the Levites at Jerusalem, was Vsi the son of Bani,
the son of Hasabia, the son of Mathania, the son of Micha.



And Pethaia the son of Mesesabeel of the children of Serah the son of Judah
next the king in all matters concerning the people. And the children of Judah
that were without in the towns of their land, dwelt some at Kiriath Arba, and
in the vyllages thereof, and at Dibon, and in the vyllages thereof: and at
Cabzeel, and in ye vyllages thereof: and at Iesua, Molada, Bethphalet,
Hazarsual, Berseba and in their vyllages: and at Siclag and Mochona, and in
their vyllages: And at Enrimmon, Zarega, Ieremuth, Sanoah, Adullam and in their
vyllages: At Lachis, and in the feldes thereof: At Aseka, and in the vyllages
thereof: and dwelt from Berseba unto the valley of Hinnom.

The children of Ben Iamin of Gaba, dwelt at Michmas, Aia, Bethel and in their
vyllages. And at Anathoth, Nob, Anania, Hazor, Rama, Githaim, Hadid, Ziboim,
Neballat, Lod, Ono and in the Carpe^ters valley. And certain of the Levites yt
had porcions in Judah, dwelt in Ben Iamin.

The XII. Chapter.
THese are ye prestes and Levites that

Iesua begat Ioachim. Ioachim begat Eliasib. Eliasib begat Ioiada. Ioiada begat
Jonathan. Jonathan begat Iaddua. And in the time of Ioachim were these the
chief fathers among the prestes: namely of Seraia was Meraia, of Jeremy was
Hanania, of Eszdras was Mesullam, of Amaria was Iohanan, of Malluch was
Jonathan, of Sebania was Joseph, of Harim was Adna, of Meraioth was Helcai, of
Iddo was Zachary, of Ginthon was Mesulla^, of Abia was Sichri, of Miniamin
Moadia

And in the time of Eliasib. Ioiada, Iohanan and Iaddua, were the chief fathers
among the Levites, and the prestes written under the reign of Darius ye
Persian. The children of Leui the pryncipall fathers were written in the
Cronicles, until the time of Iohanan the son of Eliasib. And these were the
chief among the Levites, Hasabia, Serebia and Iesua the son of Cadmiel, and
their brethren over against them, to give praise and thanks, acordinge as
David ye man of God had ordained it, one watch over against another. Mathania,
Bacbuchia, Obadia, Mesullam, Talmon and Acub were porters in the watch at the
thresholdes of the gates. These were in the time of Ioiachim the son of Iesua
the son of Iosedec, and in the time of Nehemias the Debyte, and of the pressed
Eszdras the scrybe.



And I caused the princes to go up upon the wall, and appointed two great
queres of thankesgeuynge, which went on the right hand of the wall toward
the Donggate, and after them went Hosaia, and half of the princes of Judah,
and Asaria, Eszdras, Mesullam, Judah, Ben Iamin, Semaia and Jeremy: and certain
of the prestes children with trompettes, namely Zachary ye son of Jonathan, the
son of Semaia, the son of Mathania, the son of Michaia, the son of
Sachur, the son of Assaph, and his brethren, Semaia, Asareel, Milalai,
Gilalai, Maai, Nathaneel and Judah and Hanani, with the musical instruments of
David ye man of God.



The other quere of thankesgeuynge went over against them, and I after them,
and the half part of the people upon ye wall, toward ye Fornacegate upward,
until ye broad wall, and to ye port of Ephraim, and to the Oldgate, and to ye
Fyshgate, and to the tower of Hananeel, and to the tower of Meah, until the
Shepegate. And in ye presongate stood they still, and so stood the two queres
of thankesgeuynge of the house of God, and I and the half of the rulers with
me, and the prestes, namely Eliachim, Maeseia, Miniamin, Michaia, Elioenai,
Zachary, Hanania, with tro^pettes, and Maeseia, Semaia, Eleasar, Vsi, Iohanan,
Malchia, Elam and Aser. And the syngers song loud, and Iesrahia was the
ouerseer.

And the same day were there great sacrifices

At the same time were there men appointed over the treasure chestes (wherein
were ye Heue offerynges, the firstlinges and the tithes) that they should
gather them out of ye feldes about the cities, to destribute the^ unto the
prestes and Levites acordinge to the law: for Judah was glad of the prestes,
and Levites, that they stood and waited upon the office of their God, and the
office of the purificacion. And the syngers and porters stood after the
commandment of David and of Solomon his son: (...)
for in the time of David and Assaph, were the chief syngers founded, and the
songs of praise and thankesgeuynge unto God. In the time of Zorobabel and
Nehemias, did all Israel give porcio^s unto the syngers and porters, every day
his portion, and they gave things hallowed unto the Levites, and the Levites
gave things that were sanctified, unto the children of Aaron.

The XIII. Chapter.
ANd what time as the book of Moses (...)
yt the Ammonites and Moabites should never come in to the congregation of God,
because they met not the children of Israel with bred and water, (...)
and hired Balaam against the^, that he should curse them: nevertheless our God
turned ye curse in to a blessing. Now when they herd the law, they separated
from Israel every one that had myxte him self therein. And before this had the
pressed Eliasib delivered the chest of ye house of our God unto his kynsman
Tobia: for he had made him a great chest, and there had they aforetyme laid
the meat offerynges, frankencense, vessel, and the tithes of corn, wine and
oil (acordinge to the commandment given to the Levites, syngers and porters)
and the Heue offerynges of the prestes.

But in all this was not I at Jerusalem:

And I perceived, that the porcions of ye Levites were not given them, for the
which cause the Levites and syngers were fled, every one to his land for to
work. Then reproved I the rulers, and said: Why forsake we the house of God?
But I gathered them together, and set them in their place. Then brought all
Judah the tithes of corn, wine and oil unto the treasure. And I made
treasurers over ye treasure, even Selemia ye pressed, and Sadoc the scrybe, and
of the Levites Pedaia, (...)
Think upon me O my God here in, and wype not out my mercy, that I have showed
on ye house of my God, and on the offices thereof.

At the same time saw I some tredinge wine presses on the Sabbath, and
brynginge in clusters, and asses laden with wine, grapes, fygges, and brynginge
all manner of burdens unto Jerusalem, upon the Sabbath day. And I rebuked them
earnestly ye same day that they sold ye vytayles. There dwelt me^ of Tire
also therein, which brought fysh and all manner of ware, and sold on the
Sabbath unto the children of Judah and Jerusalem. Then reproved I the rulers in
Judah, and said unto them: What evil thing is this that ye do, and break the
Sabbath day? Did not our fathers even thus, and our God brought all this
plage upon us and upon this cite? And ye make the wrath more yet upon Israel,
in that ye break the Sabbath.



And at the same time saw I Jews, that married wives of Asdod, Ammon and of
Moab, and their children spoke half in the speech of Asdod, and could not
speak in ye Jewish language, but by ye tongue might a man perceive every
people. And I reproved Deuteronomy. 7.
Ye shall not give your daughters unto their sons, nether shall ye take their
daughters unto your sons, or for your selves. 3. Re. 11.
Did not Solomon ye king of Israel sin there in and yet among many Heythen
was there no king like him, and he was dear unto his God, and God made him
king over all Israel, and the outlandish women.

And one of the children of Ioiada the son of Eliasib ye hye pressed, had made
a co^tracte with Saneballath the Horonite: but I chaced him fro me. O my God,
think thou upon them that are quyte of the presthode, and have desyled the
covenant of the presthode and of the Levites. Thus cleansed I them from all
soch as were outlandish, and appointed the courses of the prestes and Levites,
every one to his office, and to offer the wod at times appointed, and the first
fruits. Think thou upon me (O my God) for the best.

The end of the second book of Eszdras, otherwise called the book of Nehemias.
The book of Hester.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I. Ahasuerus makes a great feast to his lords and princes, calls
for Vasthi the queen, she comes not, therefore is she deposed from the
kingdom. Chap. II. Among the daughters, Hester pleases the king. Mardocheus
gives the king warning of his harm. Chap. III. Ama^ is great with the
king, hates Mardocheus that will not worship him, and commands to slaye
all the Jews. Chap. IIII. Great heaviness among the Jews. Chap. V. Hester
comes before the king, and byddeth him and Aman to a feast. Aman makes a
galowe for Mardocheus. Chap. VI. Mardocheus is recompensed for his frendshippe
showed unto the king. Chap. VII. Hester prays for her people, Aman is hanged
on the galowe that he had prepared for Mardocheus. Chap. VIII. The king gives
Ama^s house unto the queen, and at her request he causes Ama^s wrytinges to be
called again. Chap. IX. Amans sons are hanged also, and many enemies slain.
The Jews keep a joyful feast. Chap. X. Of the auctorite of Mardocheus under
the king.
The first Chapter.


And when these days were expyred, the king made a feast unto all the people
that were in the castle of Susan, both unto great and small, seven days
long in the court of the garden by the kings palace: where there hanged
white, reed and yalow clothes, fastened with coardes of lynnen and scarlet in
silver rings, upon pylers of Marble stone.



And the king spoke to ye wise men that

And yt this wrytinge of the king which shall be made, be published through out
all his empire (which is great) that all wives may hold their huszbandes in
honor, both among great and small.

This pleased the king and the princes, and the king did acordynge to the
word of Memuchan. Then were there letters sent forth in to all the kings
lands, in to every land acordinge to the wrytinge there of, and to every
people after their language, yt every man should be lord in his own house.
And this caused he be spoken after the language of his people.

The II Chapter.


In the castle of Susan there was a Jew, whose name was Mardocheus, the son
of Iair, the son of Simei, the son of Cis, the son of Iemini, which was
carried away from Jerusalem, (...)
when Iechonias the king of Judah was led away, (whom Nabuchodonosor the king
of Babylon carried away) and he norished Hadassa (that

Now when ye kings commandment and co^myssion was published, and many
da^sels were brought together unto the castle of Susan under ye hand of
Hegai, Hester, was taken also unto ye kings house under ye hand of Hegai ye
keeper of ye weme^, and the damsel pleased him, and she found grace in his
sight. And he put her with her mayde^s in ye best place of ye Wome^s buildi^ge.
And Hester showed it not unto her people and her kynred: for Mardocheus had
charged her, yt she should not tell it. And Mardocheus walked every day before
ye court of ye Wome^s buyldinge, yt he might know how Hester did, and what
should be come of her.

And when the appointed time of every

Now when the time came of Hester the daughter of Abihail Mardocheus uncle
(whom he had received as his own daughter) yt she should come to the king,
she desired nothing but what Hegai the kings chamberlayne the keeper of the
women said.

And Hester found favor in the sight of all them that looked upon her. And
Hester was taken unto king Ahasuerus in to the house royal, in the tenth
month which is called Tebeth, in the seuenthe year of his

And the king loved Hester above all the women, and she found grace and mercy
in his sight before all the virgins: and he set the queen's croune upon her
head, and made her queen in stead of Vasthi. And the kynke made a (...) feast
unto all his princes and servants (^h^ch feast was because of Hester) and let
the lands be in quyetnes, and gave royal gifts.

And when the virgins were gathered together the second time, Mardocheus sat
in the kings gate. And as yet had not Hester showed her kynred and her people,
acordinge as Mardocheus had bydden her: for Hester did after the word of
Mardocheus, like as when he was her tutoure. At the same time while Mardocheus
sat in the kings gate, two of the kings chamberlaynes* Bigthan and There Is
which kept the door, were wroth, and sought to lay their hands on the king
Ahasuerus: Whereof Mardocheus gat knowledge, and told it unto queen Hester, and
Hester certified the king thereof in Mardocheus name. And when inquisicion was
made, it was found so. And they were both hanged on tree: and it was written in
the Cronicles before the king.

The III. Chapter.






This was the sum of the wrytinge, yt there should be a commandment given
in all lands, to be published unto all people, yt they should be ready against
the same day. And the posts went in all the haist acordynge to the kings
commandment. And in the castle of Susan was the commandment devised. And
the king and Aman sat and drank. But ye cite of Susan was disquieted.

The IIII. Chapter.
When Mardocheus perceived all

And Mardocheus told him of all yt had

And wha^ Hathat came in, and told Hester the words of Mardocheus, Hester
spoke unto Hathat, and commanded him to say unto Mardocheus: All the kings
servants, and the people in the lands of the king know, that who so ever
comes within the court unto ye king, whether it be man or woman, which is
not called, the commandment is that the same shall dye immediately, except the
king hold out the golden cepter unto him, that he may live. As for me, I
have not been called to come in to the king now this thirty days.



The V. Chapter.




Then answered Hester and said: My peticion and desire is, if I have found
grace in ye sight of the king, and if it please the king to give me my
peticion, and to fulfill my request, then let the king and Aman come to the
bancket yt I shall prepare for the^, and so will I do tomorow as the king has
said.

Then went Aman forth the same day joyful and merry in his mind. And when he
saw Mardocheus in the kings gate, yt he stood not up and kneled before him,
he was full of indignacion at Mardocheus. Nevertheless he refrained himself:
and wha^

The VI. Chapter.
THe same night could not the king sleep, and he commanded to bring ye
Cronicles and stories: which wha^ they were red before ye king, they happened
on the place where it was written, how Mardocheus had told, that the kings
two cha^berlaynes (which kept ye tresholdes) sought to lay hondes on king
Ahasuerus. And the king said: What worship and good have we done to
Mardocheus therefore? Then said the kings servants that mynistred unto him.
There is nothing done for him. And the king said: Who is in ye court? (for
Aman was gone in to ye court without before ye kings house, yt he might
speak unto ye king to hang Mardocheus on ye tree, yt he had prepared for
him.) And the kings servants said unto him: Behold, Ama^ sto^deth in the
court. The king said: Let him come in. And wha^ Ama^ came in, ye king said
unto him: What shall be done unto ye man, whom the king would feign bring unto
worship? But Hama^ thought in his heart: Whom should the king else be glad to
bring unto worship, but me? And Aman said unto the king: Let the man unto
whom the king would be glad to do worship, be brought hither, that he may
be araied with the royal garments which the king uses to weere: and the
horse that the king rydeth upon, and that the crown royal may be set upon
his head. And let this raiment and horse be delivered under the hand of one
of the kings princes, that he may array the man withal (whom the king would
feign honor) and carry him upon the horse through the street of the cite, and
cause it to be proclaimed before him: Thus shall it be done to every man, whom
the king would feign honor.



The VII. Chapter.


As for Ama^, he was exceadingly afraied

And when the king came again out of the palace garden in to ye parler where
they had eaten, Aman had laid him upon the bed that Hester sat upon. Then
said the king: will he force the queen also beside me in the house? As soon
as that word went out of the kings mouth, they covered Amans face. And
Harbona one of the chamberlaynes that stood before the king, said Behold,
there stondeth a galowe in Ama^s house fifty cubytes hye, which he had made
for Mardocheus, that spoke good for ye king. The king said: Hang him
thereon. So they hanged Aman on the galowe that he had made for Mardocheus. Then
was the kings wrath stylled.

The VIII. Chapter.
THe same day did king Ahasuerus my people? and how can I look upon the
destruc^ion of my kynred?

Then said ye king Ahasuerus unto queen Hester, and to Mardocheus the Jew:
Behold, I have given Hester the house of Aman, and him have they hanged upon a
tree, because he laid hand upon ye Jews. Write ye now therefore for the Jews,
as it likes you in the kings name, and seal it with ye kings ring (for the
wrytinges that were written in ye kings name, and sealed with the kings
ring, durst no man dysanulle.) Then were the kings scrybes called at the same
time in the third month, that is the month Si^an, on the three and twentieth
day.



And it was written in the king Ahasuerus name, and sealed with the kings
ring. And by posts that rode upon swyfte young Mules, sent he the wrytinges,
where in the king granted the Jews (in what cities so ever they were) to
gather them selves together, and to stand for their life, and for to rote out,
to slaye, and to destroy all the power of the people and land that would
trouble them, with children and women, and to spoil their good upon one day
in all the lands of king Ahasuerus, namely upon the thirtenth day of the
twolueth month, which is the month Adar.



As for Mardocheus, he went out from the king in royal apparel of yalow and
white, and with a great crown of gold, being arrayed with a garment of
linen and purple, and ye cite of Susan reioysed and was glad: but unto the
Jews there was come light and gladness, and joy and worship. And in all
lands and cities, in to what places so ever the kings word and commandment
reached, there was joy and mirth, prosperity and good days among the Jews:
in so much that many of the people in the land became of the Jews believe, for
the fear of the Jews came upon them.

The IX. Chapter.
IN the twolueth month, that is the

Thus the Jews smote all their enemies with a sore slaughter, and slew and
destroyed, and did after their will unto soch as were their adversaries. And at
ye castle of Susan slew the Jews and destroyed five hundredth men: and slew
Parsandatha, Dalphon, Aspatha, Poratha, Adalia, Aridatha, Parmastha Arissai,
Aridai, Vaiesatha, the ten sons of

As for the other Jews in the kings lo^des, of their enemies five and
seuentye thousand, howbeit they laid no hondes on their goods. This was done
on the thirte^th day of the month Adar, and on the fourtenth day of the same
month rested they, which (day) they ordained to be a day of feastinge and
gladness. But the Jews at Susan were come together both on the thyrtenth day
and on the fourtenth, and on the fyftenth day they rested, and the same day
ordained they to be a day of feastinge and gladness. Therefore the Jews that
dwelt in the vyllages and unwalled towns, ordained ye fourtenth day of the
month Adar, to be a day of feastinge and gladness, and one sent gifts unto
another.

And Mardocheus wrote these acts, and sent the writings unto all the Jews yt
were in all ye lands of king Ahasuerus, both nigh and far, that they should
yearly receive and hold the fourtenth and fiftenth day

And the Jews received it that they had begone to do, and that Mardocheus
wrote unto them: how that Aman the son of Amadathai all ye Jews enemy, had
devised to destroy all the Jews, and caused the lot to be cast for to put
them in fear, and to bring them to naught: and how Hester went and spoke to
the king, that through letters his wicked deuyce (which he ymagyned against the
Jews) might be turned upon his own head, and how he and his sons were
hanged on the tree. For the which cause they called this day Purim after the
name of the lot, acordynge to all ye words of this wrytinge: and what they
the^ selves had seen, and what ha^ happened unto them.



And queen Hester the daughter of Abihail and Mardocheus the Jew, wrote with
all auctorite, to confirm this second wrytinge of Purim, and sent the letters
unto all the Jews in the hundredth and seven and twentye lands of ye empire of
Ahasuerus, with friendly and faithful words, to confirm these days of Purim,
in their time appointed, acordynges as Mardocheus the Jew and Hester the queen
had ordained concerning them: like as they upon their soul and upon their
sede had confirmed the acts of the (...)
fastinges and of her co^plainte. And Hester commanded to stablish these acts
of this Purim, and to write them in a book.

The X. Chapter.
ANd the king Ahasuerus laid tribute upon the land, and upon the Isles

The end of the second part of the Old Testament.
The book of Job.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I.II. The prosperity of Job, and how God gives Satan power over his
body and goods, which he is content withal Chap. III. The flesh can not
suffer: and here is described the impatient man, that grudgeth against the
judgment of God. Chap. IIII. Jobs friends comfort him, and give his sins the
blame of his punyshme^t. Chap. V. That no man is without sin. A praise off
the allmightynesse and loving kyndnesse of God. Chap. VI. Job excuses his
own vnpacience, lays ypocrysie to his fre^des charge, and says they are
but dyssemblers. Chap. VII. A friendly contencion that Job makes with God,
shewinge the miserable life and travail of man. Chap. VIII. Baldad reproves
Job. The nature of ypocrytes. Chap. IX. All men are sinners in the fight of
God, and righteousness comes only of him. He punysheth also whom he will.
Chap. X. No man is without sin, nether may any man escape the hand of God
Chap. XI. Sophar reproves Job of sin: and for so much as no man may
withstonde God, he byddeth him be pacie^t. Chap. XII. All things come off the
mighty ordinance of God. The wicked have better days then the godly. Chap.
XIII. Job speaks as he thinks, reproves the ypocrysy of his friends, and
commends the wisdom of God. Chap. XIIII. The miserable life off man. Chap.
XV.XVI. No man is innocent before God. The conversation of the ungodly. Chap.
XVII. Job declares his mysery. Chap. XVIII. Baldad reproves Job as ungodly,
and shows the punishment off the wicked. Chap. XIX. Job shows his miserable
estate, and reproves his friends, in that they increace his pain. Chap. XX.
Punysment off the proud, ungodly and ypocrytes. Chap. XXI. Wicked men have
prosperity in this world. God punysheth acordinge to his own will. Chap.
XXII. They tell Job, that is punishment comes for his sins. Chap.
XXIII.XXIIII. Job defends his innocency Chap. XXV. No man is innocent before
God. Chap. XXVI. Job mocketh his fre^des, because they go about to prove the
thing, that he denies not. The power of God. Chap. XXVII. God punysheth us
not acordinge to our merits, but is merciful and spares even the ungodly
Again, he chasteneth the most righteous (as Job was) with aduersite. Chap.
XXVIII. The wisdom and foreknowlege of God. Chap. XXIX. The prosperity that
Job was in a fore. His innocence and good deeds. Chap. XXX. He complayneth of
his mysery: how the ignorant and simple people laugh him to scorn. Chap.
XXXI. He rehearses his innocent life. Chap. XXXII. Jobs friends are angry,
and forsake him. Chap. XXXIII. God punysheth for sin, yet hears he a meke
prayer. Chap. XXXIIII. Job withsto^deth the words of them, which say, that
the wicked only are punyshed. Chap. XXXV. Job is reproved, for holdinge himself
rightuous. Chap. XXXVI. An argument, that God punishes no man, except he have
deserved it. Chap. XXXVII. The power of God is here descrybed. Job is reproved.
Chap. XXXVIII.XXXIX.XL.XLI. The foreknowlege and wisdom of God. Chap* XLII.
Jobs friends are reproved, and he himself is restored to his prosperity again.


The first Chapter.
IN the lord of Hus there was a man called Job: an innocent Genesis 22. d
soch one as feared God, and eschued evil. This man had vij. sons, and iij.
daughters. Job. 42. c
His substance was vij.M. sheep, iij.M. camels, v.C. yock of oxen, v.C. she
asses, and a very great household: so yt he was one of the most principal men
among all them of the east country. His sons now went on every man, and
made banckettes: one day in one house, another day in another, and ^ent for
their iij. sisters, to eat and drink with them. So when they had passed over
the time of their banckettinge round about, Job sent: for them, and cleansed
them again, stood up early, and offered for every one a bre^t offeringe. For
Job thought thus: peradventure my sons have done some offense, and have been
unthankful to God in their hertes. And thus did Job every day.

LORD, Job. 2. a
Satan came also among them. And the LORD said unto Satan: From whence
come thou? Satan answered the LORD, and said: I have gone about the
lord, and walked through it. 1. Pe. 5. b


Then said the LORD unto Satan: have thou not considered my servant Job,
how that he is an innocent and virtuous man: soch one as fears God, and
eschueth evil, and that there is none like him in the land? Satan answered,
and said unto the LORD: Does Job fear God for naught? have thou not
preserved him, his house, and all his substance on every side? have thou not
blessed the works of his hondes? Is not his possession encreaced in the land?
But lay thine hand upon him a little, touch once all that he has, and (I
hold) he shall curse the to thy face. And the LORD said unto Satan: lo all
that he has, be in thy power: only upon him self se that thou lay not thine
hand. Then went Satan forth from the LORD.



And while he was yet speaking, there came another, and said: The fire of God
is fallen from heaven, it has consumed and bre^t up all the sheep and
servants: and I only ran my way, to tell the. In the mean season while he
was yet speakinge, there came another, and said: The Caldees made three armies,
and fell in upon the camels, which they have carried away, ye and slain the
servants with the swearde: and I only am

Then Job stood up, and rent his clothes shaued his head, fell down upon the
ground, worshipped, and said: Naked came I out of my mothers womb, ^cls. 5.
c Tim. 6. b
and naked shall I turn thither again. The LORD gave, (...)
and the LORD has taken away (the LORD has done his pleasure) now blessed
be ye name off the LORD. (...)
In all these things did Job not offend, ner murmured foolishly against God.

The II. Chapter.
IT happened also upon a time, that LORD, (...)
Satan came also among them, and stood before him. And the LORD said unto
Satan: From whence come thou? Satan answered and said: (...)
I have gone about the lord, and walked through it.

Then said the LORD unto Satan: Have thou not considered my servant Job,
how that he is an innocent and virtuous man soch one as fears God, and
eschueth evil, and that there is none like him in the land? But thou mouedest
me against him, to punysh him: yet is it in vain, for he contynueth still in
his godliness.

Satan answered the LORD, and said: Skin for skin? ye a man will give
all yt ever he has, for his life. But lay thine hand upon him, touch him
once upon the bone and flesh, and (I hold) he shall curse the to thy face.
Then said the LORD unto Satan: lo, there have thou him in thy power, but
spare his life.

So went Satan forth from the LORD,

Then said his wife unto him: Do tho^ yet co^tynue in thy perfectness?
curse God, (...)
and dye. But Job said unto her: Thou speak like a foolish woman. Saying we
have received prosperity at the hand of God, wherefore should we not be content
with aduersite also? In all these things, (...)
did not Job sin with his lips.

Now when Jobs friends herd of all ye

For they were agreed together to come, to show their compassion upon him, and
to comfort him. So when they lift up their eyes a far off, they knew him
not.

Then they cried, and wept: then every one off them rent his clothes, and
sprynckled dust upon their heads in the air. They sat them down by him also
upon the ground, vij. days and vij. nights. Nether was there any of them
that spoke one word unto him, for they saw that his pain was very great.

The III. Chapter.
(...)
and said: lost be that day, wherein I was borne: and the night, in the which
it was said: there is a manchilde conceived. The same day be turned to
darcknesse, and not regarded of God from above, nether be shyned upon with light:
but be covered with darcknesse, and the shadow of death. Let the dymme cloud
fall upon it, and let it be lapped in with sorrow. Let the darckstorme overcome
ye night, let it not be reckened among the days off the year, ner counted in
the months. Despised be that night, and discommended: let them that curse the
day, give it their curse also, even those that be ready to raise up Leuiathan.
Let the stars be dymme through darcknesse of it. Let it look for light, but
let it se none, nether the rysynge up of the fair morning: because it shut
not up the womb that bare me, ner hyd these sorrows fro mine eyes.

(...)
as soon as I came out of my mothers womb? Why set they me upon ye irknees?
Why gave they me suck with their breasts? Then should I now have lain still, I
should have slepte, and been at rest: like as the kings and lords of ye
earth, which build them selves special places: As the princes that have
great substance of gold, and their houses full of silver. O that I utterly
had no being, or were as a thing borne out of time (that is put aside) either
as young children, which never saw the light. There must the wicked cease
from their tyranny,

Wherefore is the light given, to him that is in mysery? and life unto them,
that have heavy hertes? (Which long for death, and it comes not: for if they
might find the (...) grave, they would be marvelous glad, as those that dygge
up treasure) To the man whose way is hyd, which God keeps back from him.

This is the cause, that I syghe before I eat, and my roaringes fall out like
a water floude. For the thing that I feared, is come upon me: and the thing
that I was afraid of, is happened unto me. Was I not happy? Had I not
quietness? Was I not in rest? And now comes soch mysery upon me.

The IIII. Chapter.
THen answered Eliphas of Theman

Thy words have set up those that were fallen, thou have refresshed the weak
knees. But now that the plage is come upon the, thou shre^ckest away: now that
it has touched thyself, thou art faint hearted. Tob. 2. d
Where is now thy fear of God, thy steadfastness, thy patience, and the
perfectness of thy life? Considre (I pray the) who ever peryshed, being an
innocent? Or, when were the godly destroyed? As for those that plowe
wickedness (as I have seen myself) and sow myschefe, they reap ye same.
Gala. (...)
For when God blows upon them, they perysh, and are destroyed through the
blast of his wrath. The roaringe of the lion, the cryenge off the lioness, and
ye teth off ye lyo^s whelps are broken. The great lion perysheth, because he
ca^ get no pray and the lions whelps are scatred abroad.

There is spoken unto me a thing in council, Dan. 10. ^
when men are fallen a sleep. Soch fear and dread came upon me, that all my
bones shoke. And when the wind passed over by me, the hayres of my flesh stood
up.

Then stood there one before me, whose face I knew not: an image there was,
and the wether was still, so that I herd this voyce^ May a man be justified
before God? May there any man be judged to be clean, Job. ^5. ^ Psalm. 1. ^.
Romans 3. ^ Job. 15. b 2. Pe. ^. d
by reason of his own works? Behold, he has found unfaithfulness among
his own servants, and proud disobedience among his angels.

How much more the^ shall they (that dwell in houses of claye, whose foundation
is but earth) be moth eaten? They shall be destroyed from the morning unto the
evening: ye they shall perish, or ever they be awarre: and be taken away so
clean, that none of the^ shall remain, but be deed, or ever they be awarre off
it.

The V. Chapter.
Psalm. 36. d
that his bewty was suddenly destroyed: that his children were without
prosperity or health: that they were slain in the door, and no man to deliver
them: that his harvest was eaten up off the hungry: ^eu. 2^. d
that the weapened man had spoiled it, and that the thurstie had droncke up his
riches. It is not the earth that brings forth travail, nether comes sorrow
out of ye ground: but it is man, that is borne unto mysery, like as the bird
for to fle.

LORD, and talk of God: which does things, that are unsearchable, and
marueles without no^bre: ^eu. 28. b ^ccli. 10. c ^uc. 1. d (...). 144. b ^6. a
Re. 2. b
Which gives rain upon the earth, and pours water upon all things: which
sets up them of low degree, and sends prosperity, to those that are in
heaviness: Which destroys the deuyces of the sotyll, so that they are not
able to perform the things that they take in ho^de: ^a 8. c Cor 3. c ^al.
32. b
which compaseth ye wise in their own craf^ynesse, and ouertroweth the
council of the wicked: In so much that they run in to darcknesse by fair
day, ^eu. 28. c
and grope about them at the noone day, like as in the night.

And so he delyuereth the poor from the swearde, (...)
from their mouth, and from the ho^de of the cruel: that the poor may have
hope, and that the mouth of the oppressoure may be stopped.

(...). 3. b ^et. 4. c ^^b. ^2. a ^ec. ^. a
therefore, despise not thou ye chastenynge of the Allmighty. For though he make
a wound, he gives a medicyne again: though he smite, his hand makes whole
again.

He delyuereth the out of six troubles, so that in the seventh there can no
harm touch the. In the myddest of honger he saves ye from death: and when it
is war, from the power of the swearde.

He shall keep the from the persons tongue so that when trouble comes, thou
shall not need to fear. In destruction and derth thou shall be merry, (...)
and shall not be afraid for the beasts of the earth: But the castles in the
land shall be confederate with the, and the beasts of the field shall give the
peace:

Ye thou shall se, that thy dwelling place shall be in rest: thou shall behold
thy substance, and be no more punyshed for sin. Thou shall se also, that thy
sede shall encreace, and that thy posterite shall be as the grass upon the
earth. Thou shall come to thy grave in a fair age, like as ye corn sheeues
are brought in to the barn in due season. Lo, this is the matter, as we our
selves have proved by experience. Therefore now that thou hear it, take
better head to thy selff.

The VI. Chapter.
Job answered, and said: O that my misery weere weyed, and my punishment

For the allmighty has shot at me with his arowes, whose indignacion has
droncke up my sprete, and ye terrible fears of God fight against me. Does the
wild ass roar when he has grass? Or cries the ox, (...)
when he has fodder enough? May a thing be eaten unseasoned, or without
salt? What taist has ye white within the yoke an egg? The things that
sometime I might not a way withal, are now my meat for very sorrow. O that I
might have my desire: O ye God would grant me the thing, that I long for:
That he would begin and smite me: that he would let his hand go, and hew me
down. The^ should I have some comfort: ye I would desire him in my pain,
that he should not spare, for I will not be against ye words of the holy one.

What power have I to endure? Or* what (...)
the snow shall fall upon them.

When their time comes, they shall be destroyed and perish: and when they be
set on fire, they shall be removed out of their place. for the paths yt they go
in, are crooked: they haist after vain things, and shall perish. Considre the
paths off Theman, and the ways off Saba, wherein they have put their trust.
Confounded are they, that put any confidence in them: For when they came to
opteyne the things that they looked for, they were brought to confucion.



Wherefore blame ye then the words, that are well and truly spoken? which of
you can reprove them? Saving only that ye are sotyll to check men's sayenges,
and can speak many words in the wind. Ye fall upon the fatherless, and go
about to overthrow your own friend. Wherefore look not only upon me, but
upon your selves: whether I lie, or no. Turn in to your own selves (I pray
you) be indifferent judges, and considre mine vngyltinesse: whether there be
any unrighteousness in my tongue, or vain words in my mouth.

The VII. Chapter.
(...)
I said: O when shall I rise? Again, I longed sore for the night. Thus am I
full off sorrow, till it be darcke. My flesh is clothed with worms,
fylthinesse and dust: my skin is wythered, and crompled together: Job. 9. c
14. a
my days pass over more spedely, the^ a weeuer can weeue out his web, and
are gone, or I am awarre. O remember, that my life is but a wind, and that
mine eye shall no more se the pleasures thereof ye and that none other man's eye
shall se me any more. For if thou fasten thine eyes upon me, I come to naught*
like as a cloud is consumed and vanyshed away, even so he that goes down to
hell, comes no more up, ner turns again in to his house, nether shall his
place know him any more.

Therefore I will not spare my mouth, but Dan. ^. a
and make me so afraid through visions, that my soul wyssheth rather to be
hanged, and my bones to be deed.

I can se no remedy, I shall live no more: O spare me then, for my days are but
vain What is man, Matt. ^ c Deu. 8. a Genesis 22 a
that thou have him in soch reputacion, and set so much by him? Thou take
diligent care for him, and suddenly do thou try him.

Why go thou not fro me, ner let me alone, so long till I swalow down
my spetle? I have offended, what shall I do unto ye, O thou preserver off men?
Why have thou made me to stand in thy way, and am so heavy a burden unto
myself? Why do thou not forgive me my sin? Wherefore take thou not away
my wickedness? Behold, now must I sleep in the dust: and yff thou sekest me
tomorow in the morning, I shall be gone.

The VIII. Chapter.
THen answered Baldad the Suhit^ and said: How long will thou talk Job. 1. c
did not he punysh the^ for their wickedness? Yff thou would now resort
unto God by times, Deu. 30.
and make thine humble prayer to ye Almighty: if thou would live a pure and
a godly life: should he not wake up unto the immediately, and give the the
beauty of righteousness again? In so much, that where i^ so ever thou had
little before, thou should now have great abundaunce. Enquere of them that
have been before the, search diligently among thy forefathers: Namely, yt we
are but of yesterdaye, and considre not, that our days upon earth are buth a
very shadow. They shall show the, Psalm. 14^*
they shall tell the, ye they will gladly confess the same.



He leeneth him upon his house, but he shall not stand: he holds him fast by
it, yet shall he not endure. Often times a thing does flourish, and men think
that it may abide the Sonneshyne: it shuteth forth the branches in his
garden, it takes many rotes, in so much that it is like an house off stones.
But if it be taken out off his place, every man denies it, saying: I know
the not. Lo, thus is it with him, that reioyseth in his own doings: and as for
other, they grow out of the earth.

Behold, God will not cast away a virtuous man, nether will he help the
ungodly. Thy mouth shall he fill with laughing, and thy lyppes with gladness.
They that hate the, shall be confounded, and ye dwellinges of ye ungodly shall
come to naught.

The IX. Chapter.
Psalm. 142. a (...) To. 3. b (...) Job. 4. b (...). b. 25. a
yt a man compared unto God, can not be justified. If he will argue with him, he
shall not be able to answer him unto one among a thousand. He is wise of
heart, and mighty in strength. Who ever prospered, that took part against him?
He translateth the mountains, or ever they be awarre, and overthrows them in
his wrath. He remoueth the earth out of her place, that her pilers shake
withal. He commands the Son, and it ryseth not: he closes up the
stars, as it were under a signet. He himself alone spredeth out ye heavens,
and goes upon the wawes of the sea. He makes the waynes of heaven, the
Orions, Amos. 5 a
the Some ^all the^e seven ^tarres, ^^he clock soenne ^ith her ^hekens.
vij. stars and the secret places of the south. He does great things, soch
as are unsearchable, ye and wonders without nombre.

If he came by me, I might not look upon him: if he went his way, I should
not perceive it. If he be haisty to take any thing Eccls. 8. g Iere. 10. a
whose wrath no man may with sto^de: but the proudest of all must stoop under
him. How should I then answer him? or, what words should I find out against
him? Ye though I be rightuous, yet will I not give him one word again, but
mekely submytte my self to my judge. All be it that I call upon him, and he
hear me, yet am I not sure, yt he has herd my voice: he troubles me so with
the tempest, and wounds me out of measure without a cause. He will not let my
sprete be in rest, but fylleth me with bytternesse.

If men will speak of strength, he is the

This one thing will I say: (...)
He destroys both the rightuous and ungodly. And though he slaye suddenly with
the scourge, yet laugheth he at the punishment of the innocent. As for the
world, he gives it over in to the power of the wicked, soch as the rulers be,
whereof all lands are full. Is it not so? where is there any, but he is soch
one?

My days have been more swifte, (...)
then a

The X. Chapter.
Nevertheless, now will I put forth say unto God: O do not condemn me, but
show me the cause, wherefore thou iudgest me on this manner. Think thou it
well done, to oppress me, to cast me of (being a work of thy hondes) and to
manteyne the council of the ungodly? Have thou fleszshy eyes then, or do
thou look as man looks? Are thy days as the days of man, and thy years as
man's years? that thou make soch inquisicion for my wickedness, and
searchest out my sin? where as (notwithstondinge) thou know that I am no
wicked person, and that there is no man able to deliver me out of thine hand.
(...)
Thy hondes have made me, and fashioned me altogether round about, will thou
then destroy me suddenly? O remember (I beseke the) how that thou made me of
the moulde of the earth, and shall bring me to earth again.



Though thou hydest these things in thine heart, yet am I sure, that thou
remembrest the^ all. Wherefore did thou keep me, when I sinned, and have not
cleansed me fro mine offense? If I do wickedly, woe is me therefore: If I be
rightuous, yet darre I not lift up my head: so full am I of confucion, and se
mine own misery.

(...)
O that I had perished, and that no eye had seen me. If they had carried me to
my grave, as soon as I was borne, then should I be now, as though I had never
been.

Shall not my short life come soon to an end? O hold the fro me, let me
alone, that I may ease my self a little: before I go thither, from whence I shall
not turn again: Namely, to that land of darcknesse and shadow of death: ye
in to that darck clowdy land and deadly shadow, where as is no order, but
terrible fear as in the darcknesse.

The XI. Chapter.


Will thou find out God with thy seeking? will thou attain to the
perfectness of the Almighty? He is hyer the^ heaven, what will thou do?
Deper the^ hell, how will thou then know him? His length exceadeth the length
of the earth, and his breadth ye breadth of the sea. Though he turn all things
up side down, close them in, or thrust the^ together, who darre check him
therefore?

For it is he, that knows the vanite of 1. Re. 16 Iere. 17. d
should he not then considre it? A vain body exalts him self, and the son
of man is like a wild asses foale. If thou had now a right heart, and
liftest up thine hondes toward him: if thou would put away the wickedness,
which thou have in hand, so that no ungodliness dwelt in thy house: Then
might thou lift up thy face without shame, the^ should thou be sure, and
have no need to fear.

Then should thou forget thy misery, and think no more upon it, then upon the
waters that run by. Then should thy life be as clear as the noone day, and
spring forth as the morning. Then might thou have comforth, in the hope
that thou have: and sleep quyetly, when thou art buried. Then should thou
take thy rest, and no man to make the afraid, ye many one should set much by
the. As for the eyes of the ungodly, they shall be consumed, and not escape:
their hope shall be misery and sorrow of mind.

The XII. Chapter.
SO Job answered, and said: Then

The houses of robbers are in wealth and prosperity, and they that maliciously
meddle against God, dwell without care: ye God gives all things richely with
his hand.

LORD made all these? In whose hand is the soul of every living thing, ^ap
3. a ^ob 34. a
and the breath of all men. Have not the ears pleasure in hearing, and the
mouth in tastinge the thing that it eats? (...). 32. d
Among old persons there is wyszdome, and among the aged is
vndersto^dinge. Ye with God is wyszdome and strength, it is he that has
council and foreknowlege. If he break down a thing, who can set it up
again? If he shutt a thing, ^sa 22. d ^po. 3. b ^sa. 50. a
who will open it? Behold, if he witholde the waters, they dry up: If he let
the^ go, they destroy the earth. With him is strength and wyszdome: he knows
both the disceauer, and him that is disceaued.

^. Par. 18. c Eze. 14. b
and disapoynteth ye aged of their wyszdome. He pours out confucion upon
princes, and comforts them that have been oppressed. Luc. 12. a
Look what lies hyd in darcknesse, he declares it openly: and the very
shadow of death brings he to light. He both increases the people, and
destroys them: He makes them to multiply, and dryueth them away. He
changes the heart of the princes and kings of the earth, and disapoynteth
them: so that they go wa^dringe out of the way, and grope in the darcke
without light, stackeringe to and fro like droncken men.

The XIII. Chapter.
Pro. 17. d
and pondre the sentence of my lips. Will ye make answer for God with lies,
and ma^teyne him with disceate? Will ye accept ye person of God, and entreat
for him? Shall that help you, when he calls you to reckoning? Think ye to
begyle him, as a man is begyled? Punysh you shall he and reprove you, if ye do
secretly accept any person. Shall he not make you afraid, when he shows
himself? Shall not his terrible fear fall upon you? your remembrance shall be
like the dust, and your pride shall be turned to claye.

Hold your tongues now, and let me speak, (...)
But if I show and reprove mine own ways in his sight, he is even the same,
that makes me whole: and why? there may no Ypocrite come before him, Hear my
words, and pondre my sayenges with your ears. Behold, though sentence were
given upon me, I am sure to be known for unguilty. What is he, that will go to
law with me? For if I hold my tongue, I shall dye. Nevertheless grant me ij.
things, and then will I not hyde my self from the.

Withdraw thine hand fro me, and let not ^para
thou lokest narowly unto all my paths, and marckest the steps of my fete:
where as I (notwithstondinge) must consume like as a foul carrion, and as a
cloth that is moth eaten.

The XIIII. Chapter.
MAn that is borne of a woman, has he can not go beyond them. Go from him,
that he may rest a little: until his day come, which he looks for, like as
an hyrelinge does.

(...)
The floudes when they be dried up, and the ryuers when they be empty, are
filled again through the flowinge waters of the sea: (...)
but when man slepeth, he ryseth not again, until the heaven perish: he shall
not wake up ner rise out of his sleep. O that thou would keep me, and hyde me
in the hell, until thy wrath were stilled: and to appoynte me a time, wherein
thou might remember me. May a deed man live again? All the days of this
my pilgremage am I lokynge, (...)
when my chaunginge shall come. If thou would but call me, I should obeie the:
only despise not the work of thine own hondes. (...)




The XV. Chapter.


Do thou no more regard the comfort Job 4. b 2. Pet. 2. d
ye the very heavens are unclean in his sight. How much more then an
abominable and vile man, which dryncketh wickedness like water? I will tell
the, hear me: I will shewethe a thing, that I know: which wise men have
told, and has not been hyd from their fathers: unto whom only the land was
given* that no stranger should come among them.

The ungodly despayreth all the days of Genesis 4. b
and the nombre of a tyrauntes years is unknown. A fearful sound is ever in
his ears, and when it is peace, yet fears he destruction: He believes never
to be delivered out of darcknesse, the swearde is allwaye before his eyes. When
he goes forth to get his lyuinge, he thinks planely, that the day of
darcknesse is at hand. Sorrow and carfulness make him afraid, and compass
him round about, like as it were a king with his host ready to the battayll.
For he has stretched out his hand against God, and armed himself against ye
Almighty. He runs proudly upon him, and with a stiff neck fights he
against him: where as he covers his face with fatness, and makes his body
well liking. Therefore shall his dwelling be in desolate cities, and in houses
which noma^ inhabiteth, but are become heaps of stones.

He shall not be rich, nether shall his substance

He shall perish, before his time be worn out, and his hand shall not be grene.
He shall be pluckte of as an untimely grape from ye vine, and shall let his
flower fall, as the olyue does. For the congregation of Ypocrites is
unfruitful, and the fire shall consume the houses of soch, Psalm. 7. b Esa. 59. a
as are gredy to receive gifts. He conceaueth travail, he bears myschefe,
and his body brings forth disceate.

The XVI. Chapter.


3. Re. 22 d Mar. 14. g
and smytten me upon the cheke despitefully, they have eased the^ selves through
mine aduersite. God has given me over to the ungodly, and delivered me in to
the hondes of ye wicked. I was sometime in wealth, but suddenly has he brought
me to naught. He has taken me by the neck, he has rent me, and set me, as it
were a marck for him to shute at. He has compased me round about with his
darts, he has wounded my loins, and not spared. My bowels has he poured
upon the ground. He has given me one wound upon another, and is fallen upon
me like a giaunte. I have sowed a sack cloth upon my skin, and lie with my
strength in the dust.



The XVII. Chapter.
MY breath fails, my days are shortened,

The rightuous will keep his way, and he

The XVIII. Chapter.
THen answered Baldad the Suhite,



The XIX. Chap.
(...)
yet violence is done unto me, I can not be herd: Though I complane, there is
none to give sentence with me. He has hedged up my path, I ca^ not get away,
he has set darcknesse in my gate.



His men of war came together, which made their way over me, and beseged my
dwellinge round about. (...)
He has put my brethren far away fro me, and soch as were of mine
acquauntaunce, are become strangers unto me. Mine own kynszfolkes have
forsaken me, and my friends have put me out of remembrance. The servants and
maidens of mine own house take me for a stranger, and I am become as an
aleaunt in their sight.

When I call upon my servant, he gives LORD has touched me. Seeing God
persecuteth me, will ye vex me also? Have ye not yet enough of the trouble of
my flesh?

O that my words were written, O that

The XX. Chapter.
THen answered Sophar the Naamathite,

From his youth his bones are full of vice, wickedness is sweet in his mouth,
he hydeth it under his tongue. That he favors, that will he not forsake, but
keeps it close in his throat. The meat that he eats, shall be turned to the
poison of serpe^tes within his body. The riches yt he deuoureth, shall he
perbreake again, for God shall draw them out of his belly. The serpents head
shall suck him, and the adders tongue shall slaye him: so that he shall no more
se the ryuers and brokes of honey and butter: But labor shall he, and yet have
nothing to eat. Great travail shall he make for riches, but he shall not
enjoy them. And why? he has oppressed the poor, and not helped them: houses
has he spoiled, and not builded them. His belly could never be filled, therefore
shall he perish in Eccls. 5. b
Though he had plenteousnesse of euerythinge, yet was he poor, and therefore he
is but a wretch on every side.

For though ye wicked have never so much to fill his belly, yet God shall send
his wrath upon him* and cause his battayll to rain over him: so that if he fle
the iron weapens, he shall be shot with the stele bow. The arowe shall be
taken forth, and go out at his back, and a glisteringe swearde through ye gall
of him, fear shall come upon him. There shall no darcknes be able to hyde him.
An vnkyndled fire shall consume him, and look what remains in his house, it
shall be destroyed. The heaven shall declare his wickedness, and the earth
shall take part against him. The substance that he has in his house, shall be
taken away and perish, in the day of the LORDS wrath. This is the portion
that ye wicked shall have of God, Job 27. b
and the heretage that he may look for of the LORD.

The XXI. Chapter.
Psalm. 72. a Iere. 12. a
Wherefore do wicked me^ live in health and prosperity, come to their old age,
and increase in riches? Their childers children live in their sight, and their
generation before their eyes. Pro. 3. b Heb. 12. a
Their houses are safe from all fear, for the rodd of God does not smite the^.
Their bullock gendreth, and that not out of time: their cow calueth, and is
not unfruitful.

They send forth their children by flocks, (...)
They bear with them tabrettes and harpes, and have instruments of music at
their pleasure. They spend their days in welthynesse: but suddenly they go
down to hell. They say unto God: go from us, we desire not the knowledge of
thy ways. (...)
What manner of fellow is the Almighty, that we should serve him? What profit
should we have, to submit our selves unto him? Lo, there is utterly no
goodness in them, therefore will not I have to do with the council of the
ungodly. How often shall the candle of ye wicked be put out* (...)
how often comes their destruction upon them? O what sorrow shall God give them
for their part in his wrath? Ye they shall be even as chafe before the wind,
(...)
and as dust that the storm carries away.

And though God save their children from (...)
For ye say: where is the princes palace? where is the dwelling of the
ungodly: Axe any man that goes by the way, and (if ye will not regard their
tokens and deeds) he shall tell you, (...)
that the wicked is kept unto the day of destruction, and that the ungodly
shall be brought forth in the day of wrath. Who darre reprove him for his ways
to his face^ who rewards him for the ungraciousness that he does? Yet shall
he be brought to his grave, and watch among the heap of the deed. The^ shall
he be feign to be buried among the stones by the brokesyde. All men must
follow him, and there are innumerable gone before him. O how vain is the
comfort ye ye give me? Are not your answers clean contrary to right and
treuth?

The XXII. Chapter.
(...)
Comes not this for ye great wickedness, (...)
and for thine ungracious deeds which are innumerable? Thou have taken the
pledge from thy brethren for naught, and robbed the naked of their clothinge:
(...)
To soch as were weery, have thou given no water to drink, thou have
withdrawe^ bred from the hungry: Should soch one the^ as uses violence,
wrong and oppression (doing all things of parcialyte, and having respect
of persons) dwell in the lord? Thou have sent wyddowes away empty and
oppressed the poor fatherless.

(...)
Tush, how should God know? Does his dominion reach beyond the clouds? Tush,
the clouds cover him, yt he may not se, for he dwells in heaven. Well, thou will keep the old way, yt all wicked me^ have gone: both old and young,
whose foundation is a runnynge water, which say unto God: go from us, and
after this manner: Tush, (...)
what will the Almighty do unto us? where as he (not with sto^dinge) fylleth
their houses with all good. Which meaning of the ungodly be far fro me. (...)
For with joy shall the godly, and with gladness shall the innocent se, that their
increase shall be hewn down, and their posterite consumed with the fire.

(...)
Receive the law at his mouth, and lay up his words in thine heart. For if
thou will turn to the Almighty, (...)
thou shall stand fast, and all unrighteousness shall be far from thy
dwellinge: He shall give the an harvest, which in plenty and abundaunce shall
exceade the dust of the earth, and the gold of Ophir like river stones. Ye
the Almighty his own self shall be thine harvest, and the heap of thy money.
Then shall thou have thy delight in the Almighty, and lift up thy face unto
God. The^ shall thou make thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear the, and thou
shall keep thy promyses. The^, look what thou take in hand, he shall make it
to prospere with the, and the light shall shine in thy ways. For who so
humbles himself, him shall he set up: and who so looks mekely, shall be healed.
If thou be innocent, he shall save the: and through the vngiltynesse of thine
hands shall thou be delivered.

The XXIII. Chapter.
Job answered, and said: My saying Sap. 3. a 1. Pet. 1. ^
he knows it: and tries me as ye gold in ye fire.

Nevertheless my fete keep his path, his

The XXIIII. Chapter.
COnsideringe then that there is no time Deu. 19. c 27. c Exo. 22. c
that rob them of their catell, and keep the same for their own: that drive
away the ass of the fatherless: that take ye wyddowes ox for a pledge: that
thrust the poor out of the way, Exo. 23. a
and oppress the simple of the world together. Behold, the wild asses in ye
deserte go by times (as their manner is) to spoil: Ye the very wilderness
ministers food for their children. They reap the corn field that is not
their* own: and gather the grapes out of his vynyarde, whom they have
oppressed by violence. They are the cause yt so many men are naked and bare,
having no clothes to cover them and keep them

They spoil the suckinge fatherless children, and put the poor in preson: In
so much that they let them go naked without clothinge, and yet the (...) bear
the sheeues. The poor are (...) to labor in their oil mylles, ye (...)
tread in their wine presses, and yet (...) thyrst. The whole cite cries unto
the LORD with sighinge, ^oc. 6. b Es. 15. b
the souls of the ^layne make their complaynte: But God destroys them not
for all this, where as they (not with sto^dinge) are rebellious and disobedient
enemies: which seek not his light and way, ner turn again in to his path.
(...). 22. d
Tymely in the morning do they arise, to murthur the simple and poor, and in
the night they go a stealinge.

The eye of the ungodly is like the aduouterer,

The XXV. Chapter.
THen answered Baldad the Suhite, (...)
But how may a man compared unto God, be justified? Or, how can he be clean,
that is borne of a woman? Behold, the Moon shyneth nothing in comparison to
him, and the stars are unclean in his sight. How much more the^, man, that is
but corrupcion: and the son of man, which is but a worm?

The XXVI. Chapter.
Job answered, and said: O how helpest

He has co^pased the waters with certain bounds, (...)
until the day and night come to an end. The very pilers of heaven tremble
and quake at his reprofe. (...)
He stilleth the sea with his power, and through his wyszdome has he set forth
ye world. With his sprete has he garnished the heavens, and with his hand
has he wounded the rebellious serpent. This is now a short sum of his
doings. But who is able sufficiently to rehearce his works? Who can perceive
and understand ye thondre of his power?

The XXVII. Chapter.
Job also proceaded and went forth in

God forbydde, that I should grant your cause to be right. As for me, until
mine end come will I never go fro mine innocence. My rightuous dealing will I
keep fast, and not forsake it: For my conscience reproves me not in all my
conversation. Therefore mine enemy shall be found as the ungodly, and he yt
takes part against me, as the unrighteous. What hope has ye Ypocrite, though
he have great good, and though God give him riches after his hertes desire?
Does God hear him the sooner, when he cries unto

The XXVIII. Chapter.
(...) ^. b
and where gold is tried: where iron is dygged out of the ground, and stones
resolved to metal. The darcknes shall once come to an end, he can seek out the
ground of all things: the stones, the darcke, and the horrible shadow. with
the river of water parts he a sunder the strange people, yt knows no good
neghbourheade: soch as are rude, unmannerly and boysteous. He brings food out
of the earth, and yt which is under, consumes he with fire. There is found a
place, whose stones are clean Saphirs, and where ye clottes of the earth are
gold. There is a way also that the birds know not, that no vulturs eye has
seen: wherein ye proud and hye minded walk not, and where no lion comes.
There puts he his hand upon the stony rocks, and overthrows the
mountains. Ryuers flow out of the rocks, and look what is pleasant, his eye
seyth it. Out of drops brings he great floudes together, and the thing
that is hyd brings he ^o light. How comes a man then by wyszdome? Eccli. 1.
a 7. c Jacob. 1. a ^. Reg. 3. b 4. c Pro. ^. a Sap. 7. b
Where is the place that men find understanding? Verily no man can tell how
worthy a thing she is, nether is she found in the lord of the living. The
deep says: she is not in me. The sea says: she is not with me. She can not
be gotten for the most fine gold, nether may the price of her be bought with
any money. No wedges of gold of Ophir, no precious Onix stones, no Saphirs
may be compared unto her. No, nether gold ner Crystal, nether sweet odours
ner golden plate. There is nothing so worthy, or so excellent, as once to be
named unto her: for parfecte wyszdome goes far beyond the^ all. The Topas
that comes out of Inde, may in no wise be lickened unto her: ye no manner of
apparel how pleasant and fair so ever it be.

From whence then comes wyszdome? and Psalm. 110. b Pro. 1. a 9 b Eccli. 1. e
to fear the LORD, is wyszdome: and to forsake evil, is understanding.

The XXIX. Chap.
SO Job proceaded and went forth in of oil: when I went through the cite unto
the gate, and when they set me a chair in ye street: Genesis 14. c




The XXX. Chapter.
(...)
Now am I their song, and am become their iestinge stock. they abhor me,
they fle far fro me and stayne my face with spetle. For ye LORD has opened
his quyuer, he has hytt me, and put a bridle in my mouth. Upon my right hand

The XXXI. Chap.
I Made a covenant with mine eyes, yt I (...)
For how great a porcio^ shall I have of God from above? and what enheritau^ce
from ye Almighty on hie? As for the ungodly and he yt joins himself to ye
co^pani of wicked doers shall not

(...)
and causes every man to find acordinge to his ways. For sure it is, that
God condemns no man wrongeously, and the judgment of the Almighty is not
unrighteous. Who rules the earth in his stead? Or, whom has he set to
govern the whole world? To whom has he given his heart, for to draw his
sprete and breath unto him? All flesh shall come together unto naught, (...)
and all me^ shall turn again unto earth. If thou now have vndersto^dinge,
hear what I say and harken to the voice of my words.

May he be made whole, that loves no right? If thou were a very innocent man,
should thou then be punyshed? For he is even the same, yt knows the
rebellious kings, and says to princes: Ungodly men are ye He has no
respect unto the persons of ye lordly, and regards not the rich more the^
poor. For they be all the work of his hondes. (...)
and he seyth all his goinges. There is no darcknes ner thick shadow, yt can
hyde the wicked doers from him. For no man shall be suffered to go into judgment
with God.

(...)
Many one, ye innumerable does he punyshe and sets other in their steades.
For he knows their evil and darcke works, therefore shall they be destroyed.
They that were in ye stead of Seers, dealt like ungodly me^. Therefore turned
they back traytorously and unfaithfully from hi^, and would not receive his
ways. In so much that they have caused ye voice of the poor to come unto him,
and now he hears the co^playnte of soch as are in necessite. If he deliver
and grant pardon, who will judge or condemn? But if he hyde away his
countenance, who will turn it about again, whether it be to the people or to
any man? For the wickedness and sin of ye

The XXXV Chapter.
ELiu spoke morouer, and said: Think Psalm. ^9. b Heb. 10. a Psalm. 49. ^
Of soch an ungodly person as thou, and of ye son of man that is rightuous
as thou pretendest to be: there is a great cry and co^playnte made by the^
that are oppressed with violence, ye every man complayneth upon the cruel
arm of tyrauntes. For soch one never says: Where is God that made me? and yt
shyneth

If any soch complain, no man geu^^h answer, and yt because of the
wickedness off proud tyrauntes. But if a man call upon God, does not he hear
him? Does not the Almighty accept his cry? Wha^ thou speak then, should
not he pardon the, yff thou open thy self before him, and put thy trust in him?
Then uses he no violence in his wrath nether has he pleasure in curious and
deep inquisicions. Therefore has Job opened his mouth but in vain, and
folishly has he made so many words.

The XXXVI. Chapter.
ELiu proceaded forth in his talkinge, and said: hold the still a little, and
I

As for the ungodly, he preserves the^ not but helps the poor to their
right. ^sal. 31. b ^ Re. 7. c ^. Re. 10. c Par. 33. c
He turns not his eyes away from the rightuous he sets up kings in their
Trone, and confirms them, so that they allwaye sit therein. But if they be
laid in preson and cheynes, or bound with the bonds of pouerte: then shows
he them their works and deeds and the sins wherwt they have used cruel
violence.

Esa. 1. c
and their years in pleasure and joy. But yff they will not obey, they shall
go through the swearde, and perish or ever they be awarre. As for soch as be
feigned, dyssemblers and ypocrytes, they heap up wrath for them selves: for
they call not upon him, though they be his presoners. Thus their soul
perishes in foolishness, and their life with ye condemned. The poor delyuereth
he out of his straytnesse, and comfort soch as be in necessite and trouble.
Even so shall he keep the (if thou will be content) from the bottomless pytte
that is beneth: and if thou will hold the quyete, he shall fill thy table with
plenteousnesse.

Nevertheless, thou have condemned the

Deu. 11. c 28. d
He can sprede out the clouds (a covering off his tabernacle) and cause his
light to shine upon them, and to cover the botome of the sea. By these things
governs he his people, and gives the^ abundaunce of meat. In ye turnynge of
a hand he hydeth the light, and at his commandment it comes again. The
rysinge up thereof shows he to his friends and to the catell.

The XXXVII. Chapter.
AT this my heart is astonnied, and moved (...)
As soon as he gives the rain a charge, Immediately the showers have their
strength and fall down He sends fear upon every man, that they might know
their own works. The beestes crepe in to their dens, and take their rest.
Out of the south comes the tempest, and cold out of the north.

At the breath of God, the frost comes, and

Harken unto this (o Job) stand still, and considre the wondrous works of
God. Art thou of counsel with God, when he does these things? When he causes
the light to come forth of his clouds? Art thou of his counsel, when he
spredeth out the clouds? Have thou the perfect knowledge of his wonders? and
how thy clothes are warm, when the lord is still through the south wind? have
thou helped him to spread out the heaven, which is to look upon, as it were cast
of clear metal? north, but the praise and honor off Gods fear comes from
God himself. It is not we that can find out the almighty: for in power,
equite and rigtuousnesse he is hyer then can be expressed. Saying then that
every body fears him, why should not all wise men also sto^de in fear of hi^?

Chap. XXXVIII.
LORD unto Job out of the storm, (...)
and said: what is he, that hydeth his mind with foolysh words? Gyrde up thy
loins like a man, for I will question the se thou give me a dyrecte answer.
Where wast thou, when I laid ye foundacions of the earth? Tell planely yff
thou have understanding. Who has measured it, know thou? Or, who has
spread ye line upon it? Where upon sto^de the pilers of it? (...)
Or, who laid ye corner stone? where wast thou when the morning stars gave
me praise, and when all the angels of God reioysed? (...)
Who shutt the sea with doors, when it brake forth as a child out off his
mothers womb? When I made the clouds to be a coueringe for it, and swedled it
with ye darcke? (...)
when I gave it my commandment, making doors and bars for it, saying:
Hither to shall thou come, but no further, and here

(...)
or have thou seen ye secret places of the hale: which I have prepared against
the time of trouble, against the time of batell and war? By what way is the
light parted, and the heat dealt out upon earth? Who deuydeth the abundau^ce
of waters in to ryuers, or who makes a way for the stormy wether, yt it
waters and moystureth ye dry and baren ground: to make the grass grow in
places where no body dwells, and in the wilderness where no man remains? Who
is the father of rain? Or, who has begotten the drops of dew? Out of whose
womb came the yse? who has gendred the coldness of ye air? yt the waters are
as hard as stones, and lie congeeled above the deep. Have thou brought ye vij.
stars together? Or, art thou able to break the Circle of heaven? Can thou
bring forth the morning star or the evening Psa. 14^. ^
when his young ones cry unto God, and fle about for want of meat?

Chap. XXXIX.
Know thou the time when the wild

So hard is he unto his young ones, as though they were not his, and labors
in vain without any fear. And that because God has taken wisdom from him,
and has not given him understanding. When his time is, he flies up an hye,
and cares nether for horse ner man.



Mat. 24. c
and where any deed body lies, there is he immediately.

Morouer, God spoke unto Job and said: Can he that stryueth with the
Almighty, be at rest? Should not he which disputes with God, give him an
answer? Job answered the LORD, saying: Behold, I am to vile a person, to
answer the, therefore will I lay my hand upon my mouth. Once or twyse have I
spoken, but I will say no more.

The XL. Chapter.
THen spoke the LORD unto Job out Job. 38, a
and tell me the thing that I will axe the. Will thou disanulle my judgment?
Or, will thou condemn me, yt thou thy self may be made rightuous? Is thine
arm then like the arm of God? Makes thy voice soch a sou^de as his does?
Then arm thy self with thine own power, up, deck the in thy ioly array,
pour out the indignacion of thy wrath: se that thou cast down all ye proud,
look well, that thou make all soch as be stubburne, to obey: tread all the
ungodly under thy fete, cast the^ down in to the mire, and cover their faces
with darcknesse: Then will I confess also, that thine own right hand has
saved the.

Behold, the cruel beast (whom I made

Darrest thou draw out Leuiathan with (...)
Can thou put a ring in the nose of him, or bore his chaftes through with a
naule? Will he make many fair words with the (thynkest thou) or flatre the?
Will he make a covenant with the? Or, art thou able for to compel him to do
the contynuall service? Will thou take thy pastyne with him as with a bird, or
give him unto thy maidens, that thy companyons may hew him in pieces, to be
parted among the merchant men? Can thou fill the nett with his skin, or ye
fysh pa^nyer with his head? Darrest thou lay hand upon him? It is better for
the to considre what harm might happen the there through and not to touch him.
For when thou thynkest to have hold upon him, he shall begyle the: Every man
also that seyth him, shall go back. And why? there darre none be so bold, as
to raise him up.

The XLI. Chapter.
WHo is able to stand before me? Or, (...)
that I am bound to reward him again? All things under heaven are mine. I
fear him not, whether he threaten or speak fair. Who lifts him up and
stripeth him out of his clothes, or who takes him by the bytt of his bridle?
Who opens the door of his face? for he has horrible tethe round about. His
body is covered with scales as it were with shyldes, lockte in, kept, and well
co^pacte together. One is so joined to another, that no air can come in: Ye
one hangs so upon another, and stick so together, that they can not be
sundered. His nesinge is like a glisteringe fire, and his eyes like the
morning shine. Out of his mouth go torches and fire brandes, out off

His heart is as hard as a stone, and as fast as the styth ye that the hammer
man smyteth upon. When he goes: the mightiest off all are afraid, and the
wawes heavy. Yff he draw out the swearde, there may nether

The XLII. Chapter.
LORD, and said: I know that thou have power of all things, (...)
and that there is no thought hyd unto the. For who can keep his own council
so secret, but it shall be known? Therefore have I spoken unwisely, seeing
these things are so hye, and pass mine understanding. O harken thou unto me
also, and let me speak: answer me unto the thing that I will axe the. I have
given diligent ear unto the, and now I se ye with mine eyes. Wherefore I give
mine own self ye blame, and take repentance in the dust and ashes.

Now when the LORD had spoken these words unto Job, he said unto Eliphas ye
Themanite: I am displeased with the and thy two friends, for ye have not spoken
the thing yt is right before me, like as my serua^^^ Job has done. Therefore
take vij. oxen (...) seven rams, and go to my servant (...) offer up also
for your selves a brent offe^^^^^ge, and lat my servant Job pray for (...)
Him will I accept, and not deal with (...) after your foolishness: in that
ye hau^ (...) spoken ye thing which is right, like as my (...) Job has done.

So Eliphas the Themanite, Bald (...) Suhite and Sophar the Naamathite (...)
their way, and did acordynge as the (...) commanded them. The LORD also
(...) the person off Job, and the LOR^^ (...) turned him unto Job, when he
prayed for (...) friends: Ye the LORD gave Job twyse (...) much as he had
before.

And the^ came there unto him all his (...) thren, all his sisters with all
them that (...) been off his acqua^tau^ce before, and ate (...) with him in his
house, wondringe at him, and (...) comfortinge him over all the trouble, (...)
the LORD had brought upon him. (...) man gave him a sheep and a Jewel of (...)

And the LORD made Job richer the^ (...) was before: for he had xiiij.M.
sheep, vi. (...) camels, a M. yock oxe^, and a M. asses. (...) had children
also: vij. sons and iij. dough^ters. The first he called Day, the second
(...) pouerte: the third, All plenteousnes. In the land were none found so
fair, as (...) daughters of Job, and their father gave (...) enheritaunce
among their brethren. After this lived Job xl. years, so that he saw his
children, and his childers children unto the fourth generation. And so he dyed,
being old and of a perfect age.

The end of the book of Io^ (...)
The Psalter
The first psalm.
O Blessed is ye man, yt goes (...) in the council of ye vngod^^ (...) yt
abides not in the way (...) sinners, and sytteth not in ye (...) of the
scornful. But (...) lyteth in the law of ye LORD, and exercise (...)
himself in his law both ^aye and night. (...) Soch a man is like a tree plated
(...) ye water, syd^de, yt bri^geth forth his fruit in due season.

His leeues shall not fall off, and look what (...) he does, it shall prospere.
As for the (...), it is not so with them: but they are (...) dust, which ye
wind scatereth (...) of the ground. Therefore the ungod (...) all not be able
to stand in the judgment, (...) the sinners in the congregation off ^ightuous.
For the LORD aloweth ye (...) ofthe rightuous, but the way of the (...) shall
perish.

The II. A psalm of David.
THy do the Heithe^ grudge? why do the people ymagyn vain things? The kings
of the earth sto^de up, (...) rulers are come together, against (...) LORD and
against his anointed. Let (...) break their bonds a sunder, and cast (...)
their yocke from us. Nevertheless, (...) that dwells in heaven, shall laugh
the^ (...) scorn: ye even the LORD himselff shall have them in derision.
Then shall he (...) unto them in his wrath, and vex them in (...) dispeasure.
Yet have I set my (...) upon my holy hill of Sion. As for me (...) preach the
law, whereof the LORD (...) said unto me: Thou art my son, (...) day have
I begotten the. Desire off (...), and I shall give the the Heithen for (...)
enheritaunce, Ye the vttemost parts of (...) world for thy possession. Thou
shall (...) with a rod of iron, and break the^ (...) like an erthen vessel.
Be wise now (...) (o ye kings) be warned, ye that are (...) of the earth.
Serve the LORD ^ith fear, and rejoice before him with reue^^nce. Kiss the
son, lest the LORD be (...), and so ye perish from the right way. ^or his
wrath shall be kindled shortly: blessed (...) they that put their trust in him.

The III. A psalm of David.
^Hy are they so many (o LORD) yt (...) trouble me? a great multitude are
(...) they, that rise against me. Ye (...) one there be that say off my
soul: (...) is no help for him in God. Sela (...) (o LORD) art my defender,
my (...), and the lifter up of my head. I call (...) the LORD with my voice,
and he (...) me out of his holy hill. Sela I laid (...) down and slepte, but
I rose up again, (...) the LORD sustained me. I am not (...) for thousands
of the people, that (...) round about. Up LORD, and help (...) my God: for
thou smytest all mine (...) upon the chek^bones, and breakest the (...) of the
v^godly. Help belongs (...) the LORD, therefore let thy blessing be upon
thy people.

The IIII. A psalm of David.
Hear me when I call, o God of my righteousness, LORD deals maruelously with
his saint: and when I call upon the LORD, he hears me. Be angry, but sin
not: (...)
common with your own hertes upon yor beds, LORD. There be many yt say: who
will do us any good? where as thou (o LORD) have showed us the light of ye
countenance. Thou reioysest mine heart, though their encreace be great both
in corn and wine. Therefore will I lay me down in peace, and take my rest: for
thou LORD only set me in a sure dwelling.

The V. A psalm of David.
Hear my words (o LORD) considre LORD) for early in the morninge will I get
me unto the, (...)
ye and yt with diligence. For thou art not the God yt has pleasure in
wickedness, there may no ungodly person dwell with the. Soch as be cruel
may not stand in thy sight, thou art an enemy unto all wicked doers.

Thou destroyest the liars: the LORD abhors the blood thurstie and
disceatfull. But as for me, I will come into thy house, (...)
even upon the multitude of thy mercy: and in thy fear will I worshipe toward
thy holy temple. Led me (o LORD) in thy righteousness, because of mine
enemies, and make thy way plain before me. For there is no faithfulness in
their mouths: they dyssemble LORD geuest thy blessinge unto the rightuous:
and with thy favorable kyndnes thou defendest him, as with a shylde.

The VI. A psalm of David.
OH LORD, rebuke me not in thine anger: (...)
Have mercy upon me (o LORD) for I am weak: o LORD heal me, for all my
bones are vexed. My soul also is in great trouble, but LORD how long? Turn
the (o LORD) and deliver my soul: Oh save me, for thy mercies sake. For in
death no man reme^breth the: Oh who will give the thanks in the hell? I am
weery of gronynge: (...)
I have so many enemies. Away fro me all ye wicked doers, for the LORD has
herd the voice off my wepinge. The LORD has herd mine humble peticie^, the
LORD has received my prayer. All mine enemies shall be confounded and sore
vexed: ye they shall be turned back and put to shame, and that right soon.

The VII. A psalm of David.
LORD my God, in ye do I trust: save me from all the^ yt persecute me, (...)
and deliver me. Lest he hantch up my soul like a lion, and tear it in pieces,
while there is none to help. O LORD my God, yff I have done any soch thing:
if there be any unrighteous in my hands: Yff I have rewarded evil unto
the^ yt dealt friendly with me or hurt the^ yt with out any cause are mine enemies:
Then let mine enemy persecute my soul, and take me: ye let hi^ tread my
life down in the earth, and lay mine honor in the dust. Sela. Sto^de up (o
LORD) in yi wrath, lift up thyself over the furious indignacio^ of mine
enemies: arise up (for me) in the vengeance that thou have promised. (...)
That the congregation LORD is judge over the people: Avenge me then (o LORD)
acordinge to my righteousness and innocence. Oh let the wickedness of the ungodly
come to an end: but manteyne the just, thou rightuous God, yt triest the very
hertes and the reins. My help comes of God, which preserves them yt are
true of heart. (...)
God is a rightuous judge, and God is ever threateninge. If men will not turn,
he has whet his swearde: he has bent his bow and made it ready. He has
prepayred him the weapens of death, and ordened his arowes to destroy.
Behold, he trauayleth with myschefe, (...)
he has conceived unhappiness, and brought forth a lie. He has graven and
dygged up a pytte, (...)
but he shall fall himself into ye pytte yt he has made. For his unhappiness
shall come upon his own head, Psalm. ^^9. b
and his wickedness shall fall upon his own pate. As for me, I will give
thanks unto the LORD for his righteousness sake, and will praise the name of
the LORD the most highest.

The VIII. A psalm of David.
O LORD our gouernoure: how ^onderfull is thy name in all the world? how
excellent is thy glory above the heavens? Matt. ^1. b
Out of the mouth of the very babes and sucklinges thou have ordened praise,
because of thine enemies, yt thou might destroy the enemy and the auenger.
For I considre thy heavens, even the work off thy fyngers: the Moon and the
stars which thou have made. Oh what is man, yt thou Psalm. 143. a Heb 2. b
After thou had for a season made him lower the^ the angels, thou
crownedest him with honor and glory. Thou have set him above the works off thy
hondes: (...)
thou have put all things in subieccion under his fete. All sheep and oxen,
ye and the beasts of the field. The fowls of the air: the fysh of the sea,
and what ^o walks through the ways of the sea. O LORD our gouernoure, how
wonderful is thy name in all the world?

The IX. A psalm of David.
I Will give thanks unto the (o LORD) with my whole heart, I will speak of
Psalm 110. a and. 137. a
I will be glad and rejoice in the, ye my songs will I make of thy name, o thou
most highest. Because thou have dryue^ mine enemies abacke, they were
disco^fited, and perished at thy presence. For thou have manteyned my right and
my cause: thou syttest in the Trone that art the true judge. Thou rebukest the
Heithen, and destroyest the ungodly, thou put out their name for ever and
ever. The enemies swerdes are come to an end, thou have overthrown their
cities, their memorial is perished with the^. But ye LORD endures for ever,
he has prepared his seat unto judgment. LORD is a defense for the poor, a
defense in the time of trouble. Therefore they yt know thy name, put their
trust in ye: for thou ( LORD) never faylest the^, that seek the. O praise the
LORD, Deu. 4. c Psalm. 75. a
which dwells in Sion show ye people of his doings. And why? he makes
inquysicion for their blood, and remembers them: Psalm. 21. c
he forgets not the complaynte of the poor. Have mercy upon me (o LORD)
considre the trouble that I am in among mine enemies, thou that liftest me up
from ye gates of death. That I may she we all thy praises within the ports
off the LORD is known to execute true judgment, when the ungodly is trapped
in the works of his own hands Sela. The wicked must be turned unto hell, and
all the Heithen yt forget God. But the poor shall not allwaye be out of
remembrance, the pacie^t abydinge of soch as be in trouble shall not perish
for ever. Up LORD, let not man have the upper hand, let the Heithe^ be
condemned before the. O LORD, set a scolemaster over the^, that the Heithe^
may know them selves to be but me^. Sela.

Here the Hebrews begin the x. psalm.
WHy art thou gone so far of, o LORD? will thou hyde thyselff in time of
trouble? While ye ungodly has the over hand, the poor must suffer
persecucion: O that they were taken in the ymaginacions which they go about.
For the un godly makes boost of his own hertes desire, the cuvetous blesses
him self, and blasphemeth the LORD. The ungodly is so proud and full of
indignacio^, that he cares not: nether is God before his eyes. His ways are
allwaye filthy, thy judgments are far out of his sight, he defyeth all his
enemies. For he says in his heart: Tush, I shall never be cast down, there
shall no harm happen unto me. His mouth is full of cursynge, fraud and
disceate: under his tongue is travail and sorrow. He sytteth lurkynge in the
gardens, that he may pryuely murthur the innocent, his eyes are set upon the
poor. He lies way ^inge secretly, as it were a lion in his den. He lurketh
that he may rauysh the poor, ye to ravish the poor, when he has gotten him
in to his nett. Then smyteth he, then oppresses he and casts down the poor
with his auctorite. For he says in his heart: Tush, God has forgotten, he
has turned a way his face, so yt he will never se it. Arise o LORD God, lift
up thine hand, and forget not the poor. Wherefore should the wicked blaspheme
God, and say in his heart: Tush, he cares not for it? This thou seist, for
thou considrest the mysery and sorrow: The poor gives himselff over in to thy
hand, and commits him unto the, for thou art the helper of the friendless.
Break thou ye arm off the ungodly and malycious, search out the wickedness
which he has done, that he may perish. The LORD is king for ever, ye
Heithen shall perish out off his land. LORD, thou hear the desirous
longinge off the poor: their heart is sure, that thine ear herkeneth thereto.
Help the fatherless and poor unto their right, that the ungodly be no more
exalted upon earth.

The X. A psalm of David.
IN the LORD put I my trust: how (...)
which are true of heart. The very foundation have they cast down, what ca^
the rightuous the^ do withal? But the LORD is in his holy temple, the LORDS
seat is in heaven: (...)
He co^sidereth it with his eyes, his eye lyddes behold the children of men.
(...)
The LORD seith both the rightuous and ungodly, but who so deliteth in
wickedness, him his soul abhors. Upon the ungodly he shall rain snares,
fire, brymstone, storm and tempest: this reward shall they have to drink. For
the LORD is rightuous, and he loves righteousness, his countenance beholds
the thing yt is just.

The XI. A psalm of David.
Help LORD, for there is not one saint LORD would rote out all disceatfull
lips, and the tongue that speaks proud things. Which say: Our tongue
should prevail: we are they that ought to speak, who is lord over us? Now
for the troubles sake off the oppressed, and because of the complaynte of the
poor, I will up (says the LORD) I will help the^, and set the^ at rest. The
words of the LORD are pure words: eue^ as ye silver, (...)
which from earth is tried and purified vij. times in the fire. Keep the^
therefore (o LORD) and preserve us from this generation for ever. And why? when
vanite and ydylnes gets the over hand among the children of men, all are
full of ye ungodly.

The XII. A psalm of David.
LORD? for ever? how long will thou hyde thy face fro me? Oh how long shall
I seek council in my soul? how long shall I be so vexed in my heart? how
long shall mine enemy triumph over me? Considre, and hear me, o LORD my
God: lighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in death. Lest mine enemy say: I
have prevailed against hi^ for if I be cast down, they that trouble me will
rejoice at it.

But my trust is in thy mercy, and my heart is joyful in thy saving health. I
will sing of the LORD, that deals so louyngly with me. (Ye I will praise the
name of the LORD the most highest)

The XIII. A psalm of David.
(...)
Tush, there is no God. They are corrupt, and become abominable in their
doings, there is not one ^ does good. The LORD looked down from heaven upon
the children of men, (...)
to se if there were any, that would understand and seek after God. But they
are all gone out of the way, they are altogether become unprofitable: there
is none that does good, no not one. (...)
Their throat is an open sepulcre, with their tongues they have disceaued, the
poison of Aspes is under their lips. (...)
Their mouth is full of cursinge and bytternes, their fete are swift to shed
blood. (...)
Destruction and wretchedness are in their ways, and the way of peace have
they not known: there is no fear off God before their eyes. How can they have
understanding, yt work myschefe, eatinge up my people, as it were bred, and
call not upon ye LORD?

Therefore shall they be brought in great fear, for God stondeth by the
generation of the rightuous. As for you, ye have made a mock at the counsel
of the poor, because he puts his trust in the LORD. Oh yt the saving
health were given unto Israel out off Sion. (...)
Oh that the LORD would deliver his people out of captiuyte. The^ should Jacob
rejoice, and Israel should be right glad.

The XIIII. A psalm of David.
LORD, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle? (...)
who shall rest upon yi holy hill? Even he yt ledeth an incorrupt life: that
does the thing which is right, and that speaks the treuth from his heart. He
yt uses no disceat in his tongue: he that does no evil to his neighbor, and
slaundreth not his neghbours. He yt sets not by the ungodly but makes much
of the^ that fear the LORD: he yt swears unto his neighbor and dispoynteth
him not. He that gives not his money upon usury, Eze. 18. a
and takes no reward against the innocent. Who so does these things, shall
never be removed.

The XV. A psalm of David.
Preserve me (o God) for in the do I trust. I have said unto ye LORD: thou
art my God, my goods are nothing unto the. All my delight is upon the sanctes
that are in the earth, and upon soch like. But they yt run after another
shall have great trouble. Their drynk offerynges of blood will not I offer,
nether make mention of their name in my mouth. The LORD himself is my good and
my (...) thou manteynest my enheritau^ce. (...) is fallen unto me in a fair
ground^ (...) a goodly heretage. I will thank (...) for geuynge me warning my
(...) so have chastened me in the night (...) Before hand saw I God always
(...) me, for he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved.

Therefore did my heart rejoice, and my tunge was glad, my flesh also shall rest
in hope. For why? thou shall not leave my sou^e in hell, nether shall thou
suffer thy saint to se corrupcion. Thou have showed me the ways off life:
thou shall make me full of joy with thy countenance. At thy right hand there
is pleasure and joy for evermore.

The XVI. A psalm of David.
Hear ye right (O LORD) consider my co^^playnte: harken unto my prayer, tha^
goes not out of a feigned mouth. Le^ my sentence come forth from thy presence,
and look upon the thing that is equal. Tho^ have proved and visited mine
heart in the nigh^ season: thou have tried me in the fire, and has^ found no
wickedness in me: for I utterly pu^^posed, that my mouth should not offend.
Because of the words of thy lips, I have kept me from the works of men, in
ye way^ off the murthurer. Oh order thou my goyn^ges in thy paths, that my
footsteps slip not. For unto the I cry, hear me o God^ enclyne thine
ears to me, and herke^ unto my words. Show yi marvelous louinge kindness,
thou that sauest them which put their trust in the, from soch as resist thy
right hand. zac. 2. b Matt* 23.
From the ungodly that trouble me, fro mine enemies which compass my soul
round about.

Which manteyne their own welthynesse with oppression, and their mouth
speaks proud things. They lie waytinge in or way on every side, turnynge
their eyes down to the ground. Like as a lion that is gredy of his pray, and
as it were a lions whelpe lurckynge in his den. Up LORD, dispoynte him and
cast him down: deliver my soul with thy sword from the ungodly. Ephe. ^. b
From the men of thy hand (o LORD) from the men off the world, which have
their portion in this life: whose belies thou fyllest with thy treasure.

They have children at their desire, and leave the rest of their substance
for their babes

But as form, I will behold thy presence in righteousness: and when thy glory
appea^^ shall be satisfied.

(...) XVII. A psalm of David when he is delivered from the hand off Saul.
(...) love the (o LORD) my strength. (...) The LORD is my sucor, my refuge,
(...) my Savior: my god, my helper i^ who^ (...): my buckler, ye horn of my
health, and my proteccio^. I will praise ye LORD and call upon him, (...) a
so shall I be safe fro mine enemies. The sorrows of death compassed me, and the
brokes of ungodliness made me afraid. (...) a
The pains of hell came about me, the snares of death took hold upon me. Yet
in my trouble I called upon the LORD, and co^playned unto my God. So he herd
my voice out off his holy temple, and my co^playnte came before hi^, ye eue^
in to his ears. The^ the earth trembled and quaked, ^att. ^7. f
the very fou^dacio^s of the hills shoke and were removed, because he was
wroth. There went a smoke out of his nostrels, and a co^sumynge fire out of
his mouth, so ye coals were kyndled at it. He bowed the heavens and LORD also
thondred out of ye heaven, and the heyth gave his thondre with hale stones and
coals of fire. He sent out his arowes and scatred the^, he cast sore
lighteninges, and destroyed the^. The springes of waters were seen, and the
foundacio^s of the round world were discovered at yi chiding (o LORD) at the
blastinge and breath of thy displeasure. He sent down from the heyth to fetch
me, and took me out of great waters. He delivered me fro my strong enemies,
and fro my foes which were to mighty form. They prevented me in the time of
my trouble, but ye LORD was my defense. He brought me forth also into lyberte:
and delivered me, because he had a favor unto me. The LORD shall reward me
after my rightuous dealing, and acordinge to the cle^nesse of my ho^des shall
he LORD, and have not behaved myself wickedly against my God. I have an eye
unto all his laws, and cast not out his commandments fro me. Incorrupt
will I be before hi^, and will eschew mine own wickedness. Therefore shall ye
LORD reward me after my rightuous dealinge, and acordinge unto ye cle^nesse
of my ho^des in his eye sight. With the holy thou shall be holy, and with ye
innocent thou shall be innocent. With the clean thou shall be clean and with
the froward thou shall be froward. (...)
For thou shall save the poor oppressed, and bri^ge down the hye lokes of the
proud. (...)
Thou lightest my ca^dle, o LORD my God: thou make my darcknesse to be
light. For in the I can disco^fit an host of me^: ye in my God I ca^ leap
over the wall.

The way of God is a perfect way: (...)
the words of the LORD are tried in the fire: he is a shylde of defense, for
all them that trust in him. For who is God, but the LORD? (...)
Or, who has any strength, but our God? (...)
It is God that has gyrded me with strength (...)
and makes mine arms to break even a bow off stele. Thou have given me the
defense of thy health, thy right hand vpholdeth me, and thy loving correccion
makes me great. Thou have made rowme enough under me for to go, that my footsteps should not slide. I will follow upon mine enemies, and take them: I
will not turn till they be discomfited. I will smite them, they shall not be
able to stand, but fall under my fete. Thou have gyrded me with strength unto
ye batell, thou have throwe^ them all down under me, that rose up against me.
Thou have made mine enemies to turn their backs upon me, thou have destroyed
the^ yt hated me. They cried, but there was none to help the^: ye even unto
the LORD, (...)
but he herd the^

As soon as they hear of me, they shall obey me, but the strange children
dyssemble with me. The strange children are waxe^ old, and go haltinge out of
their paths. The LORD lives: and blessed be my helper, praised be the God of
my health. Eue^ ye God which seyth that I be avenged, and subdueth the people
unto me. It is he that delyuereth me fro my cruel enemies: thou shall lift me
up from them that rise against me, thou shall ryd me from the wicked man.

(...)
For this cause I will give thanks unto ye (o LORD) among the Gentiles, and
sing praises unto thy name. Great prosperity gives he unto his king, (...)
and shows louinge kyndnesse unto David his anointed, ye and unto his sede
for evermore.

The XVIII. A psalm of David.
(...)
and the very firmament shows his ha^dye work. One day tells another, and
one night certifieth another. There is nether speech ner language, but their
voices are herd among the^. Their sou^de is gone out in to all lands, and
their words in to the ends of the world. (...)


In the^ has he set a tabernacle for ye Son, which comes forth as a
brydegrome out of his chamber, and reioyseth as a giaunte to ru^ne his course.
It goes forth from the one end of the heaven, and runs about unto LORD
is a perfect law, it quickens the soul. (...)
The testimony of ye LORD is true, and gives wisdom even unto babes. The
statutes of the LORD are right, and rejoice the heart: ye commandment of ye
LORD is pure, and gives light unto the eyes.

The fear of the LORD is clean, and endures for ever: the judgments of the
LORD are true and rigtuous altogether. More pleasunt are they then gold,
(...)
ye then much fine gold: sweter then honey and the honey comb. These thy
servant keeps, and for kepinge of them there is great reward. (...)
Who can tell, how often he offends? Oh cle^se thou me fro my secret fautes.
Keep thy seruau^te also from presumptuous sins, lest they get the dominion
over me: so shall I be undefiled and innocent from the great offense. Ye the
words of my mouth and the meditacio^ of my heart shall be acceptable unto the, o
LORD, my helper and my redemer.

The XIX. A psalm of David.
LORD hear the in the time off trouble, the name of the God of Jacob defend
the. Send the help from the Sanctuary, and strength ye out of Sion Remember
all thy offerynges, and accept thy brent sacrifice* Sela. Grant the thy
hertes desire, and fulfill all thy mind. We will rejoice in thy health, and
triu^phe in ye name of the LORD our God: the LORD perform all thy
peticio^s. Now know I, that the LORD helps his anointed, and will hear him
from his holy heaven: mighty is the help of his right ho^de. Some put their
trust in charettes, and some in horses: but we will remember ye name of the
LORD our God. They are brought down and fallen, but we are risen and stand
up right. Save ( LORD) and help us (o king) when we call upon the.

The XX. A psalm of David.
LORD, how joyful is the king in ye strength? O how exceadinge glad is
LORD, and in the mercy of the most hiest he shall not myscary. Let all thine
enemies feel thy hand, let thy right hand find out LORD shall destroy the^
in his displeasure, and the fire shall consume them. Their fruit shall thou
rote out of the earth, and their sede from among the children of men. For they
intended myschefe against the, and ymagined soch deuyces, as they were not able
to perform. Therefore shall thou put the^ to flight, and with thy stringes
thou shall make ready thine arowes against the faces off them. Be thou exalted
(LORD) in thine own strength, so will we sing and praise thy power.

The XXI. A psalm of David.
MY God, my God: why have thou forsaken Matt. ^7. ^ Mar. 15. d
ye words of my co^playnte are far fro my health. O my God, I cry in the
day time, but thou hear not: and in the night season also I take no rest.
Yet dwell thou in the Sanctuary, o thou worshipe of Israel. Our fathers
hoped in the, they trusted in the and thou dyddest deliver them. They called
upon the, and were helped: they put their trust in the, and were not
confounded. But as for me, I am a worm and no man: a very scorn of me^ and
the outcast of the people. All they yt se me, Psalm. 108. d
laugh me to scorn: they shute out their lips, and shake their heads. He
trusted in God, Matt. 27. c
let him deliver him: let him help hi^, Psalm. 7^. a
thou wast ^^y hope, when I hanged yet upon my mothers breasts. I have been
left unto the ever sense I was borne, thou art my God, eue^ fro my mothers
womb. O go not fro me the^, for trouble is hard at hand, and here is none to
help me. Great bulls are come about me, fatt oxen close me in on every
side. They gape upon me with their mouths, as it were a rampinge and roaringe
lion.

^uc. 7. a Re. 14. b
I am poured out like water, all my bones are out of joint: my heart in the
myddest off my body is even like meltinge wax. My strength is dried up like a
potsherde, my tunge cleueth to my goomes, and thou have brought me in to the
dust of death. For dogs are come about me, the counsel of ye wicked has
laid sege against me. They pearsed my hondes and my fete, I might have told
all my bones: as for them, they stood staringe and lokinge upon me. They have
parted my garments among them, and cast lottes upon my vesture. (...)


But be not thou far fro me, o LORD: ^sal. ^4. b
So will I declare thy name unto my brethren, Heb. 2. c
in the myddest off the congregation will I praise the. O praise the LORD ye
that fear him: Magnify him all ye sede of Jacob. and let all ye sede of
Israel fear hi^. ^sal. 9. b
For he has not despised ner abhorred the miserable estate of the poor: he
has not hyd his face from, but when I called unto him, he herd me. I will
praise the in the great congregation, and perform my vows in the sight off
all ^sal. 1^1. b
they ye seek after ye LORD shall praise him: your heart shall live for ever.

All the ends of the world shall remember them selves, and be turned unto the
LORD: and all the generacions of the Heithen shall worshipe before him. For the
kingdom is the LORDS, and he shall be the gouernoure of ye Heithen. All soch
as be fat upon earth, shall eat also and worshipe: All they that lie in the
dust, and live so hardly, shall fall down before him. The sede shall serve
him, and preach of the LORD for ever. They shall come, and declare his
righteousness: unto a people that shall be borne, (...)
who^ the LORD has made.

The XXII. A psalm of David.
THe LORD is my shepherde, I can (...)
He fedeth me in a grene pasture, and ledeth me to a fresh water. He quickens
my soul, and brings me forth in the way of righteousness for his names sake.
(...)
Though I should walk now in the valley of the shadow of death, yet I fear
no evil, for thou art with me: thy staff and thy shepehoke comfort me. Thou
preparest a ^^ble before me against mine enemies: thou anoyntest my head with
oil, and fyllest my cup full. Oh let thy loving kyndnes and mercy follow me
all the days off my life, that I may dwell in the house off the LORD for
ever.

The XXIII. A psalm of David.
THe earth is the LORDS, (...)
and all that therein is: the co^pase of the world, and all yt dwell therein.
For he has founded it upon the sees, and builded it upon the floudes. Who shall
go up in to the hill off the LORD? Or, who shall remain in his holy place?
Eue^ he yt has innocent ho^des and a clean heart: which lifts not up his
mind unto vanite, and swears not to disceaue. (...)
He shall receive the blessinge from the LORD, and LORD strong and mighty,
even the LORD mighty in batell.

Open your gates (o ye princes) let the everlasting doors be opened, yt the
king off glory may come in. Who is this king off glory? It is the LORD of
hoostes, he is the king of glory. Sela.

The XXIIII. A psalm of David.
UNto the (o LORD) I lift up my soul. (...)
Oh let me not be confounded, lest mine enemies triu^phe over me. For all they
yt hope in ye shall not be ashamed: but soch as be scornful despysers with out a
cause* they shall be put to co^fucio^. Show me thy ways (o LORD) and teach
me thy paths. Led me in ye truth and learn me, for thou art the God off my
health, and in the is my hope all the day long.

Call to remembrance, O LORD, thy tender mercyes and thy louinge kyndnesses,
which have been ever of old. Oh remember not ye sins and offenses of my
youth, but acordinge unto thy mercy think upon me (O LORD) for thy goodness.
O how fre^dly and rightuous is the LORD, therefore will he teach LORD are very
mercy and faith fullness, unto soch as keep his testament and covenant. For
thy names sake, O LORD, be merciful unto my sin, for it is great. What so
ever he be that fears the LORD, he shall show him the way that he has
chosen.

His soul shall dwell at ease, and his sede shall possess the land. The
secret of the LORD is among them that fear him, and he shows them his
covenant. Mine eyes are ever lokynge unto the LORD, for he shall pluck my
fete out of ye nett. Turnethe unto me and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate
and in misery. The sorrows of my heart are great, O bring me out of my
troubles.

Look upon my aduersite and misery, and forgive me all my sins. Considre how
mine enemies are many, and bear a malicious hate against me. O keep my soul,
and deliver me: let me not be confounded, for I have put my trust in the. Let
innocence and righteuous dealinge wait upon me, for my hope is in the. Deliver
Israel (O God) out of all his trouble.

The XXV: A psalm of David.
LORD) for I walk innocently: my trust is in the LORD, therefore shall I not
fall. Examen me O LORD, and prove me: try out my reins and my heart. For thy
loving kyndnesse is before mine eyes, and I walk in thy truth. I sit not
among vain persons, and have no fellishipe with the disceatfull. I hate the
congregation of the wicked, and I will not sit among the ungodly.

I waszshe my hondes with innocence O LORD, and so go I to thine altar. That
I may show the voice of thy praise, and tell of all thy wondrous works.
LORD, I love the habitacion of thy house, and ye place where thy honor
dwells. O destroy not my soul with the sinners, ner my life with the blood
thurstie. In whose hondes is wickedness, and their right hand is full of
gifts. But as for me I will walk innocently: O deliver me, Deu. 17. ^
and be merciful unto me. My foot stondeth right: I will praise the (O LORD)
in the congregacions.

The XXVI. A psalm of David.
THe LORD is my light and my health: Psalm 111. ^
whom then should I fear the LORD is the strength of my life, for whom the^
should I be afraid? Therefore when the wicked (even mine enemies and my foes)
came upon me, to eat up my flesh, they stombled and fell. Though an host of
men were laid against me, yet shall not my heart be afraid: and though there
rose up war against me, yet will I put my trust in him. Luce 10. ^
One thing have I desired of the LORD, which I will require: namely, that I
may dwell in the house of the LORD all the days of my life, 2. Re. 7. ^
to behold the fair beutie of the LORD, and to vyset his temple.

For in the time of trouble he has hyde me 1. Re. 21. ^
ye in the secret place of his dwellinge has he kept and set me up upon a
rock of stone. And now has he lift up my head above mine enemies, that
compassed me round about. Therefore will I offer in his dwellinge, the oblacion
of tha^kesgeuynge: I will both sing and speak praises unto the LORD. Herke^
unto my voice (O LORD) when I cry unto the: have mercy upon me and hear me.
My heart speaks unto the, my face seeks the, ye LORD, thy face will I seek.
O hyde not thou thy face fro me, cast not thy servant of in displeasure. Thou
art my succoure, leave me not, nether forsake me, O God my Savior. For my
father and my mother have LORD has taken me up. Show me thy way O LORD,
and led me in the right path, because of mine enemies. Deliver me not in to
the wylles of mine adversaries, for there are false witnesses risen up against
me, and they ymagyn myschefe. Nevertheless, I believe verily to se the
goodness of the LORD in the land of the living. Psalm. ^0. d
O tarry thou ye LORDS leisure, be strong, let thine heart be of good comfort,
and wait thou still for the LORD.

The XXVII. A psalm of David.
UNto the will I cry, o my strong defense:

O pluck me not away among the ungodly and wicked doers, (...). 9. a
which speak friendly to their neighbor, but ymagin myschefe in their hertes.
Reward them acordinge to their deeds and wickedness of their own inuencions.
Recompense them after ye works of their ^^des, pay them that they have
deserved. For they regard not the works of the LORD, ner the operacion of
his hands: therefore shall he break them down, and not build them up. Praised
be ye LORD, for he has herd the voice of my humble peticio^. ^eut. ^. d
The LORD is my strength and my shylde: my heart hoped in him, and I am
helped: therefore my heart dau^seth for joy, and I will sing praises unto him.
The LORD is the strength of his people, he is the defender and Savior of his
anointed.

O help thy people, give thy blessing unto thy enheritaunce: ^eut. 32. a
feed them, and set them up for ever.

The XXVIII. A psalm of David.
LORD (o ye mighty) ascribe unto the LORD worshipe and strength. Give the
LORD the honor of his name, bow your selves to the holy magesty of the
LORD It is the LORD that commands the waters: It is the glorious God that
makes ye thonder: it is the LORD yt rules the sea. The voice of the LORD is
mighty in operacion, the voice of the LORD is a glorious voice. ^ze. 17. d
The voice of the LORD breaks the Cedr^ trees: ye the LORD breaks the
Ceders of Libanus. He makes them to skippe like a calfe: Deuteronomy. 3. b
Libanus and Sirion like a young unicorn. Number. 1^. c
The voice of the LORD deuideth the flames of fire: the voice of the LORD
shakes the wilderness, ye the LORD shakes the wilderness of Cades.

The voice of the LORD moves ye hyndes and discovers the thick buszshes:
in his temple shall every man speak of his honor. The LORD stilleth the
water floude, and ye LORD remains a king for ever. The LORD shall give
power unto his people, the LORD shall give his people the blessing of peace.

The XXIX. A psalm of David.
LORD) for thou have set me up, and not suffered my foes to triu^phe over me. O
LORD my God, I cried unto the, and thou have healed me. 1. Reg. 2. b Psalm. ^5.
b
Thou LORD have brought my soul out of hell: thou have kept my life, where
as they go down to the pytte. Sing praises unto the LORD (o ye saints of
his) give thanks unto him for a remembrance of his holiness. (...)
For his wrath endures but the twincklinge of an eye, and his pleasure is in
life: heaviness may well endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning.

As form, when I was in prosperity, I said: LORD of thy goodness had
made my hill so strong.) But as soon as thou turnedest thy face fro me, I was
brought in fear. The^ cried I unto ye (O LORD) ye unto ye LORD made I my
prayer. What profit is there in my blood, (...)
if I go down to corrupcion? May the dust give thanks unto ye? Or shall it
declare thy faithfulness? Hear (O LORD) and have mercy upon me: LORD be
thou my helper. And so thou have turned my heaviness in to joy: thou have put
of my sack cloth, and gyrded me with gladness. That my honor might sing praises
unto the with out ceassynge: O LORD my God, I will give thanks unto the for ever.

The XXX: A psalm of David.
IN the, O LORD, is my trust: let me (...)
but deliver me in thy righteousness. Bow down thine ear to me, make haist
to deliver me: be thou my strong rock and a house of defense, that thou
may save me. For thou art my strong hold and my castle: O be thou my
gyde, and led me for thy names sake. Draw me out of the nett yt they have
laid privily for me, for thou art my strength. (...)


Into thy hondes I commend my sprete: thou have ^^lyuered me O LORD thou God
of treuth. I hate them that hold of vanities, and my trust is in the LORD. I
will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy: for thou have considred my trouble, thou
have known my soul in aduersite. Thou have not delivered me over in to the
ho^des of the enemy, but have set my fete in a large rowme. Have mercy upon
me, O LORD, for I am in trouble, mine eye is consumed for very heaviness, ye
my soul and my body. My life is waxen old with heaviness, and my years with
mourning. My strength fails me because of my aduersite, and my bones are
corrupt. I am become a very reprofe among all mine enemies, my neghbours and
they of mine own acquauntaunce are afraid of me: they yt seem in the street,
co^veye them selves fro me. I am clean forgotten and out of mind, as a deed
man: I am become like a broken vessel.

For I have herd the blasphemy of the gathered a council together against me,
and are purposed to take away my life.

But my hope is in ye O LORD, and I say: thou art my God. My time is in thy
hand: deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, and from them yt persecute
me. Show thy servant the light of thy countenance, help me for thy mercies
sake. Let me not be confounded (o LORD) for I call upon the: let the ungodly
rather be put to confucion, and brought unto the hell. Let the lyenge lips be
put to silence, which cruelly, diszdanedly and despitefully speak against the
rightuous. O how great and manifold is thy good, which thou haist hyd for
them that fear ye? O what things bring thou to pass for them, that put
their trust in the, even before the sons of men?

LORD, for he has showed me marvelous great kyndnesse in a strong cite. For
when the sodane fear came upon me, I said: I am cast out of thy sight.
Nevertheless, thou herdest mine humble prayer, when I cried unto the. O love the
LORD (all ye his saints) for the LORD preserves the faith full, and
plenteously rewards he the proud doer. (...)
Be strong therefore and take a good heart unto you, all ye that put your
trust in the LORD.

The XXXI. A psalm of David.
(...)
and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man, unto whom the LORD imputes
no sin, in whose sprete there is no gyle. For while I held my tongue, my
bones consumed away through my daily complaynynges. And because thy hand was
so heavy upon me both day and night, my moisture was like the drouth in Summer.
Sela.

Therefore I confessed my sin unto the, and hyd not mine unrighteousness.
(...)
I said: I will knowledge mine offense, and accuse my self unto the LORD, and
so thou forgauest me the wickedness of my sin.

(...)
Sela. For this shall every saint make his prayer unto the in due season,
therefore shall not the great water floudes come nigh

(...)
Sela. I will inform the, and show the the way wherein thou shall go: I will
fasten mine eyes upon the. Tob. 6. d Pro. 26. a
Be not ye now like horses and mooles, which have no understanding. Whose
mouths thou must hold with bytt and bridle, if they will not obeie the.

Great plages shall ye ungodly have, but who so puts his trust in the
LORD, mercy shall compass him on every side. Be glad (o ye rightuous) and
rejoice in the LORD, be joyful all ye that are true of heart.

The XXXII. A psalm of David.
EEioyse in ye LORD (o ye rightuous) Psalm. 96. b
Praise the LORD with harp: Colo. 3. b Ephe ^^. b
sing psalms unto him with the lute and instrument of ten strings. Singe him
a new song, ye sing lustely unto him and with a good courage. For the word
of ye LORD is true, and all his works are faithful. He loves mercy and
judgment, ye earth is full of the goodness of the LORD By the word of the
LORD were the heavens made, Genesis 1. a Colos. 1. b
and all the hoostes of them by ye breath of his mouth. He gathers ye waters
together LORD, and let all them that dwell in the world, sto^de in awe of
him. For look what he says, it is done: and look what he commands, it
stondeth fast. The LORD brings the council of the Heithen to naught, and
turns the deuyces of the people.

But the counsel of the LORD endures, and the thoughts of his heart from
generation to generation. Psalm. 143. c
Blessed are the people that hold the LORD for their God, and blessed are the
folk whom he has chosen to be his heretage. Psalm. 101. c
The LORD looks down from heaven, and beholds all the children of men:
from his strong seat he considreth all them yt dwell in the world. Pro. 16.
a 21. a
He only has fashioned all the hertes of them, and knows all their works. A
king is not helped by

A horse is but a vain thing to save a man, Pro. 21. d
it is not the power of his strength that can deliver him. Behold, Eccli. 15. e
the eye of the LORD looks unto them that fear him, (...) put their trust in
his mercy. That he may deliver their souls from death, and to feed them in
the dear time. Let our soul patiently abide the LORD, for he is our help
and shilde. So shall our heart rejoice in him, because we have hoped in his
holy name. Let thy merciful kyndnesse (o LORD) be upon us, like as we put
our trust in the.

The XXXIII. A psalm of David.
LORD, his praise shall ever be in my mouth. My soul shall make her boast in
the LORD: the poor oppressed shall hear thereof, and be glad. O praise ye
LORD with me, and let us magnify his name together. ^. Re. ^^. d
I sought the LORD, and he herd me, ye he delivered me out of all my fear.
They that have an eye unto him, shall be lightened, and their faces shall not be
ashamed. This poor man cried unto the LORD, and he herd him, ye and
delivered him out of all his troubles. ^ Re. 6.19 ^os^e 5. d
The angel of the LORD pitcheth his tente round about them that fear him,
and delyuereth them.

^sal. 2. b
O taist and se how friendly the LORD is, LORD, Psalm. 127. a Matt. 6* c
ye yt be his saints: for they that fear him, lack nothing. The rich shall
want and suffer hunger, but they which seek the LORD, shall want no manner of
thing, that is good. Come hither (o ye children) harken unto me, I will teach
you the fear of the LORD. (...)* 3 b
Who so lists to live, and would feign se good days. Let him refrain his
tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no gyle. Let him eschew
evil, and do good: Let him seek peace and ensue it. For the eyes of the LORD
are over the rightuous, and his ears are open unto LORD beholds them that
do euel, to destroy the remembrance of them out of the earth.

When the rightuous cry, the LORD hears them, and delyuereth the^ out of
all their troubles. The LORD is nigh unto them yt are contrite in heart, and will
help soch as be of an humble sprete. Pro. 24. c ^. Tim. 3* b
Great are ye troubles of the rightuous, but the LORD delyuereth them out of
all. He keeps all their bones, so yt not one of them is broken. But
miszfortune shall slaye the ungodly, and they that hate ye rightuous shall be
guilty. The LORD delyuereth the souls of his servants, and all they that
put their trust in him, shall not offend.

The XXXIIII. A psalm of David.
LORD) that strive with me, fight thou against them that fight against me. Lay
hand upon the shylde and spear, and stand up to help me. Draw out thy
swearde, and stop the way against them that persecute me, say unto my
soul: I am yi help. Let them be confounded and put to shame, that seek after
my soul: let the^ be turned back and brought to confucion, that ymagin
myschefe for me. (...)
Let the^ be as ye dust before the wind, and the angel of the LORD
scaterynge the^. Let their way be darcke and slippery, and the angel of the
LORD to persecute them. For they have pryuely laid their nett to destroy me
without a cause, ye and made a pit for my soul, which I never deserved. Let
a sodane destruccio^ (...)
and ye nett that he has laid privily, catch him self, that he may fall in
to his own myschefe. But let my soul be joyful in the LORD, and rejoice in
his help. All my bones shall say: LORD, who is like unto the? which
delyuerest ye poor from those that are to strong for him, ye the poor and
the nedy from his robbers.

False witnesses are risen up, and lay to my charge things that I know not.
(...)
They reward me evil for good, to the great discomforth of my soul.
Nevertheless, when they were sick, I put on a sack cloth: I humbled my soul
with fasting, and my prayer turned in to mine own bosom. I behaved myself as
though it had been my friend or my brother, I went heuely, as one ye mourns
for his mother. (...)
But in my aduersite they rejoice, and gather them together: ye ye very lame
come together against me vnawarres, making mowes at me, and cease not.

With ye gredy and scornful ypocrites, they LORD, when will thou look upon
this? O restore my soul from ye wicked rumoure of the^, my dearlinge from the
lions. (...)
So will I give ye thanks in the great congregation, and praise the among
much people. O let the^ not triu^phe over me, that are mine enemies for naught:
O let them not wyncke with their eyes, that hate me without a cause. (...)
And why? their comonynge is not for peace, but they ymagin false words
against ye outcastes of the land. They gape upon me with their mouths, saying:
there there: we se it with our eyes. This thou seist, o LORD: hold not thy
tongue the^: go not far fro me, o LORD. Awake ( LORD) and stand up: avenge
thou my cause, my God, and my LORD. Judge me (o LORD my God)

Let them be put to confucion and shame, that rejoice at my trouble: let the^
be clothed with rebuke and dishonor, that boost the^ selves against me. Let
them also be glad and rejoice, that favor my rightuous dealinge: ye let them
say allwaye: blessed be ye LORD, which has pleasure in the prosperity of his
servant. And as for my tongue, it shall be talking of thy righteousness and of
thy praise, all the day long.

The XXXV. A psalm of David.
(...)
he will not be learned to do good.

He ymagineth myschefe upon his bed, he will come in no good way, ner refuse
the thing that is evil. (...)
Thy mercy (O LORD) reaches unto the heaven, and thy faith fullness unto the
clouds. Thy righteousness stondeth like the strong mountains, and LORD
preseruest both me^ and the beestes. (...)
How precious is thy mercy (O God) that the children of men may put their
trust under ye shadow of thy wings? They shall be satisfied with the
ple^teousnesse of thy house, and thou shall give them drink of the river of
thy pleasures. (...)
For by the is ye well of life, and in thy light, shall we se light. O sprede
forth thy loving kyndnesse unto them that know the, and thy righteousness unto
the^ that are true of heart. O let not the foot of pride overtake me, O let not
the hand of ye ungodly cast me down. As for wicked doers, they fall, they are
cast down, and are not able to sto^de.

The XXXVI. A psalm of David.
(...)
and be wythered even as ye grene herb. Put thou thy trust in ye LORD, (...)
and be doing good: so shall thou dwell in the land, and verily it shall feed
the. Delight thou in the LORD, and he shall give the thy hertes desire. (...)
Commit thy way unto ye LORD, set thy hope in him, and he shall bring it to
pass. Ye he shall make thy righteousness as clear as the light, and thy
just dealinge as the noone day. Hold the still in ye LORD, and abide
pacie^tly upon him: but grieve not thy self at one that has prosperity, and
lives in abhominacion. Leave of from wrath, let go displeasure, let not thy
gelousy LORD, shall enheret the land.

Suffer yet a little while, and ye ungodly shall be clean gone: thou shall look
after his place, and he shall be away. Matt. 5. a
But the meke spreted shall possess the earth, and have pleasure in much rest.
The ungodly lays wait for the just, and gnaszsheth upon him with his tethe.

But ye LORD laugheth him to scorn, Psalm. ^. a
for he seith yt his day is coming. The ungodly draw out the sword and
bend their bow, to cast down ye simple and poor, and to slaye soch as go ye
rightwaye. Nevertheless, their sword shall go through their own heart, and their
bow shall be broken. Pro. 15. b Eccli. 29. ^ 1. Tim. 6. b
A small thing yt the rightuous has, is better then great riches of the
ungodly. For the arms of ye ungodly shall be broken, but the LORD vpholdeth the
rightuous. The LORD knows the days of the godly, and their enheritau^ce
shall endure for ever. They shall not be confounded in ye perlous time, and in ye
days of derth they shall have enough. As for ye ungodly, they shall perish:
and when ye enemies of ye LORD are in their flowers, they shall consume, ye
even as the smoke shall they consume away. The ungodly * boroweth and paieth
not again, but the rightuous is merciful and liberal. Soch as be blessed of
him, shall possess the land: and they whom he curses, shall be roted out. The
LORD ordreth a good man's goinge, and has pleasure in his way. Though he
fall, he shall not be hurt, for the LORD vpholdeth him with his hand. I have
been young, and now am old: yet saw I never the rightuous forsaken, ner his
sede to seek their bred. The rightuous is ever merciful, and le^deth ge^tly,
therefore shall his sede be blessed. Fle from evil, and do ye thing that is
good, so shall thou dwell for ever.

For ye LORD loves ye thing yt is right, he forsakes not his saints, but
they shall be preserved for evermore: as for the sede of the un godly, it shall be
roted out. Ye the rightuous shall possess ye lord, and dwell therein for ever.
Pro. 10. ^
The mouth of the rightuous is exercised in wyszdome, and his tongue talks of
judgment. The law of his God is in his heart, therefore shall not his fotesteppes
slide. The un godly seyth the rightuous, and goes about to slaye him. But the
LORD will not leave him in his ho^des, ner co^demn^ him when he is judged. Hope
thou in the LORD, and

Keep innocence, and take heed unto the thing that is right, for that shall
bring a man peace at the last. As for the tra^sgressours, they shall perish
together, and the un godly shall be roted out at ye last. The help of the
rightuous comes of the LORD, he is their strength in the time of trouble.
The LORD shall sto^de by them, and save them: he shall deliver them from the un
godly, and help the^, because they put their trust in him.

The XXXVII. A psalm of David.
LORD) in thine anger: ^ere. 10. d Psalm. 6. a
Oh chaste^ me not in thy heavy displeasure. For thy arowes stick fast in me,
and thy hand presses me sore. There is no whole part in my body, be cause of
thy displeasure: there is no rest in my bones, by reason of my sins. For my
wickednesses are gone over my head, and are like a sore burden, to heavy form
to bear.

My wounds styncke and are corrupt, through my folishnesse. I am brought in to
so great trouble and misery, that I go mourning all the day long. For my
loins are clean dried up, and there is no whole part in my body. I am feeble
and sore smytte^, I roar for the very disquietnes of my heart.

LORD, thou know all my desire, and my gronynge is not hyd from the. My
heart paunteth, my strength has failed me, and the light of mine eyes is gone
fro me. My lovers and friends stand lokynge upon my trouble, ^ob 19. b
Psalm. ^4 b
and my kynsmen are gone a far of.

They that sought after my life, and to do me evil, spoke of lies and ymagined
disceate all the day long. As for me, I was like a deaf man, and herd not:
and as one that were domme, not opening his mouth. I am become as a man that
hears not, and that can make no resistaunce with his mouth.

For in the (O LORD) is my trust, thou LORD my God. My desire is, yt mine
enemies triumph not over me: for if my foot slip, they rejoice greatly
against me. I am ready to suffer trouble, and my heaviness is ever in my sight.
For I confess my wickedness, and my sin greueth me.

But mine enemies live, and are mighty: and they that hate me without a cause,
are many in nombre. They that reward me evil for good, speak evil of me,
because I follow the thing that good is. Forsake me not (O LORD my God) O go
not far fro me. Haist the to help me, O LORD my succoure.

The XXXVIII. A psalm of David.
I Said: I will keep my ways, that I LORD, (...)
let me know mine end, and the nombre of my days: that I may be certified
what I want. Behold, (...)
thou have made my days a spanne long, and my life is as it were nothing
before the. O how vain are all men living? Sela. Ye every man walks as it
were a shadow, and disquieteth him^self in vain: he heapeth up riches, (...)
and can not tell to whom he gathers them. And now LORD, wherein shall I
comfort me? my hope is in the. Deliver me from all mine offenses, and make me
not a scorn unto the foolish. I keep syle^ce, and open not my mouth, for thou
have done it. Turn thy plages away fro me, for I am consumed through the fear
of thy hand. When thou punyshest man for sin, thou chastenest him: so that
his beutie consumes away, like as it were a mothe. O how vain are all men?

Sela. Hear my prayer o LORD, and considre my calling: show not thy self as
though thou saw not my tears. For I am a stranger and pilgrymme with the,
(...)
as all my forefathers were. Oh spare me a little, that I may refresh myself,
before I go hence, and be no more seen.

The XXXIX. A psalm of David.
I Waited patiently for the LORD, LORD, and put their trust in him. (...)
Blessed is the man that sets his hope in the LORD, and turns not unto
the proud, and to soch as go about with lies. O LORD my God, great are ye
wondrous works which thou have done: and in thy thoughts toward us there
may none be lickened unto the.

I would declare them, and speak of the^^ but they are so many, that they can
not be told. Sacrifice and offeringe thou would not have (...)
but a body have thou ordained me* burnt offerynges and sacrifice for sin
thou have not allowed. Then said I: Lo, I come. In the beginning of the book
it is written of me, (...)
that I should fulfill thy will O my God, and that am I content to do: ye thy
law is within my heart. I will preach of ye righteousness in the great
congregation: Lo, I will not refrain my lips, o LORD, and that thou know.
I do not hyde ye righteousness in my heart, my talking is of thy treuth and
saving health: I keep not thy loving mercy and faithfulness back from the
great congregation. Turn not thou thy mercy fro me o LORD, but let thy
loving kyndnesse LORD, let it be thy pleasure to deliver me, make haist (o
LORD) to help me. Let them be ashamed and confounded, (...)
that seek after my soul, to destroy it: let them fall backwarde and be put
to confucion, that wysh me evil.

Let the^ soon be brought to shame, that cry over me: there there. But let
all those that seek the, be joyful and glad in the: and let all soch as delight
in thy saving health, say allwaye: the LORD be praised. As for me, I am
poor and in mysery, but the LORD cares for me. Thou art my helper and
redemer, make no long tarie^ge, o my God.

The XL. A psalm of David.
LORD shall deliver him in the time of trouble. (...)
The LORD shall preserve him, and keep him alive: he shall make him to prospere
upon earth, and shall not deliver him in to ye will of his enemies. The LORD
shall ref^esh him, when he lies sick upon his bed, ye thou make his bed in
all his sickness. I said: LORD be merciful unto me, heal my soul, for I
have sinned against the. Mine enemies speak evil upon me: when shall he dye,
and his name perish? Though he came in to se, yet meaned he falsede in his
heart, heapinge myschefe (...)
Ye even mine own familier friend, whom I trusted, which did eat my bred,
has lift up his hele against me. But be thou merciful unto me (o LORD) raise
thou me up, and I shall reward them. By this I know thou fauourest me, that my
enemy shall not triumph over me. Thou have up holden me because of my
innocence, and set me before thy face for ever. O blessed be ye LORD God of
Israel, from hence forth and for evermore. Amen, Amen.

The XLI. A psalm of ye children of Corah.
LIke as the heart desires the water Psalm. ^9
My tears are my meat* day and night, while it is daily said unto me:
where is now thy God? Now when I think there upon, I pour out my heart by my
self: 1. Reg. 1
for I would feign go hence with the multitude, and pass over with them unto
the house of God, in ye voice of praise and thankesgeuynge, among soch as keep
holy day. Psalm. 4^
Why art thou so full of heaviness (o my soul) and why art thou so unquiet
within me? O put thy trust in God, for I will yet give him thanks, for the
help of his countenance. My God, my soul is vexed within me: therefore I
remember the land of Iordane, and the little hill of Hermon^m.

One deep calls another with the voice of thy whystles, all thy wawes and water
floudes are gone over me. The LORD has promised his loving kyndnesse daily,
therefore will I praise him in the night season, and make my prayer unto ye God
of my life. I will say unto God my stony rock: why has^ thou forgotten me? why
go I thus heuely* while the enemy oppresses me? While my bones are broken,
and while mine enemies cast me in the tethe, daily saying unto me where is
now thy God? Why art thou (...) h^uy (o my soul) and why art thou so
disquiete^^ within me? O put thy trust in God, for ^ will yet thank him for the
help of his coun^tenaunce, and because he is my God.

The XLII. psalm.
Been sentence upon me (o God) and de^fende my cause against the vnhol^ people:
Oh deliver me from the di^ceatfull and wicked man. For thou (o God art my
strength: why have thou shot me from the? Why go I then so heuely, while the
e^^mie oppresses me? Oh send out ye ligh^ and thy truth, yt they may led
me and bring me unto thy holy hill and to thy dwelling^

That I may go in to the altar of Go^ even unto the God which is my joy and
plea^^^re, and upon the harp to give thanks unto (...) o God, my God. Why art
thou so heavy my soul) and why art thou so disquieted with^^ me? O put thy
trust in God, for I will yet g^^ue him thanks for ye help of his countena^^ce,
and because he is my God.

The XLIII. A psalm of ye children of Corah.
^^ut. 6. b
what thou have done in their time, of old.

How thou have dryue^ out the Heithen with thy hand, and planted the^ in: how
thou have destroyed the nations and cast the^ out. For they gat not the land
in possession through their own sword, ^^ut. 9. a
nether was it their own arm that helped them. But thy right hand, thine
arm and the light of thy countenance, because thou had a favor unto
them.

^^al. 97. a
Thou art ye king and my God, thou sendest help unto Jacob. Through ye, will we
over throw our enemies: and in thy name will we tread them under, that rise
up against us.

For I will not trust in my bow, it is not my sword yt shall help me. But it
is thou that sauest us from our enemies, and put them to confucion that
hate us. We will allwaye make our boast of God, and praise (...) 9. b
Thou make us to turn our backs upon our enemies, so that they which hate
us, spoil our goods. (...)
Thou let us be eaten up like sheep, and scatrest us among the Heithen.

Thou sellest thy people for naught, and take no money for them. Thou make
us to be rebuked of or neghbours, to be laughed to scorn and had in derision,
of them that are round about us. ^sal. ^^. a
Thou have made us a very by word among the Heithen, and that the people
shake their heads at us. My co^fucion is daily before me, and the shame of my
face covers me. For the voice of the slaunderer and blasphemer, for the
enemy and auenger. All this is come upon us, and yet have we not forgotten
the, ner behaved our selves unfaithfully in thy covenant. Our heart is not
turned back, nether our steps gone out of thy way. That thou smytes^ us so
in the place of the serpent, and couerest us LORD, why slepest thou* Awake,
and cast us not of for ever. Wherefore hydest thou thy face? will thou clean
forget our misery and oppression? For our soul is brought low even unto the
dust, and our belly cleueth unto the ground. Arise o LORD, help us, and
deliver us for thy mercy sake.

The XLIIII. A psalm of the children of Corah.
MY heart is dytinge of a good matter,

Gyrde the with thy sword upon thy thee (o thou mighty) with worshipe and
renown. Good luck have thou with thine honor, ride on with the treuth,
meekness and righteousness: and thy right ho^de shall teach ye wonderful
things. Thy arowes are sharp, the people shall be subdued unto the, even in the
myddest among the kings enemies.

Thy seat (o God) endures for ever: the (...)


Thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquite: wherefore God (which is thy
God) has anointed the with the oil of gladness above thy f^lowes. All thy
garments are like myrre, Aloes and Cassia, when thou co^mest out of thine
yuerie palaces in thy beutifull glory. Kings daughters go in thy goodly array,
and upon thy right hand stondeth the queen in a vesture of the most fine
gold. Harken (o daughter) considre, and enclyne thine ear: forget thine own
people, and thy fathers house. So shall the king have pleasure in thy beutie,
for he is thy LORD, and thou shall worshipe him. The daughters (...)
the rich among the people shall make their supplicacion before the. The
kings daughter is all glorious within, her clothinge is of wrought gold* She
shall be brought unto the king in raiment of nedle work, and maidens after her:
soch as be next her shall be brought unto the. With joy and gladness shall they
be brought, and go into the kings palace. In stead of thy fathere thou have
gotten children, whom thou shall make princes in all lands. I will remember thy
name from one generacio^ to another: therefore shall the people give thanks unto
the, world without end.

The XLV. A psalm of the children of Corah.
IN our troubles and aduersite, we have found, that God is our refuge, our
strength and help. Therefore will we not fear, though the earth fell, and
though the hills were carried in to the myddest of the sea.

(...)
Though the waters of the sea raged and were never so troublous, and though the
mountains shoke at the tempest of the same. Sela.

For there is a floude, which with his ryuers reioyseth ye cite of God, the holy
dwelling of the most highest. God is in ye myddest of her, therefore shall she
not be removed: for God helps her, and ye right early. The Heithen are madd,
the kingdoms make much a do: but when he shows his voice, ye earth LORD of
hoostes is with us, the God of Jacob is our defense.

Sela. O come hither, and behold ye works of the LORD, what destruccio^s he
has brought upon ye earth. (...)
He has made wars to cease in all the world: he has broken the bow, he
has knapped the spear in sonder, and bre^t the charettes in the fire. Be
still the^ and confess yt I am God: I will be exalted among the Heithe^, and I
will be exalted upon earth. The LORD of hoostes is with us, the God of Jacob is
our defense. Sela.

The XLVI. A psalm of the children of Corah.
LORD the most highest is to be feared, and he is the great king upon all ye
earth. He shall subdue the people under us, and the Heithe^ under our fete. He
choseth us for an heretage, the beutie of Jacob whom he loved. Sela. God is
gone up with a merry noise, and the LORD with the sownde of the tro^pet. O sing
praises, sing praises unto God: O sing praises, sing praises unto our king.

For God is king of all the earth, O sing praises unto him with
understanding.

God is king over the Heithe^, God sits in his holy seat. The princes of
the people are gathered together unto the God of Abraham: for God is far
far hyer exalted, then the mighty lords of the earth.

The XLVII. A psalm of the children of Corah.
LORD and hyelie to be praised, in ye cite of or God, eue^ upon his holy hill.
The hill of Sion is like a fair pla^te, whereof all the land reioyseth: upon
the north side lies the cite of the great king.

God is well known in her palaces, yt he is the defense of the same. (...)
For lo, kings are gathered, and gone by together. They marveled, to se soch
things: they were aston^ied, and suddenly cast down. Fear came there upon
the^, and sorrow as upon a woman in her travail. Thou shall break ye ships
of the sea, through the east wind. Like as we LORD of hoostes, in the cite of
or God: God vpholdeth the same for ever. Sela. We wait for thy loving
kyndnesse (o God) in the myddest of thy temple. O God, acordinge unto thy name,
so is ye praise unto the worlds end: thy right ho^de is full of righteousness.

Oh let the mount Sion rejoice, Psalm. 96. ^
and ye daughters of Judah be glad because of thy iudgme^tes. Walk about Sion,
go round about her, and tell her towers. Mark well her walls, set v^ her
houses: that it may be told them yt come after. For this God is or God for
ever and ever, and he shall allwaie be or gyde.

The XLVIII. A psalm of the children of Corah.
O Hear this, all ye people: pondre it well, all ye that dwell upon the earth.
Hye and low, rich and poor, one with another

My mouth shall speak of wyszdome, and my heart shall muse of understanding. I
will incline mine ear to the parable, and show my darcke speech upon the
harp. Wherefore should I fear the evil days, when the wickedness of my
heles co^paseth me round about? They that put their trust in their good, and
boost them selves in the multitude of their riches. No man may deliver his
brother, ner make agreement for him unto God.

For it costeth more to redeem their souls, so that he must let that alone for
ever. Ye though he live long, and se not ye grave. For it shall be seen, yt
soch wise me^ shall dye and perish together, as well as the ignorant and
foolish, and leave their goods for other. Look what is in their houses, it
continues still: their dwellinge places endure from one generation to another,
and are called after their own names upon the earth, Nevertheless man abides
not in soch honor, but is compared unto ye brute beasts, and becomes like
unto the^.

This way of theirs is very foolishness, and yet their posterite praise it with
their mouth.

Sela. They lie in the hell like sheep, death shall gnawe upon them, and the
rightuous shall have dominacion of them in the mo^^nynge by times: their
strength shall consum^ and hell shall be their dwellinge. But God shall deliver my
soul from the power of hell when he receaueth me. Sela. O be not thou afraid,
when one is made rich, and the glory of his hense increased. For he (...) carry
nothing^ away with him when he dye^ nether shall his pomp follow him. (...) he
lives, he is counted an happy (...) so long as he is in prosperity, me^
speak good of him. But when he follows his fathers generation, he shall never
se light any more.

When a man is in honor and has no vndersto^dinge, he is compared unto the
brute beasts, and becomes like unto them.

The XLIX. A psalm of Asaph.
LORD even the mighty God has spoken, and called the world from the rysinge
up of the son unto the goinge down of the same. ^saie 2. a
Out of Sion ^peareth the glorious beutie of God. Our God shall come, and not
keep silence: there goes before him a consumynge fire, and a mighty tempest
round about him. He shall call the heavens from above, and the earth, that he
may judge his people. Gather my saints together unto me, those yt set more by
the covenant then by any offeringe. And the heavens shall declare his
righteousness, for God is judge himself.

Sela. Hear, o my people: let me speak, let me testify among you, o Israel:
I am God, even thy God. I reprove the not because of thy sacrifice, ye burnt
offeringes are allwaye before me. I will take no bullockes out of thy house, ner
gotes out of thy foldes. For all the beestes of the field are my^e, and
thousands of catell upon the hills.

I know all the fowls upon the mountains, and the wild beasts of the field
are in ^y sight. If I be hongrie, I will not tell ^he: for ye whole world is
mine, and all that ^herin is. Thynkest thou, that I will eat ^he flesh of oxen,
or drink the blood of goa^es? Offer unto God praise and thankesgeuynge, and
pay thy vows unto the most ^yest. And call upon me in the time of trou^le, so
will I hear the, that thou shall than^e me. But unto the ungodly says God:
Why do thou preach my laws, and ta^est my covenant in thy mouth? Where ^s
thou hate to be reformed, and castest ^y words behind the? If thou seist a
^hefe, thou runnest with him, and art parta^er with the aduouterers. Thou
let ye ^outh speak wickedness, and thy tongue payneth disceate. Thou
syttest and speak a^aynst thy brother, ye and slaundrest thine ^wne mothers
son. This thou do, why^e I hold my tongue: and think me to be e^e^ soch
one as thy self but I will reprove the, set my self against the. O considre
this, (...) that forget God: lest I pluck you away, (...) there be none to
deliver you. Who so ^^reth me thanks and praise, he honors me: and this is
the way, whereby I will show him the saving health of God.

The L. A psalm of David.
Have mercy upon me (o God) after thy goodness, and acordinge unto thy great
mercies, do away mine offenses.

Wash me well fro my wickedness, and cleanse me fro my sin. For I knowledge my
fautes, and my sin is ever before me.

Against the only, against the have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight: that
thou might be justified in thy saynges, and should over come when thou art
judged.

Behold, I was borne in wickedness, and in sin has my mother conceived me.

But lo, thou have a pleasure in the treuth* and have showed me secret
wyszdome. O reconcile me with Isope, and I shall be clean: wash thou me, and I
shall be whyter then snow. Oh let me hear of joy and gladness, that the bones
which thou have broken, may rejoice. Turn thy face fro my sins, and put out
all my myszdedes. Make me a clean heart (o God) and renew a right sprete within
me. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy sprete fro me. O
give me the comfort of thy help again, and stablish me with thy fre sprete.
Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked, that sinners may be converted
unto the. Deliver me from bloudegyltynesse o God, thou that art the God of my
health, that my tongue may praise thy righteousness. Open my lips (O LORD)
that my mouth may show thy praise.

For if thou had pleasure in sacrifice, I would give it the: but thou
delytest not in burnt offerynges. The sacrifice of God is a troubled sprete, a
broken and a co^trite here (o God) shall thou not despise. O be favorable and
gracious unto Sion, that the walls of Jerusalem may be builded. For then
shall thou be pleased with the sacrifice of righteousness, with the burnt
offerynges and oblacions: then shall they lay bullockes upon thine altar.

The LI. A psalm of David.
WHy boastest thou thy self (thou Tyrant) that thou can do myschefe? Where
as the goodness of God endures yet daily. Thy tongue ymagineth wickedness,
and with lies it cutteth like a sharp rasoure. Thou love ungraciousness
more the^ good, to talk of lies more then righteousness. Sela.

Thou love to speak all words yt may do hurt, O thou false tongue.
Therefore shall God clean destroy the, smite the in pieces, pluck the out of
thy dwellinge, and rote the out of the land of the lyuinge. Sela.

(...)
Lo, this is the man, yt took not God for his strength, but trusted unto the
multitude of his riches, and was mighty in his wickedness. As for me, I am
like a grene olyue tree in ye house of God: my trust is in the tender mercy of
God for ever and ever.

I will allwaye give thanks unto the, for that thou have done: and will hope in
thy name, for thy saints like it well.

The LII. A psalm of David.
(...)
there is no God. Corrupt are they, and become abominable in their
wickednesses: there is not one, that does good. God looked down from heaven
upon the children of men, to se if there were any that would understand, or
seek after God. (...). 3. b
But they are all gone out of ye way, they are all become unprofitable: there
is none yt does good, no not one. How ca^ they have understanding, that are
the workers of wickedness, eatinge up my people as it were bred, and call not
upon God? They are afraid, where no fear is: for God breaks the bones of
them that besege the: thou put them to confucion, for God despises them.
Oh yt the saving health were given unto Israel out of Sion: Oh that the LORD
would deliver his people out of captiuyte. Then should Jacob rejoice, and
Israel should be right glad.

The LIII. A psalm of David.
(...) 2. e
and in thy treuth shall thou destroy them. A frewil offeringe will I give the,
and praise thy name o LORD, because it is so comfortable.

For thou have delivered me out of all my trouble, so that mine eye seyth his
desire upon mine enemies.

The LIIII. A psalm of David.


I would make haist to escape, from the stormy wind and tempest. Destroy
their tongues (o LORD) and deuyde them, Genesis 11
for I se unrighteous and strife in ye cite. This

Wickedness is therein, disceate and gyle go not out of her streets. If it were
mine enemy that reuyled me, I could bear it: or if one that ought me evil
will did threaten me, I would hyde myself from him. But it is thou my
companyon, my gyde and mine own familier friend. We had sweet (...) secret
communicacion together, and louyngly walked we together in ye house of God.

Let death come hastily upon them, and let them go down quick in to hell, for
wickedness is among them in their dwellinges.

As for me, I will call unto God, and the LORD shall help me. In the
eueninge, morning and at noone day will I mourn and complain: and he shall
hear my voice.

It is he that delyuereth my soul in peace,

For they will not turn: and why? they fear not God. Ye they lay hondes upon
soch as be at peace with him, and so they break his covenant. Their mouths
are softer then butter, and yet have they batell in their mind: their words
are smoother then oil, and yet be they very swerdes. Matt. 6. c Luc. 12. d 1.
Pet. 5. a
O cast thy burden (or care) upon the LORD, he shall norish the, and not leave
the rightuous in unquietness. But as for them, thou (o God) shall cast them
down in to the pit of destruction. The bloudthurstie and disceatfull shall
not live out half their days. Nevertheless my trust is in the.

The LV. A psalm of David.
BE merciful unto me (o God) for (...) will tread me down: they are (...)
fightinge and troublinge me. (...) enemies tread me daily under their fete,
for they be many, yt proudly fight against me.

Nevertheless, when I am afraid, I put my trust in the. I will comfort my
self in Gods word, ye I will hope in God, and not fear: What can flesh then
do unto me?

They vex me daily in my words: all yt they ymagin, is to do me evil. They
hold^ ^lltogether, and keep them selves close: they marck my steps, how they
may catch my soul. But in vain, for it shall escape the^: and why? thou (o
God) in thy displeasure shall cast down soch people. Thou tellest my
flittinges, thou put my tears in thy botell, and nombrest them. When so
ever I call upon the, mine enemies are put to flight: whereby I know, that thou
art my God. In Gods word will I rejoice, in the LORDS word will I comfort me.
Ye in God do I ^rust, and am not afraied: what ca^ man the^ do unto me? Unto
the (o God) will I pay my vows, unto ye will I give thanks and praise. For
thou have delivered my soul from death, and my fete from fallinge, yt I may
walk before God in ye light of ye living.

The LVI. A psalm of David.
BE merciful unto me (o God) be merciful unto me, for my soul trusts in
ye* and under the shadow of thy wings shall be my refuge, until wickedness
be ever past.

I call unto God ye most highest, eue^ ye God yt shall help me up again. ^e shall
send from heaven, and save me from the reprofe of him that would swalowe me
up. Sela.

This shall God send, for his mercy and faithfulness sake. I lie with my soul
among the cruel lions: even among the children of men, whose tethe are
spears and arowes, and their tongue a sharp sword.

Set up thy self (o God) above the heavens, and thy glory above all the earth.
They have laid a nett for my fete, and pressed down my soul: they have
dygged a pyt before me, and are fallen in to it them selves.

(...)
Sela. My heart is ready (o God) my heart is ready, to sing and give praise.
Awake (o my glory) awake lute and harp, I my self will awake right early. I will
give thanks unto the (o LORD) among the people, I will sing praises unto the
among the Heithe^. For ye greatness of thy mercy reaches ^^to the heavens, and
thy faithfulness unto (...) clouds. Set up thy self (o God) (...) heavens,
and thy glory above all ye earth.

The LVII. A psalm of David.
^F your minds be upon rightuous^esse in deed, then judge the thing that is
right, o ye sons of men. But ye ymagin myschefe in your hertes, and your
hondes deal with wickedness. The ungodly are froward, eue^ from their
mothers womb: as soon as they be borne, they go astraie and speak lies. They
are as furious as the serpent, (...)
even like the deaf Adder that stops her ears. That she should not hear
the voice of the charmer, charm he never so wisely. Break their teth (o God)
in their mouths, smite the chaft bones of the lions whelps in sonder, o LORD.

That they may fall away, like water ye (...)
The rightuous shall rejoice when he seyth the vengeance, and shall wash his
fete in the blood of the ungodly. So that me^ shall say: verily, there is a
reward for ye rightuous: doutles, there is a God that judges the earth.

The LVIII. A psalm of David.
Deliver me fro mine enemies (o my LORD. They ru^ne and prepare the^ selves,
with out my fault: Arise, come thou help me, and behold. Sto^de up o LORD God
of hoostes, thou God of Israel, to vyset all Heithen: be not merciful unto
the^ yt offend of malicious wickedness. Sela. (...)
Let the^ go to and fro, and run about the cite youlinge like dogs.
Behold, they speak (against me) with (...)
But thou (o LORD) shall have them in derision, thou shall laugh all Heithe^
to scorn. My strength do I ascrybe unto the, for thou (o God) art my defender.
God shows me his goodness plenteously, God lets me se my desire upon mine
enemies. Slayethe^ not, lest my people forget it: but scatre the^ abroad with
thy power and put the^ down, o LORD our defense. For ye sin of their
mouth, for the words of their lips, and because of their pride, let the^ be
taken: and why? their preachinge is of cursynge and lies. Consume them in yi
wrath, consume the^ yt they may perish, and know yt it is God, which rules
in Jacob and in all the world. Sela. Let the^ go to and fro, and ru^ne about
the cite, youlinge like dogs. Let the^ run here and there for meat, and
grudge when they have not enough. As for me, I will sing of thy power, and
praise thy mercy betymes in the morning: for thou art my defense and refuge in
the time of my trouble.

Unto the (o my strength) will I sing, for thou (o God) art my defense, and my
merciful God.

The LIX. A psalm of David.
O God, thou yt have cast us out and scatred us abroad, thou yt have been so
sore displeased at us, comfort us again. Thou yt have removed the lord and
divided it, heal the sores thereof, for it shakes. Thou have showed thy people
heavy things, (...)
thou have given us a drink off wine, yt we slo^bre withal. Yet have thou
given a toke^ for soch as fear the, yt they may cast it up in ye treuth.
Sela. That thy beloved might be delivered, help them with thy right hand,
(...)
and mete out the valley (...) Suchoth Galaad is mine, Manasses is mine,
Ephraim is the strength of my head, Judah is my captain. Moab is my washpotte,
over Edom will I stretch out my shue, Philistea shall be glad of me. Who will
led me in to the strong cite? Who will bring me in to Edom? Shall not thou
do it, o God, thou yt have cast us out: thou God, yt wentest not out with or
hoostes? (...)
O be thou our help in trouble, for vain is the help of man. Through God we
shall do great acts, for it is he that shall tread down our enemies.

The LX. A psalm of David.
LORD) have herd my desires, thou have given an heretage unto those that
fear thy name. Thou shall grant the king a long life, that his years may
endure through out all generacions. That he may dwell before God for ever: Oh
let thy loving mercy and faithfulness preserve him. So will I allwaye sing
praises unto thy name, yt I may daily perform my vows.

The LXI. A psalm of David.
MY soul wayteth only upon God, for of him comes my help. He only is my
strength, my salvation, my defense, so yt I shall not greatly fall. How long
will ye ymagin myschefe against every man? ye shall be slain all ye sort of
you: ye as a tottringe wall shall ye be, and like a broken hedge. Their deuyce
is only how to put him out, their delight is i^ lies: they give good words with
their mouth but curse with their heart. Sela. Nevertheless, my soul abides only
upon God, for he is my God. He only is my strength, my salvation, my defense:
so yt I shall not fall. In God is my health, my glory, my might, and in God is
my trust. O put yor trust in him allwaye (ye people) pour out yor hertes
before him, for God is our hope. Sela. As for men, they are but vain, me^ are
disceatfull: upon the weightes they are al together lighter then vainte itself.
O trust not in wrong and robbery, give not yor selves unto vanite: if riches
increase, set not yor heart upon them. God spoke once a word, twyse have I
herd the same: that power belongs unto God. That thou LORD art merciful,
and that thou rewardest every man acordinge to his works.

The LXII. A psalm of David.
O God, thou art my God: early will I seek the. My soul thursteth for the, my
flesh longs after the in a bare^ and dry lord, where no water is. Thus do I
look for the in thy Sa^ctuary, that I might behold ye power and glory. For thy
loving kyndnesse is better then life, my lyppes shall praise the. As long as I
live will I magnify the, and lift up my hondes in thy name. My soul is
satisfied eue^ as it were with marry and fatness, when my mouth prayseth the
with joyful lips. In my bed will I remember ye, and when I wake, my
talking shall be of the.

For thou have been my helper, and under the shadow of ye wings will I
rejoice. My soul hangs upon the, thy right hand up holds me. They seek
after my soul, but in vain, for they shall go under the earth. They shall fall
into the sword, and be a porcio^ for foxes. But ye king shall rejoice in God:
all they that swear by him, shall be commended, for the mouth of liars shall be
stopped. Deuteronomy. 6.


The LXIII. A psalm of David.
Hear my voice (o God) in my co^playnte,

They have devised myschefe, and commoned among them selves, how they may
lay snares: Re. 1^. d
tush (say they) who shall se them?

LORD, and put his trust in him: and all they yt are true off heart, shall be
glad thereof.

The LXIIII. A psalm of David.
THou (o God) art praised in Sion, and

LXV. A psalm off David.
Psalm. 99. a
O Be joyful in God (all ye lo^des) sing praises unto the honor of his name
make his praise to be glorious. Say unto God: O how wonderful are thy works?
through the greatness of thy power shall thine enemies be confounded. O yt all
the world would worshipe the, sing of the and praise thy name. Sela. O come
hither and behold the works of God, which is so wonderful in his doings
among the children of men. He turned the sea in to dry lord, so that they
went through the water on foot: therefore will we rejoice in him. He rules with
his power for ever, his eyes behold the people: the rennagates shall not be
able to exalte them selves. Sela. O magnify or God (ye people) make ye voice
off his praise to be herd. Which holds or soul in life, and suffers not
our fete to slip. For thou (o God) have proved us, thou have tried us li^^
as silver is tried. Thou have brought us in to captiuyte, and laid trouble
upon or lo^nes. Thou have suffered men to ride over or heads, we went through
fire and water, (...) thou have brought us out, and refreshed (...).

Therefore will I go in to thy house with (...) offeringes, to pay the my vows,
which I promised with my lips, and spoke with my mouth, when I was in trouble.
I will offer unto the fat brentsacrifices with the smo^e of ra^mes, I will
offer bullockes and goate^. Sela. O come hither and herke^ (all ye that fear
God) I will tell you, what he has done for my soul. I called unto hi^ with my
mouth and gave him praises with my tu^ge. (Yff I enclyne unto wickedness with my
heart, ye LORD will not hear me.) Therefore God has herd me, and considred
the voice off my prayer. Praised be God, which has not cast out my prayer, ner
turned his mercy fro me.

The LXVI. psalm.
GOd be merciful unto us, bless us, and show the light off his countenance
upon us. Sela. That we may know ye way upon earth, ye saving health among
all Heithen. Let the people praise the (o God) ye let all people praise the. O
let the people rejoice and be glad, that thou iudgest the folk rightuously,
and gouernest the nations upon earth. Let the people praise the (o God) let all
people praise the. God (even our own God) give us his blessinge, that the
earth may bring forth her increase God bless us, and let all the ends of ye
world fear him.

The LXVII. A psalm of David.
LEt God arise, so shall his enemies be scatered, and they that hate him, (...)
shall fle before him. Like as the smoke vanishes, so shall thou drive them
away: and like as wax melts at the fire, so shall the ungodly perish at the
presence off God.

But the rightuous shall be glad and rejoice before God, they shall be merry and
joyful. Oh sing unto God, sing praises unto his name: magnify him ye rydeth
above the heavens (whose name is ye LORD) and rejoice before hi^.

He is a father of ye fatherless, he is a defender of widows: eue^ God in
his holy habitacio^. He is the God yt makes me^ to be of one mind in a house,
and brings ye presoners out of captivity in due season, but lets ye
rennagates continue in scarceness. O God, when thou we^test forth before ye
people, when thou we^test through ye wilderness. Sela. The earth shoke, and ye
heavens dropped at the presence of God in Sinai, at ye presence of God which is
ye God of Israel. Thou o God sendest a gracious rain upon thine enheritau^ce,
and refreshest it, when it is dry. That thy beasts may dwell therein, which
thou of thy goodness have prepared for the poor. The LORD shall give the word,
with great hoostes of Eua^gelistes. Ringes with their armies shall fle, and they of
ye household shall deuyde ye spoil. If so be yt ye lie among the pales, the
doves feathers shall be covered with silver, and her wings of the color of gold.
When the All mighty sets kings upon the earth, it shall be clear even in
the darcknesse. The hill of Basan is Gods hill, the hill of Basan is a
ple^teous hill. Why hoppe ye so, ye great hills? It pleases God to dwell
upon this hill, ye^ the LORD will abide in it for ever. The charettes of God
are many M. times a thousand, the LORD is among them in the holy Sinai. Thou
art gone up an hye, thou have led captyuite captyue, and received gifts for
me^: Ye even for thy enemies, that they might dwell with the LORD God.
Praised be the LORD daily, eue^ ye God which helps us, and pours his
benefits upon us. Sela. The God yt is or Savior, eue^ God the LORD by who^ we
escape death. The God that smyteth his enemies upon the heads and upon the
hayrie scalpes: soch as go on still in their wikednes. The LORD has said:
some will I bring again from Basan, some will I bring again from the deep of
the sea. That thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine enemies, and that
thy dogs may lick it up.

It is well se^e (o God how thou go, how thou my God and king go in the
Sanctuary. The syngers go before, and then the mynstrells among the maidens
with the tymbrels. O give thanks unto God the LORD in the congregation, for
the wells of Israel. There little Benjamin, the princes of Judah, the princes of
Zabulo^, and the princes of Nephthali bear rule among them. Thy God has
committed strength un to the, stablish the thing (o God) that thou have
wrought in us. For thy temples sake at Jerusalem shall kings bring presents
unto the. Reprove the beestes among the redes, the heap of bulls with the
calves: those that drive for money. Oh sca^re the people that delight in
battle. The princes shall come out of Egipte, the Morians lord shall stretch
out her hondes unto God. Sing unto God, o ye kingdoms of the earth: o sing
praises unto the LORD. Sela.

Which sytteth in the heavens over all from the begynnge: Lo, he shall send out
his voice, ye and that a mighty voice. Ascrybe ye the power unto God, his
glory is in Israel, and his might in the clouds. God is wonderful in his
Sanctuary, he is the God of Israel, he will give strength and power unto his
people. Blessed be God.

The LXVIII. A psalm of David.
Help me (o God) for the waters are come in eue^ unto my soul. I stick fast
in the deep mire, where no ground is: I am come in to deep waters, and the
floudes will drown me. I am weery of crienge, my throat is dry, my sight
fails me, for waytinge so long upon my God. They yt hate me without a cause,
are mo then the hayres of my head* they that are mine enemies and would
destroy me giltlesse, are mighty: I am feign to pay the things yt I never
took. God, thou know my symplenesse, and my fautes are not hyd from the. Let
not them that trust in the (o LORD God of hoostes) be ashamed for my cause:
let not those yt seek the, be confounded through me, o God o^ Israel. And why?
for thy sake do I suffer reprofe, shame covers my face. I am become a
stranger unto my brethren, and an aleaunt unto my mothers children. For the
zele of thine house has even eaten me, and the rebukes of them that rebuked
the, is fallen upon me. I wept and chastened my self with fasting, and that was
turned to my reprofe. I put on a sack cloth, and therefore they iested upon me.
They that satt in the gate, spoke against me, and the dronckardes made songs
upon me. But LORD, I made my prayer unto the in an acceptable time: Hear me
(o God) with thy great mercy and sure help. Take me out of the mire, yt I
syncke not: Oh let me be delivered from the^ yt hate me, and out of ye deep
waters. (...) floude drown me, that the (...) LORD) for thy loving kyndnesse
is confortable: turn the unto me acordinge unto ye great mercy. Hyde not thy
face from thy servant, for I am in trouble: O haist ye to help me. Draw nigh
unto my so^le, and save it: Oh deliver me because of (...) enemies. Thou
know my reprofe, my shame and my dishonor: my adversaries are all in thy
sight. The rebuke breaks my heart, and makes me heavy: I look for some to have
pity upon me, but there is no man: and for some to comfort me, but I find
none. ^at. 27. d Ioh. 18. c
They gave me gall to eat, and when I was To. 11. b
an occasion to fall and a reward unto them. Let their eyes be blinded, that
they se not: and ever bow down their backs.

Pour out thy indignacion upon them, and let thy wrothfull displeasure take
hold of them. Let their habitacion be void, and no man to dwell in their
tents. (...)
For they persecute him whom thou have smytten, and beside thy wounds they
have given him moo. Let them fall from one wickedness to another, and not come
into thy righteousness. Let the^ be wyped out of ye book of the lyuinge, and
not be written among the rightuous. (...) 2. g
As for me, I am poor and in heaviness, let thy help LORD better then a
bullock, that has horns and hoffes. O considre this and be glad (ye that be
in aduersite) seek after God, and yor soul shall live.

For the LORD hears the poor, and despy^^ not his presoners. Let heaven and
earth praise him, the sea and all that moves therein. For God will save Sion,
and build the cities of Judah, that men may dwell there, and have the^ in
possession. The sede of his servants shall i^heret it, and they that love his
name, shall dwell therein.

The LXIX. A psalm of David.
HAist the (o God) to deliver me, and to help me, o LORD. Let the^ be shamed
and confounded that seek after my soul: let them be turned backwarde and put
to confucio^, that wysh me evil. Let them soon be brought to shame, (...)
yt cry over me: there there.

But let all those that seek the, be joyful and glad in the: and let all soch
as delight in thy saving health, say always: ye LORD be pray (...) As for me,
I am poor and in misery, (...) to help me. Thou art my help, my redemer and
my God: oh make no (...) tarienge.

The LXX psalm.
IN the, o LORD, is my trust, let me never be put to co^fucio^, (...)
but rydde me and deliver me through thy righteousness* incline thine ear unto
me, and help me. Be thou my strong hold (where unto I may allwaye fle) thou
that have promised to help me: for thou art my house of defense and my
castle. Deliver me (o my God) out of ye hand of the ungodly, out of the hand
of the^ rightuous and cruel man. For thou (o LORD God) art the thing that I
long for, (...)
thou art my hope even fro my youth. I have ^eaned upon ye ever sens I was
borne, thou art he that took me out of my mothers womb, therefore is my praise
allwaye of the. I am become a wonder unto the multitude, but my sure trust is
in the. Oh let my mouth be filled with thy praise and honor all the day
long. Cast me not away in mine old age, forsake me not when my strength
fails me. For mine enemies speak against me, and they that lay wait for my
soul, take their co^^cell together, saying: God has forsaken him, p^ersecute
him, take him, for there is none to help him. Go not far fro me, o God: my
God, haist the to help me. Let them be confounded and perish, that are against
my soul: let the^ be covered with shame and dishonor, that seek to do me
evil. As for me, I will pacie^tly abide allwaye, and will ever increase thy
praise. My mouth shall speak of thy righteousness and saving health all the
day long, for I know no end thereof. Let me go in (o LORD God) and I will
make mention of thy power and righteousness only. Thou (o God) have learned me
fro my youth up until now, therefore will I tell of ye wondrous works. Forsake
me not (o God) in mine old age, when I am gray headed: until I have showed
thine arm unto childers children, (...)
and thy power to all them that are yet for to come. Thy righteousness (o God)
is very hie, thou that do great things: o God, who is like unto the? O
what great troubles and aduersite have thou showed me? and yet did thou
turn and refresh me, ye and broughtest me from the deep of the earth again.
Thou have brought me to great honor, and comforted me on every side.
Therefore will I praise the and thy faith fullness (o God) playe^ge upon the
lute, unto the will I sing upon the harp. o thou holy one of Israel. My lips
would feign sing praises unto the: and so would my soul, whom thou have
delivered.

My tongue talks of thy righteousness all the day long, for they are
confounded and brought unto shame, yt sought to do me euel.

The LXXI. A psalm of Solomon.
Give the king thy judgment (o God) and thy righteousness unto the kings
son. That he may govern thy people acordinge unto right, and defend thy
poor. That the mountains may bring peace, and the little hills righteousness
unto the people. He shall keep the simple folk by their right, defend the
children of the poor, and punysh the wrongeous doer.

Thou shall be feared as long as ye Son and the Moon endures, from one
generation to another. He shall come down like the rain in to a flese of woll,
and like the drops that water ye earth. In his time shall righteousness
flourish, ye and abundau^ce of peace, so long as the Moon endures.

His dominion shall be from the one see to the other, and from the floude unto
the worlds end. They that dwell in the wilderness, shall knele before him, and
his enemies shall lick the dust. The kings of the sea and of the Isles shall
bring presents, ye kings of Araby and Saba shall offer gifts. All kings
shall worshipe him, and all Heithe^ shall do him service. For he shall deliver the
poor when he cries, and the nedy yt has no help. He shall be favorable to
the simple and poor, he shall preserve the souls of soch as be in aduersite.
He shall deliver their souls from extorcion and wrong, and dear shall their
blood be in his sight. He shall live, and unto him shall be given of ye gold of
Arabia: Prayer shall be made ever unto him, and daily shall he be praised. There
shall be an heap of corn in the earth hye upon the hills, his fruit shall shake
like Libanus, and shall be grene in the cite, like grass upon the earth. His
name shall endure for ever, his name shall remain under the son among the
posterites, which shall be blessed through him, and all the Heithen shall praise
him. Blessed be the LORD God, even the God of Israel, which only does
wo^derous things. And blessed be the name of his majesty for ever, and all
lands be fulfilled with his glory. Amen, Amen.

Here end the prayers of David the son of Iesse.
The LXXII. A psalm of Asaph,
O How loving is God unto Israel, to soch as are of a clean heart?
Ne^erthelesse my fete were almost gone, my treadinges had well nigh slipte. And
why? I was grieved at ye wicked, Aba. 1. c Iere. 12. a Job. ^^. a
to se the ungodly in soch prosperity. For they are in no parell of death, but
stand fast like a palace. They come in no misfortune like other folk, nether
are they plaged like other men. And this is the cause that they be so puffed up
in pride, and overwhelmed with cruelte and vnrigthuousnesse. Their eyes swell
for fatness, they do Psalm. 93* ^
Tush (say they) how should God perceive it? is there knowledge in the most
highest? Lo, these are the ungodly, these prospere in the world, these have
riches in possession. Should I then cleanse my heart in vain (thought I) and
wash my hondes in innocence? Wherefore should I be then punyshed daily, and be
chastened every morning* Ye I had almost also said even as they: but lo,
then should I have condemned the generation of thy children. Then thought I to
understand this, but it was to hard for me. Until I went in to ye Sanctuary
of God, and considered the end of these men. Namely, how thou have set the^ in
a slippery place, that thou may cast the^ down headlynges and destroy
the^. O how suddenly do they consume, perish, and come to a fearful end? Ye
even like as a dream when one awaketh, so make thou their image to vanish
out of the cite. Thus my heart was grieved, and it went even through my reins.

So foolish was I and ignorant, and as it were a be before the.
Nevertheless, I am allwaye by the, thou hold est me by my right hand. Thou
ledest me with thy counsel, and afterward receauest me unto glory. O what is
there prepared for me in heaven? there is nothing upon earth, that I desire in
comparison of the. My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my
heart, and my portion for ever. For lo, Number. 18. c Psalm. 118. h Tren. 3. c
they that forsake the, shall perish, thou destroyest all them that commit
fornicacion against the. But it is good for me, to hold me fast by God, to put
my trust in the LORD God, and to speak of all thy works.

The LXXIII. A psalm of Asaph.
O God, wherefore do thou cast us so think upon thy congregation, whom thou
have purchased from the beginning: the staff of thine inheritance, whom thou
have redeemed, even this hill of Sion wherein thou dwell. Tread upon them
with thy fete, and cast them down to the ground, for the enemy has
destroyed altogether in the Sa^ctuary. Thy adversaries roar in thy houses,
and set up their banners for tokens. Men may se the axes glister above, like
as those that hew in the wod. They cut down all the sylinge work of ye
Sa^ctuary with bylles and axes. 4. Re. 25. b 2. Pa. 36. c Eze. 16. d
They have set fire upon ye Sa^ctuary they have defiled ye dwelling place of
ye name, eue^ unto the ground. Ye they say in their hertes: Let us spoil
the^ all together, thus (...) 14. c


(...). 27. a (...) 40. c
Thou smytest the heads of Leuiathan in pieces, and geuest him to be meat for
the people in the wilderness. Thou dyggest up wells and brokes, thou dryest
up mighty waters. LORD) how the enemy rebukes, and how the foolish people
blaspheme thy name. O deliver not the soul of thy turtle dove unto the
beestes, and forget not the congregacon of the poor for ever. Look upon the
covenant, for the darcke houses of the earth are full of wickedness. O let
not the simple go away ashamed, for the poor and nedy give praises unto thy
name. Arise (o God) and manteyne thine own cause, remember how the foolishma^
blasphemeth the daily. Forget not the voice of thine enemies, for the
presumpcion of them that hate the, increases ever more and more.

The LXXIIII. A psalm of Asaph.


I said unto the mad people: deal not so madly, and to the ungodly: set not
up your horns. Set not up your horns an hye, and speak not with a stiff
neck. For promocio^ comes nether from the east ner from the west, ner yet
from the wilderness. And why? God is the judge: he puts down one and
sets up another. For in the hand of the LORD there is a cup full of
strong wine, and he pours out of the same: As for the dregge^ thereof, all ye
ungodly of the earth shall drink them, and suck them out. But I will talk of
the God of Jacob, and praise him for ever. All the horns of the ungodly will I
break, and ye horns of the rightuous shall be exalted.

The LXXV. A psalm of Asaph.
IN Judah is God known, his name is great in Israel. At Salem is his
tabernacle, and his dwellinge in Sion. There breaks he the arowes of the bow
ye shylde, the sword and the whole batta^ll.

Sela. Thou art of more honor and might the^ the hills of robbers. The
proud shall be robbed and sleep their sleep, and ye mighty shall be able to do
nothing with their ho^des. When thou rebukest them (o God of Jacob) both the
charettes and horsemen shall fall on sleep. Thou art fearful, for who may abide
in ye sight, when thou art angry? When thou lattest thy judgment be herd from
heaven, the earth trembles and is still. Ye when God aryseth to give judgment,
and to help all them that be in aduersite upon earth. Sela.

When thou punyshest one man, he must knowledge, that thou art ready to punysh
other mo. Look what ye promise unto the LORD your God, se that keep it, all
ye that be round about him: bring presents unto him yt ought to be feared.
Which takes away the breath of princes, and is wonderful among the kings of
the earth.

The LXXVI. A psalm of Asaph.
I Cried unto God with my voice, yet even unto God cried I with my voice, and
he herd me. In the time of my trouble I sought the LORD, I held up my hondes
unto him in the night season, for my soul refused all other comfort. When I
was in heaviness, I thought upon God: when my heart was vexed, then did I speak.

Sela. Thou heldest mine eyes wa^^^ge, I was so feeble, that I could not speak,
Then remembered I the times of old, and the years that were past. I called to
remembrance my song in the night, I commoned with mine own heart, and sought
out my sp^ete. Will the LORD cast out for ever?

Will he be no more entreated? Is his mercy clean gone? Is his promise come
utterly to an end for evermore? Has the LORD forgotten to be gracious? Or,
has he shut up his loving kyndnesse in displeasure? Sela. At the last I came
to this point, that I thought: O why art thou so foolish? the right hand of
the most highest can change all.

Therefore will I remember the works of the LORD, and call to mind thy wonders
of old time. I will speak of all thy works, and my talking shall be of thy
doings.

Thy way (o God) is holy, who is so great

The LXXVII. A psalm of Asaph.
(...)
and speak of things of old. Which we have herd and known, and soch as
our fathers have told us. That we should not hyde them from the children of
the generacions to come: but to show the honor of the LORD, his might and
wonderful works that he has done. He made a covenant with Jacob, and gave
Israel a law, which he commanded our forefathers to teach their children.
(...)
That their posterite might know it, and the children which were yet unborn.

To the intent yt when they came up, they might show their children the same.
That they also might put their trust in God, and not to forget what he had
done, but to keep his commandments. (...)
And not to be as their forefathers, a froward and ouerthwarte generation, a
generation that set not their heart a right, and whose sprete was not true
toward God. Like as the children of Ephraim, which being harnessed and
carienge bows, turned them selves back in the time of battayll. They kept
not the covenant of God, and would not walk in his law.

They forgot what he had done, and the wonderful works that he had showed for
them. Marvelous things did he in the sight of their fathers in the land of
Egipte, even in the field of Zoan. Exo. 14. e
He divided the sea and let them go through it, and made the waters to stand
like a wall. In the day time he led them with a cloud, Exo. 13. d Exo. 17. b
Nu. 20. b 1. Co. 10. a
and all the n^ght through with a light of fire. He cloaue the hard rocks in
the wilderness, and gave them drink thereof, as it had been out of the great
d^^pth. He brought waters out of the (...) rock, so that they gushed out like
(...). Yet for all this they sinned against him, and provoked the most highest in
the wilderness. They tempted God in their hertes, and required meat for their
lust, For they spoke against God and said: Ye ye, God shall prepare a table
in the wilderness, shall he? Lo, he smote the stony rock, that the watery
streams gushed out, and the streams flowed withal: but how can he give bred
and provide flesh for his people? When the LORD herd this, he was wroth: so
the fire was kyndled in Jacob, and heavy displeasure against Israel.

Because the^ believed not in God, and put not their trust in his help. So he
commanded the clouds above, and opened the doors of heaven. Exo. 16. c* Deuteronomy.
8. a Sap 16. d Ioh. 6. d
He rayned down Manna upon them for to eat, and gave them bred from heaven.
Then ate they angels fode, for he sent them meat enough. He caused the east
wind to blow under the heaven, and through his power he brought in the south
wind. Exo. 16. c Number. 11. g
He made flesh to rain upon them as thick as dust, and fethered fowls like
the sonde of ye see. He let it fall among their te^tes round about their
habitacio^s. So they ate and were filled; for he gave them their own desire.
They were not dispoynted of their lust. Number. 11. g


But while ye meat was yet in their mouths: The heavy wrath of God came upon
the^, slew ye welthiest of the^, and smote down ye chosen men of Israel. But
for all this they sinned Number ^4. a
and believed not his wo^derous works. Therefore their days were consumed in
vanite, and suddenly their years were gone. When he slew them, they sought
him, and turned them ^arly unto God.

They thought then that God was their socoure, and that the hye God was their
redemer. Nevertheless, they did but flater him in their mouths, and
dissembled with him in their tongues. For their heart was not whole with him,
nether continued they in his covenant. But he was so merciful, that he
forgave their misdeeds, and destroyed them not: Ye many a time turned he his
wrath away, and would not suffer his whole displeasure to arise. Psalm. 102. b
For he considered yt they were but flesh: even a wind that passes away, and
comes not again. O how often have they grieved him in the wilderness? How many
a time have they provoked him in the deserte? They turned back and tempted
God, and moved the Exo. 7. d (...). 8. e ^^o. 8. b
How he sent lyse among them, to eat them up, and frogs to destroy them.
How he gave their fruits unto the catirpiller, and their labor unto the
greshopper. (...). 10. d (...)
How he bett down their vynyardes with hayle stones, and their Molbery trees
with the frost. How he smote their catell with haylestones, and their flocks
with hot tho^der boltes. How he sent upon them ye furiousness of his wrath,
anger and displeasure: with trouble and fallinge in of euel angels. Exo. 9. a
When he made a way to his fearful indignacio^, and spared not their souls
from death, ye and gave their catell over to the pestilence. When he smote all
the firstborne in Egipte, Exo 12 ^ Psalm. 1^4. b
the most principal and mightiest in ye dwellinges of Ham.

Deuteronomy. ^. a Iosu. 6. a
He did cast out the Heithen before them, caused their land to be divided
among them for an heretage, and made ye tribes of Israel to dwell in their
te^tes. For all this they tempted and displeased the most hye God, and kept
not his covenant. But turned their backs and fell away like their
forefathers, startinge aside like a broken bow. And so they grieved him with
their hie places, and provoked him with their images. When God herd this, he
was wroth, and took sore displeasure at Israel. Iere. 7. a
So that he forsook the tabernacle in Silo, even his habitacion wherein he dwelt
among men. (...)
He delivered their power in to captiuyte, and their glory in to the enemies
ho^de. He gave his people ^uer in to the

The fire consumed their young men, and their mayde^s were not given to marriage.

Their prestes were slain with the sword, and there were no wyddowes to make
lamentacion. So the LORD awaked as one out of sleep, and like a giaunte
refreshed with wine. (...)
He smote his enemies in ye hinder parts, and put them to a perpetual shame.
He refused the tabernacle of Joseph, and chose not the trybe of Ephraim.
Nevertheless, he chose ye trybe of Judah, eue^ the hill of Sion which he loved.
(...)
And there he builded his temple on hye, and laid ye foundation of it like ye
ground, that it might perpetually endure. (...)
He chose David also his servant, and took him away from the sheep foldes. As
he was folowinge the yowes great with young, he took him, that he might feed
Jacob his people, and Israel his enheritaunce. So he fed them with a faithful
and true heart, and ruled them with all ye diligence of his power.

The LXXVIII. A psalm of Asaph.
O God, ye Heithen are fallen in to thine (...)
thy holy temple have they defiled, and made Jerusalem an heap of stones. The
deed bodies of thy servants have they given unto ye fowls of the air to be
devoured, (...)
and the flesh of thy saints unto ye beestes of the land. Their blood have
they shed like water on every side of Jerusalem, and there was no man to bury
them. We are become an open shame unto our enemies, (...)
a very scorn and derision unto them that are round about us.

LORD, how long will thou be angry? shall thy gelousy burn like fire for
ever? Pour out thy indignacion upon the Heithen that know the not, (...)
and upon the kingdoms that call not upon thy name.

For they have devoured Jacob, and laid waiste his dwellinge place. (...)
O remember not our old sins, but have mercy upon us (and that soon) for
we are come to great mysery.

Help us (O God or Sauyor) for ye glory of (...)
O let the vengeance of thy servants blood that is shed, be openly showed
upon the Heithe^ in our sight. O let the soroufull sighinge of the presoners
come before the, and acordinge unto ye power of thine arm, preserve those yt
are appointed to dye. And for the blasphemy where with or neghbours have
blasphemed ye, reward the^ (o LORD) seven fold in to their bosom. So we yt
be ye people and sheep of thy pasture, shall give the thanks for ever, and will
allwaye be shewinge forth thy praise more and more.

The LXXIX. A psalm of Asaph.
(...) 2. c
Before Ephraim, Be^ Iamin and Manasses: stere up thy power and come help us.
Turn us again (o God) show the light of thy countenance and we shall be
whole. O LORD God of hoostes, how long will thou be angry over the prayer of
thy people? Thou have fed the^ with the bred of tears, (...) 41 a
ye thou have given the^ ple^teousnes of tears to drink. Thou have made us a
very strife unto or neghbours, and or enemies laugh us to scorn.

Turn us again (thou God of hoostes) show the light of thy cou^tenau^ce, and
we shall be whole. (...). 5. a (...). 1^. b (...). 2^. d
Thou have brought a vyny^rde out of Egipte, thou did cast out ye Heithe^,
and pla^te it. Thou maydest rowme for it, and caused it to take rote, so yt it
filled the lord. The hills were covered with the shadow of it, and so were
the strong Cedretrees with the bows (...)
and her bows unto the water: Why have thou then broken down her hedge, that
all they which go by, pluck of her grapes?

The wild bore out of the wod has wrutt it up, and the beestes of the field
have devoured it. Turn ye again (thou God of hoostes) look down from heaven,
behold and viset this vynyarde. Manteyne it, that thy right ho^de has
planted, and the son whom thou maydest so much of for thy self. (...)
For why? it is bre^t with fire, and lies waist: o let the^ perish at there
buke of thy wrath.

Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, and upon the man who^ thou
maydest so much off for thine own self. And so will not we go back from the:
oh let us live, and we shall call upon thy name. Turn us again o LORD God of
hoostes, show the light of thy cou^tenau^ce, and we shall be whole.

LXXX. A psalm of Asaph.
Sing merely unto God which is or strength make a cheerful noise unto ye God
of Jacob. Take ye psalm, bring hither the tabret, the merry harp and lute.
Blow up the tro^pettes in the new Moon, upon or sole^pne feast day. (...)
For this is the use in Israel, and a law of the God of Jacob.

This he ordened in Joseph for a testimony, when he came out of Egipte, and had
herd a strange language. When he eased his shulder from the burden, and when
his hondes were delivered from the pottes. Exo. 3. b Exo. 19. c Exo. 17. a
When thou calldest upon me in trouble, I helped the and herd the, what time
as the storm fell upon the, I proved the also at the water of strife. Sela.

Hear o my people, for I assure the o Israel, if thou will harken unto me:
There shall no strange God be in the, nether shall thou worshipe any other God.
Exo. 20
I am the LORD thy God, which brought the out of the lord of Egipte: open thy
mouth wide, and I shall fill it. Pro. 1. c
But my people would not hear my voice, and Israel would not obey me. So I
gave the^ up unto their own hertes lust, Rom 1.
and let the^ follow their own ymaginacions. O yt my people would obey me,
for if Israel would walk in my ways. I should soon put down their enemies,
and turn mine ho^de against their adversaries. The haters of ye LORD should
mysse Israel, but their time should endure for ever. He should feed them with
the fynest wheat flower, and satisfy them with honey out of the stony rock.

The LXXXI. A psalm of Asaph.
GOd stondeth in the congregation of the gods, and is a judge among the
judges. How long will ye give wrong judgment, and accept the persons of the
ungodly? Sela. Defend the poor and father less, se that soch as be in need
and necessite have right. Deliver the outcaste and poor, Pro. 24. b
and save him from the hand of the ungodly. Nevertheless, they will not be
learned and understand, but walk on still in darcknesse: Esa. 3. a Exo. 22. b
Ioh. 10. d
therefore must all the foundacions of the land be moved. I have said: ye are
gods, ye all are the children of ye most highest. But ye shall dye like men, and
fall like one of the tyrauntes. Arise (o God) and judge thou the earth, Psalm.
2. b
for all Heithen are thine by enheritaunce.

The LXXXII. A psalm of Asaph.
Hold not thy tongue (o God) keep not

For lo, Psalm. 2. a
thy enemies make a murmuringe, and they yt hate the, lift up their head* They
ymagin craftily against thy people, and take council against thy secret ones.
Come (say they) let us rote them out from among the people, that the name of
Israel may be put out of remembrance. For they have cast their heads
together with one consent, and are co^federate against the. The tabernacles of
the Edomites and Ismaelites, the Moabites and Hagarenes. Gebal, Ammo^ and
Amalech: the Philistynes with them that dwell at Tire. Assure also is joined
unto the^ and help the children of Loath. Sela.

But do thou to them as unto the Madianites, unto Sisera and unto Iabin by ye
broke of Cyson. Iud. 7. c Iud. 4. c
Which perished at Endor, and Iud. 7. g Iud. 8. b
Ye make all their princes like as Zebea and Salmana.

Which say: we will have the houses of God in possession? O my God, make them
like unto a whele, Psalm. 1. b and 34. a
and as the stuble before the wind. Like as a fire that burns up the wodd,
and as the flame that consumes the mountains. Persecute them even so with thy
tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm. Make their faces ashamed (o
LORD) yt they may seek thy name. Let the^ be confounded and vexed ever more
and more: Let the^ be put to shame and perish. That they may know, that thou
art alone, that thy name is the LORD, and that thou only art the most highest
over all the earth.

The LXXXIII. A psalm of the children of Corah.
O How amiable are yt dwelli^ges, thou LORD of hoostes? My soul has a desire
and lo^ginge for ye court of ye LORD, my heart and my flesh rejoice in ye
living God. For the sparow has found her an house, and the swalowe a nest,
where she may lay her yo^ge: eue^ ye aulters O LORD of hoostes, my king and
my God. O how blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they are allwaye
praysinge ye. Blessed are ye men whose strength is in ye, in whose heart are yt
ways.

Which goinge through the vale of mysery, use it for a well, and the poles are
filled with water. They go from strength to strength and so the God of Gods
apeareth unto the^ in Sion. O LORD God of hoostes, hear my prayer: harken o
God of Jacob.

Behold o God our defense, look upon the face of thine anointed. For one day
in thy court is better then a thousand: I had rather be a door keeper in the
house of my God, then to dwell in the tents of the ungodly. For the LORD God
is a light and defense, the LORD will give grace and worshipe, and no good
thing shall he witholde from them, that live a godly life. O LORD God of
hoostes, blessed is the man, yt puts his trust in the.

The LXXXIIII. A psalm of the children of Corah.
LORD, thou barest a love unto thy land, thou did bring again the
captiuyte of Jacob. Thou did forgive the offense of thy people, (...)
and couerdest all their sins. Sela.

Thou tokest away all thy displeasure, and turnedest thy self from thy
wrothful indignacion. Turn us then (o God or Savior) and let thine anger
cease from us. Will thou be displeased at us for ever? will thou stretch out
thy wrath from one generation to another? Will thou not turn again, and
quycken us, that thy people may rejoice in the?

I will harken what the LORD God will LORD shall show louinge kyndnesse, and
our land shall give her increase. Righteousness shall go before him, and
prepare the way for his coming.

The LXXXV. psalm A prayer of David.
Bow down thine ear (o LORD) LORD) for I call daily upon the. Comfort
the soul of thy servant, for unto the (o LORD) do I lift up my soul. (...)
For thou LORD art good and gracious, and of great mercy unto all them that
call upon the.

Give ear LORD unto my prayer, and pondre my humble desire. In the time of my
trouble I call upon the, for thou hear me. Among the gods there is none
like LORD, there is not one that ca^ do as thou do. All nations whom thou
have made, shall come and worshipe before the o LORD, and shall glorify thy
name. For thou art great, thou do wondrous things, thou art God alone.
Led me in thy way (o LORD) that I may walk in thy truth: O let my heart
delight in fearing thy name. I thank the o LORD my God, and will praise thy
name for ever. For great is thy mercy toward me, (...)
thou have delivered my soul from ye nethermost hell. O God, (...)
But thou (o LORD God) art full of compassion and mercy, long suffrynge,
great in goodness and truth. O turn the then unto me, have mercy upon me:
give thy strength unto thy servant, and help the son of thy handmayde^.

Show some toke^ upon me for good, that they which hate me, may se it and be
ashamed: because thou LORD have helped me, and comforted me.

The LXXXVI. A psalm of the children of Corah.
(...)
the LORD loves the gates of Sion more, the^ all ye dwelli^ges of Jacob.

Very excellent things are spoken of ye, thou cite of God* Sela. I will think
upon Rahab and ^abilo^, so that they shall know me: Ye the Philistynes also
and they of Tire with the Morians. Lo, there was he borne. And of Sion it
shall be reported, that he was borne in her, even the most highest which has
builded her. The LORD shall cause it be preached and written among the people,
that he was borne there. Sela.

Therefore the dwellinge of all syngers and daunsers is in the.

The LXXXVII. A psalm of the children of Corah.
LORD God my Sauyor, I cry day and night before the: Oh let my prayer enter
in to thy presence, incline thine ear unto my calling. For my soul is full
of trouble, and my life draws nigh unto hell. I am counted as one of the^ that
go down unto the pytte, I am eue^ as a man that has no strength. Fre among
the deed, like unto the^ yt lie in the grave, which be out of remembrance, and
are cut away from thy hand. Thou have laid me in the lowest pytte, in ye
darcknesse and in the deep. Thy indignacion lies hard upon me, and thou vexest
me

My sight fails for very trouble: LORD, I call daily upon the, and stretch
out my hondes unto the. (...)
Do thou show wonders among the deed? Can the physicia^s raise them up
again, that they may praise the? (...)
May thy loving kyndnes be showed in the grave, or thy faithfulness in
destruction? May thy wondrous works be known in the darcke, or thy
righteousness in the land where all things are forgotten?

LORD) and early comes my prayer before the. LORD, why put thou away
my soul? Wherefore hydest thou thy face fro me? My strength is gone for very
sorrow and misery, with fearfulness do I bear thy burdens. Thy wrothfull
displeasure goes over me, the fear of the oppresses me. They come round
about me daily like water, and compase me together on every side. My lovers
and fre^des have thou put away fro me, and turned away mine acquantaunce.

The LXXXVIII. A psalm of Ethan the Esrahite.
MY song shall be allwaye of the loving LORD, Psalm. 100
with my mouth will I ever be shewinge thy faithfulness from one generation to
another. For I have said: mercy shall be set up for ever, thy faithfulness
shall thou stablish in the heavens. I have made a couenaun^ with my chosen, I
have sworn unto Daui^ my servant. Thy sede will I stablish for e^uer, and set
up thy Trone from one generation to another. Sela.

O LORD, the very heavens shall praise the wondrous works, ye and thy
faithfulness in ye congregation of the saints. For who is he among the
clouds; that may be compared unto the LORD? Ye what is he among the
gods, that is like unto the LORD? God is greatly to be feared in the
council of the saints, and to be had in reverence of all the^ that are about
him. O LORD God of hoostes, who is like unto the in power? thy truth is
round about the. Thou rulest the pride of the sea, thou stillest the wawes
thereof, when they arise. Thou breakest the proud, like one that is wounded*
thou scatrest thine enemies abroad with thy mighty arm. The heavens are
thine, the earth is thine: thou have laid the foundacio^ of the round world
and all that therein is. Thou have made the north and the south, Tabor and
Hermon shall rejoice in thy name. Thou have a mighty arm, strong is thy
hand, and hye is thy right hand. Righteousness and equite is the habitacion of
thy seat, mercy and truth go before thy face. Blessed is the people (o LORD)
that can rejoice in the, and walks in the light of thy countenance. Their
delight is in thy name all the Esa. 1. a Abac. 1. c
The LORD is our defense, and the holy one of Israel is our king. Thou
spakest sometime in visio^s unto thy saints, and saydest: I have laid help
upon one that is mighty, I have exalted one chosen out of the people. 1. Re.
16. a 2. Reg. 5. a
I have found David my servant, with my holy oil have I anointed him. My
hand shall hold him fast, and my arm shall strength him. The enemy shall not
overcome him, and the son of wickedness shall not hurt him. I shall smite
down his foes before his face, and plage them that hate him.

My truth also and my mercy shall be with him, and in my name shall his horn be
exalted. ^. Reg. ^
He shall call me: thou art my father, my God, and the strength of my salvation.
And I will make him my firstborne, ^yer then the kings of the earth.

My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall stand fast
with him His sede will I make to endure for ever, ye and his Trone as the days
of heaven. But if his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments.
If they break mine ordinances, and keep not my commandments. I will vyset
their offenses with the rod, and their sins with scourges. Nevertheless,
my loving kyndnesse will I not utterly take from him, ner suffer my truth to
fail. My covenant will I not break, ner disanulle the thing yt ^^al. 71. a
He shall stand fast for evermore as the Moon, and as the faithful witness
in heaven.

Sela. But now thou forsakest and abhorrest thine anointed, and art displeased
at him. Thou have turned back the covenant of thy servant, and cast his
crown to the ground. Psalm. 79. b
Thou have over thrown all his hedges, and broken down his strong holds. Al
they that go by, spoil him, he is become a rebuke unto his neghbours. Thou
set up the right hand of his enemies, and make all his adversaries to
rejoice. Thou have taken away the strength of his sword, and geuest him not
victory in the battayll. Thou have put out his glory, and cast his Trone down
to

LORD, how long will thou hyde thy self? For ever? shall thy wrath burn like
fire? O remember how short my time is, have thou made all men for naught? Genesis
2. c Heb. 9. d
What man is he that lives, and shall not se death?

May a man deliver his own soul from the hand of hell? Sela.

LORD, where are thy old loving kyndnesses, which thou sworest unto David in
thy truth? Remember LORD the rebuke that ye multitude of the people do unto
thy servants, and how I have borne it in my bosom. Where with thine enemies
blaspheme the, (...)
and slander ye fotesteppes of ye anointed. Thanks be to the LORD for
evermore: Amen, Amen.

The LXXXIX psalm. A prayer of Moses the man of God.
LORD, thou art our refuge from one generation to another. Before the
mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth and the world were made, thou
art God from everlasting and world with out end. Thou turnest man to
destruction, Again, thou say: come again ye children of men. For a
thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterdaye that is past, and like as
it were a night watch.

As soon as thou scatrest them, they are even as a sleep, and fade away
suddenly like the grass. (...)
In the morning it is grene and grows up, but in the evening it is cut
down and wythered. For we consume (...)


Turn the again (o LORD) at the last, and be gracious unto thy servants. O
satisfy us with thy mercy, and that soon: so shall we rejoice and be glad all
the days of our life. Comfort us again, now after the time that thou have
plaged us, and for the years wherein we have suffered aduersite.

Show thy servants thy work, and their children thy glory. And the glorious
majesty of the LORD our God be upon us: O prospere thou the work of our
hondes upon us, o prospere thou our hondy work.

The XC. psalm.
WHo so dwells under ye defense of the most highest, and abides under ye
shadow of ye almighty: He shall say unto ye LORD: o my hope, and my strong
hold, my God, in who^ I will trust. For he shall deliver the from the snare of
the hunter, and from the noisome pestilence. He shall cover the under his
wings, that thou may be safe under his feathers: his faithfulness and
truth shall be thy shylde and buckler. So yt thou shall not need to be afraid
for any bugges by night, ner for arowe that flies by day.

For the pestilence that crepeth in ye darcknesse, ner for the sickness yt
destroys in the noone day. A thousand shall fall beside the, and ten
thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not come nigh the. Ye with thine eyes
shall thou behold, and se the reward of the ungodly. For thou LORD art my
hope, thou have set thy house of defense very hye. There shall no evil happen
unto the, nether shall any plage come nigh thy dwellinge. (...)
For he shall give his angels charge over the, to keep the in all thy ways.

They shall bear the in their hondes, that thou hurt not thy foot against a
stone.

Thou shall go upon the Lion and Adder, the young Lion and the Dragon shall
thou tread under thy fete. Because he has set his love upon me, I shall
deliver him: I shall defend him, for he has known my name.

(...)
When he calls upon me, I shall hear him: ye I am with him in his trouble,
where out I will deliver him, and bring him to honor. With long life will I
satisfy him, and show him my salvation.

The XCI. psalm.
LORD, (...)
and to sing praises unto ye name, o most highest. To tell of thy loving
kyndnesse early in the morning, and of thy truth in the night season.

Upon an instrument of ten strings, upon the lu^e and with a song upon the
harp.

(...)
For thou LORD have made me glad through thy works* and I will rejoice over the
operacion of thy hondes. O LORD, how glorious are thy works, thy thoughts
are very deep. An unwise man will not know this, (...)
and a fool will not understood it. That the ungodly are grene as the grass,
and that all the works of wickedness do flourish, to be destroyed for ever. But
thou LORD o most highest, abydest world without end.

LORD) lo, thy enemies shall perish, and all the workers of wickedness shall be
scatred abroad. But my horn shall be exalted like the horn of an Unicorn, (...)
and shall be anointed with fresh oil. Mine eye also shall se his lust of mine
enemies, and mine ear shall hear his desire of the wicked yt rise up against
me. The rightuous shall flourish like a palm tree, and grow like a Cedre of
Libanus. Soch as be planted in the house of the LORD, be fruitful, plenteous
and grene. That they may show, how true the LORD my strength is, and that
there is no unrighteousness in him.

The XCII. psalm.
THe LORD is king, and has put on LORD has put on his apparel, and gyrded
himself with strength: Psalm. ^^ a
he has made the round world so sure, that it can not be moved. From that
time forth has ye seat been prepared, thou art from everlasting. The floudes
arise (o LORD) the floudes lift up their noise, ye floudes lift up their
wawes. The wawes of the sea are mighty, and rage horribly: but yet the LORD
that dwells on hye, is mightier. Thy testimonies (o LORD) are very sure,
holiness becomes thine house for ever.

The XCIII. psalm.
O LORD God, to whom vengeance belongs: thou God to whom vengeance
belongs, show thy self.

Arise thou judge of the world, and reward the proud after their deseruynge.
LORD, how long shall the ungodly, how long shall the ungodly tryumphe? How
long shall all wicked doers speak so diszdaynedly, and make soch proud
boastynge? They smite down thy people (o LORD) and trouble thine heretage.
They murthur the widdowe and the stranger, and put the fatherless to death.
And yet they say: Tush, Esa. 29. c Eze. ^ b 9. b Job 22. b Eccli^ 2.3. ^
the LORD seyth not, the God of Jacob regards it not. Take heed, ye unwise
among the people: o ye fools, when will ye understand? He that planted the
ear, shall he not hear? he that made the eye, shall not he se? He that
nurtureth the Heithen, and Genesis 7. d and 19 Exo. 14. ^ 1. Cor. 3. c Baruc. 4.
shall not he punysh? The LORD knows the thoughts of men, that they are but
vain. Blessed is the man, whom thou lernest (o LORD) and teach him in thy
law. That thou may give him patience in time of aduersite, until the pytte
be dygged up for the ungodly. For the LORD will not fail his people, nether
will he forsake his inheritance. And why? judgment shall be turned again unto
righteousness, and all soch as be true of heart shall follow it. Who ryseth up
with me against the wicked? who takes my part against the evil doers? If the
LORD had not helped me, my soul had almost been put to silence.

^ob 13. b ^. Ioh. 1. b Psalm. 31. a ^. Cor. 1. a
When I said: my foot has slipped, thy mercy (o LORD) held me up. In ye
multitude of the sorrows that I had in my heart, thy comfortes have refreshed
my soul.

Will thou have any thing to do with the stole of wickedness, which ymagineth
myschefe in the law? They gather them together against the soul of the
rightuous, and condemn the innocent blood. But the LORD is my refuge, my God
is the strength of my confidence. He shall recompense the^ their wickedness,
and destroy them in their own malice: ye the LORD our God shall destroy
them.

The XCIIII. psalm.
LORD, let us hertely rejoice in the strength of our salvation. ^phe. 5. b
Let us come before his presence with tha^kesgeuynge, and show our self glad
in him with psalms. For the LORD is a great God, and a great king above all
gods. In his hand are all ye corners of the earth, and the strength of the
hills is his also. The sea is his, for he made it, and his hondes prepared the
dry lord.

O come, let us worshipe and bow down our selves: Let us knele before the
LORD ^sal. 22. a (...). a ^eb. 3. a. b (...). b
we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his ho^des. To day if ye
will hear his voice, harde^ not your hertes, as when ye provoked in time of
temptacion in the wilderness. Where yor fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw
my works. XL. years long was I grieved with that generation, and said: they
ever err in their hertes, they verily have not known my ways. (...). 14 c
^eb. 4. a
Therefore I swear unto the^ in my wrath, that they should not enter in to my
rest.

The XCV. psalm.
LORD a new song, Par. 17. a
sing unto the LORD all the whole earth. Sing unto ye LORD, and praise his
name, be telling of his salvation from day to day. Declare his honor
among the Heithe^, and his wonders among all people. ^sal. 46. a ^ccli^. 4^ d
For ye LORD is great, and can not worthily be praised: he is more to be
feared then all gods. As for all ye gods of the Heithe^, they be but Idols,
but it is the LORD that made the heavens.

Thankesgeuynge and worshipe are before him, power and honor are in his
Sanctuary. ^sal. 28. a
Ascrybe unto the LORD (o ye kinredes of the Heithen) ascrybe unto the LORD
worshipe and strength. Ascrybe unto the LORD the honor of his name, bring
presents, and come in to his court. O LORD in the beutye of holiness, let
the whole earth stand in awe of him. Tell it out among the Heithe^, that the
LORD is king: and that it is he which has made the round world so fast,
that it can not be moved, and how that he shall judge the people rightuously.
Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad: let the sea make a noise,
ye and all that therein is. Let the field be joyful and all that is in it, let
all the trees of the wodd leap for joy. Before the LORD, for he comes: for
he comes to judge the earth: ye with righteousness shall he judge the
world, and ye people with his truth.

The XCVI. psalm.
THe LORD is king, the earth may be glad thereof: (...)
ye the multitude of the Isles may be glad thereof. Clouds and darcknesse are
round about him, righteousness and judgment are the habitacion of his seat.
There goes a fire before him, to burn up his enemies on every side. His
lightenynges give shine unto the world, the earth seyth it and is afraied.
(...)
The hills melt like wax at the presence of ye LORD, at the presence of the
LORD of the whole earth. (...)
The very heavens declare his righteousness, and all people se his glory.
Confounded be all they that worshipe images, and delight in their Idols:
worshipe him all ye gods. Sion heareh of it and reioyseth: LORD. (...)
For thou LORD art the most highest over all the earth, thou art exalted far
above all gods. (...)
O ye that love the LORD, se that ye hate the thing which is evil: the LORD
preserves the souls of his saints, he shall deliver the^ from the hand of
the ungodly. There is spronge up a light for the rightuous, and a joyful
gladness for soch as be true herted.

Rejoice therefore in the LORD, (...)
ye rightuous: and give thanks for a remembrance of his holiness.

The XCVII. psalm.
O Sing unto the LORD a new song, (...)
for he has ^one marvelous things. With his own right hand and with his
holy arm has he gotten the victory. The LORD has declared his saving
health, and his righteousness has he openly showed in the sight of the Heithe^.

He has remembered his mercy and truth toward the house of Israel: (...) Esa.
so that all the ends of the world se the saving health of our God. Show
your self joyful unto the LORD all ye lands, sing, rejoice and give
thanks. (...)
Praise the LORD upon the harp, sing to the harp with a psalm LORD the
king. Let the sea make a noise and all yt therein is, ye the whole world and
all that dwell therein. (...)
Let the floudes clappe their hondes, and let all the hills be joyful
together. Before the LORD, for he is come to judge the earth. Ye with
righteousness shall he judge the world, and the people with equite.

The XCVIII. psalm.
LORD is king, be the people never so impatient: he sytteth upon the
Cherubins, be the earth never so unquiet. The LORD is great in Sion, and hye
above all people. O let men give thanks unto thy great and wonderful name,
for it is holy. The kings power loves judgment, thou preparest equite, thou
executest judgment and righteousness in I^cob. O magnify the LORD or God, (...)
f^ll down before LORD, (...)
and he herd the^. He spoke unto the^ out of the cloudy piler, for they kept
his testimonies, and the law that he gave them.

Thou herdest the^ (o LORD or God) thou forgauest the^ o God, and punyshedst
their own invencions. O magnify the LORD our God, and worshipe him upon his
holy hill, for the LORD our God is holy.

The XCIX. psalm.
LORD with gladness, (...)
come before his presence with joy. Be ye sure, yt the LORD he is God: It is he
yt has made us, and not we our selves: we are but his people, and the sheep
of his pasture. O go your way in to his gates the^ with thankesgeuynge, and
in to his courts with praise: be tha^kfull unto him, and speak good of his
name. For the LORD is gracious, (...)
his mercy is everlasting, and his treuth endures from generation to
generation.

The C. psalm A tha^kesgeuynge of David.
(...)
ye unto the (o LORD) will I sing. O let me have understanding in the way
of godliness, until the time that thou come unto me: and so shall I walk in
my house with an innocent heart. I will take no wicked thing in hand, I hate the
sin of unfaithfulness, it shall not cleue unto me. A froward heart shall
depart fro me, I will not know a wicked person.

Who so preuely slaundreth his neighbor, him will I destroy: Who so has a
proud look and an hye stomach, I may not away with him. Mine eyes shall look
for soch as be faithful in the land, yt they may dwell with me: and who so
ledeth a godly life, shall be my servant. There shall no disceatfull person
dwell in my house, he that tells lies shall not tarry in my sight. I shall soon
destroy all the ungodly of the land, that all wicked doers may be roted out
of the cite of the LORD.

The CI. psalm.
Hear my prayer (o LORD) and let my Psalm. 142. a
Hyde not thy face fro me in the time of my trouble: enclyne thine ears unto
me when I call, O hear me, and that right soon. For my days are consumed
away like smoke, and my bones are brent up as it were a fire brande.

My heart is smytte^ down and wythered like grass, so that I forget to eat my
bred.

For the voice of my gronynge, my bone will scarce cleue to my flesh. I am
become like a Pellicane in the wilderness, and like an Oule in a broken wall. I
wake, and am even LORD) endurest for ever, and thy remembrance through out all
generacions. Arise therefore and have mercy upon Sion, for it is time to have
mercy upon her, ye the time is come. And why? 2. Pa. 36. ^ Iere. 25. b 29. b
1. Esd. 1 a 6.7
thy servants have a love to her stones, and it pitieth them to se her in the
dust. The Heithen shall fear thy name (o LORD) and all LORD shall build up
Sion, and shall apeare in his glory. He turns him unto the prayer of the poor
destitute, and despyseth not their desire. This shall be written for those yt
come after, Psalm. 21. d
that the people which shall be borne, may praise the LORD.

For He looks down from his Sanctuary, Psalm. 3^. b
out of the heaven does the LORD behold the earth.

That he may hear the mournynges of soch as be in captinyte, and deliver the
children of death. That they may preach the name of the LORD in Sion, and his
worshipe at Jerusalem. When the people are gathered together, and the kingdoms
also LORD. He has brought down my strength in my journey, and shortened my
days. Yet will I say: O my God, take me not away in ye myddest of mine age:
as for thy years, they endure through out all generacions. ^ebre. 1. b
Thou LORD in the beginning have laid ye foundation of the earth, and the
heavens are the works of thy hondes. ^sa. 40. a ^. Pet. 3. b
They shall perish, but thou shall endure: they all shall wexe old as does a
garment, and as a vesture shall thou change the^, and they shall be changed.
But thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail.

The children of thy servants shall continue, and their sede shall prospere in
ye sight.

The CII. A psalm of David.
LORD (o my soul) and all that is within me praise his holy name. Praise the
LORD o my soul, and forget not all his benefits. Which forgeueth all thy
sins, and heals all thy infirmities. ^sal. 31. a
Which saves thy life from destruction, and crowns the with mercy and
loving kyndnesse. Which satisfies thy desire with good things, making the
young and lusty as an Aegle. The LORD executes righteousness and judgment,
for all them yt suffer wrong. He showed his ways unto Moses, and his works
unto the children of Israel. ^xo. 34. a ^sal. 85. c (...). 4. a
The LORD is full of compassion and mercy, long sufferinge, and of great
goodness. He will not allwaye be chydinge, nether will he keep his anger for
ever.

^sal. ^^. b ^7. a
For look how hye the heaven is in comparison of the earth, so great is his
mercy also toward them that fear him.

Look how wide the east is from the west, so far has he set our sins from
us.

Ye like as a father pitieth his own children, even so is the LORD merciful
unto the^ that fear him. For he knows whereof we be made, ^sal. 77. d
he remembers that we are but dust. That a man in his time is but as is
grass, and florisheth as a flower of the field.

For as soon as the wind goes over it, it gone, and the place thereof knows
it no more. LORD endures for ever and ever, ^sal. 101. d
upon them yt fear him, and his righteousness upon their childers children.
Soch as keep his covenant, and think upon his commandments to do them. The
LORD has prepared his seat in heaven, and his kingdom rules over all. O
praise the LORD ye angels of his, ye that be mighty instre^gth, fulfillinge
his commandment, that me^ may hear the voice of his words. O praise the
LORD all ye his hoostes, ye servants of his, that do his pleasure. O speak
good of the LORD all ye works of his, in every place of his dominion: praise
thou the LORD, o my soul.

The CIII. psalm.
Praise the LORD o my soul: O LORD my God, (...)
thou art become exceadinge glorious, thou art clothed with majesty and
honor. Thou deckest thy self with light, as it were with a garment, thou
spredest out the heaven like a curtayne.

Thou voltest it above with waters, thou make the clouds thy charet, and
go upon the wings of the wind. Thou make thine angels spretes, (...)
and thy ministers flammes of fire. Thou have laid ye earth upon her
foundation, that it never moves at any time. Thou couerest it with the deep
like as with a garment, (...)
so that the waters stand above the hills. But at thy rebuke they fle, at the
voice of thy thonder they are afraid. (Then are the hills seen alofte, and
the valleys beneth in their place which thou have appointed for the^. (...)
) Thou have set them their bounds, which they may not pass, that they turn
not again to cover ye earth. Thou causest the wells to spring up among the
valleys, and the waters run among ye hills. That all the beasts of the
field may have drink, and that the wild asses may quench their thyrste.

Above upon the hills have the fowls of the air their habitacion, and sing
among the branches. Thou watrest the hills from above, the earth is filled
with ye fruits of thy works. Thou bryngest forth grass for the catell, and
grene herb for the service of men. (...)
Thou bryngest fode out of the earth: wine to make glad ye heart of man, oil
to make him a cheerful countenance, and bred to strength man's heart. The
trees of the LORD are full of sap, even the trees of Libanus which he has
planted. There make the birds their nestes, and the fyrre trees are a
dwellinge for the storcke. The hills are a refuge for the wild goats, and so
are the stony rocks for ye conyes. Thou have appointed the Moon for certain
seasons, the Son knows his goinge down. Thou make darcknesse, that it
may be night, wherein all the beasts of the forest do move. Ye and the young
lions which roar after the pray, and seek their meat at God. But when the
Son arises, they get them away together, and lie them down in their
dens. Then goes man forth to his work, and to till his land until the
evening. O LORD, how manifold are thy works, right wisely have thou made
the^ all: ye the earth is full of thy riches. So is this great and wide see
also, wherein are things crepinge innumerable, both small and great beasts.
There go the ships ^uer, and there is that Leuiathan, whom thou have made, to
take his pastyme therein.

They wait all upon the, that thou may give them meat in due season. When
thou geuest it them, they gather it: when thou openest thine hand, they are
filled with good.

But when thou hydest thy face, they are soroufull: if thou take away their
breath, they dye, and are turned again to their dust.

Again, when thou lattest thy breath go forth, they are made, and so thou
renuest the face of the earth. The glorious magesty of the LORD endures for
ever, and the LORD reioyseth in his works. (...)
The earth tre^bleth at the look of him, he does but touch ye hills and they
smoke. I will sing unto the LORD as long as I live, I will praise my God
while I have my being. O that my words might please him, for my ^oye is in
the LORD. As for sinners, they shall be consumed out of the earth, and the
ungodly shall come to an end: but praise thou the LORD, o my soul. Halleluya.

The CIIII. psalm.
O Give thanks unto the LORD, and call upon his name: tell the people what
things he has done. O let your songs be of him: praise him, and let your
talking be of all his wondrous works. Give his holy name a good report, let
their hertes rejoice that seek the LORD.

Seek the LORD, and his strength, seek his face evermore. Remember the
marvelous works that he has done, his wonders and the judgments of his
mouth. O ye sede of Abraham his servant, ye children of Jacob his chosen. He
is the LORD our God, whose punyshmentes are through out all the world. He is
allwaye myndfull of his covenant, and promise that he made to a thousand
generacions.

Ye the covenant that he made with Abraham, Genesis 17. a Genesis 26. a Genesis 28. a
and the ooth that he swore unto Isaac. And appointed the same unto Jacob for a
law, and to Israel for an everlasting testament. Saying: unto the will I give
the land of Canaan, the lot of your heretage. When there was yet but a few
of them, and they strangers therein. What time as they went from one nation to
another, from one kingdom to another. He suffered no man to hurt them, Genesis
12. d and 20. a
but reproved even kings for their sakes. Touch not mine anointed, do my
prophets no harm.

Morouer he called for a derth upon the lord,

But he had sent a man before them, Genesis 45. a 37. f. 39. a
even Joseph which was sold to be a bond servant. They hurt his fete in the
stocks, the iron pearsed his heart. Luc. 2 ^
Until the time that his word came, and till the word of ye LORD had tried
him. Genesis ^
Then sent the king and caused him be delivered, the prince of the people bad
let him go. He made him lord of his house, and ruler of all his substance.
That he might enfourme his princes after his will, and teach his Senators
wisdom. Israel also came in to Egipte, Genesis 4
and Jacob was a stranger in the lord of Ham.

But he increased his people exceadingly, Exo. 1 Acto.
and made them stronger then their enemies.

Whose heart turned, so that they hated his Exo. 3 Acto.
and Aaron whom he had chosen. These did his tokens among them, and wonders in
the land of Ham. Exo 10. e
He sent darcknesse and it was darcke, for they were not obedient unto his
word. Exo. 7. d
He turned their waters in to blood, and slew their fish. Their land
brought forth frogs, Exo. 8. b Exo. 8. d Psalm. 77. c
ye even in their kings chambers. He spoke the word, and their came all
manner of flies and lise in all their quarters. He gave them hale stones for
rain, and flammes of fire in their lord. He smote their vynyardes and fige
trees, and destroyed the trees that were in their coasts. He spoke ye word,
Exo. 10. d
and their came greshoppers and catirpillers innumerable. These ate up all the
grass in their lord, and devoured the fruits of their ground. He smote all
ye first Exo. 11. a 12. c
even the chief of all their substance. He brought them forth with silver and
gold, there was not one feeble person among their try^es. Egipte was glad of
their departinge, for they were afraied of the^

He spread out a cloud to be a covering, and fire to give light in the night
season. Exo


Exo. 16. a
At their desire, there came quales, and he filled them with the bred of heaven.
Exo. 17. b Nu. 20. b Exo. 17. a
He opened the rock of stone, and the waters flowed out: so that ryuers ran
in the wilderness.

For why, he remembered his holy promise which he had made unto Abraham his
servant. Thus he brought forth his people with joy, and his chosen with
gladness.

And gave them the lo^des of the Heithe^, where they took the labors of the
people in possession. That they might keep his statutes, and observe his laws.
Halleluya.

The CV. psalm. Halleluya.
LORD, for he is gracious, and his mercy endures for ever. 1. Mac. 4. c
Iudit. 13. c Psalm. 106. a Eccli^. 43. d
Who can express ye noble acts of the LORD, or show forth all his praise?
Blessed are they that allwaye keep judgment, and do righteousness. Remember us
(o LORD) acordinge to the favor that thou bear unto thy people: o vyset
us with thy sauinge health. That we might se the pleasure of thy chosen, that we
might rejoice in the gladness of thy people, and give thanks with thine
enheritaunce. Iud. 7. e
We have sinned with our fathers, we have done amysse, we have dealt wickedly.
Our fathers regarded not thy wonders in Egipte, they kept not thy great
goodness in remembrance: but were dishobedie^t at the sea, eue^ at the reed
see. Nevertheless, he helped the^ for his names sake, that he might make his
Psalm. 103. a
and it was dried up: so he led the^ through the deep as in a wilderness. Thus
he saved them from the hand of the hater, and delivered them from the hand of
the enemy.

As for those yt troubled them, the waters overwhelmed the^, there was not one
of the^ left. Exo. 15. a
Then believed they in his word, and song praise unto him. But within a while
they forgot his works, and would not abide his council. Nu. 11. a
A lust came upon them in the wilderness, so that they tempted God in the
deserte. Yet he gave them their desire, and sent the^ enough at their wills.
They angered Moses in the te^tes, Nu. 16. a
and Aaron the saint of the LORD. So the earth opened and swalowed up Dathan,
and covered the congregation Exo. 32. a 1. cor. 10. a Romans 1. ^
They made a calfe in Horeb, and worshipped the molte^ image. Thus they turned
his glory into the similitude of a calfe, yt eats hay. They forgot God their
Savior, which had done so great things in Egipte. Wondrous works in the
land of Ham, and fearful things in the reed see. So he said he would have
destroyed them, had not Moses his chosen stand before him in ye gappe: to
turn away his wrothfull indignacion, lest he should destroy the^.

Ye they thought scorn of yt pleasant land, and gave no credence unto his
word.

But murmured in their tents, and herkened not unto the voice of the LORD.

Then lift he up his hand against them, to overthrow them in the wilderness.
To cast out their sede among the nations, and to scater them in the lands.
They joined themselves unto Baal Peor, and ate the offeringes of the deed. Thus
they provoked him unto anger with their own inve^cions, and the plage was
great among them.

Then stood up Phineas and excuted justice, and so the plage ceased. And that
was counted unto him for righteousness, among all posterites for evermore.
They angerd him also at the waters of strife, so that Moses was punyshed for
their sakes. Because they provoked his sprete, and he told the^ planely with
his lips. Nether destroyed they the Heithen, as the LORD commanded them.
But were mengled amon^ge the Heithen, and learned their works.

In so much that they worshipped their images, which turned to their own
decay.

Ye they offered their sons and their daughters unto deuels. And shed the
innocent blood of their sons and of their daughters, whom they offered unto
the images of Canaan, so that the land was defiled wi^^ blood. Thus were they
stained with the^^ own works, and went a whoringe with their own invencions.
Therefore was the wrath of the LORD kyndled against his people, in so much that
he abhorred his own enheritaunce. And gave them over in to the hand of the
Heithe^, and they that hated them, were lords over them. Their enemies
oppressed the^, and had them in subieccion. Many a time did he deliver them,
but they provoked him with their own inve^cions, and were brought down for
their wickedness. Nevertheless when he saw their aduersite, he herd their
complaynte. (...)
He thought upon his covenant, and pitied the^* acordinge unto the multitude
of his mercies. Ye he made all those yt had led them away captive, to pity
them. Deliver us (o LORD our God) and gather us from among the Heithen: that
we may give thanks to thy holy name, and make our boast of thy praise.
Blessed be the LORD God of Is^

(...)
and are done in truth and equite. He sent redemption unto his people, he has
commanded his covenant for ever, holy and reverent is his name. (...)
The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wyszdome, a good understanding
have all they that do thereafter: the praise of it endures for ever.

The CXI. psalm. Halleluya.
LORD, and has great delight in his commandments. (...)
His sede shall be mighty upon earth, the generation of the faithful shall be
blessed. Riches and ple^teousnesse shall be in his house, and his righteousness
endures for ever. Unto the godly there arises up light in the darcknesse: he
is merciful, (...)
loving and rightuous. Well is him that is merciful, and lends gladly, and
po^dreth his words with discrecion. (...)
For he shall never be moved, the rightuous shall be had in an ever lasting
remembrance. He will not be afraid for any evil tydinges, his heart stondeth
fast, and believes in ye LORD. His heart is stablished, he will not shrencke,
until he se his desire upon his enemies. He has sparsed abroad, (...)
and given to the poor, his righteousness remains for ever, his horn shall be
exalted with honor. The ungodly shall se it, and it shall grieve him: he shall gnash
with his ^^th and consume away, and the desire of the un godly shall perish.

The CXII. psalm. Halleluya.
Praise the LORD (O ye servants) O praise the name of the LORD. (...)


Blessed be the name of the LORD, from this time forth for evermore. The
LORDS name is worthy to be praised, from the rysinge up of the Son unto the
goinge down of the same. The LORD is hye above all Heithen, and his glory
above the heavens. Who is like unto the LORD our God, yt has his dwellinge
so hye, which humbles himself, to behold that is in heaven and earth? Which
takes up the simple out of the dust, and lifts the poor out of the mire.
That he may set him among the princes, even among the princes of his people.
Which makes the baren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful mother of
children. Halleluya.

The CXIII. psalm.
WHen Israel came out of Egipte, and the house of Jacob from among that
strange people. Judah was his Sa^ctuary, Israel his dominion. Exo. 14. e Iosu.
3. d
The sea saw that, and fled, Jordan turned back. The mountains stripped like
rams, and the little hills like young sheep. What ayled the (o thou see) that
thou fleddest? and thou Jordan, that thou turnedest back? Ye mountains, that
ye stripped like rams? and ye little hills, like young sheep? The earth
trembled at the presence of the LORD, at the presence of the God of Jacob.
Exo. 17. b Nu. 20. b
Which turned the hard rock in to a stondinge water, and the flynt stone in
to a sprynginge well.

Here the Hebrews begin the CXV. psalm.
Not unto us (o LORD) not unto us, but Psalm. 78. b


As for our God, he is in heaven, he does what soever it pleases him. Their
images are but silver and gold, even the work of men's ho^des. They have
mouths, Psalm 13 4 ^ Esa. 4 4. b ^ere. 10. a
and speak not: eyes have they, but they se not.

They have ears, and hear not: noses have they, but they smell not. They have
hands and handle not, fete have they, but they can not go, nether can they
speak through their throat. They that made them, are like unto them, and so are
all soch as put their trust in them. But let Israel trust in ye LORD, for he
is their sucoure and defense. Let LORD, for he is their sucoure and defense.
They that fear the LORD, let the^ put their trust in the LORD, Psalm. 17. c
for he is their sucoure and defense. The LORD is myndefull of us, and
blesses us: he blesses ye house of Israel, he blesses ye house of Aaron. Ye
he blesses all them that fear the LORD, both small and great. The LORD
increase you more and more: you, and your children. For ye are ye blessed of
the LORD, which made heaven and earth. All the whole heavens are the LORDS,
but the earth has he given unto ye children of men. Psalm. ^ Esa
The deed praise not the (o LORD) nether all they that go down in to silence.
But we will praise the LORD, from this time forth for evermore. Halleluya.

The CXIIII. psalm.
I Am well pleased, yt the LORD (...) herd ye voice of my prayer. (...) he
has enclyned his ear (...) therefore will I call upon him as long (...). The
snares of death co^pas^ (...) about, the pains of hell gat^ (...) me, I
found trouble and heavy (...) called I upon ye name of the LORD: o LORD,
deliver my soul. Gracious is ye LORD and rightuous, ye our God is merciful.

The LORD preserves ye simple, I was brought down, and he helped me. Turn
again then unto thy rest (o my soul) for the LORD has given the thy desire.

Psalm. 55. b
And why? thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my
fete from fallinge. I will walk before ye LORD, in the land of the living.

The CXV. psalm. This psalm do the Hebrews join unto it that goes before,
and it is with them the CXVI* psalm.
2. cor. 4. c Romans 3. a
I said in my haist: All men are liars.

What reward shall I give unto ye LORD, for all the benefits yt he has done
unto me? I will receive the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the
LORD.

I will pay my vows in the presence of all his people, right dear in the
sight of ye LORD is the death of his saints. O LORD, I am thy servant, I am
thy servant, and the son of thy handmayden, thou have broken my bonds in
sonder. Hebr. ^3. c Psalm. 91. a
I will offer the the sacrifice of thanks geuynge, and will call upon the name
of the LORD. I will pay my vows unto the LORD in the sight of all his
people, in the courts of the LORDS house, eue^ in the myddest of the, o
Jerusalem. Halleluya.

The CXVI. psalm.
LORD all ye Gentiles, laud him all ye people. Romans 15. c
For his merciful kyndnes is ever more and more toward us, and the truth of
the LORD endures for ever. Halleluya.

The CXVII. psalm.
LORD, for he is gracious, ^^dit. 13. c ^^al. 105. a (...) 6. a 135. a Nu. 16*
a c* 4. c
and his mercy endures for ever. Let Israel now confess, yt his mercy
endures for ever. Let the house of Aaron now confess, that his mercy endures
for ever. Ye let the^ now that fear the LORD, confess, that his mercy
endures for ever. I called upon the LORD in trouble, and the LORD herd me
(...) large. The LORD is my helper, I will (...) what man does unto me. The
(...) is my helper, and I shall se my desire (...) enemies. It is better to
trust (...), then to put any confidence in (...) is better to trust in the
LORD, (...) confidence in princes. All Heithen compased me round about, but
in the name of the LORD will I destroy the^.

They kept me in on every side, but in the name of the LORD, I will destroy
them.

They came about me like bees, and were LORD. I will destroy them.

They thrust at me, that I might fall, but the LORD was my help. (...)
The LORD is my strength, and my song, and is become my salvation. The voice
of joy and mirth is in the dwellynges of ye rightuous, for ye right hand of
the LORD has gotten the victory.

The right hand of the LORD has the preemynence, the right hand of the
LORD has gotten the victory. I will not dye, but live, and declare the works
of the LORD.

The LORD has chastened and correct me, but he has not given me over unto
death.

Open me the gates of righteousness* yt I may go in there through, and give
thanks unto the LORD. This is the door of the LORD, the rightuous shall
enter in through (...)

I thank the, yt thou have herd me, and are become my salvation. The same
stone which the buylders refused, is become the headestone in the corner. This
was the LORDS doing, and it is marvelous in or eyes. This is the day which
the LORD has made* let us rejoice and be glad in it. Help now o LORD, o
LORD send us now prosperity.

Blessed be he that comes in the name of the LORD, we wish you good luck,
ye that be of the house of the LORD. God is the LORD, and has showed us
light: O (...) the solemn feast with grene branches, (...) unto the horns
of ye altar. Thou art (...) God, and I will thank the: thou art my (...) and I
will praise the. O give thanks (...) to the LORD, for he is gracious, and his
m^^^cy endures for ever.

The CXVIII. psalm. Aleph.
BLessed are those yt be undefiled in the way: which walk in the law of
(...) LORD. Blessed are they that keep his t^^^timonies, and seek him with
their whole hert^*

Which walk in his ways, and do no wi^kednesse. Thou have given strayte
cha^^^ to keep thy commandments. O th^^ my ways were stablished to keep thy
stat^^tes. So should I not be confounded, (...) I have respect unto all thy
commaund^mentes. I will thank the with an vnfay^ned heart, because I am learned
in the iudg^mentes of thy righteousness. I will (...) thy statutes, o forsake
me not utterly.

They came about me like bees / and were ^s hot as the fire in the thorns /
but in the ^^me of the Lord I will destroy them.

They thrust at me / that I might fall / but ^^e Lord was my help.

*The Lord is my strength / and my song / and is become my salvation.

The voice of joy and mirth is in ye dwel^^ges of the ryghtuous / for the
right hand (...) the Lord has gotten the victory.

The right hand of the Lord has ye pre^^ynence / the right hand of the Lord
has ^^tten the victory.

I will not dye / but live / and declare the ^orckes of the Lord.

The Lord has chastened and correct me / ^^t he has not given me over unto
death.

a* Open me the gates of ryghtuousnes / (...) I may goo in there through / and
give ^^^nckes unto the Lord.

This is the door of the Lord / the rygh^^ous shall enter in through it.

I thancke the / that thou have herd me / and become my salvation.

The same*b* stone which the buylders re^^^^^^ / is become the head stone in
ye corner. This was the Lords doing / and it is ^^^uelous in our eyes.

This is the c* day / which the Lord has ^^de / let us rejoice and be glad
in it.

Help now O Lord / O Lord send us (...) prosperity.

Blessed be he that comes in the name of (...) Lord / we wysh you good luck
/ ye that of the house of the Lord.

God is the Lord / and has showed us light: garnysh the solemn feast with
grene ^^^ches / eue^ unto the horns of ye altar. ^^ou art my God / and I will
tha^cke the* (...) art my God / and I will praise the. (...) give thanckes unto
the Lord / for he is ^^^^ous / and his mercy endures for ever.

The.cxix. Psalm.
This Psalm declares how much the saynctes (...) set by the laws of God /
and how greatly (...) endeavor the^ selves unto them: in so much that (...)
sorrow them to be transgressed and withstanded of (...) wicked: And how they
pray to be taught the^ from (...) and to be accustomed with the^: and wyshe as
many ^ransgresse and withstand them / to be destroyed and (...) away.

Aleph.
^BLessed are those that a* be undefiled in the way: which walcke in the law
of the Lord.

^ Blessed are they that keep his testymo^^^s / and seek him with their whole
heart. (...) which walcke in his ways / and do no wyc^^^nesse.

^ Thou have given strayte charge to keep (...) commandments.

O that my ways were stablyshed to keep thy statutes.

So should I not be confounded / while I have respect unto all thy
commandments.

I will thancke the with an unfeigned heart / because I am learned in the
judgments of thy ryghtuousnesse.

I will keep thy statutes / O forsake me not utterly.

Beth.
Where withal shall a young man cleanse his way? Even by rulynge him self
after thy word.

With my whole heart do I seek the / O let me not go wrong out of thy
commandments.

Thy words have I hyd within my heart / that I should not sin against the.

Praised be thou O Lord / O teach me thy statutes.

With my lyppes will I be tellyng out all the judgments of thy mouth.

I have as great delight in the way of thy testymonies / as in all manner of
riches.

I will exercise my self in thy co^maundme^tes / and have respect unto thy
fotepathes.

My delight shall be in thy statutes / I will not forget thy words.

Gimel.
O do well unto thy servant / that I may live and keep thy words.

Open thou mine eyes / and so shall I spy out wondrous things in thy law.

I am a stranger upon earth / O hyde not thy commandments fro me.

My soul breaks out / for the very fervent desire yt I have always unto thy
judgments.

Thou rebukest the proud / cursed are they that depart from thy
commandments.

O turn fro me shame and rebuke / for I keep thy testimonies.

b*Prynces also sit and speak against me / but thy servant is occupied in thy
statutes.

In thy testymonies is my delight / they are my councelers.

Daleth.
My soul cleaves to the dust / O quycke^ thou me according to thy word.

I knowledged my ways / and thou herdest me / O teach me then thy statutes.

Make me to understand the way of t(...) commandments / and so shall I
ta(...) thy wondrous worckes.

My soul melts away for ver^ (...) / O set me up according unto the (...)

Take fro me ye way of lyenge (...) me thy law.

I have chosen the c* way of treuth (...) judgments have I laid before me.

I stycke unto thy testymonies / O Lo(...) confound me not.

(...) I will run the way of thy commandments / when thou have comforted
my heart.

He.
Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes / and I shall keep it unto the end.

O d* give me understanding / and I shall keep thy law / ye I shall keep it
with my whole heart.

Lead me in the path of thy commaundmentes / for that is my desire.

Enclyne mine heart unto thy testymonies / and not to covetousness.

O turn away mine eyes / lest they behold vanite / and quycken me in thy
way.

O stablish thy word in thy servant / yt I may fear the.

Take away ye rebuke that I am afraid of / for thy judgments are amyable.

Behold / my delight is in thy commandments / O quycke^ me in thy
ryghtuousnesse.

Vau.
Let thy loving mercy come unto me / O Lord / and thy saving health
according unto thy word.

That I may give answer unto my blasphemers / for my trust is in thy word.

O take not ye word of treuth utterly out of my mouth / for my hope is in thy
iudgme^tes

So shall I always keep thy law / ye for ever and ever.

And I will walcke at lyberty / for I seek thy commandments.

I will speak of thy testimonies even before kings / and will not be ashamed.

My delight shall be in thy co^maundme^tes / which I love.

My hands also will I lift up unto thy commandments which I love / and my
talking shall be of thy statutes.

Zain.
O thyncke upon thy servant as concerning thy word / wherein thou have caused
me to put my trust.

For it is my comfort in my trouble / ye thy word quyckeneth me.

The proud have me greatly in derisyon / yet shryncke not I from thy law.

I remember thine everlasting iudgme^tes / O Lord / and am comforted.

^ I am horribly afraid for the ungodly / yt (...) thy law.

(...) statutes are my songs in the house (...) ^ylgremage.

(...) upon thy name / O Lord / in the (...) ^eason / and keep thy law.

(...) mine own / for I keep thy co^mau^d^^^^es.

Heth.
^ Thou art my porcyon / O Lord / I am purposed to keep thy law.

I make mine humble petycyon in presence with my whole heart / O be (...) unto
me according unto thy wor^^

I call mine own ways to rememb^^^ce / and turn my fete in to thy testimon^^^

I make haste / and prolonge not the (...) to keep thy commandments.

The congregacyons of the ungodly (...) robbed me / but I forget not thy law.

At mydnight stand I up / to give tha^^^^ unto the / for the judgments of thy
^^^^^^tuousnesse.

I am a companyon of all them that (...) the / and keep thy commandments.

*The earth / O Lord / is full of thy (...). O teach me thy statutes.

Teh.
O Lord / thou have dealt friendly with (...) servant / according unto thy
word.

O learn me thy kyndnesse / (...) knowledge / for I believe thy co^mau^de^^^^

Before I was troubled / I went (...) but now I keep thy word.

Thou art good and friendly / O teach (...) statutes.

The proud ymagin lies upon me (...) keep thy commandments with my (...)
heart.

Their heart is as fat as brawne / (...) delight is in thy law.

It is good for me yt I have been in^^ble / that I may learn thy statutes.

The law of thy mouth is dearer (...) me / then thousands of gold and sylue^*

Iod.
*Thy hands have made me and (...) me / O give me understanding / that I
(...) learn thy commandments.

They yt fear the / will be glad (...) me / because I put my trust in thy (...)

I know / O Lord / that thy iudgm^^^ are right / and that thou of very
faithfu^^ have caused me to be troubled.

O let thy merciful kyndnesse be my ^^^^forte / according to the promise that
(...) have made unto thy servant.

O let thy loving mercies come unto (...) that I may live / for thy law is my
(...)

Let the proud be confounded / which (...) me so falslye.

But let soch as fear the / and know (...) testymonies / be turned unto me.

O let mine heart be undefiled in the ^^^^tutes that I be not ashamed.

Caph.
My soul longs for thy saving (...) for my trust is in thy word.

Mine eyes long sore for thy word / (...) O when wylt thou comfort me?

^ For I am become like a botell in ye smoke / do not I forget thy statutes.

^ How many are the days of thy servant? ^hen wylt thou be aue^ged of mine
aduer^^^yes?

^ The proud have dygged pyttes for me / ^^ich are not after thy law.

^ ^ll thy commandments are true / they ^^^secute me falsely / O be thou my
help.

^ They have almost made an end of me (...) earth / but I forsake not thy
co^maunde^^ntes.

^ O quycke^ me after thy loving kyndnes / and shall I keep ye testimonies of
thy mo^^h.

Lamed.
^ O Lord / thy word endures for ever in ^^^uen.

^ Thy treuth also remains from one (...) to another: thou have laid ye
(...) of the earth / and it abides.

^ They continue this day according to (...) ordinance / for all things
serve the. If my delight were not in thy law / I (...) peryshe in my trouble.

^ I will never forget thy commaunde^^ntes / for with them thou quickenest me.
I am thine / Oh help me / for I seek thy ^^^maundementes.

^ The ungodly lay wait for me to (...) me / but I consydre thy testimonies.

^ I ^e that all things come to an end / but (...) commandment is
exceadynge broad.

Mem.
^ O what love have I unto thy law? all day long is my talking of it

^ Thou through thy commandment have (...) me wyser then mine enemies* for it
is (...) by me.

^ I have more understanding then all my others / for thy testymonies are my
study. Ye I am wyser then ye aged / for I keep (...) commandments.

^ I refrain my fete from every evil way / (...) I may keep thy words.

^ I shrynck not from thy judgments / for (...) teach me.

^ O how sweet are thy words unto my (...)?

^ Ye more then honey unto my mouth.

^ Through thy commandments I get vn^^^standing / therefore I hate all false
ways.

Nun.
^ Thy word is a e * lantern unto my fete (...) a light unto my ^^^thes.

(...) have sworn and (...) ^tedfastly purposed / ^epe ye iudgme^tes (...) ^hy
ryghtuousnesse. I am troubled (...) measure / quycken (...) / O Lord /
according unto thy word. Let the frewyll offe^ynges of my mouth (...) the / O
Lord / and t^ach me thy iudgme^tes

(...)
My soul is always in my hand / yet do not I forget thy law.

The ungodly have laid a snare for me / but yet swerve not I from thy
co^maundme^tes.

Thy testymonyes have I claymed as mine heritage for ever: and why? they are ye
very joy of my heart.

I apply mine heart to fulfill thy statutes always / even unto the end.

Samech.
I hate ye ungodly / but thy law do I love.

Thou art my defense and shylde / my trust is in thy word.

Away fro me ye wicked / I will keep the commandments of my God.

O stablish me according unto thy word / that I may live / and let me not be
disapoynted of my hope.

Hold thou me up / and I shall be safe: ye I shall ever be talking of thy
statutes.

Thou treadest down all them yt depart from thy statutes / for they ymagin
but disceate

Thou put away all the ungodly of the earth like dross / therefore I love
thy testymonies.

My flesh trembles for fear of the / and I am afraid of thy judgments.

(...) Aiin.
I deal with the thing yt is laufull and right /

Be thou suertye for thy servant to do him good / yt the proud do me no
wrong.

Mine eyes are waysted ^waye with lokyng for thy health / and for the word of
thy righteousness.

O deal with thy servant according unto thy loving mercy / and teach me thy
statutes.

I am thy servant / O grant me understanding / that I may know thy
testimonies.

It is time for the (O Lord) to lay to thine hand / for they have destroyed
thy law.

For I love thy commandments above gold and precious stone.

Therefore hold I straight all thy commandments / and all false ways I
utterly abhor.

Phe.
Thy testymonyes are wonderful / therefore does my soul keep them.

When thy word goes forth / it gives light and understanding / even unto
babes.

I open my mouth and draw in my breath / for I desire thy commandments.

O look thou upon me / and be merciful / as thou use to do unto those yt
love thy name.

Order my goinges after thy word that no wickedness raygne in me.

O deliver me from ye wro^geous dealinges of men / and so shall I keep thy
commandments.

Show ye light of thy countenance unto thy servant / and learn me thy
statutes.

Mine eyes gusshe out with water / because men keep not thy law.

Zade.


The testymonyes that thou have commanded are exceadynge / ryghtuous and true.

^sal. lx. c (...). ij. b.
My zele has eue^ consumed me / because mine enemies have forgotten thy words.

Thy word is tried to the uttermost / and thy servant loves it.

I am small and of no reputacyon / yet do not I forget thy commandments.

Thy ryghtuousnesse is an everlasting ryghtuousnes / and thy law is true.

Trouble and heaviness have taken hold upon me / yet is my delight in thy
commandments.

The ryghtuousnes of thy testymonyes is everlasting / O grant me
understanding / and I shall live.

Koph.


Ye even upon the do I call / help me / and I shall keep thy testymonies.

Early in the morning do Is What is ^^fyed by (...) ye have (...) Psalm
cry unto the / for in thy word is my trust.

Mine eyes preuente the night watches / that I might be occupied in thy words.

Hear my voice / O Lord / according unto thy loving kyndnesse / quycken me
according as thou art wont.

They draw nigh that of malice persecute me / and are far from the law.

Be thou nigh at hand also / O Lord / for thy promyses are faithful.

As concerning thy testimonies / I have known ever sens the beginning / yt
thou have grounded them for ever.

Res.


Manteyn thou my cause and defend me / quycken me according unto thy word.

Health is far from the ungodly / for they regard not thy statutes.

Great is thy mercy / O Lord / quycken me as thou art wont.

Many there are that trouble me / and persecute me / yet do not I swerve from
thy testimonies.

It greueth me / when I se / that the transgressors keep not thy law.

Consydre / O Lord / how I love thy commandments / O quycken me with thy
loving kyndnesse.

Thy word is true from everlasting / all the judgments of thy ryghtuousnesse
endure for ever more.

Sin.
h*The princes persecute me without (...) but my heart stands in awe of thy
(...)

I am as glad of thy word / as one (...) great spoils.

As for lies / I hate and abhor (...) thy law do I love.

i* Seven times a day do I praise ^^^cause of thy ryghtuous judgments.

Great is the peace that they have (...) love thy law / and they are not
offend^^*

Lord / I look for thy saving (...) do after thy commandments.

My soul keeps thy testymonyes (...) loves them exceadingly.

I keep thy commandments and (...) / for all my ways are before (...)*

Chau.
Let my complaynte come before (...) Lord / give me understanding / (...)
unto thy word.

Oh let my supplicacyon come before deliver me according to thy promise*

My lyppes shall speak of thy (...) seeing thou have taught me thy statu^^^*

Ye my tongue shall sing of thy (...) for all thy commandments are (...)

Let thine hand help me / for I have (...) thy commandments.

I long for thy saving health / O (...) and in thy law is my delight.

Oh let my soul live and praise the (...) thy judgments may help me.

I go astraye / like a sheep that is (...) seek thy servant / for I do not
forget the ^^^^maundementes.

The.cxx. Psalm.
An affectuous complayn^e of the prophe^^ (...) drive out of the l^nde ^
a^ydyng among (...) that did all things by fraud and violence.

In Hebr. Maheloth. Ab^. Ezra thyn^ (...) the beginning of some song / after
whose (...) Psalms that have this title were song. (...) pound it to
sygnifye: in a high plac^. Some (...) which say / that the Leuytes sange
(...) these (...) in David's house / upon the steares which (...) the chamber
where the men assembled / to the (...) where the women comm^n^y abode.
The song of the steares.
WHen I am in trouble / I call (...) the Lord / and (...) answers (...)*

Deliver my soul / O (...) from lyenge ^lyppes / and from a ^^^ceatfull tongue.

What reward sha^^ be given or (...) to the / thou false tong^^.

Even mighty an^ sharp arowes / (...) hot burning a* (...).

Woe is me that (...) banishment endur^^^ long: I dwell in ye tabernacles of ye
soro^^^

My soul has long dwelt among (...) (...) the enemies unto peace.

I labored for peace / but when I spoke (...) / they made them to battle.

The.cxxj Psalm.
(...) shows that the godly must look for their help (...) God only / and
that he gives it very readely.

The song of the steares.
I Lift up mine eyes unto the a*hylles / (...) from whence comes my help.

My help comes even from the ^^rde which has made heaven and earth. He will
not suffer thy foot to be moved / (...) he that keeps the / slepeth not.

*Behold / he that keeps Israel / does (...) ^lombre nor sleep.

The Lord him self is thy keeper / (...) Lord ^hy defense upon thy right hand.

So that the sun shall not burn the by (...) / nether the moon by night.

The Lord preserves the from all evil / (...) it is the Lord that keeps
thy soul.

The Lord preserves thy going out and (...) coming in / from this time
forth for ^^er more.

The.cxxij. Psalm.
under the shadow and figure of Jerusalem he de^^^^eth the felycytie of the
congregacyon of Christ / (...) the desires of the saynctes / wyshyng ever the
fur^^^^aunce of it.

The song of the steares
I Was glad / when they said unto me: we will go in to the house of the Lord.

Our fete shall stand in thy gates / (...) Jerusalem.

Jerusalem is builded as a city / that is (...) in it self.

For there the tribes go up / even the tribes (...) the Lord: to testyfye unto
Israel / to give ^^an^kes unto the name of the Lord.

For there is the seat of judgment / even (...) seat of the house of David.

O pray for the peace of Jerusalem / they (...) all prospere that love the.

Peace be within thy walls / and plenteous^^^s with (...) thy palaces.

For my brethren and companions sakes / (...) will wysh (...) the prosperity.

Ye because of the house of the Lord our (...) / I will se^^e to do the good.

The.cxxiij. Psalm.
The godly subdued (...) the wicked / do affectuously (...) God to deliver th^^
for unto him they wholly (...) them selves.

The song of the steares.
Unto the lift I (...) mine a * eyes / thou that dwell in th^^e heavens.

Behold / eue^ as the eyes of seruau^^^^ look unto the hands of their
masters: and (...) the eyes of a maiden unto the hands of ^astresse / even so
our eyes wait upon (...) our God / vn^yll he have mercy upon us.

Have mercy upon us / O Lord / have mercy upon us / for we are utterly despised.

Our soul is filled with the scornful reprofe of the welthy / and with the
despitefulnesse of the proud.

The.cxxiiij. Psalm.
The godly rejoice that they are rydde / by the help of God / from a Ieopardy
whereunto they were very nigh.

^
The song of the steares.
IF the Lord had not been of our side (now may Israel say) If the Lord

They had swalowed us up quycke / when they were so wrathfully dyspleased at us.

Ye the waters had drowned us / ye stream had gone over our soul.

The deep waters of the proud had gone even unto our soul.

But praised be the Lord / which has not given us over for a pray unto their
teeth.

Our soul is escaped / eue^ as a bird out of the snare of the fouler: the
snare is broken and we are delivered.

Our help stands in the name of the Lord / which has made heaven and
earth.

The.cxxv. Psalm.
The church or congregacyon is in safetye when the Lord defends it / and
shall be prosperous when he favors it / and purges the wicked theroute.

The song of the steares.
THey that put their trust in the Lord / are even as the mount Syon / which

The hills stand about Jerusalem / eue^ so stands the Lord round about
his people / from this time forth for evermore.

That the rodd of the ungodly come not into the lot of the ryghtuous / lest ye
ryghtuous put their hand unto wickedness.

Do well / O Lord / unto those yt be good and ^
true of heart.

As for soche as turn back unto their own wickedness / the Lord shall
lead the^ forth with the evil doers: but peace be upon Israel.

The.cxxvj. Psalm.
He descrybeth the gladness of the people returning again from Babylon / and
under the figure hereof the reioysynge of the Christen / whom the son of God
has made fre from the captiuyte of sin and deeth.

The song of the steares.
When the Lord turns again the captyuyte of Sion / then shall we be

Then shall our mouth be filled with laughter / and our tongue with joy.

Then shall it be said among the Heathen: the Lord has done great things
for the^.

Ye the Lord has done great things for us all ready / whereof we rejoice.

Turn our captyuyte / O Lord / as the ryuers in the south.

They yt sow in tears / shall reap in joy.

He that now goes in his way weeping and bears forth good sede / shall come
again with joy / and bring his sheaues with him.

The.cxxvij. Psalm.
By the only liberalyte and gift of God is the house and household given / the
city defended ^ meat mynystred / children and those toward and thryftye
obtained.

(...)
The song of the steares.
EXcept the Lord build the house / their

Except the Lord keep the city / the watchman waketh but in vain.

It is but lost labor that ye rise up early / and take no rest / but eat the
bredde of carfulness: for look to whom it pleases him / he gives it in
sleep.

Lo / children and the fruit of the womb are an heritage and gift / yt comes
of ye Lord.

Like as the arowes in the hand of the gyaunt / even so are the young children.

Happy is the man / that has his quyuer full of them: they shall not be ashamed
/ when they speak with their enemies in the gate.

The.cxxviij. Psalm.
He that fears God shall do well and fortunately at all ceasons.

The song of the steares.


For thou shall eat the labors of thine own hands: O well is the / happy
art thou.

Thy wife shall be as ye fruitful vine upon the walls of thy house.

Thy children like the Olyue branches round about thy table.

Lo / thus shall the man be (...)
blessed / that fears the Lord.

The Lord shall so bless the out of Sio^ / that thou shall se Jerusalem in
prosperyte all thy life long.

Ye that thou shall se thy chylders children / and peace upon Israel.

The.cxxix Psalm.
Although the wicked do long and greatly persecute the godly / yet shall they
not prevail over them: ye they shall at the length perish when the godly shall
be in safetye.

The song of the steares.


Ye / many a time have they fought against me fro my youth up / but they have
not overcome me.

The plowers plowed upon my back / and and made long forowes.

But the rightuous Lord has hewn (...) yocke of the ungodly in pieces.

Let them be confounded and turned bac^^ward / as many as have evil will at a *
(...)

Let them be even as the hay upon (...) house tops / which wythereth before
it (...) pluckte up.

Whereof the mower fylleth not his han^^ nether he that byndeth up the sheaues /
(...) bosom.

So yt they which go by / say not so (...) as: ye Lord prospere you / we wish
you (...) luck in the name of the Lord.

The.cxxx. Psalm.
An earnest prayer of him that is oppressed with ^^^uersitie for his sins /
and that surely hops to (...) of God both forgeuenes of his sins and
delyura^^^ from his aduersytyes.

The song of the steares.
OVt of the a * deep call I unto (...) O Lord / Lord hear my voy^^*

Oh let thine ears (...) well the voice of my complay^^^

If thou Lord wylt be extreme to (...) what is done a mysse / Oh Lord who
(...) abide it?

But there is mercy with the / that (...) may be feared.

I look for the Lord / my soul does wa^ for him / and in his word is my trust.

My soul does patiently abide ye Lor^^ from the one morning to the other.

Let Israel trust in the Lord / for with (...) Lord there is mercy and
ple^teous redemp^^^^ And he shall redeem Israel from al his synn^

The.cxxxj. Psalm.
He shows yt he was not proud / but meake and (...)

The song of the steares.
Lord / I am not hye minded / I have (...) proud lokes.

I do not exercise my self in grea^^ matters / which are to hye for me.

But I refrain my soul and keep it (...) like as a child that is weened from
his (...): ye my soul is eue^ as a ween^ed (...)

Let Israel trust in the Lord* from (...) time forth for evermore.

The.cxxxij. Psalm.
He shows that the prosperyty (...) of Christ's kyn^^dome dureth ever / and
that God is (...) allwaye present (...) his church and congregacyon: This does
he (...) the figure of David and of the ^^a^cke abydyng in (...)

The song of the steares.
Lord / remember David and al his trou^^^

How he swore, unto the Lord / (...) vowed a vow unto the almyghtye (...) of
Jacob: I will not come within ye taber^^^cle of my house / nor clyme up in my
bed*

I will not suffer mine eyes to sleep / (...) mine eye lyddes to ^^omber.

Until I find out a place for ye (...) an habytacyo^ for the mighty one of
(...) shall eat the labors of thine own hondes: o well is the, happy art
thou. Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine upon the walls of thy house. Thy
children like the olyue branches round about ye table. Lo, thus shall ye man
be blessed, yt fears the LORD. (...)
The LORD shall so bless the out of Sion, that thou shall se Jerusalem in
prosperity all thy life long. Ye that thou shall se thy childers children,
and peace upon Israel.

The CXXVIII. psalm.
MAny a time have they fought against me fro my youth up (may Israel now
say). Ye many a time have they fought against me fro my youth up, but they
have not overcome me. The plowers plowed upon my back, and made long forowes.
But the rightous LORD has hewn ye yocke of ye ungodly in pieces. Let them be
confounded and turned backwarde, as many as have evil will at Sion. (...)
Let the^ be eue^ as the hay upon the house tops, which wythereth before it
be pluckte up.

Whereof the mower fylleth not his hand, nether he that byndeth up the sheaues,
his bosom. So that they which go by, say not so much as: the LORD prospere
you, we wish you good luck in the name of the LORD.

The CXXIX. psalm.
OVt of the deep call I unto the (o LORD) LORD hear my voice. Oh let thine
ears considre well the voice of my complaynte. (...)
If thou ( LORD) wilt be extreme to marcke what is done amysse, Oh LORD, who
may abide it? But there is mercy with the, that thou may be feared. I look
for the LORD, my soul does wait for him, and in his word is my trust. My
soul does patiently abide the LORD, from the one morning to the other. Let
Israel trust in the LORD* for with the LORD there is mercy and plenteous
redemption. (...)
And he shall redeem Israel from all his sins.

The CXXX. A psalm of David.
LORD, I am not hye minded, I have no proud lokes. (...)
I do not exercise myself in great matters, which are to hye for me. But I
refrain my soul and keep it low, like as a child yt is weened from his
mother, ye my soul is even as a weened child. Let Israel trust in the LORD,
from this time forth for evermore.

The CXXXI. Psalm
LORD, remember David and all his trouble. How he swore unto ye LORD, and
vowed a vow unto ye mighty one of Jacob: I will not come within the tabernacle
of my house, ner clymme up i^ to my bed. I will not suffer mine eyes to sleep,
ner mine eye lyddes to slo^ber. Until I find out a place for the LORD, an
habitacio^ for the mighty one of Jacob. Lo, we herd of the same at Ephrata,
and found it in ye wod.

We will go in to his tabernacle* and fall down before his fotestole. 2. Par.
6. g
Arise (o LORD) in to thy restinge place, thou and ye arc of ye strength.

Let thy prestes be clothed with righteousness, and let thy saints rejoice.
Exo 28 a Ephe 6. b
For thy servant David's sake turn not away the presence of thine anointed.
The LORD has 2. Re. 7. c 1. Par. 18. b Psalm. 88. a Act. 2. d
and he shall not shrenke from it: Of the fruit of thy body shall I set upon thy
seat. If thy children will keep my covenant, and my testimony yt I shall learn
the^, their children also shall sit upon thy seat for evermore. For the LORD
has chosen Sio^, to be an habitacio^ for him self has he chosen her. This
shall be my rest, here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein. I will bless her
vytales with increase, and will satisfy her poor with bred. Psalm 2. Esa ^
I will deck her prestes with health, and her saints shall rejoice and be glad.
Luc* (...) 3. (...) 15.
There shall I make the horn of David to flourish, I have ordened a lantern
for mine anointed. As for his enemies, I shall clothe the^ with shame, but upon
himself shall his crown flourish.

The CXXXII. A psalm of David.
Behold, how good and joyful a thing (...)
brethren to dwell together in unite. It is like yt precious ointment upon the
head, that ran down unto the beerd, eue^ unto Aarons beerd, (...)
and went down to the skyrtes of his clothinge. Like the dew of Hermon, (...)
which fell upon the hill of Sion. For there the LORD promised his blessing,
and life for evermore.

The CXXXIII. psalm.
Behold, O praise the LORD all (...) servants of the LORD, ye that (...)
night sto^de in the house of the LORD. (...) lift up your hands in the
Sanctua^^ (...) praise the LORD. The LOR^^ (...) heaven and earth, bless the
out (...)

The CXXXIIII. psal^^*
O Praise ye name (...) o ye seruau^te^ (...) in ye (...) of the house of (...)
LORD, for the (...) (...) For I know yt ye LORD is great. and yt or LORD
is above all gods. What so ever ye LORD pleases, yt does he in heaven and
in earth, Iere. 10. c 51. a
he turns ye lighteni^ges unto rain, bringi^ge the wyndes out of their
treasuries. Which smote the firstborne of Egipte, Exo. 12 e ^xo. 7.8. ^. 10.
both of man and be. He has sent tokens and wonders in to the myddest of
the (o thou land of Egipte) upon Pharao and all his servants. Iosu. 12. a
Which smote diverse nations, and slew mighty kings. Number. 21. c Deuteronomy. 3. a
Sihon king of ye Amorites, Og the king of Basan, and all the kingdoms of
Canaa^. And gave their lord for an heretage, for an heretage unto Israel his
people. Thy name (o LORD) endures forever, so does thy memorial (o LORD)
from one generation to another. Deu. 32. c
For the LORD will aue^ge his people, and be gracious Psalm. 113. b (...)* 44. b
(...)* 10. a
they are but silver and gold, the work of men's hands. They have mouths,
and speak not: eyes have they, but they se not. They have ears, and yet they
hear not, nether is there any breath i^ their mouths.

They that make them, are like unto them, and so are all they that put their
trust in the^. Praise the LORD ye house of Israel, praise the LORD ye house
of Aaron. Praise the LORD ye house of Leui, ye that fear ye LORD, praise the
LORD. Praised be the LORD out of Sion, which dwells at Jerusalem.

Halleluya.

The CXXXV. psalm.
LORD, for he is gracious, and his mercy endures for ever. O give thanks
unto the God of all gods, for his mercy endures for ever. O thank the LORD
of all lords, for his mercy endures for ever.

which only does great wonders, for his (...) endures for ever. Which by his
(...) soome made the heavens, for his mercy (...) for ever. Which laid out the
earth (...) waters, for his mercy endures for (...) has made great lights,
for (...) for ever. The Son (...) his mercy endures for (...) the stars to
govern (...) endures for ever. (...) their firstborne, (...) for ever. And
(...) them, for (...) reed see in to parts, for his mercy endures for ever.
And made Israel to go through ye myddest of it, for his mercy endures for ever

But as for Pharao and his host, he over threw them in the reed see, for his
mercy endures for ever. (...)
Which led his people through the wilderness, for his mercy endures for ever.
Which smote great kings, (...)
for his mercy endures for ever. Ye and slew mighty kings, for his mercy
endures for ever. Sihon king of the Amorites, (...)
for his mercy endures for ever. And Og the king of Basan, for his mercy
endures for ever.

And gave away their land for an heretage, for his mercy endures for ever.
Even for an heretage unto Israel his servant, for his mercy endures for ever.
Which reme^breth us, when we are in trouble, for his mercy endures for ever.
Which gives food unto all flesh, for his mercy endures forever.

O give thanks unto the God of heaven, for his mercy endures for ever.

The CXXXVI. psalm.
BY the waters of Babylon we sat down (...)
when we remembered Sion. As for our harpes, we hanged them up upon the trees,
that are therein. The^, they that led us away captyue, required of us a song
and melody in or heaviness* sing us one of the songs of Sion. How shall we sing
the LORDS song in a strange lord? (...)
If I forget the (o Jerusalem) let my right hand be forgotten. If I do not
remember the, let my tongue cleue to the rofe of my mouth: ye if I prefer not
Jerusalem in my mirth. (...)
Remember the children of Edom (o LORD) in the day of Jerusalem, how they
said: down with it, down with it, eue^ to the ground. O daughter Babilo^,
(...)
thou shall come to misery thy self: ye happy shall he be, that rewards ye
as thou have served us. Blessed shall he be, that takes thy children, and
throws them against the stones

The CXXXVII. A psalm of David.
I Will give thanks unto the (o LORD) with my whole heart, even before the
gods will I sing praises unto the.

I will worship toward thy holy temple, and praise thy name because of thy
loving kyndnesse and treuth, for thou have magnified thy word, acordynge unto
thy great name. When I call upon the, thou hear me, and endewest my soul
with much strength. All the kings of the earth shall praise the (o LORD) when
they hear the words of thy mouth. Ye they shall sing in the ways of the
LORD, that great is the glory of the LORD. For though the LORD be hye, yet
has he respect unto ye lowly: as for ye proud, he beholds him afar off.
Though I walk i^ ye myddest of trouble, yet shall thou refresh me: thou shall
stretch forth thine hand upon the furiousnes of mine enemies, and ye
righthande shall save me. The LORD shall make good for me, ye thy mercy (o
LORD) endures for ever: despise not then the work of thine own hands.

The CXXXVIII. A psalm of David.
O LORD, thou searchest me out, and know me. Thou know my down syttinge
and my vprisynge, thou vndersto^dest my thoughts afar of. Thou art about my
path and about my bed, and spyest out all my ways. For lo, there is not a
word i^ my tongue, but thou (o LORD) know it altogether. Thou have
fashioned me behind and before, and laid thine ho^de upon me. Soch knowledge
is to wonderful and excellent for me, I can not atteyne unto it. Whither shall
I go then from thy sprete? Or, whither shall I fle from thy presence? If I
clymme up in to heaven, thou art there: if I go down to hell, thou art there
also. If I take the wings of the morning, and remain in the vttemost part
of the sea: Even there also shall thy hand led me, and thy right hand shall
hold me. If I say: peradventure the darcknesse shall cover me, then shall my
night be turned to day. Ye the darcknesse is no darcknesse with the, but the
night is as clear as the day, the darcknesse and light are both alike. For my
reins are thine, thou have covered me in my mothers womb. I will give thanks
unto the, for I am wo^derously made: marvelous are thy works, and that my
soul knows right well. My bones ^re not hyd from the, though I be made
secretly, and fashioned beneth in the earth. Thine eyes se mine vnparfitnesse,
they ston^e all written i^ thy book: my days were fashi^ned, when as yet there
was not one of them

How dear are ye councils unto me o God? O how great is the sum of them? If
I tell them, they are mo in nombre then the end: when I wake up, I am present
with ^he. Will thou not slaye ye wicked (oh God) that the bloudethyrstie might
depart fro^^e? For they speak unright of the, thine ^^emies exalte them
selves presumptuously.

I hate them (o LORD) that hate the, and I may not away with those that rise
up ^gaynst the? Ye I hate them right sore, ^^erfore are they mine enemies.
Try me ^o God) and seek the ground of mine heart: prove me, and examen my
(...) well, if there be any way (...) me, and led me in the way (...)

The CXXXIX. A psalm of David*
Deliver me (o LORD) from the (...) men, oh preserve me from the wicked men.
Which ymagin myschefe in their hertes, and stere up strife all the day long.
They sharpen their tongues like a serpent, Adders poison is under their lips.
Sela. Keep me (o LORD) from the hand of the ungodly, preserve me from the
wicked men, which are purposed to overthrow my goinges. The proud have laid
a snare for me, and spread a nett abroad with coardes, ye and set trappes in
my way. Sela.

But my saying is unto the LORD: thou art my God, hear the voice of my
prayer o LORD. O LORD God, thou strength of my health, thou have covered my
head in ye day of battayll. Let not ye ungodly have his desire (o LORD) let
him not have his Psalm. 7. b
Let hot burning coals fall upon the^, let the^ be cast in to the fire, and
in to the pytt, that they never rise up again. A man full of words shall not
prospere upon earth: a malicious and wicked person shall be hunted away and
destroyed. Sure I am, that the LORD will avenge the poor, and manteyne the
cause of the helpless. The rightuous also shall give thanks unto thy name, and
the just shall continue in thy sight.

The CXL. A psalm of David.
LORD, I call upon the: haist the unto Exo. 30 b Nu. 2.8 a
and let the liftinge up of my hands be an evening sacrifice. Set a watch (o
LORD) before my mouth, Eccli. 22. ^
ye a watch at the door of my lips. O let not mine heart be enclyned to any
evil thing, to be minded as the ungodly or wicked men, lest I eat of soch
things as please the^

Let the rightuous (rather) smite me friendly, and reprove me: so will I take it,
as though he had poured oil upon my head: it shall not hurt my head, ye I
will pray yet for the^ wickedness. Their judges sto^ble at the stone, yet
hear they my words, yt they be joyful. Our bones lie scatered before ye
pytt like as when one graueth and dyggeth up the ground. But mine eyes look
unto ye, o LORD God: in the is my trust, oh cast not out my soul. Keep me
from ye snare which (...) me, and from the trappes (...). Let the ungodly fall
(...) nets together, until I be (...) them.

The CXLI. A psalm of David.
I Cry unto the LORD with my voice, ye eue^ unto the LORD do I make my
supplicacion. I pour out my complaynte before him, and show him of my
trouble. When my sprete is in heaviness, for thou know my path: in the way
where in I walk, have they preuely laid a snare for me. I look upon my right
hand and se, there is no man that will know me. I have no place to fle unto,
no man cares for my soul. Therefore do I cry unto the (o LORD) and say:
thou art my hope and my portion, in the land of the living. Consider my
complaynte, for I am brought very low. Oh deliver me fro my persecuters, for
they are to strong for me: Bring my soul out of preson, that I may give
thanks unto thy name: which thing if thou will grant me, then shall the
rightuous resort unto my company.

The CXLII. A psalm of David.
Hear my prayer (o LORD) considre my desire: answer me for thy treuth and
righteousness sake. And enter not in to judgment with thy servant, for in thy
sight shall no man living be justified. For the enemy persecuteth my soul, he
smyteth my life down to the ground, he lays me in the darcknesse, as the
deed men of the world. Therefore is my sprete vexed within me, and my heart
within me is desolate. Yet do I remember the times past, I muse upon all ye
works, ye I exercise my self in the works of thy hondes. I stretch forth my
hondes unto the, my soul cries unto the out of the thyrstie land. Sela.
Hear me (o LORD) and that soon, for my sprete waxes faynte: hyde not ye
face fro me, lest I be like unto the^ that go down in to the grave. Oh let me
hear thy loving kyndnesse by times in the morning, for in the is my trust:
show thou me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my soul unto the.
Deliver me (o LORD) fro mine enemies, for I resort unto the.

Teach me to do the thing that pleases the, for thou art my God: let thy
loving spre^e led me forth unto the land of righteousness. Quycke^ me (o
LORD) for thy names sake, and for thy righteousness sake bring my soul out
of trouble. And of thy goodness scater mine enemies abroad, and destroy all
them that vex my soul, for I am thy servant.

The CXLIII. A psalm of David.
BLessed be the LORD my refuge, which teaches my hands to war, and my
fyngers to fight. My hope and my castle, my defense and my delyuerer, my
shylde in whom I trust, which governs the people that is under me. LORD,
what is man, that thou have soch respect unto him: Or the son of man, that
thou so regardest him? Man is like a thing of naught, his time passes away
like a shadow. Bow thy heavens (o LORD) and come down, touch the
mountains, yt they may smoke withal*

Send forth the lightenynge and scater the^, shute out thine arowes and
consume them. Send down thine hand from above, deliver me and take me out of
ye great waters, from the hand of strange children. Whose mouth talks of
vanite, and their right hand is a righthande of falsede. That I may sing a
new song unto the (o God) and sing praises unto the upon a tenstrynged luck,
Thou that geuest victory unto kings, and have delivered David thy servant
from the parell of the sword. Save me and deliver me from the hand of
strange children, whose mouth talks of vanite, and their right hand is a
right hand of falsede. That (...) sons may grow up as the yo^ge plants,
and that our daughters may be as the polished corners of the temple. That or
garners may be full and plenteous with all manner of stoare: that or sheep may
bring forth thousands and hundredth thousands in our villages. That our oxen
may be strong to labor, that there be no myschaunce, (...) decay, and no
complayninge in our streets*

Happy are the people that be in soch a ^^se: ye blessed are the people,
which have the LORD for their God.

The CXLIIII. A psalm of David.
I Will magnify the (o my God and kynge^ I will praise ye name for ever and
ever. Every day will I give thanks unto the, and praise ye name for ever and
ever. Great is the LORD, and marvelous worthy to be praised, there is no end
of his greatness. One generation shall praise thy w^kes unto another, and
declare thy power. As for me I will be talki^ge of thy worshipe thy glory, thy
praise and wo^derous works*

So that men shall speak of the might of thy marvelous acts, and tell of ye
greatness*

The memorial of ye abundaunt kyndne^ shall be showed, and me^ shall sing of
thy righteousness. The LORD is gracious and merciful, long sufferynge and
of great goodness. The LORD is loving unto every man, and his mercy is over
all his works. All thy works praise the (o LORD) and thy saints give
thanks unto the. They show the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of ye power.
That ye power, thy glo^^ and mightynesse of thy kingdom mig^^ (...) known
unto men. Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, (...)
and thy dominion endures through out all ages. The LORD vpholdeth all soch as
should fall, and lifts up all those that be down. The eyes of all wait upon
the, and thou geuest them their meat in due season. Thou openest thine hand,
and fyllest all things living with plente^usnesse. (...)
The LORD is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works. The LORD
is nigh unto all them that call upon him, ye all soch as call upon him
faithfully.

He fulfilleth the desire of them that fear him he hears their cry, and
helps them.

The LORD preserves all them that love him, but scatereth abroad all the
ungodly.

My mouth shall speak the praise of the LORD, And let all flesh give thanks
unto his holy name for ever and ever. Halleluya.

The CXL^. psalm.
Praise the LORD (o my soul:) while I live will I praise the LORD, (...)
ye as long as I have any being, I will sing praises unto my God. (...)
O put not yor trust in princes, ner in the child of man, for there is no
help in the^. For when ye breath of man goes forth, he shall turn again to
his earth, and so all his thoughts perish. Blessed is he that has ye God of
Jacob for his help, and whose hope is in the LORD his God. (...)
Which made heaven and earth, yt see and all that therein is, which keeps his
LORD lowseth men out of preson, the LORD gives sight to the blind.

The LORD helps the^ up that are fallen, the LORD loves the righteous. The
LORD cares for the strangers, he defends ye fatherless and wyddowe: as
for the way of ye ungodly, he turns it vpsyde down. The LORD thy God (o
Sion) is king for evermore, and through out all generacions. Halleluya.

The CXLVI. psalm.
LORD, for it is a good thing to sing praises unto or God: ye a joyful and
pleasant thing is it to be thankful. The LORD shall build up Jerusalem, and
gather together ye outcastes of Israel. He heals the contrite in heart, and
byndeth up their wounds. He tells the nombre of the stars, Esa 40. d
and calls them all by their names. Great is or LORD, and great is his
power, ye his wyszdome is infinite. The LORD sets up ye meke, and brings
ye ungodly down to ye ground

O sing unto ye LORD with thankesgeuynge, sing praises upon ye harp unto or
God. 1. Esd. 3. c


Which covers ye heaven with clouds, prepares rain for ye earth, Psalm 103. b
and makes ye grass to grow upon the mountains. Which gives foder unto ye
catell, Job. 38. d
and fedeth ye young ravens yt call upon him. He has no pleasure in the
strength of an horse, nether delyteth he in any ma^s legs. But the LORDS
delight is in them that fear him, and put their trust in his mercy.

The CXLVII. psalm, This psalm do the hebrews join unto it, that goes
before.
Praise ye LORD o Jerusalem, praise (...) God o Sion. For he makes fast (...)
baries of ye gates, and blesses ye (...) within ye. He makes peace in ye
bord^^^ (...) fylleth ye with ye flor of wheat. He (...) synde ye forth his
commandment upon earth, (...) LORD runs swiftly. He gives snow, Iaco.
1.^ (...) Eccls. 1.^ (...) And. 7.^ (...) Job. 28 (...) 3. reg 3 (...) 4.c.
and scatereth ye horefrost like ashes. (...). He forth his yse like morsels,
who is ghtuous, and de his frost? He sends out ^^cently: he ^emelteth them,
he blows with hi^ (...) preserves ye waters flow. He shows (...) shall thou

The (...) shall keep the. That
^P^est be delivered from ye evil way, ^om the man yt speaks f^owarde
thines. from soch as leave the hye street, and ualkei ye ways of darcknesse:
which rejoice (...) doing evil, and delight i wicked things: whose ways are
crooked, and their paths slanderous.

that thou may be delivered also from the strange woman, Pro. 1.a and.5.a
and from her that is not thine own: which gives sweet words,

That thou may walk in ye good way, and keep tha paths of the righuous.
For the just shall dwell in the lend, and the inno

Let them praise the name of the LORD, for his name only is excellent, and his
praise above heaven and earth. He exalts the horn of his people, all his
saints shall praise him, the children of Israel, even the people that serves
him. Halleluya.

The CXLIX. psalm. Halleluya.
LORD a new song, let the congregation of saints praise him. Esa. 42. b
Let Israel rejoice in him that made him, and let the children of Sion be
joyful in their king. Let them praise his name in the dau^ce, let them sing
praises unto him with tabrettes and harpes. For the LORD has pleasure in his
people, and helps the mekcharted. Let the saints be joyful with glory, let
them rejoice in their beds. Let the praises of God be in their mouth, and
sharp swerdes in their hands. To be avenged of the Hei^he^, and to rebuke the
people. To bind their ^^nges in cheynes, and their nobles with lync^^^^ of
iron. That they may be avenged (...), as it is written, Soch honor have
(...) saints. Halleluya.

The CL. psalm. Halleluya.
(...) Praise the LORD in his Sanctu^^^ (...), praise him in the firmament of
(...) power. Praise him in his noble (...) him in his excellent greatness.
(...) in the sound of the trompet, (...) ^po^ the lute and harp. Pray (...)
^ymbals and daunse, praise him (...) and pype. Praise him (...) cymbals, praise
him (...) cymbals. Let (...) yt has breath, (...) LORD. (...).

The Proverbs of Solomon.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I. The wisdom of God calls us by the mouth of Salomo^, exorteth us,
and gives us warning to eschew the wicked: whose un godly co^uersacion in
word and work, and punishment also of the same, is here descrybed. Chap. II.
How wisdom may be gotten, and what profit comes of it. Chap. III. He
exorteth us to the fear of God and to patience: he commends wyszdome, ^
requires us to cleue unto the same. Chap. IIII. A fatherly exortacion unto
wisdom with the profit thereof, and how we ought to refrain the me^bres of
our body from evil. Chap. V. He exorteth unto wyszdo^e, and to be war of
harlottes: he tells what harm m^ye follow therout, when men meddle with soch:
h^ teaches men, louyngly to cleue unto their m^ried wives, and descrybeth the
end of the vn^godly. Chap. VI. He warns men to bewarre of s^^^tishipe,
exorteth the slothful to labor, shows the wikednesse of false tongues, and
requires men to bewarre of aduoutry, because it is more perlo^s then theft or
felony. Chap. VII. He exorteth unto wiszdome, shows the conditions of
harlottes, and what hurt happens unto soch as enclyne to the prouocacio^s and
desires of the flesh. Chap. VIII. Wyszdome calls men swetely unto her, and
tells them what treasure and power she has. A co^mendacion and praise of
wiszdome, wherout every man is exorted to cleue unto her. Chap. IX. Wyszdome
cries upon the ignorant, and promises them great things. The foolish manner
of a light woman. Chap. X. From this chapter forth unto the XXXI, there are
described many sweet, lovely and wise sentences, which teach men wyszdome and
what profit comes of it: Again, how men may avoid foolishness, and the
hurt thereof. Chap. XXXI Wyszdome warns us to bewarre of evil women, and
descrybeth the co^uersacion, manner, and behauoure of an honest married wife.
These are the proverbs of Solomon the son of David king of Israel: to
learn wyszdome nurtoure, understanding, prudence, righteousness, judgment and
equite. That the very babes might have wit, and that young men might have
knowledge and understanding. By hearing, the wise man shall come by more
wisdom: and by experience, he shall be more apt to understand a parable, and
the interpretacion thereof: the words of the wise, and the darcke speeches of
the same. The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom. (...)
But fools despise wisdom and nurtoure.

The first Chapter.
(...)
My son, co^sente not unto sinners, if they entyse the, and say: come with
us, let us lay wait for blood, and lurk preuely for the innocent with out a
cause: (...)
let us swalowe the^ up like ye hell, let us devour the^ quycke and whole, as
those that go down in to the pytt. So shall we find all manner of costly
riches, and fill our houses with spoils. Cast in thy lot among us, we shall
have all one purse.

My son, walk not thou with them, refrain ye foot from their ways. (...)
For their fete ru^ne to evil, and are haistie to shed blood. But in vain is
ye net laid forth before the birds

Wyszdome cries without, and puts forth her voice in the streets. She
calls before ye congregation in ye open gates, and shows her words through
ye cite, saying: O ye children, how long will ye love childyshnesse? how long
will ye scorners delight in scornynge, and ye unwise be enemies unto knowledge? O
turn you unto my correccion: lo, I will express my mind unto you, and make
you understood my words. Saying then that I have called, and ye refused it: I
have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded it, but all my councils have
ye despised, and set my correccio^s at naught. Therefore shall I also laugh in
yor destruction, and mock you, when ye thing that ye fear comes upon you:
even when ye thing that ye be afraid of, falls in suddenly like a storm,
and yor misery like a tempest: ye wha^ trouble and heaviness comes upon you.
Then shall they call upon me, but I will not hear: they shall seek me early, but
they shall not find me: And yt because they hated knowledge, and received not ye
fear of ye LORD, but abhorred my council, and despised my correccion.
Therefore shall they eat ye fruits of their own way, and be filled with their
own councels: for ye turnynge away of ye unwise shall slaye the^, and ye
prosperi of fools shall be their own destruccio^. But who so harkeneth unto me,
shall dwell safely, Pro. 3. c
and have enough without any fear of evil.

The II. Chapter.
MY son, if thou will receive my LORD, and find ye knowledge of God. Iaco.
1. a Eccls. 1. ^ And. 7. c Job. 28 b 3. reg 3 ^ 4. c.
For it is the LORD that gives wyszdome, out of his mouth comes knowledge
and understanding. He preserves ye welfare of the rightuous, and defends
them yt walk innocently: he keeps them in ye right path, and preserves ye
way of his saints. Then shall thou understand

That thou may be delivered also from the strange woman, Pro. 7. a And. 5. a
and from her that is not thine own: which gives sweet words,

That thou may walk in ye good way, and keep the paths of the rightuous.
For the just shall dwell in the land, and the innocents shall remain in it:
but the ungodly shall be roted out of ye land, and the wicked doers shall be taken
out of it.

The III. Chapter.
Deu. 11. a
For they shall prolo^ge ye days and years of ye life, and bring ye peace.
Let mercy and faithfulness never go from ye: bind the^ about ye neck, and
write them in the tables of thine heart. So shall thou find favor and good
understanding in ye sight of God and men. Put thy trust in ye LORD with all
thine heart, and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways
have respect unto him, and he shall order thy goinges. Esa. 5. c Rom^ 12. c
Be not wise in thine own conceate, but fear ye LORD and depart from evil:
so shall thy nauel be whole, and thy bones strong.

LORD with ye substance, and with ye firstlinges of all thine increase: ^ob. 4. b
Deuteronomy. 26. a Mala. 3. b Exo. 23. c and 34. c Pet. 4. b Tob. 12. c Heb. 12 a Apo
3. d
so shall thy barnes be filled with plenteousnesse, and thy presses shall flow
over with sweet wine. My son, despise not the chastenynge of ye LORD, nether
faynte when thou art rebuked of him. For who^ the LORD loves, him he
chasteneth: and yet delyteth in him even as a father in his own son. Well is
him that fyndeth wyszdome, and opteyneth understanding, for the gettinge of it
is better then any marchaundise of silver, and the profit of it is better then
gold. Pro. ^. a
Wyszdome is more worth the^ precious stones, and all ye things yt thou can
desire, are not to be compared unto her. Upon her right hand is long life,
and upon her left hand is riches and honor.

Her ways are pleasant ways, and all her paths are peaceable. Genesis 2. b
She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her, and blessed are they
that keep her fast.

LORD laid the fou^dacion of ye earth, and through understanding has he
stablished ye heavens. Through his wiszdome ye depthes break up, and ye clouds
drop down the dew. My son, let not these things depart from thine eyes,
but keep my law and my council: so shall it be life unto thy soul, and grace
unto ye mouth.

Then shall thou walk safely in ye way, and thy foot shall not stomble. If
thou slepest, thou shall not be afraid, but shall take thy rest and sleep
swetely. Pro. 3. c
Thou neddest not to be afraid of any sodane fear, nether for the violent
russhinge in of the ungodly, when it comes.

For the LORD shall be beside the, and keep thy foot yt thou be not taken.
Refuse not to do good unto him that should have it, so lon^^ as thine hand is
able to do it. Say (...)
and chose none of his ways: for the LORD abhors the froward, but his
secret is among the righteous. The curse of the LORD is in the house of the
ungodly, but he blesses the dwellinges of the righteous

As for the scornful, he shall laugh the^ to scorn, but he shall give grace
unto the lowly. The wise shall have honor in possession, but shame is the
promocio^ that fools shall have.

The IIII. Chap.
Hear (O ye children) the fatherly exortacio^,

Get the wyszdome, get the understanding, forget not ye words of my mouth,
and shre^ke not from them. Forsake her not, and she shall preserve the: love
her, and she shall keep the. The chief point of wyszdome is, that thou be
willing to opteyne wyszdome, and before all thy goods to get the
understanding. Make much of her, and she shall promote the: Ye if thou
embracest her, she shall bring the unto honor.

She shall makethe a gracious head, and garnish the with ye crown of glory.
Hear my son, and receive my words, that the years of thy life may be
many. I will show the ye way of wyszdome, and led the in the right paths. So
that if thou go therein, there shall no straytnesse hinder the: and when thou
runnest, thou shall not fall. Take fast hold of doctrine, let her not go: keep
her, for she is thy life.

Come not in the path of the ungodly, and walk not in the way of the wicked.

Eschueit, and go not therein: depart aside, and pass over by it. For they can
not sleep e^cepte they have first done some myschef^ nether take they any rest,
except they have first done some harm. For they eat the bred of wickedness,
and dri^ke the wine of robbery. The path of the rightuous shyneth as the light,
and is ever brighter and brighter unto the parfecte day. But ye way of the
ungodly is as the darcknesse, wherein me^ fall, or they be awarre.

(...)
Let them not depart from thine eyes, keep them even in the myddest of thine
heart. For they are life unto all those that find the^, and health unto all
their bodies. Keep thine heart with all diligence, for there upon hangs life.
Put away from the a froward mouth, and let the lips of slander be far
from the. Let thine eyes behold the thing yt is right, and let thine eye
lyddes look straight before the.

Po^dre the path of thy fete, so shall all ye ways be sure. (...)
Turn not aside, nether to the right hand ner to the left, but witholde thy
foot from evil.

The V. Chapter.


(...)
For the lips of an harlot are a droppinge honey comb, and her throat is
softer then oil. But at ye last she is as bitter as worm wod, and as sharp as
a two edged sword. Her fete go down unto death, and her steps pearse through
unto hell. She regards not the path of life, so unsteadfast are her ways,
that thou can not know them. Hear me therefore (o my son) and depart not
from the words of my mouth. Keep thy way far from her, and come not nigh ye
doors of her house. That thou give not thine honor unto another, and thy years
to the cruel. Eccle. 9.
let her breasts always satisfy the, and hold the ever content with her love.
My son, why will thou have pleasure in an harlot, and embrace the bosom of
another woman? Job. 31. a And 34.
For every ma^s ways are open in the sight of the LORD, and he po^dereth all
their goinges. The wickednesses of the ungodly shall catch himself, and with the
snares of his own sins shall he be trapped. Because he would not be
reformed, he shall dye: and for his great foolishness he shall be destroyed.

The VI. Chapter.
MY son, if thou be suertie for ye neighbor, Pro. 21. ^ 17. c. 20. ^
thou have fastened thine ho^de with another man: ye thou art bound with thine
own words, and taken with thine own speech. Therefore (my son) do this,
discharge thy self, for thou art come i^ to ye neghbours danger. Go thy way
then soon, and entreat thy neighbor: let not thine eyes sleep, ner thine eye
lyddes slomber. Save thy self as a do from ye hand, and as a bird from the
ho^de of the fouler. Go to the Emmet (thou slogarde) consider her ways, and
learn to be wise

She has no gyde, no teacher, no leder: Pro. 24. ^0. c. Pro. 13. ^
yet in the summer she provides her meat, and gathers her food together i^
ye harvest. How long will thou sleep, thou slogish man? Wha^ will thou arise
out of thy sleep? Ye sleep on still a little, slo^ber a little, fold thine
hands together yet a little, that thou may sleep: so shall pouerte come unto
the as one yt trauayleth

There be six things, which the LORD hates, and the seventh he utterly
abhors: A proud look, a dyssemblynge tongue, Psalm. 17 Pro. 12.
hands that shed innocent blood, an heart yt goes about with wicked
ymaginacio^s, Pro. 1. a
fete that be swift in rennynge to do myschefe, a false witness yt brings up
lies, and soch one as sows discord among brethren. My son, keep thy
fathers commandments, and forsake not ye thou awakest, Psalm. 118. o
thou may talk of the^ (For the commandment is a lantern, and the law a
light: ye chastenynge and nurtoure is ye way of life) that they may keep the
from the evil woman, Pro. 5 a. And. 7. a.
and from the flaterynge tongue of the harlott: yt thou lust not after her beuty
in thine heart, and lest thou be taken with her fair lokes. An harlot will make a
man to beg his bred, but a married woman will hunt for ye precious life. May a
man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be brent? Or can one go upon
hot coals, and his fete not be hurt? Even so, who so ever goes in to his
neghbours wife, and touches her, can not ^xo. 22. a.
that steals to satisfy his soul, when he is hongerie: but if he may be
gotten, he restores again seven times asmoch, or else he makes recompense
with all the good of his house. But who so commits aduoutrie with a woman,
he is a fool, and brings his life to destruction. He gets him self also
shame and dishonor, soch as shall never be put out. For the gelousy and wrath of
the man will not be i^treated, no though thou would ofre him great gifts to
make amends, he will not receive them.

The VII. Chapter.
^eut. 11. a. Nu^. 15. d.
Keep my commandments and my law, eue^ as the aple of thine eye, and thou
shall live. Bind them upon thy fyngers, and write the^ in the table of thine
heart. Say unto wisdom: thou art my sister, and call understanding thy
kynswoman: Pro. 2. b. And. 5. a.
that she may keep ye from ye strange woman, and from ye harlot which gives
sweet words. For out of the wyndowe of my house I looked through the trelies,
and beheld the simple people: and among other young folks I spyed one young
fool goinge over the streets, by the corner in the way toward the harlottes
house in the twylight of of the evening, when it began now to be

For the good man is not at home, he is gone far of. He has taken the bagg
of money with him, who can tell when he comes home? Thus with many sweet
words she (...)
and with her flateringe lips she wanne him.

Immediately he follows her, as it were an oxeled to the slaughter (and like as
it were to the stocks, where fools are punyshed) so long till she has
wounded his liver with her darte: like as if a bird haisted to the snare, not
knowinge that the parell of his life lies there upon. Hear me now therefore (o
my son) and marcke the words of my mouth.

Let not thine heart wandre in her ways, and be not thou disceaued in her
paths. For many one has she wounded and cast down, ye many a strong man
has she slain. Her house is the way unto hell, where men go down to the
chambers of death.

The VIII. Chapter.
Does not wisdom cry? does not understanding put forth her voice? Stondeth
she not in the hye places in the streets and ways? does she not cry before
the whole cite, and in the gates where men go out and in? It is you, o ye men
(says she) whom I call. Unto you (o ye children of me^) lift I up my voice.
Take heed unto knowledge o ye ignorant, be wise in heart o ye fools. Give
ear, for I will speak of great matters, and open my lips to tell things
that be right. For my throat shall be talking of ye truth, and my lips
abhor ungodliness. All the words of my mouth are rightuous, there is no
frowardness ner falsede therein. They are all plain to soch as will
understood, and right to the^ that find knowledge. Receive my doctrine
therefore and not silver, and knowledge more then fine gold. For wisdom is more
worth then precious stones, ye^ all the things that thou can desire, are not
to be compared unto it.

I wisdom have my dwelling with knowledge, and prudent council is mine own.
With me is the fear of the LORD, and ye eschuynge of evil. As for pride,
disdain, an evil way, and a mouth that speaks wicked things, I utterly
abhor the^. I can give council, and be a gyde: I have understanding, I have
strength.

Through me, kings reign: through me, paces make just laws. Through me, lords
bear rule, and all judges of ye earth execute judgment. I am loving unto
those that love me, and they that seek me early, shall find me.

Riches and honor are with me, ye excellent goods and righteousness. My fruit
is better the^ gold and precious stone, and mine increase more worth then fine
silver. I walk in ye way of righteousness, and in the street of judgment. That
I may send prosperity to those that love me, and to increase their treasure.

LORD himself had me in possession in the beginning of his ways, or ever he
begame his works aforetyme. I have been ordened from euerlasti^ge, (...)
and from ye beginnynge or ever the earth was made. When I was borne, there
were nether depthes ner springes of water. Before the foundacions of ye
mountains* were laid, ye before all hills was I borne. The earth and all
that is upon the earth was not yet made, no not the ground it self. (...)
For when he made the heavens, I was present: wha^ he set the depthes in order:
when he hanged the clouds above: when he fastened the sprynges of the deep:
(...)
When he shutt the sea within certain bowndes, that ye waters should not go
over (...)


Therefore harken unto me (o ye children) for blessed are they that keep my
ways*

O give ear unto nurtoure, be wise, and refuse it not. Blessed is ye man that
hears me, watchinge daily at my gates, and geuynge attendaunce at the posts
of my doors.

For who so fyndeth me, fyndeth life, and shall obtain favor of the LORD.
But who so offends against me, hurts his own soul. All they that hate me,
are the lovers of death.

The IX. Chapter.


Who so reproves a scornful person, gets him self dishonor: and he
that rebukes the ungodly, stayneth himself.

Reprove not a scorner, lest he owe the evil will: but rebuke a wise man, and
he will love the. Give a discrete man but an occasion, LORD is the beginning
of wisdom, Job. 28. c Psalm. 110. ^ Eccli. 1. c Pro. 4. b
and the knowledge of holy things is understanding. For through me ye days
shall be prolonged, and the years of thy life shall be many. If thou be wise, yi
wisdom shall do yi self good: but if thou thynkest scorn thereof, it shall be
thine own harm. A foolish restless woman, full of words, and soch one as
has no knowledge, sytteth in the doors of her house upon a stole above in the
cite, to call soch as go by and walk straight in their ways. Who so is
ignorant (says she) let him come hither, and to the unwise she says:
stolen waters are sweet, and the bred that is preuely eaten, has a good taist.

But they consider not that death is there, and that her gestes go down to
hell.

The X. Chapter. These are proverbs of Solomon.
A Wise son makes a glad father, but Pro. 15. c Pro 11 a Eccli. 5. b
Treasures that are wickedly gotten, profit nothing, but righteousness
delyuereth from death. Pro. 12. ^
The LORD will not let the soul of the rightuous suffer ho^ger, but he puts
ye ungodly from his desire. An idle hand makes poor, but a quycke laboringe
hand makes rich.

Who so gathers in Summer, is wise: but he that is slogish in harvest,
brings himself to confucion. Loving and favorable is the face of the
rightuous, but ye fore head of the ungodly is past shame, and presumptuous.
Psalm. 111.
The memorial of the just shall have a good report, but the name of the un
godly shall stynke. A wise man will receive warning, but a fool will sooner be
smytten in the face. He that leads an innocent Psalm. 22. a Pro. 28. ^ Eccl.
27.
but who so goes a wrong way, shall be known. He yt wynketh with his eye, will
do some harm: but he that has a foolish mouth, shall be beaten. The mouth of a
rightuous man is a well of life, but ye mouth of the ungodly is past shame, and
presumptuous. Evil will stereth up strife, but love covers ye multitude of
sins. 1. Pet. 4.


In ye lips of him yt has vndersto^dinge a man shall find wisdom, but ye
read belongs to ye back of ye foolish. Wise me^ lay up knowledge, but ye
mouth of ye foolish is nigh destruccio^. The rich ma^s goods are his strong
hold, but pouerte oppresses the poor.

The rightuous labors to do good, but the ungodly uses his increase unto
sin.

(...). 42. c ^ccli 11. ^sal. 126. a ^at. 6. c. d
The blessing of the LORD makes rich me^, as for careful travail, it does
nothing thereto. A fool does wickedly and makes but a sport of it:
nevertheless it is wisdom for a man to bewarre of soch.

The thing that the ungodly are afraid of, shall come upon them, but the
rightuous shall have their desire. The ungodly is like LORD makes a long
life, but ye years of ye ungodly shall be shortened. The pacient abydinge of
the rightuous shall be turned to gladness, but the hope of the ungodly shall
perish. The way of the LORD gives a courage unto ye godly, but it is a fear
for wicked doers. The rightuous shall never be overthrown, ^sa 124. a ^sal. 36.
d
but ye ungodly shall not remain in the land. The mouth of the just will be
talking of wisdom, but the tongue of the froward shall perish. The lips of
the rightuous are occupied in acceptable things, but the mouth of the ungodly
takes them to the worst.

The XI. Chapter.
LORD, ^ro. 16. b (...). b. d
but a true weight pleases him. Where pride is, there is shame also and
confucion: but where as is lowlynes, there is wisdom. The innocent dealing of
the just shall led them, but the unfaithfulness of the despysers shall be their
own destruction. Riches help not in the day of vengeance, ^rou. 10. a
^ccli. 5. b
but righteousness delyuereth from death. The righteousness of ye innocent
ordreth his way, but the ungodly shall fall in his own wickedness. The
righteousness of the just shall deliver them, but the despysers shall be taken in
their own ungodliness. When an ungodly man dies, his hope is gone, the
confydence of riches shall perish. The rightuous shall be delivered (...)
When it goes well with the rightuous, the cite is merry: and when the ungodly
perish, there is gladness. When the just are in wealth, the cite prospers:
but when the ungodly have the rule, it decays. A fool brings up a slander
of his neighbor, but a wise man will keep it secret. (...)
A dyssemblynge person will discover preuy things, but he that is of a
faithful heart, will keep council. (...)
Where no good council is there the people decay: but where as are many that
can give council, there is wealth. (...)
He that is suertye for a stranger, hurts himself: but he that medleth not
with suerteshippe, is sure. A

The labor of the ungodly prospers not, but he that sows rightuosnes,
shall receive a sure reward. Like as righteousness brings life, eue^ so to
cleue unto evil, brings death. The LORD abhors a feigned heart, but he
has pleasure in them that are undefiled. It shall not help ye wicked, though
they lay all their hondes together, but the sede of the rightuous shall be
preserved. A fair woman without discrete manners, is like a ring of gold in a
swynes snoute. The just labor for peace and tra^quylite, but the ungodly for
disquyetnesse.

Some man gives out his goods, and is the richer, but ye nygarde (having
enough) will depart from nothing, and yet is ever in pouerte. He that is
lyberall in geuynge, shall have plenty: and he that waters, shall be watered
also himself. Who so hoordeth up his corn, shall be cursed among the people:
but blessing shall light upon his head that sells it. He that labors for
honesty fyndeth his desire: but who so seeks after myschefe, it shall happen
unto him. He that trusts in his riches, shall have a fall, but ye rightuous
shall flourish as the grene leaf.

Who so makes disquyetnesse in his own house, he shall have wind for his
heretage, and the fool shall be servant to the wise.

The fruit of the rightuous is as the tree of life, a wise man also wynneth men's
souls. If ye rightuous be reco^pe^sed upon earth how much more the^ the
ungodly and ye sinner*

The XII. Chapter.
Who so loves wyszdome, will be content to be reformed: but he that hates to
be reproved,, is a fool. A good man is acceptable unto the LORD, but ye
wicked will he condemn. A man ca^ not endure in ungodliness, but ye rote of
ye righteous shall not be moved. A steadfast woman is a crown unto her
huszbonde: but she that behaueth herself unhonestly, is a corrupcion in his
bones. The thoughts of ye righteous are right, but the ymaginacion of the
ungodly are disceatfull. The talking of the ungodly is, how they may lay
wait for blood, but the mouth of ye righteous will deliver them. Or ever thou
can turn the about, the ungodly shall be overthrown, but the house of the
righteous shall sto^de.

A man shall be commended for his wyszdome, but a fool shall be despised. A
simple man which labors and works, is better the^ one that is gorgious and
wants bred.

A righteous man regards the life of his catell, but the ungodly have cruel
hertes. He that tilleth his lord, shall have plenteousnesse of bred: but he yt
follows ydylnes, is a very fool. The desire of ye ungodly hunteth after
myschefe, but the rote of the righteous brings forth fruit. The wicked
falls in to the snare through ye malice of his own mouth, but the just shall
escape out of parell. Every man shall enjoy good acordinge to the innocence of
his mouth, and after the works of his hands shall he be rewarded. Look what a
fool takes in hand, he thinks it well done: but he that is wise, will be
cou^celed. A fool utters his wrath in all the haist, but a discrete man
forgeueth wrong. A just man will tell the truth, and show the thing yt is
right: but a false witness disceaueth. A slanderous person pricketh like a
sword, but a wise man's tongue is wholesome. A true mouth is ever constant, but a
dyssemblinge tongue is soon changed. They that ymagin evil in their mind,
will disceaue: but the councelers of peace shall heave joy folowinge the^. There
shall no mysfortune happen unto the just, but the ungodly shall be filled with
misery. The LORD abhors disceatfull lips, but they that labor for
treuth, please him. He that has vndersto^dinge, can hyde his wisdom: but an
indiscreet heart tells out his foolishness. A dilligent hand shall bear
rule, but the idle shall be under tribute. Heaviness discorageth ye heart of
man, Pro. ^5. b and. 17. d Eccli. ^0. c
but a good word makes it glad again. The righteous is liberal unto his
neighbor, but the way of the ungodly will disceaue them selves. A disceatfull
man shall find no vau^tage, but he that is content with that he has, 2. (...). 6
b Heb. 13. a
is more worth the^ gold. In the way of righteousness there is life, as for
any other way, it is the path unto death.

The XIII. Chapter.
A Wise son will receive his fathers

Some men are rich, though they have nothing: again, Pro. 11. c
some me^ are poor having great riches. With goods every man delyuereth his
life, and the poor will not be reproved. The light of the righteous makes
joyful, Pro. ^4. c*
but the candle of the ungodly shall be put out. Among the proud there Sap. 2.
c
but fools abhor him that eschueth evil. He that goes in the company of
wise men, shall be wise: but who so is a co^panyo^ of fools, shall be hurt.
Myschefe follows upon sinners, but the rightuous shall have a good reward.
Which their childers children shall have in possession, for the riches of the
sinner is laid up for ye just. Job 27. c
There is plenteousnesse of fode in the feldes of the poor, and shall be
increased out of measure. Eccli. 30. a Psalm. 23. b Hebr. 12. b Psalm. 33. b
He that spares the rod, hates his son: but who so loves him, holds
him ever in nurtoure. The rightuous eats, and is satisfied, but ye belly of
the ungodly has never enough.

XIIII. Chapter.
A Wise woman vpholdeth her house, but a foolish wife plucketh it down.

Who so fears the LORD, walks in the right path: and regards not him
that abhors the ways of the LORD. In the mouth of the foolish is the
boostinge of lordshipe, but ye lips of ye wise will be war of soch. Where no
oxen are, there the crybb is empty: but where the oxen labor, there is much
fruit. A faithful witness will not dyssemble, but a false record will make a
lie.

A scornful body seeks wyszdome, and fyndeth it not: but knowledge is easy to
come by, unto him that will understand. Se yt thou meddle not with a fool, Pro.
8. a
and do as though thou had no knowledge. The wyszdome of him that has
understanding is, to take heed unto his way, but the foolishness of the
unwise disceaueth. Fools make but a sport of sin, but there is favorable
love among

The houses of the ungodly shall be overthrown, but the tabernacles of ye
righteus shall florishe. Deu. 12. a Pro. 16. c
There is a way, which some men think to be right, but the end thereof ledeth
unto death. The heart is soroufull even in laughter, and the end of mirth is
heaviness. An unfaithful person shall be filled with his own ways, but a
good man will bewarre of soch. An ignorant body believes all things, but who
so has understanding, looks well to his goinges. A wise man, fears, and
departs from evil, but a fool goes on presumptuously. An impatient man
handeleth foolishly, but he that is well aduysed, does other ways.



The evil shall bow them selves before ye good, and the ungodly shall wait at
the ^^res of the rightuous. The poor is hatch even of his own neghbours, but
the rich has many friends. Who so despyseth his neghbor, does amysse: but
blessed is he that has pity of the poor. They that ymagin wickedness, shall be
disapoynted: but they that muse upon good things, unto soch shall happen mercy
and faithfulness. Dilligent labor brings riches, but where many vain words
are, truly there is scarceness.

Riches are an ornament unto the wise, but the ignorance of fools is very
foolishness. A faithful witness delyuereth so^les, but a liar dysceaueth
them. The fear^ of the LORD is a strong hold, for unto his he will be a sure
defense. The fear of the LORD is a well of life, to avoid the snares of
death. The increase and prosperity of the commons is the kings honor, but the
decay of the people is the confucio^ of the prince. Patience is a token of
wiszdome, but wrath and haistie displeasure is a token of foolishness. A merry
heart is the life of the body, but rancoure consumes away the bones. He that
does a poor man wrong, blasphemeth his maker: but who so has pity of the
poor, does honor unto God.

The ungodly is afraid of every parell, but the rightuous has a good hope
eue^ in death. Wyszdome rests in the heart of him that has understanding,
and he will teach them that are unlearned. Righteousness sets up the people,
but wickedness brings folk to destruction. A discrete servant is a
pleasure unto ye king, but one yt is not honest, provoke him unto wrath.

The XV. Chapter.
A Soft a^swere puts down displeasure, but froward words provoke unto
anger. A wise tongue commends knowledge, a foolish mouth blabbeth out nothing
but foolishness. The eyes of the LORD look in every place, both upon ye good
and badd. A wholesome tongue is a tree of life, but he that abuses it, has a
broken mind. A fool despyseth his fathers correccion, but he yt takes head
when he is reproved, shall have ye more vndersto^dinge.

In the house of the rightuous are great riches, but in the increase of the
ungodly there is mysordre. A wise mouth pours out knowledge, but ye heart of
the foolish does not so. The LORD abhors ye sacrifice of the ungodly, but
the prayer of the rightuous is acceptable unto him. The way of the ungodly is
an abhominacio^ vn^to ye LORD, but who so follows righteousness, him he
loves. He that forsakes ye ^ight street, shall be sore punyshed: and who so
hates correccion, falls in to death. The hell with her pain is known unto
the LORD, how much more then the hertes of men?

A scornful body loves not one yt rebukes him, nether will he come among ye
wise. A merry heart makes a cheerful countenance, but an unquiet mind makes
it heavy. A wise heart will seek after knowledge, but ye mouth of fools medleth
with foolishness. All the days of the poor are miserable, but a quyete heart
is as a co^tynuall feast. Better is a little with the fear of the LORD then
great treasure, for they are not without sorrow. Better is a meace of potage
with love, then a fat ox with evil will.

An angry man stereth up strife, but he yt is pacient stilleth discord. The
way of ye slothful is full of thorns, but ye street of the rightuous is
well cleansed. A wise son makes a glad father, but an indiscreet body shameth
his mother. A fool reioyseth in foolish things, but a wise man looks well to
his own goinges. Unadvised thoughts shall come to naught, but where as are men
yt can give council, there is steadfastness. O how joyful a thing is it, a
man to give a convenient answer? O how pleasant is a word spoken in due
season? The way of life ledeth unto heaven, yt a man should be war of hell
beneth.

The LORD will break down ye house of ye proud, but he shall make fast ye
borders of ye wyddowe. The LORD abhoreth ye ymaginacions of ye wicked, but
pure words are pleasant unto him. The covetous man wr^tteth up his own
house, but who so hates rewards, shall live. A rightuous man museth in his
mind how to do good, but ye mind of the ungodly ymagineth, how he may do
harm. The LORD is far from the ungodly, but he hears ye prayer of the
rightuous. Like as ye clearness of ye eyes reioyseth ye heart, so does a good
name feed ye bones. The ear yt harkeneth unto wholesome warning, and enclyneth
thereto, shall dwell among ye wise. He that refuses to ^e reformed, despyseth
his own soul: but he that submytteth himself to correccion, is wise.

The XVI. Chapter.
THe fear of ye LORD is ye right scye^ce of wyszdome, and lowlynes goes
before honor. A man may well pur^ose a thing in his heart, but ye answer of
ye tongue comes of ye LORD. Pro. 21 a Psalm. 32. b
A man thinks all his ways to be clean, but it is ye LORD yt fashioneth ye
minds. Psalm. 36. a
Commytte thy works unto ye LORD, and look what thou deuysest, it shall
prospere. The LORD does all things for his own sake, ye and when he keeps
ye ungodly for ye day of wrath.

The LORD abhors all presumptuous and proud hertes, there may nether
strength ner power escape. With loving mercy and faithfulness sins be
forgeuen, and who so fears ye LORD eschueth evil. When a man's ways please
ye LORD, he makes his very enemies to be his friends. Better is it to have a
little thing with righteousness, the^ Pro 19. c
but it is ye LORD yt ordreth his goinges. When ye prophecy is in ye lips of
ye king, his mouth shall not go wrong in judgment. A true measure and a true
balau^ce are ye LORDS, Pro. 11. a and 20* b
he makes all weightes. It is a great abhominacio^ when kings are wicked,
for a kings seat should be holden up with righteousness.

Righteous lips are pleasant unto kings, and they love him yt speaks ye
truth.

The kings displeasure is a messaunger of death, but a wise man will pacify
him.

The cherefull countenance of ye king is life, and his loving favor is as
the evening dew. Pro. 8. a
To have wyszdome in possession is better then gold, and to get
understanding,

Presumptuousnes goes before destruction, and after a proud stomach there
follows a fall. Better it is to be of humble mind with the lowly, then to
deuyde ye spoils with ye proud. He yt handles a matter wisely, opteyneth good:
and blessed is he, Psalm. 2. b
yt puts his trust in ye LORD. Who so has a wise understanding, is called
to council: but he yt can speak fair, gets more riches. Understanding is
a well of life unto him yt has it, as for ye chastenynge of fools, it is but
foolishness. The heart of the wise enfourmeth his mouth, and amendeth ye
doctrine in his lyppes.

Fair words are an honey comb, a refreshinge of ye mind, and health of ye
bones.

There is a way yt men think to be right, Pro 14. b Deuteronomy. 12. a Esa. 55. b
but the end thereof leads unto death. A troublous soul disquyeteth her
self, for her own mouth has brought her thereto. An ungodly person stereth
up evil, and in his

A froward body causes strife, and he yt is a blabbe of his tongue, makes
deuysion among princes. A wicked man begyleth his neghbor, and ledeth him ye
way yt is not good.

He that wyncketh with his eyes, ymagineth myschefe: and he yt byteth his lips,
will do some harm. Leui. 19 g
Age is a crown of worshipe, if it be found in the way of righteousness.

A pacient man is better then one that is strong: and he that can rule him
self, is more worth then he yt wynneth a cite. The lottes are cast in to the
lap, but their fall sto^deth in the LORD.

The XVII. Chapter.
Eccl^. 10. d
A discrete servant shall have more rule then the sons yt have no wisdom,
and shall have like heretage with the brethren. Sap. 3 a 1. pet. 1. b
Like as silver is tried in the fire and gold in the furnace, even so does the
LORD prove the hertes. A wicked body holds much of false lips, and a
dyssemblynge person gives ear to a disceatfull tongue. Pro. 14. d Job. 31. c
Pro 24. c
Who so laugheth ye poor to scorn, blasphemeth his maker: and he yt is glad
of another man's hurt, shall not be unpunished. Childers children are a worshipe
unto the elders, and the fathers are the honor of the children. An eloquent
speech becomes not a fool, a dyssemblinge mouth also besemeth not a prince.
^. reg. 24. c 26. b.
Who so rewards evil for good, the plage shall not depart from his house. 2.
reg. 12. c
He yt sows discord and strife, is like one yt dyggeth up a water broke: but
an open enemy is like the water yt breaks out and re^^eth LORD hates as
well him yt justifies ye ungodly, as him yt condempneth the innocent. What
helps it to give a fool money in his ho^de, where as he has no mind to bye
wyszdome? He is a friend that all way loves, and in aduersite a man shall
know who is his brother. Pro. 6. a 11. b
Who so promises by the hand, and is suertie for another, he is a fool. He
yt loves strife, delyteth in sin: and who so sets his door to hye, seeks
after a fall. Who so has a froward heart, opteyneth no good: and he yt has
an oue^rth^^^^ tongue, shall fall in to myschefe. An (...) body brings himself
in to sorrow, and ye father of a fool can have no joy. A m^^y heart makes a
lusty age, but a sorrowful ^^^de dries up ye bones. The ungodly takes gifts
out of the bosom, to wraist the waye^^ of judgment. Wyszdome shyneth in ye
face of him yt has understanding, but ye eyes ^^ fools wandre through out all
lo^des. An (...) discrete son is a grefe unto his father, (...) heaviness
unto his mother yt bare him. (...) punysh ye innocent, and to smite ye princes
^ give true judgment, are both evil. He is (...) and discrete, yt tempereth
his words: (...) he is a man of vndersto^dinge, yt makes mo^^ of his sprete.
Ye a very fool (when he hol^deth his tongue) is counted wise, and to (...)
vndersto^dinge, when he shuts his lips.

The XVIII. Chapter.
WHo so has pleasure to sow dis^^de, piketh a quarrel in every things* A
fool has no delight in vnder^^^^dinge, but only in those things wherein (...)
heart reioyseth. Where ungodliness is, the^re is also diszdayne: and so there
follows sha^me and dishonor. The words of a ma^s (...) are like deep waters,
and the well of wyszdo^me is like a full stream. It is not good (...) regard
ye person of the ungodly, or to (...) back ye righteous in judgment. A
fools lip^pes are ever brawlinge, and his mouth pro^uoketh unto battle. A
fools mouth is (...) own destruction, and his lips are ye (...) for his
own soul. The words of a slaun^derer are very wou^des, and go through unto
the ynmost parts of the body. Who so i^ slothful and slack in his labor, is
ye brother of him yt is a waister. The name of ye LORD is a strong castle,
ye righteous flies vnt^ it, and shall be saved. But ye rich ma^s good^^ are his
strong hold, ye he takes them (...) an hye wall round about him. After
(...) comes destruccio^, and honor after lowlyne^ He that gives sentence in
a matter before (...) hear it, is a fool, and worthy to be confou^^ded. A
good stomach dryueth away a (...) disease, but wha^ ye sprete is vexed, who
may^ abide it? A wise heart labors for know^lege, and a prudent ear seeks
vnderstondi^^ge. Liberalite brings a man to honor and worshipe, and sets
him among great (...)*

The righteous accuses hi^ self first of all if his neghbor come, he shall
find him. The lot pacifieth ye variau^ce, and parts ye might^ asunder. The
unite of brethren is stronge^ then a castle, and they that hold together are
like the bar of a palace. A man's belly shall be satisfied with the fruit of his
own mouth, and with the increase of his lips shall he be filled. Death and
life stand in the power of the tongue, he that loves it, shall enjoy the fruit
thereof. (...)
Who so fyndeth a wife fyndeth a good thing, and receaueth an wholesome
benefit of the LORD. The poor makes supplicacion and prays mekely, but
the rich gives a rough answer.

A friend that delyteth in love, does a man more fre^dshipe, and sticks
faster unto him then a brother.

The XIX. Chapter.
(...)
Where no discrecion is, there the soul is not well: and who so is swifte on
foot, stombleth hastily. Foolishness makes a man to go out of his way, and
then is his heart impatient against the LORD. Riches make many friends, but
the poor is forsaken of his own friends. (...)
A false witness shall not remain unpunished, and he that speaks lies shall
not escape. The multitude ha^geth upon great men, and every man favors him
that gives rewards. As for the poor, he is hated among all his brethren:
ye his own friends forsake him, and he that gives crede^ce unto words,
gets nothing.

(...)
The kings disfauor is like ye roaringe of a Lyo^, but his fre^dshpe is like
the dew upon ye grass. (...)
An indiscreet son is ye heaviness of his father, and a braulynge wife is like
the topp of an house, where through it is ever droppynge. House and riches may
a man have by ye heretage of his elders, (...)
but a discrete woman LORD. Slouthfulnes brings sleep, and an ydell soul
shall suffer ho^ger. Who so keeps the commandment, keeps his own soul: but
he yt regards not his way, shall dye. He yt has pity upon the poor,
le^deth unto ye LORD: and look what he lays out, it shall be paid him again.
Chaste^ ye son while there is hope, but let not ye soul be moved to slaye
hi^. For great wrath brings harm, therefore let him go, and so may thou
teach him more nurtoure. O give ear unto good council, and be content to be
reformed, that thou may bewyse here after. There are many devices in a ma^s
heart, Pro. 16. b
nevertheless the counsel of ye LORD shall sto^de. It is a man's worshipe to do
good, and better it is to be a poor man, then a dyssembler. The fear of the
LORD preserves the life, ye it gives ple^teousnes, without the visitacio^
Pro. 26. ^
A slothful body shuteth his hand in to his bosom, so yt he can not put it
to his mouth. If thou smytest a scorneful person, Pro. 21. b
the ignorant shall take better head: and if thou reprouest one yt has
understanding, he will be ye wyser. He yt hurts his father or shuteth out his
mother, is a shameful and an unworthy sonne^ My son, hear no more the
doctrine yt leads the away from the words of understanding.

A false wytnes laugheth judgment to scorn, and the mouth of the ungodly
eats up wickedness. Punyshmentes are ordened for the scornful, and stripes
for fools backs.

The XX. Chapter.
Wine is a voluptuous thing, and dro^ckennes Ephe. 5. ^ 3. Esd. 3. ^
who so delyte^h therein, shall never be wise. The king ought to be feared as
the roaringe of a lion, Pro. 24. ^
who so provoke him unto anger, offends against his own soul. It is a
man's honor to keep himself from strife, but they yt have pleasure in
braulinge, are fools eueryone. A slothful body will not go to plowe for
cold, therefore shall he go abegginge in Summer, and have nothing. Wise
council in the heart of man is like a water in the deep of the earth, but he
that has understanding, brings it forth. Many there be that are called good
doers, but where shall one find a true faithful man? Who so ledeth a godly and
an innocent life, happy shall his children be, Psalm. 36
whom he leaves behind him.

A king that sytteth in judgment, and looks 1. Ioh. 1. b
I am innocent from sin? To use two manner of weightes, or two manner of
measures, both these are abominable unto the LORD.

A child is known by his conversation, whether his works be pure and right.
As for the hearing of the ear and the sight of ye eye, ye LORD has made
the^ both. Delight not thou in sleep, lest thou come unto pouerte: but open
thine eyes, and thou shall have bred enough. It is naught, It is naught (say
men) when they have it, but when it is gone, they give it a good word.

A mouth of vndersto^dinge is more worth then gold, many precious stones, and
costly Jewels. (...). 6. a (...) 27. b
Take his garment that is suertie

Through council the things that men deuyse go forward: and with discrecion
ought wars to be taken in hand. Meddle not with him that bewrays secrets,
and is a slaunderer, and disceaueth with his lips. Who so curses his father
and mother, (...). 20. b (...). 20. b (...) 21. b ^eu. 27. c Re. 15. a (...).
5. e (...). 12. c
his light shall be put out in the myddest of darcknesse. The heretage that
comes to haistely at the first, shall not be praised at the end. Say not
thou: I will recompense evil, LORD, and he shall defend ye. (...). 20. b
The LORD abhors two manner of weightes, and a false balau^ce is an evil
thing. (...). 10. d
The LORD ordreth every ma^s goinges, for what is he, that understands his
own ways? It is a snare for a man to blaspheme that which is holy, and then
to go about with vows. Reg. 15
A wise king destroys ye ungodly, and brings the whele ^uer them. The
lantern of ye LORD is ye breath of man, and goes through all the inward
parts of the body. (...). 29. b
Mercy and faithfulness preserve the king, and with loving kyndnes his feate
is holden up. The strength of young men is their worshipe, and a gray head, is
an honor unto ye aged. Wounds drive away evil, and so do stripes the inward
parts of the body.

The XXI. Chapter.
LORD, ^. Reg. 1. c
like as are the ryuers of water: he may turn it whyther so ever he will.
Every man thinks his own way to be right, but the LORD judges ye hertes.
Mich. 6. b
To do righteousness and judgment is more acceptable to the LORD the^
sacrifice.

A presumptuous look, a proud stomach, and the lantern of the ungodly is
sin. The deuyses of one that is diligent, bring plenteousnes: but he yt is
unadvised, comes un to pouerte. Who so hoordeth up riches with ye disceatfulnes
of his tongue, he is a fool, and like unto them that seek their own death. The
robberies of the ungodly shall be their own destruction, for they would not do
the ^it. 1. c (...). 25. d
but ye works of him yt is clean, are right. It is better to dwell in a
corner under ye house top, then with a braulinge woman in a wide house.

The soul of the ungodly wysheth evil, and has no pity upon his neighbor.

When the scornful is punyshed, the ignorant take ye better head: and when a
wise man is warned, he will receive the more understanding. The rightuous
enfourmeth the house of the ungodly, but ye ungodly go on still after their
own wickedness. Who so stops his ear at the crie^ge of the poor, he shall
cry himself and not be herd. (...)
A preuy reward pacifieth displeasure, and a gift in the bosom stilleth
furiousness.

The just delyteth in doing the thing that is right, but the workers of
wickedness abhor the same. The man that wandreth (...)
Who so delyteth in wine and delicates, shall not be rich. The ungodly shall be
given for the rightuous, and the wicked for the just.

It is better to dwell in a wilderness, (...)
the^ with a chydinge and an angry woman. In a wise man's house there is great
treasure and plenteousnesse, but a foolish body spends up all. Who so
follows righteousness and mercy, fyndeth both life, righteousness and honor.
A wise man wynneth the cite of the mighty, and as for the strength yt they
trust in, he brings it down. Who so (...)
the same keeps his soul from troubles. He yt is proud and presumptuous, is
called a scornful man, which in wrath darre work maliciously.

The voluptuousness of the slothful is his own death, for his hands will
not labor.

He coueteth and desires all the day long, but the rightuous is allwaye
geuynge and keeps nothing back. (...)
The sacrifice of the ungodly is abhominacion, for they offer the thing yt is
gotten with wickedness. (...)
A false witness shall perish, but he yt will be content to hear, shall allwaye
have power to speak himself. An ungodly man goes forth rashly, but the just
refourmeth his own way.

There is no wyszdome, (...)
there is no understanding, there is no council against the LORD. The horse
is prepared against ye day of battayll, but the LORD gives the victory.

The XXII. Chapter.
A Good name is more worth then great riches, (...)
and loving favor is better then silver and gold. Whether riches or pouerte
do mete us, it comes all of God. A wise man seyth the plage and hydeth
himself, but the foolish go on still and are punyshed. The end of lowlynes and
the fear of God, is riches, honor, prosperity and health. Spears and snares
are in ye way of the froward, but he yt will keep his soul, let him fle from
soch. If thou reachest a child in his youth what way he should go, he shall
not leave it when he is old. The rich rules the poor, and ye borower is
servant to ye lender. He yt sows wickedness, shall reap sorrow, and the
rod of his plage shall destroy him. (...)
A loving eye shall be blessed, for he gives of his bred unto ye poor. Cast
out ye

The eyes of ye LORD preserve knowledge, but as for ye words of ye despyteful,
he brings them to naught. The slothful body says: there is a lyo^ with out,
I might be slayue in ye street. The mouth of an harlot is a deep pytt, (...)
wherein he falls that ye LORD is angry withal. Foolishnes sticks in the
heart of ye lad, but ye rod of correccion drives it away. Who so does a poor
man wrong to increase his own riches, gives (como^ly) LORD. Have not I
warned ye very often with council and lerninge? yt I might show ye the treuth
and that thou with the verite might answer them yt lay any thing against
ye? Se yt thou rob not ye poor because he is weak, and oppress not ye
simple in judgment: for ye LORD himself will defend their cause, and

Make no fre^dshipe with an angry wylfull man, and keep no company with ye
furious: lest thou learn his ways, and receive hurt unto thy soul. (...)
Be not thou one of them yt bind the^r hand upon promise, and are suertie for
dett: for if thou have nothing to pay, they shall take away thy bed from
under the. Thou shall not remove the land marcke, (...)
which thy fore elders have set. Seist thou not, yt they which be diligent in
their business stand before kings, and not among the simple people?

The XXIII Chapter


Take not over great travail and labor to be rich, bewarre of soch a
purpose. Eccl. 27. Iere 17. b 1. Tim. 6 ^
Why will thou set thine eye upon ye thing, which suddenly vanishes away? For
riches make them selves wings, and take their flight like an Aegle in to ye
air. Eat not thou with ye envyous, and desire no his meat, for he has a
marvelous heart. He says unto ye: eat and drink, where as his heart is not
with ye. Ye ye morsels that thou have eaten shall thou perbreake, and lose those
sweet words. Tell nothing in to ye ears of a fool, for he will despise the
wyszdome of thy words. Remove not ye old land mark, Pro. 22. d
and come not within ye field of the fatherless: For he yt delivers them is
mighty, even he shall defend their cause against the. Apply thine Pro. 13. c
^ccl^. 30.
Witholde not correccion from ye child, for if thou beatest him with the rod,
he shall not dye thereof. Thou smytest him with the rod, but thou delyuerest his
soul from hell. My son, if ye heart receive wyszdome, my heart also shall
rejoice: ye myreynes shall be very glad, if ye lyppes speak the thing yt is
right. Pro. 24 ^ and. c
Let not thine heart be gelous to follow sinners, but keep ye still in the
fear of the LORD all the day long: for the end is not yet come, and thy
pacient abydinge shall not be in vain. My son, ne ear and be wise, so shall
thine heart prospere in the way. Keep no company with wine bebbers and ryotous
eaters of flesh: for soch as be dronckardes and ryotous, Pro. 22. c
shall come to pouerte, and he that is given to much sleep, shall go with a ragged
cote. Give ear unto thy father that begat the, and despise not thy mother when
she is old. Labor for to get ye treuth: sell not away wyszdome, nourt or and
vndersto^dinge (for a righteous father is marvelous glad of a wise son, and
delyteth in hi^) so shall thy father be glad, and thy mother that bare the, shall
rejoice. My son, give me Pro. 22. b
and an harlot is a narow pytt. She lurketh like a thief, and those that be not
awarre she bri^geth unto her. Where is woe? where is sorrow? where is strife?
where is braulynge? where are wounds without cause? where be reed eyes? Even
among those that be ever at the wine, and seek out where the best is. Look not
thou upon the wine, how reed it is, and what a color it gives in the glass.

It goes down softly, but at the last it byteth like a serpent, and styngeth
as an Adder.

So shall thine eyes look unto strange women, and thine heart shall muse upon
froward things. Ye thou shall be as though thou slepte, in ye myddest of ye
see, or upon ye top of the mast. They wounded me (shall thou say) but it
has not hurt me, they smote me, but I felt it not. When I am well wakened, I
will go to ye drink again.

The XXIIII. Chapter.
Pro. 23. b ^4. c


For their heart ymagineth to do hurt, and their lips talk of myschefe.
Through wyszdome an house shall be builded, and with understanding it shall be set
up. Through discrecion shall ye cha^bers be filled with all costly and pleasant
riches* A wise man is strong, ye a man of vndersto^dinge is better, the^ he
yt is mighty of strength. For with discrecion must wars be taken in hand,
and where as are many yt can give council, there is ye victory. Wyszdome is an
hie thing, ye eue^ to ye fool, for he darre not open his mouth in ye gate.
He yt ymagineth myschefe, may well be called an ungracious person. The
thought of ye foolish is sin, and ye scornful Psalm. 33. c 3^ d
For a just man falls seven times, and ryseth up again, but ye ungodly fall
in to wickedness. Rejoice not thou at ye fall of thine enemy, Pro. 17. a
and let not thine heart be glad when he stombleth.

Lest ye LORD (when he seyth it) be angry, and turn his wrath from him unto
the. Pro. 23. b 24. a
Let not ye wrath and gelousy move ye, to foolow ye wicked and ungodly. And
why? ye wicked has nothing to hope for, Job 21. b Pro 13. a Pro. 20. a
and ye ca^dle of the ungodly shall be put out. My son, fear thou ye LRODE
and ye king, and keep no company with ye slanderous: for their destruction shall
come suddenly, and who knows ye fall of the^ both?

These are also ye saie^ges of ye wise.

It is not good, (...)
to have respect of any person in judgment. He yt says to ye ungodly: thou
art rightuous, him shall the people curse, ye ye como^tie shall abhor him.
But they yt rebuke ye ungodly shall be commended, and a rich blessinge shall come
upon the^. He makes him self to be well loved, that gives a good answer.
First make up ye work yt is with out, and look well unto yt which thou have in
ye field, and the^ build thine house. Be no false witness against ye neghbor,
and hurt him not with ye lyppes Say not: (...)
I will handle him, eue^ as he has dealte with me, and will reward every man
acordinge to his deeds. I went by ye field of ye slothful, and by ye
vynyarde of the foolish man. And lo, it was all covered with nettels, and stood
full of thistles, and ye stone wall was broken down. This I saw, and
considered it well: I looked upon it, and took it for a warning. Ye sleep on
still a little, (...)
slo^bre a little, fold thine ho^des together yet a little: so shall pouerte
come unto the as one yt trauayleth by ye way, and necessite like a wapened man.

The XXV. Chapter.
THese also are Salomons prouerbe^, which the men of Ezechias king of Judah
gathered together. It is the honor of God to keep a thing secret, (...)
but ye kings honor is to search out a thing. The heaven is hie, ye earth is
deep, and ye kings heart is unsearchable. Take ye dross from ye silver, and
there shall be a clean vessel thereof. Take away ungodliness from ye king,
and his seat shall be stablished with righteousness.

Put not forth yt self in ye presence of ye king, and prease not in to ye
place of great men.

Better it is yt it be said unto ye: (...)
come up hither, then thou to be set down in ye presence of ye prince, whom
thou seyst with thine eyes. Be not haistie to go to the law, lest happlie thou
order yi self so at ye last, yt thy neghbor put ye to shame. Handle thy matter
with yi neghbor himself, and discover not another man's secret: lest when men
hear thereof, it turn to ye dishonor, and lest thine evil name do not cease.
A word spoken in due season, is like apples of gold in a silver dyshe.

The correccion of the wise is to an obedient ear, a golden cheyne and a Jewel
of gold. Like as the winter cool in the harvest, so is a faithful messaunger
to him that sent him, and refreszsheth his masters mind.

Who so makes great boastes and gives nothing, is like clouds and wind
without rain. With patience may a prince be pacified, and with a soft tongue
may rigorousnes be broken. If thou find honey, eat so much as is sufficient
for ye: lest thou be over full, and per break it out again. Withdraw ye
foot from thy neghbours house, lest he be weery of the, and so abhor the.
Who so bears false witness against his neighbor, he is a very spear, a
swearde and a sharp arowe. The hope of the ungodly in time of need, is like a
rotten toth and a slippery foot. Who so syngeth a song to a wicked heart,
clotheth hi^ with rags in the cold, and pours vyneger (...)
if he thyrst, give him drink: for so shall thou heap coals of fire upon his
head, and the LORD shall reward the. The north wind dryueth away the rain,
even so does an earnest sober countenance a back byters tongue. It is better to
sit in a corner under the rofe, (...)
then with a braulynge woman in a wide house. A good report out of a far
country, is like cold water to a thyrstie soul. A righteous man falling
down before the ungodly, is like a troubled well and a spring yt is
destroyed. Like as it is not good to eat to much honey, (...)
even so he that will search out hye things, it shall be to heavy for him. He
that can not rule himself, is like a cite, which is broken down, and has no
walls.

The XXVI. Chapter.
(...)
to the Ass a bridle, and a rod to the fools back. Give not the fool an
answer after his foolishness, lest thou become like unto him: but make ye
fool an answer to his foolishness, lest he be wise in his own co^ceate. He
is lame of his fete, ye droncken is he in vanite, that commits any thing
to a fool. Like as it is an unseemly thing to have legs and yet to halte,
eue^ so is a parable in ye fools mouth.

He yt sets a fool in hye dignite, yt is eue^ as if a man did cast a
precious stone upon ye (...)
even so a fool begins his foolishness again a fresh. If thou seyest a
man yt is wise in his own conceate, there is more hope in a fool then in hi^.
(...)
The slothful says: there is a leoparde in ye way, and a lion in ye
myddest of the streets. Like as the door turns about upon the tresholde,
even so does the slothful we^ter himself in his bed. The slothful body
thrusts his ho^de in to his bosom, Pro. 19. d
and it greueth him to put it again to his mouth. The slogarde thinks him
self wyser, then vij. men that sytt and teach.

Who so goes by and medleth with other men's strife, he is like one yt takes a
dog by ye ears. Like as one shuteth deadly arowes Psalm. 10. a
even so does a dyssembler with his neighbor, And then says he: I did it but
in sport. Where no wodd is, there the fire goes out: Eccli. 28.
and where the bacbyter is taken away, there the strife cease. Coals kyndle
heat, and wodd ye fire: even so does a braulinge fellow stere up variaunce^ A
slaunderers words are like flatery, but they pearse ye inward parts of ye
body. Venymous lips and a wicked heart, are like a potsherde covered with
silver dross. An enemy dyssembleth with his lips, and in the mean season
he ymagineth myschefe: but wha^ he speaks fair, believe him not, for there
are seven abhominacio^s in his heart. Who so keeps evil will secretly to do
hurt, his malice shall be showed before the whole congregation. Eccl^. 10.
Eccli. 27
Who so dyggeth up a pytt, shall fall therein: and he yt weltreth a stone, shall
stomble upon it himself.

A dyssemblynge tongue hates one that rebukes him, and a flateri^ge mouth
works myschefe.

The XXVII. Chapter.
TAke not thy boost of tomorow, for thou know not what may happen Eze. 28.
a Luc. 12. b Iaco. 4.
Let another man praysethe, and not thine own mouth: ye other folks lips,
and not thine. Eccli. 22
The stone is heavy, and the sonde weighty: but a fools wrath is heuyer then
they both. Wrath is a cruel thing, and furiousness is a very tempest: ye
who is able to abide envye? An open rebuke is better, then a secret love. Psa.
14^. Luc. 22.
Faithful are the wounds of a lover, but ye kysses of an enemy are
disceatfull. He that is full, abhors an honey comb: but unto him that is
ho^grie, every sower thing is sweet. He that often times flytteth, is like a
bird yt forsakes her nest. The heart is glad of a sweet ointment and sauoure,
but a stomach that ca^ give good council, reioyseth a man's neighbor. Thine
own friend

Better is a friend at ho^de, then a brother far of. My son, be wise, and
thou shall make me a glad heart: so that I shall make answer unto my rebukers.
A wise man seeing the plage will hyde him self, as for fools they go on still,
Pro. 10. c
and suffer harm. Take his garment that is suertie for a stranger, and take a
pledge of him for the unknown man's sake. He that is to hasty to praise his
neighbor above measure, shall be taken as one yt gives him an evil report.
Pro. 19. b
A brawling woman and the rofe of the house droppynge in a raynie day, may
well be compared together. He that refrayneth her, refrayneth the wind, and
holds oil fast in his Pro. ^^* ^ Eccls. 1. a ^ccli^. 14. a ^cci^. 27. b
Like as hell and destruction are never full, even so the eyes of me^ can never
be satisfied. Silver is tried in the moulde, and gold in the furnace, and so
is a man, when he is openly praised to his face. Though thou should bray a
fool with a pestell in a mortar like otemeell, yet will not his foolishness go
from him. Se yt thou know the nombre of thy catell thy self, Ioh. 10. a
and look well to thy flocks. For riches abide not allwaye, and the crown
endures not for ever. The hay grows, ye grass comes up, and herbs are
gathered in ye mountains.

The lambs shall clothe the, and for the goats thou shall have money to ye
huszbondry.

Thou shall have goats mylck enough to feed the, to uphold thy husholde, and
to sustain thy maidens.

The XXVIII. Chapter.
^eui. 26. c
but the rightuous stondeth stiff as a lion. Because of sin ye land does often
change her prince: but through men of understanding and wyszdome a realm
endures long. One poor man oppressinge another by violence, is like a
contynuall rain that destroys ye fruit. They that forsake the law, praise
ye ungodly: but soch as keep the law, abhor them. Wicked men discern not
the thing yt is right, Cor. 2. b
but they that seek after the LORD, discuss all things. Pro. 19. a
A poor man ledynge a godly life, is better then the rich that goes in
froward ways. Who so keeps the law, is a child of understanding: but he
yt fedeth (...)
He that turns away his ear from hearing ye law, his prayer shall be
abhorred. Who so ledeth ye rightuous in to an evil way, shall fall in to his
own pytt, but ye just shall have the good in possession.

The rich man thinks him self to be wise, but the poor that has
understanding, ca^ perceive him well enough. (...)
When rightuous men are in prosperity, the^ does honor flourish: but when the
ungodly come up, ye state of men changes. He that hydeth his sins, shall
not prospere: but who so knowlegeth them and forsakes them, shall have mercy.
Well is him that sto^deth all way in awe: as for him that hardens his heart,
he shall fall in to mischefe. Like as a roaringe lion and an hongrie beer, even
so

Where the prince is without understanding, there is great oppression and
wrong: but if he be soch one as hates covetousness, he shall long reign.
(...)
He that by violence sheddeth any man's blood, shall be a rennagate unto his
grave, and no man shall be able to sucor him. (...)
Who so leads a godly and an innocent life, shall be safe: but he that goes
froward ways, shall once have a fall. He yt tylleth his land, (...)
shall have plenteousnesse of bred: but he that follows ydilnesse, shall have
pouerte enough. A faithful man is greatly to be commended, but he that makes
to much haist for to be rich, (...)
shall not be unguilty. To have respect of persons in judgment is not good:
And why? he will do wrong, ye even for a piece of bred. He that will be rich
all to soon, (...)
and says it is no sin: the same is like unto a mortherer.

He that is of a proud stomach, stereth up strife: but he that puts his
trust in ye LORD, shall be well fedd. He that trusts in his own heart, is a
fool: (...)
but he that deals wisely, shall be safe. He that gives unto the poor, shall
not want: but he that turns away his eyes from soch as be in necessite,
shall suffer great pouerte himself.

When the ungodly are come up, (...)
men are feign to hyde them selves: but when they perish, the rightuous
increase.

The XXIX. Chapter.
(...)
ye people are in prosperity: but where the ungodly bears rule, there ye
people mourn. Who so loves wyszdome, (...)
makes his father a glad man: but he yt keeps harlottes, spe^deth away yt he
has. With true judgment ye king sets up the land, but if he be a man yt
takes gifts, he turns it vpsyde down. Who so flatreth his neghbor, lays
a net for his fete. The sin of ye wicked is his own snare, but ye
righteous shall be glad and rejoice. The righteous considreth the cause of the
poor, but the ungodly regards no understanding. Wicked people bring a cite
in decay, but wise men set it up again. If a wise man go to law with a fool
(whether he deal with him friendly or roughly) he gets

If a prince delight in lies, all his servants are ungodly. The poor and the
lender mete together, the LORD lighteneth both their eyes. The seat of the
king yt faithfully judges the poor, (...)
shall continue sure for evermore. The rod and correccion mynistre wyszdome,
but if a child be not looked unto, he brings his mother to shame. When the
ungodly come up, wickedness increases: but the rightuous shall se their fall.
Nurtoure thy son with correccion, and he shall comfort the, ye he shall do
the good at thine heart. Where no prophet is, there the people perish: but well
is

If thou seyst a man that is haistie to speak unadvised, thou may trust a
fool more then him. He that delicately brings up his servant from a child,
shall make him his master at length. An angry man stereth up strife, and he
that bears evil will in his mind, does much evil. After pride comes a
fall, (...)
but a lowly sprete brings great worshipe. Who so keeps company with a thief,
hates his own soul: he hears blasphemies, and tells it not forth.

He that fears men, shall have a fall: but who so puts his trust in the
LORD, shall come to honor. Many there be that seek ye princes favor, but
every man's judgment comes from the LORD.

The rightuous abhor the ungodly: but as for those that be in ye right way,
ye wicked hate them.

The XXX. Chapter. The words of Agur the son of Iake.
THe prophecy of a true faithful man,

Who has holden ye wind fast in his hand? Who has comprehended ye waters in
a garment? Who has set all the ends of ye world? What is his name, or his
sons name? Can thou tell? Psalm 17. c 1^. b. 118. ^
All the words of God are pure and clean, for he is a shylde unto all them,
that put their trust in him. (...)
Put thou nothing therefore unto his words, lest he reprove the, and thou be
found as a liar.

Two things I require of the, that thou will not deny me before I dye. Remove
fro me vanite and lies: give me nether pouerte ner riches, only grant me a
necessary living. Lest if I be to full, I deny ye, and say: Deuteronomy. 8. c and
31. e Exo. 5. a Job 21^ b Eccli^. 27. ^
what fellow is ye LORD? And lest I being constrained through pouerte, fall
unto stealinge, and forswear the name of my God.

Accuse not a servant unto his master,

The generation that think them selves clean, shall not be cleansed from their
fylthynesse. There are people yt have a proud look, and cast up their eye
lyddes. This peoples tethe are swerdes, and with their chaft bones they consume
and devour the simple of the earth, and the poor from among me^.

This generation (which is like an horsleche) has two daughters: ye one is
called, fetch hither: the other, bring hither.

There be three things that are never satisfied, and the fourth says never
hoo. The hell, a woman's womb, Pro^ 27. c
and the earth has never water enough. As for fire, it says never: hoo. Who
so laugheth his father to scorn, Exo. 21. b Deu* 27.
and sets his mothers commandment at naught: the ravens pycke out his eyes
in the valley, and devoured be he of the yongle Aegles.

There be three things to hye for me, Sap. 5. b
and as for the fourth, it passes my knowledge.

The way of an Aegle in ye air, ye way of a serpent over ye stone, ye way
of a ship in ye see, and ye way of a man with a young woman. Soch is the way
also of a wife yt breaks wedlock, which wypeth her mouth like as wha^ she
has eaten, and says: As for me, I have ^ro. 6. a
yet gather they their meat together in ye harvest.

The conyes are but a feeble folk, yet make they their couches among the
rocks. The greshoppers have not a gyde, yet go they forth together by heaps.
The spyder labors with her hands, and yt in ye kings palace.

There be three things yt go stiftly, but the goinge of the fourth is the
goodliest of all. A Lion which is king of beasts, and gives place to no man:
A cock ready to fight: A ra^me: And a king yt goes forth with his people.

If thou be so foolish to magnify ye self, or medlest with any soch thing, the^
lay thine hand upon ye mouth. Who so chyrneth mylck, makes butter: he that
rubbeth his nose, makes it blede, and he that causes wrath, brings forth
strife.

The XXXI. Chapter.




She will do him good and not euel all ye days of her life. She occupies woll
and flax, and labors gladly with her hands. She is like^ a merchants
ship, that brings her

She opens her hand to ye poor, ye she stretches forth her hands to soch
as have need. She fears not yt the cold of winter shall hurt her house, for
all her household folks are duble clothed. She makes her self fair
orname^tes, her clothi^ge is white sylke and purple. Her huszba^de is much set
by in ye gates, when he sytteth among ye rulers of ye land. She makes cloth
of sylke and sells it, and delyuereth a gyrdle unto ye merchant.

Strength and honor is her clothinge, and in the latter day she shall
rejoice. She opens her mouth with wyszdome, and in her tongue is the law of
grace. She looks well to the ways of her household, and eats not her bred
with ydilnes. Her children arise and call her blessed, and her huszbande makes
much of her. Many daughters there be yt gather riches together, but thou go
above the^ all. As for favor, it is disceatfull, and beutie is a vain thing:
but a woman that fears the LORD, she is worthy to be praised. Give her of
the fruit of her hands, and let her own works praise her in the gates.

The end of the proverbs of Solomon.
Ecclesiastes.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I. All things (if a man will consider them well) are but vanite.
Nevertheless among them all there is nothi^ge weaker and more unsteadfast, then
man him self. Chap. II. In this chapter (and in the other also) he makes often
times me^sion of the words and co^uersacio^ of the ungodly: that by this
means he may the better cause men to despise all creatures, in respect of
the only everlasting God. Chap. III. Every thing has a time. There is no
thing, but God has put tedyousnesse and travail in it, to exercise men
withal. What so ever a man enjoys of his labor, the same is a gift of God,
given to the intent that men should fear him. Chap. IIII. A co^sideracion of
diverse things. There is nothing so excellent and hye, but if it do not the
deuty and office where unto it is ordened, it shall be brought low. Chap. V.
Against foolish and temerarious vows. Let no man maruayle that so much evil
is done, for the wicked are many. Against the rich and against riches. Chap.
VI. Against those rich me^ that dar^e not enjoy their riches: how mad and
foolish they be. Chap. VII. No man knows what is for to come. How worthy a
thing it is to have a good name. The profit of wyszdome. Chap. VIII. Of the
obedience which men owe unto God and to their heads. The long sufferaunce of
God is not to be despised. It is not possible for any man, to co^prehende the
works that be in the world. Chap. IX. Like things happen unto all men:
therefore with mirth and thankfulness should men enjoy the gifts of God.
Wyszdome passes all things. Chap. X.XI In these two chapters are many wise
and profitable sentences, well worthy to be considered of every man. Chap. XII.
In this chapter the preacher shows his whole meaning, as though he would
say: As for all the things that be under the Son (where of I have spoken) I
have considered them, and proved them metely well by experience. And this is the
conclucion, that there is nothing steadfast and durable but God himself, who^
men ought to fear, and to have his commandments before their eyes even from
their youth up
The first Chapter. These are the words of the Preacher, the son of David,
king of Jerusalem.
ALl is but vanite (says ye preacher) Eccl^ 12. b
For what else has a man, of all the labor yt he takes under the Son? One
generacio^ passes away, another comes, but the earth a bydeth still. The
Son aryseth, the Son goes down, and returns to his place, yt he may
there rise up again. The wind goes toward ye South, and fetches his
co^pase about unto the North, and so turns in to himself again. All floudes
run in to the sea, Job 14. b
and yet the sea is not filled: for look unto what place the ^^ters run,
thence they come again. All things are so hard, yt no man can express them.
The eye is not satisfied with sight, Pro. 27. c Eccli^. 14. Eccls. 3. ^
the ear is not filled with hearing. The thing yt has been, comes to pass
again: and ye thing

Thus I have considered all the things ^. Pet 3. b and 4. c
I am come to a great estate, and have gotten more wyszdome, the^ all they yt
have been before me in Jerusalem. Ye my heart had great experience of wyszdome
and knowledge, for there unto I applied my mind: yt I might know what were
wyszdome and vndersto^dinge, what were error and foolishnes. And I perceived yt
this also was but a vexacion of mind: for where much wyszdome is, there is
also great travail and disquietnes: and ye more knowledge a man has, the more
is his care.

The II. Chapter.
THe^ said I thus in my heart: Now go

So I thought in my heart, to withdraw my flesh from wine, to apply my mind
unto wyszdome, and to comprehe^de foolishnes until the time that (among all
ye things which are under ye Son) I might se what were best for men to do,
so long as they live under heaven.

^eg. 3.4 6.7
I made gorgious fair works, I builded me houses, and planted vynyardes: I
made me ortchardes and gardens of pleasure, and planted trees in them of all
manner fruits. I made poles of water, to water ye grene and fruitful trees
withal. ^eg. 4.9
I bought servants and mayde^s, and had a great household. As for catell and
sheep, I had more substance of them, then all they yt were before me in
Jerusalem. I gathered silver and gold together, even a treasure of kings and
lands.



(...)


So I turned me to refrain my mind (...)
For who may eat, drink, or bring any thing to pass without him? And why?
he gives unto man, what it pleases him: whether it be wyszdome*
understanding, or gladness. But unto the sinner he gives weerynes and sorrow,
that he may gather and heap together ye thing, yt afterward shall be given
unto him whom it pleases God. This is now a vain thing, ye a very
disquietnesse and vexacio^ of mind.

The III. Chapter.
EVery thing has a time, ye all that is under the heaven, has is convenient
season. There is a time to be borne, and a time to dye. (...)
There is a time to pla^te, and a time to pluck up the thing, yt is planted:
A time to slaye, and a time to make whole: A time to break down, and a time
to build up: A time to weep, and a time to laugh: A time to mourn, and a time
to daunse: A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together: A
time to enbrace, and a time to refrain from enbracynge: A time to win, and a
time to lose: A time to spare, and a time to spend: A time to cut in pieces,
and a time to sow together: A time to keep syle^ce, and a time to speak: (...)
A time to love, and a time to hate: A time of war, and a time of peace.

What has a man else (that does any thing) but weerynesse and labor? For as
touching the travail and carfulness which God has given unto me^, I se
that he has given it them, to be exercised in it. All this has he ordened
marvelous goodly, to every thing his due time. He has planted ignorance also
in the hertes of men, yt they should not find out ye ground of his works,
which he does from ye beginning to ye end. So I perceived, yt in these
things there is nothing better for a man, the^ to be merry and to do well so
long as he lives. For all yt a man eats and drynketh, ye what so ever a
man enjoys of all his labor, ye same is a gift of God. I considered also yt
what so ever God does, it continues for ever, and yt nothing can be put unto
it ner taken from it: and yt God does it to ye intent, yt men should fear him.
(...)
The thing yt has been, is now: and the thing yt is for to come, has been
before time, for God restores again the thing

Then thought I in my mind: God shall separate the rightuous from the ungodly,
and then shall be the time and judgment of all councels and works. I co^moned
with mine own heart also concerning the children of men: how God has chosen
them, and yet lets the^ apeare, as though they were beasts: for it
happens unto men as it does unto beasts, and as the one dies, so dies ye
other: ye they have both one manner of breath, so yt (in this) a man has no
preemynence above a be, but all are subdued unto vanite. They go all unto
one place, for as they be all of dust, so shall they all turn unto dust again.

(...)
Who knows the sprete of man yt goes upward, and the breath of the beast yt
goes down in to the earth? Wherefore I perceive, yt there is nothyinge better
for a man, then to be joyful in his labor, for that is his portion. But who
will bring him to se the thing, that shall come after him?

The IIII. Chapter.
(...)
and behold, the tears of soch as were oppressed, and there was no man to
comfort them, or that would deliver and defend them from the violence of
their oppressors. Wherefore I judged those that are deed, to be more happy
then soch as be alive: ye him that is yet unborn to be better at ease the^
they both, because he seith not the miserable works that are done under the
Son. Again, I saw that all travail and diligence of labor was hated of
every man. This is also a vain thing, and a vexacion of mind. The fool
foldeth his hands together, and eats up his own flesh. One handful (says
he) is better with rest, the^ both ye hands full with labor and travail.
Morouer, I turned me, and Gen* 41. b 1. Re. 16. c 3. Re. 12. c 2. Par 33. c 4.
Re. 25. a
Some one comes out of preson, and is made a king: and another which is
borne in the kingdom, comes unto pouerte. And I perceived, yt all men
living under the Son, go with the second child, that comes up in the
stead of the other. As for the people that have been before him, and that come
after him, they are innumerable: yet is not their joy the greater through him.
This is also a vain thing and a vexacion of mind. When thou come in to
the house of God, keep thy foot, and draw nigh, that thou may hear: that is
better then the offeringes of fools, 1. Reg. 15. c
for they know not what evil they do.

The V. Chapter.
BE not hasty with thy mouth, and let Deu. 23. d Baruc. 6. ^
If thou make a vow unto God, be not slack to perform it. As for foolish
vows, he has no pleasure in them. If thou promise any thing, pay it: for
better it is that thou make no vow, then that thou should promise, and not
pay. Use not thy mouth to cause ye flesh for to sin, yt thou say not before
the angel: my foolishness is in ye fault.

For the^ God will be angry at thy voice, and destroy all ye works of thine
hands.

And why? where as are many dreams and many words, there are also diverse
vanities: Eccl^. 4. a
but look yt thou fear God. If thou seyst the poor to be oppressed and
wrongeously dealt withal, so ye equite and the right of the law is wraisted
in the land: marvel not thou at soch judgment, for one great man keeps
touch with another, and the mighty help the^ selves together. The whole land
also with the feldes and all that is therein, is in subieccion and bondage unto
ye king.

Job 20. c
but the abundaunce of the rich will not suffer him to sleep.

Yet is there a sore plage, which I have seen under the Son (namely) riches
kept to the hurt of him yt has them in possession.

Job 1. c
For often times they perish with his great m^sery and trouble: and if he have a
child, it gets nothing. Like as he came naked out of his mothers womb, so
goes he thither again, and carries nothing away

Eccls. 2. d
Therefore me think it a better and a fayrer thing, a man to eat and drink,
and to be refreshed of all his labor, yt he takes under the Son all the
days of his life which God gives him, for this is his portion. For unto whom
so ever God gives riches, goods and power, he gives it him to enjoy it, to
take it for his portion, and to be refreshed of his labor: this is now the
gift of God. For he thinks not much how long he shall live, for so much as
God fylleth his heart with gladness.

The VI. Chapter.


The VII. Chapter.
FOr who knows what is good for man living, in ye days of his vain life,
which is but a shadow? Or* who will tell a man, what shall happen after him
under the Son? (...)
A good name is more worth then a precious ointment, and the day of death is
better the^ ye day of birth.

It is better to go in to an house of mourning, then in to a bancket house.
For there is the end of all men, and he that is lyuinge, takes it to heart.
It is better to be sorry then to laugh, for when the countenance is heavy, the
heart is joyful. The heart of ye wise is in the mourning house, but the heart
of the foolish is in the house of mirth. It is better to give ear to the
chastenynge of a wise man, then to hear the song of fools. For the laughinge
of fools is like ye crackynge of thorns under a pott. And yt is but a vain
thing.

Who so does wrong, makes a wise man to go out of his wit, and destroys a
gentle heart. The end of a thing is better then the beginning. The pacient of
sprete is better then the hie minded. Be not haistely angry in ye mind, for
wrath rests in the bosom of a fool. Say not thou: What is the cause that
ye days of ye old time were better, then they yt be now* for that were no
wise question. Wyszdome is better then riches, ye much more worth then the eye
sight. For wyszdome defends as well as money, and the excellent knowledge and
wyszdome gives life unto him that has it in possession. Considre the work of
God, how that no man can make the thing straight, which he makes crooked. Use
well the time of prosperity, and remember the time of mysfortune: for God
makes the one by the other, so that a man can find nothing else.

(...). 11. c
yt thou perish not: be nether to unrighteous also ner to foolish, lest thou
die before thy time. It is good for the to take hold of this, and not to let
yt go out of thy hand. For he yt fears God shall escape them all.

(...). 20. c (...). 7. a (...). 6. f (...) ^7. a
Wyszdome gives more courage unto the wise, then ten mighty men of the city:
for there is not one just upon earth, yt does good, and sins not. Take not
head unto every word yt is spoken, lest thou hear thy servant curse the: for
thine own heart knows, that thou thy self also have often times spoken evil by
other men. All these things have I proved because of wyszdome: (...) 28 b
for I thought to be wise, but she went farther fro me then she was before,
ye and so deep that I might (...)
And I found, that a woman is bytterer then death: for she is a very angle,
her heart is a nett, and her hands are cheynes. Who so pleases God shall escape
from her, but the synne^ will be taken with her.

Behold (says ye preacher) this have I diligently searched out and proved,
yt I might come by knowledge: which as yet I seek, and find it not. Among a
thousand men I have found one, but not one woman among all. (...)
Lo, this only have I found, that God made man just and right, but they seek
diverse sotylties, where as no man has wyszdome and vndersto^dinge, to give
answer there unto.

The VIII. Chapter.
(...)
but malice puts it out of favor. Keep the kings commandment (I warn
the) and the ooth yt thou have made unto God. Be not haistie to go out of his
sight, and se thou co^tynue in no evil thing: for what so ever it pleases
him, yt does he. Like as when a king gives a charge, his commandment is
mighty: Even so who may say unto him: what do thou? Job ^ Leui. ^
Who so keeps the commandment, shall feel no harm: but a wise man's heart
discerns time and manner: For every thing will have opportunite and judgment,
and this is the thing that makes men full of carefulnes and sorrow. And why?
a man knows not what is for to come, for who will tell him? Nether is there
any man yt has power over ye sprete, to keep still ye sprete, ner to have any
power in the time of death: It is not he also that can make an end of the
battle, nether may ungodliness deliver him yt medleth withal.

All these things have I considered, and Psalm. 3^
and fallen down from the hye and glorious place: in so much yt they were
forgotten in the cite, where they were had in so hye and great reputacion.
This is also a vain thing. Because now that evil works are not haistely
punyshed, the heart of man gives him self over unto wickedness: But though an
evil person offend an hundredth times, and have a long life: yet am I sure,
that it shall go well with the^ that fear God, because they have him before
their eyes. Again, as for the ungodly, it shall not be well with him, nether
shall he prolo^ge his days: but even as a shadow, so shall he be that fears
not God.

Yet is there a vanite upon earth: There reach unto the^: ye though a wise man
would undertake to know them, yet might he not find them.

The IX. Chapter.
(...)
with the good and clean as with the unclean: with him that offers as with
him that offers not: like as it goes with the virtuous, so goes it also
with the sinner: As it happens unto the perjured, so happens it also unto
him that is afraid to be man sworn. Among all things yt come to pass under
the Son, this is a misery, that it happens unto all alyke. This is the
cause also that the hertes of men are full of wickedness, and madd
foolishness is in their hertes as long as they live, until they dye.

(...). 6. b
Use thy self to live joyfully with thy wife whom thou love, (...). 5. c
all ye days of thy life (which is but vain) yt God

So I turned me unto other things under ye Son, and I saw, that in
runnynge, it helps not to be swift: in battle, it helps not to be strong:
to fedynge, it helps not to be wise: to riches, it helps not to be sutyll:
to be had in favor, it helps not to be conning: but that all lies in time
and fortune. ^uc. 21. d
For a man knows not his time, but like as the fyshe are taken with the
angle, and as the birds are catched with the snare: Eue^ so are men taken in the
perilous time, when it comes suddenly upon them.

This wiszdome have I seen also under ye (...)
Nevertheless, a simple man's wyszdome is despised, and his words are not herd.
A wise man's council that is followed in silence, is far above the crienge of
a captain among fools. For wyszdome is better then harness: (...)
but one unthrift alone destroys much good.

The X. Chapter.
DEed flies yt corruppe sweet ointment (...)
be not negligent the^ in thine office: for so shall great wickedness be put
down, as it were with a medecyne. Another plage is there, which I have seen
under the Son: namely, ye ignorance yt is commonly among princes: in yt a
fool sytteth in great dignite, and the rich are set down beneth: I se
servants ride upon horses, and princes goinge upon their fete as it were
servants. (...)
But he yt dyggeth up a pytt, shall fall therein himself: and who so breaks
down the hedge, a serpent shall byte him. Who so remoueth stones, shall have
travail withal: and he that heweth wod, shall be hurt therewith.

When an iron is blont, and ye point not

(...)
but unto money are all things obedient. Wysh the king no evil in ye
thought, and speak no hurt of ye rich in thy preuy chamber: for a bird of
the air shall betraye thy voice, and with her feathers shall she bewraye thy words.

The XI. Chapter.




The XII. Chapter.
Eccls. 3. ^
Or dust be turned again unto earth from whence it came, and or the sprete
return unto God, which gave it. Eccls. 1. a
All is but vanite (says the preacher) all is but plain vanite.

The same preacher was not wise alone, but taught the people knowledge also: he
gave good head, sought out the ground and set forth many parables. His
diligence was to Heb. 4. c
For the words of ye wise are like pricks and nales that go through, wherewith
men are kept together: for they are given of one shepherde only. Therefore
bewarre (my son) that above these thou make the not many and innumerable
books, nor take diverse doctrynes in hand, to weery thy body withal.

Let us hear the conclucion of all things: Fear God, and keep his
comaundementes, for that touches all men: For God shall judge all works and
secret things, whether they be good or evil.

The end of Ecclesiastes, called the Preacher.
Salomons Balettes, called Cantica Canticorum.
The first Chapter.
^^cl^. 7. a
Thy name is a sweet smelling ointment, therefore do the maidens love the: ye
that same moves me also to run after the.

The king has brought me into his preuy chamber. We will be glad and rejoice
in the, we think more of thy breasts then of wine: well is them that love the.

(...). 25. b Par. 3. c
and as the hanginges of Solomon: but yet am I fair and well favored withal.
Marvel not at me yt I am so black, and why? ye Son has shyned upon me. For
when my mothers children had evil will at me, they made me ye keeper of the
vynyarde. Thus was I feign to keep a vynyarde, which was not mine own.

Tell me (o thou whom my soul loves) where thou fedest, where thou restest at
the noone day: lest I go wrong, and come unto the flocks of thy companyons,

If thou know not yi self (o thou fairest among women) tha^ go ye way forth
after ye fotesteppes of the sheep, as though thou would feed ye goats beside
ye shepherdes tents. There will I tarry for the (my love) with mine host and with
my charettes, which shall be no fewer then Pharaos.

^xo. (...). 14. b


^ant. 4. a
O how fair art thou (my love) how fair art thou* thou have doves eyes. O how
fair art thou (my beloved) how well favored art thou? Our bed is decte with
flowers, ye sylinges of our house are of Cedre tree, and ou^e balkes of
Cypress.

The II. Chapter.
I Am the flower of the field, and lylie

Like as the aple tree among the trees of the wodd, so is my beloved among the
sons. My delight is to sit under his shadow, for his fruit is sweet unto my
throat. He brings me in to his wine seller, and loves me specially well.
Refresh me with grapes, comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love. (...)
His left hand lies under my head, and his right hand enbraceth me.

I charge you (o ye daughters of Jerusalem

Me think I hear the voice of my beloved: lo, there comes he hoppinge upon
ye mountains, and leapinge over the little hills. My beloved is like a Roo or
a young heart. Behold, he stondeth behind or wall, he looks in at the
wyndowe, and pepeth through the grate.

My beloved answered and said unto me: O sto^de up my love, my dove, my
beutyfull, and come: for lo, the winter is now past, the rain is away and
gone. The flowers are come up in the field, the twystinge time is come, the
voice of the turtle dove is herd in our land. The fyge tree brings forth
her fyges, the vynes bear blossoms, and have a good smell.

O sto^de up my love, my beutyfull, and come

My love is mine, and I am his, (...)
(which fedeth among the lylies) until the day break, and till the shadows
be gone. Come again preuely (o my beloved) like as a Roo or a young heart unto
the mountains.

The III. Chapter.
BY night in my bed, I sought him,

So when I was a little past them, I found him whom my soul loves. I have got
ten hold upon him, and will not let him go, until I bring him in to my
mothers house, and in to her chamber that bare me.

I charge you (o ye daughters of Jerusalem) by the Roes and hyndes of the
field, that ye wake not up my love ner touch her, till she be content herself.

Who is this, that comes out of ye wilderness like pilers of smoke, as it
were a smell of Myrre, frankencense and all manner spyces of the Apotecary?

Behold, about Salomo^s bedsteade there stand LX. valeaunt men of the
mighty in Israel. They hold swerdes every one, and are expert in war.
Every man has his sword upon his thee, because of fear in the night.

King Solomon has made himself a bedsteade of the wodd of Libanus, the pilers
are of silver, the coueringe of gold, ye seat of purple, ye ground
pleasauntly paued for the daughters of Jerusalem.

Go forth (o ye daughters of Sion) and behold king Solomon in the crown,
wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his marriage, and in the day of
the gladness of his heart.

The IIII. Chapter.
O How fair art thou (my love) how fair art thou? (...)
thou have doves eyes beside that which lies hid within. Thy hayrie locks are
like a flock of sheep that be clypped, which go first up from the washinge
place: where every one bears two twyns, and not one unfruitful among them.
Thy lips are like a rose colored rybende, thy words are lovely: thy chekes
are like a piece of a pomgranate, besides that which lied hyd within. Thy neck
is like the tower of David builded with bulworkes, where upon there ha^ge a
thousand sheldes, ye all the weape^s of the giau^tes. Thy two breasts are
like two twyns of young roes, (...)
which feed among the lilies. O that I might go to the mountain of Myrre, and
to the hill of frankynsense: till the* day break, and till the shadows be
past away. Thou art all fair (o my love) and no spott is there in the.



Thou art a well kept garden (o my sister, my spouse) thou art a well kept
water spring, a sealed well. The fruits that sproute in the, are like a very
paradyse of po^granates with sweet fruits: as Cypress, Nardus, Saffron, Calmus,
and all the trees of Libanus: Myrre, Aloes, and all the best spyces. Thou art a
well of gardens, a well of living waters, which run down from Libanus. Up
thou northwynde, come thou southwynde, and blow upon my garden, that the smell
thereof may be carried on every side: Ye that my beloved may come in to my
garden, and eat of the fruits and apples that grow therein.

The V. Chapter.
COme in to my garden o my sister, my spouse: I have gathered my Myrre with my
spyce. I will eat my honey and my honey co^be, I will drink my wine and my mylk
Eat o (ye friends) drink and be merry, o ye beloved.

As I was a sleep, and my heart waking, I herd the voice of my beloved, wha^
he knocked. Open to me (said he) o my sister, my love, my dove, my derlinge:
for my head is full of dew, and ye locks of my hair are full of the night
drops.

I have put off my cote, how ca^ I do it on

Now like as before time when he spoke, my heart could no longer refrain: Even
so now I sought hi^, but I could not find him: I cried upon him, nevertheless
he gave me

Who is thy love above other lovers, O thou fairest among women? Or, what can
thy love do, more then other lovers, that thou chargest us so straightly?

As for my love, he is white and read colored, a synguler person among
many thousands: his head is the most fine gold, the locks of his hair are
buszshed, brown as the evening: His eyes are as the eyes of doves by the
water brokes, washen with Eccl. 26. c
His legs are as the pilers of Marbell, set upon sokettes of gold: His face
is as Libanus, and as the bewty of the Cedre trees: His throat is sweet, ye he
is altogether lovely. Soch one is my love (o ye daughters of Jerusalem) soch
one is my love.

Whither is thy love gone the^ (o thou fairest among weme^) whither is thy
love departed, that we may seek him with the?

The VI. Chapter.


Thou art pleasant (o my love) even as louelynesse itself, thou art fair as
Jerusalem, glorious as an army of men with their ba^ners (Turn away thine
eyes fro me, for they make me to proud) Thy hayrie locks are like a flock of
goats upon ye mount of Galaad. Canti. 4. a
Thy teth are like a flock of sheep yt be clypped, which go out of the washinge
place: where every one bears two twyns, and not one unfruitful among them.
Thy chekes are like a piece of a pomgranate, besides yt which lies hid within.
There are three score queen's, 3. Re. 11. a
four score concubynes, and young weme^ without nombre. But one is my dove,

I went down in to the nutt garden, to se what grew by the brokes, to look if
the vynyarde flourished, and if the pomgranates were shot forth. Then the
charettes of the prince of my people made me suddenly afraid. Turn again,
turn again (O thou S^^lamite) turn again, turn again, that we may look
upon the.

The VII. Chapter.
WHat pleasure have ye more in ye S^lamite, than when she daunseth among the
men of war? O how pleasant are thy treadinges with thy sh^es, thou princes
daughter? Thy thees are like a fair jewel, which is wrought by a co^^nynge
workmaster: Thy navel is like a round goblett, which is never without drink*
Thy womb is like an heap of wheat, se^^ about with lilies: Thy two breasts
are like two twyns of young roes: Thy neck is as it were a tower of yuery:
Thine eyes are like ye water poles in Hesebon, beside the port of Bathrabbim:
Thy nose is like the tower of Libanus, which looks toward Damascu^* That
head that stondeth upon the is like Carmel: The hair of thy head is like the
kings purple folden up in plates.

O how fair and lovely art thou (my derlynge) in pleasures? Thy stature is
like a date tree, and thy breasts like the grapes. I said: I will clymme up in
to the date tree, and take hold of his branches. Thy breasts also shall be as
the vine grapes, the smell of thy nostrels like the smell of apples, and thy
th^^^te like the best wine.

This shall be pure and clear for my love, his lips and teth shall have their
pleasure. There will I turn me unto my love, and he shall turn him unto me. O
come on my love, let us go forth in to the field, and take ^^re lodginge in the
vyllages. In the morning will we rise by times, and go se the vynyarde: if it
be spronge forth, if the grapes be grown, and if the pomgranates be sho^^ out.
There will I give the my breasts: There shall the Mandragoras give their smell
beside our doors: There (o my love) have I kept unto the all manner of fruits,
both new and old.

The VIII. Chapter.
O That I might find the without and kiss ye, whom I love as my brother which
suckte my mothers breasts: and that thou would not be offended, if I took the
and brought the in to my mothers house: that thou might teach me, and that I
might give the drink of spyced wine and of the sweet sap of my pomgranates.
His left hand lies under my head, and his right hand embraces me.

I charge you (o ye daughters of Jerusalem) (...) ye wake not up my love ner
touch her, (...) she be content herself. What is she this, (...) comes up
from the wilderness, and (...) upon her love? I am the same that (...) the up
among the aple trees, where thy ^^ther bear ye, where ye mother brought (...)
in to the world.

O set me as a seal upon thine heart, and as ^eale upon thine arm: for love is
mighty the death, and gelousy as the hell. Her coa^^ are of fire, and a very
flamme of the LOR^E: so yt many waters are not able to quench (...), nether
may ye streams drown it. Ye (...) man would give all the good of his hou^^
for love, he should count it nothing.

When our love is told our young sister, those breasts are not yet grown,
what shall ^e do unto her? If she be a wall, we shall ^ylde a silver bollworke
there upon: If she (...) a tower, we shall festen her with bordes of ^edre tree.

If I be a wall, and my breasts like towers, then am I as one that has found
favor in his sight.

Solomon had a vynyarde at Baal Hamon, this vynyarde delivered he unto the
kepers: yt every one for the fruit thereof should give him a thousand pieces of
silver. But my vynyarde (o Solomon) gives the a thousand, and two hundredth to
ye kepers of the fruit.

Thou that dwell in the gardens, O let me hear thy voice, that my
companyons may harken to the same. O get the away (my love) as a roo or a
young heart unto the sweet smellinge mountains.

The end of Salomons Balettes, called Cantica Canticorum.
Fautes escaped in the pryntinge of this part.
Upon the second leaf, the second side, in the syxte Chapter of Job, the
letter A.

Within the yoke an egg, read, Within the yoke of an egg.

In the Psalter.
Upon the xxxv. leaf, the second side, in the cxxxvi. psalm, the second
verse*

Upon the trees, read, Upon the will ye trees.

All the Prophets in English.

Esaias. Jeremy. Baruch. Ezechiel. Daniel. Oseas. Joel. Amos. Abdy. Jonas.
Micheas. Naum. Abacuc. Sophony. Aggeus. Zachary. Malachy.




The Prophet Esaias.
What Esaias conteyneth.
Chap. I. The prophet rebukes the people of Israel, for their abhominacions.
Chap. II. The calling of the Heithen. Chap. III. Punyshme^t of God, specially
for the pride of women. Chap. IIII. Plages to come, with a promise of the grace
and conforte through Christ. Chap. V. The loving kyndnes of God toward Israel,
before other people. Again, the unthankfulness and unfaithfulness of them. Chap.
VI. The sendynge of Esaias. The hard hertes of the people. Chap. VII. He
rebukes the king, for being afraid of the ungodly kings of the Heithen,
and because he put not his trust in God. He gives him a toke^ of grace, which
he receaueth not. Chap. VIII. The people forsake God, and seek help at the
Heithen. Chap. IX. He puts the^ in mind of the mysery that is past. Of the
coming and kingdom of Christ. Punishment for their pride. Chap. X.
Punishment of unrighteous rulers. The comfort of Israel against the pry^^ of
the king of the Assyrians. Chap. XI. A prophecy of Christ. Chap. XII. A
thankesgeuynge of the faithful people. Chap. XIII. Punishment to come upon
Babylon, by the Persians and Medes. Chap. XIIII. God will have mercy on his
people. He threteneth Palestina. Chap. XV. The plage of Moab. Chap. XVI. The
vexacion and fear of Moab. Chap. XVII. Punyshme^t of Damascus and siria. Chap.
XVIII. The calling of the Heithen. Chap. XIX.XX. Plages upon Egipte and
Ethiopia. Chap. XXI. The punyshme^t of Babylon, Duma, and Arabia. Chap. XXII.
The punishment upon Jerusalem by Se^nacherib Sobna is put down, Eliachim
comes in his stead. Chap. XXIII. The punishment of Tire, of all the cities
by the sea coast, and of the Isles. Chap. XXIIII. Of the general punishment of
the whole earth unto the end of the world. Chap. XXV. A tha^kesgeuynge unto
God. The calling of the Heithen. Chap. XXVI. Men ought to trust only i^ God.
Chap. XXVII. The punishment of Leuiathan. The goodness of God. The delyueraunce
of Israel. The calling of the Heithen. Chap. XXVIII. The punishment of Ephraim
Of men's laws Of the stone in Sion. Chap. XXIX. Punyshme^t upon Jerusalem for
men's laws and doctrynes. Chap. XXX Gods people are punyshed, for sekinge help
at other then him self. Chap. XXXI. He calls the people again to God, and
promises them defense. Chap. XXXII. Health under the king of righteousness. He
threateneth the careless cities^ Chap. XXXIII. Punyshme^t upon the enemies of
Gods people. Chap. XXXIIII. Gods plage upon the Heithen. Chap. XXXV. A
comfort, and secret promise concerning the calling of the Heithen. Chap.
XXXVI. Sennacherib the king of the Assirians sends his host to besege
Jerusalem. Chap. XXXVII. The prayer of Ezechias. God comforts him by Esaias.
The angel of the LORD puts the Assirians host to shame. Chap. XXXVIII.
Ezechias is deed sick. God helps him up again. He thanketh God. Chap.
XXXIX. The king of Babylon sends Embassitours unto Ezechias, which shows
them his treasure, and displeases God withal. Chap. XL. The delyuerau^ce not
only of Israel out of the captiuyte of Babylon, but of all faithful also in
Christ. The vanyte of man. The excellent power of God. Chap. XLI. God reasons
with the Jews and gentiles, and reproves the people of Israel for their
unthankfulness. Chap. XLII. The coming and power of Christ The praise of God.
Punishment of the ungodly. Chap. XLIII. A prophecye of the coming of the
Savior. He puts them in mind of the benefits past. Chap. XLIIII.
Unthankfulness of the people. The vanite of Idols or images. The madd foolishnes
of those that make the^, or worshipe them. Chap. XLV. The LORD only is the
true God of Israel. Chap. XLVI. Of the destruction of images. The power of the
true God. Chap. XLVII. Plages upon proud Babylon. Chap. XLVIII. Against the
vanite of images. Chap. XLIX. The coming and office of Christ. Salvation for
the Jews and for the gentyles. Chap. L. The Jews refused, because they have
forsaken their maker, and go a whoringe with strange gods. Chap. LI. The
mighty God has ever done them good: if they cleue to him, there shall no body
hurt them. Chap. LII. A promise of Messiah: He waketh up the Jews and
Gentyles also to the coming of him. Chap. LIII. He complayneth of the
hardneckes of the people, and testifies clearly of Christ. Chap. LIIII. One
church of Jews and Gentiles. Chap. LV. God calls all men to his goodness in
Christ. Chap. LVI. How the church of Christ should prepare her self against his
coming. A complaynte of false prophets and rulers. Chap. LVII. He rebukes
the prophets, r^lers and the people, and promyseth mercy to all soch as will
turn. Chap. LVIII. He puts the prophets in mind of their office. What the
true fast is. Chap. LIX. Why God hears not the Jews Chap. LX. He calls
unto all soch as fear God, that they will know his goodness. Chap. LXI. The
office of a prophet, fulfilled specially in Christ. Chap. LXII. The prophet
may not leave of to cry, to warn, and to exorte, until the light of grace
arise in Sion. Chap. LXIII. An exortacion to receive the Savior for to come.
Chap. LXIIII. He longs sore for the coming of the Savior, shows his
power, and prays for the people. Chap. LXV. Of the forsakinge of the Jews,
and calling of the Heithen. Chap. LXVI. The outward ceremonies of the Jews
are refused: and here is showed the true service of God.


This is the prophecy of Esaias the son of Amos, which he showed upon Judah and
Jerusalem: In the time of Osias, Ioathan, Ahas, and Ezechias kings of Judah.
The first Chapter.
LORD speaks: (...)
I have norished and brought up children, and they are fallen away fro me. An
ox knows his LORD, and an Ass his masters stall, but Israel knows
nothing, my people has no understanding. Alas for this synful people, which
are expert in blasphemies, a frawerde generation, unnatural children. They
have forsaken the LORD, they have provoked the holy one of Israel unto anger,
and are gone bacward. Wherefore should ye be plaged any more? For ye are ever
fallinge away. The whole head is sick, and the heart is very heavy. (...)
From the sole of the foot unto the head, there is no whole part in all yor
body: but all are wounds, botches, sores and strypes, which can nether be
helped, bound up, molified, ner eased with any ointment.

Your land lies waist, your cities are brent up, your enemies devour
your land, and ye must be feign to stand, and look upon it: and it is
desolate, as it were with enemies in a batell. Morouer ye daughter of Syonis
left alone like a cotage in a vynyearde, like a watchouse in time of war,
like LORD of hosts had left us a few alive: we should have been as Sodoma,
and like unto Gomorra.

Hear the word of the LORD ye tyrauntes of Sodoma: and harken unto the law
of our God, thou people of Gomorra. Why offer ye so many sacrifices unto me? I
am discontent for the brent offringes of wethers, and with ye fatness
offedbeastes. I have no pleasure in the blood of bullockes, lambs and gootes.
When ye apeare before me, who requires you to tread within my porches?
Offreme no mo oblacions, Hiere. 6. e Amos 5. b Mich 6. b
for it is but lost labor. I abhor your incense. I may not away with
your newmoones, your Sabbathes and solemn days. Esa. 58. a
Your fastinges are also in vain. I hate your new holy days and fastinges,
even fro my very heart. They make me weery, I can not abide them. Though ye
hold out yor hondes, yet turn I mine eyes from you. Zach. 7. b Mat. 6. b Esa.
59. a
And though ye make many prayers, yet hear I nothing at all, for your hondes
are full of blood.

Wash you, make you clean, put away yor Iere. 7. ae and 21. ae and 22. ae
cease from doing of evil and violence. Learn to do right, apply your
selves to equity, deliver the oppressed, help the fatherless to his right,
let the wydowes complaynte come be fore you. Now go to (says the LORD) we
will talk together. Is it not so? Though your sins be as read as scarlet,
shall the^ not be whyter then snow? And though they were like purple, shall
they not be like white woll? Is it not so? If ye be loving and obedient, ye
shall enjoy the best thing that grows in the land. Deuteronomy. 11. b Leui. 26. d
deuteronomy. 28. d
But if ye be obstinate and rebellious, ye shall be devoured with the sword: for
thus the LORD has promised with his own mouth.

How happens it then that the rightuous city (which was full of equite) is
become unfaithful as an whore? righteousness dwelt in it, but now murthur. Pro.
25. ^ Eze. 2^. b
Thy Silver is turned to dross, and thy wine myxte with water. Thy princes are
traitors and companyons of thieves. Iere. 5. g
They love gifts altogether, and follow rewards. As for the fatherles, they
help him not to his right, nether will they let the wydowes causes come before
them. Therefore speaks the LORD Zach. 8. ^
Then shall thou be called the rightuous city, the faithful city. But Sion
shall be redeemed with equity, and her captiuyte with righteousness. For the
transgressors and ungodly, and soch as are become unfaithful unto the LORD,
must all together be utterly destroyed.

And except ye be ashamed of the oketrees wherein ye have so delited, and of
the garde^s that ye have chosen: ye shall be as an oak whose leaves are fallen
away, and as a garden that has no moystnesse. Iere. 10. c
And as for the glory of these things, it shall be turned to dry straw, and he
that made them to a spark. Esa. 29. b
And they shall both burn together, so that no man shall be able to quench them.

The second Chapter.
LORD is builded, Mich. 4. a
shall be ye chief among hills, and exalted above al little hills. Zach. 8. d
And alheithe^ shall prease unto him and the multitude of people shall go unto
him, speakinge thus one to another: up, let us go to the hill of the LORD,
Psalm. 121. a Iere. 31. a
and to the house of ye God of Jacob: yt he may show us his way, Psalm. 49. a
Acto. 1. a
and yt we may walk in his paths. For ye law shall come out of Syon, and the
word of God from Jerusalem, and shall give sentence among the heithen, and
shall reform the multitude of people: So that they shall break their swerdes
and spears, to make sythes, sycles and sawes thereof.

Joel. 3. b
From that time forth shall not one people lift up wapen against another, Mich.
4. b
nether LORD. But thou art scatred abroad with thy people (o house of Jacob)
for ye go far beyond yor fathers, whether it be in Sorcerers) whom ye have
as the phylistynes had) or in calkers of men's byrthes, whereof ye have to many.
Deuteronomy. 8. c and 17. d
As soon as your land was full of silver and gold, and no end of your
treasure: so soon as your land was full of strong horses and no end of
your charettes: Inmediatly was it full of Idols also, even works of your own
hondes, Esa. 44 b.
which ye your selves have facioned, and your fyngers have made. There
kneleth the man, there falls the man down before them, so yt thou can not
bring him away from thence.

And therefore get ye soon in to some rock, vnd hyde the in the ground from
the sight of the fearful judge, 2. Tess. 1. b
and from ye glory of his Magestie. Which casts down ye high lokes of
presumptuous persons, and brings low the pride of man, Esa. 5. b
and he only shall be exalted in ye day. For the day of ye LORD of hosts
shall go over all pride and presumpcio^, upon all the^ that exalte the^ selves,
and shall bring them all down? upon all high and stout Cedre trees of
Libanus, and upon all the oaks of Basan, upon all high hills, and upon all
stout mountains, upon all costly towers, and upon all strong walls, upon
all ships of the sea, and upon every thing yt is glorious and pleasant to
look upon.

And it shall bring down the pride of man, (...)
(...)
and lay man's presumptuousnesse full low, and the LORD shall only have the
victory in that day. (...)
But the Idols shall utterly be roted out. Men shall crepe in to holes of stone,
and in to caves of the earth, from the sight of the fearful judge, and from
the glory of his magesty: (...)
what time as he shall make him up to shake the earth. Then, the^ shall man cast
away his gods of silver and gold (which he nevertheless had made to honor
the^) unto Molles and Backs: that he may the better crepe in to the caves and
rocks, and in to the cliffes of hard stones, from ye sight of the fearful
judge and from the glory of his Magesty.

The third Chapter.
EVery man can eschew a person moved in anger, for what does he wisely* Even
so shall ye LORD of hoostes take away from Jerusalem and Judah, all possessions
and power, all meat and drink, ye captain and the soudyare, ye judge and the
prophet, the wise and the aged man, the worshipful of fifty year old, and
the honorable: the Senators, and men of understanding: the masters of crafts
and orators. And I shall give you children to be your princes (says the
LORD) and babes shall have the rule of you. One shall ever be doing violence
and wrong to another. The boy shall presume against the elder, and the vile
person against the honorable. Ye one shall take a friend of his own kynred by
ye bosom, and say: thou have clothinge, thou shall be our head, for thou
may keep us from this fall and parell.

Then shall he swear and say: I can not help you. Morouer, there is nether
meat ner clothinge in my house, make me no ru^ler of the people. For Jerusalem
and Judah must decay, because that both their words and councels are against
the LORD, they provoke the presence of his magestyrs to anger. The chaunginge
of their countenance bewrays them, ye they declare their own sins them
selves, as the Sodomites, and hyde the^ not. Woe be unto their souls, for they
shall be heuely rewarded. Then shall they say: O happy are the godly, for they
may enjoy the fruits of their studies. But woe be to ye ungodly and
unrighteous for they shall be rewarded after their works. (...)
O my people, rybaudes oppress ye, and women have rule of the.

(...)
The LORD is here to common of the matter, and stondeth to give judgment with
the people. The LORD shall come forth to reason with the Senators and princes
of his people, and shall say thus unto them: It is ye th^at have burnt up my
vynyearde, the robbery of the poor is in your house. Wherefore do ye oppress
my people, and mar ye faces of the innocents? thus shall the God of hoostes
reuyle them.

Morouer thus says ye LORD: Saying the daughters of Sion are become so
proud, and come in with stretched out necks, and with vain wanton eyes:
saying they come in trippinge so nycely with their fete: LORD shave the heads
of the daughters of Sion, and make their beauty bare in that day. In that day
shall the LORD take away the gorgiousnes of their apparel, and spanges,
cheynes, partlettes, and colares, bracelettes and hooues, ye goodly floured,
wide and broderd rayme^t, brusshes and headbandes, rings and garla^des, holy
day clothes and vales, kerch^es and pynnes, glasses and smockes, bonettes and
taches.

And in stead of good smell there shall be stynck among them. And for their
gyrdles there shall be lowse bonds. And for wel^set hair there shall be
baldness. In stead of a stomacher, a sack cloth, and for their bewty
wythrednesse and sonneburnynge. Their husbondes and their mighty men shall
perish with the sword in batell.

The fourth Chapter.
(...)
After that time shall the branch of ye LORD be beutiful and mighty, and ye
fruit of the earth shall be fair and pleasant for those Israelites that shall
spring thereof. (...)
Then shall the remnaunt in Sion and the remnaunt at Jerusalem be called holy:
namely all soch LORD shall wash away the desolacion of the daughters of Sio^,
and pourge the blood out from Jerusalem, with ye wind of his smoke and fire.

Morouer upon all the dwellinges of the hill of Sion and upon their whole
congregation, shall the LORD provide a cloud and smoke by day, and the
shyninghe of a flammynge fire by night, for all their glory shall be preserved.
And Jerusalem shall be a tabernacle for a shadow because of hete in the day
time, a place and refuge where a man may keep him for wether and rain.

The V. Chapter
NOw well than, I will sing my beloved friend a song of his vynyearde. Iere.
2. c Matthew. 21. ^
This he hedged, this he walled round about, and planted it with goodly
grapes. In the myddest of it builded he a tower, and made a wine press therein
And afterward when he looked yt it should bring him grapes, it brought forth
thorns. I show you now my cause (o ye Citysens of Jerusalem and whole Judah:)
Judge I pray you betwixt me: and my wynegardinge. What more could have been
done for it, Iere. 2. d
that I have not done? Wherefore then has it given thorns, where I looked to
have had grapes of it?

Well, I shall tell you how I will do with my vynyarde: I will take the hedge
from it, that it may perish, and break down ye wall, that it may be trodden
under foot. I will lay it waist, that it shall nether be twysted nor ^ut, but
bear thorns and breares. I will also forbid ye clouds, that they shall not
rain upon it. As for the vynyarde of the LORD of hoostes it is the house of
Israel, and whole Judah his fair plantinge. Of these he looked for equity, but
se there is wrong: for righteousness, lo, It is but misery.

Woe to you that join one house to another, and bring one land so nigh unto
another, Esaiae 32. c and 56. c
Will ye dwell upon the earth alone? The LORD of hoostes rowneth me thus i^
mine ear: shall not many greater and more gorgious houses be so waist, that no
man shall dwell in the^? And ten akers of vynes shall give but a Quarte, and
xxx. bushels of sede shall give but three.

Woe be unto them that rise up early to use them selves in dronkynnes, and yet
at night are more superfluous with wine. In whose companies are harpes and
lutes, ^ob 21 b
tabrettes LORD, Amos ^ a
and consider not the operacio^ of his hondes. Therefore comes my folck also in
captiuyte, Osee 4 b Abac. 2 b
because they have no understanding. Their glory shall be myxte with hunger, and
their pride shall be marred for thirst. Therefore gapeth hell, and opens her
mouth marvelous wide: that pride, boostinge and wisdom, with soch as rejoice
therein, may descend in to it.

Esaiae 2 b
Thus shall man have a fall, he shall be brought low, and the high lokes of the
proud laid down. But the LORD of hoostes, ye holy God: shall be exalted and
untouched, when he shall declare his equity and righteousness after this manner.
Then shall ye lambs eat their appointed foder, and shall feed plenteously in the
mountains. Pro. 20 c
that we may se it. Let the council of ye holy one of Israel come, and draw
me, yt we may know it.

Woe unto them that call euel good, and good euel: Pro. 17 c Mich 3 a
which make darcknesselight, and light darcknesse, yt make sower sweet, and
sweet sower. Woe unto them that are wise in their own sight, and think them
selves to have vndersto^dinge. Pro. 3 a
Woe unto them, yt are conning men to suppe out wine, and expert to set up
dro^ke^nesse. Pro 17 c Deuteronomy. 17 a Ezec. 13 d
These give sentence with the ungodly for rewards, but condemn the just cause
of the rightuous.

Therefore, like as fire licketh up the straw, LORD of hoostes, Nu. 11 g
and blaspheme the word of the holy maker of Israel.

Therefore is the wrath of the LORD kyndled also against his people, and he
shakes his hand at them: ye he shall smite so, that the hills shall tremble.
And their carcases shall lie in the open streets, like mire. After all this,
Esa. 9 e
the wrath of God shall not c^asse, but he shall stretch his ho^de wyder* And he
shall give a toke^ unto a strange people, Esa. 43 c Dan. 9 c
and call unto them in a far country: and behold, they shall come hastily
with speed. There is not one faint nor feeble among them, no not a slogish nor
slepery parsone. There shall not one of them

The vj Chapter.
IN the same year yy king Osias dyed, LORD sittinge upon an high and
glorious seat, 3 Reg. (...) 4. Reg. (...) 2. (...)
and his train filled ye palace. From above flakred the Seraphins, whereof
every one had sex wings. With twain each covered his face, with twain his fete,
and with twain did he fly. They cried also each one to other on this manner:
holy, holy, holy is the LORD of hoostes. (...)
The whole world is full of his glory. Ye the geastes and dorechekes moved
LORD of hoostes with mine eyes.

Then flewe one of the Seraphins unto me, having a hot cole in his hand,
which he had taken from the altar with the tongues, and touched my mouth, and
said: lo, this has touched thy mouth, and thy unrighteous is taken away,
and thy sin forgeuen. After this I herd the voice of the LORD taking
advysement on this manner: Whom shall I send, and who will be our messaunger?
The^ I said: here am I, send me. And so he said: go, and tell this people: ye
shall hear in deed, but ye shall not understand, (...)
ye shall plane lyse, and not perceive. Harden the heart of this people, stop
their ears, and shut their eyes, that they se not with their eyes, hear not
with their ears, and understand not with their hearts, and convert and be
healed.

Then spoke I: LORD, how long? he answered: LORD shall take the men far
away, so that the land shall lie waist Nevertheless, the tenth part shall
remain therein, for it shall convert and be fruteful. And like wise as the
Terebyntes and Oketrees bring forth their fruits, so shall the holy sede have
fruit. (...)


The seventh Chapter.
(...). 16 a (...). ^3 a
which was the son of Ioathan King of Judah: that Rezin the King of Siria,
and Poca Rome lies son, King of Israel: went up toward Jerusalem to besege
it (but wanne it not.) Now when the house of David (that is Ahas) herd word
thereof, yt Siria and Ephraim were confederate together: his heart quaked (ye
and ye hertes also of his people) like as a tree in the field, that is moved
with the wind.

Then said God unto Esaias: go mete Ahas (thou and thy son Sear Iasub) at the
head of ye over pole, in the foot path by the fullers ground, and say unto
him: take heed to thy self and be still, but fear not, nether be faint hearted,
for these two tales: that is: for these two smokynge fire brandes, the wrath
and furiousnes of Rezin the Sirian and Romelies son: because that the King
of Siria Ephraim and Romelies son have wekedly conspyred LORD God thereto, It
shall not so go forth, nether come so to pass: for the head city of ye
Sirians is Damascus, but the head of Damascus is Rezin. And after five and
threscore year, shall Ephraim be no more a people. And the chief city of
Ephraim is Samaria, but the head of Samaria is Rome lies son. And if ye
believe not, there shall no promise be kept with you. (...)


Morouer, God spoke unto Ahas, saying: require a token of the LORD thy God,
whether it be toward the depth beneth or toward ye hight above. The^ said
Ahas: I will require none, nether will I tempte the LORD. The LORD answered:
Then he are to, ye of the house of David: Is it not enough for you, that ye be
grievous unto LORD shall give you a token of himself: Behold, Luc. 1 d Math. 1 d
a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call his name Emanuel.
Butter and honey shall he eat, yt he may know the euel, and chose ye good. But
or ever that child come to knowledge, to eschew the euel and chose the good:
The land (that thou art so afraid for) shall be desolate of both her kings.

The LORD also shall send a time upon the, upon thy people, and upon thy
fathers house (soch as never came sense the time yt Ephraim departed from Judah)
through ye king of the Assirians. For at the same time shall the LORD whistle
for the flies yt are about the water of Egipte, 2. Par. 32 a Esa. 36 a
and for ye Beyes in the Assirians land. These shall come, and shall light all
in the valeyes, in ye vowtes of stone, upon all grene things, and in all
corners.

At the same time shall the LORD shave 2. Par. 22 e
he shall make butter and eat it. So that every one which remains in the
land, shall eat butter and honey. At the same time all vynyardes (though there
be a thousand vynes in one, and were sold for a thousand siluerlinges) shall be
turned to brears and thorns. Like as they shall come in to the land with
arowes and bows, so shall all the land become brears and thorns. And as for
all hills that now are hewn down, thou shall not come upon them, for fear
of brears and thorns. But the catel shall be driven thither, and the sheep shall
feed there.

The viij Chapter.
MOrouer the LORD said unto me: Esa. 30 b
and write in it, as men do with a pen, that he speed him to rob, and haist
him to spoil. And Inmediatly I called unto me faithful witnesses: Vrias the
pressed, and Zacharias ye son of Barachias. After that went I unto the
prophetisse, that now had conceived and borne a son. Then said the LORD to
me: give him this name: Maherschalal haschbas, that is: a spedierobber, an
hasty spoyler. For why, or ever the child shall have knowledge to say: Abi and
Im, yt is father, and mother: shall ye riches of Damascus and ye substance of
Samaria be taken away, through the king of ye Assirians. 4. Re. 16 b 4. Re. 17
a


LORD spoke also unto me, saying: ^ ^e. 2. a ^^al. 12^ a ^aiae 30. a ^hel. 9.
a
for so much as the people refuses the sti^renninge water of Silo, and put
their delight in Rezin and Romelies son: Behold, the LORD shall bring
mighty and great floudes of water upon them: namely, ye king of the Assirians
with all his power. ^. Reg. 18. c ^saiae 36 a
Which shall pour out his furyousnes upon every man, and run over all their
banks. And shall break in upon Judah, increasinge in power, till he get him by
the throat. He shall fyl also the wydenesse of thy land with ^saiae 19. c
go in hand withal, yet shall it not prospere. Except Emanuel: (that is God)
be with us. For the LORD chastised me, and took me by ye hand, and warned me,
saying unto me: that I should not walcke in the way of this people. He said
morouer: round with none of the^, who so ever say: yonder people are bound
together. 1. Pet. 3. b 4 Reg. 17. g Matthew. 10. d 1. Cor. 1. d 1. Pet. 2. b
Nevertheless fear them not, nether be afraid of them, but sanctify the LORD
of hoostes, let him be your fear and dread. For he is the sanctifienge, and
stone to stomble at, ye rock to fall upon, a snare and net to both the houses:
to Israel, and the inhabitours of Jerusalem. And many shall stomble, fall, and
be broken upon him: ye they shall be snared and taken.

LORD) and seal the law with my disciples. Daniel. 8. d
Thus I wait upon the LORD, that has turned his face from the house of
Jacob, Heb. ^. d
and I look unto him. But lo, as for me, and the children which the LORD has
given me: we are a token and a wondre in Israel, for the LORD of hoostes sake,
which dwells upon the hill of Syon.

And therefore if they say unto you: ask council at the soythsayers, witches,
charmers and coniurers, then make them this answer: Is there a people
enywhere, that a^eth not council at his God: whether it be concerning the
dead, or the living? If any man want light, Psalm. 1^.
let him look upon the law and the testimony, whether they speak not after
this meaning. If he do not this, he stombleth and suffers hunger. And if he
suffer honger, he is out of patience, and blasphemeth his king and his God.
Then looks he upward, and downewarde to the earth, and behold, there is
trouble and darcknesse, vexacion is round about him, and the cloud of
error And out of soch aduersite, shall he not escape.

The jx. Chapter.
EVen like as in time past it has been (...)
that ye land of Zabulon and the land of Nepthali (where through the sea way
goes over Iordane in to the land of Galilee) was at the first in little
trouble, but afterward sore vexed. (...)


Nevertheless ye people that have dwelt in darcknesse, shall se a great light.
As for them that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them shall the
light shine. Shall thou multiply the people, and not increase the joy also?
(...)
They shall rejoice before the even as men make merry in harvest, and as men that
have gotten the victory, when they deal the spoil. For thou shall break the
yocke of the peoples burden: the staff of his shulder, (...)
and the rod of his oppressoure, as in ye day at Madia^.

Morouer all temerarious and sedicious (...)
For unto us a child shall be borne, and unto us a son shall be given. Upon his
shulder shall the kingdom lie, and he shall be called with his own name? (...)
The wo^derous geuer of council, the mighty God, the everlasting father, the
prince of peace, he shall make no end to increase the kingdom and peace, and
shall sit upon the seat of David and in his kingdom, to set up the same, to
stablish it with equity and righteousness, from thence forth for evermore.
This shall the gelousy of the LORD of hoostes bring to pass.

The LORD sent a word in to Jacob, LORD shall prepare Rezin the enemy
against the^, and so order their adversaries, that ye Sirians shall lay hold
upon them before, and the Philistynes behind, and so devour Israel with open
mouth.

After all this, (...)
the wrath of the LORD shall not cease, but yet his hand shable stretched out
still. For the people turns not unto him, that chastises them, nether do
they seek the LORD of hoostes. Therefore the LORD shall rote out of Israel both
head and tale, branch and twygge in one day. By the head, is understand
the Senatoure and honorable man, and by ye tale, the prophet that preaches
lies. For all they which enfourme the people that they be in a right case, soch
be disceauers. Soch as men think also to be perfect among these, are but
cast away.

LORD have no pleasure in their young me^, nether favor their fatherless
and wydowes. For they are altogether ypocrites and wicked, and all their
mouths speak folly. After all this shall not the LORDS wrath cease, but yet
his hand shall be stretched out still. For the ungodly burn, as a fire in the
briars and thorns: And as it were out of a fire in a wod or a redebush, so
ascends the smoke of their pride.

For this cause shall ye wrath of the LORD of hoostes fall upon the land, and
the people shall be consumed, as it were with fire, no man shall spare his
brother. If a man do turn him to the right hand, he shall famesh, or to the
left hand to eat, he shall not have enough. Every man shall eat the flesh of
his own arm: Manasses shall eat Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasses, and they both
shall eat Judah. After all this shall not the Lords wrath cease, but yet shall
his hand be stretched out still.

The tenth chapter.
(...)
and devyse things, which be to hard for to keep: wherthorow the poor are
oppressed, on every side, and the innoce^tes of my people are there with robbed
of judgment: that wyddowes may be your pray, and that ye may rob the
fatherless. What will ye do in time of the visitacion and destruction, that
shall come from far? To whom will ye run for help? or to whom will ye give
your honor, that he may keep it? that ye come not among the presoners, or
lie among the deed? (...)
After all this shall not the wrath of the LORD cease, but yet shall his hand
be stretched out still.

(...) 26. a (...) 25. b (...) ^1. b
Woe be also unto Assure, which is a staff of my wrath, in whose hand is the rod
of my punishment. For I shall send him among those ypocritish poeple, among
the people that have deserved my disfauoure shall I send him: that he may
utterly rob them, spoil them, and tread them down like the mire in the
street. Howbeit his meaning is not so, nether thinks his heart of this
fashion. But he ymagineth 4. Reg. 18.
Is not Calno as easy to win, as Charchamis? Is it harder to conquer
Antiochia then Arphad? Or is it lighter to overcome Damascus the^ Samaria? As
who say: I were able to win the kingdom of the Idolaters and their gods,
but not Jerusalem and Samaria. Shall I not do unto Jerusalem and their images,
as I did unto Samaria and their images?

Wherefore the LORD says: As soon as I have performed my whole work upon
the Hyl of Syon and Jerusalem: the^ will I also vyset the noble and stout
king of Assiria, with his wisdom and pride. For he stondeth thus in his own
co^ceate: This do I, Deuteronomy. 8. d Esa. 47. b Eze. 29. b
through the power of mine own hand, and through my wisdom: For I am wise, I
am he that remove the lands of the people, I rob their princes: and (like
one of the worthies) I drive them from their hie seats. My hand has found

But does the axe boost itself, Esa. 45. b Romans 9. c
against him yt heweth therewith, or does the saw make any krakinge, against
him that rules it? That were even like, as if the rod did exalte it self
against him, that bears it: or as though ye staff should magnify it self, as
who say: it were no wodd. Esa. 37. f
Therefore shall the LORD of hoostes send him pouerte in his riches, and burn
up his power, as it were with a fire. Mat. 13. a
But the light of Israel shall be yt fire, and his Sanctuary shall be the flame,
and it shall kyndle, and burn up his thorns and breyers in one day, ye all
the glory of his woddes and feldes shall be consumed with body and soul. As for
himself, he shall be as one chased away. The trees also of his field shall be of
soch a nombre, that a child may tell them.

After yt day shall the remnaunt of Israel, LORD, the holy, ^. Re. 19. c To.
9. c Esa. 28. f and 11. e
one of Israel. The remnaunt, ye and the Posteryte of Jacob, shall co^uerte
unto God the mighty one. For though thy people (o Israel) be as the sonde of
the sea, yet shall but the remnaunt of them only convert unto him. Perfect is
the judgment of him that flows in righteousness: and therefore ye LORD of
hoostes shall perfectly fulfill the thing, that he has determined in the
myddest of the whole world. Therefore thus says the LORD God of hoostes:
Thou my people, that dwell in Sion, be not afraid for the king of the
Assirians: He shall wagg his staff at the, ye and beat the with the rodd, as
the Egiptia^s did sometime: But soon after, shall my wrath and my indignacion
be fulfilled against their blasphemies.

LORD of hoostes shall prepare a scourge for him, Esa. 37. f Iudic* 7. g
like as was the punyshme^t of Madia^ upon ye mount of Oreb. And he shall lift
up his rod over the sea, Exo. 14. c
as he did sometime over the Egiptians. Their shall his burden be taken from thy
shulders, and his yock from thy neck, ye the same yock shall corrupt for very
fatness. He shall come to Aiath, and go through toward Migron. But at Machmas
shall he muster his hooste, and go over ye foorde. Gaba shall be their restinge
place, Rhama shall be afraid, Gabea Saul shall fle away. The voice of ye noise
of thy horses (o daughter Gallim) shall be herd unto lais and to Anathoth, which
also shall be in trouble. Madmena shall tremble for fear, but the citesyns of
Gahim are ma^ly, yet shall he remain at Nob that day. After that, shall he lift
up his hand against the mount Sion, and against the hill of Jerusalem. But se,
the Lord God of hoostes shall take away the proud from thence, with fear. He
shall hew down the proud, and fell the hie minded. The thorns of the wod shall
be rooted out with iron, and Libanus shall have a mighty fall.

The xj. Chapter.
Mat. 1. a Esa. 61. a Luc. 4. b and 7. c
and a blossom out of his rote. The sprete of the LORD shall light upon it:
the sprete of wisdom, and understanding: the sprete of council, and strength:
ye sprete of knowledge, and of the fear of God: and shall make him fervent in
the fear of God. For he shall not give sentence, after the thing yt shall be
brought before his eyes, nether reprove a matter at the first hearing: but
with rightousnesse shall he judge the poor, and with holiness shall he refourme
the simple of the world. (...)


He shall smite ye world with ye staff of his mouth, and with ye breath of his
mouth shall he slaye the wicked. (...)
Righteousness shall be the gyrdle of his loins, treuth and faithfulness the
gyrdinge up of his raynes. The^ shall ye wolf dwell with the la^be, (...)
lions and catel shall keep company together, so that a little child shall drive
them forth. The cow and the Bear shall feed together, and their yongones shall
lie together. The lyo^ shall eat straw like the ox, or the cow. The child
while he sucketh, shall have a desire to the serpents nest, and when he is
weened, he shall put his hand in to the Cockatryce den. (...)
No man shall do euel to another, no man shall destro^ another, in all the hill
of my Sanctuary. For the earth shall be full of ye knowledge of ye LORD, even as
though the water of the

Then shall the Gentiles enquere after the rote of Iesse (which shall be set up
for a token unto the Gentiles) for his dwellinge shall be glorious. (...)
At the same time shall the LORD take in hand again, to conquer ye remnaunt
of his people (which are lefft alive) From the Assiria^s, Egiptians, (...)
Arabians, Morians, Elamites, Caldeyes, Antiochia^s and Ilo^des of the sea.
(...)
And he shall set up a toke^ among the Gentiles, and gather together ye
dispersed of Israel, ye and the outcastes of Judah from the four corners of ye
world. The hatred of Ephraim, and ye enmyte of Judah shall be clean rooted out.
Ephraim shall bear no euel will to Judah,

The LORD also shall cleue the tunges of the Egipcia^s see, and with a mighty
wind shall he lift up his hand over Nilus, and shall smite his seven streams
and make men go over dry shod. And thus shall he make a way for his people, yt
remains from the Assirians, (...)
like as it happened to ye Israelites, what time they departed out of the land
of Egipte.

The xij. Chapter.
SO that then thou shall say: O LORD, wrath, (...) c. ^. c (...). a (...).
117. b
and have mercy upon me. Behold, God is my health, in whom I trust, and am not
afraid. For the LORD God is my strength, and my praise, he also shall be my
refuge. (...). a (...). b
Let us give thanks unto the lord, and call upon his name, and declare his
councels among the people, and keep them in remembrance, for his name is
excellent. O sing praises unto the LORD, for he does great things, as it is
known in all the world. Cry out, and be glad, thou that dwell in Sion,
for great is thy prince: the holy one of Israel.

The XIII. Chapter.
(...)
call unto them, hold up your ho^de, that the princes may go in at the door.
For I will send for my debites and my gyau^tes (says the LORD) and in my
wrath I will call for soch, as tryumphe in my glory.

(...)
With that, me thought I herd in the mountains, a noise, like as it had been
of a great people: and a ruszshinge, as though the kingdoms of all nations
had come together. (And the LORD of hoostes was the captain of the whole
army.) As they had come not only out of far countrees, but also from the
ends of the heavens: Eue^ the LORD himself with the ministers of LORD is at
hand, and comes as a destroyer from ye allmighty. Then shall all hondes be
letten down, and all men's hertes shall melt away, they shall stand in fear,
carfulness and sorrow shall come upon them, and they shall have pain, as a
woman that traueleth with child. (...)
One shall ever be abaszshed of another, and their faces shall burn, like ye
fla^me.

For lo, the day of the LORD shall come, terrible, full of indignacion and
wrath: to make the land waist, and to root out the sin thereof. For the
stars and planetes of heaven shall not give their light, the Son shall be
quenched in the rysinge, (...)
and the Moon shall not shine with his light. And I will punysh the wickedness
of the world, and the sins of the ungodly, says the LORD. The hye
stomachs of the proud will I take away, and will lay down the boostinge

Thus shall it go with Babylon, in the wrath of the LORD of hoostes in ye day
of his fearful indignacio^. And Babylon shall be as an hunted or chased do, and
as a flock with out a shepherde. Every man shall turn to his own people, and
fle echone into his own land. Who so is found alone, shall be shot through: And
who so gather together, shall be destroyed with the sword. Their children shall be
slain before their eyes, their houses spoiled, and their wives rauyshed. For
lo, I shall bring up ye Medes against the^, which shall not regard silver, nor
be desirous of gold. Then shall young men's bows be knapped Genesis 19. c
nether shall there be any more dwellinge there, from generation to generation.

The Arabians shall make no mo tents there, nether shall the shepardes make
their foldes there any more: but wild beasts shall lie there, and ye houses
shall be full of great Oules. Estriches shall dwell there, and Apes shall daunse
there: The little Oules shall cry in the palaces, one after another, and
Drago^s shall be in the pleasant perlours. And as for Babilons time, it is at
hand, and her days may not be long absent.

The XIIII. Chapter.
But ye LORD will be merciful unto Jacob, Abdie 1. d Zach. 2. b
and carry the^ home with the^. And ye house of Israel shall have the^ in
possession, for servants and mayde^s in ye lord of ye LORD. They shall take
those prisoners, whose captyues they had been before: and rule those, yt had
oppressed the^. When ye LORD now shall bring ye to rest, from ye travail,
fear, and hard bondage yt thou wast laden with all: then shall thou use this
mockage upon ye king of Babylon, and say: How happens it yt ye oppressor
leaves of? It ye golden tribute come to an end? Doutles the LORD has broken
the staff of the ungodly, and the cepter of ye lordly. Which when he is wroth,
smyteth ye people with durable strokes, and in his wonders he persecuteth the^,
and tameth the^ continually. And therefore ye whole world is now

Luc. 10. c
and worms shall be thy coueringe.

How art thou fallen from heaven (o Lucifer) thou fair morni^ge child? APo.
12. d
have thou gotten a fall even to the ground, thou that (not withstondinge)
dyddest subdue the people? And yet thou thoughtest in thine heart: I Eze. 31. c
Eze. 32. c
They that se the, shall narowly look upon the, and think in them selves,
saying: Is this the man, that brought all lands in fear, and made ye
kingdoms afraid: Is this he that made the world in a manner waist, and and
laid the cities to the ground, which let not his prisoners go home?

How happens it, that the kings of all people lie, every one at home in his
own palace, with worshipe, and thou art cast out of thy grave like a wild
branch: like as dead men's raiment that are shot through with the sword: as
they that go down to the stones of the deep: as a dead coarse that is tr^den
under fete: and art not buried with them? Even because that thou have waisted thy
lord, and destroyed thy people. For the generation of the wicked shall be
without honor, for ever. There shall a way be sought to destroy their
children, for their fathers wickedness: they shall not come up again to possess
the land, and fill the world full of castles and towns.

LORD of hoostes) and root out ye name and generation of Babylon (says the
LORD) and will give it to the Otters, and will make water poddels of it. And I
will swepe them out with the besome of destruction, says the LORD of hoostes.
The LORD of hoostes has sworn an ooth, saye^ge: It shall come to pass as I
have determined: and shall be fulfilled as I have devised. Esa. 37. a
The Assirians shall be destroyed in my land, and upon my mountaytaines will I
tread them under foot. Wherthorow his yocke shall come from you, and his
burden shall be taken from your shulders. This deuyce has God taken through the
whole world, and thus is his hand stretched out over all people. For if the
LORD of hoostes determe a thing, who will dysanulle it? And if he stretch
forth his hand, who will hold it in again?

The same year that king Achas dyed, (...)
Rejoice not (thou whole Palestina) as though ye rod of him yt beats the were
broken: For out of ye serpents rote, there shall wax a k^c katrice, and the
fruit shall be a fyrie worm. But the poor shall feed of the best things, and
the simple shall dwell in safety. (...)
Thy rotes will I destroy with honger, and it shall slaye ye remnaunt. Mourn ye
ports, weep ye Cities And fear thou (o whole Palestina) for that shall come
from the North a smoke, whose power no man may abide. Who shall then maynteyne
the messages of the Gentyles? But the LORD stablisheth Syon, and the poor of
my people shall put their trust in him.

The XV. Chapter.
THis is ye heavy burden upon Moab: Ar of Moab was destroyed (as me thought) in
the night season: (...)
The walls of Moab perished in the night, and vanished away: They went to
Both and Dibon in the hie places, for to weep: Moab did mourn from Nebo to
Medba: All their heads were colled, and al their beardes shaven. (...)
In their streets were they gyrded about with sack cloth. In all the tops of
their houses and streets was there nothing, but mourning and weping^. Hesebon
and Eleale cried, that their voice was herd unto Iahaz. The worthies also of
Moab bleared and cried for very sorrow of their minds: Woe is my heart for Moabs
sake. They fled unto the cite of Zoar, which is like a fair fruteful bullock,
they went up to Luhith, wepinge. The way toward Horonaim was full of
lamentacion for ye hurt. The waters of Nimrim were dried up, the grass was
wythred, the herbs destroyed, and what necessary grene thing there was
beside. In like manner the thing yt was left them of their substance, they
carried it by water to Araby. The cry went over the whole land of Moab: from
Eglaim unto Beer, was there nothing but mourning. The waters of Dimon were
full of blood, for ye enemy had sent thither a bond of men, which as a lion,
laid wait for the remnaunt of the land, and for them yt were escaped.

The xvj. Chapter.
(...)
as the night does: hyde the chased, and bewraye not the^ that are fled, let
the persecuted Moabites dwell among you, be our open refuge against the
destroyer: for the adversary oppresses us, the robber undoes us, and the
tyraunte dryueth us out of our land. But ye Trone of your kingdom is full of
grace, therefore he that sytteth upon it with faitfulnesse and treuth in the house
of David, know the thing and do his diligence to help shortly* acordinge to
Equite and righteousness. As for Moabs pride (shall they answer) it (...)
proud, arrogant, and hie minded: yet is their strength nothing like. And
therefore Moab complayneth unto Moab, where through they come all to mourn: and
now yt they be smytten, they take their deuyce beneth by the bryckwall, and
make their co^playnte.

The suburbs also of Hesebon were made waist, and the princes of the Gentyles
hewed down ye vynyardes of Sibma, which were planted with noble grapes, and
spread unto Iazer, and went unto the end of the deserte, whose branches
stretched their selves forth beyond the sea. Therefore I mourned for Iazer, and
for ye vynyardes of Sibma with great sorrow. I poured my tears upon Hesebon and
Eleale, for all their songs were laid down, in their harvest and gatheringe
of their grapes: Mirth and chere was gone out of ye field and vynyardes, in so
much, that no man was glad ner sunge. There went no (...)
she went up an hie in to her sanctuary to make her prayer there, but she might
not (...) helped. This is the deuyce, which the LORD took in hand at that
time against Moab. But now the LORD says thus: In three year shall ye power
of Moab with their po^pe (which is great) be minished, like as ye burden of an
hired servant: And as for ye remnaunt of them, they shall be less then a few,
and not rekened much worth.

The xvij. Chapter.
THis is the heavy burden upon Damascus: Iere. 49 d Amos. 1. a
Damascus shall be no more a cite, but an heap of broken stones. The cities of
Aroer shall be waist, The catel shall lie there, and noma^ shall fraye the^ away.
Ephraim shall no more be strong, and Damascus shall no more be a kingdom. And
as for ye glory of ye remnaunt of ye Sirians, it shall be as the glory of the
children of Israel, says ye LORD Esa. 24. b
which fyndeth but two or three olyue beries above in the top, and four or
five in the branches. Thus the LORD God of Israel has spoken.

Then shall man co^uerte again unto his maker, and turn his eyes to the holy
one of Israel And shall not turn to the aulters that are ye work of his own
ho^des, nether shall he look upon groaues and images, which his 4. Re. 7. b


So shall thou (o Damascus) be desolate, because thou have forgotten God ye
Savior, and have not called to remembrance ye rock of thy strength, Wherefore
thou have also set a fair pla^te, and grafted a strange branch. In the day
when thou did plant it, it was great, and gave soon the fruit of thy
sede: But in the day of harvest, thou shall reap an heap of sorrows and
miseries.

Woe be to the multitude of much people, Esa. 37 ^
and though they be armed, yet they fle far of, and vanish away like the
dust with the wind upon an hill, and as the whyrle wind through a storm.
Though they be fearful at night, yet in the morninge it is gone with the^, This
is their portion, that do us harm, and heretage of them, that rob us.

The xviij. Chapter.
LORD said unto me. I laid LORD of hoostes: even that hard folk, that
fearful folk, and that further is the^ this: yt desperate and pylled folk
(whose land is divided from us with floudes of water) unto the place of the
name of the LORD of hoostes: Deuteronomy. 12. a
even unto the hill of Sion.

The xix. Chapter.
Iere. 46. a Eze. 29. a Luc. 21. d
the LORD will ride upon a swifte cloud, and come in to Egipte. And the gods
of Egipte shall trymble at his coming, and the heart of Egipte shall quake
within her. For thus says the LORD: I will stere up the Egiptians one against
a another among them selves, Mar. 13. a
so that one shall be ever against his brother and neighbor, ye one cite
against another, and one kingdom against another. And Egipte shall be choked in
her self. When they axe council at their gods, at their Prophets, at their
soythsayers and witches: then will I bring their council to naught.



Ye the indiscreet princes of Zoan, (...)
the (...)
shall turn to foolishness: Those that darre boast and say of Pharaos
behalf: I am come of wise people. I am come of ye old regal Progeny. But
where are now thy wise me^? Let them tell the and show the, what the LORD of
hoostes has taken in hand against Egypt. Fools are those princes of Zoan,
and proud are the princes of Noph: ye they dysceaue Egypt mith the nobilite
of their stock. (...)
For the LORD has made Egypt droncke^ with the sprete of error, and they
shall use it in all matters: eue^ like as a dronke^ man goes spewinge about.
For Egipte shall lack good council, so yt they shall not know what to do,
nether beginnynge nor end, nether upon the lord nor water. The^ shall ye
Egiptia^s be like unto women, afraid and asto^^ed, at the liftinge up of the
ho^de, which ye LORD of hoostes shall lift up over them.

The land of Judah also shall make the Egiptians afraid, who so does but speak
upon it, shall put them in fear: And that be cause of the council, which ye
LORD of hoostes has devysed against them. Then shall the five cities of Egipte
speak with the Canaanites t^nge, ande swear by the LORD of hoostes, and
Heliopolis shall be one of them. At the same time shall the LORD of hoostes have
an altar in the myddest of the land of Egipte, with this title there by: Unto
the LORD. This shall be a token or testimony unto the LORD of hoostes in the
land of Egipte, when they shall cry unto him, because of those that oppress
them: that he shall send them a captain and a Savior to deliver them.

Morouer, Egipte shall be bought unto the LORD, and the Egiptians also shall
know the LORD at the same time: they shall do him reverence with peace
offringes, and with meat offringes: they shall promise him offringes, ye and
pay him also. Thus the LORD shall smite Egipte, and heal it again: and so
shall they turn to ye LORD, and he also shall have mercy upon them, and save
them. Then shall there be a common way out of Egipte in to Assiria. The
Assirians shall come in to Egipte, and the Egypcians in to Assiria. The
Egipcians also and the Assirians shall both have one Gods service. Then shall
Israel with honor be the third to Egipte and Assure. And the LORD of hoostes
shall bless them, saying: Blissed is my people of the Egipcians, Assure is the
work of my ho^des, but Israel is mine enheritaunce.

The xx. Chapter.
LORD unto Esaye ye son of Amos, saying: go and lowse of yt sack cloth from
thy loins, and put of ye shues from thy fete. And so he did, goinge naked and
barefote. Then said the LORD: where as my servant Esaye goes naked and
barefote, it is a token and signifienge of the thing, that after three year
shall come upon Egipte and Ethiopia. For even thus shall the king of the
Ass^rians drive both young and old, as prisoners naked and barefote, out of
Egipte and Ethiopia, And shall dyscouer ye shame

Morouer they that dwell in ye Isles shall say even the same day: behold, this
is our hope, to whom we fled to seek help, that we might be delivered from
the king of ye Assirians. How will we escape?

The xxj. Chapter.
^sa. 13. a (...). 13. a
Panges came upon me, as upon a woman in her travail. When I herd it, I was
abashed: and when I looked up, I was afraid. Mine heart paunted, I trembled
for fear. The darcknesse made me fearful in my mind.

LORD has charged me: go thy way, and set a watchma^, that he may tell what
he seyth. And when he had waited diligently, he saw two horsemen: the one
rydinge upon an Ass, the other upon a camel. And the lion cried: LORD, I have
stand waytinge all the whole day, and have kept my watch all the night. With
yt came there one rydinge upon a charet, which answered, and said: Babylon is
fallen, Iere. 51. a Apo. 14. b and 1^. a
she is turned vpsyde down, and all ye images of her gods are smytten to ye
ground. This (o my fellow throsshers and fanners) have I herd of the LORD of
hoostes the God of Israel, to show it unto you.

The heavy burden of Duma.
One of Seir cried unto me: watchman, Iere. 49. b
what have thou espied by night? Watchman, what have thou espied by night? The
watchman answered: The day breaks on, and the night is coming: If your
request be earnest, then axe, and come again.

The heavy burden upon Arabia.
At even ye shall abide in the wod, in the Esa. 16. a
Mete the thurstie with water, (o ye citisens of Hema) mete those with b^ed
that are fled. For they shall run away from the weapen, from the drawn
sword, from the bent bow, and from the great batell. For thus has the LORD
spoken unto me: over a year shall all the power of Cedar be gone, like as when
the office of an hired servant goes out: And the remnaunt of the good
Archers of Cedar, shall be very few: Iere. 49. e
For the LORD God of Israel has spoken it.

The xxij. Chapter.
The heavy burden, upon the valley of Visions.
WHat have thou there to do, that thou Iere. 9. a Lucae 19. d
as touching the destruction of my people. For this is ye day of the LORD of
hoostes, wherein he will plage, tread down, and wede out the valley of
Visio^s, and break down the walls, with soch a crack, that it shall give a
sownde in the mountains.

2. Peg. 5. b
whereof there shall be many. Ye shall gather together the waters of the lower
pole, and tell the houses of Jerusalem, and break of some of the^ to keep ye
walls. And ye shall make a pyt betwyxte ye twain walls of the water of the
old pole, and nothing regard him, that took it in hand and made it. And at
the same time shall ye LORD of hoostes call me^ to wepinge mourninge, to
baldness and puttinge on of sack clothe. But they to fulfill their lust and
wilfulnes, slaugter oxe^, they kill sheep, they eat costly meat, Sap. 2. b 1.
Cor. 15. c
and drink wine: let us eat and drink, tomorow we shall die. Nevertheless when
the LORD of hoostes herd of it, he said: ye, if this wickedness of yours
shall be remitted, ye must die for it. This has ye LORD God of hoostes spoken.

Thus says the LORD God of hoostes: Esa. 36. a
and say unto him: What have thou here to do? and from whence come thou?
that thou have made the a grave here? For he had caused a costly tomb of stone
to be made for himself, and a place to lie in to be hewn out of a rock.
Behold the LORD shall cast the out by violence, he will deck the of another
fashion, and put upon the a strange clothe. He shall carry ye in to a far
country, like a ball with his hondes, There shall thou die, there shall the
pomp of thy charettes have an end: thou vylleyne of the house of thy LORD: I
will shute the out of thine office, and put the from thine estate.

Apo. 1. d Job 12. b
and of the Kynred of Judah. I will also lay the keye of David's house upon his
shulders, and if he open, no man shall shit, and if he do shyt, no man shall
open. I will fasten him to a nale in the place of the most hie faithfulness,
Zach. 10. a
and he shall be upon the glorius trone of his fathers house. They shall ha^ge
upon him all the glory of his fathers house, of the children and childers
children, all apparel small and great, all instruments of measure and music.
This shall come to pass, (says the LORD of hoostes) when the nale, yt is
fastened to the place of the highest faithfulness: shall be plucked of, And when
the weight that hangs upon it, shall fall, be broken, and hewn in pieces. For
the LORD himself has said it.

The xxiij. Chapter.
AN heavy burden upon Tirus. Mourn (...)
for she is thrown down to the ground, and conquered of them, that are come
from Cithim. The Indwellers of the Ilondes, the merchants of Sidon, and they
that occupied the sea (of whom thou wast full sometime) are at a point. For by
see were there fruits brought unto the, and all manner of corn by water. Thou
wast the common marcket of al people. Sido^ is sorry for it, ye and all ye power
of the sea co^planeth, and says: O yt I had never traueled with child, that
I had never borne any, yt I had nether norished boy, ner brought up daughter.
As soon as Egipte perceaueth it, she will be as sorry as Tirus it self. Go over
the sea, Mourn ye yt dwell in the Isles. Is not that the glorious cite, which
has been of long antiquite? whose natyues dwellinge far of, commend her so
greatly* Who has devised soch things upon Tirus the crown of al cities,
whose merchants and captains were the highest and principal of the world?
Eue^ the LORD of hoostes has devised it, (...)
and there is not a gyrdle more.

Thus the LORD that remoueth the kingdoms, (...)
and has taken in hand against that mighty Canaan to rote it out:) has
stretched out his hand over the sea, and said: From hence forth shall thou
make no more mirth (o thou daughter Sidon) for thou shall be put down of the
Cethe^s. Stand up therefore, and go where the enemy will carry the, where thou
shall also have no rest. Behold (for thine ensample:) The Caldees were soch a
people, that no man was like them, Assure builded them: he set up his castles
and palaces, and broke them down again. And therefore mourn (ye ships of
the sea) for your power shall be thrown down.

After that, shall the lxx years of Tirus (even as long as their kings life
was) beforgotten. And after lxx. years, it shall happen to Tirus as with an
harlot that plays upon a lute. Take thy lute (say men to her) and go about
the city, thou art yet an unknown wensche, make pastyme with diverse
balettes, whereby* thou may come in to acquantaunce. Thus shall it happen
after lxx. years. (...)* ^1. a
The LORD shall uiset the city of Tirus, and it shall come again to her
Marchaundyse, and shall occupy with all the Kingdoms that be in the world. But
all her occupie^ge and winning, shall be hallowed unto the LORD. (...)* 4^. c
For then shall they lay up nothing behind them nor upon heaps: but the
marchau^dise of Tirus shall belo^ge unto the citisens of the LORD, to the
fedinge and susteninge of the hu^grie, and to the clothinge of the aged.

The xxiiij. Chapter.
LORD shall waist and plage the world, (...)* 4 b
he shall make the face of the earth desolate, and scatre abroad ye inhabitours
thereof. Then shall the pressed be as the people, the master as the servant, the
dame like the maid, the seller like the byer, he that le^deth upon usury, like
him yt boroweth upon usury, the creditoure, as the detter. Ye miserably shall
ye world be waysted and clean destroyed. For ye LORD has so determed in
himself. The earth shall be heuye and decay: The face of ye earth shall perish
and fall away, the proud people of ye world shall come to naught, For ye earth
is corrupt of her indwellers.

^po. 1^. c
shall sighe. The mirth of tabrettes shall be laid down, the chere of the joyful
shall cease, and the pleasure of lutes shall have an end: there shall no more
wine bedronke with mirth, the beer shall be bitter to the^ that drink it, the
wicked cities shall be broken down, all houses shall be shut, that no man may
come in.

In the streets shall there be lift up a cry because of wine, all men's chere
shall vanish away, and all joy of the earth shall pass. Desolacion shall
remain in the cities, and the gates shall be smytten with waistnesse. For it
shall happen unto all lands and to all people, like as when a man smyteth down
ye olyues, yt are left upon the tree: Esa 17. b
or seeks after grapes, when the wine gatheringe is out. And those same (that
remain) shall lift up their voice, and be glad, and shall magnify the glory of
the LORD, even from the sea, and praise the name of the LORD God of Israel,
in the valeis and Ilo^des. We hear songs sunge Iere. 4^ g
And if he come out of the pyt, he shall be taken with the snare. For the
wyndowes above shall be opened, and the foundation of the earth shall move.

The earth shall give a great crack, it shall have asore ruin, and take an
horrible fall. The earth shall stacker like a dronken man, and be taken away
like a tent. Her misdedes shall lie so heuye upon her, yt she must fall, and
never rise up again. At the same time shall the LORD mustre together the hie
hooste above, and ye kings of the world upon the earth. These shall be coupled
together as prisoners be, and shall be shut in one ward and punished innumerable
days. The Moon and the Son shall be ashamed, Luc. 21. c
when the LORD of hoostes shall rule them at Jerusalem upon the mount Sion,
before and with his excellent council.

The xxv. Chapter.
O LORD, thou art my God, I will praise ^sa. 26. a
heaps of stone: and of head cities, broken walls: The palaces of the wicked
destroyest thou out of the city, that they shall never be builded again.
Therefore the very rude people must magnify the, and the cities of the cruel
heithen must fear the. For thou art the poor man's help, a strength for the
neadful in his necessite. Thou art a defense against euel wether, a schadowe
against the hete. But unto the presumptuous, thou art like a strong whyrle
wind, that casts down the boostinge of the ungodly, thou kepest men from
heat with the shadow of the clouds, thou cuttest of the branches of
tyrauntes.

Morouer the LORD of hoostes shall once prepare a feast for all people upon the
hill: Luc. 14 d
A plenteous, costly, pleasant feast, of fat and welfed beasts, of sweet and
most pure things. Upon the hill shall he take away the side vale yt ha^geth
before ye face of al people, Ose. 13. e 1. Co. 15. g Apo. 7. d and 21. a
and the coueringe wherewith all Gentiles are covered. As for death, he shall
utterly consume it, The LORD God shall wipe away the tears from all faces,
and take away the confucio^ of his people through ye whole world. For ye LORD
himself has said it.

At the same time shall it be said: lo, this is our God in who^ we put our
trust, Ephe. 2. a
and he has healed us. This is the LORD that we have waited for: Let us
rejoice and delight in his health. For the ho^de of ye LORD cease upon this
hill. But Moab shall be throsshe^ down under him, like as the straw is trode^
under fete in a do^ge hill. For he shall stretch out his ho^des upon him, like
as a swimmer does to swymme. And with the power of his hondes shall he cast down
his hie pomp. As for his strong holds and hie walls: he shall bur^e them,
cast the^ down, and fell the^ to the ground in to dust.

The xxvj. Chapter.
Pro. 1^. b Zac. 2. a Psalm. 117. b
We have a strong city, the walls and the ordinance shall keep us. Open ye
gates, yt the good people may go in, which labors for the treuth. And thou,
which art the doer and have the matter in hand: shall provide for peace, eue^
the peace yt me^ hope for in the. Romans 5. a Esa. 12. b Esa. 25. a
Hope still in the LORD, for in the LORD God is everlasting strength. For
why, it is he, yt brings low the hie minded citesyns, and casts down the
proud cities. He casts the^ to the ground, ye eue^ in to ye mire, yt they
may be trode^ under the fete of the simple, and with the steps of the poor.
Pro. 16. a Iere. 10. d
Thou (LORD) co^sidrest the path of ye rigtuous, whether it be right, whether
the way of ye rightuous be right. Therefore (LORD) we have a respect unto the
way of thy judgments, thy name and thy remembrance rejoice the soul. Psalm.
62. a and 142. a
My soul lusts after the all the night long, and my mind haisteth freely to
the. For as soon as thy judgment is known to the world, the^ the inhabitours
of the earth learn righteousness. LORD.

LORD, they will not se thine hie hand, but they shall se it, and be
confounded: when thou shall devour them with the wrath of the people, and with
the fire of thine enemies. But unto us (LORD) provide for peace: for thou
workest in us all or works. (...)
O LORD our God, though soch lords have dominacion upon us as know not the:
yet grant, that we may only hope in the, and keep thy name in remembrance.
The malicious Tyrauntes when they die, (...)
are nether in life nor in the resurrection, for thou visitest the^ and rootest
the^ out, and destroyest all the memoryall of them. Again, thou increacest the
people (o LORD), thou increacest the people, thou shall be praised and
magnified in all ye ends of the world. The people that seek unto the in
trouble, that same aduersite which they complane of, is unto the^ a chastenynge
before the. Like as a wife with child (when her travail comes (...)
cries and suffers the pain: Eue^ so are we (o LORD) in thy sight. We are
with child, we travail, and bear, (...)
and with the sprete we bring forth health, where through the earth is
undestroyed, and the inhabitours of the world perish not.

But as for thy dead men and ours, (...)
that be departed, they are in life and resurrection. They lie in the earth,
they wake, and have joy: for yt dew is a dew of life and light. But ye place
of the malicious Tyrauntes is fallen away. So go now my people in to thy
chamber, (...)
and shut the door to the, and suffer now ye twi^cklinge of an eye, (...)
till the wrath be ouerpast. For behold, the LORD will go out of his
habitacion, (...)
and vyset the wickedness of the^ that dwell upon earth. He will discover the
blood that she has devoured, she shall never hyde the^, that she has
murthured.

The xxvij. Chapter.
THen the LORD with his heuye, great LORD keep it, and water it in due
season. I watch day and night, that no man break in to it. I bear no euel
will in my mind. Who will compel me, that I greatly forgettinge all faith
fullness, should burn it up at once with thorns and bushes? Or who will enforce
me to keep or make peace? It will come to this point, yt Jacob shall be rooted
again, and Israel shall be grene and bear flowers, and they shall fill ye whole
world with their fruit. Smyteth he not his smyter, as euel as he is smytte^ him
self? Destroieth he not ye murderers, as he is murthured? Every man
reco^penseth with ye measure yt he receaueth: He museth upon his sore wind, as
upon the days of extreme heat. And therefore shall the iniquite of Jacob be
thus reconciled. And so shall he take away all ye fruit of his sins.

(...). 9. c
As for altar stones, he shall make them all as stones beaten to poulder: the
Groves and Idols shall not stand. The strong cities shall be desolate, and ye
fair cities shall be left like a wilderness. The catel shall feed and lie there,
and the sheep shall eat it up. (...). 26 (...). 32. b
shall be defiled. For it is a people without vndersto^dinge, and therefore he yt
created them, shall not favor them: and he yt made them, shall not be merciful
to the^. In yt time shall ye LORD shute from ye swifte water of Euphrates, unto
ye river of Egipte. And there shall the children be chosen out one by one. Then
shall the great trompet be blown, so that those which have been destroyed in
the Assirians land, and those that be scatred abroad in Egipte: shall come and
worshipe the LORD at Jerusalem, upon the holy mount.

The xxviij. Chapter.
(...) 3* a
and to the faydinge flower, to the glory of his po^pe, yt is upon the top of
the ple^teous valley: which me^ be ouerladen with wine. Behold, the strength and
power of the LORD shall break in to the land on every side, like a tempest of
hale, that bears down strong holds, and like an horrible, mighty and over
flowinge water. And the proud crown of the dronken Ephraemites, shall be
trodden underfoot. (...)* 10. a
And as for the faydinge flower, the glory of his pomp, which is upon the
top of the plenteous valley: it shall happen unto him, as to an untimely fruit
before the harvest come. Which as soon as it is seen, is by and by devoured,
or ever it come well in a man's hand.

And then shall the LORD of hoostes be a joyful crown, and a glorious garla^de
unto the remnaunt of his people. Unto the lowly, he shall be a sprete of
judgment, and unto them that drive away the enemies from ye gates, he shall be a
sprete of strength. Esa. 3. c
they are dronken with wine, and weak braned through strong drink. They err
in saying, and in judgment they fail. For all tables are so full of vomyte and
fylthynes, yt no place is clean. What is he among them, yt can teach,
instruct or enfourme the children, which are weened from suck or taken from
the breasts: of any other fashion, then: Esa. 10. a Mat 23. b
Command yt may be commanded, bid yt may be bydde^, forbid that may be
forbydde^, keep back yt may be kept back, here a little, there a little. 1.
Cor. 14. c
And therefore the LORD also shall speak with lispinge lips and with a strange
language unto this people, to whom he spoke before of this manner: This shall
bring rest, if one refresh the weery, ye this shall bring rest. But they had
no will to hear. And therefore the LORD LORD, ye mockers that rule the Lords
people, which is at Jerusalem. For ye comfort yor selves thus: Tush, death and
we are at a point, and as for hell, we have made a condition with it: that
though there break out any sore plage, it shall not come upon us. Amos 9. d
For with disceate will we escape, and with nymblenes will we defend or selves.
Psalm. 117. c To* 9. g 1 Pet 2. a Luc. 20. b
Therefore thus says the LORD God: Behold, I will lay a stone in Sion, a
great stone, a costly corner stone for a sure foundation: yt who so puts
his trust in him, shall not be confouded. Righteousness will I set up again in ye
balaunce, and judgment in the weightes. 1. Cor. 13. b
The tempest of hale shall take away yor refuge, that ye have to disceaue
withal, and ye ouerflowinge waters shall break down yor strong holds of
dissimulacio^. Thus the appoyntme^t LORD shall step forth as he did upon the
mount Perazim, Esa. 37. f 2. Re. 5. d Iosue 10. b 1. Par. 14. d
and shall take on as he did upon the dale of Gabaon: that he may bring forth
his deuyce, his strange deuyce: and fulfill his work, his wonderful work.
And therefore make no mockes at it, that your captiuyte increase not: for I
have herd the LORD of hoostes say, that there shall come a soden destruction
and plage LORD of hosts which is marvelous in council, and great in
righteousness.

The xxix. Chap.
Eze. 43. c 2. Reg. 5. a
Take yet some years, and let some feasts yet pass over: then shall Ariel be
beseged, so that she shall be heavy and sorouful, and shall be unto me even as a
lion. For I will lay sege to the round about, and keep ye in with towers, and
grave up dykes against ye. And thou shall be brought low, and speak out of
the earth, and thy words shall go humbly out of ye ground. Thy voice shall come
out of the earth, like the voice of a witch, and thy talkinge shall groan out
of the mire. For the multitude of thine enemies shall be like mealdust. Psalm. 1. b
And the nombre of Tyrauntes shall be as ye dust that the wind takes away
suddenly.

Thou shall be visited of the LORD of hoostes with thondre, earth quake, and
with a great crack, with the whyrle wind, tempest, and with the flame of a
consumynge Psalm. 72. c
It is like as when an hungry man dreameth that he is eating, and when he
awaketh, he has nothing: like as when a thurstie man dreameth that he is
drinkinge, and when he awaketh, he is faint, and his soul impatient.

So is the multitude of all people, that mustre them selves against the hill of
Sion. But ye shall be at your wits end, ye shall be abashed: ye shall stackre,
and rele to and fro. Ye shall be dronken, but not of wine. Ye shall fall, but not
through dronkenes: For the LORD shall give you an hard slepinge sprete, and
hold down your eyes: namely yor prophets and heads which should se, them
shall he cover. (...)
And all visions shall be unto you, as the words that stand in a sealed lettre,
when one offreth it to a man that is learned, and says: read us this lettre.
The^ he answers: I ca^ not read it, for it is shutt. But if it be given to
one yt is not learned, or said unto him: read this lettre: Then says he. I
can not read.

Therefore thus says the LORD: For (...)
and prayseth me highly with their lips (where as there heart nevertheless is
far fro me, and the fear which they owe unto me, that turn they to men's
laws and doctrynes) therefore will I also show unto this people, a marvelous
terrible and great thing (Namely this: (...)
) I will destroy the wisdom of their wise, and the vndersto^dinge of their
learned men shall perish. Woe be unto them that seek so deep, (...)
to hyde their ymaginacion be fore the LORD, which rehearce their councils in
ye darkness, and say: who seith us, or who knows us?

Which ymaginacion of yours is even as when the potters claye takes
adviseme^t, as though the work might say to ye work master: make me not, or
as when an erthen vessel says of the potter: he understands not. Se ye not
that it is hard by, (...)
that Libanus shall be turned in to Charmel, and that Charmel shall be taken as a
wodde? Then shall deaf men understand the words of the book, and the eyes of
the blind shall se without any cloud or darkness. The oppressed shall hold a
merry feast LORD, and the poor people shall rejoice in the holy one of Israel.

Then shall the furious people cease, and ye mockers shall be put away, and all
they yt do wrong shall be rooted out, soch as labor to draw me^ unto sin:
(...)
and yt disceaue him, which reproves them in the gate, and soch as turn good
persons to vanite.

And therefore the LORD (even the defender of Abraham) says thus unto the
house of Jacob: (...)
Now shall not Jacob be ashamed, nor his face confounded, when he seith among
his children (whom my hondes have made) soch as halowe my name among them:
that they may sancifie the holy one of Jacob, and fear the God of Israel: and
that they which before time were of an erroneous sprete, have now
understanding, and yt soch as before could not speak, are now learned in my
law.

The xxx. Chapter.
LORD) which seek council, (...)
but not at me: which take a web in hand, but not after my will: that they
may heap one sin upon another. They go down in to Egipte, (and axe me no
council) to seek help at the power of Pharao, and comfort in the shadow of
the Egipcia^s. But Pharaos help shall be your co^fucion, and the comfort in
the Egipcians shadow shall be your own shame. Your rulers have been at Zoan,
and yor messaungers came unto Hanes. (...) 29. a (...)* 1^. d (...) 16. b
But ye shall all be ashamed of the people yt may not help you, which shall not
bring you strength or comfort, but shame and confucion.

(...)
Wherefore go hence, and write them this in their tables, and note it in a
book: that it may remain by their posterite, and be still kept. For it is an
obstinate people, ^sa. 1. a
unfaithful children, children that will not hear the law of the LORD.

(...). 11. d (...) 7. b
They darre say to the prophets: Intro mitte your selves with nothing, and
unto ye Soythsayers: tell us of nothing for to come, but speak friendly words
unto us, and preach us false things. Tread out of the way, go out of the
path, turn the holy one of Israel from us. Therefore thus says the holy one
of Israel: In as much as ye have cast of your beauty, and conforted your
selves with power and nymblenesse, and put your confidence therein: therefore
shall ye have this myschefe again for your destruction and fall, like as an
hie wall, that falls because of some rift (or blast,) whose breakinge comes
suddenly.

^sal. 2. b
which breaks no man touching it, ye and breaks so sore, that a man shall
not find a sheuer of it to fetch fire in, or to take water with all out of the
pyt. For the LORD God, Exo. 14. d 2. Par. 20 c
even the holy one of Israel has promised thus: With stilsittinge and rest
shall ye be healed, In quietness and hope shall your strength lie.
Notwithstondinge ye regard it not, but ye will say: No, for thus are we
constrained to fle upon horses. (And therefore shall ye fle) we must ride upon
swift beasts, and therefore your persecutours shall yet be swifter. Leui. 26. h
Iosu. 23. c
A thousand of you shall fle for one, or at the most for five, which do but only
give you evil words: until ye be desolate, as a ship mast upon an hie
mountain, and as a beaken upon an hill.

Yet stondeth the LORD waitinge, To. 2. a
that he may have mercy upon you, and lifts him self up, that he may
receive you to grace. For the LORD God is rightuous. Happy are all they that
wate for him. For thus (o thou people of Sion and ye citisens of Jerusalem)
shall ye never be in heaviness, for doutlesse he will have mercy upon the. As
soon as he hears the voice of thy cry, he will help the. The LORD gives
you Deuteronomy. 4. a
This is the way, go this, and turn nether to the right hand nor the leffte.

Morouer if ye destroy the silver works of your Idols, and cast away the
golden coapes that ye decked them withal (as fylthynes) and say, get you
hence: The^ will he give rain to the sede, that ye shall sow in the earth, and
give you bread of the increase of the earth, so that all shall be plenteous and
abundaunt. Psalm. 36. b
Thy catel also shall he feed in the broad meadows. ye thine oxe^ and Mu^es
that till the ground, shall eat good fodder, which is pourged with ye fan.
Goodly ryuers shall flow out of all his mountains and hills. In the day of
2. Pet. 3. b
the Moon shall shine as the Son and ye Son shine shall be seven fold, and
have as much shine, as in seven days beside.

In that day shall the LORD bind up ye brussed sores of his people, and heal
their wounds. Behold, the glory of the LORD shall come from far, his face
shall burn, that no man shall be able to abide it, his lips shall wagge for very
indignacion, and his tunge shall be as a consumynge fire. His breath like a
vehement floude of water, which goes up to the throat. That he may take away
ye people, which have turned them selves unto vanite, and the bridle of
error, that lies in other folks chawes.

But ye shall sing, as the use is in ye night of the holy solempnite. Ye shall
rejoice from your heart, as they that come with the pipe, when they go up to
the mount of the LORD, unto ye rock of Israel. The LORD also shall set up the
power of his voice, and declare his terrible arm, with his angry
countenance, ye and the flame of the consumynge fire, with earth quake,
tempest of wind, Esa. 10. a
and hale stones. Then shall the Assirian fear also, because of the voice of
the LORD, which shall smite him with the rod. And the same rod which the
LORD will send upon him, shall move the whole foundation: with trompet, with
noise of war and batell to destroy. Mat. 25. d
For he has prepared the fire of pain from the beginning, ye even for
kings also. This has he made deep and wide, ye norishinge thereof is fire and
wodde innumerable, which the breath often LORD kyndleth, as it were a match of
brymstone.

The xxxj. Chapter.
LORD. Where as he nevertheless plageth ye wicked, and yet goes not from his
word, wha^ he steppeth forth and takes the victory against the household of
the frauwerde, and against the help of euel doers. Now the Egiptians are men,
and not God, and their horses flesh and not sprete. And as soon as the LORD
stretches out his hand, then shall the helper fall, and he that should have
been helped, and shall altogether be destroyed. For thus has the LORD spoken
unto me: Apo. 5. a (...). 49. b
Like as the Lion or lyo^s whelpe roareth upon the pray that he has gotten,
and is not afraid, though ye multitude of shepardes cry out upon him, nether
abashed for all the heap of them: So shall the LORD of hoostes come down from
the mount Sion, and defend his hill. Like as birds flotre about their
nestes, so shall the LORD of hoostes keep, Deuteronomy. 32. b
save, defend and deliue Jerusalem. Therefore (o ye children of Israel turn
again, like as ye hahaue exceaded in your goinge back. For in yt day every
man shall cast out his Idols of silver and gold, (...)
which ye have made with your synful hondes. Assure also shall be slain with the
sword, not with a man's sword* A sword shall devour him, (...)
but not a man's sword. And he shall fle from the slaughter, and his servants
shall be taken prisoners* He shall go for fear to his strong holds, and his
princes shall fle from his badge. This has ye LORD spoken, whose light burns
in Sion, and his fire in Jerusalem.

The xxxij. Chapter.
Behold, the king shall govern after ye (...)
But the liberal person ymagineth honest things, and comes up with honesty.

Up (ye rich and idle cities), harken unto my voice. Ye careless cities, marcke
my words. After years and days shall ye be brought in fear, o ye careless
cities. For Harvest shall be out, and the grape gatheringe shall not come. O ye
rich idle cities, ye that fear no parell, ye shall be abashed and removed: when
ye se the barennesse, the nakedness and preparinge to war. Ye shall knock
upon your breasts, because of the pleasant field, and because of the fruteful
vynyarde. My peoples field shall bring thorns and thistels, for in every house
is voluptuousnes and in the cities, wilfulnes. The palaces also shall be broken,
and the greatly occupide cities desolate. The towers and

Then shall the wilderness be a fruteful field and the plenteous field shall be
rekened for a wodde. Then shall equity dwell in the deserte, and righteousness
in a fruteful land. And the reward of righteousness shall be peace, (...)
and her fruit rest and quietness for ever. (...)
And my people shall dwell in the ynnes of peace, in my tabernacle and pleasure,
where there is enough in the^ all. And when the hale falls, it shall fall in
the wodde and in the city. O how happy shall ye be, when ye shall safely sow
your sede beside all waters and drive thither the fete of your oxe^ and asses.

The xxxiij. Chapter.
(...) 26. c
and unto the that laiest wait, as who say there should no wait be laid for
the? (...)
Woe unto the which do hurt, even so shall thou be hurt also. And as thou
layest wait, so shall wait be laid for the also.

LORD be merciful unto us, we wait for the. Thine arm is at a point to vyset
us, but be thou our health in the time of trouble. (...)
Grant that the people may fle at the anger of thy voice, and that at thy
vpstondinge the Gentiles may be scatred abroad, and that their spoil may be
gathered, as the greshoppers are commonly gathered together in to the pyt.
Stand up LORD, thou that dwell on hie: Let Sio^ be filled with equity and
righteousness. Let treuth and faithfulness be in her time: power, health,
wisdom, knowledge and the fear of God are her treasure. Behold, their angels
cry with out, the messaungers of peace weep bytterly. The streets are waist,
there walks no man therein, the appoyntmen is broken, the cities are despised,
they are not regarded, the desolate earth is in heaviness. Libanus takes it but
for a sport, that it is hewn down: Saron is like a wyldernes: Basa^ LORD: I
will up, now will I get up, now will I arise. Ye shall conceive stubble, (...)
and bear straw, and your sprete shall be the fire, that it may consume you:
and the people shall be burnt like lyme, and as thorns burn that are hewn of,
and cast in the fire.

Now harken to (ye that are far of) how I do with them, and consider my
glory, ye that be at hand. The sinners at Sion are a frayde, a sodane
fearfulness is come upon the ypocrytes. What is he among us (say they) that
will dwell by that consumynge fire? which of us may abide that everlasting
heat? (...) 14 a
He that ledeth a godly life (say I) and speaks the treuth: He that
abhors to do violence and disceate: he that keeps his ho^de that he touch
no reward: which stops his ears, that he hear no council against the
innocent: which holds down his eyes, that he se no euel. He it is, that shall
dwell on hie, whose sauegarde shall be in the true rock, to him shall be given the
right true meat and drink. His eyes shall se the king in his glory: and in the
wide world, and his heart shall delight in the fear of God. What 1. Cor. 1. d
of the Senatoure? what of him that teaches children? There shall thou not se
a people of a strange tu^ge, to have so diffused a language, that it may not
be understand: nether so strange a speech, but it shall be perceived.

There shall Sion be seen, the head city of our solemn feasts. There shall
thine eyes se Jerusalem that glorious habitation: the tabernacle that never
shall remove, whose nales shall never be taken out world without end, Heb. 9. b
whose coardes euerychone shall never corruppe: for the glorious Magesty of the
LORD shall there be present among us. In that place (where fair broad ryuers
and streams are) shall nether Gallye row, ner great ship sale. For the
LORD shall be our capteyne, Iaco. 4. c
the LORD shall be our law geuer, The LORD shall be our king, and he himself
shall be our Savior. There are the coardes so laid abroad, that they ca^ not
be better: The mast set up of soch a fashion, that no ba^ner ner sale ha^geth
thero^: but there is dealed great spoil, ye lame men run after the pray.
There lies no man that says: I am sick, but all euel is taken away from the
people, that dwell there.

The xxxiiij. Chapter.
COme ye Heithen and hear, take heed ye LORD is angry with all people, and
his displeasure is kindled against all the multitude of them, to curse them,
and to slaye them. So that their slain shall be cast out, and their bodies
stincke: that eue^ the very hills shall be wet with the blood of them. All the
stars of heaven shall be consumed, and the heaven shall fold together like a
roll, and all the stars thereof shall fall, 2. Pet. 3. b
like as the leaves fall from the vynes and fygetrees. For my swearde (says
he) shall be bathed in heaven, and shall immediately come down upon Idumea, and
upon the people which I have cursed for my vengeance.

And the LORDS swearde shall be full of blood, and be rustie with the fatness
and blood of lambs and gootes, with the fatness of neeres of the wethers.
For the LORD shall kyl a great offringe in Bosra, and in the land Esa. 63. a
and the year when as thine own iugdmentes shall be recompensed. Thy floudes
shall be turned to pytch, and thine earth to brymstone, and therewith shall the
land be kyndled, so that it shall not be quenched day ner night: But smoke
evermore, and so forth to lie waist. And no man shall go through thy land for
ever: But Pellicanes, Soph. 2. b
Storkes, great Oules, and Ravens shall have it in possession, and dwell
therein.

For God shall sprede out the line of desolacion Tren. 4. b
and the wild keep company together. There shall the lamia lie, and have her
lodginge. There shall the hedghogge build, dig, be there at home, and bring
forth his yongeones. There shall the kytes come together, each one to his like.

Ioh. 5. b Deuteronomy. 28.
Seek through the scripture of the LORD and read it. There shall none of these
things be left out, there shall not one (ner soch like) fail* For what his
mouth commands, that same does his sprete gather together (or fulfilleth).
Upon whom so ever ye lot fallet, or to whom he deals it with the line: those
shall possess the enheritaunce from generation to generation, and dwell therein.

The xxxv. Chapter.
But the deserte and wilderness shall rejoice, ye waist ground shall be glad,
and flourish as the lilly. She shall flourish pleasauntly, and be joyful, and ever
be geuynge of thanks more and more. For ye glory of libanus, the bewty of
Charmel and Saro^ shall be given her. These shall know the honor of the LORD,
and the magesty of our God. And therefore strength ye weak ho^des, Heb. 12. b
Deuteronomy. 30. a 31. b
and conforte the feeble knees. Say unto them that are of a fearful heart: Be of
good chere, and fear not. Behold: your God comes, to take vengeance and to
reward, God comes his own self, and will deliver you. (...)
Then shall the eyes of the blind be lightened, and the ears of the deaff
opened. Then shall the lame man leap as an heart, and the domme ma^s tu^ge shall
give thanks.

In the wilderness also there shall wells (...)
The dry ground shall turn to ryuers, and the thurstie to springes of water.
Where as dragons dwelt before, there shall grow sweet flowers and grene russhes.
There shall be footpathes and common streets, this shall be called the holy way. No
unclean person shall go through it, for the LORD himself shall go with the^ that
way, and the ignorant shall not err. There shall be no lion, and no rauyshinge
beast shall come therein nor be there, but men shall go there fre and safe. And
the redeemed of the LORD shall convert, (...)
and come to Sion with thankesgeuinge. Everlasting joy shall they have,
pleasure and gladness shall be among them, And as for all sorrow and heaviness, it
shall vanish away.

The xxxvj. Chapter.
IN the xiiij. year of king Ezechias, (...)
came Sennacherib king of the Assirians down, to lay sege unto all the
strong cities of Judah And the king of the Assiria^s sent Rabsaches from
Lachis toward Jerusalem, against king Ezechias, with a grievous hooste* which
set him by the condite of the ouerpole, in the way that goes through ye
fullers lord. And so there came forth unto him Eliachim Helchias son the
presydent, Sobna the scribe, (...)
and Ioah Asaphs son the Secretary.

And Rabsaches said unto them: Te^ Ezechias, that the great king of Assiria
says thus unto him: What presumpcion is this, that thou trustest unto? Thou
think (peradventure) that thou have council and power enough, to mayntene
this war: or else where to trustest thou, that thou castest thy self of fro me?
lo, Thou put thy trust in a broken staff of read (I mean Egipte) which he
that leans upon, (...)
it goes in to his hand and shuteth him through. Even so is Pharao the king
of Egipte, unto all the^ that trust in him. But if thou would say LORD our
God: A goodly god, indede: whose hie places and aulteres Ezechias took down,
and commanded Judah and Jerusalem, to worshipe only before the altar. Abide
the, thou have made a condition with my lord the king of the Assiria^s, that
he should give the two thousand horses: Art thou able to set me^ there up?
Saying now that thou can not resist the power of the smallest prince that my
LORD has, how darrest thou trust in yt charettes and horse men of Egipte?
Morouer, think thou yt I am come down hither, to destroy this land with
out the LORDS will? The LORD said unto me: go down in to that land, that
thou may destroy it.

Then said Eliachim, Sobna and Iohah unto Rabsaches: Speak to us thy
servants (we pray the) in the Sirians language, for we understand it well:
And speak not to us in the Jews tunge, lest the folcke hear, which lies
upon the wall. Then answered

And Rabsaches stood stiff, and cried with a loud voice in the Jews tu^ge,
and said: Now take heed, how the great king of the Assiria^s gives you
warning. Thus says the king: Let not Ezechias disceaue you, for he shall not
be able to deliver you. Morouer, let not Ezechias comfort you in the LORD,
when he says: The LORD with out doubt shall defend us, and shall not give
over this cite in to the hondes of the king of the Assiria^s, believe him not.
But thus says the king of Assiria: opteyne my favor, enclyne to me: So
may every man enjoy his vynyardes and fygetrees, and drink the water of his
cisterne: unto the time that I come myself, and bring you in to a land, yt is
like your own: where in is wheat and wine, which is both sown with sede, and
planted with vynyardes. Let not Ezechias disceaue you, when he says unto you:
the LORD shall deliver us.

(...)
from the power of the king of the Assirians? Where is the God of hemath and
Arphad? Where is the God of Sepharnaim? And who was able to defend Samaria out
of my hand? Or which of all the gods of the lo^des, has delivered their
country out of my power, so that the LORD should deliver Jerusalem fro my
hand? Unto this, Ezechias messaungers held their tunges, and answered not one
word: for the king had charged them, that they should give him none answer.
So came Eliachim Elchias son the president, Sobna the scrybe, and Ioah Asaphs
son the Secretary, unto Ezechias with rent clothes, and told him the words
of Rabsaches.

The xxxvij. Chapter.
WHen Ezechias herd that, he rent 4. Re. 19. a
and went in to the temple of the LORD. But he sent Eliachim the President,
Sobna the scrybe with the eldest prestes cloothed in sack, Ione 3. a
unto the Prophet Esaias the son of Amos, and they said unto him: Thus says
Ezechias: this is the day of trouble, of plage and of wrath: like as when a
child comes to the birth, but the woman has no power to bring it forth. The
LORD thy God (no doubt) has well considered the words of Rabsaches, whom his
lord ye king of the Assirians has sent, to defy and blaspheme the living
God with soch words, as the LORD ye God has herd rightwell. And therefore
lift up ye prayer for the remnaunt, that yet are left. So the servants of
king Ezechias came to Esaias.

And Esaias gave them this answer: Say thus unto your lord: thus says the
LORD: Be not afraid of the words that thou have herd, wherewith the king of
Assiria^s servants have blasphemed me. Behold, I Esa. 31. b
as soon as he hears it, he shall go again in to his country, there will I
distroye him with the sword. Now when Rabsaches returned, 1. Re. 23 c
he found ye king of Assiria layenge sege to Lobna, for he had understand,
that he was departed from Lachis. For there came a rumoure, yt Taracha king of
Ethiopia was come forth to war against him.

And when the king of Assiria herd yt, he sent other messaungers to king
Ezechias, with this commandment. Say thus to Ezechias king of Judah: Let not
thy God disceaue the, in whom thou hopest, and say: Jerusalem shall not be
given in to the hondes of the king of Assiria. For thou know well, how the
kings of Assiria have handled all the lands, that they have subverted, and
hapest thou to escape? Were the people of the Gentiles (whom my progenitors
conquered) delivered at any time through their gods? As namely, Gozan, Haran,
Rezeph, 4. Re. 17. a
and the children of Eden, which dwell at Thalassar. Where is the king of
Hemath, and the king of Arphad, and the king of the city Sepharnaim, Ena and
Aua? Now when Ezechias LORD, and opened the lettre before ye LORD. And
Ezechias prayed before the LORD on this manner: O LORD of hoostes, thou God of
Israel, which dwell upon Cherubin. Batuc. 2. c
Thou art the God, Exo* 25 c Gene. 1. a
that only is God of all the kingdoms of the world, for thou only have
created haue^ and earth. Incline thine ear LORD and co^sidr^, open thine eyes
(o LORD,) and se, and pondre all the words of Se^nacherib, which has sent
his embassage to blaspheme the, the living God. It is true (o LORD) that the
kings of Assiria have conquered all kingdoms and lands, and cast their
gods in the fire. Notwithsto^dinge those were no gods but the works of
men's hondes, of wodd or stone, therefore have they destroyed them. Deliver us
then (o LORD our God) from the hondes of Sennacherib, yt all kingdoms of the
earth may know, that thou only art ye LORD. Then Esaias the son of Amos sent
unto Ezechias, saying: Thus says ye LORD God of Israel: Where as thou have
made thy prayer unto me, as touching Sennacherib, this is the answer, that
the LORD has given concerning him: Despised art thou, and mocked (o daughter
of Sion) he has shaken his head at the, o daughter of Jerusalem. Zac. 2. b
Matt. 25. b
But thou Sennacherib, whom have thou defied or blaspemed? And against who^
have thou lifted up thy voice, Act. 9. a
and exalted thy proud lokes? even against the holy one of Israel. Thou with
thy servants have blasphemed the LORD, and thus hold thou of thy self: I
cover the hie mountains, and sides of Libanus with my horsemen. And there will I
cut down the hie Cedre trees and the fairest Fyrre trees. I will up in to the
heyth of it and in to the chefest of his timbre woddes. If there be no water, I
will grave and drink. And as for waters of defense, I shall dry them up with
the fete of mine hooste. Ye (say thou) have thou not herd, what I have
taken in hand, and brought to pass of old time? That same will I do now also:
waist, destroy, and bring the strong cities unto heaps of stones. For their
inhabitours shall be like lame men, brought in fear and confounded. They shall be
like the grass and grene herbs in the field, like the hay upon house tops,
that wythereth, a fore it be grown up.



And soch of the house of Judah as are escaped, shall come together, and the
remnaunt shall take rote beneth, and bring forth fruit above. For the escaped
shall go out of Jerusalem, and the remnaunte from the mount Sion. And this shall
the gelousy of the LORD of hoostes bring to pass. Therefore thus says
LORD, concerning the king of the Assirians: He shall not come in to the
city, and shall shute no arowe in to it, there shall no shilde hurt it, nether
shall they grave about it. The same way that he came, shall he return, and not
come at this city, says the LORD. And I will keep and save the city (says
he) for mine own, and for my servant David's sake.

Thus the angel went forth, (...)
and slew of the Assirians hooste, (...)
an clxxxv. thousand. And when men arose up early (at Jerusalem:) Behold, all
lay full of deed bodies. So Sennacherib the king of the Assirians brake up,
and dwelt at Niniue. Afterward it chaunsed, as he prayed in the Temple of
Nesrah his god, that Adramalech and Sarazer his own sons slew him with the
swearde, and fled in to the land of Ararat. And Esarhadon his son reigned
after him.

The xxxviij. Chapter.
NOt long before this, was Ezechias deadsick: (...)
And the prophet Esaias the son of Amos came unto him, and said: Thus
commands the LORD: Set thine house in order, for thou must dye, and shall
not escape. Then Ezechias turned his face toward the wall, and prayed unto the
LORD, and said: Remember (o LORD) that I have walked before the in treuth
and a steadfast heart, and have done the thing that is pleasant to the. And
Ezechias wept sore. The^ LORD God of David thy father sends ye this word:
(...)
I have herd thy prayer, and considred thy tears: behold, I will put xv
years mo unto thy life, and deliver the and the city also, from the hand of
the king of Assiria, for I will defend the cite. And take the this token of
the LORD, (...)
yt he will do it, as he has spoken: Behold, I will return the shadow of
Achas Dial, yt now is laid out with the Son, and bring it ten degrees
bacward. So the Son turned ten degrees bacward, the which he was descended
before.

A thankesgeuynge, which Ezechias king of Judah wrote, when he had been sick,
and was recovered.



I spoke within my self: I shall never viset the LORD God in this life: I shall
never se man, among the dwellers of the world

Mine age is folden up together and taken away fro me, like a sheperdes
cotage: my life is hewn of, like as a weeuer cutteth of his webb.

Whyl I was yet taking my rest, he hewed me of, and made an end of me in one
day.

(...) 4. d
I thought I would have lived unto the morrow, but he brussed my bones like a
lion, and made an end of me in one day.

Then chatred I like a swalowe, and like a Crane, and mourned as a dove.

I lift up mine eyes in to ye hight: O LORD, (said I) violence is done unto
me, be thou suertie for me.



Verily ( LORD,) men must live in bytternesse, and all my life must I pass
over therein: For thou raysest me up, and wakest me. But lo, I will be well content
with this bytternes.

Nevertheless my co^uersacion has so pleased ye, that thou would not make an
end of my life, so that thou have cast all my sins behind thy back.

(...)
For hell prayseth not the, death does not magnify the.

They that go down in to the grave, praise not thy treuth: but the living,
ye the living acknowledge the, like as I do this day. The father tells his
children of thy faithfulness.

Deliver us (o LORD) and we will sing praises in thy house, all the days of
our life.

And Esaias said: take a plaster of fyges, and lay it upon the sore, so shall
it be whole. Then said Ezechias: O what a great thing is this, that I shall
go up in to the house of the LORD.

The xxxix. Chapter.
(...)
sent lettres and presents to Ezechias. For he understood, how that he had
been sick, and was recovered again. (...)
And Ezechias was glad thereof, and showed them the commodities of his treasure:
of silver, of gold, of spyces and roots, of precious oils, all that was in
his cubboordes and treasure houses. There was not one thing in Ezechias house,
and so through out all his kingdom, but he let them se it.

The^ came Esaias the prophet to king Ezechias, and said unto him: What have ye
men said, and from whence came they unto the? Ezechias answered: They came out
of a far country unto me: out of Babylon. Esaias said: what have they looked
upon in thine house? Ezechias answerde: All that is

Then said Esaias unto Ezechias: 4. Re. 2. c
Understood the word of the LORD of hoostes, Behold, the time will come,
that every thing which is in thine house, and all that thy progenitors have
laid up in stoare unto this day, shall be carried to Babylon, and nothing left
behind. This says the LORD. Ye and part of thy sons that shall come of
the, and whom thou shall get, shall be carried hence, and become gelded
chamberlaines in the king of Babilons court: Then said Ezechias to Esaias: Now
God prospere his own council, which thou have told me. He said morouer: So
that there be peace, and faithfulness in my time.

The xl. Chapter.
BE of good chere my people, be of good LORDS hand sufficient correction for
all her sins. A voice cries: Matt. 3. a Mar. 1. a Luc. 3. c Esa. 57. e Ioh.
1. d
Prepare ye way for the LORD in the wilderness, make straight ye path for
our God in the deserte. Let all valleis be exalted, and every mountain and
hill be laid low. What so is crooked, let it be made straight, and let the
rough places be made plain feldes. Ioh. 1. b
For the glory of the LORD shall apeare, and all flesh shall se it, for why, ye
mouth of the LORD has spoken it.

The same voice spoke: Now cry. Psalm. 89. a Ecci^. 14. ^ Iaco. 1. b 1. Pet. 1.
d
And I said: what shall I cry? Then spoke it: that, all flesh is grass, and
that all the beauty the rof, is as the flower of the field. When the grass is
wytthered, the flower falls away. Even so is the people as grass, when the
breath of the LORD blows upon them. Nevertheless whether the grass wyther,
Matt. 5. d Psalm. 32. b Iaco. 1. b 1. Pet. 2. b
or the flower fade away: Yet the word of our God endures for ever. Morouer
the voice cried thus: Go up unto the hill (o Sion) thou that bring good
tidinges, lift up thy voice with power, o thou preacher Jerusalem. Lift it up
without fear, and say unto the cities of Judah: Behold, your God: Esa. 6^. c
behold, the LORD, even the almighty sha^ come with power, and bear rule
with his arm. Behold, he brings his treasure with him, and his works go
before him. He shall feed his flock like an hirdman. Esa. 34. d
He shall gather the lambs together with his arm, and carry them in his
bosom, and shall kindly entreat those that bear young.

Who has holden the waters in his fist? Who has measured heaven with his
spanne* and has comprehended all the earth of ye world in three fyngers? Who
has weyed the mountains and hills? Who has reformed the mind of the
LORD? Sap. 9. b To. 11. d
Or who is of his council to teach him? At whom has he asked counsel, to make
him understood, and to learn him the way of judgment: to teach him science,
and to enstructe him in the way of vndersto^dinge? Behold, all people are in
comparison of him, as a drop to a bucket full, and are counted as the leest
thing yt the balaunce weyeth. Behold, ye Isles are in comparison of him, as
the shadow of the Son beam. Libanus is not sufficient to ministre fire for
his offringe, and all the beasts thereof are not enough to one sacrifice. All
people in comparison of him, are rekened, Psalm. 61. b
as nothing, ye vain vanite and emptynesse.

^sa. 44. e
That he spredeth out the heavens as a coueringe, that he stretches them out,
as* a tent to dwell in: That he brings princes to nothing, and the judges of
the earth to dust: so that they be not planted nor sown again, nether their
stock rooted again in the earth? For as soon as he blows upon them, they
wither and fade away, like the straw in a whirle wind.

(...)
For there is nothing hyd unto the greatness of his power, strength, and
might. How may then Jacob think, or how may Israel say: My ways are hyd
from the LORD, and my God knows not of my judgments. Know thou not, or
have thou not herd, that the everlasting God, the LORD which made all the
corners of the earth, is nether weery nor faint, and that his wisdom can not
be comprehended: but that he gives strength unto the weery, and power unto the
faynte? Children are weery and faint, and the strongest men fall: But unto them
that have the LORD before their eyes, shall strength be increased, (...)
Aegles wings shall grow upon them: When they run, they shall not fall: and
when they go, they shall not be weery.

The xlj. Chapter.
BE still (ye I lands) and harken unto LORD, (...)
which am the first, and with the last.

Behold ye Isles, that ye may fear, and ye ends of the earth, that ye may
be abashed, draw nigh, and come hither. Every man has exorted his neighbor,
and brother, and bydden him be strong. The Smyth conforted the moulder, and
the Ironsmyth the hammerman, saying: It shall be good, that we fasten this cast
work: and then they fastened it with nales, that it should not be moved. And
thou Israel my servant: Jacob (...)
I have chosen the, and will not cast ye away: be not afraid, for I will be
with ye. Lake not behind ye, for I will be thy God, to strength ye, help ye,
and to keep ye with this right ho^de of mine. Behold, all they that resist
the, shall come to confucion and shame: and thine adversaries shall be destroyed
and brought to naught. So that who so seeks after them, shall not find them.
Thy destroyers shall perish, and so shall they that undertake to make batell
against the. For I thy LORD and God, will strength thy right hand. Even I that
say unto the: Fear not, I will help the. Be not afraid thou little worm
Jacob, and thou despised Israel: For I will help the, says the LORD, and
the holyone of Israel thine avenger. Behold, I will make the a treadinge cart
and a new flale, yt thou may throsshe and grynde the mountains, and bring
the hills to poulder. Thou shall fan them, and the wind shall carry them
away, and the whyrlwynde shall scatre the^. But thou shall rejoice in the
LORD, and shall delight in praysinge the holyone of Israel.

(...)
and when their tunge is dry of thurst: (...). 3^. b (...)* 4^. c (...)* 44* a
I give it them, says the LORD. I the God of Israel forsake them not. I
bring forth floudes in the hills, and wells in the plain feldes. I turn ye
wilderness to ryuers, and the dry land to condytes of water. I plant in the
wayst ground trees of Cedre, Box, Myrre and olyues. And in the dry, I set
Fyrre trees, elmes and hawthornes together. All this do I, yt they altogether
may se and marcke, perceive with their hertes, and considre: that the hand of
the LORD makes these things, and that the holyone of Israel brings them to
pass. Stand at your cause (says the LORD) and bring forth your
stro^gest ground, counceleth the king of Jacob. Let the gods come forth
them selves, and show us the things yt are past, what they be: let the^
declare the^ unto us, yt we may take them to heart, and know them herafter.
Either, let the^ show us things for to come, and tell us what shall be done
herafter: so shall we know, that they be gods. Show somthinge, either good or
bad, so will we both knowledge ye same, and tell it out.



The xlij. Chapter.
Behold now therefore, this is my servant Matt. 3. ^ Matt 12. ^ Matt. 17. ^
my elect, In whom my soul shall be pacified. I will give him my sprete, that
he may show forth judgment and equity among the Gentiles. He shall not be an
outcryer, ner an hie minded person. His voice shall not be herd in ye streets.
A brussed read shall he not break, and the smokinge flax shall he not quench:
but faithfully and truly shall he give judgment. He shall nether be ouersene ner
haistie, that he may restore righteousness unto the earth: and the Gentiles
also shall keep his laws. Esa 44. ^ Esa. 40. f
For thus says God the LORD unto him (Even he that made the heavens, and
spread them abroad, and set forth the earth with her increase: which gives
breath unto the people that is in it, and to them that dwell therein) I the LORD
have called ye in righteousness, and led the by the hand. Therefore will I Esa.
49. ^ Luc. 2. c Zac. 9. b
and them that sit in darkness, out of the dongeon house. I my self, whose
name is the LORD, which give my power to none other, nether mine honor to
the gods: show you these new tidinges, and tell you them or they come, for
old things also are come to pass.

Sing therefore unto the LORD, Psa. 149. ^
a new song of thanks geuynge, blow out his praise unto the end of the
world. They that be upon the sea, and all that is therein, praise him, the Isles
and they that dwell in them. Let the wilderness with her cities lift up her
voice, the towns also that be in Cedar. Let them be glad that sit upon rocks
of stone, and let them cry down from the hie mountains: ascribinge
almightynes unto the LORD, and magnifienge him among the Gentiles. The LORD
shall come forth as a gyaunte, and take a stomach to him like a fresh man of
war. He shall roar and cry, and overcome his enemies.

I have long holden my peace (says the LORD) should I therefore be still,
and keep silence for ever? I will cry like a trauelinge woman, and once will I
destroy, and devour. I will make waist both mountain and hill, and dry up
every grene thing, that grows thereon. I will dry up the floudes of water,
and drink up the ryuers. I will bring the blind in to a street, that they
know not: and led them in to a fotepath, that they are ignorant in. I shall
make darkness light before the^, and the thing yt is crooked, to be straight.
These things will I do* and not forget them. And therefore let them convert,
Esa. 44. b
and be a shamed earnestly, that hope in Idols, and say to fashioned images:
ye are our gods.

Matt. 15. b
) But who is blynder, the^ my servant? Or so deaf, as my messaungers, whom I
sent unto them? For who is so blind as my people, and they yt have the rule of
them? They are like, as if thou vnderstodest much, and keptest nothing: or if
one herd well, but were not obedient. The LORD be merciful unto them for his
righteousness sake, that his word might be magnified and praised. But it is a
myscheuous and wiked people. Their young men belong all to the snare, and
shall be shut in to preson houses. They shall be carried away captyue and no man
shall lowse them. Deuteronomy. 28
They shall be trode^ under foot, ^sa. 44. d
and no man shall labor to bring the^ again. But who is he among you, yt
pondreth this in his mind, yt considreth it, and takes it for a warning in
time to come?

Who suffered Jacob to be trodden under foot, ^aruc. 1 d ^obi 3. a Dan. 9. a
and Israel to be spoiled? did not the LORD? Now have we sinned against him,
and have had no delight to walk in his ways, nether been obedient unto his
law. Therefore has he poured upon us his wroothful displeasure, and strong
batell, which makes us have to do on every side, yet will we not understood:
He burns us up, yet syncketh it not in to our hearts.

The xliij. Chapter.
LORD that made the (o Jacob) and he that fashioned the (o Israel) says
thus: ^sa. 41. b ^. Re. 17. g Deuteronomy. 7. a Deu. 26. d Ose. 1 b ^xo. 14. ^ Dan. 3.
d
Fear not, for I will defend ye. I have called ye by thy name, thou art mine
own. When thou wentest in the water, I was by the, that the strong floudes
should not pluck ye away: When thou walk in the fire, it shall not burn ye,
and the flame shall not kindle upon the. For I am the LORD thy God, the
holyone of Israel, thy Savior. I gave Egipte for ye delyueraunce, the Morya^s
and the Sabees for the: because thou wast dear in my sight, and because I set
by the, and loved the. (...)
I pilled all men for the, and delivered up all people for thy sake, that thou
should not fear, (...)
for I was with the. I will bring thy sede from the east, and gather the
together from the west. I will say to the north: let go. And to the south, keep
not back: But bring me my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends
of the world: Namely, all those that be called after my name: For the^ have I
created, fashioned, and made for mine honor.

Bring forth that people, whether they (...)
All nations shall come in one, and be gathered in one people. But which among
yonder gods shall declare soch things, and tell us what is to come? Let them
bring their witnesses, so shall they be fre: for the^ men shall hear it, and
say: it is truth. But I bring you witnesses (says the LORD) even those that
are my servants, whom I have chosen: to the intent that ye might be
certified, and give me faithful credence: ye and to consider, that I am he,
before whom there was never any God, and that there shall be none after me. I am
only the LORD, (...)
and without me is there no Savior. I give warning, I make whole, I teach
you, that there should be no strange God among you. And this record must ye
bear me your selves (says the LORD) that I am God. And even he am I from
the beginning, and there is none, (...)
that can take any thing out of my hand. And what I do, can no man change.

Thus says the LORD the holyone of (...)
For your sake I will send to Babylon, and bring all the strongest of them
from thence: Namely, the Caldees that boost them of their ships: Even I the
LORD your holy one which have made Israel, and am your king. Morouer, thus
says the LORD (Even he that makes a way in the sea, (...)
and a footpath in the mighty waters: which brings forth the charettes and
horses, the hooste and the power, that they may fall a sleep and never rise,
and be extincte, like as tow is quenched.

Ye remember not things of old, (...)
and regard nothing that is past. Therefore behold, I shall make a new thing,
and shortly shall it apeare: Ye shall well know it, I told it you before, but
I will tell it you agaane.

I will make streets in the deserte, and ryuers of water in the wilderness.
The wild beasts shall worship me: the dragon, and the Estrich. For I shall
give water in ye wilderness, (...)
and streams in the deserte: that I may give dri^ke to my people, whom I
chose. This people have I made for my self, and they shall show forth my
praise. For thou (Jacob) would not call upon me, but thou had an unlust
toward me, o Israel. Thou gave me not thy young beasts for burnt offringes,
nether did honor me with thy sacrifices. Thou boughtest me no dear spice
with thy money, nether pouredest the fat of thy sacrifices upon me. Howbeit I
have not been chargeable unto the in offri^ges, Esa. 1. b (...). c
nether grievous in Incense.

But thou have lade^ me with thy sins, and weeried me with thy ungodliness:
(...)* 24. b (...) 33. b
Where as I yet am even he only, that for mine own selfs sake do away thine
offenses, and forget thy sins: so that I will never think upon them. Put me
now in remembrance (for we will reason together) and show what thou have for
the, (...). 3. b (...). ^0. b
to make the quyte. Thy first father offended sore, and thy rulers have sinned
against me Therefore I either suspended, or slew the chefest princes: I did
curse Jacob, and gave Israel into reprofe.

The xliiij. Chapter.
(...) 30. b (...)* 4^. g (...). 4^. a (...). 41. b
For thus says the LORD, that made the, fashioned the, and helped the, even
from thy mothers womb: Be not afraid (o Jacob my servant,) thou rightuous,
whom I have chosen. For I shall pour water upon the dry ground, (...). d
(...). 2. g (...). 2. g
and ryuers upon the thurstie. I shall pour my sprete upon thisede, and mine
increase upon thy stock. They shall grow together, like as the grass, and as
the Willies by the waters side. One will say: I am the LORDS. Another will
call under the name of Jacob. The third shall subscrybe with his hand unto ye
LORD, and give him self under the name of Israel.

LORD spoken: even the king of Israel, (...). 4^. b (...) d (...). 4^. b
(...). ^2. c (...)* 43. b
and his avenger, ye LORD of hoostes: I am the first, and the last, and
without me is there no God. For what is he, that ever was like me, which am
from everlasting? Let him show his name and do wherthorow he may be lickened
unto me. Let him tell you forth planely things, that are past and for to come:
ye and that without any fear or stop. For have not I ever told you
hitherto, and warned you? Ye can bear me record youreselues. Is there any God
except me? or any maker, that I should not know him?

Wherefore all caruers of Idols are but vain, and their labor lost. They must
bear record them selves, that (saying they can nether se ner understand)
they shall be confounded. Who should now make a god, Esa. 42. b
or fashion an Idol, that is profitable for nothing? Behold all the
felashippe of the^ must be brought to confucion. Psalm. 113. b Sap. 13. c
Let all the workmasters of them come and stand together from among men: they
must be abashed and confounded one with another. The smyth takes iron, and
tempreth it with hot coals, and fashioneth it with hammers, and makes it with
all the strength of his arms: Ye sometime he is faint for very hunger, and so
thurstie, that he has no more power. The carpenter

Morouer, he goes out to hew down Cedre trees: He brings home Elmes and
oaks, and other tymbre of the wodd. Or else the Fyrretrees which he planted
himself, and soch as the rain has swelled, which wodde serves for me^ to
burn. Of this he takes and warmeth himself withal: he makes a fire of it to
bake bred. And after ward makes a god there of, to honor it: and an Idol,
to knele before it. One piece he burns in the fire, with another he rosteth
flesh, that he may eat roste his belly full: with the third he warmeth
himself, and says: A ha: I am well warmed, I have been at the fire. And of
the residue, he makes him a god, and an Idol for himself. He kneleth before
it, he worshippeth it, he prays unto it, and says: deliver me, for thou art
my god.

Yet men nether considre ner understand, Esa. 42. ^
that they can not se: and their hertes, that they can not perceive. They
pondre not in their minds (for they have nether knowledge ner vndersto^dinge)
to think thus: I have bre^t one piece in the fire, I have baked bred with ye
coals there of, I have roasted flesh withal, and eaten it: Shall I now of the
residue make an abhominacion, and fall down before a rotten piece of wodd? The
kepinge of dust, and folishnesse of heart has turned them a side: so that none
of them can have a fre conscience to think: may not Ierre?

Consider this (o Jacob and Israel) for thou art my servant. I have made the,
that thou might serve me. O Israel, forget me not. As for thine offenses,
^sa. 43. d
I drive them away like the clouds, and thy sins as the mist. Turn ye
again unto me, and I will deliver ye.

Be glad ye heavens, whom the LORD LORD shall redeem Jacob, and show his
glory upon Israel. For thus says the LORD thy redemer, even he that
fashioned the from thy mothers womb: ^om. 11. d Genesis 1. a ^sa. 4. c
I am the LORD, which do all things my self alone. I only have spread out the
heavens, and I only have laid the foundation of the earth. I destroy the
tokens of witches, and make the Sothsayers go wrong. As for the wise, I turn
them bacward, and make their conninge folishnesse.

But I set up the purpose of my servants, and fulfill the council of my
messau^gers. I say to Jerusalem: turn again: And to the cities of Judah, be
ye builded again: and I repair their decayed places. I say to the ground:
be dry. And I dry up thy water floudes. I say to Cirus: thou art mine hyrd
man, so that he shall fulfill all things after m^ will. I say to Jerusalem: be
thou builded, and to the temple: be thou fast grounded.

The xlv. Chapter.
LORD unto Cirus his anointed, Esd. 1. a
whom he ledeth by ye right ho^de: that the people may fall down before him:
I will lowse the gyrdle of kings, yt they shall open the gates before thy face,
and not to shut their doors. I will go before the, and make the crooked straight.
I shall break the brazen doors, and burst the iron bars. I shall give the the
hyd treasure, and the thing which is secretly kept: that thou may know,
yt I the God of Israel have called the by thy name: ^en. 39. a
and that for Jacob my servant sake, and for Israel my chosen. For I called
the by ye name, and ordened the, or ever thou knew me: ^sa. 43. b
Even I the LORD, before whom there is none other, for with out me there is no
God I have prepared the, or ever thou knew me: ^ere. 1. a
that it might be known from the risynge of the Son to the goinge down of
the same, that all is nothing without me. For I am the LORD, and there is else
none. (...)
It is I yt created the light and darcknes, I make peace and trouble: Ye even
I the LORD do all these things. The heavens above shall drop down, and the
clouds shall rain righteousness. The earth shall open it self, and bring forth
health, and thereby shall righteousness flourish. Even I the LORD shall bring it
to pass.

Woe be unto him that chydeth with his maker, (...)
Says ye claye to the potter: What make thou? or, yi work serves for
nothi^ge? Woe be unto him, yt says to his father: why begettest thou? And to
his mother: why bear thou? Thus says the LORD, even the holy one and
maker of Israel: Axe me of things for to come, concerning my sons: and put
me in remembrance, as touching the works of my ho^des: I have made the
earth, and created man upon it. With my hondes have I spread forth heaven, and
given a commaundment for all the hooste thereof. I shall wake him up with
righteousness, and order all his ways. (...)
He shall build my cite, and let out my prisoners: and that nether for gift nor
rewards, says the LORD of hoostes.

The LORD has said morouer: The occupiers of Egipte, the merchants of the
Moryans and Sabees, shall come unto the with tribute, they shabethine, they shall
follow the, and go with cheynes upon their fete. They shall fall down before
the, and make supplicacion unto the. For God (with out who^ there is none other
God) shall be with the. (...)
O how profounde art thou o God, thou God and Savior of Israel? Confounded be
ye, and put to dishonor: go hence together with shame, all ye that be
workmasters of error: (that is worshippers of Idols) But Israel shall be saved
in the LORD, which is the everlasting salvation: They shall not come to shame
ner confucion, world without end.

For thus says the LORD: even he that (...)
that fashioned it, and set it forth: I have not made it for naught, but I made
it to be enhabited: Even I the LORD, without whom there is none other. (...)
I have not spoken secretly, nether in darcke places of the earth. It is not
for naught, that I said unto the sede of Jacob: seek me. I am the LORD, which
when I speak, declare the thing that is rightuous and true. Let the^ be
gathered and come together, let the^ draw nigh hither, yt are escaped of the
people: Have they any understanding, that set up the stocks of their Idols,
and pray unto a god, (...) 44 c (...). ^
that ca^ not help the^? Let men draw nigh, let them come hither, and ask
council one at another, and show forth ^What is he, that told this before?
or, who spoke of it, ever sense the beginning? Have not I ye LORD done it:
(...). 4^. b
without whom there is none other God? the true God and savior, (...) 44. b
and there is else none but I? And therefore turn you unto me (all ye ends of
the earth) so shall ye be saved, for I am God, and there is else none. I swear
by myself: out of my mouth comes ye word of righteousness, and that may no
man turn: but all knees shall bow unto me, and all tunges shall sweat by me,
(...). 14. b (...). 2. b
saying: Verily in the LORD is my righteousness and strength. To him shall me^
come: but all they that think scorn of him, shall be confounded. And the whole
sede of Israel shall be justified, and praised in ye LORD


(...) 14. c (...). 5. a (...). 5. a
Nevertheless Bell shall fall, and Nabo shall be broken: whose images are a burden
for the beasts and catell, to ouerlade the^, and to make them weery. They shall
syncke down, and fall together: for they may not ease them of their burden,
therefore must they go in to captiuyte.

Harken unto me, o house of Jacob, and all ye that remain yet of the household
of Israel: whom I have borne from your mothers womb, and brought you up from
yor birth, till ye were grown: I I which shall bear you unto your last age:
I have made you, I will also norish you, bear you and save you. Whom will ye
make me like, in fashion or image, (...) 44 ^. (...) 3^. a
that I may be like him? Ye fools (no doubt) will take out silver and gold
out of your purses, and weye it, and hyre a goldsmyth to make a god of it,
that men may knele down and worshipe it. Yet must he be taken on men's
shulders and borne, (...) 44. c (...) c
and set in his place, that he may stand and not move. Alas that men should
cry unto him, which gives no answer: and delyuereth not the man that calls
upon him, from his trouble.

Considre this well, and be ashamed, Go into your own selves (O ye
runnagates). Remember the things which are past, sense the beginning of the
world: that I am God, and that there is else no God, ye and yt there is
nothing like unto me. In the beginning of a thing, I show the end thereof:
and I tell before, things that are not yet come to pass. With one word is my
deuyce accomplished, and fulfilleth all my pleasure. I call a bird out of the
east, Exo. 16. c
and all that I take in hand, out of far countrees. As soon as I command,
I bring it hither: as soon as I think to deuyse a thing, I do it. Psalm.
148. a 32. b


Hear me, o ye that are of an hie stomach, but far from righteousness. I
shall bring forth my righteousness, It is not far, and my health shall not
tarry long away. I will lay health in Sio^, and give Israel my glory.

The xlvij. Chapter.
But as for the (O daughter, thou virgin Babylon) thou shall sit in the dust.
Eze. 16. d Nau. 3. b
and thy preuyties shall be seen. For I will avenge me of the, and no man shall
let me: says our redemer, which is called the LORD of hoostes, the holy one
of Israel.

Sit still, hold thy tunge, and get the in to some darcke corner (O daughter
Caldea) for thou shall no more be called lady of kingdoms. I was so wroth with
my people, yt I punyshed mine enheritaunce, Pro. 21. b Iere. 50. b
and gave them in to thy power. Nevertheless, thou shewdest them no mercy, but
even the very aged men of the^, did thou oppress right sore with thy yock,
and thou thoughtest thus: I shall be lady for ever. And beside all that, thou
have not regarded these things, nether cast, what should come after.

Hear now therefore, thou wilful, that syttest Esa. 10. b Apo. 18. c
and speak thus in thine heart: I am alone, and without me is there none: I
shall never be wydow, ner desolate again. And yet both these things shall come
to the upon one day in the twincklinge of an eye: Namely, wyddowhead, and
desolacion. Dani. 5. c
They shall mightily fall upon the, for ye multitude of thy witches, and for the
great heap of thy coniurers. For thou have conforted thy self in thy
disceatfulnes, and have said: No man seith me. Thine own wisdom and conning
have disceaued the, Esa. 29. c
In that thou have said: I am alone, and without me there is none. Therefore
shall trouble come upon ye, and thou shall not know, from whence it shall arise.
Myschefe shall fall upon ye, which thou shall not be able to put of. A sodane
misery shall come upon the, or ever thou be awarre.

Now go to thy coniurers, and to the multitude

The xlviij. Chapter.
Hear this, O thou house of Jacob: ye yt LORD, ^phe. 2. b ^sa. ^1. c ^erem.
3. f
and bear witness by the God of Israel (but not with treuth and right) which
are called fre men of the holy city, as they that look for conforth in the God
of Israel, whose name is the LORD of hoostes.

The things that I showed you ever sense the beginning: Have I not brought
the^ to pass, immediately as they came out of my mouth, and declared them? And
they are come? Howbeit I knew that thou art obstinate, and that thy neck has
an iron vane, and that thy brow is of brass. Nevertheless I have ever sense the
beginning showed the of things for to come, and declared the^ unto the, or
ever they came to pass: that thou should not say: mine Idol has done it,
my carved or cast image has showed it. Hear and considre all these things,
whether it Esa. 37. f
whereof thou never herdest, before they were brought to pass: that thou can
not say: I knew of them. Morouer there be some whereof thou have nether herd
ner known, nether have they been opened unto thine ears before time. For I
knew that thou would maliciousli offend, therefore have I called the a
transgressoure, even from thy mothers womb.

Nevertheless for my names sake, I have withdrawn my wrath, and for mine
honoursake I have ouersene the, so that I have not rooted the out. Behold I
have pourged (...)
for I give mine Honor to none other, that thou should not despise me.
Harken unto me o Jacob, (...)
and Israel who^ I have called. I am even he that is, I am ye first and the
last. (...)
My hand is the foundation of the earth, and my right hand spanneth over the
heavens. As soon as I called the^ they were there. Gather you all together,
and harken: Which of yonder gods has declared this, that the LORD will do by
the king of Babylon, (whom he loves and favors) and by the Caldees his
arm* I my self alone have told you this before. Ye I shall call him and
bring him forth, and give him a prosperous iourneye. Come nigh and hear this:
(...)
have I spoken any thing darckly sense the beginning? when a thing
begins, I am there.

Wherefore the LORD God with his sprete LORD thine avenger, the holyone of
Israel: (...)
I am ye LORD thy God, which teach the profitable things, and led ye the
way, that thou should go. If thou will now regard my commandment, thy
welthynes shall be as the water stream: and thy righteousness as the wawes
flowinge in the sea. Thysede shall be like as the sonde in the sea, and the fruit
of thy body, like the grauel stones thereof: Thy name shall not be roted out, nor
destroyed before me. Ye shall go away from Babylon, and escape the Caldees with
a merry voice. (...)
This shall be spoken of, declared abroad, and go forth unto the end of the
world: so that it shall be said: The LORD has defended his servant Jacob,
that they suffered no thirst, (...)
when they trauayled in the wilderness. He claue the rocks a sonder, and the
water gusshed out. As for the ungodly, they have no peace, (...)
says the LORD.

MESSIAH The xlix. Chapter.
Harken unto me, ye Isles, and take heed ye people from far: The LORD has
called me fro my birth, and made mention of my name fro my mothers womb: he
has made my mouth like a sharp sword, (...)
under ye shadow of his hand has he defended me, and hyd me in his quyuer,
as a good arowe, and said unto me: Thou art my servant Israel, I will be
honored in the. (...)
Then answerde I: I shall lose my labor, I shall spend my strength in vain.
Nevertheless, I will commytte my cause and my work unto the LORD my God. And
now says the LORD (eue^ he that fashioned me fro my mothers womb to be his
seruau^te, that I may bring Jacob again unto him: howbeit, Israel will not
be gathered unto hi^ again. In whose sight I am great, which also is my
LORD, my God and my strength) Let it be but a small thing, that thou art my
servant, to set up (...)
if I make the not also the light of the Gentiles, that thou may be my
health unto the end of the world.

Morouer thus says the LORD the ave^ger and holy one of Israel, because of
the abhorringe and despisinge among the Gentiles, concerning the servant of
all them yt bear rule: Kings and princes shall se, and arise and worshipe,
because of the LORD that he is faithful: and because of the holy one of
Israel, which has chosen the.

(...)
And thus says the LORD: In the time appointed will I be present with the. And
in the hour of health will I help the, and deliver the. I will make the a
pledge for ye people, (...)
That thou may say to ye presoners: go forth, and to them that are in
darkness: come in to the light, that they may feed in the hie ways, and get
their living in all places. There shall nether hunger ner thirste, heat nor
Son hurt them. (...)
For he that favors them, shall led them, and give them dri^ke of the
spring wells. I will make ways upon all my mountains, and my foot paths
shall be exalted. And behold, they shall come from far: lo, seem from the north
and west, (...)
some from the south. Rejoice ye heavens, and sing praises thou earth: Talk
of joy ye hills, for God will comfort his people, and have mercy upon his, yt
be in trouble.

Then shall Sion say: God has forsaken LORD has forgotten me. Does a wife
forget the child of her womb, (...)
and the son who^ she has borne? And though she do forget, yet will not I
forget the. Behold, I have written the up upon my hondes, thy walls are ever
in my sight. They that have broken the down, shall make haist to build the up
again: and they that made the waist, shall dwell in the. Lift up thine eyes,
and look about the: (...)
all these shall gather them together, and come to the. As truly as I live
(says the LORD) thou shall put them all upon the, as an apparel, and gyrde
the^ to the, as a bryde does her Jewels. As for thy land that lies desolate,
waisted and destroyed: it shall be to narow for the^, that shall dwell in it. And
they yt would devour the, shall be far a way. Then the child who^ ye bare^
shall bring forth unto ye, shall say in thine ear: this place is to narow,
sit nigh together, yt I may have rowme. Then shall thou think by thy self: Who
has begotten me these? saying I am bare^ and alo^e, a captyue and an outcast?
And who has norished the^ up for me? I am desolate and alone, but from whence
come these?

And therefore thus says the LORD God: Behold, I will stretch out mine hand
to the Gentiles, and set up my token to the people. LORD. To. 9. d
And who so puts his trust in me, shall not be confounded. Who spoyleth the
giaunte of his pray? or who takes the presoner from the mighty? And therefore
thus says the LORD: The prisoners shall be taken from the giaunte, and the
spoil delivered from the viole^te: for I will maynteyne thy cause against thine
adversaries, and save thy sons. And will feed thine enemies with their own
flesh, and make the^ drink of their own blood, as of sweet wine. And all
flesh shall know (o Jacob) that I am the LORD thy Savior, and strong
auenger.

Chap. I.
THus says the LORD: Where is the bill of yor mothers deuorceme^t, that I
sent Iere. 3. a
to who^ I sold you? Behold, for your own offenses are ye sold: and
because of your transgression, Esa. ^9. a
is your mother forsaken. For why would no man receive me, when I came? and
when I called, no man gave me answer. Was my ho^de clean smyte^ of, that it
might not help? or, had I not power to deliver? lo, Exo. 14. c Iosu. 3. d
at a word I dri^ke up the sea, and of water floudes I make dry lord: so yt
for want of water, the fish corruppe and die of thurst. As for heaven, Exo. 10.
^
I clooth it with darcknesse, and put a sack upon it.

The LORD God has given me a well learned tu^ge, so that I can conforte them
which 2. Cor. 1. ^
He waked mine ear up by times in ye morning (as ye scolemasters do) yt I
might herke^. The LORD God has opened mine ear, therefore ca^ I not say
nay, ner wtdrawe myself, Psalm. 39. b Job. 30. d Mat. 26. g Heb. 13. ^
but I offer my back unto ye smyters, and my chees to the nyppers. I turn not
my face from shame and spittinge, for the LORD God helps me, therefore shall I
not be confounded. I have hardened my face like a flynt stone, for I am sure,
that I shall not come to confucion. Mine advocate speaks for me, who will then
go with me to law? Let us sto^de one against another: if there be any that will
reason with me, let him come here forth to me. To ^. f
Behold, the LORD God stondeth by me, what is he that can condemn me? lo,
they shall be all like as an old cloth, which ye mothes shall eat up. Psalm. 101


Therefore who so fears the LORD among LORD, and hold him by his God. But
take heed, ye have all kyndled a fire, and gyrded your selves with the flame:
Ye walk in the glistri^ge of your own fire, and in the flame that ye have
kyndled. This comes unto you fro my hand, namely, yt ye shall sleep in sorrow.

The li. Chapter.
Harken unto me, ye that hold of righteousness, LORD. Take heed unto the
stone, wherout ye are hewn, and to the grave wherout ye are dug. Considre
Abraham your father, and Sara that bare you: Genesis 21. a Romans 4. a Genesis 12. a
how that I called him alone, prospered him well, and increased him: how the
LORD conforted Sio^, and repaired all her decay: making her deserte as a
Paradise, and her wilderness as the garden of the LORD. Mirth and joy was
there, thanks geuynge and ye voice of praise. Have respect unto me then (o my
people) and lay thine ear to me: for a law, and an ordinance shall go forth
fro me, Esa. 2. a
to lighten the Gentiles. It is hard by, that my health and my righteousness
shall go forth, and the people shall be ordered with mine arm.

Psalm. 101. d Matt. 24. c 2. Pet. 3. b
For the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall tear like a
clothe, and they that dwell therein, shall perish in like manner. But my health
endures for ever, Psalm. 36
and my righteousness shall not cease. Therefore hercken unto me, ye yt have
pleasure in righteousness, Iere. 31. f
thou people that bear my law in thine heart. Fear not the curse of men,
Matt. 10. d Luc. 12 a Psalm. 101. d
be not afraid of their blasphemies and reuylinges: for worms and mothes shall
eat the^ up like clothe and woll. But my righteousness shall endure for ever,
and my saving health from generation to generation.

Wake up, wake up, and be strong: O thou arm of the LORD: wake up, like as
in times past, ever and sense the world began. Art not thou he, (...)
that have wounded that proud lucifer, and hewn the dragon in pieces? Art not
thou even he, which have dried up the deep of the sea, which have made plain
the sea ground, that the delivered might go through? (...)
That the redeemed of the LORD, which turned again, might come with joy unto
Sio^, there to endure for ever* That mirth and gladness might be with (...)
Ye I, I am eue^ he, that in all things gives you consolacion. What art thou
then, that fear a mortal man, ye child of man, which goes away as does
the flower? And forgettest the LORD that made the, (...)
that sp^ed out the heavens, and laid the foundation of the earth. But thou
art ever afraid for the sight of thine oppressoure, which is ready to do
harm: Where is the wrath of the oppressoure? It comes on fast, it makes
haist to apeare: It shall not perish, yt it should not be able to destroy,
nether shall it fail for fault of norishinge. I am the LORD yi God, that make
the sea to be still, (...)
and to rage: whose name is the LORD of hoostes. I shall put my word also in
thy mouth, and defend the with the turnynge of my honde^ that thou may
plant the heavens, and lay the foundacions of the earth, and say unto Sion:
thou art my people.

Awake, Awake, and stand up o Ierusasalem, (...)
thou that from the hand of the LORD, have dronke^ out the cup of his
wrath: thou that have supped of, and sucked out the slombringe cup to the
botome. For among all the sons whom thou have begotten, there is not one
that may hold the up: and not one to lead the by the hand, of all the sons
that thou have norished. Both these things are happened unto the, but who is
sorry for it? Ye, destruction, waistinge, hunger and sword: but who has
conforted the? Thy sons lie comfortles at ye head of every street like a
taken venyson, and are full of ye te^rible wrath of ye LORD, and punyshme^t of
thy God. And therefore thou miserable and dronke^ (howbeit not with wine) Hear
this: Thus says thy LORD: thy LORD and God, ye defender of his people:
Behold, I will take ye slo^bri^ge cup out of thy ho^de, eue^ ye cup with the
dregs of my wrath: yt from hence forth thou shall never drink it more, and
will put it i^ their ho^de that trouble the: which have spoken to thy soul:
stoop down, that we may go over the: make thy body eaue^ with the ground,
and as the street to go upon.

The lij. Chapter.
UP Sion up, take thy strength unto the: LORD: Ye are sold for naught, (...)
therefore shall ye be redeemed also without any money.

For thus has the LORD said: My people went down before time in to Egipte,
(...)
there to be strangers. Afterward did the king of the Assirians oppress
the^, for naught. And now what profit is it to me (says ye LORD) yt my
people is freely carried away, and brought in to heaviness by their rulers, (...)
and LORD. But yt my people may know my name, (...)
I my self will speak in that day. Behold, here am I. O how bewtiful are the
fete of the Embassitoure, yt brings the message from the mountain, (...)
and proclameth peace: yt bri^geth the good tydinges, and preaches health, and
says unto Sion: Thy God is the king. Thy watchme^ shall lift up their voice,
with loud voice shall they preach of him: for they shall se him present, when the
LORD shall come again to Sion.

Be glad, o thou desolate Jerusalem, and rejoice together: (...)
for the LORD will comfort his people, he will deliver Jerusalem. The LORD
will make bare his holy arm, (...)
and show it forth in the sight of all the Gentiles, and all the ends of the
earth shall se the saving health of our God. (...)
Away, Away, get you out from thence, LORD. But ye shall not go out with
sedicio^, ner make haist as they that fle away: for the LORD shall go before
you, and the God of Israel shall keep the watch. (...)


Behold, my servant shall deal wisely, therefore shall he be magnified, exalted
and greatly honored. Like as ye multitude shall wo^dre upon him, because his
face shall be so deformed and not as a man's face, and his beauty like no man:
Even so shall the multitude of the Gentiles look unto him, and ye kings shall
shut their mouths before him. For they yt have not been told of him, shall se
him: and they yt herd nothing of him, (...) 5. c (...) 5 a
shall behold him.

The liij. Chapter.
But who gives credence unto our LORD known? (...)
He shall grow before the LORD like as a brau^ch, and as a rote in a dry
ground. He shall have nether bewty ner favor. When we look upon him, there
shall be no fayrnesse: we shall have no lust unto him. Hebr. ^ a
He shall be the most simple and despised of all, which yet has good experience
of sorrows and infirmities. We shall reken him so simple and so vile, that we
shall hyde our faces from him. Math. 8. b 1. Pet. 2. d
Howbeit (of a treuth) he only takes away our infirmite, and bears our
pain: Yet we shall judge him, as though he were plaged and cast down of God:
2. Cor. 11. c
where as he (notwithsto^dinge) shall be wounded for our offenses, and smytten
for our wickedness. For the pain of or punyshme^t shall be laid upon him, and
with his stripes shall we be healed.

As for us, we go all astraye (like sheep), every one turns his own way.
But through him, the LORD pardons all or sins. He shall be payned and
troubled, and shall not open his mouth. Iere. 11. d Actu. ^ f Mat. 27. b 1. Cor.
5. c
He shall be led as a sheep to be slain, yet shall he be as still as a lamb
before the shearer, and not open his mouth. He shall be had away, his cause not
herd, and without any judgment: Whose generation yet no man may nombre, when he
shall be cut of from the ground of the lyvinge: Which punishment shall go upon
him, for the transgression of my people. Mat. 27. c
His grave shall be given him with the condemned, and his crucifienge with the
thieves, 2 Cor. 5. c 1. Pet. 2. d
Where as he did never violence ^er unright, nether has there been any
disceatfulnesse in his mouth.

Yet has it pleased ye LORD to smite him Ioha^. 12. c Romans 8. d
that when he had made his soul an offeringe for sin, he might se a long
lasting sede. And this device of the LORD shall prospere in his hand. With
travail and labor of his soul, shall he obtain great riches. My rightuous
servant shall with his wisdom justify and deliver the multitude, for he shall
bear away their sins. Therefore will I give him the multitude for his part,
Romans ^. c
and he shall deuyde the strong spoil because he shall give over his soul to
death, and shall be rekened among the transgressors, which nevertheless shall
take away ye sins of the multitude, Marc. 15. d Luc. 22. b
and make intercession for the myszdoers.

The liiij. Chapter.
Therefore be glad now, thou bare^ that bear Gala. ^. d
says the LORD. Make thy tente wyder, and sprede out the hanginges of thine
habitacio^: spare not, lay forth thy coardes, and make fast thy stakes: for
thou shall break out on the right side and on the left, and thy sede shall have
ye Gentiles in possession, and dwell in the desolate cities. Fear not, for thou
shall not be confounded: Be not ashamed, for thou shall not come to confucion.
Ye thou shall forget the shame off thy youth, and shall not remember the
dishonor of thy wedo wheade. For he that made the, shall be thy LORD and
husbonde (whose name is the LORD of hoostes) and thine avenger shall be even the
holy one off Israel, Esa. 62 a Eze 16. b Esa. 48. a
the LORD of the whole world. For the LORD shall call the, being as a
desolate soroufull woman, and as a young wife that has broken her wedlock:
says thy God.

Esa. 26. d Psalm. 29. a
When I was angry, I hid my face from the for a little season, but through
everlasting goodness shall I pardon the, says the LORD thine avenger. And
this must be unto me, as the water of Noe: For like as I have sworn yt I will
not bring the water off Noe any more upon the world: Genesis 9. b
So have I sworn, 2. Re. 7. c
yt I will never be angry with the, ner reprove the: The mountains shall remove,
and the hills shall fall down: but my loving kyndnesse shall not move, and the
bond off my peace shall not fall down from ye, says ye LORD thy merciful
lover.

Esa. 6. b
and ye foundacio^ of Saphires, thy wyndowes off Cristall, thy gates of fine
clear stone, and ye borders of pleasant stones. Thy children shall all be
taught of God, 1. Ioh. 2. d Ioh. 6. e
and I will give the^ plenteousnes of peace. In righteousness shall thou be
grounded, and be far from oppression: for the which thou nedest not be
afraid, nether for hynderau^ce, for it shall not come nigh the. Behold, ye
ale^unt yt was far from the, shall dwell with the: and he yt was somtyne a
stranger unto the, shall be joined with the: Behold, I make the smyth yt blows
the coals in the fire, and he makes a weapon after his hondy work. I make
also the waister to destroy: but all the weapens yt are made against the, shall
not prospere. And as for all tunges, yt shall resist the in judgment, Luc. 21.
b Actu. 4. a
thou shall over come the^, and condemn them. This is the heretage of the
LORDS servants, and the righteousness that they shall have of me, says the
LORD.

The lv. Chapter.
Ecc^. 51. d Ioh. 7. d Apo. 22. d
and ye that have no money. Come, bye, that ye may have to eat. Come, bye
wine and mylck, without any money, or money worth, Wherefore do ye lay out yor
money, for the thing yt fedeth not, and spend your labor about the
thing that satisfies you not? But herke^ rather unto me, and ye shall eat of
the best, and your soul shall have her pleasure in ple^teousnes. Enclyne your
ears, and come unto me, take heed and your soul shall live. For I will make
an everlasting covenant with you, (...)
eue^ the sure mercies of David.

Behold, I shall give him for a witness among ye folk, for a prince and
captain unto LORD thy God, ye holy one of Israel, which glorifieth the. Seek
the LORD while he may be found, call upon him while he is nigh. Let the
ungodly man forsake his ways, (...)
and the unrighteous his ymaginacio^s, and turn again unto the LORD, (...)
so shall he be merciful unto him: and to our God, for he is ready to forgive.

For thus says the LORD: My thoughts (...)
and my thoughts yours And like as the rain and snow comes down from
heaven, and returns not thither again, but waters the earth, makes it
fruitful and grene, that it may give corn and bread unto the sower: So the
word also that comes out of my mouth, shall not turn again void unto me,
but shall accomplish my will and prospere in the thing, whereto I send it. And
so shall ye go forth with joy, and be led with peace. The mountains and hills
shall sing with you for joy, and all the trees of the field shall clappe their
hondes. For thorns, there shall grow Fyrre trees, and ye Myrte tree in the
stead of breres. And this shall be done to the praise of the LORD, and for an
everlasting toke^, that shall not be taken away.

The lvj. Chapter.
THus says ye LORD: Keep equite, (...)
yt he vnhalowe not the Sabbath (that is) he that keeps himself that he do no
euel. Then shall not the stranger, which cleaves to the LORD, say: (...)
Alas the LORD has shut me clean out from his people. Nether shall the gelded
man say: lo, I am a dry tree. For thus says the LORD, first unto the gelded
yt keeps my Sabbath: Namely: that holds greatly of the thing that pleases
me, and keeps my covenant: (...)* 1. a
I will give them an everlasting name, that shall not perish. Again, he
says unto the strangers that are disposed to stick to the LORD, to serve
him, and to love his name: That they shall be no bo^de me^. And all they, which
keep the^ selves, that they vnhalowe not the Sabbath, namely: that they fulfill
my covenant: Them will I bring to my holy mountain, (...). 7. c
and make the^ joyful in my house of prayer. Their burnt offringes and
sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine altar. (...)* ^1. b (...) 8. f
for my house shall be an house of prayer for all people.

LORD God which gathers together the scatred of Israel: (...). 11. b (...)
19. d
I will bring yet another congregation to him. All the beasts of the field,
and all the beasts of ye wod, shall come to devour hi^. For his watch men are
all blind, they have altogether no understanding, they are all domme dogs,
(...). 1^. b
not being able to barcke, they are slepery: slogish are they, and lie
snortinge: they are shameless dogs, yt be never satiszfied. The sheperdes
also in like manner have no understanding, but every man turns his own way,
every one after his own covetousness, with all his power. (...)
Come (say they) I will fetch wine, so shall we fill our selves, that we may
be dronken. And do tomorow, like as to day, ye and much more.

The LVII. Chapter^
But in the mean season ye righteous perishes, and no man regards it in his
heart. Good godly people are taken away and no man co^sidreth it. (...)
Namely: that the righteous is conuayed away through ye wicked:: that he
himself might be in rest, lie quietly upon his bed, and live after his own
pleasure. Come hither therefore ye charmers children, (...) 1^. d
ye sons of the aduoutrer and the whore: Wherein take ye your pleasure? Upon
whom gape ye with yor mouth, and bleare out yor tongue? Are ye not children of
aduoutry, and a sede of dissimulaicon? Ye take your pleasure under the oaks,
(...) 1^. b (...) a (...) 7. a (...) 1^. b (...) 20. d (...) 20. a (...). c
and under all grene trees, the child being slain in the valleys, and dens
of stone. Thy part shall be with the stony rocks by the river: Ye even these
shall be thy part. For there thou have poured meat and drynk-offringes unto
the^. Should I ouersee that? Thou have made thy bed upon hie mountains, thou
wentest up thither, and therehast thou slain sacrifices. Behind the doors and
posts, have thou set up thy remembrance?

When thou had discovered thyself to another then me, when thou we^test
down* and made thy bed wyder (that is) when thou did carue the certain of
yonder Idols, and louedest their couches, where thou saw the^: Thou wentest
straight to kings with oil and Ose. 12. a Eze. 16. b
and yet art thou fallen in to the pyt thereby. Thou have had trouble for ye
multitude of thine own ways, yet saydest thou never: I will leave of. Thou
think to have life (or health) of thy self, Math. 9. ^
and therefore thou beleuest not that thou ar^ sick. For when will thou be
abaszshed or fear, saying thou have broken thy promise, and remembrest not me,
nether have me in thine heart? Think thou, that I also will hold my peace
(as before time) yt thou fear me not? Ye verily I will declare ye goodness and
ye works, but they shall not profit ye. when thou criest, let ye chosen heap
deliver the. Iere. 2. d Deuteronomy. 32. ^
But the wind shall take them all away, and carry the^ in to ye air.
Nevertheless, they yt put their trust in me, shall inheret the land, and have my
holy hill in possession.

And therefore thus he says: Make ready, Psalm. 50. b Esa. 61. a
I dwell hie above and in the sanctuary, and with him also, yt is of a co^trite
and humble sprete: yt I may heal a troubled mind, and a co^trite heart.
Psalm. 101.
For I chide not ever, and am not wroth with out end. But ye blastinge goes fro
me, though I make the breath. I am wroth with hi^ for his covetousness and lust, I
smite him, I hyde me, and am angry, when he turns him self, and follows ye
bywaye of his own heart. But if I may se his right way again, I make him
whole, I led him, and restore him unto them whom he makes joyful, and that
were sorry for him. I make the fruits of tha^kesgeuinge. I give peace unto them
that are far of, Ephe. 2. d
and to them that are nigh, say I the LORD, that make him whole. But the
wicked are like the raginge see, that ca^ not rest, who se water fometh with
the mire and grauel. Eue^so ye wicked have no peace, says my God. Esa. 48. d


The LVIII. Chapter.
ANd therefore cry now, Eze. 3. c Iere. 1^. a Ionae. 3. a Mat. 10. a and ^^. e
as loud as thou can. Leave not of, life up thy voice like a tro^pet, and
show my people their offenses, and ye house of Jacob their sins. For they
seek me dalye, and will know my ways, even as it were a people that did right,
and had not forsaken the statutes of their God. They argue with me concerning
right judgment, and will pleate at the law with their God. Wherefore fast we
(say they) and thou seist it not? we put our lives to straitness, and thou
regardest it not?

Esa. 1. b
for ye do no less violence to your detters: lo, ye fast to strife and
debate, and to smite him with your fist, that speaks unto you. Ye fast not
(as sometime) that your voice might be herd above. Think ye this fast
pleases me, zach. 7
that a man should chasten himself for a day, and to wryth his head about
like an hoke in an hairy cloth, and to lie upon the earth? Should that be
called fasting, or a day yt pleases ye LORD? But this fasting pleases not
me, Deu. 15 a
till ye time be thou lowse him out of bondage, that is in thy danger: that
thou break the ooth of wicked bargaynes, that thou let the oppressed go fre,
and take from them all manner of burdens. It pleases not me, till thou deal
thy bred to the hongrie, Eze. 18. b Mat. 25. b
and bring the poor fatherless home in to thy house, when thou seist the
naked that thou cover him, and hyde not thy face from thine own flesh. Then
shall thy light break forth as ye morning, Luc. 11. d
and ye glory of the LORD shall embrace the.

Then if thou call, the LORD shall answer the: Pro. 21. b
if thou criest, he shall say: here I am. Ye if thou layest away thy
burdens, and hold thy fyngers, and ceasest from blasphemous talkinge, if
thou have compassion upon the hongrie, and refreszshest ye troubled soul: Then
shall thy light spring out in the darkness, zach. 7. a Mat. 5. b
and thy darkness shall be as the noone day. The LORD shall ever be thy gyde,
and satisfy the desire of thine heart, and fyl ye bones with marry. Thou

Esa. 56. a Esa. 66. d
Ye if thou turn thy fete from the Sabbath, so that thou do not the thing
which pleases thyself in my holy day: then shall thou be called unto the
pleasant, holy and glorious Sabbath of the LORD, where thou shall be in
honor: so yt thou do not after thine own ymaginacion, nether seek thine own
will, ner speak thine own words. The^ shall thou have ye pleasure in ye
LORD, which shall carry ye hie above ye earth, and feed the with the heretage of
Jacob thy father: for the LORDS own mouth has so promised.

The LIX. Chap.
Behold, the LORDS hand is not so (...)
nether is his ear so stopped yt it may not hear. But yor myszdedes have
separated you from yor God, and yor sins hyde his face from you, yt he
hears you not. For yor hondes are defiled with blood, (...)
and yor fyngers with unrighteousness: Yor lips speak lesynges, and yor tongue
sets out wickedness. No man regards righteousness, and no man judges truly
Every man hops in vain things, and ymagineth disceate, co^ceaueth
weerynesse, and brings forth evil. (...)
They bread cockatrice eggs, and weeue ye spyders webb. Who so eats of their
eggs, dies. But if one tread upon the^, there comes up a serpent. Their
web makes no clothe, and they may not cover the^ with their labors. Their
deeds are ye deeds of wickedness, and ye work of robbery is in their ho^des.
Their fete run to evil, and they make haist to shed innocent blood. (...)
Their councils are wicked councils, harm and destruccio^ are in their ways.
But ye way of peace they know not. In their goinges is no equity, their ways
are so crooked, yt who so ever goes therein, knows nothing of peace.

And this is ye cause yt equite is so far from us, and yt righteousness
comes not nigh us. (...)
We look for light, lo, it is darkness: for ye morning shine, se, we walk in
ye dark. We grope like ye blind upon ye wall, we grope even as one yt has
none eyes. We stomble at ye noone day, as though it were toward night: in ye
fallinge places, like men yt are half deed. We roar all like Beeres, and
mourn still like doves. We look for equite, but there is none: for health, but
it is far from us. For or offenses are many before ye, and or sins testify
against us. Ye we must confess yt we offend, and knowledge, yt we do amysse:
Namely, transgress and dyssemble against ye LORD, and fall away from or God:
vsinge presu^ptuous and traytorous ymaginacions, and castinge false matters in
or hertes. And therefore is equity gone aside, and righteousness sto^deth far
of: (...)
treuth is fallen down in the street, and the thing that is plain and open,
may not be showed. Ye ye treuth is lade in preson, and he that refrayneth
himself from euel, must be spoiled.

LORD saw this, it displeased him sore, (...). 5. a
yt there was no where any equite. He saw also, that there was no man, which
had pity thereof, or was grieved at it. And he held him by his own power, and
cleued to his own righteousness. He put righteousness upon him for a breast
plate, (...). b (...). 5.
and set the helmet of health upon his head. He put on wrath in stead of
clothi^ge, and took gelousy about him for a cloak: (like as when a man goes
forth wrothfully to recompense his enemies, and to be avenged of his
adversaries.) Namely, that he might recompense and reward the I lo^des,
wherthorow the name of the LORD might be feared, from the risynge of the
Son: and his magesty, unto the goinge down of the same.

For he shall come as a violent waterstreame, (...). 1^. a (...)* ^1. d
which the wind of the LORD has moved. But unto Sion there shall come a
redemer, and unto them in Jacob that turn from wickedness, says the LORD.
I will make this conuenaunt with them (says ye LORD): My sprete that is come
upon the, and the words which I have put in yt mouth, shall never go out of thy
mouth, nor out of ye mouth of thy children, no ner out of ye mouth of thy
childers children, from this time forth for ever more.


(...) ^6. c (...) 5. b
ANd therefore get the up by times, for thy light comes, and the glory of ye
LORD shall rise up upon ye. For lo, while ye darkness and cloud covers the
earth and the people, the LORD shall show the light, and his glory shall be
seen in the. (...)
The Gentiles shall come to thy light, (...). 49. c (...) 1^. a (...). a
and kings to the brightness yt springs forth upon ye. Lift up thine eyes,
and look round about the: All these gather the^ selves, and come to the.
Sons shall come unto ye from far, and daughters shall gather the^ selves to
the on every side. When thou seist this, thou shall marvel exceadingly, and
thine heart shall be opened: when the power of the sea shall be converted unto the
(that is) when the strength of the Gentiles shall come unto the. The multitude
of Camels shall cover ye, the Dromedaries of Madia^ and Epha. All they of Saba
shall come, bringinge gold and incense, (...)* 2. b (...) ^1.
and shewinge the praise of the LORD. (...). 1^. b
the ra^mes of Nabaioth shall serve the, to be offered upon mine altar, which I
have chosen, and in the house of my glory which I have garnished. But what are
these that fle here like the clouds, and as the doves flienge to their
wyndowes?

The Isles also shall gather the^ unto me, and specially the ships of ye see:
that they may bring the sons from far, and their silver and their gold
with them, unto the name of the LORD thy God, unto the holy one of Israel,
that has glorified the. Esa. 54* b
Strangers shall build up thy walls, and their kings shall do the service.
For when I am angry, I smite the: and when it pleases me, I pardon the. Thy
gates shall stand open still both day and night, and never be shut: Apo. 21. g
that the hooste of the Gentiles may come, and

Morouer those shall come knelinge unto the, yt have vexed the: and all they
that despised ye, shall fall down at ye foot. Thou shall be called the cite of
the LORD, the holy Sion of Israel. Because thou have been forsaken and hated,
so that noman went through the: I will make the glorious for ever and ever, and
joyful through out all posterities. Thou shall suck the mylck of the Gentiles,
Esa. 49. ^
and kings breasts shall feed the. And thou shall know that I the LORD am thy
Savior and defender, the mighty one of Jacob. For brass Apo. 21. g
and thy gates the praise of God The Son shall never by thy day light, and
the light of the Moon shall never shine unto the: Apo. 22. b
but ye LORD himself shall be thy everlasting light, and thy God shall be thy
glory.

Thy Son shall never go down, and thy Moon shall not be taken away, for the
LORD himself shall be thy everlasting light, and thy sorouful days shall be
rewarded ye. Thy people shall be all godly, and possess the land for ever: the
flower of my plantinge, the work of my hondes, whereof I will rejoice. The
youngest and leest shall grow in to a thousand, and the symplest in to a
strong people. I the LORD shall shortly bring this thing to pass in his
time.

The lxj. Chapter.
THe sprete of the LORD God is with me, Luc. 7. c Luc. 4. c Esa. 11. a
for ye LORD has anointed me, and sent me, Esa. 66 a Esa. 57. c
to preach good tydi^ges unto the poor, yt I might bind up ye wounded hertes,
yt I might preach delyueraunce to ye captyue, and open the preson to the^ that
are bound: yt I might declare ye acceptable year of ye LORD, and the day of
ye ave^geaunce of our God: that I might comfort all them that are in
heaviness, Matt. ^. a Matt. 11. d
that I might give unto them yt mourn in Sion, bewty in the stead of ashes,
joyful oyntme^t for sighinge, pleasant rayme^t for an heavy mi^de: That they
might be called excellent in righteousness, a pla^tinge of the LORD for him
to rejoice in. Esa. 60. d


They shall build the long rough wilderness, and set up ye old deserte. They
shall repair the waist places, and soch as have been void through out many
generacio^s Strangers shall sto^de and feed yor catel, and the Aleauntes shall be
yor plowme^ and reapers. But ye shall be named the prestes of the LORD, and me^
shall call you the servants of our God. Esa. 66. d Iere. 33. d
Ye shall enjoy the goods of ye Gentiles and tryu^phe in Luc. 2. d
For I the LORD, which love right and hate robbery (though it were offered me)
shall make their works full of faithfulness, and make an everlasting covenant
with them.

Their sede also and their generation shall be known among the Gentiles, and
among the people. All they that se them, shall know, that they are the hie
blessed sede of ye LORD. And therefore I am joyful in the LORD, and my soul
reioyseth in my God. Psalm. 131. b
For he shall put upon me the garment of health, and cover me with the ma^tle
of righteousness. He shall deck me like a brydegrome, and as a bryde that has
her apparel upon her. For like as ye ground brings forth fruit, and as the
garden shuteth forth sede: So shall the LORD God cause righteousness, and the
fear of God to flourish forth before all the Heithen.

The lij. Chapter.
FOr Sions sake therefore will I not hold my tu^ge, and for Ierusale^s sake I
will not cease: until their righteousness break forth as ye shyninge light,
and their health as a burning lamp. Then shall the Gentiles se thy
righteousness and all kings thy glory. Thou shall be named with a new name,
which the mouth of ye LORD shall show. Thou shall be a crown in the hand of
the LORD, and a glorious garla^de in the ho^de of thy God. From this time
forth thou shall never be called the forsaken, and thy lord shall no more be
called the wilderness. But thou shall be called Hephziba (that is, my beloved)
and ye land Beula (that is) a married woman: (...)
for ye LORD loves ye, and thy lord shall be inhabited. And like as young man
takes a daughter to marriage, so shall God mary himself unto ye sons. And as a
brydegrome is glad of his bryde, so shall God rejoice over the.

I will set watchme^ upon thy walls (o Jerusalem) LORD. And ye also shall not
keep him close, nor leave to speak of hi^, until Jerusalem be set up, and
made the praise of the world. The LORD has sworn by his right hand and by
his strong arm, that from hence forth he will not give thy corn to be meat
for thine enemies, ner ye wine (wheri^ thou have labored) to be drink for ye
strangers. But they that have gathered in the corn, shall eat it, and give
thanks to the LORD: and they that have borne in the wine, shall drink it in
the court of my Sanctuary.

Sto^de back, and depart a sunder, ye yt stand under ye gate, make rowme ye
people, repair the street, and take away ye stones, and set out a toke^ for
the people. Behold, ye LORD proclameth in the ends of the world: (...)
tell ye daughter Sio^: se, thy Salvation comes, behold, he brings his
treasure with him, and his works go before him. For they who^ ye LORD
delyuereth, shall be called the holy people: and as for the, thou shall be named
the greatly occupied, and not the forsaken.

The lxiij. Chapter.
WHat is he this, that comes from Edom, with stained read clothes of Bosra:
(which is so costly cloth) and comes in so nee^bly with all his strength: I am
he yt teaches righteousness, and am of power to help. Wherefore the^ is thy
clothinge read, and thy rayme^t like his yt treads in ye wine press? I have
trodde^ the press my self alone, and of all people, there was not one with me.
(...)
Thus have I trode^ down mine enemies in my wrath, and set my fete upon them
in my indignacion: And their blood sprange upon my cloothes, and so have I
stained all my raiment. For the day of vengeance that I have taken in hand,
and the year of my delyueraunce is come. I looked about me, and there was no
man to show me any help, I fell down, and no man held me up. The^ I held me
by mine own arm, and my ferue^tnesse sustained me. And thus have I trodden
down the people in my wrath, and bathed them in my displeasure: In so much
that I have shed their blood upon the earth.

I will declare the goodness of the LORD, (...)
ye and the praise of the LORD for all that he has given us, for the great
good yt he has done for Israel: which he has given them of his own favor,
and acordinge to the multitude of his loving kindnesses. For he said: These
no doubt will be my people, and no shre^kinge children, and so he was their
Savior. (...)
In their troubles he forsook the^ not, but the angel that went forth from his
presence, delivered them: Of very love and kindness that he had unto them,
redeemed he them. He has borne them, and carried them up ever, sense the world
began. But after they provoked him to wrath and vexed his holy mind, he was
their enemy, and fought against them him self. Yet remembered he the old time,
of Moses and his people: How he brought them from the water of the sea, (...)
14. c (...) 76. b
as a shepherde does with his sheep: how he had given his holy sprete among
them: how he had led Moses by the right hand with his glorious arm: how he
had divided the water before them (whereby he gat him self an everlasting name)
how he led them in the deep, as an horse is led in the plain, that they should
not stomble. The sprete of the LORD led them, as a tame beast goes in the
field.

(...)
and behold the dwellinge place of thy sanctuary and thy glory. How is it, yt
thy gelousy, thy strength, the multitude of thy mercies and thy loving
kyndnesse, will not be entreated of us? Yet art thou or father: (...)
For Abraham knows us not, nether is Israel acquanted with us. But thou LORD
art our father and redemer, (...)
and thy name is ever lasting. O LORD wherefore have thou led us out of thy
way? wherefore have thou hardened our hertes, that we fear the not? Be at one
with us again, for thy servants sake yt are of the generacio^ of thy
heretage. Thy people has had but little of thy Sanctuary in possession, for
our enemies have taken it in: And we are become, even as we were from the
beginnynge: but thou art not their LORD, for they have not called upon thy
name.

The lxiiij. Chapter.
1. Cor. 2. b*
nether has any eye seen what thou do for the^, that put their trust in the.

Thou helpest him that does right with cherefulnesse, and them that think upon
thy ways. But lo, thou art angry, for we offend, and have been ever in
sin, and there is not one whole. To. 3. b Psalm. 13. a
We are all as an unclean thing, and all our rightuousnesses are as the
clothes stained with the flowers of a woman: we fall euerychone as the leaf,
for our

But now o LORD, thou father of ours: Matt. 6. b Iere. 18. b To 9. c Ecci^. 33
b Iere. 10. d Psalm. 78. a Iere. 26. d
we are the claye, and thou art our potter, and we all are the work of thy
hondes. Be not to sore displeased (o LORD) and keep not our offenses to long
in thy remembrance, but considre that we all are thy people. The cities of thy
Sanctuary lie waist, Sion is a wilderness, and Jerusalem a deserte. Mich 3. c
Our holy house which is our bewty, where our fathers praised the, is brent
up, ye all our commodities and pleasures are waysted away. Will thou not be
entreated ( LORD) for all this? Will thou hold thy peace, and scourge us so
sore?

The lxv. Chapter.
THey shall seek me, that hitherto have Esa. 52. a To. 10. d
that hither to have not sought me. Then shall I say immediately, to the people
that never called upon my name: I am here, I am here. For thus long have I
ever holden out my hondes to an unfaithful people, that go not the right way,
but after their own ymaginacions: To a people, that is ever defyenge me to my
face. Deuteronomy. 12. a Deuteronomy. 14. b
They make their oblacions in gardens, and their smoke upon aulters of brick,
they lurck among the graves, and lie in the dens all night. Leuit. 11. a
Deuteronomy. 14 a
They eat swyne flesh, and unclean broth is in their vessels. If thou come
nigh them, they say: touch me not, for I am holyer then thou.

All these men when I am angry, shall be turned to smoke and fire, that shall
burn for ever. ^^tt 25. d
Behold, it is written before my face, and shall not be forgotten, but
reco^pensed. I shall reward it them in to their bosom: (...). 7. a (...) 57. a
(...). 20. d
I mean your misdeeds, and the misdeeds of your fathers together (says the
LORD) which have made their smokes upon the mountains, and blasphemed me upon
the hills: therefore will I measure their old deeds in to their bosom again.

LORD: like as when one would gather holy grapes, (...). 11. b
men say unto him: break it not of, for it is holy: Even so will I do also
for my servants sakes, Re. 19. c (...). 9. c
that I will not destroy them all. But I will take a sede out of Jacob, and
out of Judah one, to take possession of my hill. My chosen shall possess these
things, and my servants shall dwell there. ^^su. 7. d
Saron shall be a shepefolde, and the valley of Achor shall give stallinge for the
catell of my people, that fear me. But as for you, ye are they, yt have for
saken the LORD, and forgotten my holy hill. Ye have set up an altar unto
fortune, and given rich drink offeringes unto treasure. Therefore will I nombre
you with the sword, that ye shall be destroyed all together. (...). 1. c
(...). 7. c
For when I called, no man gave me answer: when I spoke, ye herkened not unto
me, but did wickedness before mine eyes, and chosed the thing that pleased me
not.

LORD God: Behold, my servants shall eat, but ye shall have honger.
Behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall suffer thirst. Behold, my
servants shall be merry, but ye shall be confounded. Behold, my servants shall
rejoice for very quietness of heart. ^^cob. 4. b
But ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and compain for vexacion of mind. Your
name shall not be sworn by among my chosen, for God the LORD shall slaye you,
and call his servants by another name. ^^re. 9. d ^ Cor. 1. d ^ Cor. 11. a
Who so reioyseth upon earth, shall rejoice in the true God: And Who so
swears upon earth, shall swear in the true God. For the old enemite shall be
forgotten, and taken away out of my sight. For lo, I shall make a new heaven, ^
Pet. 3. b ^po. 21. a
and a new earth. And as for the old, they shall never be thought upon, ner
kept in mind: but me^ shall be glad and evermore rejoice, for the things, that
I shall do.

^po. 21. a
and be glad with my people: And the voice of wepinge and waylinge shall not be
herd in her from thence forth. There shall never be child ner old man, that
have not their full days. But when the child comes to an hu^derth year
old, it shall dye. And if he that is an hu^derth year of age do wrong, he
shall be cursed. (...)
They shall build houses, and dwell in them: they shall plant vynyardes, and
eat the fruit of them. They shall not build, and another possess: they shall
not plant, and another eat: (...)
But the life of my people shall be like a tree, and so shall the work of their
hondes.

My chosen shall live long, they shall not labor in vain, ner beget with
trouble: for they are the hie blessed sede of the LORD, and their fruits with
them. And it shall be, that or ever they call, I shall answer them. (...)
While they are yet but thinkinge how to speak, I shall hear them. The wolff
and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion shall eat hay like the
bullock. But earth shall be the serpe^tes meat. (...)
There shall no man hurt ner slaye another, in all my holy hill, says the
LORD.

The lxvj. Chapter.
THus says the LORD: Heaven is my (...)
Where shall now the house stand, yt ye will build unto me? And where shall be
the place, yt I will dwell in? As for these things, my ho^de has made them all,
and they are all created, says the LORD. Which of them shall I then regard?
Eue^ him that is of a lowly troubled sprete, and sto^deth in awe of my words.
For who so slays an ox for me, does me so great dishonor, as he yt
kylleth a man. He that kylleth a sheep for me, choketh a dog. He that
brings me meat offringes, offreth swynes blood: Who so makes me a memorial
of Incense, prayseth the thing yt is unright. Yet take they soch ways in
hand, and their soul deliteth in these abhominacions.

Therefore will I also have pleasure in laughinge them to scorn, (...)
and the thing that they fear, will I bring upon the^. For when I called, no
man gave answer: when I spoke, they would not hear: But did wickedness
before mine eyes, and chose the things that displease me. Hear the word of
God LORD magnify himself, that we may se your gladness: and yet they
shall be confounded.

For as touching the cite and the temple, (...)
I hear the voice of the LORD, that will reward, and recompense his enemies:
like as when a wife brings forth a man child, or ever she suffer the pain
of the birth and anguysh of ye travail. Who ever herd or saw soch things?
does the ground bear in one day? or are the people borne all at once, as
Sion bears his sons? For thus-sayeth the LORD: Am I he that makes other
to bear, and bear not my self? Am not I he that bears, and makes baren?
(...)
says thy God. Rejoice with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that love
her. Be joyful with her, all ye that mourned for her. For ye shall suck
comfort out of her breasts, and be satisfied. Ye shall taist, and have delight
in the plenteousnesse of her power. For thus says the LORD: behold, I will
let (...)
And when ye se this, your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall flourish
like an herb.

Thus shall the hand of the LORD be known among his servants, and his
indignacion among his enemies. For behold, the LORD shall come with fire, and
his charet shall be like a whyrlwynde, that he may recompense his vengeance in
his wrath, and his indignacion with the flame of fire. For ye LORD shall judge
all flesh with the fire and with his sword, and there shall be a great nombre
slain of the LORD. Soch as have made themselves holy and clean in the
gardens, and those that have eaten swyne flesh, myce, and other abhominacio^s,
shall betaken away together, says the LORD. For I will come to gather all
people and tongues, with their works and ymaginacions: these shall come, and se
my glory. Unto them shall I give a toke^, and send certain of the^ (that be
delivered) among the Gentiles: in to Celicia, Africa and Lidia (where men can
handle bows) in to Italy also and Greek land.

The Isles far of, Esa. 61. a 52. a 60 65. a
that have not herd speak of me, and have not seen my glory: shall preach my
praise among the Gentiles, and shall bring all your brethren for an offringe
unto the LORD, out of al people, upon horses, charettes and horse lytters,
upon Mooles and carts to Jerusalem my holy hill (says the LORD) like as the
children of Israel bring the offringe in clean vessels, to the house of the
LORD.

And I shall take out certain of them for to be preastes and levites, says ye
LORD. Esa. 61. a 1. pet. ^. Romans 1^
For like as the new heaven and the new earth which I will make, shall be fast
stablished by me: (says the LORD) So shall your sede and your name
continue, and there shall be a new Moon for the other, and a new Sabbath for the
other, and all flesh shall come to worshipe before me, (says ye LORD.) And
they shall go forth, and look upon the caryons of them, that have transgressed
against me. For their worms shall not dye, Mat. 9 ^ Mar. 9. ^
nether shall their fire be quenched, and all flesh shall abhor them.

The end of the prophet Esaias.
The Prophet Jeremy.
What Jeremy conteyneth.
Chap. I. He declares first his calling, and in a vision he seith the
destruction of Jerusalem. Chap. II. The faithfulness and loving mercy of God:
Again, the vnthanckfulnes of the people. Chap. III He cries upon the people
to amend, and shows them the wrath of God. Chap. IIII. He lays the
wrothfull displeasure of God before them, and exorteth the^ to amendment Chap.
V.VI.VII.VIII. The wrath of God, and the cause thereof. Plages and misery for to
come. Chap. IX. The prophet mourns and co^playneth upon the sins of the
people. Chap. X. He gives the^ warning, that they follow not the uses and
customs of the Heithe^, and shows them how vain a thing it is to worshipe
images, and to forget the true living God. Chap. XI. He puteth them in
remembrance of the covenant, shows their misery, and complayneth of his
own persecucion. Chap. XII. The prosperity of the wicked, and trouble of the^
that are godly. The forsakynge of the Jews, and calling of the Heithe^. Chap.
XIII. Sore plages upon the people, showed unto the prophet by the lynninge
breche. Chap. XIIII^ The derth of fruits. So wroth is God at the people, that
he forbids the prophet to pray for them. Chap. XV. God will not be
entreated, where his law is trodden under foot. He answers the prophet to his
complaynte. Chap. XVI. The LORD forbids the prophet to keep company with
the people, or to-take a wife in that place, for he is minded to punish them.
Chap. XVII. Punishment of them that forsake the LORD, and put their trust in
men. A commandment concerning the Sabbath. Chap. XVIII. By the potters work
the prophet is taught, so that he warns the people, and tells them of the
punishment. Chap. XIX. The plage upon Jerusalem and Tophet. Chap. XX. Pashur
the chief pressed smyteth Jeremy the prophet, and puts him in preson: which
shows him his plage for to come. Chap. XXI. The prophet shows the king,
what shall become of the cite. Chap. XXII He exorteth the king and all the
people unto godliness, and tells what shall become of Sellu^ (other wise
called Ioas) the son of Josias: and what shall happen to Iechonias the son
of Ioachim. Chap. XXIII. He reproves the wicked rulers and false prophets.
Chap. XXIIII. The vision of the fyge mau^des. Chap. XXV. He reproves the king
and all the people, and shows the punishment for to come upon the heithen.
Chap. XXVI. Because the prophet rebukes the people, the prestes and the
prophets put him to trouble: but at the last Ahicam delyuereth him. Chap.
XXVII. God commands the prophet for to make bonds and cheynes, to signify
the captiuyte of the Heithen kings. Chap. XXVIII. Hananias the false prophet
with stondeth Jeremy. Chap. XXIX. A lettre of Jeremy sent unto the presoners at
Babylon. Chap. XXX. Jeremy (at the commandment of God) writes his sermons in
a book. Sweet and comfortable promises unto the godly: Again, the wrath of God
against the wicked. Chap. XXXI. He puts the people in mind of the loving
mercy and benefits of God, and comforts them with his promises. Chap. XXXII
The prophet being in preson shows the delyueraunce of the people out of
captiuyte. Chap. XXXIII. A plain and manifest prophecy of the kingdom of
Christ. Chap. XXXIIII. He shows the king Sedechias and the people their
punyshme^t for breaking the covenant. Chap. XXXV. He reproves the
disobedience of the people, through the good example of the Rechabites. Chap.
XXXVI The king burns the propheres book, but a greater is written again for
it, and the king punyshed. Chap. XXXVII. Pharao comes out of Egipte to help
the king, but in vain. Jeremy is put in preson. Chap. XXXVIII The princes
labor to have the prophet deed, they put him i^ a sorer preson: but
Abdemelech gets him out, and the king co^moneth with him. Chap. XXXIX. The
cite of Jerusalem is won the king taken, his sons and princes slain
before his face, his own eyes put out, and he led unto Babylon. But Jeremy and
Abdemelech escape. Chap. XL. How the chief captain entreats Jeremy. Godolias
is made gouernoure of the land, the people resort unto him. Chap, XLI. Ismael
slays Godolias, and takes the people presoners, but Iohanna defends them.
Chap. XLII. The captains axe council at Jeremy, but follow him not. Chap.
XLIII.XLIIII. They will needs go into Egipte against the commandment of God
The prophet exorteth the^ to the contrary, and to leave their ydolatry:
Nevertheless, they regard it not, but will do as their fathers did before them.
Chap. XLV. Jeremy comfort Baruch, concerning his weakness of mind. Chap.
XLVI. The sum of Ieremies preachinge unto the Heithen, specially unto Egipte.
Chap. XLVII. Against the Philistynes. Chap. XLVIII. Against Moab. Chap^ XLIX.
Against the Ammonites, Edomites, Damascus, Cedar and Elam. Chap. L.LI. Against
Babylon. Chap. LII. A recitynge how Jerusalem was beseged, won, and taken.


These are the Sermons of Jeremy the son of Helchia the pressed, one of them
that dwelt at Anathot in the land of Ben Iamin: (...)
when the LORD had first spoken with him, in the time of Josias the son of
Amon king of Judah, in the xiij year of his kingdom: and so duringe unto the
time of Ioachim the son of Josias king of Judah, and unto the xj years of
Sedechias the son of Josias king of Judah were ended: (...) 39. a (...) 2^. a
when Jerusalem was taken, even in the fyfth Month.

The first Chapter.
LORD spoke thus unto me: (...) 44. a
Before I fasshioned the in thy mothers womb, (...)
I did know the: And or ever thou wast borne, I sanctified the, and ordened
the, to be a prophet unto the people. (...) 14. b (...) 4. c
The^ said I: Oh LORD God, I am vn^ete, for I am yet but young. And the LORD
answered me thus: Say not so, I am to young: (...) b (...). c (...) 3. a (...)
1^ a
For thou shall go to all that I shall send the unto, and what so ever I
command the, that shall thou speak. Be not afraid of their faces, for I
will be with the, to deliver the, says the LORD.

And with that, the LORD stretched out his hand, (...) 6. a
and touched my mouth, and said morouer unto me: Behold I put my words in
thy mouth, and this day do I set the over the people and kingdoms: that thou
may rote out, break of, destroy, and make waist: and that thou may
build up, and LORD spoke unto me saying: Jeremy, what seist thou? And I
said: (...) ^4. b
I se a waking rod. Then said ye LORD: thou have seen right, for I will
watch diligently upon my word, to perform it.

It happened afterward, that the LORD spoke to me again, and said: What
seist thou? (...) 41. b
And I said: I do se a seethinge pot, lokinge from out of the north
hitherwarde.

Then said the LORD unto me and Out of the north shall come a plage upon all
the dwellers of the land. For lo, Iere. 4 b Abac. 1. b Iere. 25. b
I will call all the officers of the kingdoms of the north, (says the
LORD.) And they shall come, and every one shall set his seat in the gates of
Jerusalem, and in all their walls round about, and through all the cities of
Judah. And through them shall I declare my judgment,

And therefore gyrde up thy loins, arise, Eze. 3. a
and tell them all, that I give the in commandment. Fear them not, I will
not have the to be afraid of the^. For behold, Iere. 15. d
this day do I make the a strong fensed town, an iron pyler, and a wall of
or brass
stele against ye whole land, against the kings and mighty men of Judah,
against the prestes and people of the land. They shall fight against the, but
they shall not be able to over come the: Iere. 25. d
for I am with the, to deliver the, says the LORD.

The II. Chapter.
MOrouer, the word of the LORD Iere. 3. d
cry in the ears of Jerusalem, and say: Thus says the LORD: I remember
the for the kyndnesse of thy youth, and because of thy steadfast love: in that
thou folowdest me through the wilderness, in an untilled land. Thou Israel
wast hallowed unto te LORD, and so was his first fruits. Iere. 10. d and ^0 c
Zac. 2. b
All they that devoured Israel, offended: miszfortune fell upon them, says
the LORD. Hear therefore the word of the LORD, O thou house of Jacob, and
all the generation of the house of Israel. Thus says ye LORD unto your

What unfaithfulness found your fathers in me, that they went so far
away fro me, fallinge to lightness, and being so vain? They thought not in
their hertes: Where have we left the LORD, yt brought us out of the lord of
Egipte: Exo. 14. c
yt led us through the wilderness, through a deserte and roughlonde, through a
dry and a deedly land, ye a land that no man had gone through, and wherein
no man had dwelt. Esa. 32. f Deuteronomy. 6. b
And when I had brought you in to a pleasant welbuylded land, that ye might
enjoy the fruits and all the commodities of the same: ye went forth and
defiled my land, Iere. 32. c
and brought mine heretage to abhominacion.

The prestes the^ selves said not once: where LORD? Marc. 12. c Ioh. 5. d
They yt have the law in their hondes, know me not: The shepherdes offend
against me. The prophets do service unto Baal, and follow soch things as
shall bring them no profit.

Wherefore I am constrained (says the LORD) to make my complaynte upon you,
and upon your children. Go in to the Isles of Cethim, and look well: send unto
Cedar, take diligent head: and se, whether soch things be done there, whether
the Gentiles them selves deal so falsely and untruly with their gods (which
yet are no gods in deed. Psalm. 95. a
) But my people has given over their hie honor, for a thing that may not
help them.

Be astonished (o ye heavens) be afraid, and abashed at soch a thing, says
the LORD. For my people has done two euels. They have forsaken me the well of
the water of life, Ba^uc. 3. b Iere. 17. c Ioh. 4. b
and dug them pittes, ye vile and broken pittes, that hold no water. Is
Israel a bond servant, or one of the household? Why is he then so spoiled?
Exo. 4. d
Why do they roar and cry then upon him, as a lion? They have made his land
wayst, his cities are so brent up, Esa. 1. b
that there is no man dwellinge in them. Ye the children of Noph and Taphanes
have defiled thy neck.

LORD thy God, Iere. 32. c
ever sense he led the by the way? And what have thou now to do in ye street
of Egipte? to drink foul water? Either, what make thou in the way to
Assiria? To drink water of the floude? Job 22. b
Thine own wickedness shall reprove the, and thy turnynge away shall condemn
the: that thou may know and understand, how euel and hurtful a thing it
is, yt thou have forsaken the LORD thy God, and not feared him, says the
LORD God of hoostes.

Esa. 65. a Eze. 20. d Iere. 3. b
I have ever broken thy yock of old, and bursten thy bonds: yet say thou, I
will no more serve, but (like an harlot) thou runnest about upon all hie hills,
and among all grene trees: where as I planted the out of noble grapes and good
rotes. Esa. ^* a
How art thou turned then into a bitter, unfruitful, and strange grape? Ye
and that so sore: that though thou wasshest the with Nitrus and make thiself
to sauoure with that sweet smellinge herb of Borith: yet in my sight thou art
stained with thy wickedness, says the LORD thy God.

^ere. 3. b ^ Re. 17. b ^ere. 5. b Isa. 5^. a (...) 16. b
Look upon thine own ways in the woddes, valleis and dens: so shall thou
know, what thou have done. Thou art like a swift Dromedary, that goes easily
his way: and thy wantonness is like a wild Ass, that uses the wilderness,
and that snoffeth and blows at his will. Who can tame the? All they that seek
the, shall not fail, but find the in thine own uncleanness. Thou kepest thy
foot from nakedness, and thy throat from thirst, and think thus in thy self:
tush, I will take no sorrow, I will love the strange gods, and hang upon them.

Like as a thief that is taken with the deed, comes to shame, eue^ so is the
house of Israel come to confucion: the common people, their kings and rulers,
their prestes and prophets. For they say to a stock, (...)
thou art my father, and to a stone: thou have begotten me, ye they have
turned their back upon me, and not their face. But in the time of their
trouble, when they say: stand up, and help us, I shall answer the^: (...)
Where are now thy gods, that thou have made the? bid them stand up, and
help the in the time of need? For look how many cities thou have (o Judah) so
many gods have thou also.

Wherefore the^ will ye go to law with me, LORD? It is but lost labor, that I
smite your children, for they receive not my correction. (...)
Your own swearde destroys your prophets, like a deuouringe lion. If ye
be the people of the LORD, then herke^ unto his word: Am I the^ become a
wilderness unto the people of Israel? or a land that has no light? Wherefore
says my people then: we are fallen of, and we will come no more unto the? Does
a maiden forget her rayme^t, or a bryde her stomacher* And does my people
forget me so long? Why boostest thou thy ways so hylie, (to obtain favor
there through) when thou have yet stained them with blasphemies?

Upon thy wings is found the blood of poor and innocent people, (...)
and that not in corners and holes only, but openly in all these places. Yet
darrest thou say: I am giltlesse: Tush, his wrath can not come upon me.
Behold, I will reason with ye, because thou darrest say: I have not offended.
O how euel will it be for the, to abide it: when it shall be known, (...)
how often thou have gone bacwarde? For thou shall be confounded, as well of
Egipte, as of the Assirians: Ye thou shall go thy way from the^, and smite
yine hondes together upon thy head. Because the LORD shall bring that
confidence and hope of thine to naught, and thou shall not prospere with all.

The III. Chapter.
(...) 24. a
and she goes from him, and marieth with another, then the question is: should
he resort unto her any more after that? Is not this field then defiled and
unclean? (...)
But as for the, thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet turn again
to me, says the LORD. Lift up thine eyes on every side, and look, if thou be
not defiled. Thou have waited for them in the streets, and as a murderer in
the wilderness. Through thy whordome and shameful blasphemies, is the land
defiled.

(...)
This is the cause, that the rain and evening dew has ceased. Thou have
gotten the an whores foreheade, and can not be ashamed. Else would thou say
unto me: O my father, thou art he that have brought me up, and led me fro my
youth: Will thou then put me away, and cast me of forever? Or will thou
withdraw thy self clean fro me? Nevertheless, thou speak soch words, but
thou art ever doing worse, and worse.

LORD said also unto me, in the time of Josias the king: Have thou seen what
that shre^kinge Israel has done? how she has run up upon all hie hills,
(...) 2. d (...) 17. b
and among all thick trees, and there played the harlot? have thou seen also,
(when she had done all this) how I said unto her: that she should turn again
unto me, and yet she is not returned? (...) ^3. b
Judah that unfaithful sister of hirs also saw this: Namely, that affter I had
well seen the aduoutrye of the shrenkinge harlot Israel, I put her away, and
gave her a byll of deuorcement.

For all this, her unfaithful sister Judah was not ashamed, but went back and
played the whore also. Ye and the noise of her whordome has defiled the whole
lord. For she has committed her aduoutrie with stones and stocks.

Nevertheless, her unfaithful sister Judah is not turned unto me again with
her whole heart, (...) 3. a
but faynedly, says the LORD. LORD said unto me: The bacslyder Israel is
more rightuous, (...)
the^ the unfaithful Judah: and therefore go preach these words toward the
north, and say: Thou shrenkinge Israel, turn again (says the LORD,) and I
will not turn my face from you, for I am merciful, says the LORD, and I
will not allwaye bear displeasure against the: but on this condition, that
thou know thy great blasphemy: Namely, that thou have unfaithfully forsaken
the LORD thy God, Iere. 5. b Esa. 57. a
and have made thy silf partaker of strange gods under all grene trees, but
have had no will to hear my voice, says the LORD.

O ye shrenkinge children, turn again, Eze. 2. e Osee. 14. a Eze. 14. a Osee.
2. d
says the LORD, and I will be married with you. For I will take one out of the
city and two out of one generation from among you, and bring you out of
Sion: and will give you hyrdme^ after mine own mind, which shall feed you with
learning and wyszdome. Morouer, when ye be increased and multiplied LORD)
there shall no more boost be made of the ark of the LORD'S Testament: No man
shall think upon it, nether shall any man make mention of it: for from thence
forth it shall nether be visited, ner honored with gifts.

Then shall Jerusalem be called the LORDS seat, and all Heithen shall be
gathered unto it, for the name of the LORD sake, which shall be set up at
Jerusalem. And from that time forth, they shall follow no more the ymaginacion
of their own frauwerde heart.

The^ those yt be of the house of Judah, shall go unto the house of Israel: And
they shall come together out of the north, Matt. 8. b
in to the same land that I have given your fathers. I have showed also, how
I took the up being but a child, and gave the a pleasant land for thine
heretage, ye and a goodly hooste of the Heithen: and how I commanded the,
Matt. 23. c
that thou should call me father only, and not to shrencke fro me.

But like as a woman fails her lover, so are ye unfaithful unto me (o ye
house of Israel) says the LORD. And therefore the voice of the children of
Israel was herd on every Iere. 31. c
for they have defiled their way, and forgotten God their LORD.

O ye shrenkinge children, turn again, (saying: lo, we are thine, for thou
art the LORD our God:) And so shall I heal your bacturnynges. The hills
fall, and all the hie pride of the mountains, but the health of Israel
stondeth only upon God our LORD.

Confucion has devoured our fathers labor from our youth up: Tren. 5. a
Dan. 3. b 6. a Baruc. 1. b Iere. 14. a Psalm. 105. a Esa. 64. a Hest. 14. a
Iudit* 7. c
ye their sheep and bullockes, their sons and daughters. So do we also sleep
in our confucion, and shame covers us: for we and our fathers from our
youth up unto this day have sinned against the LORD our God* and hahaue not
obeyed the voice of the LORD our God. ^. Esd. 9. a and 10. b


The IIII. Chapter.
LORD. And if thou will put away thy abhominacio^s out of my sight, thou
shall not be moved: Iere. 5. a and 12. a
And shall swear: The LORD lives: in treuth, in equite and righteousness:
and all* people shall be fortunable and joyful in him. For thus says the
LORD, to all Judah and Jerusalem: plowe your land, and sow not among the
thorns.

Iere. 6. b and 9. a
Be circumcided in the LORD, and cut away the foreskynne of your hertes, all
ye of Judah, Iere. 21. c
and all the indwellers of Jerusalem: that my indignacion break not out like
fire, and kyndle, so that no man may quench it, because of the wickedness of
your ymaginacions.

Preach in Judah and Jerusalem, cry out and speak: Esa. 58. a
blow the trompettes in the land, cry that every man may hear, and say:
Gather you together, and we will go in to strong cities. Set up the token in
Sion, speed you, and make no tarienge: for I will bring a great plage, and a
great destruction from the north. Iere. 1. c
For the spoyler of the Gentiles is broken up from his place, as a lion out of
his de^ne, that he may make the LORD shall not be withdrawn from you*

At the same time (says the LORD) the heart of the king and of the princes
shall be gone, the prestes shall be astonished, and the prophets shall be sore
afraid. Then said I: O LORD God, have thou then disceaued this people and
Jerusalem, saying: ye shall have peace, Deuteronomy. 28. a
and now the swearde goes through their lives? Then shall it be said to the
people and to Jerusalem: Iere. 1. b
there comes a warm wind from the north through the way of my people, but
nether to fan, ner to cle^se.

After that shall there come unto me a strong wind, and then will I also give
sentence upon them. For lo, he comes down like as a cloud, and his
charettes are like a stormy wind: Tren. 4. d Dan. 7. a
his horsemen are swifter then Esa. 1. c
that thou may be helped. How long shall thy noisome thoughts remain with
the?

For a voice from Dan and from ye hill of Ephraim speaks out, and tells of
a destruction. Behold, the Heithen give Jerusalem warning, and preach unto
her, that her destroyers are coming from far countrees. They tell the
cities of Judah the same also, they shall give them warning in every place,
like as the watch men in the field. For they have provoked me to wrath, (...)
says the LORD.

Thy ways and thy thoughts, (...)
have brought the unto this, this is thine own wickedness and disobedience,
that has possessed thine heart: Ah my belly, ah my belly, (shall thou cry) how
is my heart so sore? my heart paunteth within me, I can not be still, for I have
herd the crienge of the trompettes, and peales of war.

They cry murthur upon murthur, the whole land shall perish. Immediathly my
tents were destroyed, and my hanginges, in the twincklinge of an eye. How
long shall I se the tokens of war, and hear the noise of the trompettes?

Nevertheless this shall come upon them, (...)
and has vterly no understanding. They are the children of foolishnes, (...)
and without any discrecio^. To do evil, they have wit enough: but to do
well, they have no wiszdome. I have looked upon the earth, and se, it is wayst
and void. I looked toward heaven, and it had no shine.

I beheld the mountains, and they trembled, and all the hills were in a
fear. I looked about me, and there was no body, and all the birds of the air
were away. I marked well, and the plowed field was become waist: ye all their
cities were broken down at the presence of the LORD, and indignacion of his
wrath.

For thus has the LORD said: The

What will thou now do, thou being destroyed? (...)
For though thou clothest thy self with scarlet, and deckest ye with gold:
though thou payntest thy face with colors, (...)
yet shall thou trymme thy self in vain.

For those that hither to have been thy great favorers, shall abhor the, and
go about to slaye ye. For (me think) I hear a noise, like as it were of a
woman trauelinge, or one laboringe of her first child: Even the voice of the
daughter Sion, that casts out her arms, and swowneth, saying: Ah woe is me,
how sore vexed and faynte is my heart, for them that are slain?

The V. Chapter.
LORD) For though they can say: (...)
the LORD lives, yet do they swear to disceaue: Where as thou (o LORD)
lokest only upon faith and treuth.

Thou have scourged them, but they took no repentance: thou have correct them
for amendeme^t, but they refused thy correction. They made their faces harder
then a stone, and would not amend.

Therefore I thought in my self: peradventure they are so simple and folish,
that they understand nothing of the LORDS way, (...). 17. d
and judgments of our God. Therefore will I go unto their heads and rulers,
and talk with them: if they know the way of the LORD, and the iudgme^tes of
our God. But these (in like manner) have broken the yock, and bursten the
bonds in sonder.

(...). ^2. d
and a wolf in the evening shall destroy them. The cat of the mountain shall
lie lurkinge by their cities, to tear in pieces all them, that come therout.
For their offenses are many, and their departinge away is great.

(...) 1. a
Should I then for all this have mercy upon the? Thy children have forsaken me,
and sworn by them that are no gods. And albeit they were bound to me in
marriage, yet they fell to aduoutrie, and haunted harlottes houses.

In the desire of uncleanly lust they are become like the stoned horse, every
man neyeth at his neghbours wife. (...). 22. b
Should I not correcke this, says the LORD?

(...). 9. a
Should I not be avenged of every people, that is like unto this? Clymme up upon
their walls, beat them down, but destroy them not utterly: cut of their
branches, because they are not the LORDS.

For unfaithfully has the house of Israel and Judah forsaken me, says the
LORD. 2. Pet. 2. a Iere. 14. ^ Deu. 29. ^ Soph. 1. ^ Ier. 23. c
They have denied the LORD, and said: it is not he.

Tush, there shall no miszfortune come upon us, we shall se nether swearde ner
honger. As for the warning of the prophets, Iere. 6. b
ye there is none of these, which will tell them, that soch things shall
happen unto them.

Wherefore thus says the LORD God of hoostes: because ye speak soch words,
behold: Esa. 33. b
The words that are in thy mouth will I turn to fire, and make the people to
be wod, that it may consume them.

Lo, Deuteronomy. 28. ^ Baru. 4. ^
I will bring a people upon you from far, o house of Israel (says the
LORD) a mighty people, an old people, a people whose speech thou know
not, nether vndersto^dest what they say.

Their arowes are sodane death, ye they them selves be very giauntes. This
people shall eat up thy fruit and thy meat, ye they shall devour thy sons
and thy daughters, thy sheep and thy bullockes.

They shall eat up thy grapes and fyges. As for thy strong and well fensed
cities, wherein thou did trust, they shall destroy them with the swearde.

Nevertheless I will not then have done LORD. But if they say: wherefore does
the LORD our God all this unto us?

Then answer them: because, that like as ye have forsaken me, Iere. 16. b Deu.
28. g
and served strange gods in your own land, even so shall ye serve other
gods also in a strange land.

Preach this unto the house of Jacob, and cry it out in Judah, and say thus:
Hear this (thou folish and indiscreet people. Esa. 6. b Ioh. 9. d
) Ye have eyes, but ye se not: ears have ye, but ye hear not.

Fear ye not me, says the LORD? Are ye not ashamed, to look me in the face?
Job 26 b 28. a
which bind the sea with the sonde, so that it can not pass his bounds: For
though it rage, yet can it do nothing: and though the wawes thereof do swell,
yet may they not go over.

But this people has a false and an obstinate heart, they are departed and
gone away fro me. They think not in their hearts: O let us fear the LORD
our God, that gives us rain early and late, when need is: which keeps ever
still the harvest for us yearly.

Nevertheless your miszdedes have turned Esa. 59. a
and your sins have robbed you hereof. For among my people are found wicked
persons, that privily lay snares and wait for men, to take them, and
destroy them.

And like as a net is full of birds, so are their houses full of that, which
they have gotten with falsede and disceate. Hereof comes their great
substance and riches, her of are they fat and welthy, and are run away fro
me with shameful blasphemies. They ministre not the law, ^sa. 1. e
they make no end of the fatherlesses cause, they judge not the poor
acordinge to equite.

^ere. 9. a ^ere. 5. b
Should I not punysh these things, says the LORD? Should I not be avenged of
all soch people, as these be? Horrible and grievous things are done in the
land.

The prophets teach falsely, and the prestes follow them, and my people has
pleasure therein. What will come thereof at the last?

The VI. Chapter.
^. Re. 14. a
set up a token unto Bethacarem, for a plage and a great misery pepeth out
from the North.

I will licken the daughter Sion to a fair and tender woman, and to her shall
come the shepherdes with their flocks. Their tents shall they pitch round
about her, and every one shall feed with his hand. Make batell against her
(shall they say:) Arise, let us go up, while it is yet day.

Alas, the day goes away, and the night shadows fall down: Arise, let us
go up by night, and destroy her strong holds, for thus has the LORD of
hoostes commanded.

Hew down her trees, and set up bulworkes against Jerusalem. This is the cite
that must be punished, for in her is all maliciousnes. Like as a co^dyte
abounds in water, eue^ so this city abou^deth in wickedness. Robbery and
unrighteousness is herd in her, sorrow and wounds are ever there in my sight.
Amend the (o Jerusalem) lest I with draw my heart from the, and make the
desolate: and thy land also, yt no man dwell in it. For thus says the LORD
of hoostes: The residue of Israel shall be gathered, as the remnaunt of grapes.

^ere. 4. a 9. d
that he may take heed? Their ears are so uncircumcised, that they may not
hear.

Behold, (...)
they take the word of God but for a scorn, and have no lust thereto. And
therefore I am so full of thy indignacion (o LORD) that I may suffer no
longer. Shed out thy wrath upon the children that are without, and upon all
young men. Ye the man must be taken presoner with the wife, and the aged with
the crepel. Then ^^uses with their lands and wives shall be turned unto
strangers, when I stretchout mine ho^de upon the inhabitours of this land,
says the LORD. For from the leest unto the most, (...)
they hang all upon covetousnes: and from the prophet unto the pressed, they go
all about with falsede and lies.

And beside that, (...)
they heal the hurt of my people with sweet words, saying: peace, peace,
when there is no peace at all. (...)
Therefore they must be ashamed, for they have committed abhominacion. But how
should they be ashamed, when they know nothing, nether of shame ner good
nurture? And therefore (...)
and in the hour when I shall viset them, they shall be brought down, says
the LORD.

Thus says the LORD: go in to the streets, considre and make inquisicion for
the old way: and if it be the good and right way, then go therein, that ye
may find rest for your souls. (But they say: we will not walk therein) and
I will set watchmen over you, and therefore take heed unto the voice of the
trompet. But they say: we will not take heed. Hear therefore ye Gentiles, and
thou congregation shall know, what I have devised for them. Hear thou earth
also: behold, (...)
I will cause a plage come upon this people, even the fruit of their own
ymaginacions.

For they have not been obedient unto my words and to my law, but abhorred
them. Wherefore bring ye me incense from Saba, (...)
and sweet smellinge Calamus from far countrees? Your burnt offeringes
displease me, and I rejoice not in your sacrifices.

And therefore thus says the LORD: behold, I will make this people fall, and
there shall fall from among them the father with the children, one neighbor shall
perish with another.

Morouer thus says ye LORD: Behold, (...)
and a great people shall arise from ye ends of ye earth, with bows and with
darts shall they be weapened: It is a rough and fearce people, an unmerciful
people: their voice roareth like the sea, they ride upon horses well appointed to
ye batell against the, o daughter Sion. Then shall this cry be herd: Our
arms are feeble, heaviness and sorrow is come upon us, as upon a woman trauelinge
with child. Noman go forth in to the field, no man come upon the hie street:
for the swearde and fear of the enemy shall be on every side.

Wherefore, gyrde a sack cloth about the (o thou daughter of my people)
sprynkle thy self with aszshes, (...)
mourn and weep bitterly, as upon thy only beloved son: For the destroyer
shall suddenly fall upon us. The have I set for a prouer of my hard people, to
seek out and to try their ways. For they are all unfaithful and fallen away,
they hang upon shameful lucre, they are clean brass and iron, for they hurt
and destroy every man. The bellous are brent in the fire, the lead is
consumed, the melter melts in vain, for the euel is not taken away from
them. Therefore shall they be called naughty silver, because the LORD has cast
them out.

The VII. Chapter.
(...) 17. d (...) ^6. a
Stand under the gates of the LORDS house, and cry out these words there,
with a loud voice, and say: Hear the word of the LORD, all ye of Judah,
that go in at this door, to honor the LORD. Thus says the LORD of hoostes
the God of Israel. ^sa. 1. c (...). ^6. c
Amend your ways and your councels, and I will let you dwell in this place.
Trust not in false lyenge words, saying: here is the temple of the LORD,
here is the temple of the LORD, here is the temple of the LORD.

(...). 22. c (...). 8 c (...). 19. g (...) 24. a
For if ye will amend your ways and councels, if ye will judge right betwixt
a man and his neighbor: if ye will not oppress the stranger, the fatherles
and the wyddowe: if ye will not shed innocent blood in this place: if ye will
not cleue to strange gods to your own destruction: then will I let you
dwell in this place, ye in the land that I gave before time unto your fathers
for ever. But take heed, ye trust in councels, that begyle you and do you no
good. For when ye have stolle^, murthured, committed aduoutrie, and perjury:
When ye have offered unto Baal, folowinge strange and unknown gods: (...)
Then come ye, and stand before me in this house (which has my name given
unto it) and say: Tush, we are absolved quyte, though we have done all these
abhominacions.

^sa. ^6. b
What? think you this house that bears my name, is a den of thieves? Ioh. 2.
b Matt. 21. ^ Iere. 32. d Iosu. 18. a Iere. 26. ^ 1. Re. 3, 4* 5.6
And these things are not done privily, but before mine eyes, says the
LORD. Go to my place in Silo, where unto I gave my name before time, and look
well what I did to the same place, for the wickedness of my people of Israel.
And now, though ye have done all LORD) and I my self rose up ever by times to
warn you and to common with you: yet would ye not hear me: I called, ye would
not answer. Esa. 95. b Pro. 1. c Luc. 2^. a
And therefore even as I have done unto Silo, so will I do to this house, that my
name is given unto, (and that ye put your trust in) ye unto the place that I
have given to you and your fathers. 4. Re. 17. ^
And I shall thrust you out of my sight, as I have cast out all your brethren
the whole sede of Ephraim.

Therefore thou shall not pray for this people, thou shall nether give thanks,
Iere. 14. ^ 1. Ioh. 5. a Eze. 14. c
nor bid prayer for them: thou shall make no intercession to me for them, for
in no wise will I hear the. Seist thou not what they do in the cities of Judah,
and without Jerusalem? The children gather sticks, Iere. 44. ^
the fathers kyndle the fire, the mothers kneade the dowe, to bake cakes for
the queen of heaven.

They pour out drink offringes unto strange gods, to provoke me unto wrath:
How be it they hurt not me (says the LORD) but rather confound, and shame
them selves.

And therefore thus says the LORD God: behold, my wrath and my indignacion
shall be poured out upon this place, upon men and catell, upon the trees in the
field and all fruit of the land, and it shall burn so, that no man may quench
it.

Thus says the LORD of hoostes, the Esa. 1. a
Ye heap up your burntoffringes with your sacrifices, and eat ye flesh. But
when I brought your fathers out of Egipte, Deuteronomy. 10 ^ Esa. 43. d Exo. 6. b
I spoke no word unto them of burnt offringes and sacrifices: but this I
commanded them, saying: harken and obey my voice, Exo. 20. a
and I shall be your God and ye shall be my people: so that ye walk in all the
ways, which I have commanded you, that ye may prospere.

But they were not obedient, zach. 7. b
they inclyned not their ears there unto, but went after their own
ymagynacions and after the mocions of their own wicked heart, and so turned
them selves away, and converted not unto me. And this have they done, from the
time that your fathers came out of Egipte, unto this day.

Iere. 25. a
Nevertheless, I sent unto them my servants all the prophets: I rose up early
and sent them word, yet would they not herke^, ner offer me their ears, but
were obstinate, and worse then their fathers.

And thou shall now speak all these words unto them, but they shall not hear
the: thou shall cry upon them, but they shall not LORD their God, ner
receaueth his correction. Iere. 5. a
Faithfulness and treuth is clean rooted out of their mouth.

Eze. 5. a
Wherefore cut of thine hair, and cast it away, take up a complaynte in the
whole land: for the LORD shall cast away, and scatre the people, yt he is
displeased withal.

For the children of Judah have done evil in my sight, Iere. 12. d
says the LORD. They have set up their abhominacions, in the house yt has
my name, and have defiled it. They have also builded an altar at Tophet, 4.
Re. 23. e Deuteronomy. 32. c Psalm. 105. c Iere. 44. a
which is in the valley of ye children of Enno^: yt they might burn their
sons and daughters, which I never commanded them, nether came it ever in my
thought. And therefore behold, the days shall come (says the LORD) that it
shall no more be called. Tophet* or the valley of the children of Ennon, ^ere.
19. c
but the valley of the slain: for in Tophet they shall be buried, because they
shall else have no rowme. ^ere. 8. b ^. c
Ye ye deed bodies of this people shall be eaten up of the fowls of the air
and wild beasts of the earth, and no man shall fraye them away. Eze. 26. b
And as for the voice of mirth and gladness of the cities of Judah, and
Jerusalem, the voice of the brydegrome and of the bryde: ^ere. 16. b ^5. b
I will make them cease, for the land shall be desolate.

The VIII. Chapter.
LORD, the bones of the kings of Judah, the bones of his princes, the bones of
the prestes and prophets, ye and the bones of the citisens of Jerusalem,
shall be brought out of their graves and laid against the Son, Deuteronomy. 4. e ^ap.
21. a
the Moon and all the heavenly hooste: whom they loved, whom they served, whom
they ran after, whom they sought and worshipped. They shall nether be gathered
together ner buried, but shall lie upon the earth, to their shame and despisinge.

And all they that remain of this wicked generation, Luc. 23. c
shall desire rather to dye the^ to live: where so ever they remain, and where
as I scatre them, says the LORD of hoostes. This shall thou say unto them
also: Thus says the LORD: Do men fall so, that they arise not up again: And
turn they so far away, yt they never convert? Wherefore then is this people
and Jerusalem gone so far back, that they turn not again* They are ever
the longer the more obstinate, and will not be converted.

For I have looked, and considered: but there is no man, that speaks a good
word: (...)
there is no man, that takes repentance for his sin, that will so much as
say: wherefore have (...)
but my people will not know the time of the punishment of the LORD. How
darre ye say then: we are wise, we have the law of the LORD among us?

Behold, the disceatfull pen of the scrybes, sets forth lies: therefore
shall the wise be confounded, they shall be afraid and taken: for lo, (...)
they have cast out the word of the LORD: what wyszdome can then be among
them? Wherefore, I will give their wives unto aleauntes, and their feldes to
destroyers.

For from the lowest unto the highest, they follow all shameful lucre: and from
the prophet unto the pressed, they deal all with lies. Nevertheless, (...)
they heal the hurt of my people with sweet words, saying: peace, peace,
where there is no peace at all.

Fie for shame, how abominable things do they? And yet they be not ashamed,
ye they know of no shame.

Wherefore in the time of their visitacion, (...)
they shall fall among the deed bodies, says the LORD.

Morouer I will gather them in (says LORD) so that there shall not be one
grape upon the vine, nether one fyge upon the fyge tree, and the leaves shall be
plucte of.

Then will I cause them to depart, and say: why prolonge we the time? Let us
gather our selves together, and go in to the strong cite, there shall we be
in rest: For the LORD our God has put us to silence, and given us water
myxte with gall, to drink, because we have sinned against him.

We looked for peace, and we fair not the better, (...)
we waited for the time of health, and lo, here is nothing but trouble.

Then shall the noise of his horses be herd from Dan, the whole land shall be
afraid at the neye^ge of his strong horses: for they shall go in, and devour
the land, with all that is in it: the cities, and those that dwell therein.
Morouer, I will send Cockatrices and serpe^tes among you (which will not be
charmed) and they shall byte you, (...) ^6. d
says the LORD.

Sorrow is come upon me, and heaviness vexes my heart: for lo, the voice of the
crie^ge of my people is herd from a far country: Is not the LORD in Sion?
Is not he king in her? Wherefore then have they grieved me (shall the LORD
say) with their images and foolish strange fashions? The harvest is gone, the
So^mer has an end, and we are not helped. I am sore vexed, because of the
hurt of my people: I am heavy and abashed, for there is no more Triacle at
Galaad, and there is no Phisician, that ca^ heal the hurt of my people.

The IX. Chapter.
LORD.

Ye one must keep himself from another, no man may safely trust his own
brother: for one brother vndermyneth another, (...). 12. b (...). ^0. c (...)
7. ^
and one neighbor begyleth another. Ye one dissembleth with another, and they
deal with no treuth. (...). 2^. a
They have practiced their tunges to lie, and taken great pains to do
myschefe. They have set their stole in the myddest of disceate, and (for very
dissemblinge falsede) they will not know me, says the LORD.

Therefore thus says the LORD of hoostes, behold, I will melte them and try
the^, for what should I else do to my people? Their tunges are like sharp
arowes, (...). 1^. a ^sal. 17. a
to speak disceate. With their mouth they speak peaceably to their neighbor,
but preuely they lay wait for him. Should I not punysh them for these
things, says the LORD? Or, (...)
as this? Upon the mountains will I take up a lamentacion and soroufull cry,
and a mourning upon the fair playnes of the wilderness: Namely, how they are
so burnt up, that no man goes there any more: Ye a man shall not hear one
beast cry there.

Birds and catell are all gone from thence. Psalm. 78. a Mich. 3. c
I will make Jerusalem also an heap of stones, and a den of venymous worms.
And I will make the cities of Judah so waist, that no man shall dwell therein. What
man is so wise, as to understand this? Or to whom has the LORD spoken by
mouth, that he may show this, and say: O thou land, Osee. 14. ^
why perishest thou so? Wherefore art thou so brent up, and like a wilderness,
that no man goes through? Ye the LORD himself told the same unto them, that
forsook his law, and kept not the thing that he gave them in commandment,
nether lived thereafter: but followed the wickedness of their own hertes, Deu.
29. ^ Iosu. 24. ^
and served strange gods, as their fathers taught them.

Therefore, thus says the LORD of hoostes, the God of Israel: Behold, I will
feed this people with wormwod, and give the^ gall to drink. Deu. 32. c Iere^.
23. c
I will scatre them also among the Heithen, whom nether they ner their fathers
have known: and I will send a swearde among them, to persecute them, Deu.
28. c
until I bring them to naught. Morouer, thus says the LORD of hoostes:
look that ye call

For there is a lamentable noise herd of Sion: O how are we so sore destroyed?
O how are we so piteously confounded? We must forsake our own natural
country, and we are shot out of our own lodgi^ges. Yet hear the word of the
LORD (o ye women) and set your ears regard the words of his mouth: that ye
may learn your daughters to mourn, and that every one may teach her
neghbouresse, to make lamentacion. Namely thus: Deeth is clymme^ up in at our
wyndowes, he is come in to our houses, to destroy the child before the door,
and ye young man in the street.

But tell thou planely, thus says ye LORD: The deed bodies of men shall lie
upon ye ground, as the donge upon the field, Iere. 7 d. ^. b
and as the hay after the mower, and there shall be no man to take them up.
Morouer, thus LORD: Let not the wise man rejoice in his wisdom, ner the
strong man in his strength, nether the rich man in his riches: (...) 65. c
Cor. 1. g Co. 10. d
But who so will rejoice, let him rejoice in this, that he vndersto^deth, and
knows me: for I am the LORD, which do mercy, equite and righteousness upon
earth. Therefore have I pleasure in soch things, ^att. 9. b ^ a (...). 6. b
says ye LORD. Behold, the time comes (says the LORD) that I will vyset
all them, whose foreskynne is vncircumciscd: The Egipcians, (...). 25. c
the Jews, the Edomites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, and the shaven
Madianites, that dwell in the wilderness. For all ye Gentiles are uncircumcised
in the flesh, ^re. 4. a ^ b ^om. 2. c
but all the house of Israel, are uncircumcised in the heart.

The x. Chapter.
Hear the word of the LORD, yt he LORD: Ye shall not learn after the manner
of the Heithe^, ^sa. 47. c
and ye shall not be afraid for the tokens of heaven: for the Heithen are
afraid of soch: Ye all the customs and laws of the Gentiles are nothing,
^sa. 44. b
but vanite. They hew down a tree in the wod with the hondes of the work man,
and fashion it with the axe: they cover it over with gold or silver, they
fasten it with nales and hammers, that it move not. It sto^deth as stiff as the
palm tree, it can nether speak ner go, ^^ruc 6 Re. 17. g
but must be borne. Be not ye afraid of soch, for they ca^ do nether good ner
euel. But there is none like unto ye (o LORD) thou art great, and great is
the name of yi power. ^po. 15. a
Who would not fear the* or what ki^ge of the Gentiles would not obey the?

For among all the wysemen of the Gentiles, ^ Reg. 9
and gold from Ophir, a work yt is made with the hand of the craftesman and
the caster, clothed with yalow sylck and scarlet: even so is the work of their
wise men all together. But the LORD is a true God, a lyuinge God, and an
everlasting king. If he be wroth, ^aum 1. a
the earth shakes: all the Gentiles may not abide his indignacion.

As for their gods, it may well be said of the^: they are gods, that made
nether heaven ner earth: therefore shall they perish from the earth, and from all
things under heaven. ^en. 1. a ^re. 51. c
But (as for our God) he made the earth with his power, and with his wisdom
has he fynished the whole compass of the world, with his discrecion has he
spread out the heavens, At his voice the waters gather together in the air, he
draws up ye clouds (...)
he turns lighteninge to rain, and bri^geth forth the wyndes out of their
treasuries: (...)
His wisdom makes all men fools. And confunded be all casters of images, for
that they cast, (...)
is but a vain thing, and has no life. The vain crafts men with their
works, that they in their vanite have made, shall perish one with another in
the time of visitacion* Nevertheless, Jacobs porcio^ is not soch: but it is he,
that has made all things, and Israel is the rodd of his inheritance: The
LORD of hoostes is his name. Put away thy uncleanness out of the land, thou
that art in the strong cities. For thus says the LORD: Behold, I will now
thrust out the inhatours of this land a great way off, and trouble them of
soch a fashion, that they shall no more be found.

Alas, how am I hurt? Alas, how panefull are my scourges unto me? For I
consider this sorrow by my self, and I must suffer it, My tabernacle is
destroyed, and all my coardes are broken. My children are gone fro me, and can
no where be found. Now have I none to sprede out my tente, or to set up my
hanginges. For the hyrdmen have done folishly, that they have not sought the
LORD. Therefore have they dealt unwisely with their catell, and all are scatred
abroad. Behold, the noise is hard at hand, and great sedicio^ out of the
north: to make the cities of Judah a wilderness, and a dwellinge place for
Dragons. (...)
Now I know (o LORD) that is not in ma^s power to order his own ways, or to
rule his own steps and goinges. Therefore chaste^ thou us (o LORD) but with
favor, and not in thy wrath, (...)
bring us not utterly to naught. Pour out thy indignacion rather upon the
Gentiles, that know ye not, and upon the people that call not on thy name: And
that because they have consumed, devoured and destroyed Jacob, and have roted
out his glory.

The XI. Chapter.
THis is another Sermon, which the LORD commanded Jeremy for to

Hear the words of the covenant, and speak unto all Judah, and to all them
that dwell at Jerusalem, And say thou unto the^: Thus says the LORD God of
Israel: Cursed be every one, that is not obedient unto ye words of this
covenant: which I commanded unto your fathers, what time as I brought them
out of Egipte, from the iron furnace, saying: Be obedient unto my voice, (...)
19. a
and do according to all that I command you: so shall ye be my people, and I
will be your God, (...). 6. b
and will keep my promise, yt I have sworn unto your fathers: (...). ^5. c
(...). c
Namely, that I would give them a land which flows with milk and honey, as
ye se, it is come to pass unto this day.

Then answered I, and said: Amen. It is even so LORD, as thou say. Then
the LORD said unto me again: Preach this in ye cities off Judah and round
about Jerusalem, and say: Hear the words off this co^uenaunt, that ye may
keep them. For I have diligently exorted your fathers, ever sense the time
that I brought them out off the Land off Egipte, unto this day. I gave (...).
11. b
Nevertheless, they would not obey me, nor enclyne their ears unto me, (...)
but followed the wicked ymaginacio^s of their own hertes. And therefore have I
accused them as transgressors of all the words off this conuenaunt, that I
gave them to keep, which they (notwithsto^dinge) have not kept.

And the LORD said unto me: It is found out, that whole Israel and all the
citisens off Jerusalem are gone back. They have turned them selves to the
blasphemies off their fore fathers, which had no lust to hear my word. Even
likewise have these also followed strange gods, and worshipped them. The
house off Israel and Judah have broken my covenant, which I made with their
fathers.

Therefore thus says the LORD: Behold, I will send a plage among you,
which ye shall not be able to escape: and though ye cry unto me, I will not
hear you. The^ shall the towns off Judah and the citisens of Jerusalem go,
(...) 7. b
and call upon their gods, unto whom they made their oblacio^s: but they are
not able to help them in time off their trouble. (...). 32. c
^re 2. d
For as many cities as thou have (o Judah) so many gods have thou also: And
look how many streets there be in the (o Jerusalem) (...). 7. c
(...). 1^. a
to offer upon them unto Baal. But pray not thou for this people, bid nether
praise ner prayer for them: for though they cry unto me in their trouble, yet
will I not hear them.

O thou beloved, why do thou so shameful great blasphemies in my house?
even as though that holy flesh might absolve the, (...)
specially when thou have made thy boost off thy wickedness. The LORD called
the a grene olyue tree, a fair one, a fruitful one, Iere. 17 b Matt. 7. b To.
11. c
a goodly one: but now that there is a contrary report off the abroad, he will
burn the up, and destroy thy branches. Esa. 12. d
For the LORD off hoostes that planted the, has devised a plage for the (o
thou house of Israel and Judah) for ye euel that ye have done, to provoke him to
wrath, in that ye did service unto Baal.

This (o LORD) have I learned of the, and Esa. 53. b
But I (as a meke lamb) was carried away to be slain: not knowinge, that they
had devised soch a council against me, saying: Iere. 18. b
We will destroy his meat with wod, and drive him out of the land of the
living, that his name shall never be thought upon. Therefore I will beseke the
now (o LORD of hoostes) thou rightuous judge, Iere. 20. c 17. b
thou that tryest the reins and the hertes: let me se the avenged of them, for
unto the have I committed my cause. The LORD therefore spoke thus of the
citesens of Anothot, that sought to slaye me, saye^ge: Esa. 30. b Amo. 7. b
Preach not unto us in the name of the LORD, or else thou shall dye of our
hondes. Thus (I say) spoke the LORD of hoostes: Behold, I will viset you.
Your young me^ shall perish with the swearde, yor sons and your daughters
shall utterly dye of honger, so that none shall remain. For upon the citesyns
off Anathot will I bring a plage, and the year of their visitacion.

The XII. Chapter.
O LORD, thou art more rightuous, Job. 21. a Aba. 1. c
that the way off the ungodly is so prosperous? and that it goes so well with
them, which (with out any shame) offe^de and live in wickedness? Thou plantest
them, they take rote, they grow, and bring forth fruit. They boost much off
the, yet do thou not punysh them. But thou LORD (to whom I am well known)
thou that have seen, and proved my heart, take them away, like as a flock is
carried to the slaughter house, 2. Pet. 2. ^
and apoynte them for the day off slaughtinge.

How long shall the land mourn, and all the herbs off the field perish, for
the wickedness off them that dwell therein?

The catell and the birds are gone, Iere. 14. b Deu. 29. c Soph. 1. c Iere. 5.
b ^^. c
yet say they: tush, God will not destroy us utterly.

Saying thou art weery in runnynge with the footmen, how will thou then run
with horses? In a peaceable sure land thou may be safe, but how will thou do
in the furious pride of Iordane? For thy brethren and Iere. 9. a
Believe them not, though they s^eake fair words to the. As for me (say I) I
have forsaken mine own dwellinge place, and left mine heretage. My life also
that I love so well, have I given in to the ho^des of mine enemies. Mine
heretage is become unto me, as a Lion in the wod. It cried out upon me,
therefore have I forsaken it. Esa. 19. ^
Mine heretage is unto me, as a spreckled bird, a bird of diverse colors is
upon it. Go hence, and gather all the beasts of the field together, that they
may eat it up.

Diverse hyrdme^ have broken down my vynyarde, Esa. ^6. c Esa. 5. a
and trodden upon my portion. Of my pleasant portion, they have made a
wilderness and deserte. They have laid it waist: and now that it is waist, it
sigheth unto me. Ye the whole land lies waist, and no man regards it. The
distroyers come over the heeth every way, for the swearde off the LORD shall
consume from the one end of ye lord to the other, Pro. 22. d
and no flesh shall have rest. They shall sow wheat, and reepe thorns. They
shall take heretage in possession, but it shall do them no good. And ye shall be
confounded of your own wynnynges, because of the great wrath of the LORD.

Thus says the LORD upon all mine Deu. 4. e 30. a Esa. 54. b 1. Esd. 1. a
I will be at one with the^ again, and will have mercy upon them: and bring
them again, every man to his own heretage, and in to his lord. And if they
(namely that trouble my people) will learn ye ways of them, to swear by my
name: The LORD lives (like as they learned my people to swear by Baal) the^
shall they be rekened among my people. But if they will not obey, the^ will I
rote out the same folk, Mat. 22. b
and destroy them, says the LORD,

The XIII. Chapter.
MOrouer, thus said the LORD unto me: go thy way and get the a lynnen
breche, and gyrde it about thy loins, and let it not be wet. Then I got me a
brech, acordinge to the commandment of the LORD, and put it about my
loins. After this, the LORD spoke unto me again: Take the breche that thou
have prepared and put about the, and get the up, and go unto Euphrates, and
hyde it in a hole off the rock. So went I, and hid it, ^s the LORD
commanded me. And it happened long after this, that the LORD spoke unto me:
Up, and get the to Euphrates, and fet the breche from thence, which I
commanded the to hyde there. Then went I to Euphrates, and dug up, and took
the brech from the place where I had hyd it: and behold, the brech was
corrupt, so that it was profitable for nothing.

Then said the LORD unto me: Thus LORD: Even so will I corruppe the pride
off Judah* and the hie mind off Jerusalem. This people is a wicked people, they
will not hear my word, (...)
they follow ye wicked ymaginacions off their own heart, and hang upon
strange gods, the^ have they served and worshipped: and therefore they shall be
as this brech, that serves for nothing. For as strately as a brech lies upon
a ma^s loins, so strately did I bind ye whole house of Israel, and the whole
house of Judah unto me, says the LORD: (...)
that they might be my people: that they might have a glorious name: yt they
might be in honor: but they would not obey me. Therefore lay this ryddle
before them, and say: Thus says the LORD God of Israel: every pot shall be
filled with wine. And they shall say: think thou we know not, yt every pot
shall be filled with wine? Then shall thou say unto them: Thus says the LORD:
Behold, I LORD.

I will not pardon them, I will not spare them, ner have pity upon them: but
destroy them. Be obedient, give ear, take no diszdayne at it, for it is the
LORD himself that speaks. Honor ye LORD your God herein, or he take his
light from you, and or ever your fete stomble in darkness at ye hill: lest
when ye look for the light, he turn it in to ye shadow and darkness of
death. But if ye will not hear me, that give you secret warning, I will
mourn fro my whole heart for your stubburnesse. Piteously will I weep, (...)
and the tears shall guszhe out of mine eyes. For the LORDS flock shall be
carried away captive.

Lift up your eyes, and behold the^, that come from the North: Like a fat
flock shall they fall upon the. To whom will thou make thy moan, when they come
upon the? for thou have taught the^ thy self, and made the^ masters over the.
(...) 10. a (...) 13. b (...) 21. a
Shall not sorrow come upon the, as on a woman trauelinge with child? And if
thou would say the^ in thine heart: Wherefore come these things upon me? Eue^
for the multitude of thy blasphemies, (...) ^5. b
shall thy hinder parts and thy fete be discovered. LORD: because ye have
forgotten me, and put your trust in disceatful things. Therefore shall I turn
thy clothes over thy head, (...). 2. b
and discover thy thees, that thy preuyties may be seen: ye aduoutrie, thy
deedly malice, thy beastlynes and thy shameful whordome. For upon the feldes
and hills I have seen thy abhominacions. Woe be unto the (o Jerusalem) when
will thou ever be cleansed enymore?

The XIIII. Chapter. The word of the LORD showed unto Jeremy, concerning ye
derth off the fruits.
(...)* 23. b
and shall cover their heads. For the ground shall be dried up, because there
comes no rain upon it. The plowmen also shall be ashamed, and shall cover their
heads. The Hynde shall forsake the young fawn, that se bri^geth forth in ye
field, because there shall be no grass. The wild Asses shall stand in the
Moss, and draw in their wind like the Drago^s, their eyes shall fail for
want of grass.

Doutles our own wickedness reward us: But LORD do thou acordinge to yi
name, though our transgressions and sins be many. Esa. 49. b Iere. 16. c 17.
c
For thou art the comfort and help of Israel in the time of trouble. Why will thou be as a stranger in the Land, and as one that goes over the field, and
comes in only to remain for a night? Why will thou make thy self a cowarde,
and as it were a giau^te that yet may not help? For thou ar^ours (o LORD)
and we bear thy name, therefore forsake us not.

Then spoke the LORD, concerning LORD: in so much, that he will now bring
again to remembrance all their myszdedes, and punysh all their sins. Ye
even thus said the LORD unto me: Thou shall not pray to do this people good.
Iere. 7. b Esa 1. b
For though they fast, I will not hear their prayers. And though they offer
burnt offri^ges and sacrifices, yet will not I accept them. For I will destroy
them with the swearde, honger and pestilence. Then answerde I: O LORD God, the
prophets say unto them: Tush, Iere. 5. b Soph. 1. c Iere. 14. b 23. c
ye shall se no swearde, and no honger shall come upon you, but the LORD shall
give you continual rest in this place.

And the LORD said unto me: The prophets preach lies unto them in my name. I
have not spoken with them, Iere. 23. d
nether gave I them any charge, nether did I send the^: yet they preach unto
you false visions, charmynge, vanite, and disceatfulnesse of their own heart.
Therefore thus says the LORD: As for those prophets that preach in my name
(whom I nevertheless have not sent) and y^ say: Tush, there shall nether batel
ner honger be in this land: With swearde and with Zach. 13. a
and the people to whom they have preached, shall be cast out of Jerusalem, dye
of honger, and be slain with the swearde, (and there shall be no man to bury
them) both they and their wives, their sons and their daughters. Iere. 16. a
For thus will I (...) their wickedness upon the^. This shall tho^ say also unto
them: Mine eyes shall weep without ceass^nge day and night. Thren. 2. f Tren.
1. d
For my people shall be dtstroyed with great harm, and shall perish with a
great plage. For yff I go in to the field, lo, it lies all full off slain
men: Yff I come in to the cite, lo, they be all fameshed of honger.

Ye their prophets also and prestes shall be led in to an unknown land.

Iere. ^. c
We looked for peace, and there comes no good: for the time of health, and lo,
here is nothing but trouble. We knowledge (o LORD) all our myszdedes, and the
sins of our fathers, that we have offended ye. Be not displeased (o LORD)
for thy names sake, forget not thy loving kyndnes: Esa. 49. c
Remember ye trone of thine honor, break not the covenant, Iere. 5. d
that thou have made with us. Are there any among the gods of the Gentiles,
that send rain, or give the showers of heaven? Do not thou it o LORD our
God, in who^ we trust? Ye LORD, thou do all these things.

The XV. Chapter.
LORD unto me, and said: Iere. 7. b 11. c. 14. b Eze. 14. c
Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet have I no heart to this people.
Drive them away, that they may go out of my sight. And if they say unto the:
zach 11. b Eze. 5. c
Whyther shall we go? The^ tell the^: The LORD gives you this answer: Some
unto death, some to the swearde, some to honger, some in to captiuyte. For I
will bring four plages upon them, says the LORD. The swearde shall stra^gle
them, Iere. 16. a
the dogs shall devour them, the fowls of the air and beestes of the earth
shall eat them up, and destroy them. I will scatre them about also in all
kingdoms and lands to be plaged, because of Manasses the son of Ezechias
king of Judah, 4. Re. 21. a
for the things that he did in Jerusalem.

Who shall then have pite upon the, o Jerusalem? Who shall be sorry for the? Or
who shall make intercession, to opteyne peace for the? saying thou go fro me,
and turnest bacwarde, LORD? Therefore I will stretch out mine hand against
the, to destroy the, and I will not be entreated. I will scatre the abroad
with the fan on every side of the land: I will waist my people and destroy
them, Iere. 6. c
for they have had no lust to turn from their own ways. I will make their
wyddowes mo in nombre, then the sondes of the sea. Upon ye mothers of their
children, I shall bring a destroyer in the noone day. 1. Tess. 5. a
Suddenly and vnawarres, shall I send a fear upon their cities. She that has
borne vij. children, shall have none, her heart shall be full of sorrow.

The Son shall fail her in the clear day, when she shall be confounded and
faynte for very heaviness. Amo. 8. b
As for those yt remain, I will deliver them unto the swearde off their
enemies, says the LORD. O mother, alas that ever thou dydest bear me, (...)
an enemy and hated of the whole land: Though I never lent ner received upon
usury, yet every man speak evil upon me. And ye LORD (...)
not for any money, but because of all your sins, that ye have done i^ all
your coasts. And I will bri^ge you with your enemies in to a land, (...)
yt ye know not: for the fire that is kyndled in my indignacion, shall burn
you up.

O LORD (said I then) thou know all things, therefore remember me, and
viset me, deliver me fro my persecuters: Receive not my cause in yi long
wrath, yet thou know, that for thy sake I suffer rebuke. (...)
When I had found thy words, I at them up gredely: they have made my heart
joyful and glad. For I call upon thy name, o LORD God off hoostes. I dwell
not among the scorners, nether is my delight therein: but I dwell only in the
fear of thy hand, for thou have filled me with bytternes. Shall my heaviness
endure for ever? Are my plages then so great, yt they may never be healed?
Will thou be as a water, that falls, and can not continue? Upon these words,
thus said the LORD unto me: If thou will turn again, I shall set the in my
service: and if thou will take out the thing that is precious from the vile,
thou shall be even as mine own mouth. They shall convert unto the, (...)
but turn not thou unto the^: and so shall I make the a strong wall of stele
against this people. (...)
They shall fight against the, but they shall not prevail. For I my self will be
with the, to help the, and deliver the, says the LORD. And I will ryd the
out of the hondes of the wicked, and deliver the out of the hand of Tirauntes.

The XVI. Chapter.
MOrouer, thus said the LORD unto LORD: (...)
They shall dye an horrible deeth, no man shall mourn for them, ner bury them,
but they shall lie as do^ge upon the earth. They shall perish through the swearde
and honger, and their bodies shall be meat for the fowls of the air, ^sal.
7^. a ^ere. ^5. a
and beestes of the earth. Again, thus says the LORD: Go not unto them,
that come together, for to mourn and weep: for I have taken my peace from this
people (says the LORD) ye my favor and my mercy. And in this land shall
they dye, old and young, and shall not be buried: no man shall be weep them,
no man shall clippe or shave himselff for them.

There shall not one viset another, to mourn with them for their deed, or to
comfort them. One shall not offer another the cup off consolacion, to forget
their heaviness for father and mother. Thou shall not go in to their feast house,
Cor. 5. b
to sit down, much less LORD off hoostes the God off Israel: Behold, (...).
7. d 25 b
I shall take away out of this place, the voice off mirth and gladness, the
voice off the brydegrome and off the bryde: ye and that in your days, that
ye may se it.

(...)
Now when thou show this people all these words, and they say unto the:
Wherefore has the LORD devised all this great plage for us? Or what is the
offense and sin, that we have done against the LORD our God? Then make thou
them this answer: Because your fathers have forsaken me (says the LORD)
and have cleued unto strange gods, (...). 4. d
whom they have honored and worshipped: but me have they forsaken, and have
not kept my law. And ye with your shameful blasphemies, (...). 7. d
have exceaded the wickedness off your fathers. For every one off you follows
the frawerde euel ymaginacion off his own heart, and is not obedient unto me.

Therefore will I cast you out off this land, (...). 28. c (...). 23. b
in to a land that ye and your fathers know not: and there shall ye serve
strange gods day and night, there will I show LORD) the days are come,
that it shall no more be said: (...). ^3. b
The LORD lives, which brought the children of Israel out of the lord of
Egipte: but (it shall be said) the LORD lives, that brought the children of
Israel from the North, and from all lands where I had scatred them. For I will
bring the^ again in to the lord, that I gave unto their fathers.

Behold, (says the LORD) I will send out many fiszhers to take them, (...)
4. c
and after yt will I send out many hunters to hunte the^ out, from all
mountains and hills and out of the caves of stones. For mine eyes behold all
their ways, and they can not be hyd fro my face, nether can their wicked deeds
be kept close out of my sight. But first will I sufficiently reward their
shameful blasphemies and sins, wherewith they have defiled my land: Namely,
with their stinckinge Idols and abhominacions, wherwt they have filled mine
heretage. O LORD, Iere. 14 17. c
my strength, my power, and refuge in time off trouble. The Gentiles shall come
unto the from the ends off the world, and say: Verily our fathers have
cleued unto lies, their Idols are but vain and unprofitable. How can a man
make those his gods, which are not able to be gods? And therefore, I will
once teach them (says ye LORD) I will show them my hand and my power, that
they may know, yt my name is ye LORD.

The XVII. Chapter.
Your sin (o ye off the trybe of Judah) is written in the table of yor
hertes, Iere. 1^. c 20. b
I will make all your substance and treasure be spoiled, for the great sin
that ye have done upon your hie places, through out all ye coostes off your
lord. Ye shall be cast out also from the heretage, that I gave you. And I will
subdue you under the heavy bondage of your enemies, in a land that ye know
not. For ye have ministered fire to my indignacion, which shall burn evermore.
Thus says LORD: Psalm. 48. ^ Iere. 46. ^ 48. a Pro. 11.^ c Eze. 29. ^
Cursed be the man that puts his trust in man, and that takes flesh for his
arm: and he, whose heart departs from ye LORD. He shall be like the heeth,
that grows in the wilderness. As for the good thing that is for to come, he
shall not se it: but dwell in a dry place off the wilderness, in a salt and
unoccupied land. O Blissed is the man, that puts his trust in the LORD,
Psalm. 2. b Pro. 22. c Psalm. 1. a 117. a. 12^ a
and whose hope the LORD is himself. For he shall be as a tree, that is planted
by the water side: which spredeth out the rote unto moystnesse, whom the heat
can not harm, when it comes, but his leaves are grene. And though there
grow but little fruit because off drouth, yet is he not careful, but he never
leaves of to bring forth fruit. Among all things living, man has the most
disceatfull and unsearchable heart.

Who shall then know it? Even I the LORD ripe out the ground off the heart,
(...). 2. d (...). 11. d (...). 2. a (...). 23. a (...). 51. b (...). 12. b
and search the reins and reward every man acordinge to his ways, and
acordinge to the fruit off his councels.

The disceatfull makes a nest, but brings forth no young: He comes by
riches, but not rightuously. In the myddest off his life must he leave them
behind him, and at the last be found a very fool. But thou (o LORD) whose
trone is most glorious, excellent and off most antiquite, which dwell in the
place of our holy rest: Thou art the ^ere. 2. b ^oh. 4. b ^ze. 36. d
shall be confounded: all they that depart from the, shall be written in earth,
for they have forsaken the LORD, the very condite of the waters of life.

Heal me (o LORD) and I shall be whole: save thou me, and I shall be saved, for
thou art my praise. Behold, these men say unto me: Where is the word of the
LORD? Let it come. Where as I nevertheless ledinge the flock in thy ways, have
compelled none by violence. For I never desired any ma^s deeth, this know
thou well. My words also were right before the. Iere. 14. a 16. c
Be not now terrible unto me (o LORD) for thou art he, in whom I hope, when I
am in parell. Let my persecuters be confounded, but not me: let them be
afraid, and not me. Thou shall bring upon the^ the time off their plage, and
shall destroy them right sore.

LORD said unto me: Iere. 7. a 26. a
Go and stand under the gate, where through the people and the kings of Judah
go out and in, ye under all the gates of Jerusalem, and say unto them: Hear
the word of the LORD, ye kings of Judah, and all thou people of Judah, and all
ye citesyns of Jerusalem, that go through this gate: Thus the LORD commands:
Deu. 4. b Deu. 5. b Exo. 20. b
Take heed for your lives, that ye carry no burden upon you in the Sabbath,
to bring it through the gates of Jerusalem: ye shall bear no burden also out
of your houses in the Sabbath: Ye shall do no labor there in, but halowe the
Sabbath, as I commanded your fathers. How be it they obeyed me not, nether
herkened they unto me: Eze. 20. b
but were obstinate and stubburne, and nether obeyed me, ner received my
correccion.

Nevertheless, if ye will hear me (says LORD) and bear no burden in to ye
cite through this gate upon the Sabbath: If ye will halowe the Sabbath, so that
ye do no work there in: Exo. 20. b
then shall there go through the gates of this cite, kings and princes, that
shall sit upon the stole of David: They shall be carried upon charettes, and
ride upon horses, both they and their princes: Ye whole Judah and all the
citesyns of Jerusalem shall go here through, and this cite shall ever be the
more and more inhabited. There shall come men also from the cities of Judah,
from about Jerusalem, and from ye land of Ben Iamin, from the plain feldes,
from the mountains and from the wilderness: which shall bring burnt
offringes, sacrifices, oblacions, and incense, and offer up thankesgeuynge in
the house of the LORD. But yff ye will not be obedient unto me, to halowe the
Sabbath, so that ye will bear your burdens through the gates off Jerusalem
upon the Sabbath: Then shall I set fire upon the gates off Jerusalem, and it
shall burn up the houses off Jerusalem, and no man shall be able to quench it.

The XVIII. Chapter. This is another communicacion, that God had with Jeremy,
saying:
ARise, and go down in to the Potters LORD thus unto me: (...)
May not I do with you, as this Potter does, O ye house off Israel? says the
LORD? Behold, ye house off Israel: ye are in my hand, even as the claye in
the Potters hand.

When I take in hand to rote out, (...)
to destroy, or to waist away any people or ki^gdome: yff that people
(against whom I have thus devised) co^uerte from their wickedness: Immediately, I
repent off the plage, that I devised to bring upon the^. Again: (...)
When I take in hand, to build, or to plant a people or a kingdom: yff the
same people do evil before me, and hear not my voice: Immediately, I repent
of the good, that I devised to do for them.

Speak now therefore unto whole Judah, and to them that dwell at Jerusalem: Thus
says the LORD: Behold, I am deuysinge a plage for you, and am taking a
thing in hand against you.

Therefore, (...)
let every man turn from his evil way, (...). 35. c
take upon you the thing that is good, and do right. But they say: No more of
this, (...). 13. b
we will follow our own ymaginacions, and do every man acordinge to the
wilfulness of his own mind.

LORD: Axe among the Heithen, if any man has herd soch horrible things, as
the daughter of Sion has done. Shall not ye snow (yt melts upon the stony
rocks of Libanus) moisture the feldes? Or may the springes off waters be so
graven away, that they run no more, give moystnesse, ner make fruitful? But
my people has so forgotten me, yt they have made sacrifice unto vain gods.
And while they followed their own ways they are come out of the hie street,
and gone in to a foot way not used to be trodden. Where through they have
brought their land in to an everlasting wilderness and scorn: (...). 19. b
49. c
So yt who so ever trauayleth there by, shall be abashed, and wagge their heads.
With an East wind will I scatre the^, before their enemies. And when their
destruction comes, I will turn my back upon them, but not my face.

(...) 11 d
Then said they: come, let us ymagin somthinge against this Jeremy. Ye this
did even the prestes, to whom ye law was committed: the Senators, yt were the
wyfest: and the prophets, which wanted not ye LORD) and hear the voice of
mine enemies. Do they not recompense evil for good, (...) 108 a (...) 34. b
when they dygg a pyt for my soul? Remember, how that I stood before the, to
speak for the^, and to turn away thy wrath from them. (...). ^0. d


Therefore let their children dye of hunger, and let them be oppressed with the
swearde. (...). 3. f
Let their wives be robbed of their children, and be come wyddowes: (...)
let their huszbo^des be slain, let their young men be killed with the swearde
in the field. Let the noise be herd out of their houses, when the murderer
comes suddenly upon them: For they have dug a pit to take me, and laid
snares for my fete. (...)
Yet LORD, thou know all their counsel, that they have devised, to slaye
me. And therefore forgive them not their wickedness, and let not their sin be
put out of thy sight: but let them be judged before the as the guilty: This
shall thou do unto the^ in ye time of thy indignacion.

The XIX. Chapter.
MOrouer, thus said the LORD unto LORD, ye kings of Judah, and ye citesyns
of Jerusalem: Thus says the LORD of hoostes the God of Israel: Behold, I
will bring soch a plage upon this place, that ye ears of all that hear it,
shall glowe. And that because they have forsaken me, 4. Re. 21 ^ Iere. 6. c
and unhallowed this place, and have offered in it unto strange gods: who^
nether they, their fathers, ner the kings off Judah have known. Deu. 12. d 28.
b Eze. 20. d Psalm. 105. ^ Eze. 16. b
They have filled this place also with the blood of innocents, for they have
set up an altar unto Baal, to burn their children for a burnt offringe unto
Baal, which I nether commanded, ner charged them, nether thought once there
upon.

Behold therefore, ye time comes (says LORD) yt this place shall no more be
called Tophet, Iere. 7. d
ner ye valley of ye children of Enno^, but ye valley of slaughter. For in this
place will I slaye the Senators of Judah and Jerusalem, and kill the^ down with
the swearde in ye sight of their enemies, and of them that seek their lives.
And their deed carcases will I give to be meat for the fowls of the air, and
beestes of the field. And I will make this cite so desolate, and despised: 3.
Re. 9. b Iere. 18. b 49. c. 50. b
that who so goes there by, shall be abaszhed and geast upon her, because of
all her plages.

I will feed them also with the flesh of their sons and their daughters. Tree.
4. b
Ye every one shall eat up another in the beseginge and straytnesse, Deu. 28. b
where with their enemies (yt seek their lives) shall keep the^ in. And the pitcher
shall thou break in the sight of the me^, yt shall be with the, and say unto
the^: Thus says the LORD Iere. 18. a
Eue^ so will I destroy this people and cite: as a Potter breaks a vessel,
that can not be made whole again.

In Tophet shall they be buried, Iere. 7. b
for they shall have none other place. Thus will I do unto this place also,
says the LORD, and to the^ yt dwell there in: ye I will do to this cite, as
unto Tophet (For the houses of Jerusalem and the houses of the kings of Judah
are defiled, like as Tophet,) because off all the houses, in whose parlers they
did sacrifice unto all the hooste of heaven, and poured out drink offringes
unto strange gods. And so Jeremy came from Tophet, where the LORD had sent
him to prophecy, and stood in the court off the house off the LORD, and
spoke to all the people: Thus says the LORD off hoostes the God of Israel:
Behold, I will bring upon this cite and upon every town about it, all the
plages that I have devised against them: for they have been obstinate, Iere. 7.
c 13. b
and would not obey my warnynges.

The XX. Chapter.
WHen Pashur the preast, the son LORD, herd Jeremy preach so steadfastly:
Act. 23. a Ioh. 18. c
he smote Jeremy, and put him in the stocks, that are by the hie gate of Ben
Iamin, in the house of ye LORD. The next day folowinge, Pashur brought
Jeremy out of the stocks again. Then said Jeremy unto him: The LORD shall
call the no more Pashur (that is excellent and increasinge) but Magor (that is
fearful and afraid) every where. For thus says the LORD: behold, I will
make the afraid, the thy self, and all that favor ye: which shall perish with
the swearde off their enemies, even before yt face.

And I will give whole Judah under the power of the king of Babylon, which shall
carry some unto Babylon presoners, and slaye 4. Re. 20. c Iere. 15. c 17. a
all their precious and gorgeous works, all costlynesse, and all the treasure
of the kings of Judah: will I give into the ho^des of their enemies, which shall
spoil them, and carry them unto Babylon. But as for the (o Pashur) thou shall
be carried unto Babylon with all thine household, and to Babilo^ shall thou
come, where thou shall die, and be buried: thou and all thy favorers, to whom
thou have preached lies. O LORD, thou make me weak, but thou refreszhest
me, and make me strong again. All the day long am I despised, Tree. 3. b
and laughed to scorn of every man: because I have now preached long against
malicious Tyranny, Iere. 6. b
and showed them off destruction. For ye which cause they cast the word off
the LORD in my teth, and take me ever to the worst.

Wherefore, I thought from hence forth, LORD was a very burning fire in my
heart and in my bones, which when I would have stopped, I might not. For why, I
herd so many derisio^s and blasphemies, ye even of mine own companyons,
Psalm. ^0. b
and off soch as were conuersaunte with me: which went about, to make me
afraid saying: upon him, let us go upon him, to fear him, and make him hold
his tongue: yt we may overcome him, and be avenged off him.

But the LORD stood by me, like a mighty giaunte: therefore my persecuters
fell, and could do nothing. They shall be sore confounded, for they have done
unwisely, they shall have an everlasting shame. And now, o LORD of hoostes,
(...)
thou rightuous sercher) which know the reins and the very hertes:) let me
se them punyshed, for unto the I commit my cause.

Sing unto the LORD, and praise him, for he has delivered the soul off the
oppressed, (...)
unhappy be ye day, where in my mother brought me forth. Cursed be the man,
that brought my father the tidinges, to make him glad, saying: thou have
gotten a son. Let it happen unto that man, (...)
as to the cities which ye LORD turned vpside down (when he had long herd
the wicked rumoure of them) because he slew me not, as soon as I came out off
my mothers womb, and because my mother was not my grave hirselff, that the
birth might not have come out, but remained still in her. Wherefore came I forth
off my mothers womb? (...)
To have experience of labor and sorrow? and to lead my life with shame?

The XXI. Chapter.
THese are the words that the LORD LORD (we pray the) of our behalf, for
Nabuchodonosor the king off Babylon besegeth us, yff the LORD (peradventure)
will deal with us, acordinge to his marvelous power, and take him from us.

Then spoke Jeremy: Give Sedechias this answer, (...)
Thus says the LORD God off Israel: behold, I will turn back the weapens,
that ye have in your hondes, wherewith ye fight against the king of Babilo^
and the Caldees, which besege you round about ye walls: and I will bri^ge
the^ together in to the myddest of this cite, and I my selff will fight against
you, with an outstretched hand, and with a mighty arm, in great displeasure
and terrible wrath: and will smite them, that dwell in this cite: ye both me^
and catell shall dye of the pestilence.

And after this (says the LORD) I shall deliver Sedechias the king of Judah,
and his servants, his people (and soch as are escaped ^ere. ^9. a
ye in to the ho^des of their enemies, in to the ho^des of those yt follow
upon their lives, which shall smite them with ye sword: they shall not pite
the^, they shall not spare them, they shall have no mercy upon them.

And unto this people thou shall say: Thus says the LORD: (...). 30. c
(...). 38. a (...). 27. a
behold, I lay before you the way of life and deeth. Who so abides in this
cite, shall perish: either with the swearde, with honger, or with pestilence. But
who so goes out to hold on ye Caldees part, yt besege it, he shall save his
life, and shall win his soul for a pray. For I have set my LORD) to plage
it, (...). 32. a
and to do it no good. It must be given in to the hand of the king of
Babylon, and be brent with fire.

And unto the house of the king off Judah, say thus: Hear the word of ye
LORD (o thou house off David) for thus says the LORD: (...). 7. b (...).
22. a Esa. 1. c ^ere. 4. a ^ach ^. c
Ministre righteousness, and that soon, deliver the oppressed from violent
power: or ever my terrible wrath break out like a fire* and burn so, that no
man may quench it, because of the wickedness of your ymaginacions. (...). 48* a
Behold (says the LORD) I will come upon you, that dwell in the valleis,
rocks and feldes and say: (...) 12. a. (...). ^9 c (...). 5. b (...). 23. c
^^ph. 1. c
Tush, who will make us afraid? or who will come in to our houses? For I will
vyset you (says the LORD) because off the wickedness off your invencions,
and will kyndle soch a fire in your wod, as shall consume all, that is about
you.

The XXII. Chapter.
LORD also: Go down in to the house of the king off Judah, and speak there
these words, and say: Hear the word off the LORD, thou king off Judah that
syttest in the kyngly seat off David: thou and thy servants and ye people,
that go in and out at this gate. Thus the LORD commands: Esa. 1. c (...)
21. d ^^ch. 7. b ^. c
keep equite and righteousness, deliver the oppressed from the power off the
violent: do not grieve ner oppress the stranger, the fatherless ner the
wyddowe, and shed no innocent blood in this place.

And yff ye keep these things faithfully, then shall there come in at the door
off this house kings, to sit upon David's seat: they shall be carried in
Charettes and ride upon horses, both they and their servants, and their
people. But if ye will not be obedient unto these commandments, Iere. 51. c
Esa. 45 c Heb. 6. b
I swear by mine own self (says ye LORD) this house shall be waist. For
thus has the LORD spoken upon the kings house of Judah: Thou art the head,
as Galaad is in Libanus: What will thou lay of it, if I make the not so waist
(and

And all the people that go by this cite, shall speak one to another: Wherefore
has the LORD done thus unto this noble cite? Then shall it be answered:
because they have broken the covenant off the LORD their God, Deu. 29. ^ 3.
Re. 9 b 4. Re. 23
and have worshipped and served strange gods. Mourn not over the deed, and
be not woe for them, but be sorry for him that departs away: for he comes
not again, and sees his natyue country no more. For thus says the LORD, as
touching Sellum the son of Josias king of Judah, 2. Par. 3.
which reigned after his father, and is carried out off this place:

He shall never come hither again, for he shall dye in the place, where unto he
is led captyue, and shall se this land no more. Esa. 5. c Agg. 1. a
Woe worth him, that buyldeth his house with unrighteous, and his perlers
with the good, that he has gotten by violence: which never recompenseth his
neghburs labor, ner pays him his hyre. He thinks in himself: I will build
me a wide house, and gorgeous

Did not thy father eat and drink, and prospere well, as long as he dealt
with equite and righteousness? Ye when he helped ye oppressed and poor to
their right, then prospered he well.

From whence came this, but only because he had me before his eyes? says the
LORD. Nevertheless, as for thine eyes and thine heart, they look upon
covetousness, to shed innocent blood, to do wrong and violence. And
therefore, thus says the LORD against Ioachim, 4. Re. 23.24. a Iere. 36. d
ye son of Josias king of Judah: They shall not mourn for him (as they use
to do) alas brother, alas sister: Nether shall they say unto him: Alas sir,
alas for that noble prince. But as an Ass shall he be buried, corrupt and be
cast with out the gates of Jerusalem.

Esa. 13. b 21. a Iere. 13. d 30. a
O how great shall yi mourning be, when thy sorrows come upon the, as a woman
trauelinge with child?

As truly as I live (says the LORD.) Though Iechonias the son off Ioachim
king off Judah were the signet off my right hand, 4. Reg. 24. b
yet will I pluck him of: And I will give the in to ye power off the^ that seek
to slaye the, and in to the power off them that thou fear: in to the power
off Nabuchodonosor

O thou earth, earth, earth: hear the word off the LORD: Write this man
among the outlawes, for no prosperity shall this man have all his life long.
Nether shall any of his sede be so happy, as to sit upon the seat of David,
and to bear rule in Judah.

The XXIII. Chapter.
Ezec. 34. a
and scatre my flock, says the LORD. Wherefore, this is the commandment of
the LORD God of Israel, unto the shepherdes that feed my people: Ye scatre and
thrust out my flock, and look not upon them. Therefore, now will I vyset the
wickedness of your ymaginacions, says ye LORD: And will gather together the
remnaunt of my flock, from all lands that I ha^ driven them unto, (...)
and will bring them again to their pastures, that they may grow and
increace. I will set shepherdes also oue^ them, which shall feed them. They
shall no more fear and dread, for there shall none off them be lost, says
the LORD. Behold, the time comes (says the LORD) that I will raise up the
rightuous branch off David, (...)
which shall bear rule, and discuss matters with wyszdome, (...)
and shall set up equity and righteousness again in the earth.

In his time shall Judah be saved, and Israel (...)
And this is the name that they shall call him: even the LORD our rightuous
maker. (...)
And therefore behold, the time comes (says the LORD) that it shall no
more be said: the LORD lives, which brought the children off Israel out of
the land of Egipte: But the LORD lives, which brought forth, and led the
sede of the house off Israel, out off the north land, and from all countrees
where I had scatred them, and they shall dwell in their own land again.

My heart breaks in my body because of the false prophets, all my bones
shake: I am become like a droncken man (that by the reason of wine can take no
rest) for very fear of the LORD, and of his holy words: Because the land is
full of aduoterers, where through it is destroyed and mourns, and ye pleasant
pastures of the deserte are dried up. Ye the way that men take, is wicked,
(...)
and their governance is nothing like the holy word of the LORD. For the
prophets and the prestes them selves are poluted Ypocrytes, and their
wickedness have I found in my house, says the LORD. Wherefore, their way
shall be slippery in the darcknesse, where in they may stacker and fall. For I
will bring a plage upon them, even the year of their visitacion, says the
LORD. I have seen folly among the prophets of Samaria, yt they preched for
Baal, and disceaued my people off Israel. I have seen also among the Prophets
off Jerusalem foul aduoutery, and presumptuous lies. They take the most
shameful men by the ho^de, flatringe them, so that they ca^ not return from
their wickedness. All these with their citesyns are unto me, as Sodom, and as
the inhabitours off Gomorre.

Therefore thus says the LORD of hoostes (...)
I will feed them with worm wod, and make them drink the water of gall. For
from the prophets of Jerusalem is the sickness of Ypocrisie come in to all the
land.

And therefore the LORD of hoostes gives you this warning: (...) 27. b (...)
2^. b
Hear not the words of the prophets, that preach unto you, and disceaue you:
for they speak the meaning of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of
the LORD. (...) c (...). 5. b (...) 14. b (...). 29. c
They say unto them, that despise me: The LORD has spoken it: Tush, ye shall
prospere right well. And unto all them, that walk after the lust of their own
heart, they say: Tush, there shall no myszfortune happen you. For who has
sytten in the council of the LORD, that he has herd and understand, what
he is about to do? Who has marcked his deuyce, (...)
and herd it? Behold, the stormy wether of the LORD (that is, his
indignacion) shall go forth, and shall fall down upon the head of the ungodly.
And the wrath of the LORD shall not turn again, until he perform, and
fulfull the thought of his heart. (...) 30 d
And in the latter days ye shall know his meaning.

LORD) and yet they ran. I have not spoken to them, (...) 14. b
and yet they preached. But if they had continued in my council and herd my
words: they had turned my people from their evil ways and wicked
ymaginacions. (...)
Am I the^ God that sees but the thing, which is nigh at hand, and not that
is far of? says the LORD. May any man hyde him self so, that I shall not
se him? says the LORD. (...) 138. a (...). 9. a (...). 66. a (...) 7. f
(...) 17. d
Do not I fulfill heaven and earth? says the LORD. I have herd well enough,
what the prophets say, that preach lies in my name, saye^ge: I have dreamed,
I have dreamed. How long will this co^tynue in the prophets hertes, to tell
lies, (...). 4. b (...). 4. a
let him show it faithfully.

For what has chafe and wheat to do together? says the LORD. Is not my
word like a fire, says the LORD) and like an hammer, that breaks the
hard stone? Therefore thus says the LORD: behold, I will upon the prophets,
that steal my word privily from every man. Behold, here am I (says the
LORD) against the prophets, that take upon their tunges to speak: The LORD
has said it. Behold, here am I (says ye LORD) against those prophets,
that darre prophecy lies, and disceaue my people with their vanities and
miracles, whom I never sent, ner commanded them. They shall do this people
great harm, says the LORD.

If this people, either any prophet or pressed LORD? Thou shall say unto them:
What? burden? Therefore will I cast you fro me (says the LORD) because ye
your selves are a burden. And the prophet, pressed or people that uses this
term (the burden of the LORD) him will I viset, and his house also.

But thus shall ye say, every one to another: What answer has the LORD
given? or, what is the LORDS commandment? And as for the burden of the
LORD, ye shall speak no more of it: for every man's own word is his burden,
because ye have altered the words of the living God the LORD of hoostes our
God.

Thus shall every man say to the prophets: what answer has the LORD given
the? Or, what says the LORD? And not once to name the burden of the LORD.
Therefore thus says the LORD: For so much as ye have used this term (the
burden of the LORD) where as I notwithstondinge sent unto you, and forbade
you to speak of the LORDS burden:

Behold therefore, I will repute you as a burden, and will cast you out of my
presence: ye and the cite also, that I gave you and your fathers: and will
bring you to an everlasting confucion, and in to soch a shame, as shall never
be forgotten.

The XXIIII. Chapter.
THe LORD showed me a vision: Behold, LORD after yt Nabuchodonosor king of
Babilo^ had led away captyue Iechonias the son of Ioachim king of Judah, 4.
Reg. 24. d
the mighty men also of Judah, with the workemasters and co^nynge men of
Jerusalem, unto Babylon. In the one maunde were very good fyges, even like as
those that be first ripe. In the other maunde were very naughty figes, Os^. 9.
b
which might not be eaten, they were so evil.

Then said the LORD unto me: what

Then came the word of the LORD unto me, after this manner: Thus says ye
LORD the God of Israel: like as thou know the good fyges, so shall I know
the men led away, whom I have sent out of this place in to the land of the
Caldees, for their profit: and I will set mine eyes upon them for the best,
for I will bring them again in to this land: I will build them up, and not
break them down: I will plant them, and not rote them out. Deu. 29. a Iere.
31. f 30. d. 32. c
And I will give them an heart, to know, how that I am the LORD. They shall be
my people, and I will be their God, for they shall return unto me with their
whole heart.

Iere. 29. c
And like as thou know the naughty fyges, which may not be eaten, they are
so euel: Even so will I (says the LORD) let Sedechias the king of Judah, (ye
and all his princes, and the residue of Jerusalem that remain over in this
land, and them also that dwell in Egipte) to be vexed and plaged in all
kingdoms and lands. And will make them to be a reprofe, Psalm. 78. a Baru. 3. a
a common byworde, a laughinge stock and shame, in all the places, where I shall
scatre them. I will send the swearde, honger and pestilence among them,
until I have clean consumed them out of the land, that I gave unto them and
their fathers.

The XXV. Chapter.


From the xiij year of Josias the son of Amon king of Judah, unto this
present day, (that is even xxiij year) the word of the LORD has been
committed unto me. And so I have spoken to you, ^ere. 29. c ^4. a. 35. c
I have risen up early, I have given you warning in season, but ye would not
hear me. Though the LORD has sent his servants, ^. Par. 86. c
all the prophets unto you in season: Yet would ye not obey, ye would not
incline yor ears to hear.

He said: turn again every man from his evil way, 4. Re. 17. c
and from your wicked ymaginacions, and so shall ye dwell for ever in the
land, that the LORD promised you and your fore fathers: And go not after
strange gods, serve them not, worshipe them not, and anger me not with the
works of your ho^des: then will not I punysh you. Nevertheless, ye would not
hear me (says the LORD) but have defied me with the works of your ho^des,
to your own great harm.

Wherefore, thus says the LORD of hoostes: (...)
yt dwell in the north (says the LORD) and will prepayre Nabuchodonosor the
king of Babylon my servant, (...)
and will bring them upon this land, and upon all yt dwell therein, and upon
all the people that are about them, and will vterly rote them out. I will make
of them a wilderness, a mockage, and a continual deserte.

Morouer, I will take from them the voice of gladness and solace, (...)
the voice of the brydegrome and the bryde, the voice of the anointed, with the
creszshettes: and this whole land shall become a wilderness, and they shall
serve the said people and the king of Babylon, three score years and ten.
(...)
When the lxx years are expyred, I will viset also the wickedness of the king
of Babylon and his people, says the LORD: ye and the land of the Caldees,
and will make it a perpetual wilderness, and will fulfill all my words upon that
land, which I have devised against it: ye all that is written in this book,
which Jeremy has prophesied of all people: so that they also shall be subdued
unto diverse nations and great kings, for I will recompense them, acordinge to
their deeds and works of their own hondes. (...)


For thus has the LORD God of Israel (...)
Take this wine cup of indignacion fro my hand, that thou may cause all
the people (to whom I send the) for to drink of it: that when they have
dronke^ thereof, they may be madd, and out of their wits, when the swearde
comes, that I will send among them. Then took I the cup from the LORDS
hand, and made all the people drink there of, unto whom the LORD had sent me.

But first the cite of Jerusalem, and all the cities of Judah, their kings and
princes: to make the^ desolate, waist, despised and cursed, acordinge as it is
come to pass this day. Ye and Pharao ye king of Egipte, his servants, his
princes and his people altogether one with another and all kings of the land of
Hus, all kings of the Philistynes land, Ascalon, Gaza, Accaron and the
remnaunt of Aszdod* the Edomites, the Moabites and the Ammonites: all the
kings of Tirus and Sidon: the kings of the Isles, that are beyond the sea:
Dedan, Thema, Buz and the shaven Ismaelites: (...)
all the kings of Araby, and (generally) all the kings that dwell in the
deserte: all the kings of Simri, all the kings of Elam, all ye kings of the
Meedes, all kings toward the north (whether they be far or nigh) every one
with his neghbours: Ye and all the kingdoms that are upon the whole earth.
The king of Sesach (said he) shall drink with them also.

LORD of hoostes the God of Israel: drink and be droncken, spewe, and fall,
that ye never rise: and that through the swearde, which I will send among you.
But if they will not receive the cup of thy hand, and drink it, then tell
them: Thus does the LORD of hoostes threaten you: (...) 49. b (...). 9. b
(...). 4. c
drink it ye shall, and that shortly. For lo, I begin to plage the cite, that
my name is given unto: think ye then, that I will leave you unpunished? Ye
shall not go quyte. For why, I call for a swearde upon all the inhabitours of
the earth, says the LORD of hoostes.

Therefore tell them all these words, and say unto them: (...) 3 c (...) 1. a
The LORD shall cry from above, and let his voice be herd from his holy
habitacion. With a great noise shall he cry from his court regal. He shall
give a great voice (like the grape gatherers) and the sound thereof shall be
herd unto the ends of the world. For the LORD has a judgment to give upon
all people, and will hold his court of justice with all flesh and punyshe the
ungodly, says the LORD.

(...)
For thus says ye LORD of hoostes: Behold, a miserable plage shall go from
one people to another, and a great stormy water shall arise from all the ends
of the earth. And the same day shall the LORD himself slaye them, from one
end of the earth to another.

Mourn (o ye shepherdes) and cry: sprinckle your selves with aszshes, o ye
rams of the flock: for the time of your slaughter is fulfilled, and ye shall
fall like vessels connyngly made for pleasure.

(...). ^41* a
The shepherdes shall have no way to fle, and the rams of the flock shall
not escape. Then shall the shepherdes cry horribly, and the rams of the
flock shall mourn: for the LORD shall consume their pasture, and their best
feldes shall lie deed because of the horrible wrath of the LORD. They shall
forsake their foldes like as a lion: For their lands shall be waist, because of
the wrath of the destroyer, and because of his fearful indignacion.

The XXVI. Chapter.
IN the beginning of the reign of LORD, saying: Thus says the LORD:
Iere. 7. a 17. d
Stand in the court of the LORD house, and speak unto all them which (out
of the cities of Judah) come to do worship in the LORDS house, all the words
yt I commaundethe to say. Look that thou keep not one word back, Det. 4. a
12. b
if (perauenture) they will herke^, and turn every man from his wicked way:
that I may also repent of the plage, which I have determed to bring upon
them, because of their wicked invencions.

And after this manner shall thou speak unto them: Thus says the LORD: if ye
will not obey me, to walk in my laws, which I have given you, and to hear
the words of my servants the prophets, whom I sent unto you, rysynge up
tymely, and still sendinge: If ye will not follow the^ (I say) then will I do
to this house, as I did unto Silo, and will make this cite to be abhorred of
all the people of the earth. Iere. 7. a
And the prestes, the prophets and all the people herd Jeremy preach these
words, in the house of the LORD.

Now when he had spoken out all the words, LORD commanded him to preach unto
all the people, then the prestes, the prophets and all the people took hold
upon him, and said: thou shall dye. How darrest thou be so bold, as to say
in the name of the LORD: it shall happen to this house as it did unto Silo? and
this cite shall be so waist, that no man shall dwell there in?

And when all the people were gathered about Jeremy in the house of the LORD,
the princes of Judah herd of this rumoure, and they came soon out of the
kings Palace in to the house of the LORD, and sat them down before the new
door of the LORD. 4. Re. 15. g Iere. 36. b
Then spoke the prestes and the prophets unto the rulers and to all the
people, these words: This man is worthy to dye, Ioh. 19. a
for he has preached against this cite, as ye your selves have herd with
your ears.

Then said Jeremy unto the rulers and LORD has sent me to preach against
this house and against this cite all the words that ye have herd. Iere. 7. a
Therefore amend your ways, and your advysementes, and be obedient unto the
voice of the LORD your God: so shall the LORD repent of the plage, yt he had
devised against you. Now as form: I am in your hondes, do with me, as ye
think expedient and good. But this shall ye know: if ye put me to death, ye
shall make your selves, this cite and all the inhabitours there of, Mat. 23. e
guilty of innocent blood. For this is of a treuth: that the LORD has sent
me unto you, to speak all these words in your ears.

Then said the rulers and the people un the prestes and prophets: This man
may not be condemned to death, for he has preached LORD our God. The Elders
also of the land stood up, and said thus unto all the people: Mich. 1. a
Micheas the Morascite, which was a prophet under Ezechias king of Judah, spoke
to all the people of Judah: Thus says the LORD of hoostes: Mich. 3. c
Sion shall be plowed like a field, Jerusalem shall be an heap of stones, and the
hill of the LORDS house shall be turned to an hie wod. Did Ezechias ye king of
Judah and the people of Judah put him to deeth for this? No verily, but rather
feared ye LORD, and made their prayer unto him. For the which cause also ye
LORD repented of the plage, yt he had devised against them. Should we then do
soch a shameful deed against our souls? There was a prophet also, that
preached stiffly in LORD, called Vrias the son of Semeia of Cariathiarim:
this man preached also against this cite and against this lord, 3. Re. 22. d
acordinge to all as Jeremy says. Now when Ioachim the king with all the
estates and princes had herd his words, the king went about to slaye him.
When Vrias perceived that, 2. Re. 19. a Matt. 2. c
he was afraid, and fled, and departed in to Egipte.

Then Ioachim the king sent servants in to the lord of Egipte, Namely:
Elnatha^ the son of Achbor, and certain men with him in to Egipte, which
fetched Vrias out of Egipte, and brought him unto king Ioachim that slew him
with the swearde, and cast his deed body in to ye common peoples grave. But
Ahicam the son of Saphan helped Jeremy, that he came not in to the hondes of
the people to be slain.

The XXVII. Chapter.
LORD, which spoke thus unto me: Make the bonds and chains, and put them
about thy neck, and send the^ to the king of Edom, the king of Moab, the
king of Amon, the king of Tirus, and to the king of Sidon: and that by the
messaungers, which shall come to Jerusalem unto Sedechias the king of Judah, and
bid them say unto their masters: Thus says the LORD of hoostes the God of
Israel, speak thus unto yor masters: I am he that made the earth, (...)
the men and ye catell that are upon the ground, with my great power and
outstretched arm, and have given it unto whom it pleased me. (...)
And now will I deliver all these lands in to the power of Nabuchodonosor the
king of Babylon my servant. The beestes also of the field shall I give him to
do him service. And all people shall serve him, and his son, and his childs
children, until the time of the same lord be come also: Ye many people and
great kings shall serve him.

Morouer, that people and kingdom which will not serve Nabuchodonosor, and that
will not put their necks under ye yock of the king of Babylon: the same people
will I viset with swearde, with honger, with pestilence, until I have consumed
them in his hondes, says the LORD. And therefore, (...)
follow not your prophets, soythsayers, expounders of dreams, charmers and
witches, which say unto you: ye shall not serve the king of Babylon. For they
preach you lies, to bring you far from your land, and that I might cast
you out, and destroy you. But the people that put their necks under the yock
of the king of Babylon, and serve him, those I willet remain still in their
own lord (says the LORD) and they shall occupy it, and dwell there in.

All these things told I Sedechias the king of Judah, and said: (...)
Put your necks under the yock of the king of Babylon, and serve him and his
people, that ye may live. Why will thou and thy people perish with the
swearde, with honger, with pestilence: like as the LORD has devised for all
people, that will not serve the king of Babylon? Therefore give no ear unto
those prophets (that tell you: Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon) for
they preach you lies, (...)
nether have I sent them, says the LORD: how be it they are bold, falsely
for to prophecy in my name: that I might ye sooner drive you out, and that ye
might perish with yor preachers.

I spoke to the prestes also and to all the LORD: (...)
Hear not the words of those prophets, that preach unto you, and say:
Behold, the vessels of the LORDS house shall shortly be brought hither again
from Babylon: For they prophecy lies unto you. Hear them not, but serve the
king of Babylon, yt ye may live. Wherefore will ye make this cite to be
destroyed? But if they be true prophets in very deed, and if the word of the
LORD be committed unto them, then let them pray the LORD of hoostes, that
the remnaunt of the ornaments (which are in the house of the LORD, and
remain yet in the house of the king of Judah and at Jerusalem) be not carried
to Babylon also. For thus has the LORD of hoostes spoken concerning the
pylers, the lauer, the seat and the residue of the ornaments that yet remain
in this city, which Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon took not, when he
carried away Iechonias the son of Ioachim king of Judah, with all the power
of Judah and Jerusalem, from Jerusalem unto Babylon, captyue.

Ye thus has the LORD of hoostes the God of Israel spoken, as touching the
residue of the ornaments of the LORDS house* of the king of Iudaes house,
and of Jerusalem: They shall be carried unto Babylon, and there they shall
remain, until I vyset them, says the LORD. Then will I bring them hither
again. And this was done in the same year: eue^ in the beginning of the
reign of Sedechias king of Judah.

The XXVIII. Chapter.
But in the fourth year of the reign of Sedechias king of Judah, in the fifth
Month, It happened, that Hananias ye son of Assure the prophet of Gabaon,
spoke to me in the house of the LORD, in the presence of the prestes and of
all the people, and said: Thus says the LORD of hoostes the God of Israel:
I have broken the yock of the king of Babylon, and after two year will I
bring again in to this place, (...)
all the ornaments of the LORDS house, yt Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon
carried away from this place unto Babylon. Ye I will bring again Iechonias
the son of Ioachim the king of Judah himself, with all the presoners of Judah,
(yt are carried unto Babylon,) eue^ in to this place, says ye LORD, for I will
break ye yock of the king of Babilo^.

LORD. And the prophet Jeremy said: (...)
Amen, the LORD do that, and grant the thing, which thou have prophesied:
that he may bring again all the ornaments of the LORDS house, and restore
all the presoners from Babylon in to (...) place. Nevertheless, harken thou
also, what I will say, that thou and all the people may hear: The prophets
that were before us in times past, which prophesied of war, or trouble, or
pestilence, either of peace, upon many nations and grea^e kingdoms, were proved
by this (if God had send them in very deed) when the thing came to pass,
which that prophet told before.

And Hananias the prophet took the chain from the prophet Ieremias neck, Deu.
18. d Nu. 16. a
and brake it: and with that said Hananias, that all the people might hear:
Thus has the LORD spoken: Even so will I break the yock of Nabuchodonosor
king of Babilo^, from the neck of all nations, ye and that within this two
year. And so the prophet Jeremy went LORD came unto the prophet Jeremy
saying: Go, and tell Hananias these words: Thus says the LORD: Thou have
broken the chain of wodd, but in stead of wodd, thou shall make chains of
iron. For thus says the LORD of hoostes the God of Israel: I will put a yock
of iron upon the neck of all this people, that they may serve Nabuchodonosor
the king of Babylon, ye and so shall they do. And I will give him ye beestes in
the field. Iere. 29. c
Then said the prophet Jeremy unto ye prophet Hananias: Hear me (I pray the)
Hananias: The LORD has not sent the, but thou bring this people in to a
false believe. And therefore thus says ye LORD: behold, I will send the out
of the lord, and within a year thou shall die, because thou have falsely
spoken against the LORD. So Hananias the prophet died the same year in the
seventh Month.

The XXIX. Chapter.
THis is the Copy of the lettre, yt Jeremy LORD of hoostes ye God of Israel
spoken, unto all the presoners, yt were ^ed from Jerusalem unto Babilo^: Iere.
^5. a
(...) you houses to dwell therein: pla^te you* (...), yt ye may enjoy the
fruits thereof: Gene. d 1.^. a
take you wives, to bear you sons and daughters: provide wives for your
sons, and huszbondes for your daughters: that they may get sons and
daughters, and that ye may multiply there. Labor not to be few, but seek
after peace and prosperity of the cite, where in ye be presoners, Baru. 1. e 1.
Tim. 2. a
and pray unto God for it. For in the peace there of, shall yor peace be.

For thus says the LORD of hoostes the God of Israel: Iere. 23. c 27. b
Let not those prophets and soythsaiers yt be among you, disceaue you: and
believe not your own dreams. Iere. 14. e
For why, they preach you lies in my name, and I have not sent them, says the
LORD. But thus says the LORD: When ye have fulfilled lxx years at Babylon,
2. Pa. 36. d Iere. 25. b 1. Esd. 1. a
I will bring you home, and of mine own goodness I will carry you hither again
unto this place. For I know, what I have devised for you, says LORD. My
thoughts are to give you peace, and not trouble (which I give you all ready)
and that ye might have hope again. Deu. 4. e 30. a
Ye shall cry unto me, ye shall go and call upon me, and I shall hear you.
Joan. 7. d
Ye shall seek me, and find me: Ye, if so be that ye seek me with your whole
heart, I will be found of you (says the LORD) and will deliver you out of
preson, and gather you together again out of all places, where in I have
scatred you, says the LORD: and will bring you again to the same place,
from whence I caused you be carried away captyue.

But where as ye say, that God has raised you up prophets at Babylon: Thus
has the LORD spoken (concerning the king that sytteth in the stole of
David, and all ye people that dwell in this cite, your brethren that are not
gone with you in to captiuyte. 4. Reg. 24. d
) Thus (I say) speaks the LORD of hoostes: Behold, I will send a swearde,
honger and pestilence upon them, Iere. 24. b
and will make them like untimely fyges, that may not be eaten for bytternes.
And I will persecute them with the swearde, with honger and death.

I will deliver them up to be vexed of all kingdoms, to be cursed, abhorred,
laughed to scorn, and put to confucion of all the people, among whom I have
scatred them: and that because they have not been obedient unto my
commandments, (says the LORD) which I sent unto them by my servants
Iere. 25. a 44. a
but they would not hear, says the LORD. Hear therefore the word of the
LORD, all ye presoners, whom I sent from Jerusalem unto Babylon: Thus has the
LORD of hoostes the God of Israel spoken, of Achab ye son of Colaias, and of
Sedechias the son of Maasia, which prophecy lies unto you in my name:
Behold, I will deliver them in to the hand of Nabuchodonosor the king of
Babylon, that he may slaye them before your eyes. And all ye presoners of
Judah that are in Babylon, shall take upon them this term of cursinge, and say:
Now God do unto the, as he did unto Sedechias and Achab, whom the king of
Babylon roasted in the fire, because they sinned shamefully in Israel.

For they have not only defiled their neghbours wives, but also preached
lyenge words in my name, which I have not commanded them. This I testify,
and assure, says the LORD. But as for Semeia the Nehela^^te, thou shall
speak unto him: Thus says the LORD of hoostes the God of Israel: Because
thou have sealed lettres under thy name, unto all the people that is at
Jerusalem, and to Sophonias the son of Maasia the pressed, ye and sent them to
all the prestes: where in thou wrytest thus unto him: The LORD has ordened
the to be pressed in stead of Ioiada the pressed, that thou should be the chief
in the house of the LORD above all prophets, and preachers, and that thou
might put them in preson, or in ye stocks. How happens it then, that thou
have not reproved Jeremy of Anathot, which never leaves of his prophecienge.
And beside all this, he has sent us word unto Babylon, and told us planely,
that our captiuyte shall long endure: that we should build us houses to dwell
therein, and to plant us gardens, that we might enjoy the fruits thereof. Which
lettre Sophonias the pressed did read, and let Jeremy the prophet hear it.

Then came the word of the LORD unto Jeremy, saying: Send word to all them
that be in captiuyte, on this manner: Thus has the LORD spoken concerning
Semeia ye Nehelamite: Because that Semeia has prophesied unto you without my
commyssion, and brought you in to a false hope, therefore thus the LORD does
certify you: Behold, I will vyset Semeia the Nehelamite, and his sede: so that
none of his shall remain among this people, and none of them shall se the
good, yt I will do for this people, says the LORD. For he has preached
falsely of the LORD.

The XXX. Capter.
THese are the words, that the LORD showed unto Jeremy, saienge: Thus says
the LORD God of Israel: (...)
Write up diligently all the words, that I have spoken unto the, in a book.
For lo, the time comes (says the LORD) that I will bring again the
presoners of my people of Israel and Judah, says the LORD: For I will restore
them unto the land, that I gave to their fathers, and they shall have it in
possession.

Again, these words spoke the LORD, concerning Israel and Judah: Thus says
the LORD: We hear a terrible cry, fear and disquietnesse. For what else does
this signify, that I se? Namely, that all strong men smite, every man his
hand upon his loins, as a woman in the pain of her travail. Who ever saw a
man travail with child? (...)
Enquere thereafter, and se. Ye all their faces are marvelous pale.

LORD, I will take his yock from of thy neck, and break thy bonds. They
shall no more serve strange gods under him, but they shall do service unto
God their LORD, (...). 34. d (...). 46. e
and to David their king, whom I will raise up unto them. And as for the, o my
servant Jacob, fear not (says ye LORD) and be not afraid, (...). 9. b
o Israel. For lo, I will help the also from far, and thy sede from the
land of their captiuyte.

And Jacob shall turn again, he shall be in rest, and have a prosperous life,
and no man shall make him afraid. For I am with the, to help the, says the
LORD. And though I shall destroy all the people, among whom I have scatred
the, yet will I not destroy the, but correcke the, and that with discrecion.
(...). 10. d (...). 34. a (...) 1. a
For I know, that thou art in no wise without fault. Therefore thus says ye
LORD: I am sorry for thy hurt and wounds. There is no man to meddle with thy
cause, or to bind up thy wounds: there may no man help the.

(...). 13. d
for thy sins have had the over hand. Why make thou moan for thy harm? I
my self have pite of thy sorrow, but for the multitude of thy myszdedes and
sins, I have done this unto the.

^ere. 2. a (...). d
And therefore all they that devour the, shall be devoured, and all thine enemies
shall be led in to captiuyte. All they that make the waist, shall be waisted them
selves: and all those that rob the, will I make also to be robbed. For I will
give the thy health again, and make thy wounds whole, says the LORD:
because they reuyled the, as one cast away vnd despised, o Sion.

For thus says the LORD: Behold, Nu. 24. a
I will set up Jacobs tents again, and defend his dwellinge place. The cite
shall be builded in her old estate, and the houses shall have their right
foundation. And out of them shall go thankesgeuynge, and the voice of joy.

I will multiply them, and they shall not

A captain also shall come of them, Mich. 5. ^
and a prince shall spring out from the myddest of them: him will I challenge
to my self, and he shall come unto me. For what is he, Joan. 6. ^
that gives over his heart, to come unto me? says the LORD. Ye shall be my
people also, Iere. 13. ^ 24. b. 3. f Iere. 23. ^ 25. d
and I will be your God. Behold, on the other side shall the wrath of the LORD
break out as a stormy water, as a mighty whyrle wind: and shall fall upon the
heads of the ungodly.

The terrible displeasure of the LORD shall not leave of, until he have done,
and performed the intent of his heart, Iere. 23. ^
which in the latter days ye shall understand. At the same time (says the
LORD) shall I be the God of all the generacions of Israel, and they shall be my
people.

The XXXI. Chapter.
THus says the LORD: The people Nu. 14. c
found grace to come in to their rest. Even so shall the LORD now also apeare
unto me from far, and say: I love the with an everlasting love, therefore do
I sprede my mercy before the. Eze. 16.
I will repair the again (o thou daughter of Israel) that thou may be fast
and sure. Thou shall take thy tabrettes again, and go forth with them, that
led the dance.

Thou shall plant vynes again upon ye hills of Samaria, and the grape
gatherers shall plant, and sing.

And when it is time, the watchmen upon the mount of Ephraim shall cry: Arise,
Esa. ^. a
let us go up unto Sion to ou^e LORD God* for thus says the LORD: Rejoice
with gladness because of Jacob, cry unto the head of the Gentiles: speak out,
sing, and say: The LORD shall deliver his people, the remnaunt of Israel
and, make them whole

They departed from hence in heaviness, but with joy will I bring them hither
again. I will led them by the ryuers of water in a straight way, where they
shall not stomble: ^^ut. 32. a (...). 48. d
For I will be Isreal's father, and Epraim shall be my firstborne.

Hear the word of the LORD (o ye Gentiles) preach in the Isles, that lie
far of, and say: he that has scatred Israel, shall gather him together
again, and shall keep him as a shepherde does his flock. For the LORD shall
redeem Jacob, and ryd him from the hand of the violent. And they shall come,
and rejoice upon the hill of Sion, and shall have plenteousnes of goods, which
the LORD shall give them: Namely, wheat, wine, oil, young sheep and calves.
And their conscience shall be as a well watered garden, for they shall no more be
hongrie.

LORD.

^^re. 3. e ^att. 2. c
Thus says the LORD: The voice of heaviness, weeping and lamentacion came up in
to heaven: even of Rachel mourning for her children, and would not be
comforted, because they were away.

But now says the LORD: leave of from weeping and crienge, witholde thine
eyes from tears, for thy labor shall be rewarded, says the LORD. And they
shall come again out of the land of their enemies: Ye even thy posterite
shall have consolacion in this (says the LORD) that thy children shall come
again in to their own land.

Morouer I herd Ephraim, (that was led away captyue) complain on this manner:
^ze. 20. f
O LORD, thou have correct me, and thy chastenynge have I received, as an
untamed calfe. Convert thou me, (...)
and I shall be converted, for thou art my LORD God. Ye as soon as thou
turnest me, I shall refourme my self: and when I understand, I shall smite
upon my thee. For verily I have committed shameful things: O let my youth
bear this reprofe and confucion.

Upon this complaynte, I thought thus (...)
Is he not the child, with whom I have had all mirth and pastyme? For sense
the time that I first co^moned with him, I have him ever in remembrance:
therefore my very heart dryueth me unto him: gladly and louyngly will I have
mercy upon him, says the LORD. Get the watchmen, provide teachers for the:
set thine heart upon the right way, that thou should walk, and turn
again: (o thou daughter of Israel,) turn again to these cities of thine. How
long will thou go astraie, o thou shre^kinge daughter? For the LORD will
work a new thing upon earth: A woman shall compass a man.

For thus says the LORD of hoostes the God of Israel: It will come thereto,
that when I have brought Judah out of captiuyte, these words shall be herd in ye
land and in his cities: The LORD, (...)
which is the fair brydegrome of righteousness, make the fruitful, o thou
holy hill: And there shall dwell Judah and all her cities, the shepherdes and
huszbonde men: (...)
For I shall feed the hongrie soul, and refresh all faynte hertes. When I
herd this, I came again to

Behold (says the LORD) the days come, that I will sow the house of
Israel and the house of Judah, with men and with catell. Ye it shall come
thereto, (...)
that like as I have gone about in times past to r^te them out, to scatre
them, to break them down, to destroy them and chaste^ them: Even so will I
also go diligently about, to build them up again, and to plant them, says
the LORD.

Then shall it no more be said: (...)
ye fathers have eaten a sower grape, and the childrens teth are set on edge:
for every one shall dye for his own myszdede, so that who so eats a sower
grape, his teth shall be set on edge.

Behold, (...)
the days come (says the LORD) yt I will make a new covenant with ye house
of Israel and with ye house of Judah: not after the covenant that I made with
their fathers, when I took them by the hand, and led them out of the land of
Egipte: which covenant they brake, wherefore I punyshed them sore, says the
LORD: But this shall (...)
says the LORD: I will plant my law in the inward parts of them, and
write it in their hertes, and will be their God, and they shall be my people.

And from thence forth shall no man teach his neighbor or his brother, and
say: know the LORD: But they shall all know me, from the lowest unto the
highest, says the LORD. For I will forgive their myszdedes, and will never
remember their sins any more. Thus says the LORD which gave the son to
be a light for the day, (...)
and the Moon and stars to shine in the night: which moves the sea, so that
the floudes thereof wax fearce: his name is the LORD of hoostes. Like as this
ordinance shall never be taken out of my sight, says the LORD: So shall the
sede of Israel never cease, but all way be a people before me.

Morouer, thus says the LORD: like as the heaven above can not be measured,
and as the foundacions of the earth beneth may not be sought out: (...)
So will I also not cast out the whole sede of Israel, for that they have
committed, says the LORD. Behold, the days come says the LORD, yt the
cite of ye LORD shall be enlarged from the tower of Hananeel, unto ye gate of
the corner wall. (...)
From thence shall the right measure be taken before her unto the hill top of
Gareb, and shall come about Gaatha, and the whole valley of the deed carcases,
and of the ashes, (...)
and all Seremoth, unto the broke of Cedron: and from thence unto the corner of
the horsgate toward ye east, where as the Sanctuary of the LORD also shall be
set. And when it is now builded, and set up of this fashion it shall never be
broken, ner cast down any more.

The XXXII. Chapter.
LORD unto Jeremy, in the tenth year of Sedechias king of Judah, which was ye
xviij year of Nabuchodonosor, what time as the king of Babilons hooste laid
sege unto Jerusalem. But Jeremy the prophet lay bound in ye court of the
preson, which was in the king of Iudaes house: where Sedechias the king of
Judah caused him to be laid, because he had prophesied of this manner: (...)
Thus says the LORD: Behold, I will deliver this cite in to the hondes of
the king of Babylon, which shall take it. Iere. 34. a 27. a. 38. a 39. a
As for Sedechias the king of Judah, he shall not be able to escape the Caldees,
but surely he shall come in to the hondes of the king of Babylon: which shall
speak with him mouth to mouth, and one of them shall look another in the face.
And Sedechias shall be carried unto Babylon, and there shall he be, until the
time that I vyset him, says the LORD. But if thou take in ho^de to fight
against the Caldees, thou shall not prospere.

And Jeremy said: Thus has the LORD Leui. 25. d Nu. 27. a 36. a Ruth. 4. a


And so Hananeel mine Uncles son came to me in the court of the preson,
(acordinge to the word of the LORD,) and said unto me: Bye my land (I pray
the) that lies in Anothot in the country of Ben Iamyn: for by heretage thou
have right to lowse it out for thy self, therefore redeem it. Then I preceaued,
that this was the commandment of the LORD, and so I lowsed the land from
Hananeel of Anathot, mine Uncles son, and weyed him there the money: even
seven sycles, and ten silver pens.

I caused him also to make me a writing, and to seal it, and called record
there by, and weyed him there the money upon the waightes. So I took the
euydence with the copy (when it was orderly sealed and red over) and I gave
the euydence unto Baruch the son of Nerias the son of Maasia in the sight
of Hananeel my cosen, and in the presence of the witnesses, that be named in
the euydence, and before all the Jews that were thereby in the court of the
preson.

I charged Baruch also before them, saienge: The LORD of hoostes the God of
Israel commands the, to take this sealed euydence with the copy, and to
lay it in an erthen vessel, that it may long continue.

For the LORD of hoostes the God of Israel has determed, that houses, feldes
and vynyardes shall be possessed again in this land.

Now when I had delivered the euydence LORD, saying: O LORD God, Gene. 1. a
Iere. 10. b
It is thou that have made heaven and earth with thy great power and hie arm,
and there is nothing to hard for ye. Thou show mercy upon thousands, thou
recompe^cest the wickedness of the fathers, Exo. 34. a
in to the besome of the children that come after them.

Thou art the great and mighty God, whose name is the LORD of hoostes:
great in council, and infinite in thought: Thine eyes look upon all the ways
of men's children, To. 2. a
to reward every one after his way, and acordinge to the fruits of his
inuencions: Thou have done great tokens and wonders in the land of Egipte (as
we se this day) upon the people of Israel and upon those men: to make thy name
great, as it is come to pass this day: Exo. 7. unto the 15. chapter.
Thou have brought thy people of Israel out of the land of Egipte, with
tokens, with wondres, with a mighty hand, with a stretched out arm and with
great terriblenes: and have given them this land, like as thou had
promised unto their fathers: Namely, that thou would give them a lord, that
flows with milk and honye.

Iudi. 2.3.4.6.8
Now when they came therein, and possessed it, they followed not thy voice, and
walked not in thy law: but all that thou commaundedest them to do, that have
they not done, and therefore come all these plages upon them.

Behold, there are bulworckes made now against the cite, to take it: and it
shall be won of the Caldees that besege it, with swearde, with honger and
death, and look what thou have spoken, that same shall come upon them.

For lo, all things are present unto the: Yet say thou unto me (o LORD
God) and commaundest me, that I shall loose a piece of land unto my self, and
take witnesses thereto: and yet in the mean season the cite is delivered in to
the power of the Caldees.

LORD unto me, saying: Behold, I am the LORD God of all flesh, Is there any
thing then to hard for me? Therefore thus said the LORD: behold, I shall
deliver this cite in to the power of the Caldees, and in to the power of
Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon, Iere. 25. b 39. b
they shall take it in: For the Caldees shall come, and win this cite, and
set fire upon it, and burn it: with the gorgeous houses, in whose parlers they
have made sacrifice unto Baal, and poured drink offeringes unto strange
gods, to provoke me unto wrath.

For saying the children of Israel and the children of Judah have wrought
wickedness before me ever from their youth up, what have they else done, but
provoked me with the works of their own hondes? says the LORD.

Or, what has this cite been else, but a prouokinge of my wrath, ever sense the
day that I builded it, unto this hour? Wherein I cast it out of my sight, be
cause of the great blasphemies of the children of Israel and Judah, which they
have done to provoke me: ye they, their kings, their princes, their prestes,
their prophets, whole Judah, and all the citesyns of Jerusalem.

When I stood up early, (...)
and taught them and instruct them, they turned their backs to me, and not
their faces. They would not hear, to be reformed and correct. They have set
their gods in ye house, (...)
that is hallowed unto my name, to defyle it. They have builded hie places for
Baal in the valley of the children of Ennon, to vow their sons and daughters
unto Moloch: which I never commanded them, nether came it ever in my thought,
to make Judah sin with soch abhominacion.

Morouer thus has the LORD God of Israel spoken, concerning this cite, which
(as ye your selves confess) shall be delivered in to the hand of the king of
Babylon, when it is won with the sword, with honger and with pestilence.
Behold, (...)
I will gather them together from all lands, wherein I have scatred them in my
wrath, in my fearful and great displeasure: and will bring them again unto
this place, where they shall dwell safely. And they shall be my people, and I
will be their God.

And I will give them one heart and one way, (...)
that they may fear me all the days of their life, that they and their
children after them may prospere. (...)
And I will set up an everlasting covenant with them, Namely: that I will
never cease to do them good, and that I will put my fear in their hertes, so
that they shall not run away fro me.

Ye I will have a lust and pleasure to do them good, (...)
and faithfully to plant them in this land, with my whole heart, and with all
my soul.

For thus says the LORD: like as I have brought all this great plage upon
this people: so will I also bring upon them all the good, that I have promised
them And men shall have their possessions in this land, whereof ye say now,
that it shall nether be inhabited of people ner of catell, but be delivered in
to the ho^des of the Caldees: Ye land shall be bought for money, and euyde^ces
made there upon and sealed before witnesses in the country of Ben Iamin, and
round about Jerusalem: in the cities of Judah, in the cities that are upon the
mountains, and in them that lie beneth, ye and in the cities that are in the
deserte. For I will bring their presoners hither again, says the LORD.

The XXXIII. Chapter.
LORD came unto Jeremy on this manner, (...). 20. a
when he was yet bound in the court of the preson: Thus says the LORD,
which fulfilleth the thing that he speaks the LORD which perfourmeth the
thing that he takes in hand: even he, whose name is the LORD: Thou have
cried unto me, and I have herdethe: I have showed great and hie things, which
were unknown unto you.

Thus (I say) spoke the LORD God of Israel, concerning the houses of this
cite, and the houses of the kings of Judah: that they shall be broken through the
ordinance and weapens, when the Caldees come to be sege them: and they shall be
filled with the deed carcases of men, whom I will slaye in my wrath and
displeasure: when I turn my face from this cite, because of all her wickedness.
Behold, (says the LORD) I will heal their wounds, and make them whole: I
will open them the treasure of peace and treuth.

(...). 43. d
and will set them up again, as they were before. From all myszdedes (wherein
they have offended against me) I will cle^se them: And all their blasphemies
which they have done against me, when they regarded me not, I will forgive them.

And this shall get me a name, a praise and honor, among all people of the
earth, which shall hear all the good, that I will show unto them: Ye they
shall be afraid and astonnied at all the good deeds and benefits, that I will
do for them. Morouer, thus says the LORD: (...). 7. d
In this place, whereof ye say that it shall be a wilderness, wherein nether
people ner catell shall dwell: In like manner in the cities of Judah and without
Jerusalem (which also shall be so void, that nether people ner catell shall
dwell there) Shall the voice of gladness be herd again, the voice of the
brydegrome and of the bryde, the voice of them that shall sing: (Praise the
LORD of hoostes, 1. Ma. 4. Psalm. 117. ^
for he is loving, and his mercy endures for ever) and the voice of them that
shall offer up gifts in the house of the LORD. For I will restore the
captiuyte of this land, as it was before, says the LORD. Thus says the
LORD of hoostes. It shall come yet thereto, that in this land, which is void
from men and

In the land of Ben Iamin, in the feldes of Jerusalem, and in the cities of
Judah shall the sheep be nombred again, under the hand of him, that tells
them, says the LORD. Behold, Iere 23. a
the time comes (says the LORD) that I will perform that good thing,
which I have promised unto the house of Israel and to the house of Judah. In
those days and at the same time, I will bring forth unto David, the branch
of righteousness, and he shall do equite and righteousness in the land. In
these days shall Judah be helped, Esa. 32. a
and Jerusalem shall dwell safe, and he that shall call her is even God our
rightuous maker. For thus the LORD promyseth: 2. Re. 7. e
David shall never want one, to sit upon the stole of the house of Israel: 1.
Re. 2. ^
nether shall the prestes and Levites want one to offer allwaye before me,
burnt offeringes, to kyndle the meat offeringes, and to prepare the sacrifices.

And the word of the LORD came unto LORD: Gene. 8. ^
May the covenant which I have made with day and night, be broken, that
there should not be day and night in due season? Then may my covenant also
be broken, which I made with David my servant, and so he not to have a son
to reign in his Trone. 1. Pet. 2. a
So shall also the prestes and Levites never fail, but serve me. For like as
the stars of heaven may not be nombred, Genesis 15. a 22. c
nether the sonde of the sea measured: so will I multiply the sede of David my
servant, and of the Levites my ministers.

Morouer, the word of the LORD came to Jeremy, saienge: Co^sidrest thou not
what this people speaks? Two kynreddes (say they) had the LORD chosen, and
those same two has he cast away. For so far is my people come, yt they have
no hope to come together any more, and to be one people again. Therefore thus
says the LORD: If I have made no covenant with day and night, and given no
statute unto heaven and earth: then will I also cast away the sede of David my
servant: so that I will take no prince out of his sede, to rule the posterite
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. But yet I will turn again their captiuyte, and
be merciful unto them.

The XXXIIII. Chapter.
LORD spoke unto Jeremy, ^^re. 39. a
what time as Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon, and all his hoostes (out of
all the kingdoms yt were under his power) and all his people, fought against
Jerusalem and all the cities thereof. Thus says the LORD God of Israel: Go,
and speak to Sedechias the king of Judah, and tell him: The LORD sends the
this word: Re. 25. a ^ere. 32. a (...). a
Behold, I will deliver this cite in to the ho^de of the king of Babylon, he
shall burn it, and thou shall not escape his hondes, but shall be led away
presoner, and delivered into his power. Thou shall look the king of Babylon in
the face, and he shall speak with the mouth to mouth, and then shall thou go to
Babylon. Yet hear the word of the LORD, o Sedechias thou king of Judah: Thus
says the LORD unto the: Thou shall not be slain with the swearde, but shall
die in peace. Like as ye fore fathers, the kings, ^. Re. 3^. c
thy progenitors were burnt: so shall thou be burnt also, and in the
mourning they shall say: oh lord. For thus have I determed, says the LORD.

^. Par. 11. a
which yet remained of the strong defensed cities of Judah.

These are the words that the LORD spoke unto Jeremy the prophet, when
Sedechias was agreed with all the people at Jerusalem, that there should be
proclaimed a liberte: Exo. 21. a Leuit. 25. f Deuteronomy. 15. b
so that every man should let fre go his servant and handemayde, Hebrew and
Hebruesse, and no Jew to hold his brother as a bond man. Now as they had
consented, even so they were obedient, and let them go fre. But afterward they
repented, and took again the servants and handemaydens, whom they had letten
go fre, and so made them bond again.

LORD came unto Jeremy from the LORD him self, saying: Thus says the LORD
God of Israel: I made a covenant with your fathers, when I brought them out
of Egipte, (that they should no more be bondmen,) saying: When seven years
are out, (...)
every man shall let go fre his bought servant an Hebrew, if he have served
him six years. But yor fathers obeyed me not and herkened not unto me. As for
you, ye were now turned, and did right before me, in yt ye proclaimed, every man
to let his neighbor go fre, and in yt ye made a covenant before me, in the
temple that bears my name: But yet ye have turned your selves again, and
blasphemed my name: In this, yt every man has required his servant and
hand^mayden again, whom ye had letten go quyte and fre, and compelled them to
serve you again, and to be your bond men. And therefore thus says the
LORD: Ye have not obeyed me, every man to proclaim fredome unto his brother
and neghbor: wherefore, I will call you unto a fredome, says the LORD: even
unto the swearde, to the pestilence, and to honger, and will make you to be
plaged in all the kingdoms of the earth. Ye those men that have broken my
covenant, and not kept the words of the apoyntme^t, which they made before
me: when they hewed the calfe in two, (...)
and when there went through the two halfes thereof: The princes of Judah, the
princes of Jerusalem, the gelded men, the prestes and all the people of the
land (which went through the two sides of the calfe.) Those men will I give in
to the power of their enemies, and in to the hondes of them that follow upon
their lives.

And their deed bodies shall be meat for the fowls of the air, (...)
and beestes of the field. As for Sedechias the king of Judah and his princes,
I will deliver them in to the power of their enemies, and of them that desire
to slaye them, and in to the hand of the king of Babilons hooste, (...)
which now is departed from you: But through my commandment (says the LORD)
they shall come again before this cite, they shall fight against it, win it,
and burn it. Morouer I will lay the cities of Judah so waist, that no man
shall dwell therein.

The XXXV. Chapter.
THe words which the LORD spoke (...)
and call them out, and bring the^ to ye house of the LORD in to some
commodious place, and give them wine to drink. Then took I Iasanias the son
of Jeremy, the son of Habazania, and his brethren and all his sons, and the
whole household off the Rechabites: and brought them to the house off the
LORD, in to the closet of the children off Hanan the son off Igdalia the man
off God: which was by the closet off the princes, that is above the closet of
Maasia the son of Sellum, which is the chief off the tresury. And before the
sons of the kynred of the Rechabites, I set pottes full of wine, and cups,
and said unto them: drink wine. But they said: we drink no wine, For
Ionadab the son of Rechab our father commanded us, saying: Ye and your
sons shall never drink wine, build no houses, (...). ^9. b
sow no sede, plant no vynes, ye ye shall have no vynyardes: but for all
your time ye shall dwell inte^tes, yt ye may live long in the lord, wherein
ye be strangers.



But now yt Nabuchodonosor the king of Babilo^ came up in to the lord, we
said: come, let us go to Jerusalem, yt we may escape the hooste of the
Caldees and the Assiria^s: and so we dwell now at Jerusalem. Then came ye word
of the LORD unto Jeremy, saying: Thus says the LORD of hoostes the God of
Israel: Go and tell whole Judah and all the inhabitours of Jerusalem: Will ye
not be reformed, to obey my words? says the LORD. The words which
Ionadab the son off Rechab commanded his sons, yt they should drink no
wine, are fast and surely kept: for unto this day they drink no wy^e: but
obey (...) 18. a 25. a
I have sto^de up early, I have spoken unto you, and given you earnest
warning: and yet have ye not been obedient unto me. Ye I have sent my
servants, all the prophets unto you, I rose up early, and sent you word,
saying: O turn you, every man from his wicked way: amend yor lives, and go
not after strange gods, to worship the^: yt ye may continue in the lord,
which I have given unto you and your fathers, but ye would nether hear me,
ner follow me.

The children of Ionadab Rachabs son have steadfastly kept their fathers
commandment, yt he gave them, but this people is not obedient unto me. And
therefore thus says the LORD of hoostes ye God of Israel: Behold, I will
bring upon Judah and upon every one yt dwells in Jerusalem, all the trouble
yt I have devised against the^. For I have spoken unto the^, but they would not
follow: Pro. 1. c Esa. 65. b Iere. 7. b
I have called unto them, nevertheless they would give me no answer. Jeremy
also spoke unto the household off the Rechabites: Thus says the LORD of
hoostes the God of Israel: For so much as ye have obeyed ye commandment of
Ionadab yor father, and kept all his precepts, and done acordinge unto all yt
he has bydden you: Therefore thus says the LORD of hoostes the God of
Israel: Ionadab the son of Rechab shall not fail, but have one out of his
stock, Iere. 33. c
to sto^de allwaye before me.

The XXXVI. Chap.
IN the fourth year of Ioachim the LORD unto Jeremy, sayege: Take a book, and
write therein all ye words, yt I have spoken to the, to Israel, Iere. 30. a
to Judah and to all the people, from the time yt I began for to speak unto
the (in ye reign of Josias) unto this day. That when the house of Judah
hears of the plage, which I have devised for the^, they may peradventure
turn, every man from his wicked way, Iere. 18. a
that I may forgive their offenses and sins.

Then did Jeremy call Baruch the son of Nerias, Iere. 45. a
and Baruch wrote in the book at ye mouth of Jeremy, all the words of the
LORD, which he had spoken unto him. And Jeremy commanded Baruch saying: I am
in preson, so that I may not come in to the house of ye LORD: therefore go
thou thither, and read the book, that thou have written at my mouth: Namely,
the words off the LORD, and read the^ in the LORDS house upon the fasting
day: that the people, whole Judah, and LORD, and turn, every one from his
wicked way. For great is the wrath and displeasure, that the LORD has taken
against this people.

So Baruch the son of Nerias did, acordinge unto all that Jeremy the prophet
commanded him, readinge the words off the LORD out off the book in the
LORDS house. And this was done in the fyfth year off Ioachim ye son of
Josias king of Judah, Ione. 3. a
in the ix. month when it was commanded, Ione. 3. a
that all the people of Jerusalem should fast before the LORD, and they also
that were come from the cities of Judah unto Jerusalem.

Then red Baruch the words of Jeremy out of the book within the house of the
LORD, out of ye treasury of Gamarias the son off Saphan the scrybe, Iere.
26. d
which is beside the hyer loffte off the new door of the LORDS house: that all
ye people might hear. Now when Micheas the son off Gamarias the son of
Saphan had herd all the words of the LORD out of ye book, he went down to
the kings palace in to ye scrybes chamber for there all ye princes were set:
Elisama the scrybe, Dalias the son of Semei, Elnatha^ the son off Achbor,
Gamaria the son of Saphan, Sedechias the son of Hananias, with all the
princes. And Micheas told them all the words, yt he herd Baruch read out of
the book before the people.

Then all the princes sent Iehudi ye son of Nathanias the son of Salamia
the son of Chusi, unto Baruch, saying: Take in thine hand the book, wherout
thou have red before all the people, and come. So Baruch

Then said the princes unto Baruch: Go thy way, and hyde the with Jeremy, so
that no man know where ye be. And they went in to the king to the court. But
they kept the book in the chamber off Elisama the scrybe, and told the king
all the words, that he might hear. So the king sent Iehudi to fetch him ye
book, which he brought out of Elisama ye scrybes chamber. And Iehudi red it,
that the king and all the princes, which were about him, might hear. Now the
king sat in the winter house, for it was in their. Month, and there was a
good fire before him. And when Iehudi had red three or four leaves thereof, he
cut the book in pieces with a pen knyfe, Acto. 19. b
and cast it in to the fire upon the herth, until the book was all burnt in
the fire upon the herth.

Yet no man was abashed thereof, or rent his clothes: nether the king
himselffe, ner his servants, though they herd all these words. Nevertheless
Elnathan, Dalias and Gamarias, besoughte the kings, that he would not burn the
book: notwithstondinge ye king would not hear them, but commanded Ieramyhel
the son off Amalech, Sarias the son of Esriel and Selamia ye son of
Abdiel, to lay hondes upon Baruch the scrybe, and upon Jeremy the prophet: but
the LORD kept them out of sight. After LORD came unto Jeremy saying: Take
another book, and write in it all the forsayde sermons, that were written in
the first book, which Ioachim the king off Judah has burnt.

And tell Ioachim the king off Judah, Thus says the LORD: thou have burnt
ye book, and thoughtest within thy selff: Why have thou written therein, that
the king off Babylon shall come, and make this lord waist? so that he shall
make both people and catel to be out of it? (...)
Therefore thus the LORD says, of Ioachim the king of Judah: There shall none
of his generation sit upon the trone of David. His deed corse shall be cast out,
that the heat off the day, (...)
and the frost of the night may come upon him: And I will vyset the wickedness
of him, of his sede, and of his servants. Morouer all the evil that I have
promised the^ (though they herd me not) will I bring upon them, upon ye
inhabitours of Jerusalem, and upon all Judah. Then took Jeremy another book, and
gave it Baruch the scrybe the son of Nerias, which wrote therein out of the
mouth off Jeremy: all the sermons that were in the first book, which Ioachim
the king off Judah did burn. And there were added unto them many mo sermons,
then before.

The XXXVII. Chapter.
SEdechias ye son of Josias (which (...)
in the stead off Iechonias the son of Ioachim. But nether he, ner his
servants, ner the people in the lord would obey the words of ye LORD,
which he spoke by the prophet Jeremy. (...)
Nevertheless Sedechias the king sent Iuchal the son of Selamia and Sophonias
the son of Maasia the pressed to the prophet Jeremy, saying: O pray thou unto
the LORD our God for us. Now Jeremy walked fre among the people at that
time, and was not put in preson as yet. (...). 17. b
Pharaos hooste also was come out of Egipte: which when the Caldees that
beseged Jerusalem, perceived, they departed from thence.

Then came the word of the LORD unto Jeremy the prophet, saye^ge: Thus says
ye LORD God of Israel, This answer shall (...) 46. a
Behold, Pharaos hooste which is come forth to help you, shall return to
Egipte in to his own land: But the Caldees shall come again, and fight
against this cite, win it, and set fire upon it. For thus says the LORD:
disceaue not yor own minds, thinking on this manner: Tush, the Caldees go now
their way from us: No, they shall not go their way. For though ye had slain
the whole hooste off the Caldees* that besege you, and every one of the slain
lay in his tent, yet should they stand up, and set fire upon this cite. Now
when the hooste of the Caldees was broken up from Jerusalem for fear of the
Egipcians army, Jeremy went out of Jerusalem toward the lord of Ben Iamin,
to do certain business (...)
which fell upon him and took him, saye^ge: ye mind is to run to the
Caldees. Then said Jeremy: It is not so, I go not to the Caldees. Nevertheless
Ierias would not believe him, but brought Jeremy bound before the princes.
Wherefore the princes were angry with Jeremy, causinge him to be beaten, and to
be laid in preson in the house of Ionathas the scrybe. For he was the ruler of
the preson. Thus was Jeremy put in to the dongeon and preson, and so lay there
a long time. (...). 33. c
Then Sedechias the king sent for him, and called him, and axed him quietly in
his own house, saying: think thou this busynes (that now is in hand)
comes of the LORD? Jeremy answerde: ye yt it does: and thou (said he)
shall be delivered in to the king of Babilons power.

(...). 28.29.
which have prophesied unto you and said, that ye king of Babilo^ should not
come against you and this lord? And therefore hear now, o my lord the king:
let my prayer be accept before the, and send me no more in to ye house of
Ionathas the scrybe, that I dye not there. Then Sedechias the king commanded
to put Jeremy in the fore entry off the preson, and daily to the given him a
cake of bred, and else no dighte meat, until all the bred in the cite was
eaten up. Thus Jeremy remained in ye fore enter off the preson.

The XXXVIII. Chapter.
SAphatias the son off Matha^, Gedolias LORD: Who so remains in this cite,
shall perish, either with the swearde, Iere. 21. b 27. a
with honger or with pestilence: But who so falls unto the Caldees, shall
escape, winning his soul for a pray, and shall live. For thus says the LORD
This cite (no doubt) must be delivered in to ye power of the ki^ge of Babilo^,
Iere. 32 a
and he also shall win it. The^ said the princes unto ye king: Sir, we
beseech you let this man be put to death, For thus he discorageth the ho^des of
the soudyers yt be in this cite, and the ho^des of all the people, when he
speaks soch words unto the^. This man verily labors not for peace of ye
people, but mischefe. Sedechias the king answered and said: lo, he is in yor
ho^des, for ye ki^ge may deny you nothing. Then took they Jeremy, and cast
him in to the dongeon off Malchias the son off Amalech, that dwelt in the
fore enter off the preson. And they let down Jeremy with coardes in to a
dongeon, where there was no water, but mire. So Jeremy stack fast in the mire.
Now when Abdemelech the Morian being a chamberlayne in the kings court,

And Abdemelech the Morian said unto the prophet Jeremy: O put these rags
and cloutes under thine arm holes, betwixt the^ and the coardes: and Jeremy
did so. So they drew up Jeremy with coardes and took him out of the dongeon,
and he remained in the fore entry of the preson. The^ Sedechias the king sent
and caused Jeremy the prophet be called unto him, in to the LORD. Iere. 37^ c
And the king said unto Jeremy: I will axe the somewhat, but hyde nothing fro
me. The^ Jeremy answerde Sedechias: If I be plain unto the, thou will cause me
suffer death: if I give the counsel, thou will not follow me. So the king
swore an ooth secretly unto Jeremy, saying: As truly as the LORD lives, that
made us these souls, I will not slaye the, ner give the in to the ho^des of
them, that seek after thy life.

Then said Jeremy unto Sedechias: Thus says ye LORD off hoostes the God of
Israel: If case be, that thou will go forth unto the king off Babilons
princes, thou shall save thy life, and this cite shall not be bre^t, Iere. 27. b
ye both thou and thy household shall escape with your lives. But yff thou will not go forth to the king off Babilons princes, then shall this cite be
delivered in to the hondes of the Caldees which shall set fire upon it, and thou
shall not be able to escape them. And Sedechias said unto Jeremy: I am afraid
for the Jews, that are fled unto the Caldees, lest I come in their ho^des, and
so they to have me in derision.

But Jeremy answerde: No, they shall not LORD (I beseke ye) which I speak unto
the, so shall thou be well, and save thy life. But if thou will not go forth,
the LORD has told me this planely: Behold, all the women that are left in
the king of Iudaes house, shall go out to the king of Babilons princes. For
they think, yt thou art disceaued* and that ye men in whom thou did put thy
trust, have gotten the under, and set thy fete fast in the mire, and gone their
way from the. Therefore all thy wives with their children shall fle unto the
Caldees, and thou shall not escape their hondes, but shall be ye king of
Babilons presoner, and this cite shall be brent. Then said Sedechias unto
Jeremy: look yt no body know off these words, and thou shall not dye. But if
the princes perceive, that I have talked with the, and come unto the, saying:
O speak, what said the king to the hyde it not from us, and we will not put
the to death. Tell us (we pray the) what said ye king to the? Se thou give
them this answer: I have humbly be sought the king, that he will let me lie
no more in Ionathas house, that I dye not there? Then came all the princes unto
Jeremy, and axed him, And he told them, after the manner as the king bad him.
(...)
Then they held their peace, for they perceived nothing. So Jeremy abode
still in the fore entry off the preson, until the day that Jerusalem was
won.

The XXXIX. Chapter.
NOw when the cite off Jerusalem was (...)
came Nabuchodonosor the king off Babylon and all his hooste, and beseged
Jerusalem. And in the xi. year of Sedechias in the fourth Month ye ix. day
of ye Month, he brake in to the cite). Then all the king of Babilons princes
came in, and sat the^ down under the port: Nergall, Sarezer, Samgarnebo,
Sarsechim, Rabsaris, Nergal, Sarezer, Rabmag, with all the other princes of the
king of Babylon. And when Sedechias the king of Judah with his soudyers saw
them, they fled, (...)
and departed out of ye cite by night through the kings garden, and through the
port that is between the two walls, and so they went toward the wilderness.

But the Caldees hooste followed fast after them, and took Sedechias in the
field of Jericho, and brought him presoner to Nabuchodonosor the king off
Babilo^ unto Reblatha, that lies in the land off Hemath where he gave
iugdment upon him. So the

Morouer, the Caldees bre^t up the kings palace, with ye other houses of the
people, (...)
and brake down the walls off Jerusalem. As for the remnaunt of the people
that were in the cite, and soch as were come to help them (what so ever was
left of the come^ sort) Nabuzaradan the chief captain carried them to Babylon.
But Nabuzarada^ the chief captain let the rascal people (and those that had
nothing) dwell still in the lord off Judah, and gave them vynyardes and corn
feldes at the same time. Nabuchodonosor also the king of Babylon gave
Nabuzarada^ the chief captain a charge, concerning Jeremy, saying: take and
cherish him, and make much off him^se thou do him no harm, but entreat him
after his own desire.

(...)
sent for Jeremy, and caused him be fet out off the fore entry off the preson,
and committed him unto Godolias the son off Ahicam the son of Saphan: that
he should carry him home, and so he dwelt among the people. (...)
Now while Jeremy lay yet bound in the fore entry of the preson, ye word
off the LORD came unto him saying: Go, and tell Abdemelech the Morian: Thus
says the LORD off hoostes ye God off Israel: Behold, the cruel and sharp
plage that I have devised for this cite, will I bring upon them, that thou
shall se it: but I will deliver the (says the LORD) and thou shall not come
in the hondes off those men, whom thou fear. For doutles I will save the, so
that thou shall not perish with the swearde: but thy life shall be saved, and
that because thou have put thy trust in me, says the LORD.

The XL. Chap.
THis is the manner, how the LORD (...)
whither as he had led him bound, among all the presoners, that were carried
from Jerusalem and Judah unto Babylon. The chief captain called for Jeremy, and
said unto him: The LORD thy God spoke mightily before off the mysery upon
this place: Now the LORD has sent it, and performed it, as he had promised:
For ye have sinned against the LORD, and have not been obedient unto his
voice, therefore comes this plage upon you. Behold, I lowse the bonds from
thy ho^des this day: if thou will now go with me unto Babylon, up the^: For I
will se to the, and provide for the: But if thou will not go with me to
Babylon, then remain here. Behold, all the land is at thy will: look where
thou think convenie^t and good for the to Abide, (...)
there dwell. If thou can not be content to dwell alone, then remain with
Godolias the (...)
and dwell with him among the people, or remain, where so ever it pleases ye.
So the chief captain gave him his expe^ses with a reward, and let him go. Then
went Jeremy unto Godolias ye son of Ahica^ to Masphat, (...)
and dwelt there with him among the people that were left in the land.

Now when ye captains of the hooste of Judah (which with their fellows were
scatred abroad on every side in ye lord) understood, yt the king of Babilo^
had made Godolias ye son of Ahica^ gouernoure in the lord, and yt man, wife
and child, ye and the poor men in the land (yt were not led captyue to
Babylon) should be under his Jurisdiction: They came to Godolias unto Masphat:
Namely, Ismael the son of Nathanias, Ioha^na and Ionathas the sons of
Carea, Sareas the son of Tanhorneth, the sons of Opheus ye Netophetite,
Iesanias ye son of Machati, with their co^panyons. And Godolias the son of
Ahicam the son off Sapha^, swore unto the^ and their fellows on this manner:
Be not afraid 4. Re. 25. c
and do the king of Babylon service, so shall ye prospere. Behold, I dwell at
Masphat to be an officer in the Caldees behalf, and to satisfy soch as corn
to us. Therefore gather you wine, corn and oil, and keep them in your ware
houses, and dwell in your cities, that ye have in kepinge.

Ye all the Jews also yt dwelt in Moab under ye Ammonites, in Idumea and in
all ye countries, when they herd, yt the king of Babilo^ had made Godolias
the son of Ahica^ the son of Sapha^, gouernoure upon the^ yt were left in
Judah: All the Jews (I say) returned out off all places where they were fled
unto: and came in to the lord of Judah to Godolias unto Masphat, and gathered
wine and other fruits, and that very much.

Morouer Iohanna the son of Carea and

The XLI. Chap.
But in the seventh Month it happened, 4. Re. 25. d
yt Ismael the son of Nathanias ye son of Elisama (one of ye kings blood)
came with the^ that were greatest about the king, and ten men that were sworn
with him: unto Godolias the son off Ahicam to Masphat, and eat there
together. And Ismael ye son of Nathanias with those ten men that were sworn to
him, starte up, and smote Godolias the son of Ahicam the son of Saphan with
the swearde, and slew him, whom the king off Babilo^ had made gouernoure off
the land. Ismael also slew all the Jews that were with Godolias at Masphat,
and all the Caldees that he found there waitynge upon him.

The next day after that he had slain Godolias (the matter was yet unknown)
there came certain men from Sichem, from Silo and Samaria, to the nombre off
lxxx. which had shaven their beerdes, rent their clothes, and were all heuye,
bringinge meatoffringes and incense in their hondes, to offer LORD. And Ismael
the son of Nathanias went forth of Masphat wepinge, to mete them. Now when he
met them, he said: Go your way to Godolias the son of Ahicam. And when
they came in the myddest off the cite, Ismael the son off Nathanias (with
them that were sworn unto him) slew them, eue^ at the myddest off the pyt.
Among these lxxx. me^ there were ten, yt said unto Ismael: Oh slaye us not,
for we have yet a great treasure in the field, off wheat, barley, oil and
honey. So he spared the^, and slew them not with their brethren. Now the pyt
wherein Ismael did cast the deed bodies off the me^ (whom he slew because off
Godolias) had king Asa caused to be made, ^. Re. 15.
for fear off Baasa the king off Israel, and the same pit did Ismael fill
with slain men. As for the re^naunt off th people, the kings daughters and
all the people that were yet left at Masphat, upon whom Nabusaradan the chief
Captain had made Godolias the son of Ahicam gouernoure: 4. Re. 25. c
Ismael the son off Nathanias carried them away presoners toward the
Ammonites. But when Ioha^na the son off Carea and all they which Genesis 14 c ^.
Re. 30. b
herd of all the wickedness that Ismael the son off Nathanias had done: they
took their companyons, and went out for to fight with Ismael the son of
Nathanias, and found him by the waters of Rabim in Gabaon. Now when all the
people, whom Ismael led captyue, saw Ioha^na ye son off Carea and all the
other captains off the hooste, they were glad. So all the people that Ismael
had carried away from Masphat, were brought again.

And when they returned, they came to Iohanna the son off Carea. But Ismael
the son off Nathanias fled from Ioha^na with eight of his sworn companyons,
and went to the Ammonites. Then Iohanna the son of Carea and all the
captains of the hooste that were with him, took the remnau^t of the people, whom
Ismael the son of Nathanias had led away (When he had slain Godolias the
son of Ahica^) whom they also had rescued from him: fightinge men, women and
children, and gelded men, whom they brought again from Gabaon: and went from
thence, and sat them down at Geruth Chimham, which lies beside Bethlee^, that
they might go in to Egipte for fear of the Caldees: of whom they were afraid,
because that Ismael the son off Nathanias had slain Godolias Ahicams son,
whom the king off Babylon had made gouernoure in the land. (...)


The XLII. Chapter.
SO all the rulers, and Ioha^na the son off Carea, Iesanias the son off
Osias came with all the people from the leest unto the most, and said unto
Jeremy the prophet: O hear our peticio^, (...)
that thou may pray for us unto the LORD ye God, and for the remnaunt,
whereof there be very few left off many, as thou seist us: that the LORD thy
God may show us a way to go in, and tell us, what we should do. Then Jeremy
the prophet said unto them: I have herd you. Behold, I will pray unto God
your LORD, as ye have required me: and look what answer the LORD gives
you, I shall certify you theroff, and keep nothing back from you. And they
said unto Jeremy: (...)
The LORD off treuth and faithfulness be our record, that we will do all, that
the LORD thy God commands us, whether it be good or evil. We will harken
unto the voice off our LORD God, to whom we sendethe: that we may prospere,
when we have followed the voice off the LORD our God.

And after ten days came the word off the LORD unto Jeremy. Then called he
Iohanna the son of Carea, and all the captains of the people that were with
him: Ye and all the people from the leest to the most, and said unto them:
Thus says the LORD God of Israel unto whom ye sent me, to lay forth your
prayers before him: If ye well dwell in this land, I shall build you up, and
not break you down: I shall plant you, and not rote you out: for I am
pacified, as concerning the trouble that I have done to you. Fear not the
king off Babylon, off whom ye stand in awe: O be not afraid off him, says
the LORD: for I will be with you, to help you, and deliver you from his
hand. I will pardon you, I will have mercy upon you, and bring you again in
to your own land.

Nevertheless, if ye purpose not to dwell in this land, ner to follow the voice
off the LORD your God: but will say thus: we will not dwell here, but go in
to Egipte: where we shall nether se war, hear the noise off batell, ner
suffer honger, there will we dwell. Wherefore hear now the word of LORD, o ye
remnaunt of Judah. Thus says the LORD of hoostes the God of Israel: (...).
27. a
If ye be whole purposed to go in to Egipte, and to be there as strangers: the
swearde that ye fear, (...). 41. c
shall overtake you in Egipte: and the honger wheroff ye be here afraid, shall
hang upon you in to Egipte, and there ye shall dye. For all they, that off set
purpose undertake to go in to Egipte, there to ease them selves off their
mysery, shall perish with the swearde, with honger and pestilence: not one off
them shall remain, there shall none escape the plage, that I will bring upon
them.

For thus says the LORD off hoostes the God off Israel: like as my wrath and
indignacion is come upon the inhabitours LORD forbyddeth you (o ye remnau^t of
Judah) that ye shall not go in to Egipte. And forget not that I have warned you
earnestly this day else shall ye begyle your selves. (...). 41. a
For ye sent me unto the LORD your God, and said: O pray thou the LORD
our God for us: and look what answer the LORD our God gives the, that
bring us again, and we shall do thereafter. Now have I showed, and declared
unto you the voice off the LORD your God, for the which cause he has sent me
to you. (...). 2^. c
If ye will not follow it, be sure, yt ye shall perish with the swearde, with
honger and pestilence: even in the same place, where your lust was to go, and
dwell.

The XLIII. Chapter.
LORD God unto ye people, (for their sakes to whom God had sent him) Asarias
the son of Osias, and Ioha^na ye son of Carea, with all the proud
persons, said unto Jeremy: Thou lie, Iere. 42. ^
the LORD our God has not sent ye to speak unto us, that we should not go
in to Egipte, and dwell there: But Baruch the son of Nerias provoke the
against us, that he might bring us in to the captyuyte off the Caldees: that
they might slaye us, and carry us away presoners unto Babylon.

So Iohanna the son of Carea, and all the captains of the hooste, and all
the people followed not the commandment of the LORD: Namely, to dwell in the
land off Judah: But Iohanna the son of Carea and all the captains of the
hooste, carried away all the remnaunt in Judah, that were come together again
from the Heithen (among whom they had been scatred) to dwell in the land of
Judah: Men, women, children, Iere 41. c
the kings daughters: all those that Nabusaradan the chief captain had left
with Godolias the son of Ahicam. They carried away also the prophet Jeremy,
Baruch the son of Nerias, and so came in to Egipte: for they were not
obedient unto the commandment of God. Thus came they to Taphnis.

And in Taphnis the word off the LORD LORD of hoostes the God of Israel:
Behold, Iere. 46. ^
I will send and call for Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon my servant, and
will set his seat upon these stones that I have hyd, and he shall sprede his
tente over them.

And when he comes, he shall smite the lord of Egipte with slaughter, with
presonment and with the swearde. He shall set fire upon the temples of the
Egipcia^s gods, and burn them up, and take them selves presoners. Morouer he
shall array himselff with the lord of Egipte, like as a shepherde puts on his
cote, and shall depart his away from thence in peace. The pilers also of the
temple of the Son that is in Egipte, shall he break in pieces, and burn the
tempels of the Egipcians gods.

The LXIIII. Chapter.
THis is the word yt was showed to Jeremy at Memphis, and in the land of
Patures. Thus says the LORD of hoostes the God of Israel: Ye have seen all
ye mysery, yt I have brought upon Jerusalem, and upon all the cities of Judah:
so that this day they are desolate, and no man dwellinge therein: and yt
because of the great blasphemies, which they committed, to provoke me unto
anger: In that they went back to do sacrifice and worshipe unto strange
gods: whom nether they, ner ye, ner yor fathers have known. Howbeit, I sent
unto them my servants all the prophets: ^ere. 25. a 29. c
I rose up early, I sent unto them, and gave them warninge: O do no soch
abominable things, and things that I hate. But they would not follow ner
herke^, to turn from their wickedness, and to do no more sacrifice unto
strange gods.

Wherefore my indignacion and wrath was kyndled, (...)
and it burnt up the cities of Judah, the feldes with the streets off
Jerusalem: so that they were made waist and desolate, as it is come to pass
this day* Now therefore thus says the LORD of hoostes the God of Israel: How
happens it, that ye do so great evil unto your own souls, thus to
destroy the men and women, children and babes of Judah? so that none of you is
left, because ye provoke me unto wrath with the works of your own hondes:
when ye offer unto strange gods in the land off Egipte,

Yet are ye not sorry this day, ye fear not, nether walk ye in my law and in
my commandments, that I have given unto you and your forefathers.

Therefore thus says the LORD of hoostes the God off Israel: I am steadfastly
advysed and determed, Amo 9. b
to punysh you, and to rote out all Judah. As for the remnaunt off Judah that
purposly went in to Egipte, Iere. 42. c 43. a
there to ease them off their mysery: I will take them, and they shall all be
destroyed. In ye land of Egipte shall they perish, being consumed with the
swearde and with honger. For from ye leest unto ye most, they shall perish with
the swearde and with honger. Morouer they shall be reuyled, abhorred, shamed, and
confounded. For I will viset them that dwell in Egipte, (...)
as I have visited Jerusalem: with the swearde, with honger and with
pestilence: So that none off the remnaunt off Judah, which are gone to dwell in
Egipte, shall be left to come again in to ye land off Judah: all though they
think to come thither again, and to dwell there. For none shall come again,
but soch as are fled away.

Then all the men which knew that their LORD, we will in no wise hear them:
but what so ever goes out of our own mouth, that will we do: We will do
sacrifice, and offer oblacions unto the Queen off heaven: Iere* (...)
like as we and or forefathers, our kings and our heads have done in the
cities off Judah, and in the streets and feldes of Jerusalem. For then had we
plenteousnesse off vytales, then were we in prosperity, and no myszfortune came
upon us.

But sens we left of, to offer, and to do sacrifice unto the Queen of heaven,
(...)
we have had scarcenes of all things, and perish with the swearde and honger.
Last of all, when we women did sacrifice and offered unto the Queen of heaven,
did we make her cakes and pour unto her drink offeringes, to do her service,
without our huszbondes wylles?

Then said Jeremy unto all the people, LORD remember the sacrifices that ye,
yor forefathers, (...)
your kings and rulers (with all the people) have offered in the cities of Judah,
in the streets and land off Jerusalem? and has he not considered this in his
mind? In so much, that the LORD might no longer suffer the wickedness off
your inuencions, and the abominable things which ye did? (...)
Is not your land desolate and void, ye and abhorred, so that no man
dwells therein any more, as it is come to pass this day?

Did not all this happen unto you, (...)
because ye made soch sacrifice, and sinned against the LORD? Ye have not
followed his voice, to walk in his law, (...)
in his ordinances and statutes.

Ye this is the cause, that all mysfortune happened unto you, as it is come to
pass this day.

Morouer, Jeremy spoke unto all the people and to all the women: Hear the
word off the LORD all Judah, ye that be in the land off Egipte: Thus says
the LORD off hoostes the God of Israel: Ye and your wives have spoken with
your own mouth, the thing that ye have fulfilled in deed.

Ye thus have ye said: We will not fail, (...). 44. c
Purposly have ye set up your own good meanynges, and hastily have ye
fulfilled your own intent. And therefore, hear the word of the LORD all
Judah, ye that dwell in the land off Egipte.

(...). 22. a
Behold, I have sworn by my great name (says the LORD) that my name shall
not be rehearsed through any man's mouth of Judah, in all the land of Egipte: to
say: The LORD God lives, for I will watch, to plage them, and not for their
wealth. And all the men of Judah that be in the lord of Egipte, (...) 42. c
shall perish with the swearde and with ho^ger, until they be utterly destroyed.

Nevertheless, those that fled away for ye swearde, shall come again in to the
lord of Judah (but there shall be very few of them) And all the remnaunt off
Judah, that are gone in to Egipte, there to dwell, shall know, whose words
shall be found true: theirs or mine. Take this for a token, that I will viset you
in this place (says the LORD) and that ye may know, how that I (without
doubt) will perfourne my purpose upon you,) to punysh you. Behold (says the
LORD I will deliver Pharao Ophram king of Egipte in to the hondes of his
enemies, yt seek after his life: even as I gave Sedechias the king of Judah in
to the hondes of Nabuchodonosor ki^ge of Babilo^, Re. 25. a ^^re 39. b
which sought after his life.

The XLV. Chapter.
THese are the words yt Jeremy the ^ere. 36. a
after that he had written these Sermons in to a book at the mouth of Jeremy,
In the fourth year of Ioachim the son of Josias king of Judah.

Thus says the LORD God of Israel unto the, O Baruch: In so much as thou
thoughtest thus (when thou wast writing) Woe is me, the LORD has given me
pain for my travail: I have weeried my self with sighinge, and shall I find no
rest? Therefore tell him (O Jeremy) yt the LORD says LORD. Iere 21. ^
But thy life will I give the for a pray, where so ever thou go.

The XLVI. Chapter.
HEre follow the words off the LORD to the prophet Jeremy, which he Esa. 19.
^ 30. a Eze. 29* 30.31. 4. Re. ^ b
These words folowinge preached he to the Egipcia^s concerning the host off
Pharao Necho king off Egipte, when he was in Charcamis beside the water off
Euphrates: what time as Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon slew him, In the
fourth year off Ioachim the son off Josias king off Judah.

Ye make ready buckler and shylde, Iere. 36
ye go forth to fight: Ye harness your horses, and set your selves upon
them: Ye set your salettes fast on, ye bring forth spears, ye scour your
sweardes, and put on your breast plates.

But alas, how happens it, that I se you so afraid? why shre^cke ye back?
where fore are your worthies slain? Ye they run so fast away, that none
off them looks behind him. Fearfulness is fallen upon euerychone off them,
says the LORD. The lightest off foot shall not fle away, and the worthies
shall not escape.

Toward the north by the water of Euphrates they shall stomble and fall. But

For they say: We will go up, and will cover the earth: we will destroy ye
cities, with them that dwell therein. Get you to horse back, roll forth ye
Charettes, come forth ye worthies: ye Morians, ye Libeans with your buclers,
ye Lideans with your bows: So shall this day be unto the LORD God of
hoostes, a day of ve^geaunce, that he may ave^ge him of his enemies. The
swearde shall devour, it shall be satisfied and bated in their blood: For the
LORD God off hoostes shall have a slain offringe toward the North, by the
water of Euphrates. Go up (o Galaad) and bring triacle unto the daughter off
Egipte:

But in vain shall thou go to surgery, for thy wound shall not be stopped.
The Heithen shall hear off thy shame, and the land shall be full of thy
confucion: for one strong man shall stomble upon another, how then should they
not fall both together?

LORD spoke to the prophet Jeremy, ^^re. 45. b
concernyge ye host of Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon, which was to
destroy the land off Egipte: Preach out through the land of Egipte, and cause
it be proclaimed at Migdal, Memphis and Taphnis, and say: Stand still, make
the ready, for the swearde shall consume the round about.

How happens it that thy mighty worthies are fallen? why stood they not
fast? Even because the LORD thrust them down. The slaughter was great, for
one fell ever still upon another. One cried upon another: Up, let us go again
to our own people, and to our own natural country, from the swearde of
our enemy.

Cry even there: O Pharao king of Egipte, the time will bring sedicion. As
truly as I live (says the king, ^sa* 48. a 11. ^
whose name is the LORD of hoostes) it shall come as ye

They also shall fle away together, and not abide: for the day off their
slaughter and the time of their visitacion shall come upon them.

The cry off their enemies shall make a noise, as the blast of a trompet. For
they shall enter in with their hooste, and come with axes, as it were hewers
down of wod. And they shall cut down her wod (says the LORD) with out any
discrecion. For they shall be mo in no^bre then the greshoppers, so that no man
shall be able to tell the^. The daughter of Egipte shall be confounded. when she
shall be delivered in to the hondes off the people off the north.

LORD of hoostes the God of Israel: Behold I will vyset that restless people
off Alexandria, Pharao and Egipte, ye both their gods and their kings: even
Pharao, and all them yt litten unto him. (...)
Ye I will deliver them in to the hondes off those, that seek after their
lives: Namely, in to the power off Nabuchodonosor the king off Babylon, and in
to the power off his servants. (...)
And after all these things, it shall be inhabited as before time, says the
LORD

But be not thou afraid (o my servant Jacob) fear not thou, o Israel. For
lo, (...)
I will help the from far, and thy sede from the land of thy captiuyte.
Jacob also shall come again, and be in rest: he shall be rich, and no man
shall do him harm. (...)
Fear thou not (o Jacob my servant) says the LORD, for I am with the: and
will destroy all nations, among whom I have scatred the. Nevertheless I will
not consume the, but chasten the and correcke the: ye and that with
discrecion: nether will I spare the, as one that were fautlesse.

The XLVII. Chapter.
THese are the words, that the LORD (...)
before that Pharao smote the cite off Gaza. Thus says the LORD: Behold,
there shall waters arise out off the north: and shall grow to a great floude,
runnynge over and covering the land, the cities and them that dwell therein

And the men shall cry, and all they that dwell in the land, shall mourn at
the noise and stampynge off their strong barded horses, at the shaking off
their charettes, and at the remblinge off the wheles. The fathers shall not
look to their children, so feable and weery shall their hondes be: at the same
time, when he shall be there, to destroy

For the LORD will destroy all Palestina, and the other Isles, that be divided
from the country. Baldness is come upon Gaza, Ascalon with her other valleys
shall keep her peace.

How long will thou slaye, O thou swearde off the LORD? Turn again in to ye
sheeth, rest, and leave off. But how can it cease, when the LORD himselff
has given it a charge against Ascalon, and raised it up against the cities off
the sea coast?

The XLVIII. Chapter.
THus says ye LORD off hoostes ye (...)
Woe be to ye cite of Nebo, for it shall be laid waist, (...). 25. b (...). ^. b
(...). 1^. c
brought to confucion and taken. Ye ye strong cite of Cariatharim shall be
brought to shame, and afraid: Moab shall no more ^e had in honor: Wicked
council shall be taken upon Hesebon. Come (shall they say) let us rote them
out, that they may be no more among the nombre of the Gentiles, ye that they
may no more be thought upon: Thus the swearde shall persecute ye. A voice shall
cry from Horonaim: With great waistinge and destruction, is Moab made
desolate.

And this cry shall be herd in all her cities. At the goinge up unto Luhtih
there shall arise a lame^tacion: and down toward Horonaim, there shall be
herd a cruel and a deedly cry: Get you away, save your lives and be like
unto the heeth in ye wilderness. For, (...). 17. b (...)* ^9. a ^sa. ^ b
because thou have trusted in thy strong holds and treasure, thou shall be
taken. Chamos with his prestes and princes shall go away in to captiuyte.

LORD has determed.

Make a token unto Moab, that she get her away spedely: for her cities shall be
made so desolate, that no man shall dwell therein. Cursed be he that does the
work of the LORD necligently, and cursed be he that keeps back his swearde
from sheddynge off blood.

(...) 47. b
Moab has ever been rich and carlesse from her youth up, she has sytten and
taken her ease with her treasure. She was never yet put out off one vessel in
to another (yt is) she never went away in to captyuyte, therefore her taist
remains, and her sauoure is not yet changed.

But lo, the time comes (says the LORD) that I shall send her trussers to
trusse her up, to prepare and season her vessels: ye her tankerdes rattell,
and shake to and fro. And Moab shall be ashamed off Chamos, like as Israel was
ashamed off Bethel, wherein she put her trust.

Re* 13. ^
and strong men off war? Moab shall be destroyed, ^e. 11. g
and her cities burnt up: her chosen young men shall be slain, says the
king, whose name is the LORD off hoostes. The destruction off Moab comes on
a pace, and her fall is at hand.

All her neghbours shall mourn for her, and all they that know her name, shall
say: O how happens it, that the strong staff and the goodly rod is thus
broken? And thou daughter Dibo^, come down from thy glory, and sit in pouerte.
For he that destroys Moab, shall come up to the also, and break down thy
strong holds.

And thou that dwell in Aroer, get the to ye street, and look about the:
axe them that are fled and escaped, and say: what thing is happened? O, Moab
is confounded and overcome.

Mourn and cry, tell it out at Arnon, that Moab is destroyed. And mysery
shall come upon the plain land: Namely, upon holon, and Iaza: upon Mephat and
Dibo^, upon N^bo and the house of Diplathaim, upon Cariatharim and Bethgamul,
upon Bethniaon and Carioth, upon Bosra and all the cities in the lord off
Moab, whether they lie far or near.

The horn of Moab shall be smytte^ down, and her arm broken, says the
LORD. Make LORD:) that men may clappe their hondes at her vomyte, and that
she also may be laughed to scorn. O Israeli* shall thou not laugh him to
scorn, when he is taken among thieves? Nu. 27. a
Ye because off thy words that thou have spoken against him, thou shall be
driven away. Ye Moabites shall leave the cities, and dwell in rocks off stone,
and become like doves, that make their nestes in holes.

As for Moabs pride, we have herd off it, she is very hie minded. Esa. 16. b
Iere. 49. ^
I know her stoutnesse, her boostinge, her aroga^cy and the pride off her
stomach, says the LORD. For her furiousnes may nether uphold her with
strength, ner deed. Therefore shall there mourning be made for Moab, and every
man shall cry for Moabs sake: a lamentacion shall be made, to the men that stand
upon the wall.

Thy wine branches shall come over ye see, and the branches off Iazer but unto
the sea: the destroyer shall break in to thy harvest and grape gatheringe.
Mirth and cheer shall be taken away from the tymbre field, and from the whole
land off Moab.

There shall be no sweet wine in the press, the treader shall have no stomach
to cry, ye there shall be none to cry unto him: which before time were herd
from hesebon to Eleale and Ioaz, which lifted up their voice from Zoar unto
Horonaim, that bullock off three year old. The waters also off Nemrim shall be
dried up.

Morouer I will make Moab cease (says the LORD) from the offringes and
censinge that she has made unto her gods in hie places. Wherefore my heart
mourns for Moab, like a crowde playenge an heavy song: and for the men's sake
off the brick wall my heart mourns also, Esa. 15. a
even as a pype, that pipeth a doleful song: for they shall be very few, and
destroyed.

All heads shall be shaven, and all beerdes clipped off: all hondes bound,
and all loins gyrded about with sack cloth. Upon all the house tops and
streets off Moab, there shall be mourning: For I will break Moab like an
unprofitable vessel saieh the LORD O how fearful is she? O how mourns she?
O how does Moab hang down her head, and is ashamed? Thus shall Moab be a
laughinge stock, and had in derision off all them, that be round about her.

Deu. 28 c ^ere. 49. d
For thus says the LORD: Behold, the enemy shall come flyenge as an Aegle,
and sprede his wings upon Moab. They shall clymme over the walls, and win,
the strong holds. Then the mighty men's hertes in Moab, ^^re. 49. d
shall be like the heart off a woman trauelinge with child.

And Moab shall be made so desolate, that she shall no more be a people, because
she has set up her self against the LORD. Fear, pyt, and snare shall come
upon the (o Moab) says the LORD. Who so escapes the fear, shall fall in the
pyt: and who so gets out off the pyt, Esa. 24. c
shall betaken in the snare.

For I will bring a year off visitacion upon Moab, says the LORD. They
that are able to fle, shall stand under the shadow off Hesebon. For there
shall go a fire out off Hesebon, and a flame from Sion, and shall burn up that
proud people off Moab, both before and behind.

Woe be unto the (o Moab) for thou people off Chamos shall perish: Ye thy
sons and daughters shall be led away captyne. Yet at the last will I bring
Moab out off captiuyte again, says the LORD. Thus far off the plage off
Moab.

The XLIX. Chapter.
LORD says: Eze. 21 d 25. a ^mos. 1. a
Has Israel no children, or is he without an heir? Why has your king then
taken Gad in? wherefore does his people dwell in his cities? Behold therefore,
the time comes (says ye LORD) that I will bring a noise off war into
Rabath off the Ammonites. Lahel shall be desolate, and her cities brent up: and
the Israelites shall be lords over those, that had the^ in possession before,
says the LORD. Hesebon shall mourn, for it shall be roted out off the
ground, says the LORD. The cities off Rabath shall cry out, and gyrde them
selves with sack cloth: they shall mourn, and run about the walls: for
their king shall be led away presoner: ye his priests and princes with him.

Wherefore trustest thou in the water streams, that flow to and fro, o thou
fearce daughter: and thynkest thou art so safe (by reason off thy treasure)
that no man shall come to the?

Behold, I will bring a fear upon the, says the LORD God off hoostes,
from all those that be about the: so that ye shall be scatred every man from
another, and no man shall gather them together again, that be fled. But after
that, I will bring the Ammonites also out off captyuyte again.

Upon the Edomites has the LORD off (...)
Is there no more wyszdome in Theman? Is there no more good council among his
people? Is their wyszdome then turned clean to naught? Get you hence, turn
your backs, crepe down into the deep, O ye citesyns off Dedan.

For I will bring destruction upon Esau, ye and the day off his visitacion.
Yff the grape gatherers came upon the, should they not leave some grapes? Yff
the night robbers came upon the, should they not take so much, as they thought
were enough?

But I will make Esau bare, and discover his secrets, so that he shall not be
able to hyde them. His sede shall be waisted away, ye his brethren and his
neghbours, and he himselff shall not be left behind.

Thou shall leave thy fatherless children behind the, (...)
and I will keep them and thy wydowes shall take their comforth in me. For thus
has the LORD spoken: Behold, they that men thought were unmeet to drink of
the cup, have dronken with the first: and thynkest thou then to be fre?

No, no: thou shall nether be quyte no fre, but thou must drink also: For why,
I have sworn by my selff (says the LORD) that Bosra shall become a
wilderness,

For I am perfectly infourmed of the LORD, that he has sent a message all
ready unto the Hiethen. Gather you together, and go forth against them: make
you ready to the battle, (...). 1. a (...) 47. b (...) 4^. d
for lo: I will make the but small among the Heithen, and little regarded
among men.

Thy hie stomach and the pride of thy heart have disceaued ye, because thou will dwell in the holes of stony rocks, and have the hie mountains in
possession. Nevertheless though thy nest were as hie as the Aegles, yet will I
cast the down, says the LORD. Morouer Idumea shall be a wilderness: who so
goes by it, (...). 1^. b (...). ^0. b (...). 19. c
shall be abashed, and wondre at all her miserable plages. Like as Sodom, Gomor
and the cities that lay there about, were turned vpsyde down (says ye
LORD) so shall no body dwell in Idumea, and no man shall have his habitacion
there. Behold, like as the Lion comes up from the pleasant meadows of
Iordane unto ye grene pastures of Etha^, so will I drive him, and make him run
against her. But who is the young man that I will ordene thereto? Who is like,
unto me? What is he that will strive with me? What shepherde may stand in my
hondes?

LORD, (...) 136. b
that he has taken upon Idumea: and his purpose, that he has devised upon the
cite syns of Theman: The leest of the flock shall tear them in pieces, and look
what fair thing they have, they shall make it waist, and them selves also. At
the noise of their fall ye earth shall quake, the cry of their voice shall be
herd unto the reed see. Behold, ye enemy shall come and fle up hither, like
as it were an Aegle, and sprede his wings upon Bosra. Then shall the hertes of
the worthies in Edom be as the heart of a woman trauelinge of child. (...).
48. f (...). 7. c (...). 1. a
Upon Damascus, Hemath and Arphad shall come confucion, for they shall hear
evil tydinges: they shall be tossed to and fro like the sea that can not stand
still. Damascus shall be sore afraid, and shall fle, tremblinge shall come upon
her. Sorrow and pain shall over take her as a woman trauelinge of child. But
how should so worshipful and glorious a cite be forsaken? Hear therefore: her
young men shall fall in the streets, and all her men of war shall be taken
away in that time, says the LORD of hoostes. I will kyndle a fire in the
walls of Damascus, which shall consume the palace of Benadad.

Esa. 21. c
whom Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon smote down, the LORD has spoken
thus upon them: Arise, and get you up unto Cedar, and destroy the people
toward the east. Their tents and their flocks shall they take away, ye
their hanginges and their vessel. Their Camels also shall they carry away
with them. They shall come about them on every side with a fearful cry.

Fle, get you soon away, crepe in to caves, that ye may dwell there: O ye
inhabitours of Hasor, says the LORD: for Nabuchodonosor ye king of Babylon
has holden a council concerning you, and concluded his deuyce against you.
Arise, and get you up against yonder rich and careless people (says the
LORD) which have nether gates ner door bars, and that dwell not together.
Their Camels shall be stolen, and the droues of their catell driven away.

Morouer, these that be shaven will I scatre toward all the wyndes, and bring
them to destruction: Ye and that through their own familiers, says the
LORD. Hasor also shall be a dwellinge for Dragons, and an everlasting
wilderness: so that no body shall dwell there, and no man shall have there his
habitacion.

These are the words, that the LORD Eze. 32. d Dan. 8. a
in the beginning of the reign of Sedechias king of Judah. Thus says the,
LORD of hoostes: Behold, I will break the bow of Elam, and take away their
strength: and upon Elam I will bring the four wyndes from ye four quarters of
heaven, and will scatre them against the same four wyndes. And there shall be no
people, but some of Elam shall fle unto them.

For I will cause Elam be afraid of their enemies, and of them that seek their
lives: and will bring upon them the indignacion of my wrath, says the LORD.
And I will persecute them with the swearde so long til I have brought them to
naught. I will set my stole in Elam, I will destroy both the king and ye
princes from thence, says the LORD. But in process of time, I will bring
Elam out of captiuyte again, says the LORD.

The L. Chapter.
THe words yt the LORD spoke unto Esa. 15. a 47. a Iere. 25. ^ 31. a Esa. 46.
a Dan. 5. a
Preach among the Gentiles, let your voice be herd, make a toke^: cry out,
keep no silence, but say: Babylon shall be won, Bell shalhe confounded, and
Merodach shall be overcome.

Ye their gods shall be brought to shame, and their images shall stand in
fear. For out of the north there shall come a people against her, which shall
make her land so waist, that no body shall dwell therein: nether man ner beast,
for they shall fle and depart from thence. In those days and at that time
(says the LORD) the children of Israel shall come, Esd. 1. a
they and the children of Judah, wepinge and making haist, and shall seek the
LORD their God. They shall axe the way to Sion, thither shall they tu^^e
their faces, and come, and hang upon the, in a covenant that never shall be
broken.

^ere. 25. a ^ze* 36. f
My people has been a lost flock, my shepherdes have disceaued them, and have
made them go astraye upon the hills. They have gone from the mountain to the
little hill, and LORD, ye even the LORD which is the beauty of their
righteousness, and ye defended their fathers. Yet shall ye fle from Babylon, and
depart out of ye land of the Caldees, and ye shall be as the rams that go
before the flock. ^^re. 50. g
For lo, I will wake up an host of people from ye northren land, and bring
them upon Babylon: these shall lay sege to it, and win it: Their arowes shall
not mysse, like as a conning archer shuteth not wrong. And the Caldees shall be
spoiled, and all they that spoil them, shall be satisfied, ^sa. 47. a
says the LORD: because ye were so cheerful and glad, to tread down mine
heretage, and fulfilled your pleasures, as the calves in the grass: and
triumphed over them like the bulls, when ye had gotten the victory. Your
mothers shall be sore confounded, and they that bare you, shall come to shame. She
shall be the leest set by among the nations, vyode, waist, and dried up. No
man shall be able to dwell there, for the fear of ye LORD, but she shall be
whole desolate. All they that go by Babylon, ^^re. 18. b (...). b. 49. c
shall stand still, and be abashed, and shall wondre at all her plages.

LORD. Cry out: upon her, upon her, against her round about: she shall yield
herself, her foundacio^s shall fall, and her walls shall come down, for it
shall be the vengeance of the LORD. ^xo. 21. b ^eu. 24. d ^hel. ^. b
Ye ve^geaunce shall be taken of her, and as she has done, so shall she be dealt
withal. They shall rote out the sower from Babylon, and him yt handles the
sickle in harvest. For fear of the swearde of the enemy, every man shall get
him to his own people, and every man shall fle to his own land. Israel is a
scatred flock, the Lions have dispersed them. (...)
First the king of the Assirians devoured them, last of all this
Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon has brussed all their bones.

Therefore thus says the LORD of hoostes the God of Israel: Behold, I will
viset the king of Babylon and his kingdom, (...)
as I have visited the king of the Assirians: and will bring Israel again to
his pleasant pasture, that he may feed upon Charmel and Basan, and be
satisfied upon the mount of Ephraim and Galaad. In those days and at LORD) if
the offense of Israel be sought for, (...)
there shall none be found: If men enquere for the sin of Judah, there shall be
none: for I will be merciful unto them, whom I suffer to remain over.

Go down (o thou avenger) in to the enemies land, and viset them that dwell
therein: down with them, and smite them upon the backs, says the LORD: do
acordinge to all, that I have commanded the. There is gone about the land a
cry of a slaughter and great murthur, namely on this manner: How happens it,
that the hammer of the whole world is thus broken and brussed in sonder? How
chances it, that Babylon is become a wilderness among the Heithen on this
manner? I my self have laid wait for the, and thou art taken: vnawarres art
thou trapped and snared: for why, thou have provoked ye LORD unto anger: The
LORD has opened his house of ordinance, and brought forth the weapens of his
wrath. For the thing that is done in the land of the Caldees, it is the LORD
of hoostes work.

These things shall come upon her at the LORD our God, the vengeance of his
temple: Ye a voice of them, that cry against Babylon: Call up all the archers
against Babylon, pytch your tents round about her, that none escape.
Recompense her, (...)
as she has deserved: and acordinge as she has done, so deal with her
again: for she has set up her self against the LORD, against ye holy one of
Israel. Therefore shall her young men fall down in the streets, and all her men
of war shall be roted out in yt day, says the LORD. Behold, I speak unto
the (o thou proud) says the LORD God of hoostes: for thy day shall come,
eue^ the time of ye visitacio^. And the proud shall stomble and fall, and no
man shall help him up. I will burn up his cities with fire, and it shall consume
all that is round about him.

LORD of hoostes: The children of Israel and Judah suffer violence together.
All they that have them in captiuyte, keep them fast, and will not let them go:
but their ave^ger and redemer is mighty, whose name is the LORD of hoostes:
he shall manteyne their cause, he shall make the land shake, and judge them that
dwell therein, one with another. The swearde shall come upon the Caldees (says
the LORD) upon them that dwell in Babylon, upon their princes, and upon their
wise me^: The swearde upon their soythsayers, (as for those, they shall become
fools.) The swearde upon their worthies, so that they shall stand in fear:
The swearde upon their horsemen and charettes, and upon all the common people
that dwell under the^: so that they all shall become like women: The swearde
upon their treasure, so that it shall be stolen (...) 19. d
Like as God destroyed Sodom and Gomorre, with the cities that lay there
about, says the LORD: So shall noman dwell there also, nether shall any man
have there his habitacion. (...) ^0. b (...) 28. c
Behold, there shall come a people from the north, with a great bond of men,
and many kings shall stand up from the ends of the earth: They bear bows
and buclers, cruel are they and unmerciful.

(...) 49. c
so will I drive the^ forth, and make them run against her. But whom shall I
chose out, and ordene to soch thing? Job 41.. a
For who is like me, or who will strive with me? or what shepherde may stand
against me? Therefore hear the council that the LORD has given upon Babylon,
and the deuyce that he has taken upon the land of the Caldees. The leest
among the people shall tear them in pieces, and look what pleasant thing they
have: they shall lay it waist* The noise at ye winning of Babylon sh^^ move
the earth, and the cry shall be herd among the Gentiles.

The LI. Chapter.
THus has the LORD said: Behold, Iere. 25. b 50. a
I will raise up a perlous wind against Babylon and her citesens, yt bear
evil will against me. I will send also in to Babilo^ fanners, to fan her
out, and to destroy her land: for in the day of her trouble they shall be
about her on every side. Morouer, the LORD has said unto the bow men, and
to them yt clymme over the walls in breast plates: Ye shall not spare her
yongeme^, kill down all her host. Thus the slain shall fall down in the
land of the Caldees, and the wounded in the streets. Iere. 50. d
As for Israel and Judah, they shall not be forsaken of their God, of the LORD
of hoostes, of the holyone of Israel: no, though they have filled all their
land full of sin. Fle away from Babylon, Esa. 48. d
every man save his life. Let no man hold his tunge to her wickedness, for the
time of the LORDS vengeance is come, ye he shall reward her again. Babylon
has been in the LORDS hand a golden cup, Iere. ^5. c
yt makes all lands droncken. Of her wine have all people droncken, therefore
are they out of their wits. But suddenly is Babylon fallen, Esa. 21. b Apo.
18. a 14. b
and destroyed. Mourn for her, bring plasters for her wounds, if she may
peradventure be healed again. We would have made Babylon whole (say they) but
she is not recovered. Therefore will we let her alone, and go every man in to his
own country. For her judgment is come in to heaven, and is gone up to the
clouds. And therefore come on, we will show Sion the work of the LORD our
God.

Make sharp the arowes, and fill the quyuers: Iud. 2. c 3. Re. 11. c
for the LORD shall raise up the sprete of the king of the Meedes, which has
already a desire to destroy Babylon. LORDS, and the vengeance of his temple.

Set up tokens upon the walls of Babylon, make your watch strong, set yor
watch men in array, ye hold preuye watches: and yet for all that shall the
LORD go forth with the deuyce, which he has taken upon them that dwell in
Babylon.

O thou that dwell by the great waters, o thou that have so great treasure
and riches, thine end is come: and the reckoning of thy wynnynges. Amos 6. c
Iere. 22. a
The LORD of hoostes has sworn by himself, that he will ouerwhelme the with
men like greshoppers in nombre, which with a courage shall cry Alarm Alarm
against the. Iere. 10. b
Ye even the LORD of hoostes, that with his power made the earth, with his
wiszdome prepayred ye round world, and with his discrecion spread out the
heavens. As soon as he lets his voice be herd, the waters in the air wax
fearce: He draws up the clouds from the ends of the earth. Psalm. 134. b
He turns ye lightenynges to rain, he brings the wyndes out of their
secret places. By the reason of wyszdome, all men are become fools. Esa. 44.
c Baru. 6. a
Confounded be all the casters of images: for ye thing that they make, is but
disceate, and has no breath. Vain is it, and worthy to be laughed at: and in
the time of visitacion it shall perish.

LORD of hoostes, he is the rod of his enheritaunce. Thou breakest my
weapens of war, and yet through the I have scatred the nations and kingdoms:
Through the have I scatred horse and horse man, ye the charettes, and soch as
sat upon them: Through the I have scatred man and woman, old and young,
bacheler and maiden. Through the I have scatred the shepherde and his flock,
the husbond man and his catell, the princes and the rulers. Therefore will I
reward the cite of Babylon and all her citesyns the Caldees, with all the
evil which they have done unto Sion: Ye that ye your selves shall se it,
says the LORD. Behold, I come upon the (thou noisome hill) says the
LORD, thou that destroyest all lands. I will stretch out my hand over the,
and cast the down from the stony rocks: and will make the a burnt hill, so
that nether corner stones, ner pinnacles, ner foundation stones shall be taken
any more out of the but waist and desolate shall thou lie foreuermore, says
the LORD.



The land also shall shake and be afraid, when the deuyce of the LORD shall
come forth against Babylon: to make the land of Babylon so waist, that no man
shall dwell any more therein. The Worthies of Babylon shall leave the batell, and
keep them selves in strong holds, their strength has failed them, they
shall be like women. Their dwellinge places shall be brent up, their bars shall be
broken. One purseuaunt shall mete another, ye one post shall come by another,
to bring the king of Babylon tydinges: that his cite is taken in on every
side, the foordes occupyde, the fennes brent up, and the souldyers sore afraid.

For thus says the LORD of hoostes the God of Israel: The daughter of
Babylon has been in her time like as a threszshinge floor, but shortly shall
her harvest come. Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon has devoured and
distroyed me, he has made me an empty vessel. He swalowed me up like a
Dragon, and filled his belly with my delicates: he has cast me out, he has
taken my substance away, and the thing that was left me has he carried unto
Babylon, says the daughter, that dwells in Sion: Ye and my blood also,
unto the Caldees, says Jerusalem. Therefore thus says the LORD: Behold, I
will defend thy cause, and avenge the: I will drink up her see, and dry up
her water sprynges.

Babylon shall become an heap of stones, (...)
a dwellinge place for dragons, a fearfulnes and wondringe, because no man
dwells there. They shall roar together like lions, and as the young lions
when they be angry, so shall they be^de them selves. In their heat I shall set
drink before the^, and they shall be droncken for joy: Then shall they sleep an
everlasting sleep, and never wake, (...)
says the LORD I shall carry them down to be slain like sheep, like wethers
and gootes. O, how was Sesah won? O, how was the glory of ye whole land
taken? how happens it, that Babylon is so wondered at among the Heithe^? The sea is risen over Babylon, and has covered her with his great wawes. Her
cities are laid waist, the land lies vnbuylded and void: it is a land,
where no man dwells, and where no man traueleth through. Morouer* I will vyset
Bell at Babilo^: (...)
and the thing that he has swalowed up, that same shall I pluck out of his
mouth. The Gentiles also shall run no more unto him, ye and the walls of
Babylon shall fall.

(...)
O my people, come out of Babylon, that every man may save his life, from the
fearful wrath of the LORD. Be not faynte herted, and fear not at every
rumoure that shall be herd in the land: for every year brings new tydinges,
ye strange wickedness and lordshipe. And lo, the time comes that I will vyset
the images of Babilo^, and the whole land shall be confounded, ye and her
slain shall lie in the myddest of her. Heaven and earth with all that is
therein, (...)
shall rejoice over Babylon, when the destroyers shall come upon her from the
north, says ye LORD.

(...)
Like as Babilo^ has beaten down and slain many out of Israel, so shall there
fall many, and be slain in all her kingdom. Ye that have escaped the swearde,
haist you, sto^de not still, remember the LORD afar of: and think upon
Jerusalem, for we were ashamed to hear the blasphemies: our faces were
covered with shame, because the strange aleauntes came in to the Sanctuary of
the LORD. Wherefore behold (says the LORD) the time comes, that I will
vyset the images of Babylon, and through the whole lord they shall mourn and
fall. (...)
Though Babylon clymmed up in to heaven, and kept her power an hie: yet shall I
send her destroyers says the LORD.

LORD destroys them, and when he dryueth out the hie stomach and proud
boostinge, where with they have been as furious, as the wawes of great water
floudes, and made great crakes with their words. For the destroyers shall
come upon her (even upon Babylon) which shall take her worthies, and brake their
bows: for God is disposed to avenge him self upon them, and sufficiently to
recompense the^. Ye (says the LORD) I will make their princes, their wise
men, their chief rulers and all their worthies, droncke^: so that they shall
sleep an everlasting sleep, and never wake: Thus says the king, whose name
is ye LORD of hoostes.

LORD of hoostes: The thick wall of Babylon shall be broken, and her proud
gates shall be burnt up. And the thing that the Gentiles and the people have
wrought with great travail and labor, shall come to naught, and be consumed
in the fire.

This is the charge that Jeremy gave unto Sarias the son of Nerias, the son
of Maasia, when he went toward Babylon with Sedechias the king of Judah, in
the fourth year of his reign. Now this Sarias was a peaceable prince. Jeremy
wrote in a book, all the misery that should come upon Babylon, ye and all
these sermons that be written against Babylon, and gave Sarias this charge:
When thou come unto Babylon, se that thou read all these words, and say: O
LORD, thou art determed to rote out this place, so that nether people ner
catell shall dwell there any more, but to lie waist for ever: and when thou have
read out the book, bind a stone to it, and cast it in the myddest of
Euphrates, and say: Apoc. 18. ^
Eue^ thus shall Babylon syncke, and be thrust down with the burden of
trouble, that I will bring upon her: so that she shall never come up again.
Thus far are ye preachinges of Jeremy.

The LII. Chap.
SEdechias was xxj. year old, when 4. Re. 24 d 2. Par. 36. b
and he reigned xj. year in Jerusalem. His mothers name was Hamithal, Ieremies
daughter of Lobna. He lived wickedly before the LORD even as Ioachim did.
Wherefore the LORD was angry at Jerusalem and Judah, so long till he had cast
the^ out of his presence. And Sedechias fell from the king of Babylon. But in
ye ix. year of his reign, Iere. 39. a 4. Re. 25. a
In the tenth Month, the tenth day of the Month it happened, that
Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon with all his hooste came before Jerusalem, and
beseged it, and made them bulworkes round about it. And this beseginge of the
cite endured unto the xj year of king Sedechias.

And in the fourth Month, the ix day of the Month, there was so great
honger in the cite: that there were no more vitayles for the people of the
land. Iere. 38. b 39. a
So all the souldyers brake away, and fled out of the cite by night, through
the way of the port between the two walls by the kings garden. Now ye
Caldees had compassed the cite round

And so the Caldees followed upon them, and took Sedechias the king in the
field of Jericho, when his host was run from him. So they carried the king
away presoner to Reblatha, unto the king of Babylon in the land of Hemath,
where he gave judgment upon him. Iere. ^^ b


The king of Babilo^ also caused Sedechias sons be slain before his face,
ye and put all the princes of Judah to death at Reblatha. Morouer he put out
the eyes of Sedechias, caused him be bound with cheynes, to be carried unto
Babylon: and let him lie in preson, till he dyed.

Now ye tenth day of the fyfth Month in the xix year of Nabuchodonosor king
of Babylon, Nabusaradan the chief captain and the king of Babilons servants
came unto Jerusalem, and brent up the house of the LORD. He brent up also the
kings palace, all the houses and all the gorgeous buyldinges in Jerusalem. And
the whole host of the Caldees yt were with the chief captain, brake down all
the walls of Jerusalem round about.

LORD, ye the seat and the brazen lauer that was in the house of ye LORD:
and carried all the metal of them unto Babylon. They took away also the
Cauldrons, shouels, flesh hokes, sprinklers, spones and all the brazen vessel
that was occupide in the service: with the basens, colepannes, sprinklers,
pottes, candilstickes, spones, and cups: whereof some were of gold, and some
of silver.

The chief captain took also the two pilers, the lauer, the xij brazen
bullockes yt stood under ye seat, 3. Re. 7.
which king Solomon made in the house of the LORD: and all the vessel
contained so much metal, that it might

After this manner were both the pilers fashioned with the pomgranates, whereof
there were an hundredth and xcvj, which hanged upon the whoopes round about.
The chief captain also took Sarias yt hie pre^^ and Sophonias that was chief
next him, and the three kepers of the treasury. He took out of the cite a
chamberlayne which was a captain of the souldyers, and seven men that were the
kings servants, which were found in the cite: and Sepher a captain that
used to muster the men of war: with lx men of the country that were taken in
the cite. These Nabusaradan the chief captain took, and carried them to the
king of Babylon unto Reblatha: and the king of Babylon caused them to be put
to death at Reblatha in the land of Hemath. And thus Judah was led away
captyue, out of his own land.

This is the sum of the people, whom Nabuchodonosor led away captyue.
In the seventh year of his reign, he carried away of ye Jews, three
thousand three and twenty. In the xviij year Nabuchodonosor carried away from
Jerusalem eight hunderth and xxxij persons. In the xxiij year of
Nabuchodonosor Nabusaradan the chief captain, took away seven hundredth xlv
Jews presoners. The whole sum of all the presoners, is four thousand and
(...) hundredth.

In the xxxvij year after that Ioachi^ the king of Judah was carried away in
the xxv day of the xij Month, Euilmerodach king of Babylon (the same year
yt he reigned) gave Ioachim the king of Judah his pardon, and let him out of
preson, and spoke louyngly to him: And set his trone above ye trones of the
other kings that were with him in Babylon. He changed also the dothes of his
preson, ye and he at with him all his life long. And he had a continual
living given him of the king of Babylon, every day a certain thing allowed
him, all the days of his life, until he dyed.

The end of the prophet Jeremy.
The Lamentatacions of Jeremy.
And it came to pass (after Israel was brought in to captiuyte, and Jerusalem
destroyed:) that Jeremy the prophet sat wepinge, mourning and making his moan
in Jerusalem: so that with an heavy heart he sighed, and sobbed, saying:

The first Chapter.
(...)
how is she become like a wedowe, which was the lady of all nations? (...). 4.
b (...). 15. a
How is she brought under tribute, that ruled all lands?

(...)
She wepeth sore in the night, so that ye tears run down her chekes: for
among all her lovers, there is none, that gives her any comfort: ye her
next friends abhor her, and are become her enemies.

(...)
Judah is taken presoner, because she was defiled: and for serving so many
strange gods, she dwells now among the Heithen. She fyndeth no rest, all
they that persecuted her, took her, and so she dwells among her enemies.

(...)
All her gates are desolate, her prestes make lamentacion, her maidens are
careful, and she herself is in great heaviness.

(...)
Her enemies are fallen upon her head, and have put her to shame: because the
LORD has chastened her for her great wickedness: her children are led away
captive before their enemy. (...)


(...)
All the beauty of the daughter of Sion is away, her princes are become like
wethers, that find no pasture. They are dryue^ away before their enemy, so
that they have no more power.

(...)
Now does Jerusalem remember the time of her misery and disobedience, ye the
joy and pleasure yt she has had in times past: seeing her people is brought
down through the power of their enemy, and there is no man for to help her:
her enemies sto^de lokinge at her and laugh her Sabbath days to scorn.

(...)
All they that had her in honor, despise her: for they have seen her
fylthinesse. Ye she sigheth, and is a shamed of herself.

(...)
Her skyrtes are defiled, she remembered not what would follow: therefore is her
fall so great, and there is no man to comfort her. O LORD, consider my
trouble, for mine enemy has the upper hand.

The enemy has put his hand to all the precious things that she had, (...)
ye even before her eyes came the Heithen in and out of the Sanctuary: Deu.
23. a
whom thou (nevertheless) have forbidden to come within thy congregation.

All her people seek their bred with heaviness, (...) 4. Re. 6. f Tren. 2. c
and look what precious thing every man has, that gives he for meat, to
save his life. Considre (O LORD) and se, how vile I am become.

O ye all that go fore by, behold and se, (...)
if there be any sorrow like unto mine, wherewith the LORD has troubled me, in
the day of his fearful wrath.

From above has he sent down a fire, (...)
he has laid a not for my fete, and thrown me wide open: he has made me
desolate, so that I must ever be mourning.

The yocke of my transgression is come at the last, with his hand has he
taken it up, (...)
and put it about my neck. My strength is gone: the LORD has delivered me
into those hondes, wherout I can not quyte myself.

The LORD has destroyed all the mighty men, that were in me. (...)
He has proclaimed a feast, to slaughter all my best me^. The LORD has trodden
down the daughter of Judah, like as it were in a wine press.

Therefore do I weep, (...) Iere. 14. c Tren. 2. ^
and mine eyes gusshe out of water: for the co^forter that should quycken me,
is far fro me. My children are driven away, for why? the enemy has gotten
the over hand.

Sion casts out her ho^des, and there is no man to comfort her. (...)
The LORD has laid the enemies round about Jacob, and Jerusalem is as it
were a menstruous woman, in the myddest of them.

The LORD is rightuous, (...) Dan. 9. a
for I have provoked his countenance unto anger. O take heed all ye people,
and considre my heaviness: My maidens and my young men are led away in to
captiuyte.

I called for my lovers (but they begyled me:) for my prestes and councelers,
(...)
but they perished: even while they sought for meat, to save their lives.

Considre (O LORD) how I am troubled, (...)
my womb is disquieted, my heart turns about in me, and I am full of
heaviness. The swearde hurts me without, and within I am like unto death.

(...)
They hear my mourning, but there is none that will comfort me. All mine
enemies have herd of my trouble, and are glad thereof, because thou have done
it. But thou shall bring forth the time, when they also shall be like unto me.

(...)
From the shall come all their aduersite: thou shall pluck them away, eue^ as
thou have plucked me, because of all my wickedness. For my sorrow is very
great, and my heart is heavy.

The II. Chapter.
(...)
ALas, how has ye LORD darckened ^ren. 4 b
As for the honor of Israel, he has casten it down from heaven: Par. 19. a
^sal 98. a
How happens it, that he remembered not his own footstool, when he was
angry?

(...)
The LORD has cast down all the glory of Jacob without any favor: All the
strong places of the daughter Judah has he broken in his wrath, and thrown
them down to the ground: her kingdom and her princes has he suspended.

(...)
In the wrath of his indignacion he has broken all the horn of Israel: he has
with drawn his right hand from the enemy: ye a flame of fire is kyndled in
Jacob, and has consumed up all round about.

(...)
He has bent his bow like an enemy, he has fastened his right hand as an
adversary: and every thing that was pleasant to se, he has smyten it down.
He has poured out his wrath like a fire, in to the tabernacle of the daughter
^ion.

(...)
The LORD is become, like as it were an enemy, he has cast down Israel and
all his places: ye all his strong holds has he destroyed, and filled the
daughter of Judah with much sorrow and heaviness..

(...)
Her tabernacle (which was like a garden Iere. 7. b
The LORD has brought it so to pass, that the hie solemn feasts and
Sabbathes in Sion, are clean forgotten. In his heavy displeasure has he made
the king and prestes to be despised.

(...)
The LORD has forsaken his own altar, and is wroth with his own Sanctuary,
and has given the walls of their towers in to the hondes of the enemy. Their
enemies made a noise in the house of the LORD, as it had been in a solemn
feast day.

(...)
The LORD thought to break down the walls of the daughter Sion, he spread out
his line, and drew not in his hand, till he had destroyed them. Therefore
mourn the turrettes and the broken walls together.

Her ports are casten down to the ground, her bars are broken and smytten
in sonder: (...)
her king and princes are carried away to the Gentiles. (...)
They have nether law ner prophets, ner yet any vision from the LORD.

The Senators of the daughter Sion sit upon the ground in silence, (...)
they have

Mine eyes begin to fail me through wepinge, my body is disquieted, (...)
(...)
my leueris poured upon the earth, for the great hurt of my people, seeing
the children and babes did swowne in the streets of the cite.

Even when they spoke to their mothers: (...)
where is meat and drink? for while they so said, they fell down in the
streets of the cite, like as they had been wounded, and some dyed in their
mothers bosom.

What shall I say of the (O thou daughter (...)
Jerusalem) to whom shall I licke^ the? To whom shall I compare the (o thou
daughter Sion) to comfort the withal? Thy hurt is like a main see, who may
heal the?

Thy prophets have looked out vain and folish things for the, (...) (...)
they have not showed the of thy wickedness, (...)
to keep the from captiuyte: but have ouerladen the, and through falsede scatred
the abroad.

All they that go by the, (...)
clappe their hondes at the: hissinge and wagginge their heads

All thine enemies gape upon the, (...)
whisperinge and bytinge their teth, saying: let us devour, for the time that
we looked for, is come: we have found and seen it.

The LORD has fulfilled the thing, (...)
that he was purposed to do: and performed that he had devised long agoo: he
has destroyed, and not spared. He has caused thine adversary to tryumphe over
the, and set up the horn of thine enemy.

Let thine heart cry unto the LORD, O thou cite of the daughter Sion: let thy
tears ru^ne down like a river day and night: rest not, and let not the aple
of thine eye leave of.

Stand up, and make thy prayer in the first watch of the night, pour out
thine he^^ like water before the LORD: lift up thine hondes, for the lives of
thy young children, that dye of honger in the streets.

(...)
Behold (O LORD) and considre, why have thou gathered me up so clean? Shall the
women then eat their own fruit, even children of a spanne long? Shall the
prestes and prophets be slain thus in the Sanctuary of the LORD?

(...)
Young and old lie behind the streets upon the ground, my maidens and young
men are slain with the swearde: whom thou in the day of thy wrothfull
indignacion have put to death: Ye even thou have put them to death, and not
spared them.

(...)
My neghbours that are round about me, have thou called, as it were to a feast
day: so that in the day of the LORDS wrath none escaped, nether was any left
behind. Those that I had brought up and norisshed, has mine enemy destroyed.

The III. Chapter.
(...)


(...)
He drove me forth, and led me: ye into darcknesse, but not in to light.

(...)
Against me only he turns his hand, and lays it ever upon me.

(...)
My flesh and my skin has he made old, and my bones has he brussed.

(...)
He has builded round about me, and closed me in with gall and travail.

(...)
He has set me in darcknesse, as they that be deed for ever.

(...)
He has so hedged me in, that I can not get out, and has laid heavy lynckes
upon me.

(...)
Though I cry and call piteously, yet hears he not my prayer.

(...)
He has stopped up my ways with four squared stones, and made my paths
crooked.

(...)
He lays wait for me like a Bear, and as a lion in a hole.

(...)
He has marred my ways, and broken me in pieces, he has laid me waist
altogether.

(...)
He has bent his bow, and made me as it were a marck to shute at.

(...)
The arowes of his quyuer has he shot, even in to my reins.

(...)
I am laughed to scorn of all my people, they make songs upon me all ye day
long.

(...)
He has filled me with bytternesse, and given me wormwod to drink.

(...)
He hat^ smytten my teth in pieces, and rolled me in the dust.

(...)
He has put my soul out of rest, I forget all good things.

(...)
I thought in myself: I am undone, there is no hope for me in the LORD.

(...)
O remember yet my mysery and my trouble, the wormwod and the gall.

Ye thou shall remember them, (...)
for my soul melts away in me.

While I consider these things in my heart, (...)
I get a hope again.

Namely, (...)
that the mercies of the LORD are not clean gone, and that his loving
kyndnesse ceasseth not.

His faithfulness is great, (...)
and renueth it self as the morning.

The LORD is my portion (says my soul) therefore will I hope in him. (...)


O how good is the LORD unto the^, (...)
that put their trust in him, and to the soul that seeks after him?

O how good is it with stillness to wate and tarry, for the health of the
LORD? (...)


O how good is it for a man, (...)
to take the yock upon him from his youth up?

He sits alone, he holds him still* (...)
and dwells quietly by him self.

He lays his face upon the earth, (...)
if (per case) there happen to be any hope.

He offreth his cheke to the smyter, (...)
he will be content with reproues.

For the LORD will not forsake for ever. (...)


But though he do cast of, (...)
yet (acordinge to ye multitude of his mercies) he receaueth to grace again.

For he does not plage, (...)
and cast out the children of men from his heart.

To tread all the presoners of the earth under his fete. (...)


To move the judgment of man before the most highest. (...)


To condemn a man in his cause: (...)
The LORD has no pleasure in soch things.

What is he then that says: there should somthinge be done without the LORDS
commandment? (...)


Out of the mouth of the most highest goes not evil and good. (...)


Wherefore them murmureth the lyuinge man? let him murmoure at his own sin,
(...)


Let us look well upon our own ways, (...)
and remember oureselues, and turn again to ye LORD.

Let us lift up our hertes with our hondes unto the LORD, that is in heaven.
(...)


We have been dyssemblers and have offended, will thou therefore not be
entreated? (...)


Thou have covered us in thy wrath, (...)
and persecuted us, thou have slain us without any favor.

Thou have hyd thy self in a cloud, (...)
that our prayer should not go through.

Thou have made us outcastes, and to be despised among the Heithen. (...)


(...)
All our enemies gape upon us.

(...)
Fear and snare is come upon us, ye despite and destruction.

(...)
Whole ryuers of water guszshe out of mine eyes, for the great hurt of my
people.

(...)
Mine eyes run, and can not cease, for there is no rest.

(...)
O LORD, when will thou look down from heaven, and considre?

(...)
Mine eye breaks my heart, because of all the daughters of my cite.

(...)
Mine enemies hunted me out sharply like a bird, ye and that with out a cause.

(...)
They have put down my life in to a pit, (...)
and laid a stone upon me.

(...)
They poured water upon my head, then thought I: now am I undone.

(...)
I called upon thy name (O LORD) out of the deep pit.

(...)
Thou have herd my voice, and have not turned away thine ears fro my sighinge
and crienge.

Thou have enclyned yi self unto me, when I called upon the, (...)
and haist said: fear not.

(...)
Thou (O LORD) have mayntened the cause of my soul, and have redeemed my life.

O LORD, thou have seen my blasphemers, take thou my cause upon the. (...)


Thou have well considred how they go about to do me harm, (...)
and that all their councels are against me.

Thou have herd their despytefull words (O LORD) ye and all their
ymaginacions against me. (...)


The lips of mine enemies, and their deuyces that they take against me, (...)
all the day long.

Thou seist also their sittinge down and their rysinge up, (...)
they make their songs of nothing but of me.

(...)
Reward them (O LORD) acordinge to the works of their hondes.

Give them ye thing, that their own heart is afraid of: (...)
even thy curse.

(...)
Persecute them, (O LORD) with thy indignacion, and rote them out from under
the heaven.

The IIII. Chapter.
(...)
and the stones of ye Sanctuary thus scatred in the corner of every street?

The children of Sion that were allwaye in honor, (...)
and clothed with ye most precious gold: how are they now becomme like the
erthen vessels which be made with the potters hand?

The Lamyes give their young ones suc^ with bare breasts: (...)
but the daughter of my people is cruel, and dwells in the wilderness: like
the Estriches.

The tongues of the suckinge children, (...)
cleue to ye rofe of their mouths for very thurst. The young children axe
bred, but there is noman, that gives it them.

They that were wont to fair delicatly, perish in the streets: (...)
they that before were brought up in purple, make now much of donge.

The sin of the daughter of my people (...) (...)
then ye wickedness of Sodom, that suddenly was destroyed, and not taken with
hondes.

Her abs^^yners (or Nazarees) were whyter then ye snow or milk: (...)
their color was fresh read as the Coral, their beutie like the Saphyre.

But now their faces are very black: (...) (...)
In so much, that thou should not know them in the streets. Their skin
cleueth to their bones, It is wythered, and become like a dry stock.

They that be slain with the swearde, (...)
are happier, then soch as dye of honger, and perish away famishinge for the
fruits of the field.

The women (which of nature are pitefull) have sodden their own children with
their hondes: that they might be their meat, (...) (...)
in ye miserable destruction of the daughter of my people.

The LORD has performed his heavy wrath: (...) (...)
he has poured out the furiousnes of his displeasure. He has kindled a fire
in Sion, which has consumed the foundacions thereof.

Nether the kings of the earth, (...)
ner all ye inhabitours of the world, would have believed,

Which nevertheless is come to pass for ye sins of her prophets, (...)
and for the wickedness of her prestes, that have shed innocents blood within
her.

So that these blind men went stomblinge in the streets, (...)
and stained themselves with blood, which else would touch no bloody cloth.

But they cried unto every man: (...)
fle the staynynge, away, get you hence, touch it not. Ye (said they) ye
must be brent, ye must dwell among the Gentiles, and bide no longer here.

The countenance of the LORD has banyshed them, (...)
and shall never look more upon them: For they them selves nether regarded the
prestes, nor pitied their elders.

(...)
Wherefore yet our eyes fail us, while

(...)
They lay so sharp wait for us, that we can not go safe upon the streets: for
our end is come, our days are fulfilled, our end is here.

(...)
Our persecuters are swifter then the Aegles of the air: they followed upon us
over the mountains, and laid wait for us in ye wilderness.

(...) (...)
The very breath of our mouth: even the anointed LORD himself shall be taken in
our sins, of whom we say: Under his shadow we shall be preserved among the
Heithen.

(...)
And thou (O daughter Edom) that dwell in the land of Hus, be glad and
rejoice: for the cup shall come unto the also, which when thou suppest of,
thou shall be droncke^.

(...)
Thy sin is well punished (O thou daughter Sion) he shall not suffer the to be
carried away any more. But thy wickedness (O daughter Edom) shall he vyset,
and for thy sins sake, he shall led the in to captiuyte.

The V. Chapter.
LORD) what we have suffered, consider and se our co^fucion. Our enheritaunce
is turned to the strangers, and our houses to the aleauntes. We are become
careful and fatherless, and our mothers are as the wydowes. We are feign to
drink our own water for money, and our own wod must we bye with money.
Our necks are under persecucion, we are weery, and have no rest.

Before time we yielded our selves to the Egipcians, and now to the Assirians,
only that we might have bred enough. Our fathers (which now are gone) have
sinned, (...) 31. e (...). 18. a
and we must bear their wickedness. Servants have the rule of us, and no
man delyuereth us out of their ho^des. We must get or living with the parell
of our lives, because of the drouth of the wilderness.



Therefore our heart is full of heaviness, and our eyes dymme: because of ye
hill of Sion that is destroyed, In so much, that the foxes run upon it. But
thou (O LORD) that remaynest for evermore, and thy feate world with out end:
Wherefore will thou still forget us, and forsake us so long? O LORD: Turn
thou us unto the, and so shall we be turned. Renew or days as in old time,
Iere. 31. e
for thou have now banished us long enough, and been sore displeased at us.

The end of the Lamentacions of Jeremy.
The Prophet Baruch.
What Baruch conteyneth.
Chap. I. Baruch reads the book before the king and all the people, which
send money to Jerusalem. Chap. II. They knowledge, that they have deserved
punishment: God promyseth them forgiveness. Chap. III. They pray heartily
being in preson, and he exorteth them to amend. Chap. IIII. A sermon to the
people, with an exortacion to patience. Chap. V. He conforteth them, and
shows the vocacion of the Heithen Chap. VI. A copy of the epistole, that
Jeremy sent to the Jews, which were led away presoners unto Babylon.


These are the words of the book, that Baruch the son of Nerias the son of
Maasia, the son of Sedechias, the son of Sedei, the son of Helchia, wrote
at Babylon in the fifth year the seventh day of the month: 4. Re. 2
what time as the Caldees wanne Jerusalem and brent it.

The first Chapter.
ANd Baruch did read the words of this book, that Iechonias the son of
Ioachim king of Judah might hear: and in the presence of all the people, that
were come to hear the book: ye and before all the noble kings sons, before
ye lords of the council and elders: and before the whole people, from ye
lowest unto the highest: before all them that dwelt at Babylon, by ye water of
Sodi. Which when they herd it, wept, fasted, and prayed before the LORD.

LORD (that were taken away out of the temple) that they might bring them
again in to the land of Judah, the x. day of the month Siban: namely, silver
vessel, (which Sedechias the son of Josias king of Judah had made.) After
that Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon had taken Iechonias, with all his princes,
lords, and all the people, and led them captyue from Jerusalem unto Babylon.

^e^. 14. c
to bye you burnt offerynges and incense withal: make you vnleuended bred, and
offer for sin upon the altar of the LORD our God. ^^re. 29. b Tim. ^. a
And pray for the prosperity of Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, and of
Balthazar his son: yt their days may be upon earth, as the days of heaven:
that God also may give us strength, and lighten our eyes: that we may live
under the defense of Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, and under the proteccion
of Balthazar his son: that we may long do them service, and find favor
in their sight. Pray for us also unto the LORD our God, for we have sinned
against the LORD our God, and unto this day is not his wrath turned yet
away from us. And se that ye read this book (which we have sent unto you to be
rehearced in the temple of the LORD) upon the hye days, and at time
convenient.

LORD or God is rightuous, (...). b (...) a
but we are worthy of co^fucion and shame: like as it is come to pass this
day, unto all Judah, and to every one yt dwells at Jerusalem: to or kings,
princes, prestes, prophets and to our fathers. We have sinned before the
LORD our God, we have not put our trust in him, ner given him credence: we
have not obeyed him, we have not herkened unto the voice of the LORD our God,
to walk in the commandments that he gave us. Sens the day that he brought
our forefathers out of the land of Egipte unto this present day, we have
been ever a mysbeleuynge and an unfaithful people unto ye LORD our God:
destroyenge our selves utterly, and shrenckinge back, that we should not
hear his voice.

Wherefore there are come upon us great (...)
like as the LORD devised by Moses his servant: which brought our
forefathers out of the lord of Egipte, to give us a lord, that flows with
mylcke and honey, like as it is to se this day. Nevertheless, we have not
herkened unto the voice of the LORD our God, acordinge to all the words of
the prophets, whom he sent unto us and to our rulers: but every man followed
his own mind and wicked ymaginacion: to offer unto strange gods, and to do
euel in the sight of the LORD our God.

The II. Chapter.
FOr the which cause the LORD our (...)
whereof he certified us, and our heads that ruled in Jerusalem: ye and our
kings, our princes, with all Israel and Judah. And soch plages has ye lord
brought upon us, as never came to pass under the heaven: like as it is
fulfilled in Jerusalem, acordinge as it is written in the law of Moses: (...)
that a man should eat ye flesh of his own son, and the flesh of his own
daughter. Morouer, he has delivered them in to the hondes of all the kings,
yt are round about us (to be confounded and desolate) and scatred the^ abroad
in all lands and nations. Thus are we brought beneth LORD or God, and not
been obedient unto his voice. Therefore ye LORD or God is rightuous, (...)
and we with or fathers (as reason is) are brought to open shame, as it is to
se this day And as for these plages yt are come upon us already, ye LORD had
deuyced the^ for us: yet would we not pray unto ye LORD our God, yt we might
every man turn from his ungodly ways. So ye LORD has caused soch plages to
come upon us, for he is rightuous in all his works, which he has commanded
us: which we also have not done, ner harkened unto his voice, for to walk in
ye commandments of ye LORD, yt he had given unto us.

And now o LORD God of Israel, thou that have brought thy people out of the
land of Egipte with a mighty hand, (...)
with tokens and wo^dres, with thy great power and outstretched arm: and have
gotten thy selff LORD our God, we have sinned, we have done wickedly, (...)
9. c
we have behaved our selves ungodly in all thy rightuousnesses. Turn thy
wrath from us (we beseke the) for we are but a few left among the Heithen,
where thou have scatred us. Hear or prayers (o LORD) and our peticio^s,
bring us out of captiuyte, (...)
for thine own sake: get us favor in the sight of the^, which have led us
away: yt all lo^des may know, that thou art the LORD our God, and that
Israel and his generation calls upon thy name.

(...)
O LORD, look down from thy holy house upon us: enclyne thine ear, and hear
us. For the deed, yt be gone down to their graves, and whose souls are out of
their bodies, (...)
ascribe unto the LORD nether praise ner rigtuous-makynge: but the soul that
is vexed for the multitude of her sins, which goes on heuely and weakly,
whose eyes begin to fail: ye soch a soul ascrybeth praise and
righteousness unto the LORD. O LORD, we LORD our God: not for any
godliness off our forefathers, but because thou have sent out thy wrath and
indignacion upon us: acordinge as thou dydest threaten us, by thy servants
the prophets, saying:

(...)
Thus says the LORD: Bow down your shulders and necks, and serve the
king of Babylon, so shall ye remain still in the land, that I gave unto your
fathers. Yff ye will not do this, ner hear the voice of ye LORD your God, to
serve the king of Babylon: I shall destroy you in the cities of Judah, within
Jerusalem and without. I will also take from you the voice off mirth and the
voice of joy, the voice of the brydegrome and the voice of the bryde, and
there shall no man dwell more in the land. But they would not harken unto thy
voice, to do the

And lo, now are they laid out in the heat of ye Son, and in the cold of
ye night, and deed in great mysery: with hunger, with swearde, with pestilence and
are clean cast forth. As for the temple wherein thy name was called upon thou
have laid it waist, as it is to se this day: and yt for the wickedness of the
house of Israel and the house of Judah* O LORD or God, thou have entreated us
after all thy goodness and acordinge to all ye great louinge mercy of thine,
like as thou spakest by thy servant Moses, in the day when thou did
command him, to write thy law before the children of Israel, saying: If ye
will not herke^ unto my voice, Deu. 4. d 28. d
the^ shall this great multitude be turned in to a very small people, for I will
scatre the^ abroad. Not withsto^dinge I am sure, LORD their God: when I give
the^ an heart to understood, and ears to hear. Then shall they praise me in
the lord of their captiuyte, and think upon my name. Then shall they turn
them from their hard backs, and from their ungodliness: Then shall they
remember the things, yt happened unto their forefathers, which sinned against
me. So will I bring them again in to the land, which I promised with an ooth
unto their fathers: Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: and they shall be lords of it,
ye I will increace the^, and not minysh the^. And I will make another covenant
with them: Heb. 8. c Zach 8. b Apoc. 2^. ^
soch one as shall endure for ever: namely, yt I will be their God, and they
shall be my people: and I will no more drive my people the children off Israel, out
of the land yt I have given the^.

The III. Chapter.
ANd now o LORD almighty, thou LORD) and have pite upon us, for thou art a
merciful God: be gracious unto us, for we have sinned before ye. Thou endurest
for ever, should we the^ utterly perish* O LORD almighty, thou God of
Israel: Hear now ye prayer of ye deed Israelites and of their children, which
have sinned before ye, Ephe. 2. a
and not herkened unto the voice of the LORD their God, Dani. 3. c Iere. (...)
3. c. 5. e
for the which cause these plages hang now upon us. O LORD, remember not ye
wickedness of or forefathers, but think upon thy power and name now at this
time: for thou art ye LORD or God, and ye (o LORD) will we praise. For thou
have put ye fear i^ or hearts, to ye intent yt we should call upon ye name,
and praise ye in our captiuyte: Nu. 1^. a Psalm. 77. a
and yt we might turn from the wickedness of our forefathers, yt sinned
before the.

Psalm. 78. a
because of all their wickedness and departing from the.

O Israel, hear the commandments of life: pondre them well with thine
ears, that thou may learn wisdom. But how happens it Israel, that thou
art in thine enemies lord? thou art waxen old in a strange country, and
defiled with the deed. Why art thou become like them, that go down to their
graves? Eue^ because thou have forsaken the well of wisdom. Iere. 2. b
For if thou had walked in the way of God, truly thou should have
remained still safe i^ thine own land.

O learn then where discrecion is, where virtue is, Pro. 1 a 3. a
where vndersto^dinge is: that thou may know also from whence comes long
life, Psalm. 18. b 118. r
a necessary living, the light of the eyes and quyetnes. Who ever found out
her place? or who came ever in to her treasures?



The Agarenes sought after wisdom, but Deu. 4. f Iere. 23. d Psa. 144. a
Great is he, and has none end: hye and unmeasurable. What is become of
those famous giauntes, that were so great of bodies, and so worthy men of
war? Those had not the LORD chosen, nether have they found the way of
reformacion, therefore were they destroyed: and for so much as they had no
wisdom, they perished because of their foolishness.

Who has gone up in to heaven, to take wisdom there, and brought her down
from the (...)
This same is he which prepared the earth at the beginning, and filled it with
all manner of fowls and beestes. When he sends out the light, it goes: and
when he calls it again, it obeys hi^ with fear. The stars keep their
watch, and give their light, ye and yt gladly. When he calls them, they
say: here we be. And so with chearfulnes they show light unto him yt made
the^. This is our God, and there shall none other be compared unto him: It is
he, yt has found out all wisdom, (...)
and has given her unto Jacob his servant, and to Israel his beloved. (...)
Afterward did he show himself upon earth, and dwelt among men.

The IIII. Chapter.
THis is the book off the commandments (...)
sei^ge that God has showed us soch things as are pleasant unto him? Be of
good cheer, thou people of God, o thou awncie^t Israel. Now are ye sold
among the Heithen, howbeit not for your utter destruction: but because ye
provoked God the LORD to wrath and displeasure, therefore were ye delivered
unto unto your enemies: For ye displeased the everlasting God that made you,
offering unto deuels and not God. Ye have forgotten him that brought you up,
and your nurse have ye grieved, o. Jerusalem.

When she saw that the wrath off God

Let no man rejoice over me wyddowe and forsaken: which for the sins off my
children, am desolate of every man. For why, they departed from the law of
God: they would not know his righteousness, ner walk in the way off his
commandments: and as for the paths off the treuth and godliness, they had
no lust to go in them.

(...)
and of a strange language: which nether regard the old, ner pity the young,

These have carried away the dear beloved of my wyddowes, leaving me alone,
both desolate and childlesse. But alas, what can I help you? Now he yt has
brought these plages upon you, deliver you also from the hondes of your
enemies.

Go your way (O my children) go your way: for I am desolate and forsaken. I
have put of the clothinge of peace, and put upon me the sack cloth off prayer,
and for my time I will call upon the most highest. Be off good cheer, (...)
o my children: cry unto the LORD, and he shall deliver you from the power of
the princes, your enemies.

For verily, I have ever a good hope off your prosperous health: ye a very
gladness is come upon me from the holy one, because of the mercy that ye shall
have off our everlasting Savior.

With mourning and wepinge did I let LORD bring you again unto me. Like as
the neghbours of Sion saw your captyuite from God, Eue^ so shall they also se
shortly your health in God, which shall come on you with great honor and
everlasting worshipe.

O my children, suffer pacie^tly the wrath that shall come upon you, For the
enemy has persecuted the, but shortly thou shall se his destruction, and
shall tread upon his neck. My derlinges have gone rough hard ways, for they
are led away as a flock that is scatred abroad with the enemies. But be of
good comfort (o my children) and cry unto the LORD: For he that led you
away, has you yet in remembrance: and like as ye (...)* 33. b
to turn again, and to seek him. For he that has brought these plages upon
you, shall bring you everlasting joy again with your health. Take a good
heart unto the, o Jerusalem: for he which gave ye that name, exorteth the so to
do.

The wicked doers that now put the to trouble, shall perish: Iere. 50. a b. c
and soch as have reioysed at thy fall, shall be punyshed. The cities whom thy
children serve, and that have carried away thy sons, shall be correct. For
like as they be now glad of yi decay, so shall they mourn in their own
destruction. The joy off their multitude shall be taken away and their cheer
shall be turned to sorrow. For a fire shall fall upon them from the everlasting
God, long to endure: and it shall be inhabited of deuels for a great season.

The V. Chapter.
O Jerusalem, look about the toward the east, and behold the joy, that

Put of thy mourning clothes (o Jerusalem) and thy sorrow, and deck the with
the worshipe and honor, that comes unto the from God, with everlasting
glory. God shall put the cloak off righteousness upon the, and set a crown
off everlasting worshipe upon thine head: for upon the will God declare his
brightness, that is under the heaven: Ye an everlasting name shall be given the
of God, with peace of righteousness, and ye honor of Gods fear.

Arise o Jerusalem, sto^de up on hye: look about the toward the east, and
behold LORD bring them carried with honor, as children off ye kingdom. For
God is purposed to bring down all stout mountains, ye and all hye rocks,
to fill the valleys, and so to make them eauen with the ground: yt Israel may
be dilligent to live unto ye honor of God. The woddes and all pleasant trees
shall ouershadowe Israel, at the commandment of God. For hither shall God
bring Israel with joyful mirth, and in the light of his magesty: with the
mercy and righteousness, that comes of himselff.

A copy off the epistle, that Jeremy the prophet did send unto the Jews,
which were led away presoners by the king of Babilo^. Wherein he certifieth
them of the thing, that was commanded him of God.

The VI. Chapter.
^er. 25 a. b
ye shall be led away captyue unto Babylon, even off Nabuchodonosor the king
of Babylon. So when ye be come in to Babylon, ye shall remain there many
years, and for a long season: namely, vij. generacions: and after that will I
bring you away peaceably from thence. Now shall ye se in Babilo^, gods of
gold, of silver, of wodd and of stone: borne upon men's shulders, to cast out a
fearfulnes before the Heithen. But look that ye do not as the other: be not ye
afraid, and let not the fear of them overcome you.

Therefore, when ye se the multitude of people LORD, it is thou, that ought
only to be worshipped? Mine angel also shall be with you, Deu. 6. c
and I myself will care for your souls. As for the tymbre of those gods, ye
carpe^ter has polisshed them: ye gylted be they, and laid over with silver,
yet are they but vain things, and can not speak. Like as a wench yt loves
peramours is trymly deckte, even so are these made and hanged with gold. Crowns
of gold verily have their gods upon their heads: so the prestes themselves
take the gold and silver from them, and put it to their own uses: ye they
give of the same unto harlottes, and trymme their whores withal: Again, they
take it from the whores, and deck their gods therewith. Yet can not these
gods deliver them selves from rust and mothes. Iere. 10. a
When they have covered them with clothing off purple, they wype their faces
for the dust of the temple, whereof their is much among the^. One has a
scepter in his hand, as though he were judge of the country: yet can he not
slaye soch as offend him. Another has a swearde or an axe in his hand, for
all that, is he nether able to defend him self from battle, ner f^o
murderers.



By this ye may be sure, that they are not

The prestes also take away the garments of the images, and deck their wives
and children withal. Whether it be good or evil yt any man do unto them, they
are not able to recompense it: they can nether set up a king, ner put him
down. In like manner they may nether give riches, ner reward evil. Though a
man make a vow unto them and keep it not, they will not require it. They can
not restore a blind man to his sight, ner help any man at his need. They ca^
show no mercy to the wyddowe, ner do good to ye fatherles. Their gods of
wodd, stone, gold and silver, are but even as other stones, yt be hewe^ of ye
mountain. They yt worshipe the^, shall be confounded. How should they then be
taken for gods? ye how darre men call the^ gods? And though the caldees
worshipped the^ not, hearing yt they were but domme and could not speak: Yet
they them selves offer unto Bell, and would feign have him to speak: as who
say, they could feel, yt may not move. But when these me^ come to
vndersto^dinge, they shall forsake them, for their gods



The end of the prophet Baruch which is not in the Canon of the hebrew.
The Prophet Ezechiel.
What Ezechiel conteyneth.
Chap. I. The vision of the iiij. beestes and wheles. Chap. II. The sendinge
out of the prophet. Chap. III. The office of a prophet. Chap. IIII. A prophecy
of the sege of Jerusalem. Chap. V. With what plages God punished Jerusalem.
Chap. VI. Punishment for Idolatry. Chap. VII. The long captiuyte of the people
and causes thereof. Chap. VIII. Ezechiel seyth great abhominacion through the
hole in the wall. Chap. IX. The slaughter of the people. Soch as have the sign
of (...) Thau, are saved. Chap. X. The vision of the iiii. beestes again.
Chap. XI. The vision of the xxv. men. Chap. XII. A prophecy of the captiuyte of
Judah. Chap. XIII. A sermon against false prophets Chap. XIIII. Punishment for
wylfulnesse and presumpcio^ of sin God lets soch people be disceaued.
Chap. XV. Against Jerusalem that unfruitfully vine. Chap. XVI. A marvelous goodly
descripcion of the Idolatry of Jerusalem, for the which he calls them whores.
Chap. XVII. A prophecy of the destruction off Jerusalem. A promise of Christ.
Chap. XVIII. Every man shall bear his own sin, and not another. Chap. XIX.
The captiuyte off the kyng^s of Judah. The cruelty of kings and princes. Chap.
XX. The great vnthanfulnesse off the people. Again, the merciful long
sufferaunce of God. Chap. XXI. The swearde, prophesied to come upon Israel and
the Ammonites, by the king of Babylon. Chap. XXII. The sins, wherefore
Jerusalem was punished: both the prophets, prestes, rulers and common people.
Chap. XXIII. The Idolatry or whordome of Samaria and Jerusalem. Chap. XXIIII.
The destruction off Jerusalem and captiuyte of the people signified by the pot.
Chap. XXV. Against Ammon, Moab, Seir, and the Palestynes. Chap. XXVI. He
mourns upon the cite off Tire (otherwise called Zor) for the destruction that
was to come upon her. Chap. XXVII.XXVIII. Against the prince of Tire, and
against Sidon. Chap. XXIX.XXX.XXXI.XXXII. Plages upon Egipte and the kings
thereof. Chap. XXXIII. The office off a preacher. The word of God must be
followed in very (...), and not only in mouth. Chap. XXXIIII. Against evil
shepherdes, Christ the only true shepherde is promised. Chap. XXXV. Against the
mount Seir, that is, against the Edomites. Chap. XXXVI. A promise of the
delyueraunce of Israel. Chap. XXXVII. A consolacion for the Israelites, and a
figure of the general resurrection, signified by the dry bones. Chap.
XXXVIII.XXXIX. Of Gog and Magog, with their destruction. Chap. XL. From this
chapter unto the end, the prophet seith in a vision the buyldinge again of
Jerusalem, and the temple: Whereby is descrybed the mystery off the church off
christ, and salvation of the faithful in hi^*


The first Chapter.
IT chau^sed, in the xxx. year the fifth day off the fourth Month, that I
LORD unto Ezechiel the son off Buzi pressed, in the land off the Caldees by
the water of Cobar, where the hand off the LORD came upon him. (...)
And I looked: and behold, a stormy wind came out off the north with a great
doude full of fire, which with his glistre lightened all round about.

And in ye myddest off the fire it was all clear, and as it were the licknesse
of four beasts, which were fashioned like a man: saving, that every one had
four faces and four wings.

(...)
but each one went straight forward.

Upon the rightside off these four, their faces were like the face off a man
and the fa off a Lion: But upon the left side, they had the face off an ox and
the face off an Aegle.

Their faces also and their wings werespred out above: so that two wings off
one touched ever two wings off another, and with the other two they covered
their body. Every one when it went, it went straight forward.

(...)


The fashion and countenance of the beestes was like hot coals off fire,
even as though burning cresshettes had been among the beestes: and the fire
gave a glistre, and out off the fire there went lighteninge. When ye beestes
went forward and backwarde, one would have thought it had lightened. Now when
I had well considered the beestes, I saw a work off wheles upon the earth
with four faces also like the beestes.

The fashion and work of the wheles was like the sea. The four wheles were
joined

Their bodies were full off eyes round about them all four. When the beestes
went, the wheles went also with them: And when the beestes lift them selves
up from ye earth, the wheles were lift up also. Whyther so ever the sprete
went, thither went they also, and ye wheles were lift up and followed the^.
for ye sprete of life was in the wheles. When ye beestes went forth, stood
still, or lift them selves up from the earth: then the wheles also went, stood
still, and were lift up, for ye breath off life was in the wheles.

Above over ye heads of the beestes there

Above the firmament that was over their heads, there was the fashion off a
seat, as it had been made off Saphir. Upon the seat there sat one like a man.
I beheld him, and he was like a clear light, as it had been all of fire with
in from his loins upward.

And beneth when I looked upon him under ye loins, me thought he was like a
shyninge fire, that gives light on every side. Ye the shine and glistre yt
lightened round about, was like a raynbowe, which in a raynie day apeareth
in the clouds. Eue^ so was the similitude, wherein the glory off the LORD
apeared. When I saw it, I fell upon my face, and herkened unto the voice off
him, that spoke.

The II. Chapter.
^ze. 3. d
And as he was commonynge with me, the sprete came in to me, and set me up upon
my fete: so that I marcked the thing, that he said unto me. And he said:
Behold, thou son off man: I will send the to the children off Israel, to
those runnagates and obstinate people: for they have taken part against me,
and are run a way fro me: both they, and their forefathers, Exo. 32. a
unto this day.

Ye I will send ye unto a people yt have rough vysages and stiff stomachs:
unto whom thou shall say on this manner: This the LORD God himselff has
spoken, yt whether they be obedient or no (for it is a frauwarde household)
they may know yet that there has been a prophet among them.

Therefore (thou son off man) fear the^ Iere. 1. c
and despise ye. Ye thou shall dwell among scorpions: but fear not their
words, be not abashed at their lokes, for it is a frauwerde household.

Se that thou speak my words unto them, whether they be obedient or not, for
they are obstinate. Therefore (thou son of man) obey thou all things, that I
say unto ye, and be not thou stiffnecked, like as they are a stiffnecked
household. Open thy mouth, and eat that I give the.

So as I was lokynge up, behold, there was sent unto me an hand, wherein was a
closed book: and the hand opened it before me, Apo. 5. a
and it was written within and without, full off careful mourninges: alas, and
woe.

The III. Chapter.
Iere. 15. c 4. Es. 14 ^ Apo. 10. b
and speak unto the children off Israel. So I opened my mouth, and he gave me
the book for to eat, and said unto me: Thou son of man, thy belly shall eat,
and thy bowels shall be filled with ye book, that I give the. Then did I eat the
book, (...)
and it was in my mouth sweter then honey.

And he said unto me: thou son of man, get the soon unto the house off
Israel, and show the^ ye words, that I command the: (...)
for I send the not to a people that has a strange, unknown or hard
speech, but unto the house off Israel: Not to many nations, which have diverse
speeches and hard languages, whose words thou vndersto^dest not: Nevertheless,
(...)
if I sent the to those people, they would follow the: But the house off Israel
will not follow ye, for they will not follow me: (...)
Ye all the house off Israel have stiff foreheades and hard hertes. Behold
therefore, I will make thy face prevail against their faces, and harden thy
foreheade against their foreheades: so that thy foreheade shall be harder then
an Adama^t or flynt stone: that thou may fear them yt less, (...)
and be less afraid off them, for they are a frauwerde household.

He said morouer unto me: thou son off man, take diligent head with thine
ears,

Thus the LORD God has spoken: Whether ye hear, or hear not. With that, the
sprete took me up. And I herd the noise of a great russhinge and remouynge
off the most blissed glory off the LORD out off his place.

I herd also the noise off the wings off the beestes, that russhed one
against another, ye and the ratlynge off the wheles, that were by them, which
russhinge and noise was very great.

Now when the sprete took me up, and carried me away, (...)
I went with an heavy and a soroufull mind, but the hand off ye LORD
comforted me right soon.

And so in the beginning off the Month Abib, I came to the presoners, that
dwelt by the water off Cobar, and remay^ned in that place, where they were:
(...)
and so continued I among them seven days, being very sorry.

And when the seven days were expyred, the LORD said unto me: Thou son off
(...)
I have made the a watch man unto the house of Israel: therefore take good head
to the words, and give them warning at my commandment.

Yff I say unto the, concerning the ungodly man, that (without doubt) he must
dye, and thou geuest him not warning, ner speak unto him, that he may
turn from his evil way, and so to live: Then shall the same ungodly man dye
in his own vnrightuosnes: but his blood will I require off thine hand.
Nevertheless, yff thou give warning unto the wicked, and he yet forsake not his
ungodliness: then shall he dye in his own wickedness, but thou have
discharged thy soul.

Now if a rightuous man go from his righteousness, (...)
and do the thing that is evil: I will lay a stomblinge block before him,
and he shall dye, because thou have not given him warninge: Ye dye shall he in
his own sin, so that the virtue, which he did before, shall not be thought
upon: but his blood will I require of thine hand.

Nevertheless, if thou exhortest the rightuous, that he sin not, and so ye
rightuous do not sin: Then shall he live, because he has received thy
warning, and thou have discharged thy soul. And there came the ho^de off the
LORD upon me, and he said unto me: Stand up, and go in to the field, yt I
may there talk with the.

LORD stood there, (...)
like as I saw it before, by the water off Cobar.

(...). 1. g
Then fell I down upon my face, and ye sprete came in to me, which set me up
upon my fete, and said thus unto me: Go thy way, and sparre thy selff in
thine house. Behold (O thou son off man) there shall chains be brought for
the, to bind the with all, so that thou shall not escape out off the^. And I
will make thy tunge cleue so the rofe off thy mouth, that thou shall be domme,
and not be as a chider with them: for it is an obstinate household.

But when I speak unto the, then open thy mouth, and say: Thus says the
LORD God: who so hears, let him hear: who so will not, let him leave: for
it is a frauwarde household.

The IIII. Chapter.


Morouer, take an iron pan, and set it betwixt the and ye cite in stead off
an iron wall, Then set thy face toward it, besege it, and lay ordinance
against it, to win it. This shall be a token unto the house off Israel. But
thou shall sleep upon thy left side, and lay the sin of the house off Israel
upon the.

Certain days appointed, thou shall sleep upon that side, and bear their
sins. Dan. 9. d
Nevertheless I will apoynte the a time (to put off their sins) and the nombre
off the days: Three hundredth and xc. days must thou bear the wickedness off
the house of Israel. When thou have fulfilled these days, lie down again,
and sleep upon thy right side xl. days, and bear the sins off the house of
Judah.

A day for a year, a day (I say) for a year, will I ever lay upon the.
Nu. 14. ^
Therefore

Behold, I will lay chains upon the, that thou shall not turn the from one
side to another, till thou have ended the days of thy sege.

Wherefore, take unto the wheat, barley beans, growell sede, milium and
fitches: and put these together in a vessel, and make the loaves of bred
thereof, acordinge to the nombre of the days that thou must lie upon yt side:
that thou may have bred to eat, for three hundredth and XC. days.

And the meat that thou eatest, shall have a certain weight appointed: Namely,
twenty sycles every day. This appointed meat shall thou eat daily, from the
beginnynge to the end.

Thou shall drink also a certain measure off water: Namely, the sixte part
of an Hin shall thou drink daily from the beginning to the end. Barley cakes
shall thou eat, yet shall thou first struck the^ over with ma^s donge, yt they
may se it. And LORD: Osec. 9 a
Even thus shall the children of Israel eat their defiled bred in the myddest
off the Gentiles, among whom I will scatre them.

Then said I: Oh LORD God, Behold, my soul was yet never stained: for fro
my youth up unto this hour, I did never eat of a deed carcass, or of that
which was slain of wild beestes, nether came there ever any unclean flesh in
my mouth.

Where unto he answered me, and said: Well than, I will grant the to take
cowes donge, for the donge off a man, and to struck the bred over with all,
before the^.

And he said un to me: Behold thou son off man, Eze. 5. d Eze. 14. d Re.
25. a
I will mynishe all the prouysion of bred in Jerusalem, so that they shall we
ye their bred, and eat it with scarceness. But as for water, they shall have
a very little measure theroff, to drink. And when they have no more bred ner
water, one shall be destroyed with another, and famish away for their
wickedness.

The V. Chapter.
Iere 2. d
As for the third part that remains, cast it in the wind, and then show
the bare knyfe.

Yet afterward take a little off the same, and bind it in they cote lap.
Then take a curtesy of it, and cast it in the myddest of ye fire, and burn it
in the fire. Out of the same fire shall there go a flame, upon the whole house
of Israel.

LORD God: This same is Jerusalem. I set her in the midst of the Heithen and
nations, that are round about her, but she has despised my iudgme^tes more
then ye Gentiles the^ selves, and broken my commandments more then the
nations, that lie round about her: For they have cast out mine ordinances,
and not walked in my laws. Therefore, thus says the LORD God: Leui. ^8. d
For so much as ye with your wickedness far exceade the Heithe^, that dwell
round about you: (For ye have not walked in my laws, nether have ye kept
mine ordinances) Therefore thus says ye LORD God:

I will also come upon the, for in the myddest of the will I sit in iugdme^t,
in the sight of the Heithen, and will handle the of soch a fashion, as I never
did before, and as I never will do from that time forth, and that because of all
thy abhominacions. For in the the fathers shall be feign to eat their own
sons, Deu. 28. e Tren. 4. b 4. Reg. 6. f
and the sons their own fathers. Soch a court will I keep in the, and the
whole remnaunt will I scatre in to all the wyndes.

Wherefore, as truly as I live (says the LORD God) seeing thou have defiled
my Sanctuary, with all manner off abhominacions and with all thy shameful
offenses: For this cause will I also destroy the* Mine eye shall not ouersee
the, nether will I spare the.

One third part within the, (...)
shall die of the pestilence and of honger: Another third part shall be
slain down round about the, with the swearde: The other third part that
remains, will I scatre abroad toward all the wyndes, and draw out the
swearde after them. Thus will I perform my indignacion and set my wrath
against them, and ease my self. So that when I have fulfilled mine anger
against them, they shall know, that I am the LORD, which with a fervent gelousy
have spoken it.

Morouer I will make the waist and abhorred,

Even I the LORD have spoken it, and it shall come to pass, when I shute
among them the perlous darts of ho^ger, which shall be but death: (...)
Ye therefore shall I shute them, because I will destroy you. I will increase
hunger, and mynish all the prouysion off bred among you.

Plages and mysery will I send you, ye and wild beestes also to destroy
you. Pestilence and blood sheddinge shall come upon you, and the swearde will I
bring over you. Even I the LORD, have said it.

The VI. Chapter.
THe word of the LORD came unto me, saying: Thou son off man, (...)
that thou may prophecy unto them, and say: Hear the word of the LORD
God, o ye mountains off Israel: Thus has the LORD God spoken to the
mountains, hills, valleys and dales:

Behold, I will bring a swearde over you, and destroy your hie places: I
will cast down your aulters, and break down your temples. Your slain men
will I lay before your gods, and the deed carcases off the children off
Israel will I cast before their images, your bones will I strowe round about
your aulters, and dwellinge places.

The cities shall be desolate, ye hill chapels laid waist: your aulters
destroyed, and broken: your gods cast down, and taken away, yor te^pels
laid eaue^ with the ground, your own works clean roted out. Your LORD.
Those yt among you have escaped the swearde, will I leave among the Gentiles,
for I will scatre you among the nations. And they that escape from you, (...)
shall think upon me among the heithen, where they shall be in captiuyte.

As for that whorish and unfaithful heart of theirs, wherewith they run away
from, I will break it: ye and put out those eyes off theirs, that commit
fornicacion with their Idols.

Then shall they be ashamed, and displeased with their selves, for the
wickednesses and abhominacions, which they have done: and shall learn to know,
how that it is not in vain, that I the LORD spoke, to bring soch mysery upon
them.

The LORD said morouer unto me:

Thus will I satisfy my wrothfull displeasure upon them. And so shall ye learn
to know, that I am the LORD, when your slain men lie among your gods,
and about your aulters: upon all hie hills and tops off mountains, among
all grene trees, among all thick oaks: even in the places, where they did
sacrifice to all their Idols. I will stretch mine hand out upon them, and will
make the land waist: So that it shall lie desolate and void, from the
wilderness off Deblat forth, through all their habitacions: to learn them for
to know, that I am the LORD.

The VII. Chapter.
LORD came unto me, on this manner: The I call, O thou son off man. Thus
says the LORD God unto the land off Israel: The end comes, ye verily
the end comes upon all the four corners off the earth.

But now shall the end come upon the: for I will send my wrath upon the, and
will punysh the: acordinge to thy ways, and reward the after all thy
abhominacio^s. Mine eye shall not ouersee the, Eze. 7. b 9. c
nether will I spare the: but reward the, acordinge to thy ways, and declare
thy abhominacions. Then shall ye know, that I am the LORD.

Thus says the LORD God: Behold, one mysery and plage shall come after
another: the end is here. The end (I say) that waits for the, is come
already, ye hour is come against the, that dwell in the land.

The time is at hand, the day of sedicio^ is hard by, and no glad tidinges
upon the mountains.

Mine eye shall not ouersee the, Eze. 7. b 9. c
nether will I spare the: but reward the after thy ways, and show thy
abhominacions: to learn you for to know, how yt I am the LORD, yt smyteth.
Behold, the day is here, the day is come, the hour is run out, the rod
florisheth, wylfulnesse waxes grene, malicious violence is grown up, and the
ungodly waxen to a staff. Yet shall there no complaynte be made for them, ner
for the trouble that shall come of these things.

The time comes, the day draws nigh: Who so byeth, let him not rejoice: 1.
Cor. 7. ^
he that sells, let him not be sorry: for why, Trouble shall come in the
myddest off all rest: 2. Tess. 5. Iere. 15. b
so that the seller shall not come again to the byer, for nether off them both
shall live. For the

The trompettes shall ye blow, and make you all ready, but no man shall go to
the batell, for I am wroth with all the whole multitude.

The swearde shall be without, pestilence and honger within: so that who so is in
the field, shall be slain with the swearde: and he that is in the cite, Deu. 32.
d
shall perish with honger and pestilence.

And soch as escape and fle from among them, shall be upon the hills, like as
the doves in the field: every one shall be afraid, because off his own
wickedness.

Esa 15. e
All hondes shall be letten down, and all knees shall be weak as the water: they
shall gyrde them selves with sack cloth, fear shall fall upon them. Their faces
shall be confounded, and their heads balde: their silver shall lie in the
streets, and their gold shall be despised: Soph. 1. c Ecc. 5 b
Ye their silver and gold may not deliver them, in the day of the fearful
wrath of the LORD.

Osee. 8. a
but also abominable images and Idols. For this cause will I make them to be
abhorred. Morouer, I will give it in to ye hondes off the strangers to be
spoiled: and to ye wicked, for to be robbed, and they shall destroy it.

My face will I turn from the^, my Treasury shall be defiled: for the thieves
shall go in to it, and suspende it. I will make clean ryddaunse, for the land
is whole defiled with unrighteous judgment of innocent blood, and the cite is
full off abhominacions.

ere. 38. c
and wyszdome from the elders. The king shall mourn, the princes shall be
clothed with heaviness, and ye ho^des off the people in the land shall tremble
for fear. I will do unto them after their own ways, and acordinge to their
own judgments will I judge them: to learn them for to know, that I am the
LORD.

The VIII. Chapter.
LORDS off the council off Judah with me: and the hand off the LORD God fell
even there upon me.

And as I looked up, I saw as it were a licknesse off fire from his loins
downwarde, and from his loins upward it shyned marvelous clear. Eze. 3. b
11. d


This symilitude stretched out an hand, and took me by the hayrie locks off
my head, and the sprete lift me up betwitte heaven and earth: and God brought
me in a vision to Jerusalem, in to the court off the inward port that lies
toward the north: there stood an image, with whom he that has all things in
his power, was very wroth.

And behold, the glory off the God off Israel was in the same place: (...)
eue^ as I had seen it before in the field. And he said unto me: Thou son off
man, O lift up thine eyes, and look toward the north. Then lift I up mine eyes
toward the north, and behold: Beside the port northwarde, there was an
altar made unto the image off prouocacion in the very entering in.

And he said furthermore unto me: Thou son off man, Seist thou what these
do? Seist thou the great abhominacions that the house off Israel commytte in
this place? which ought not to be done in my sanctuary?

But turn the about, and thou shall se yet greater abhominacions. And with
that brought he me to the court gate: and when I looked, behold, there was an
hole in the wall.

Then said he unto me: Thou son off

So I went in, and saw: and behold, there were all manner images off worms
and beasts, all Idols and abhominacions of ye house off Israel painted
euerychone round about the wall.

There stood also before the images lxx. lords of the council off the house
off Israel: (...)
and in the myddest off them stood Iaasanias the son off Saphan: And every
one off them had a censoure in his hand, and out off the incense, there went
a smoke, as it had been a cloud.

Then said he unto me: Thou son off man, (...)
have thou seen what the Senators off the house off Israel do secretly, every
one in his chamber? For they say: Tush, the LORD seth us not, the LORD
regards not the world. And he said unto me: Turn the yet again, and thou
shat se the great abhominacions that they do.

And with that, he brought me to the door off the port off the LORDS house,
toward the north. And behold, there sat women mourning for Thamus. Then
said he unto me: have thou seen this, thou son LORDS house: and behold, at
the port of the LORDS house, betwixt the fore entry and the altar, there
were five and twenty men, that turned their backs upon the Temple of the
LORD, and their faces toward the east, and these worshipped the Son.

And he said unto me: have thou seen this, thou son of man? Thinks the
house of Israel, that it is but a trifle, to do these abhominacions here?
Should they fill the land full of wickedness, and undertake to provoke me
unto anger? Ye and purposly to cast up their noses upon me? Therefore will I
also do some thing in my wrothfull displeasure, so that mine eye shall not
ouersee them, nether will I spare them. (...) 1. c (...) 1^ c (...) b (...). 3. a
Ye and though they cry in mine ears with loud voice, yet will I not hear
them.

The IX. Chapter.


These went in, and stood beside the brazen altar: (...) ^0. e (...) 9. c
(...) 1. b
for the glory of the LORD was gone away from the Cherub, and was come down
to the thresholde of the house, and he called the man, that had the lynnynge
raiment upon him, and the writers ynckhorne by his side, and the LORD said
unto him: Go thy way through the cite of Jerusalem, and set this marck (...)
Thau upon the foreheades of them, (...)
that mourn, and are sorry for all the abhominacions, that be done therein. And
to the other, he said that I might hear: (...) 2. a
spare none: Kill, and destroy both old men and young, maidens, children, and
wives.

(...)
But as for those, that have this marck (...) Thau upon them: se that ye touch
them not, and begin at my Sanctuary. (...) 25. d (...) b (...). 4. c
Then they began at the elders, which were in the Temple, for he had said
unto them: When ye have defiled the Temple, and filled the court with the
slain, then go your way forth. So they went out and slew down through ye
cite. Now when they had done ye slaughter, and I yet escaped: I fell down upon
my face, and cried, saying: O LORD, will thou then destroy all the resydue
of Israel, in thy sore displeasure, that thou have poured upon Jerusalem?

Then said he unto me: The wickedness of the house of Israel and Judah is very
great: so that the lord is full of blood, Job 22. b Esa. 29. c Ecci^. 23. c
Ezec. 7. a
and ye cite full of unfaithfulness: For they say: Tush, ye LORD regards
not the earth, he seyth us not. Therefore will I upon them, mine eye shall not
ouersee them, nether will I spare them, but will recompense their wickedness
upon their heads.

And behold, the man that had the lynnynge raiment upon him, and the writers,
ynck horn by his side: told all the matter how it happened, and said: LORD,
as thou have commanded me, so have I done.

The X. Chapter.
ANd as I looked, behold, In the firmament Eze. 9 a
Then said he that sat therein, to him that had the lynnynge raiment upon him:
Crepe in between the wheles that are under the Cherubins, and take thine hand
full of hot coals out from between the Cherubins, and cast them over the
cite. And he crepte in, that I might se.

Now the Cherubins stood upon the right side of the house, when the man went
in, and the cloud filled the ynnermer court. 2. Par. 7 a
But the glory of the LORD removed from the Cherubins, and came upon the
thresholde of the house: so that the Temple was full of clouds, and the court
was full of the shine of the LORDS glory. Ye and the sound of the Cherubins
wings was herd in to the forecourte, like as it had been the voice of the
almighty God, when he speaks. Now when he had bydden the man yt was clothed
in lynnynge, to go and take the hot coals from the myddest of ye wheles,
which were under the Cherubins: he went so that by every Cherub there stood a
whele. And the wheles were (to look upon) after ye fashion of ye precious stone
of Tharsis: Yet (unto the sight) were they fashioned and like, as if one whele
had been in another.

When they went forth, they went all iiij together, not turnynge about in
their goinge: But where the first went, thither went they after also, so that
they turned not about in their goinge. ^ze. 1. b
Their whole bodies, their backs, their ho^des and wings, ye and the wheles
also, were all full of eyes round about them all four. And I herd him call
ye wheles, Galgal (that is) a round boull. Every one of them had four faces:
so that the one face was the face of a Cherub, the second of a man, the third
of a lion, the fourth of an Aegle, and they were lifted up above. This is the beast, that I saw at the water of Cobar.

^ze. 11. d ^. a
Then the glory of the LORD was lift up from the thresholde of the temple, and
remained upon the Cherubins: And the Cherubins flackred with their wings, and
lift the^ selves up from the earth: so that I saw when they went, and the
wheles with them. And they stood at the east side of the port that is in the
house of the LORD. So the glory of the LORD was upon them. This is the beast
that I saw under the God of Israel, by the water of Cobar. And I perceived,
that it was the Cherubins. Every one had four faces, and every one four
wings, and under their wings, as it were men's hondes. Now the figure of their
faces was, even as I had seen them, by the water of Cobar, and so was the
countenance of the^: Every one in his goinge went straight forward.

The XI. Chapter.
LORD lift me up, and brought me unto ye east port of the LORDS house. And
behold, there were xxv men under the door: among whom I saw Iaasanias the
son of Asur, and Pheltias the son of Banias, the rulers of the people. Then
said the LORD unto me: Thou son of man: These men ymagin myschefe, and a
wicked council take they in this cite, saying: Tush, there is no destruction
at hand, let us build houses: This Jerusalem is the cauldron, and we be the
flesh. Therefore shall thou prophecy unto them, ye prophecy shall thou unto
them, O son of man. And with that, fell the sprete of the LORD upon me, and
said unto me: Speak, thus says the LORD: On this manner have ye spoken (O
ye house of Israel) and I know the ymaginacio^s of your hertes. Many one have
ye murthured in this cite, and filled the streets full of the slain.

Therefore, thus says the LORD God: (...)
But I will bring you out of it: ye have drawn out ye swearde, eue^ so will I
also bring a swearde over you, says ye LORD God. I will drive you out of
this cite and deliver you in to your enemies hand, and will condemn you. Ye
shall be slain in all the coasts of Israel, I will be avenged of you: to learn
you for to know, that I am the LORD. This cite shall not be your cauldron,
nether shall ye be the flesh therein: but in the coasts of Israel will I punysh
you, that ye may know, that I am the LORD: in whose commandments ye have
not walked, ner kept his laws: (...)
but have done after the customs of the Heithen, that lie round about you.

Now when I preached, Pheltias the son LORD God, will thou then vterly
destroy all the remnaunt in Israel? And so the word of the LORD came to me
on this manner: Thou son of man: Thy brethren, thy kynsfolke, and ye whole
house of Judah, which dwell at Jerusalem, say: They be gone far from the
LORD, but the land is given us in possession. Therefore tell them, thus says
the LORD God: I will send you far of among the Gentiles, and scatre you
among the nations, and I will halowe you but a little, in the lands where ye
shall come. Tell them also, thus says the LORD God: I will gather you again
out of the nations, and bring you from the countrees where ye be scatred, and
will give you the land of Israel again: and thither shall ye come. And as for
all impedimentes, and all your abhominacions: I will take them away.

And I will give you one heart, and will plant (...)
That stony heart will I take out of your body, and give you a fleshy heart:
that ye may walk in my commandments, and keep mine ordinances, and do
them: that ye may be my people, and I your God. But look whose hertes are
disposed to follow their abhominacions and wicked lyuynges: Those men's deeds
will I bring upon their own heads, says the LORD God. After this did the
Cherubins lift up their wings, and the wheles went with them, and the glory
of the LORD was upon them. (...)
So the glory of the LORD went up from the myddest of the cite, (...)
and stood upon the mount of the cite toward the east. But the wind took me
up, and in a vision (which came by the sprete of God) it brought me again in
to Caldea among the presoners. Then the vision that I had seen, vanyshed a
way fro me. So I spoke unto the presoners, all the words of the LORD, which
he had showed me.

The XII. Chapter.
LORD came unto me, (...)
saying: Thou son of man, thou dwell in the myddest of a frauwerde
household: which have eyes to se, and yet se not: ears have they to hear, and
yet hear they not, for they are an obstinate household. Therefore (O thou son
of man) make thy gere ready to flit, and go forth by fair day light, yt they
may se. Ye eue^ in their sight shall thou go from thy place to another place:
if peradventure they will considre, yt they be an vnobedient household. Thy gere
that thou have made ready to flit withal, shall thou bear out by fair day
light, that they may se: and thou yi self shall go forth also at eue^ in their
sight, as a man does when he flitteth.

Dygge through the wall, that they may se, and bear through it the same thing,
that thou tokest up in their sight. As for thy self, thou shall go forth in the
darcke. Hyde thy face that thou se not ye earth, for I have made the a show
toke^ unto the house of Israel. LORD commanded me, so I did: ye gere that I
had made ready, brought I out by day. At even I brake down an hole through the
wall with my hand: and when it was darcke, I took the gere upon my shulders,
and bare them out in their sight.

And in the morning, came the word of the LORD unto me, saying: Thou son
of man, if Israel, yt frauwerde household axe the, and say: what do thou
there? Then tell them: Thus says the LORD God: This punishment touches the
chief rulers at Jerusalem, and all the house of Israel, that dwell among them:
Tell them: I am your show token: like as I have done, so shall it happen unto
you: Flyt shall ye also, and go in to captiuyte. (...) 21. b
The chefest that is among you, shall lade his shulders in the darcke, and get
him away. He shall break down the wall, to carry stuff there through: He shall
cover his face, that he se not the ground, with his eyes.

My line will I sprede out upon him, and Eze. 17. c 3^. a
and carry him to Babylon, in the lord of the Caldees: which he shall not se,
and yet shall he dye there. As for all his helpers, and all his hoostes that be
about him: I will scatre them toward all the wyndes, and draw out a swearde
after them. So when I have scatred them among the Heithen, and strowed them in
the lands: Eze. 1^. b b. 22
they shall know, that I am ye LORD. But, I will leave a little nombre of them,
from the swearde, hunger and pestilence: to tell all their abhominacions among
the Heithen, where they come: that they may know, how that I am the LORD.

Morouer, the word of the LORD came unto me saying: Thou son of man: with
a fearful tre^blinge shall thou eat thy bred, with carfulness and sorrow
shall thou drink thy water. And unto the people of the land, speak thou on
this manner: Thus says the LORD God, to them that dwell in Jerusalem, and to
the land of Israel: Ye shall eat your bred with sorrow, and drink your
water with heaviness: Ye the land with the fullness thereof shall be laid
waist, for ye wickedness of them that dwell therein. And the cities that now be
well occupied, shall be void, and the land desolate: that ye may know, how
that I am the LORD.

Yet came the word of the LORD unto To. 2. a
which ye use in the land of Israel, saying: Tush, seeing that the days are
so slack in coming, 2. Pet. 3. b
all the visio^s are of none effect: Tell them therefore, thus says the LORD
God: I will make that byworde to cease, so that it shall no more be commonly used
in Israel.

But say this unto them: The days are at hand, that every thing which has
been prophesied, shall be fulfilled. There shall no vision be in vain, nether
any prophecy fail among the children of Israel: For it is I the LORD, that
speak it: and what so ever I ye LORD speak, it shall be performed, and not
be slack in coming.

Ye even in your days (O ye frauwarde household) will I deuyse some thing,
and bring it to pass, says the LORD God. And the word of the LORD came
unto me saying: Behold, thou son of man: The house of Israel say in this
manner: Tush, as for the vision that he has seen, it will be many a day or it
come to pass: Is it far of yet, the thing that he prophecieth. Therefore
say unto them: Thus says the LORD God: All my words shall no more be slack:
Look what I speak, that same shall come to pass, says the LORD.

The XIII. Chapter.
LORD came unto me, saye^ge: Thou son of man, Speak prophecy against those
prophets, that preach in Israel: and says thou unto them that prophecy out
of their own her^es: Hear the word of the LORD, thus says the LORD God:
Eze. 34. a
Woe be unto those folish prophets, that follow their own sprete, and speak,
where they se nothing. O Israel, thy prophets are like the foxes upon the
dry field: For they stand not in the gappes, nether make they an hedge for
the house of Israel, Iere. 27. a
that me^ might abide the parell in the day of the LORD. Vain things they
se, and tell lies, to mayntene their preachinges withal. The LORD (say they)
has spoken it, when in very deed the LORD has not sent them. Vain visio^s
have ye seen, and spoken false prophecies. when ye say: the LORD has spoken
it, where as I never said it.

LORD God: Because your words be vain, and ye seek out lies: Behold, I will
upon you, says ye LORD. Mine hondes shall come upon the prophets, that look
out vain things, and preach lies: they shall not be in the council of my
people, ner written in the book of the house of Israel, nether shall they come
in the land of Israel: that ye may know, how that I am the LORD God. And
that for this cause: Iere. 8. b
they have disceaued my people, and told them of peace, where no peace was.
One sets up a wall, and they dawbe it with lowse claye. Matt. 7. c
Therefore tell them which dawbe it with untempered mortar, that it shall fall.
For there shall come a great shuwer of rain, great stones shall fall upon it,
and a fore storm of wind shall break it, so shall ye wall come down. Shall it
not then be said unto you: where is now the mortar, that ye dawbed LORD God:
I will break out in my wrothfull displeasure with a stormy wind, so that in
mine anger there shall come a mighty shuwer of rain, and hale stones in my
wrath, to destroy withal.

As for ye wall, that ye have dawbed with untempered mortar, I will break it
down, and make it eauen with the ground: so that the foundation thereof shall
remove, and it shall fall ye and ye your selves shall perish in the myddest
thereof: to learn you for to know, that I am the LORD. Thus will I perform my
wrath upon this wall, and upon them that have dawbed it with untempered mortar,
and then will I say unto you: The wall is gone, and the dawbers are away.
These are the prophets of Israel, which prophecy unto the cite of Jerusalem,
and look out visions of peace for them, where as no peace is, says the LORD
God. Wherefore (o thou son of me^,) set thy face against the daughters of ye
people, which prophecy out of their own hertes: and speak thou prophecy
against them, and say: Thus says the LORD God: Woe be unto you, that sow
pilowes under all arm holes, and bolsters under the heads both of young and
old, to catch souls withal. For when ye have gotten the souls of my people
in your captiuyte, (...)
ye promise them life, and dishonor me to my people, for an handful of
barley, and for a piece of bred: when ye kill the souls of them that dye not,
and promise life to them, that live not: Thus ye dyssemble with my people, yt
believes yor lies.

Wherefore thus says the LORD God: Behold, I will also upon the pillowes,
wherewith ye catch the souls in flyenge: the^ will I take from your arms, and
let the souls go, that ye catch in flyenge. Your bolsters also will I tear in
pieces, and deliver my people out of your hand: so that they shall come no more
in your ho^des to be spoiled, and ye shall know, that I am the LORD. Saying
yt with your lies ye discomforte the heart of the rightuous, whom I have not
discomforted: Again: (...)
For so much as ye courage the hand of the wicked, so that he may not turn
from his wicked way, and live: therefore shall ye spy out no more vanyte, ner
prophecy your own gessinges: for I will deliver my people out of your hand,
that ye may know, how that I am the LORD.

The XIIII. Chapter.
THere resorted unto me certain of ye (...)
Then came the word of the LORD unto me, saying: Thou son of man, these
men bear their Idols in their hertes, and go purposly upon the stomblinge
block of their own wickedness: how darre they then are council at me?
Therefore speak unto them, and say: thus says the LORD God: Every man of
the house of Israel that bears his Idols in his heart, purposynge to stomble
in his own wickedness, and comes to a prophet, to enquere any thing at me
by him: unto that man will I the LORD myself give answer, acordinge to the
multitude of his Idols: that the house of Israel may be snared in their own
hertes, because they be clean gone fro me, for their Idols sakes.

Wherefore, tell the house of Israel: thus says the LORD God: (...)
Be converted, forsake your Idols, and turn your faces from all yor
abhominacions. For every man (whether he be of the house of Israel, or a
stranger, that sogeourneth in Israel) which departs fro me, and carries
Idols in his heart, purposinge to go still stomblinge in his own wickedness,
and comes to a prophet, for to axe council at me through him: unto yt man will
I the LORD give answer, by mine own self.

LORD. (...)
And if that prophet be disceaued, when he tells him a word: then I the
LORD myself have disceaued that prophet, and will stretch forth mine hand upon
him, to rote him out of my people of Israel: and they both shall be punyshed
for their wickedness.

Acordinge to ye sin of him that axeth, shall the sin of the prophet be:
that ye house of Israel be led no more fro me through error, and be no more
defiled in their wickedness: but that they may be my people, and I their God,
says the LORD God. And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying: Thou
son of man, when the land synneth against me, and goes forth in
wickedness: I will stretch out mine ho^de upon it, and destroy all the
prouysion of their (...)
And though Noe, Daniel and Job these three men were among them, (...)
yet shall they in their righteousness deliver but their own souls, says
the LORD God.

If I bring noisome beestes in to the land, to waist it up, and it be so
desolate, that no man may go therein for beestes: if these three men also were
in the land, as truly as I live (says the LORD God) they shall save nether
sons ner daughters, but be only delivered them selves: and as for the land,
it shall be waist.

Or, if I bring a swearde in to the land, and charge it to go through the
land: so that I slaye down man and be in it, and if these three men were
therein: As truly as I live (says the LORD God) they shall deliver nether
sons ner daughters, but only be saved them selves.

If I send a pestilence in to the land, LORD God) they shall deliver nether
sons ner daughters, but save their own souls in their righteousness.

Morouer, thus says the LORD God: Though I send my four trublous plages
upon Jerusalem: the swearde, honger, Iere. 27. b
perlous beestes and pestilence, to destroy man and be out of it: yet shall
there a remnaunt be saved therein, which shall bring forth their sons and
daughters. Behold, they shall come forth unto you, and ye shall se their way,
and what they take in hand, and ye shall be comforted, as touching all the
plages that I have brought upon Jerusalem.

They shall comfort you, when ye se their way and works: and ye shall know,
how yt it is not without a cause, that I have done so against Jerusalem, as I
did, says the LORD God.

The XV. Chapter.
THe word of the LORD came unto

Saying then, that it was mete for no work, being whole: much less may
there any thing be made of it, when the fire has consumed and brent it. And
therefore thus says LORD God: Like as I cast the vine in to the fire for to
be brent, as other trees of the wod: Even so will I do with them that dwell in
Jerusalem, and set my face against them: they shall go out from the fire, and
yet the fire shall consume them. Eze. 1^. ^ 2^. b
Then shall ye know, that I am the LORD, when I set my face against them, and
make the land waist: because they have so sore offended, says the LORD God.

The XVI. Chapter.
LORD spoke unto me, saying: Thou son of man, show the cite of Jerusalem
their abhominacions, and say: thus says the LORD God unto Jerusalem: Thy
progeny and kynred came out of the land of Canaan, thy father was an Amorite,
thy mother a Cethite. In ye day of thy birth when thou wast borne, ye stringe
of thy nauel was not cut of: thou wast not bathed in water to make the clean*
Thou wast nether rubbed with salt, ner swedled in cloutes: No man regarded the so
much, as to do any of these things for ye, or to show the soch favor, but
thou wast utterly cast out upon ye field, ye despised wast thou in the day of
thy birth.

Then came I by the, and saw the trodden down in thine own blood, and said
unto the: thou shall be pourged from thine own blood, from thine own blood
(I say) shall thou be cleansed. Esa. 5. a Iere. 11. c
So I planted the, as the blossom of thy field: thou art grown up, and waxe^
great: thou have gotten a marvelous pleasant beutie, thy breasts are come up,
thy hair is goodly grown, where as thou wast naked and bare before.

Iere. 3. a Ose. 2. c
and married my self with the (says the LORD God) and so thou becamest mine
own. Then waszshed I the with water, and pourged thy blood from the. I
anointed the with oil, I gave the change of raymentes, I made the shues of
Taxus lether: I gyrthed ye about with white sylcke, I clothed the with kerchues,
I decked the with costly apparel, I put rings upon thy fyngers: a chain about
thy neck, spa^ges upon thy foreheade, ear rings upon thine ears, and set a
beutifull crown upon thine head. Thus wast thou deckte with silver and gold,
and thy raiment was of fine white sylke, of nedle work and of diverse colors.

Thou did eat nothing but symnels, honny and oil: marvelous goodly wast
thou and beutifull, ye even a very Queen wast thou: In so much, that thy beuty
was spoken of among the Heithen, for thou wast excellent in my beuty, which I
put upon the, says the LORD God. But thou have put confidence in thine own
beuty, and played the harlot, when thou had gotten the a name. Thou have
committed whordome, with all that went by the, and have fulfilled their
desires: Ye thou have taken thy garments of diverse colors, and deckte thine
aulters therewith, (...)
where upon thou might fulfill thine whordome, of soch a fashion, as never
was done, ner shall be. (...)
The goodly orname^tes and Jewels which I gave the of mine own gold and
silver, have thou taken, and made the men's images thereof, and committed
whordome withal.

Thy garments of diverse colors have thou taken, and deckte them therewith:
mine oil and incense have thou set before them. My meat which I gave the, as
symnels, oil and honey: (to feed the withal) that have thou set before them,
for a sweet sauoure. And this came also to pass, says the LORD God* Thou
have taken thine own sons and daughters, whom thou had begotten unto me*
(...)
and these have thou offered up unto them, to be their meat. Is this but a
small whordome of thine (think thou) that thou slayest my children, and
geuest them over, to be br^^ unto them? And yet in all thy abhominacions and
whordome, thou have not remembered the days of thy youth, how naked and bare
thou wast at that time, and trodden down in thine own blood. After all these
thy wickednesses (woe woe unto the, says ye LORD) thou have builded thy stews
and bredel houses in every place: ye at the head of every street have thou
builded the an altar. Thou have made thy beuty to be abhorred: thou have laid
out thy legs to every one that came by, and multiplied thine whordome. (...)
Thou have committed fornicacion with the Egipcians thy neghbours, which had
much flesh: and thus have thou used thine whordome, to anger me.

Behold, I will stretch out mine hand over the, and will mynish thy stoare of
fode, and deliver the over in to the wills of the Philistynes thine enemies,
which are ashamed of thy abominable way. (...)
Thou have played the whore also with the Assirians, which might not satisfy
the: Ye thou have played the harlot, and not had enough. Thus have thou still
committed thy fornicacion from the land of Canaan unto the Caldees, and yet
thy lust not satisfied. How should I circumcide thine heart (says the LORD
God) saying thou do all these things, thou precious whore: buyldinge thy
stews at the head of every street, and thy brodel houses in all places? Thou
have not been as an other whore, yt makes booste of her winning: but as a
wife yt breaks wedlock, and takes other in stead of her huszbo^de. Gifts
are given to all other whores, but thou geuest rewards unto all thy lovers:
and offrest them gifts, to come unto the out of all places, and to commit
fornicacio with the. It is come to pass with the in thy whordomes, contrary to
the use of other women: ye there has no soch fornicacion been committed after
the, saying that thou profrest gifts unto other, and no reward is given the:
this is a contrary thing. Therefore hear the word LORD, o thou harlot: Thus
says the LORD God: For so much as thou have spent thy money, and discovered
thy shame, through thy whordome with all thy lovers, and with all the Idols of
thy abhominacions in the blood of thy children, whom thou have given them:
(...)
Behold therefore, I will gather together all thy lovers, unto whom thou have
made thy self common: ye and all them whom thou fauourest, and every one that
thou hate: (...)
and will discover thy shame before the^, that they all may se thy fylthines.

Morouer, I will judge the as a breaker of wedlock and a murthurer, and
recompense the thine own blood in wrath and gelousy. I will give the over in
to their power, that shall break down thy stews, and destroy thy brodel
houses: they shall stripe the out of thy clothes, all thy fair and beutifull
Jewels shall they take from the, and so let the sit naked and bare: (...)
Ye they shall bring the common people upon the, which shall stone the, and
slaye the down with their sweardes. They shall burn up thy houses, and punysh
the in the sight of many women. Thus will I make thy whordome to cease, so that
thou shall give out no mo rewards.

Should I make my wrath to be still, take my gelousy from the, be content, and
no more to be displeased? saying thou remembrest not the days of thy youth, but
have provoked LORD God: how be it, I never did unto the, acordinge to thy
wickedness and all thy abhominacions. Behold, all they yt use common
proverbs, shall use this proverb also against the: Soch a mother, soch a
daughter.

Thou art even thy mothers own daughter, that has cast of her houszbonde and
her children: Ye thou art the sister of thy sisters, which forsook their
huszbo^des and their children. (...)
Your mother is a Cethite, and your father an Amorite. Thine eldest sister is
Samaria, she and her daughters that dwell upon thy left hand.

But thy youngest sister that dwells on ye right ho^de, is Sodoma and her
daughters. Yet have thou not walked after their ways, ner done after their
abhominacions: But in all thy ways thou have been more corrupt then they.

As truly as I live, Genesis 18. ^
says the LORD God: Sodoma thy sister with her daughters, has not done so
euel, as thou and thy daughters. Behold, the sins of thy sister Sodoma were
these: Pride, fullness of meat, abundaunce and Idilnesse: these things had
she and her daughters. Besides that, they reached not their hand to the poor
and nedy, but were proud, and did abominable things before me: Gene. 19
therefore I took them away, when I had seen it. Iere. 3. c
Nether has Samaria done half of thy sins, ye thou have exceaded them in
wickedness: In so much that in comparison of all the abhominacions which thou
have done, thou have made thy sisters good women. Therefore bear thine own
shame, thou that in sin have overcome thy sisters: saying thou have done so
abhominably, that they were better then thou. Be ashamed therefore (I say) and
bear thine own confucion, thou that make thy sisters good women.

As for their captiuyte, namely the captiuyte of Sodoma and her dougters: the
captiuyte of Samaria and her daughters: I will

Thus thy sisters (namely) Sodoma and her daughters: Samaria and her daughters
with ye self and thy daughters, shall be brought again to your old estate.
When thou wast in thy pride, and before thy wickedness came to light: thou
would not hear speak of thy sister Sodoma, until the time that the Sirians
with all their towns, and the Philistynes with all that lie round about
them, brought the to shame and confucion: that thou might bear thine own
fylthynes and abhominacion, says the LORD.

For thus says the LORD God: I should (by right) deal with the, as thou
have done. Thou have despised the ooth, and broken the couenaunte. Nevertheless,
I will remember the covenant, that I made with them thy youth, in so much that
it shall be an everlasting covenant: So that thou also remember thy ways,
and be ashamed of the^: then shall thou receive of me thy elder and younger
sisters, whom I will make thy daughters, and that beside thy covenant. (...).
31. c (...). 8. b
And so I will renew my covenant with the, yt thou may know, that I am the
LORD: that thou may think upon it, be ashamed, and excuse thine own
confucion no more: when I have forgeuen the, all that thou have done, says the
LORD God.

The XVII. Chapter.
LORD came unto me, saying: Thou son of man: put forth a darcke speaking
and a parable, (...). 24. a
unto the house of Israel, and say: Thus says the LORD God: (...). 7. a
There came a great Aegle with great wings, ye with mighty long wings, and
full of feathers of diverse colors, upon the mount of Libanus, and took a
branch from a Cedre tree, and brake of the top of his twygge, and carried it
in to the land of Canaan, and set it in a cite of merchants. He took also a
branch of the land, and planted it in a fruitful ground, he brought it unto
great waters, and set it as a will ye tree thereby. Then did it grow, and was a
great wine stock, but low by the ground: thus there came of it a vine, and
it brought forth blossoms, and spread out branches.

But there was another Aegle, a great one, which had great wings and many
feathers: and behold, ye rotes of this vine had an hunger after him, and spread
out his branches toward him, to water his fruits: Nevertheless it was planted
upon a good ground beside great waters: so that (by reason) it should have
brought out branches and LORD God: Shall this vine prospere? shall not his
rotes be pluckte out, his fruit broken of, his grene branches wythereed and
fade away? ye without either strong arm or many people, shall it be plucked
up by the rotes. Behold, it was planted: shall it prospere therefore? Shall it
not be dried up and withered, ye even in the shutinge out of his blossoms, as
soon as ye east wind blows?

Morouer, the word of the LORD came unto me saying: ^. Re. 24. c
Speak to that frauwarde household: know ye not, what these things do
signify? Tell them: Behold, the king of Babylon came to Jerusalem, and took
the king and his princes, and led them to Babylon.

He took of the kings sede, and made a covenant with him, and took an ooth of
him: The princes of the land took he with him also, that the land might be
holden in subieccion, and not to rebelle, but keep the covenant, and fulfill
it. But he fell from him, and sent his Embassitours in to Egipte, that he might
have horses and much people. Should

As truly as I live, says the LORD God: He shall dye at Babylon, in ye place
where the king dwells, that made him king: whose ooth he has despised, and
whose covenant he hat broken. Nether shall Pharao with his great host and
multitude of people, maynteyne him in the war: when they cast up diches, and
set up bulworkes to destroy much people. For saying he has despised the ooth,
and broken the covenant (where as he yet gave his hand thereupon) and done all
these things, he shall not escape.

Therefore thus says the LORD God: As truly as I live, I will bring mine
ooth that he has despised, and my covenant that he has broken, upon his own
head. (...)
I will cast my net about him, and catch him in my yarne. To Babylon will I
carry him, there will I punysh him, because of the great LORD have spoken it.

Thus says the LORD God: I will also take a branch from an hie Cedre tree,
and will set it, and take the uppermost twygge, that yet is but tender, and
plant it upon an hie hill: Namely, upon the hie hill of Sion will I plant it:
that it may bring forth twigs, and give fruit, and be a great Cedre tree:
so that all manner of fowls may bide in it, and make their nestes under the
shadow of his branches.

And all the trees of the field shall know, that I the LORD have brought
down the hie tree, and set the low tree up: that I have dried up the grene tree,
and made the dry tree to flourish: Even I the LORD yt spoke it, have also
brought it to pass.

The XVIII. Chapter.
THe word of the LORD came unto me, on this manner: what mean ye by this
common proverb, that ye use in the land of Israel, saying: The fathers have
eaten sour grapes, (...)
and the childre^s teth are set on edge? As truly as I live, says ye LORD
God, ye shall use this by word no more in Israel.

(...). 23. a
Behold, all souls are mine. Like as the father is mine, so is ye son mine
also. The soul that synneth, (...). 1^. a
shall dye. If a man be godly, and do the thing that is equal and right, (he
eats not upon the hills: he lifts not his eyes up to the Idols of Israel:
he defyleth not his neghbours wife: he medleth with no menstruous woman: he
greueth no body: he gives his detter his pledge again: he takes none other
man's good by violence: he parts his mete with the hongrie: he clotheth the
naked: he lends nothing upon usury: (...) 25. c (...) ^4. a
he takes nothing over: he withdraws his hand from doing wrong: he
ha^dleth faith fully betwixt man and man: he walbeth in my commandments,
and keeps my laws, (...)
and perfourmeth the^ faithfully:) This is a rightuous man, he shall surely
live, says the LORD God.

(...) 2. b
he defyleth his neghbours wife: he greueth the poor and nedy: he robs and
spoyleth: he gives not the detter his pledge again: he lifts up his eyes
unto Idols, and medleth with abominable things: he lends upon usury, and
takes more over. Shall this man live? He shall not live. Saying he has done all
these abhominacions, he shall dye: his blood shall be upon him.

Now if this man get a son also, that seith all this fathers sins, which he
has done: and fears, nether does soch like: Namely, he eats not upon the
mountains: he lifts not his eyes up to the Idols of Israel: he defyleth not
his neghbours wife: he vexes no man: he keeps no man's pledge:

(...) 24. c (...) 14. c
The same soul yt synneth, shall dye. The son shall not bear the fathers
offense, nenether shall the father bear the sons offense. 2. Par. 25. ^ Iere.
18. a To. 1. b Abac. 2. ^
The righteousness of the rightuous shall be upon himself, and the wickedness of
the wicked shall be upon himself also. But if ye ungodly will turn away, from
all his sins that he has done, and keep all my commandments, and do the
thing yt is equal and right: doutles he shall live, and not dye. As for all
his sins that he did before, they shall not be thought upon: but in his
righteousness that he has done, he shall live. For LORD God? 2. Pet. 3. b
but rather that he convert, and live?

Again: if the rightuous turn away from his righteousness, and do iniquyte,
acordinge to all the abhominacions, that ye wicked man does: shall he live? All
the righteousness that he has done, shall not be thought upon: but in the fawte
that he has offended withal, and in the sin that he has done, he shall dye.

And yet ye say: Tush, Eze. 33. c
the way of ye LORD is not indifferent. Hear therefore ye house of Israel: Is
not my way right? Or, are not your ways rather wicked? When a rightuous man
turns away from his righteousness, and medleth with ungodliness: he must dye
therein: Ye for the unrighteous that he has done, must he dye. Again: Esa.
55. b
and does the thing which is equal and right: he shall save his soul alive.
For in so much as he remembers himself, and turns him from all the
ungodliness, that he has used, he shall live, and not dye.

And yet says the house of Israel: Tush, the way of the LORD is not equal.
Are my ways unright, o ye house of Israel? Are not your ways rather
unequal? As for me, I will judge every man, acordinge to his ways, O ye house
of Israel, says the LORD God. Wherefore, be converted, Esa. 55. b Matt. 3. ^
and turn you clean from all your wickedness, so shall there no sin do you
harm. Cast away from you all your ungodliness, that ye have done: make you
new hertes and a new sprete. Eze. 11. d 33. c 36. c
Wherefore will ye dye, O ye house of Israel? seeing I have no pleasure in ye
death of him that dies, says the LORD God. Turn you then, and ye shall live.

The XIX. Chapter.
But mourn thou for the princes off Israel, and say: Wherefore lay thy mother
that lioness, among the lions? and norished her young ones among the lions
whelps? One of her whelps she brought up, and it became a lion: it learned to
spoil, and to devour folk. The Heithen herd of him, and took him in their
nets, and brought him in chains unto the land of Egipte.

Now when the damme saw, that all her hope and comforth was away, she took
another of her whelps, and made a lion of him: which went among the lions,
and became a fearce lion: learned to spoil and to devour folcke: he destroyed
their palaces, and made their cities waist: In so much that the whole land and
every thing therein, were utterly desolate, through the very voice of his
roaringe.

Then came the Heithen together on every side out of all countrees against him,
laid their nets for him, and took him in their pytte. ^e. 25. a ^e 39. c
(...) a
So they bound him with chains, and brought him to the king of Babylon:
which put him in preson, that his voice should no more be herd upon the
mountains

So when men saw that she exceaded ye heith and multitude of her branches,
she was roted out in displeasure, and cast down to the ground. The East wind
dried up her fruit, her strong stalks were broken of, wythered and brent in
the fire. But now she is planted in the wilderness, in a dry and thurstie
ground. And there is a fire gone out of her stalks, which has bre^t up her
branches and her fruit: so that she has no mo strong stalks, to be staves
for officers. This is a piteous and miserable thing.

The XX. Chapter.
^e. 14. a
it happened, that certain of the elders of Israel came unto me for to axe
council at the LORD, and sat them down by me. Then came the word of the
LORD unto me on this manner: Thou son of man: Speak to the elders of Israel,
and say unto them: Thus says the LORD God: Are ye come hither to axe any
thing at me? As truly as I live (says the LORD,) I will give you no
answer. Will thou not reprove them (thou son of man) will thou not reprove
them? Show them the abhominacions of their forefathers, and tell the^: Thus
says the LORD God: (...). 3. b
In the day when I chose Israel, and lift up mine hand upon the sede of the
house of Jacob, and showed my self unto them in the land of Egipte: Ye when I
lift up mine hand over the^, and said: I am the LORD your God, even in the
day that I lift up mine hand over them, to bring them out of the land of
Egipte: in to a land that I had provided for them, which flows with mylcke
and honey, and is a pleasant lord among all other: Then said I unto them:
(...)
Cast away every man the abhominacions that he has before him, and defyle not
your selves with the Idols of Egipte, for I am the LORD your God.

But they rebelled against me, and would (...)
and showed the^ my laws: which who so keeps shall live in them. I gave them
also my holy days, to be a token betwixt me and them, and thereby to know,
that I am the LORD, which haloweth them. And yet the house of Israel rebelled
against me in the wilderness, they would not walk in my commandments, they
have cast away my laws: (which who so keeps should live in them,) and my
Sabbath days have thy greatly un hallowed.

The^ I made me to pour out my indignacion upon them, (...)
and to consume them in the wilderness. Yet I would not do it, for my names
sake: lest it should be dishonored before the Heithe^, from the which I had
carried them away. But I swore unto them in the wilderness, that I would not
bring them into the land, which I gave them: a land that flows with mylcke
and honey, and is a pleasure of all lands: and yt because they refused my
laws, and walked not in my commandments, but had unhallowed my Sabbathes,
for their heart was gone after their Idols. Nevertheless mine eye spared the^,
so yt I would not utterly slaye the^, and consume the^ in the wilderness.
Morouer, I said unto their sons in ye (...)
walk not in the statutes of yor forefathers, keep not their ordinances, and
defyle not your selves with their Idols, for I am the LORD your God. But
walk in my statutes, keep my laws and do them, halowe my Sabbathes: (...).
16. e (...). 32. c
for they are a token betwixt me and you, that ye may know, how yt I am the
LORD. (...)
Notwithsto^dinge, their sons rebelled against me also: they walked not in my
statutes, they kept not my laws to fulfill them (which he that does shall live
in them) nether hallowed they my Sabbath days. (...). 18. a (...). 3. b (...)
^0. a
The^ I made me again to pour out my indignacion over them, and to satisfy
my wrath upon them in the wilderness. Nevertheless I with drew my hand for my
names sake, lest it should be un hallowed among the Heithe^, before whom I had
brought them forth. I lift up mine hand over them also in the wilderness,
that I would scatre them among the Heithen, and strowe them among the
nations: because they had not kept my laws, but cast aside my
commandments, unhallowed my Sabbathes, and lift up their eyes to their
fathers Idols. Wherefore I gave them also commandments not good, and laws
through the which they should not live, and I unhallowed them in their own
gifts: (...). 13. a
(when I appointed for myself all their first borne) to make them desolate:
that they might know, how that I am the LORD.

LORD God: Beside all this, your forefathers have yet blasphemed me more, and
greatly offended against me: For after I had brought them in to the land, yt I
promised to give them, when they saw every hie hill and all the thick trees:
they made there their offringes, and provoked me with their oblacions, making
sweet sauoures there, and poured out their drink offeringes. Then I axed them*
what have ye to do with all, that ye go thither? And therefore is it called the
hie place unto this day. Wherefore, speak unto the house of Israel: Thus
says the LORD God: Ye are even as unclean as your forefathers, and commit
whordome also with their abhominacio^s. (...). 1^. a (...). 12. d
In all your Idols, where unto ye bring your oblacio^s, (...) 16. c (...).
17. c
and to whose honor ye burn your children: ye defyle your selves, even
unto this day: (...) ^3. a
how darre ye the^ come, and axe any question at me? O ye household of Israel?
As truly as I live (says the LORD God) ye get no answer of me: and as for
the thing that ye go about, it shall not come to pass, where as ye say: we
will be as the Heithen, and do as other people in the land, wod and stone will
we worshipe.

As truly as I live (says the LORD LORD God. I will bring you under my
iuriszdiction, and under the bond of the covenant. The forsakers also and the
transgressors will I take from among you, and bring them out of the land of
your habitacion: as for the land of Israel, they shall not come in it: that
they may know, how that I am the LORD.

Go now then (says the LORD God) ye house of Israel, cast away, Esa. 2. c
80 d Eze. 14
and destroy every man his Idols: then shall ye hear me, and no more blaspeme
my holy name with your offrynges and Idols. But upon my holy hill, eue^ upon
the hie hill of Israel shall all the house of Israel and all that is in the
land, worshipe me: and in the same place will I favor them, Deu. 12* 14. b
and there will I require your heave offringes, and the first linges of your
oblacions, with all your holy things.

I will accept your sweet sauoure, when I bring you from the nations, and
gather LORD, which have brought you in to the land of Israel: ye in to the
same lord, that I swore to give unto your fore fathers. There shall ye call to
remembrance your own ways and all your ymaginacions, wherein ye baue been
defiled: and ye shall be displeased with your own selves, Iere. 8. a ^8 a. 31.
c
for all your wickedness, that ye have done. And ye shall know, that I am the
LORD: when I entreat you after my name, not after yor wicked ways, ner
acordinge to your corrupt works: o ye house of Israel, says the LORD.

Morouer, the word of ye LORD came unto me, saying: Thou son of man, set
thy face toward the south, and speak to the south wind, and say to the
wodde toward the souht: Hear the word of the LORD, thus says the LORD
God: Behold, I will kyndle a fire in the, yt shall consume the grene trees with
the dry. No man shall be able to quench his flame, but all that ^oketh from the
south to the north, shall be brent therein: and all flesh shall se, that I the
LORD have kyndled it, so that no man may quench it. Then said I: O LORD,
(...). 20. b
they will say of me: Tush, they are but fables, that he tells.

The XXI. Chapter.
LORD came to me, saying: Thou son of man, set thy face toward Jerusalem,
speak against the Sanctuary, and prophecy against the land of Israel, say
to the lord of Israel: Thus says the LORD God: Behold, I will upon the, and
will draw my swearde out of ye sheth, and rote out of ye both the rightuous and
the wicked. Saying then that I will rote out of the both the rightuous and
wicked, therefore shall my swearde go out of his sheth, against all flesh from
the north to the south: that all flesh may know, how that I the LORD have
drawn my swearde out of the sheth, and it shall not be put in again.

Mourn therefore (o thou son of man) yt thy loins crack withal, ye mourn
bytterly for them: And if they say, wherefore mournest thou? Then tell them:
for the tydinges that comes, at the which all hertes shall melt, all hondes
shall be letten down, all stomachs shall faynte, and all knees shall wax
feeble. Behold, it comes and shall be fulfilled, says the LORD God.

LORD came unto me, saying: Thou son of man, prophecy, and speak: Thus
says the LORD God: speak, the swearde is sharpened and well scoured.
Sharpened is it for the slaughter, and scoured yt it may be bright. (...)* 10.
a
O, the destroyenge staff of my son, shall bring down all wodde. He has put
his swearde to ye dightinge, yt good hold may be taken of it. This swearde is
sharpened and dight, yt it may be given in to the hand of the manslayer.

Cry (o thou son of man) and howl, for this swearde shall smite my people,
and all the rulers in Israel, which with my people shall be slain down to the
ground through this swearde. Smite thou upon thy thee, for, wherefore should not
the plage and staff of indgme^t come? Prophecy thou son of man, and smite
thine ho^des together: make the swearde two edged, ye make it three edged, yt
manslayers swearde, that swearde of the great slaughter, which shall smite
them, even in their preuy chambres: to make them abaszshed and faynte at the
hertes, and in all gates to make some of them fall. O how bright and sharp is
it, how well dight and mete for ye slaughter: Get the to some place alone, either
upon the right hand or on the left, whither so ever thy face turns. I will
smite my hondes together also, and satisfy my wrothfull indignacion: Even I
the LORD have said it.

The word of the LORD came yet unto (...)
to axe council at the soythsayers, castinge the lottes with his arowes, to
axe council at the Idols, and to look in the liver. But the soythsayenge shall
point to the right side upon Jerusalem, that he may set men of war, to
smite it with a great noise, to cry out Alarm, to set batellrammes against
the gates, to grave up dyches, and to make bulworkes.

Nevertheless, as for ye soythsayenge, they shall hold it but for vanite, even
as though a jest were told them: Ye and they them selves remember their
wickedness, so that by right they must be taken and won. Therefore says the
LORD God: For so much as ye your selves show your offense, and have opened
your wickedness, so that in all your works men may se your sins: Yet in
so much (I say) that ye youreselues have made mention thereof, ye shall be taken
by violence.

O thou shameful wicked gyde of Israel, LORD God: take away the mytre, and
put of the crown, and so is it away: the humble is exalted, and the proud
brought low. Punysh, punysh, ye punysh them will I, and destroy them: and
that shall not be fulfilled, until he come, to whom the judgment belongs,
and to whom I have given it. And thou (o son of man) prophecy, and speak:
(...)
Thus says the LORD God to the children of Ammon, and to their blasphemy,
speak then: The swearde, the swearde, is drawn forth already to the slaughter,
and s^^ured that it glistreth (because thou have looked the out vanities, and
prophesied lies) yt it may come upon thy neck, like as upon the other
ungodly, which be slain: whose day came, when their wickedness was full.

Though it were put up again into the sheath, yet will I punysh the, in the
land where thou wast norished and borne, and pour my indignacion upon the,
and will blow upon the in the fire of my wrath, and deliver the unto cruel
people, which are learned to destroy. Thou shall feed the fire, and yt blood
shall be shed in the land, that thou may be put out of remembrance. Even I
the LORD have spoken it.

The XXII. Chapter.
MOrouer, the word of ye LORD came LORD God: O thou cite, yt sheddest blood
in ye myddest of the, yt thy time may come also: and make the Idols to
defyle the withal. Thou have made thy self gilty, in ye blood yt thou have
shed: and defiled ye i^ ye ydols, which thou have made. Thou have caused thy
days to draw nigh, and made the time of thy years to come. Therefore will I
make ye to be confounded among the Heithe^, and to be despised in all the
lo^des, whether they be nigh or far from the: they shall laugh ye to scorn,
thou yt have gotten the so foul a name, and art full off myschefe. (...) ^5. c
(...) ^5. c
Behold, the rulers of Israel have brought every man his power, to shed blood
in the. In the have they despised father and mother, in the have they oppressed
the stranger, in the have they vexed the wyddowe and the fatherless. Thou
have despised my Sa^ctuary, (...)
and unhallowed my Sabbath. Murderers are there in the, that shed blood, and
eat upon the hills, and in the they use unhappiness.

(...) 3^. f (...). 5. a
Every man has dealte shamefully with his neghbours wife, and abhominably
defiled his daughter in law. In the has every man forced his own sister,
(...). 27. c (...). ^3. d (...). c
even his fathers daughter: Ye gifts have been received in the, to shed
blood. Thou have taken usury and encreace, thou have oppressed thy neghbours
by extorcion, and forgotten me, says the LORD God. Behold, I have smytten
my hondes upon thy covetousness, that thou have used, and upon the blood
which has been shed in the. Is thy heart able to endure it, or may thy hondes
defend them selves, in the time that I shall bring upon the? Even I the LORD
that speak it, will bring it also to pass.

I will scatre the among the Heithen, Eze. 1^. c 15. b
and strowe the about in the lo^des, and will cause thy fylthynesse to cease
out off the: ye and I will have the in possession in the sight of the Heithen,
that thou may know, that I am the LORD,

And the word off the LORD came unto me, saying: Thou son of man, the
house of Israel is turned to dross. Esa. 1. c
All they that should be brass, tynne, yro^ and lead, are in the LORD God:
For so much as ye all are turned in to dross, behold: I will bring you
together unto Jerusalem, like as silver, brass, iron, tynne and lead are put
together in the furnace, and the fire blown there under to melt them: Even so
will I gather you, put you in together, and melt you in my wrath and
indignacion. I will bring you together, and kyndle the fire of my cruel
displeasure under you, that ye may be melted therein.

Like as the silver is melted in the fire, so shall ye also be melted therein:
that ye may know, how that I the LORD have poured my wrath upon you.

And the word off the LORD came unto me, saye^ge: Thou son of man, tell
her: Thou art an un clean land, which is not rayned upon in the day off the
cruel wrath: Mich. 3. c
thy prophets that are in the, are sworn together to devour souls, like as
a roaringe Lion, that lives by his pray. They receive riches and good, and
make many wyddowes in ye. Thy prestes break my law, and defyle my Leui. 10. ^
They put no dyfference between the holy and unholy, nether discern between
the clean and unclean: they turn their eyes fro my Sabbathes, and I am
unhallowed among them.

Thy rulers in the are like rauyshinge wolves, to shed blood, Mich. 3. d Soph.
^. ^ Eze. 13. b
and to destroy souls, for their own covetous lucre. As for thy prophets,
they dawbe with untempered claye, they se vanities* and prophecy lies unto
them, saying: the LORD God says so, where as the LORD has not spoken The
people in the land uses wicked extorcio^ and robbery. Exo. 2^. ^
They vex the poor and nedy: and oppress the stranger against right. And I
sought in the land for a man, that would make up the hedge, and see him self
in the gappe before me in the lo^des behalf, yt I should not utterly destroy
it* but I could find none. Therefore will I pour out my cruel displeasure upon
them, and burn them in the fire of my wrath: their own ways will I
recompense upon their heads, says the LORD God.

The XXIII. Chapter.
LORD came unto me, saying: Thou son of man, there were two women, that had
one mother: Eze. ^0. a
These (when they were young) began to play the harlottes in Egipte. There
were their breasts brussed, and the pappes off their maydenheade destroyed. The
eldest of them was called Oola, and her youngest sister Ooliba. These two were
mine, and bare sons and daughters. Their names were, Samaria, and that was
Oola: and Jerusalem, that was Ooliba. As for Oola, she began to go a
whorynge, when I had taken her to me. She was set on fire upon her lovers the
Assirians, which had to do with her: even the princes and lords, that were
deckte in costly array: ^. Re. 15. d
fair young men, lusty ryders of horses.

Thus through her whordome, she cleued unto all the young men off Assiria: Ye
she was mad upon them, and defiled herselff with all their Idols. Nether
ceased she from the fornicacio^, that she used with the Egipcians: for in her
youth they lay with her, they brussed the breasts of her maydenheade, and poured
their wordome upon her. ^. Re. 17. ^
Wherefore, I delivered her in to ye ho^des of her lovers, even the Assirians,
whom she so loved. These discovered her shame, took her sons and daughters,
Eze. 16. b
and slew her with the swearde: An evil name gat she of all people, and they
punyshed her.

Iere. 3. b ^. Re. 16. b
more then she, and exceaded her sister in whordome: she loved ye Assirians
(which also lay with her) namely, the princes and great lords, that were
clothed with all manner of gorgious apparel, all lusty horsemen and fair young
persons. Then I saw, that they both were defiled a like. But she increased
still in whordome: for when she saw men painted upon the wall, the images off
the Caldees set forth with fresh colors, with fair gyrdles about them, and
goodly bonettes upon their heads, lokynge all like princes (after ye manner of
the Babilonia^s and Caldees in their own land, where they be borne)
Inmediatly, as soon as she saw them, she brent in love upon them, and sent
messau^gers for them in to the land of the Caldees.

Now when the Babilonia^s came to her, they lay with her, and defiled her with
their whordome, and so was she poluted with with them. And when her lust was
abated from them, (...)
her whordome and shame was discovered and seen: then my heart forsook her,
like as my heart was gone from her sister also. Nevertheless she used her
whordome en^ the longer the more, and remembered the days off her youth, wherein
she had played the harlot in the land off Egipte: she brent in lust upon them,
(...)
whose flesh was like ye flesh of Asses, and their sede like the sede off
horses.

Therefore (o Ooliba) thus says ye LORD God. I will raise up thy lovers (with
whom thou have satisfied thy lust) against the, and gather them together round
about the: Namely, the Babilonians, and all the Caldees: Pecod, Schoa and Coa,
with all the Assirians: all young and fair lovers: princes and lords,
knights and gentlemen, which be all good horsemen: These shall come upon the
with horses, charettes, and a great multitude of people: which shall be
harnessed about the on every side, with brestplates, sheldes and helmettes. I
will punysh yt before them, ye they the^ selves shall punysh the, acordinge to
their own judgment. I will put my gelousy upon the, so that they shall deal
cruelly with the. They shall cut of thy nose and thine ears, and the remnaunt
shall fall through the swearde. They shall carry away thy sons and daughters,
and the resydue shall be brent in the fire. Thy shall strype the out of thy
clothes, and carry thy costly Jewels away with them.

Thus will I make an end off thy fylthynesse LORD: Behold, I will deliver ye
in to the ho^des of them, whom thou hate: ye even in to the hondes of them,
with who^ thou have fulfilled thy lust, which shall deal cruelly with ye: All
thy labor shall they take with them, and leave the naked and bare, and thus
the shame of thy filthy whordome shall come to light. All these things shall
happen unto the, because of thy whordome, which thou have used among the
Gentiles, with whose Idols thou have defiled yt self. Thou have walked in the
way of thy sister, therefore will I give the her cup in thy hand.

Thus says the LORD God: Thou shall drink off thy sisters cup, how deep
and far so ever it be to the botome. Thou shall be laughed to scorn, and had
as greatly in derision, as is possible. Thou shall be full off dronckennes and
sorrow, for the cup of ye sister Samaria is a cup of destruction and
waistinge: the same shall thou drink, and suppe it out eue^ to ye dregs, ye
thou shall eat up the broken pieces off it, and so tear thine own breasts:
For even I have spoken it, says the LORD God.

Therefore thus says ye LORD God: For so much as thou have forgotten me, and
cast me LORD said morouer unto me: Thou son of man, will thou not reprove
Oola and Ooliba? Shewethe^ their abhominacio^s: namely, yt they have broken
their wedlock, and stained their ho^des with blood: ye even with their Idols
have they committed aduo^try, (...)
and offered them their own children (to be devoured) who^ they had borne unto
me. Ye and this have they done unto me also: (...)
they have defiled my Sa^ctuary in that same day, and have unhallowed my
Sabbath. For when they had slain their children for their Idols, they came the
same day in to my Sanctuary, to defyle it. Lo, this have they done in my
house. Beside all this, thou have sent yt messeungers for men out of far
countries: and when they came, thou have bathed, trymmed and set forth thy
selff off the best fashion: thou sattest upon a goodly bed, (...)
and a table spread before the: whereupon thou have set mine incense and mine
oil.



O ye all that love virtue and righteousness, (...)
judge the^, punysh them: as aduoutrers and murderers ought to be judged and
punyshed. For they are breakers off wedlock, and the blood is in their
hondes. Wherefore thus says the LORD God: bring a great multitude off
people upon them, and make them be scatred and spoiled: these shall stone them,
and gorre them with their sweardes. They shall slaye their sons and daughters
and burn up their houses with fire.

Thus will I destroy all soch fylthynes out off the land: that all women may
learn, not to do after your uncleaness. And so they shall lay your
fylthinesse upon your own selves, and ye shall be punyshed for the sins, that
ye have committed with your Idols: and ye shall know, that I am the LORD.

The XXIIII. Chapter.
IN the ix. year, in the x. Month. the x. day off the Month, came the word
LORD unto me, saying: O thou son off man, write up the name off this day,
ye eue^ ye hour of this present day: when the king of Babylon set himself
against Jerusalem. Eze. 17. a Eze 11. b
Show yt obstinate household a parable, and speak unto the^: Thus sayet the
LORD God: Get the a pot, set it on, and pour water in to it: put all the
pieces together in it, all the good pieces: the loyne and the shulder, and fill
it with the best bones. Take one off the best sheep, and an heap off bones
withal: let it boil well, and let the bones seyth well therein.

With that, said the LORD God on this manner: Woe be unto the bloody cite of ye
pot, Nau. 3. ^ Aba. 2. a
whereupon the rustynesse ha^geth, and is not yet scoured away. Take out the
pieces that are in it, one after another: there need no lottes be case therefore,
for the blood is yet in it Upon a plain dry stone has she poured it, and
not upon the ground, that it might be covered with dust. And therefore have I
letten her pour her blood upon a plain

Wherefore, thus says ye LORD God: O, woe be unto that bloudthurstie cite, for
who^ I will prepare a heap off wodde: bear thou ye bones together, kyndle thou
the fire, sees the flesh, let all be well sodde^, that the bones may be
suckte out. Morouer, set the potemptye upon the coals, that it may be warm
and the metal hot: that the fylth and rustynesse may be consumed. But it
will not go off, there is so much off it: the rustinesse must be brent out. Thy
filthiness is abominable, for I would have cleansed the, but thou would not
be cleansed. Thou can not be pourged from thine uncleanness, till I have
poured my wrothfull indignacion upon the. Even I the LORD have so devised: Ye
it is come thereto allredy, that I will do it. I will not go back, I will not
spare, I will not be entreated: but acordinge to thy ways and ymaginacions,
thou shall be punyshed, says the LORD God.

LORD came unto me, saying: Thou son off man, behold, I will take away
the pleasure off thine eyes with a plage: yet shall thou nether mourn ner weep,
ner water thy chekes therefore: thou may mourn by thy selff alone, but use
no deadly lamentacion. Hold on thy bonet, and put on thy shues upon thy fete,
cover not thy face, and eat no mourners bred. So I spoke unto the people
bytymes in the morning, and at even my wife dyed: then upon the next morrow, I
did as I was commanded. And ye people said unto me: will thou not tell us,
what that signifies, which thou do? I answered them, the word off the
LORD came unto me, saye^ge: Tell the house of Israel, thus says ye LODDE
God: behold, I will suspende my Sanctuary: eve^ the glory of your power, the
pleasure of yor eyes, and the thing that ye love: your sons and daughters
whom ye have left, shall fall through the sword.

LORD God. But behold, O thou son of man: In the day when I take from them
their power, their joy and honor, the lust off their eyes, the burden of
their bodies: namely, their sons and daughters: The^ shall there one escape,
and come unto the, for to show the. In that day shall yi mouth be opened to
him, which is escaped, that thou may speak, and be no more domme: Ye and
thou shall be their show toke^, that they may know, how that I am the LORD.

The XXV. Chapter.
THe word of the LORD came unto (...). 21 d ^ere* 49. a
and say unto the Ammonites: Hear the word off the LORD God, Thus says
the LORD God: for so much as thou speak over my Sanctuary: A ha, I trow it
be now suspended: and over the land of Israel, I trow it be now desolate: ye
and over the house of Judah, I trow they be now led away presoners: Behold, I
will deliver ye to the people of the east, yt they may have the in possession:
these shall set their castles and houses in the. They shall eat thy fruit, and
drink up thy mylcke. As for Rabath, I will make of it a stall for camels, and
of Ammon a shepefolde: and ye shall know, that I am the LORD.

For thus says the LORD God: In so much as thou have clapped with thine
hondes, and stamped with thy fete, ye reioysed in thine heart over the land
of Israel with despyte: behold, I will stretch out mine ho^de over the also,
and deliver the, to be spoiled off the Heithen, and rote the out from among
the people, and cause the be destroyed out off all lands: ye I will make the
be LORD.

Thus says ye LORD God: (...)
For so much as Moab and Seir do say: As for the house off Judah, it is but
like as all other Gentiles be: Therefore behold, I will make the cities off
Moab weapenlesse, and take away their strength: their cities and chief coasts
off their land, which are the pleasures off the country: As namely.
Betiesimoth, Baalmeo^ and Cariathaim: these will I open unto the^ off the east,
yt they may fall upon the Ammonites: and will give it them in possession: so
that the Ammonites shall no more be had in remembrance among the Heithen. Even
thus will I punysh Moab also, that they may know, how that I am the LORD.

Morouer, thus says the LORD God: Because that Edom has avenged and eased
himself upon the house off Judah, (...)
therefore thus says the LORD: I will reach out mine hand upon Edom, and
take away man and be out off it. From Thema^ unto Dedan will I make it
desolate, they shall be slain (...)
they shall handle him, acordinge to my wrath and indignacio^, so that they shall
know my vengeance, says the LORD God.

Thus says ye LORD God: For so much as the Philistynes have done this:
namely, (...)
taken vengeance with despitefull stomachs, and off an old evil will set
them selves to destroy: Therefore thus says the LORD God: Behold, I will
stretch out mine ho^de over the Philistynes, and destroy the destroyer, and
cause all the remnaunt off the sea coast to perish. A great vengeance will I
take upon them, and punysh them cruelly: that they may know, how that I am
the LORD, which have avenged me off them.

The XXVI. Chapter.
LORD came unto me, saying: (...)
Thou son of man, Because that Tire has spoken upon Jerusalem: A ha, now I
trow the ports of the people be broken, and she turned unto me, for I have
destroyed my belly full. Ye therefore says ye LORD God: Behold O Tire, I
will upon the, I will bring a great multitude off people against ye, like as
when the sea aryseth with his wawes: These shall break the walls off Tire, and
cast down her towers; I will scrape the ground from her, and mate her a bare
stone: ye as the dryenge place, where the fyshers hang up their nets by the sea side. Even I have spoken it, says the LORD God. The Gentiles shall spoil
her: her daughters upon the field shall perish with the swearde, yt they may
know, how that I am the LORD.

For thus says the LORD God: Behold,

He shall slaye thy people with the swearde, and break down the pilers of thy
strength. They shall waist away thy riches, and spoil yi marchau^dise. Thy
walls shall they break down, and destroy thy houses of pleasure. Thy stones,
thy tymbre and foundacions, shall they cast in the water. Thus will I bring the
melody of thy songs, (...)
and the voice of thy mynstrelsy to an end, so that they shall no more be
herd. I will make a bare stone off the, ye a dryenge place for nets, and
shall never be builded again: For eue^ I ye LORD have spoken it, says the
LORD God: thus has the LORD God spoken concerning Tire: The Isles shall be
moved at the noise off thy fall, and at the cry of the slain, yt shall be
murthured in the. All kings off the sea shall come down from their seats
regal: they shall lay away their roabes, and put off their costly clothinge:
Ye with tremblinge shall they be clothed, they shall sit upon the ground: they
shall be afraid at thy sodane fall, and be abashed at the.

They shall mourn for the, and say unto the: O thou noble cite, yt have been
so greatly occupied off old, Tren. 1. a.
thou that have been the strongest upon the sea with thine inhabitours off whom
all men stood in fear: How art thou now so utterly destroyed? Now at the time
off thy fall the inhabitours off the Isles, ye and the Isles them selves shall
stand in fear at thine end. For thus says LORD God: when I make the a
desolate cite (as other cities be, that no man dwell in) and when I bring the
deep upon the, yt great waters may cover the: Then will I cast the down unto
them, that descend in to ye pytte: unto a people that has been long deed,
and set the in a land yt is beneth, like the old wyldernes, with them which
go down to their graves, so yt no man shall dwell more in the. And I will make
the to be no more in honor, in the lord of the living. I will make an end off
the, and thou shall be gone. Though thou be sought for, yet shall thou not be
found for evermore, says ye LORD God.

The XXVII. Chapter.
THe word off the LORD came unto Eze. 26.28.
and many Isles: thus speaks ye LORD God: O Tire thou have said: what, I am
a noble cite. thy borders are in the myddest of the sea, and thy buylders have
made the marvelous goodly. All yi tables have they made of Cip^e trees of the
mount Senir. From Libanus have they taken Cedre trees, to make the mastes: and
the Oaks of Basan to make the rowers.

Thy boordes have they made of yuery, and of costly wod out of the I Will of
Cethim. Thy sale was of white small nedle work out off the land of Egipte, to
ha^ge upon thy mast: and thy hanginges of yalow sylcke and purple, out of ye
Isles of Elisa. They of Sido^ and Arnad were thy maryners, and the wysest in
Tire were thy shypmasters. The eldest and wysest at Gebal were they, that
mended and stopped thy ships.

All ships off the sea with their shipme^ occupied their marchaundies in the.
The Perses, Lydians and Lybians were in thine host, and helped the to fight:
these hanged up their shildes and helmettes with the* these set forth thy beuty.

They off Arnad were with thine host round about thy walls, and were thy
watchmen upon thy towers: these hanged up their shildes round about thy
walls, and made Eze. 25. ^
and many other Isles that occupied with the, brought the wethers, elepha^t
bones and Paycockes for a present The Sirians occupied with the, because of thy
diverse works, and increased thy marchaundies, with Smaragdes, with scarlet,
with nedle work, with white lynninge cloth, with sylcke and with Crystal.

Judah and the land off Israel occupide with the, and brought unto thy
markettes, wheat, balm, honey, oil, and triacle. Damascus also used
marchau^dies with the, in the best wine and white woll: because thy occupienge
was so great, and thy wares so many. Dan, Iauan, and Meusal have brought unto
thy markettes, iron ready made, with Casia and Calamus, acordinge to
thyne-occupienge. Dedan occupied with the, infayre tapestry work and
quyszhyns. Arabia and all the princes off Cedar have occupied with the, in sheep,
wethers and goats. The merchants off Seba and Rema have occupied also with
the, in all costly spices, in all precious stones and gold, which they brought
unto thy marckettes. Haran, Chene and Eden, the merchants off Saba, Assiria
and Chelmad, were all doers with ye and occupied with the: In costly raiment,
off yalow sylke and nedle work, (very precious, and therefore packte and bound
together with roapes) Ye and in Ced^e wodde, at the time off ye marckettes. The
ships of Tharsis were the chief off thy occupienge.



They shall mourn for the with hertfull sorrow, and heavy lamentacion, ye their
children also shall weep forth: Alas, what cite has so been destroyed in the sea, as Tire is? When thy wares and marchaundies came from the sees. thou
gave all people enough. The kings off the earth have thou made rich, through
the multitude off thy wares and occupienge: But now art thou cast down is to
the deep of the sea, all thy resort of people is perished with the. All they
that dwell in the Isles are abashed at the, and all their kings are afraid,
ye their faces have changed color. The merchants of the nations wondre at
the, In that thou art so clean brought to naught, and co^mest no more up.

The XXVIII. Chapter.
THe word of the LORD came unto me, saying: Thou son of man, tell the
prince of Tire: (...)
Thus says the LORD God: because thou have a proud heart and have said: I
am a God, (...)
I have my seat in the myddest off the sea like a god: where as thou art but a
man and not God, and yet stondest in thine own co^ceate, that thou art God:
Behold, thou thynkest thy self wyser then Daniel, that there is no secrets
hyd from ye. With thy wiszdome and thy vndersto^dinge, thou have gotten the
great welthynesse, and gathered treasure of silver and gold, With thy great
wiszdome and occupienge, have thou increased thy power, and because of thy
great riches thy heart is proud.

Therefore thus says ye LORD God: For so much as thou have lift up thine
heart, as though thou werst God: behold, I will bring enemies upon the, even
the tyrauntes of the Heithe^: these shall draw out their sweardes upon thy
beuty and wiszdome, and shall defyle thy glory. They shall cast the down to the
pytte, so that thou shall dye in the midst of the sea, as they that be
slain. Let se, yff thou will say then (before the^ that slaye ye) I am God:
where as thou art but a man, and not God, in the hondes of them that slaye the.
Dye shall thou, even as the uncircumcised in the ho^des of ye enemies: for I
myself have spoken it, says the LORD God.

Morouer, the word off the LORD came unto me, saying: Thou son off man,
make a lamentable complaynte over the king of Tire, and tell him: Thus says
the LORD God: Thou art a seal of a licknesse, full off wyszdome and excellent
beuty. Thou have been in ye pleasant garden off God: thou art decte with all
manner of precious stones: with Ruby, Topas, Crystal, Iacyncte, Onyx, Iaspis,
Saphir, Smaragde, Carbu^cle, and gold. Thy beuty and ye holes yt be in ye were
set forth in the day of ye creacion. Thou art a fair Cherub, stretched wide
out for to cover.

I have set the upon the holy mount off God, there have thou been, and walked
among the fair glisteringe stones. From the time of thy creacion thou have
been right excellent, (...)* 2. b
thy heart is full of wickedness, and thou have offended. Therefore will I cast
the from the mount of God, (O thou coueringe Cherub) and destroy the among
the glisteringe stones. Thy heart was proud in ye fair beuty, and through thy
beuty thou have destroyed thy wiszdome. I will cast ye down to the ground,
and yt in ye sight of kings. Thou have defiled thy Sa^ctuary, with the great
wickedness off thy onrightuous occupyenge. I will bring a fire from the
myddest of the, to consume the: and will make the to ashes, in the sight of all
the^ yt look upon the. All they that have been acquaunted with the among the
Heithe^, shall be abashed at the: saying thou art so clean brought to naugth,
and co^mest no more up.

And the word off the LORD came unto me, saying: Thou son of man, set thy
face against Sido^, Prophecy upon it, and speak. Thus says the LORD God:
(...). 3. a (...). 9. a
Behold o Sidon, I will upon the, and get me honor in the: that it may be
known, how that I am ye LORD, when I punysh her, and get me honor in her.
For I will send pestilence and blood sheddinge in to her streets, so yt those
which LORD. She shall no more be a prickinge thorn, and an hurtinge brere unto
the house of Israel, ner unto the^ that lie round about her and hate her: and
they shall know, that I am the LORD.

Thus says the LORD God: when I gather the household of Israel together
again, from the nations among whom they be scatred: then shall I be sanctified
in the^, in ye sight of the Gentiles: and they shall dwell in the lord, yt I
gave to my servant Jacob. They shall dwell safely therein, build houses, Deu.
28. c Esa. 65. d
and plant vynyardes: Ye safely shall they dwell therein, when I have punyshed
all those, that despise them round about: and then shall they know, yt I am
the LORD their God.

The XXIX. Chapter.
IN the x. year, upon the xij. day off LORD came unto me, saye^ge: Esa. 19.
a 20. a Iere. 46. Eze. 30.31.32.
O thou son off man, set now thy face against Pharao the king off Egipte,
Prophecye against him and against the whole lord of Egipte: Speak, and tell
him, thus says the LORD God: behold, o Pharao thou king of Egipte, I will
upon the, thou great whall fysh, yt lie in yi waters: Thou yt say: the
water is mine, I have made it myself. I will put an hoke in thy chawes, and
ha^ge all the fish in thy waters upon thy skales: after yt I will draw the out
of thy waters, ye and all the fish of ye waters that hang upon thy skales.

I will cast the out upon the dry lord with the fish of thy waters, so that
thou shall lie upon the field. Thou shall not be gathered ner taken up, but
shall be meat for the beestes of the field, and for the fowls off the air:
that all they which dwell in Egipte, may know, that I am the LORD: because
thou have been a staff of read to the house of Israel. 4. Re. 18. ^ Esa 30 a
31. a. 36. a
When they took hold of ye with their ho^de thou brakest and prycdest them on
every side: and yff they leaned upon the, thou brakest, and hurtdest the reins
of their backs. Therefore, thus says the LORD: God: behold, LORD: Because
he said: the water is mine, I my self have made it. Behold therefore, I will
upon the, and upon thy waters: I will make the land off Egipte waist and
desolate, from the tower of Syenes unto the borders of the Moria^s land: so
that in xl. years there shall no foot off man walk there, nether foot of
catell go there, nether shall it be inhabited. I will make the land of Egipte to
be desolate among other waist countrees, and her cities to lie void xl.
years, among other void cities: And I will scatre the Egipcians among the
Heithen and nations.

Again, thus says the LORD God: When the xl. years are expyred, I will
gather the Egipcians together again, Iere. 46. ^
out off the nations, among who^ they were scatred, and will bring the
presoners off Egipte again in to the land off Pathures their own natyue
councre, that they may be there a lowly small kingdom: ye they shall be the
smallest among other kingdoms, lest they exalte them selves above the
Heithen: for I will so mynish them, that they shall no more rule the Heithen.
They shall no more be an hope unto the house off Israel, nether provoke the^
enymore to wickedness, to cause them turn back, and to follow them: and they
shall know, that I am the LORD God.

LORD unto me, saying: Thou son off man, Nabuchodonosor the king off
Babylon has made his host, with great travail and labor to come before
Tire: that every head may be balde, and every shulder bare. Yet has Tire
given nether him ner his host any reward, for ye great travail yt he has
taken there. Therefore thus says ye LORD God: behold I will give the lord of
Egipte unto Nabuchodonosor the king off Babilo^, yt he may take away all her
substance, rob her robberies, and spoil her spoils, to pay his host
their wagies withal. I will give him the land of Egipte for his labor, that
he took for me before Tire. At the same time will I cause the horn off the
house of Israel to grow forth, and open thy mouth again among them: that
they may know, how that I am the LORD.

The XXX. Chapter.
LORD came unto me, saying: Thou son of man, prophecy and speak: thus
says the LORD God: Mourn, woe worth this day, Eze. 29.31.32.
for the day is here, the day of ye LORD is come: the darcke day of ye
Heithe^ the hour is at hand, the swearde comes upon Egipte. When the
wounded men fall down in Egipte, when her people are taken away, and when her
foundacio^s are destroyed: the Morians land shall be afraid, ye the Morians
land, Lybia and Lydia, all their common people, and Chub, and all yt be
confederate unto the^, shall fall with the^ through ye swearde.

Thus says ye LORD: The maynteyners of the lord of Egipte shall fall, the
pride of her power shall come down: eue^ unto the tower off Syenes shall they
be slain down LORD God: among other desolate countrees they shall be made
desolate, and among other waist cities they shall be waisted. And they shall
know, yt I am ye LORD, when I kyndle a fire in Egipte, and when all her
helpers are destroyed.

At that time, shall there messaungers go forth from in ships, to make ye
careless Morians afraid: and sorrow shall come upon them in the day of
Egipte, for doutles it shall come. Thus says the LORD God: I will make an end
of the people of Egipte through the hand of Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon. He
and his people with him, ye and the cruel tyrauntes of the Heithen shall be
brought to destroy the land. They shall draw out their sweardes upon Egipte
and fill the land full of slain men. I will dry up their floudes of water,
and sell the lord in to the hondes of wicked people. The lord and all yt is
therein, will I destroy through the enemies. Eue^ I the LORD have said it.

And thus says the LORD God: I will destroy the Idols, and bring the
images of Noph to an end. (...)
There shall no more be a prince of Egypt, and a fearfulness will I

Sin shall be in great heaviness, Alexandria shall be roted out, and Noph shall
have daily sorrow. The best men off Heliopolis and Bubasto shall be slain with
the swearde, and carried away captyue. At Taphnis the day shall be dark, when I
break there the scepter of the land of Egipte, and when ye pomp of her power
shall have an end. A clonde shall cover her, and her daughters shall be led a way
in to captyuyte. Thus will I punysh Egipte, that they may know, how that I am
the LORD.

It happened in the xi. year, upon the seventh day of ye first Month, yt the
LORDS LORD God: behold, I will upon Pharao ye king of Egipte, and brusse
his strong arm (yet is it but a broken one) and will smite the swearde out of
his hand.

As for the Egipcians, I will scatre them among the Heithen, and strowe the^ in
the lands about. Again I will strength ye arm of the king of Babilo^, and
give him my swearde in his ho^de: but I will break Pharaos arm, so yt he shall
hold it before him piteously, like a wounded man.

Ye I will stablish the king of Babilo^s arm, and the arms of Pharao shall
fall down: that it may be known, that I am the LORD, which give the king
off Babylon my swearde in his ho^de, that he may draw it out upon the land
of Egipte: and that when I scatre the Egipcians among the Gentiles, and strowe
them in ye lo^des about, they may know, yt I am the LORD.

The XXXI. Chapter.
MOrouer, it happened in the xi. year LORD came unto me, saying: Thou son
of man, speak unto Pharao the king of Egipte, (...) 29^ (...)* 32.
and to all his people: Whom art thou like in yt greatness? Behold, Assure was
like a Cedre tree upon the mount of Libanus, with fair branches: so thick,
that he gave shadows, and shot out very hye. His top reached unto the
clouds. The waters made him great, and the deep set him up an hye. Round
about the rotes of him ra^ne there floudes of water, he sent out his little
ryuers unto all the trees of the field. Therefore was he hyer tho^ all the trees
of the field, and through ye multitude of waters that he sent from him, he
optayned many and long branches. All fowls of the air made their nestes in
his branches, under his bows ge^dred all the beasts of ye field, and under
his shadow dwelt all people. Fair and beutifull was he in his greatness, and
in the length of his branches, for his rote stood beside great waters: no
Cedretre might hyde him. In the pleasant garden of God, there was no Fyrre tree
like his branches, the plain trees were not like ye bows of him. All the
trees in the garden off God might not be compared unto him in his beuty: so
fair and goodly had I made him with the multitude of his branches: In so
much, yt all the trees in the pleasant garden of God, had envye at hi^.
Therefore, thus says LORD God: For so much as he has lift up himself so hie,
and stretched his top in to the clouds, and saying his heart is proud in his
highness: I will deliver him in to ye hondes of ye mightiest among ye Heithe^,
which shall rote him out. Acordi^ge to his wickedness will I cast him away, the
enemies shall destroy him, and the mighty men of the Heithen shall so scatre
him, that his branches shall lie upon all mountains and in all valleys: his
bows shall be broken down to the ground through out the land. Then all the
people of the land shall go from his shadow, and forsake him. When he is
fallen, all ye fowls of ye air shall sit upon him, and all wild beestes of
the field shall go about among his branches: so that from hence forth, no tree
in the water shall attain to his hyenesse, nor reach his top unto the
clouds, nether shall any tree off the water stand so hye, as he has done. For
unto death shall they all be delivered under the earth, and go down to ye
grave, like other men.

Morouer, thus says the LORD God: Esa. 14. c Eze. 32. c
I will make the Heithen shake at the sound of his fall, when I cast him down
to hell, with them yt descend in to the pytte. All the trees of Eden, with all
the chosen and besttrees of Libanus, ye and all they that are planted upon the
waters, shall mourn with him also in the lower habitacio^s: for they shall go
down to hell with him, unto the^ that be slain with the swearde, which dwelt
before under the shadow off his arm among the Heithe^. To whom shall thou be
lickened, that art so glorious and great, among the trees off Eden? Yet art
thou cast down under ye earth (among the trees off Eden) where thou must lie
among the uncircumcised, with them that be slain with the swearde. Even thus is
it with Pharao and all his people, says the LORD God.

The XXXII. Chapter.
IN the xij. year, the first day of the xij. Month, the word of the LORD
Eze. 29.30.31.
Thou art reputed as a Lion of the Heithen, and as a whalfish in the sea. Thou
castest yt waters about the, thou troublest the waters with thy fete, and
stampest in their floudes. Thus says the LORD God: Eze. 12. b 17. c
I will sprede my net over ye, namely, a great multitude of people: these shall
drive the into my yarne, for I will cast the upon the lord, and let the lie
upon the field, that all the fowls of the air may sit upon the: I will give
all the beasts of the field enough off the. Thy flesh will I cast upon the
hills, and fill the valleys with thy hyenesse. I will water the land with the
abundaunce off thy blood even to the mountains, and ye valleys shall be full
off the.

When thou art put out, I will cover the heaven, and make his stars dymme.
Eze. 13. ^ loc. 3. c
I will sprede a cloud over the Son, and the Moon shall not give her light.
All the lights LORD God. I will trouble the hertes off many people, when I
bring thy destruction among the Heithen and countrees, whom thou know not.
Ye I will make many people with their kings so afraid through ye, that their
hair shall stand up, when I shake my swearde at their faces. Suddenly shall they
be astonnyed, every man in him self, at ye day of thy fall.

For thus says the LORD God: the king of Babilons swearde shall come upon
ye, with ye sweardes of the worthies will I smite down thy people. All they
that be mighty among the Gentiles, shall waist the proud pomp of Egipte, and
bring down all her people. All the catell also of Egipte will I destroy, that
they shall come no more upon the waters: so that nether ma^s foot ner beasts
clawe, shall stere them any more. Then will LORD God: when I make the land of
Egipte desolate, and when ye country with all that is therein, shall be laid
waist: and when I smite all the^ which dwell in it, that they may know, that
I am the LORD. This is the mourning, that the daughters off the Heithen shall
make: Ye a sorrow and lamentacio^ shall they take up, upon Egipte and all her
people, says the LORD God.

In the xij. year, the xv. day of the Month, came the word off the LORD
unto me saying: Thou son of man. Take up a lamentacion upon the people of
Egipte, and cast them down, ye and the mighty people of the Heithe^ also,
Esa. 14. c Eze. 31. c
even with the^ that dwell beneth: and with them that go down in to the grave.
Down (how fair so ever thou be) and lay the with the vncircircumcised.
Among those that be slain with the swearde, shall they lie. The swearde is
given already* he shall be drawn forth and all his people. The mighty worthies
and his helpers, yt be

Assure is there also with his company, and their graves round about, which
were slain and fell all with the swearde, whose graves lie beside him in the
low pytte. His como^s are buried round about his grave: altogether wounded
and slain with the swearde, which men before time brought fear into ye land
off the living.

There is Elam also with all his people, (...)
and their graves round about: which all being wounded and slain with the
swearde, are gone down uncircumcised under the earth, which nevertheless
sometime brought fear in to the land off the living: for the which they bear
their shame, with the other that be gone down to ye grave.

Their buryall is given them and all their

There is Mesech also and Tubal, and their people, and their graves round
about. These all are among the uncircumcised, and them that be slain with
the swearde, because before time they made the land off the living afraid.

Should not they then lie also among ye worthies, and uncircumcised Giauntes?
which with their weapens are gone down to hell: whose sweardes are laid under
their heads, whose wickedness is upon their bones: because that as worthies,
they have brought fear in to ye lord of ye lyuinge? Ye among the
uncircumcised shall thou be destroyed, and sleep with them, that perished
through the swearde.

There is the lord off Edom with her kings and princes also, which with their
strength (...)
and them which are gone down in to the pytte. Morouer, there be all the
princes of the north, with all the Sidonia^s, which are gone down to the
slain.

With their fear and strength they are come to confucion, and lie there
uncircumcised, among those that be slain with the swearde: and bear their
own shame, with them that be gone down to ye pytte. Now when Pharao seyth
this, he shall be comforted over all his people, that is slain with the
swearde: both Pharao and all his host, says ye LORD God. For I have given
my fear in the lord of the living. But Pharao and all his people shall ye
among the uncircumcised, and among them that be slain with the swearde,
says the LORD God.

The XXXIII. Chapter.
LORD came unto me, saying: Thou son off man, Speak to the children of thy
people, and tell them: When I send a swearde upon a land, if the people off
the land take a man off their country, and set him to be their watchman: ye
same man (wha^ he seyth the swearde come upon the land) shall blow the
trompet, Re. 9. d
and warn the people.

Yff a man now hear the noise off the trompet and will not be warned, and the
swearde come and take him away: his blood shall be upon his own head: For
he herd the sou^de of the trompet, and would not take heed, therefore his
blood be upon him. But yff he will receive warning, he shall save his life.
Again, if the watch man se the sword come, and show it not with the trompet,
so yt the people is not warned: yff the swearde come then, and take any man
from among the^: the same shall be taken away in his own sin, but his
blood will I require off the watchmans hand.

^ze. 3. c
that where as thou hear any thing out of my mouth, thou may warn them
on my behalf. Yff I say unto the wicked: thou wicked, thou shall surely dye:
and thou geuest him not warning, that he may bewarre off his ungodly way:
then shall the wicked dye in his own sin, but his blood will I require of
thy hand. Nevertheless if thou warn the wicked off his way, to turn from it,
where as he yet will not be turned from it: then shall he dye because off his
sin, but thou have delivered thy soul.

Therefore (O thou son off man) speak unto the house off Israel, Ye say
thus: Our offenses and sins lie upon us, and webe corrupt in them: how
should we then be restored unto life? Tell them: As truly as I live (says the
LORD God) I have no pleasure in the death off the wicked, ^ze. 18. ^
but much rather that the wicked turn from his way and live. Turn you, turn
you from yor ungodly ways, o ye off the house off Israel. Oh, wherefore will ye
dye?

^ze. 18. d
The righteousness of the rightuous shall not save him, when so ever he turns
away unfaithfully: Again, the wickedness of the wicked shall not hurt him,
when so ever he conuerteth from his ungodliness:

And ye righteousness of the rightuous shall not save his life, when so ever he
synneth. Yff I say unto the rightuous, that he shall surely live, and so he
trust to his own righteousness, and do sin: then shall his righteousness
be no more thought upon, but in the wickedness that he has done, he shall dye.

Again, yff I say to the wicked: Esa. 55. b Iere. 1^ a
thou shall surely dye: and so he turn from his sins, and do the thing that
is laufull and right: In so much that the same wicked man gives the pledge
again, restores that he had taken away by robbery, walks in the
commandments off life, and does no wrong:

Then shall he surely live, and not dye. Ye the sins that he had done, shall
never be thought upon: For in so much as he does now the thing that is laufull
and right, he shall live. And yet the children off thy people say: Tush, the
way of the LORD is not right, where as their own way is rather unright.

When the rightuous turns from his Eze. 18. To 2. a
he shall live therefore. Yet ye say* he way of ye LORD is not equal. O ye
house of Israel, I will judge every one of you after his ways.

In the xij. year, the v. day of the x. Month of our captyuyte, it
happened, that one which was fled out of Jerusalem, came unto me, and said: ye
cite is destroyed. Now the hand of the LORD had been upon me the evening,
before this man (which was escaped) came unto me, and had opened my mouth,
until the morning that he came to me: Ye he opened my mouth, so yt I was
no more domme. Then came the word of ye LORD unto me, and said: Thou son
off man, these that dwell in the waisted land of Israel, say: Abraham was but
one man, and he had the land in possession: now are we many, and the land is
given us to possess also And therefore tell them: Thus says the LORD: In the
blood have ye eaten, your Leui. 17 ^ Deu. 3. ^
and have shed blood: shall ye then have the land in possession?

Ye lean upon your sweardes, ye work abhominacions, every one defyleth his
neghbours wife: and shall ye then possess the land? Say thou these words
unto the^: Thus says the LORD God: As truly as I live, all ye that dwell in
this wilderness, shall be slain with the swearde: what so is upon the field,
will I give unto the beestes to be devoured: those that be in strong holds
and dens, shall dye off the pestilence. For I will make the land desolate and
waist, and ye po^pe off her strength shall come to an end. The mountains in
Israel shall be so waiste that no man shall travail thereby.

Then shall they learn to know, that I am the LORD, Eze. 25. c
when I make the lord waist and desolate, because off all their abhominacions,
that they have wrought. And thou LORD: These come unto the, after ye manner of
a great people: ye my people sit down before the, and hear thy words, but
they do not thereafter: Esa. 29 c Mat. 15. a
For in their mouths they show themselves, as though they were fervent, but
their heart goes after their own covetous lucre. And as a balet yt has a
sweet tune, and is pleasant to sing, so shall thou be unto them: thy words
shall they hear, but they will not do thereafter. When this comes to pass
(for lo, it comes in deed) then shall they know, that there has been a
prophet among them.

The XXXIIII. Chapter.
ANd the word off the LORD came LORD God: Woe be unto the shepherdes off
Israel, Eze. 13. a ^re. 14. b 23. a*
that feed them selves. Should not the shepherdes feed ye flocks?

Ye have eaten up the fat, ye have clothed you with the woll: the best fed
have ye slain, but ye flock have ye not norished: The weak have ye not
holden up, ^uc. 4. b
the sick have ye not healed: the broken have ye not bound together, the
outcastes have ye not brought again: ye lost have ye not sought, but
churlishly and cruelly have ye ruled the^. ^. Pe. 5. a
Thus are they scatred here and there without a shepherde: ye all the beasts
off the field devour them, and they go astraye.

My sheep go wandringe upon all mountains and upon every hye hill, ye they be
scatred abroad in all feldes, and there is no man, that cares for them, or
seeks after them.

LORD, Thus says the LORD God: As truly as I live, for so much as my sheep
are robbed, and devoured off all the wild beestes off the field, having no
shepherde: and seeing that my shepherdes take no regard off my sheep, but feed
them selves only, and not my sheep: Therefore hear ye word off the LORD, o ye
shepherdes: Thus says the LORD God: Behold, I myselff will upon the
shepherdes, and require my sheep from their hondes, and make the^ cease from
fedynge of my sheep: ye the shepherdes shall feed them selves no more: For I
will deliver my sheep out off their mouths so that they shall not devour them
after this.

For thus says the LORD God: Behold, I will look to my sheep myselff, (...)
and seek them. Like as a shepherde among the flock seeks after the sheep
that are scatred abroad, even so will I seek after my sheep, and gather them
together out off all places, where they have been scatred in the cloudy and
darcke day. I will bring them out from all people, and gather them together
out of all lands. I will bring the^ in to their own land, and feed them
upon the mountains off Israel, by the ryuers, and in all the places of

I will feed my sheep myselff, and bring them to their rest, says the LORD
God. Soch as be lost, will I seek: (...)
soch as go astraye, will I bring again: soch as be wounded, will I bind up:
soch as be weak, will I make strong: soch as be fat and well lykinge, those
will I preserve, and feed them with ye thing that is laufull. And as for you
(o my sheep) says the LORD God: I will put a difference among the sheep,
(...)
among the wethers and the goats. Was it not enough for you, to eat up the
good pasture, but ye must tread down the residue of your pasture with your
fete also? Was it not enough for you to drink clear water, but ye must
trouble the residue also with your fete?

Thus my sheep must be feign to eat ye thing, that ye have trodden down with
yor fete, and to drink it, that ye with your fete have defiled.

Therefore, thus says the LORD God unto them: Behold, I will sever the fat
sheep from the lean: for so much as ye have shot the weak sheep apo^ ye sides
and shulders, and run upon them with your homes, so long till ye have
utterly scatred them abroad. I will help my sheep, so yt they shall no more be
spoiled: ye I will discern one (...) 30. b (...) c (...) 5. a
he shall feed the^, and he shall be their shepherde. I the LORD will be their
God, and my servant David shall be their prince: Even I the LORD have spoken
it.

Morouer, I will make a covenant of peace with them, and drive all evil
beasts out of the land: so that they may dwell safely in the wilderness,
and sleep in the woddes. Good fortune and prosperity will I give them, and unto
all that be round about my hill. A prosperous shower and rain will I send
them in due season, (...) b
that the trees in the wodde may bring forth their fruits, and ye ground her
increase. They shall be safe in their land, and shall know, that I am the LORD,
which have broken their yocke, and delivered them out of the hondes of those,
that held them in subieccion.

They shall no more be spoiled of the Heithen, ner devoured with the beasts of
the lord: but safely shall they dwell, and no man shall fraye them. I will set
up an excellent pla^te for them, so yt they shall suffer no more hunger in the
land, nether bear the reprofe of ye Heithen any more. Thus shall they
understand, that I the LORD their God am with them, and yt they (even the house
of Israel) are my people, says the LORD God. Ye men are my flock, (...) ^4.
b
ye are the sheep of my pasture: and I am your God, says the LORD God.

The XXXV. Chapter.
LORD came unto me, saying: Thou son of man, turn thy face toward the
mount Seir, prophecy upon it, and say unto it: (...) 4. (...) 49. b (...) ^5.
b (...) ^6. a
Thus says the LORD God: Behold, (o thou mount Seir) I will upon the, I
will reach out mine ho^de over the, ye waist and desolate will I make the. Thy
cities will I break down, and thou shall lie void: that thou may know,
how that I am the LORD. For so much as thou bear an old enemyte against
the children of Israel, (...) 20. c (...). a
and with a cruel hand have made them afraid, what time as they were troubled
and punyshed for their sin: Therefore, as truly as I live (says ye LORD
God) I will prepare the unto blood, ye blood shall follow upon the: saying
thou layest wait for blood, (...). 5. a
therefore shall blood persecute the. Thus will I make the mount Seir desolate
and waist, and bring to pass, that there shall no man go thither, ner come
from thence. His mountains will I fill with his slain men: thy hills, dales and
valleys shallye full of them, that are slain with ye swearde. I will make the a
perpetual wilderness, so that noman shall dwell in thy cities: yt ye may
know, how yt I am the LORD.

And because thou have said: what, both Exo. 25. c
where as the LORD was there. Therefore, thus says the LORD God: As truly as
I live, I will handle the acordinge to thy wrath and gelousy, like as thou have
dealt cruelly with them: that I may be known among them, how I have punyshed
the. Ye and that thou also may be sure, that I the LORD have herd all thy
despyteful words, which thou have spoken against the mountains of Israel,
saying: Lo, they are made waist, and given us to devour.

Thus with your mouths ye have made your boost against me, ye and
multiplied your pronde words against me, which I have herd altogether. Where
unto, thus says ye LORD God: when the whole world is in wealth, then will I
make the waist. Eze. 22. ^ 26. a
And like as thou (o mount Seir) wast glad, because the heretage of the house
of Israel was destroyed: even so will I do unto the also, that thou and whole
Edom shall be destroyed, and know, that I am the LORD.

The XXXVI. Chapter.
THou son of man, prophecy upon Eze. 6. c
Hear the word of the LORD, o ye mountains of Israel: Thus says the LORD
God: Because yor enemy has said upon you: A ha, ye hie everlasting places
are now become ours: prophecy therefore, and speak: thus says ye LORD God:
Saying ye be waisted and trode^ down on every side, and become a possession
unto ye resydue of ye Gentiles, which have b^ought you in to men's mouths and
unto an euel name among ye people: Therefore, hear the word of the LORD God,
o ye mountains of Israel: Thus says the LORD God unto the mountains and
hills, valleys and dales, to the void wildernesses and desolate cities, which
are spoiled, and had in de^ision on every side, among the resydue of the
Heithe^: Ye eue^ thus says the LORD God: In the ^yre of my gelousy have I
taken a deuyce, against the resydue of the Gentiles, and against all Edom: Ez^.
35.
which have taken in my lord unto the^ selves for a possession: which also
reioysed from their whole heart with a despiteful stomach, to waist it, and to
spoil it.

LORD God: Behold, this have I devised in my gelousy and terrible wrath: For
so much as ye have suffered reprofe of the Heithen, therefore thus says the
LORD God: I have sworn, that the Gentiles which lie about you, shall bear
your confucion them selves. And as for you (o mountains of Israel) ye shall
shute out your branches, and bring forth your fruit to my people of Israel,
for it is hard by, that it will come.

Behold, I come unto you, and unto you will I turn me, that ye may be tylled
and sown. I will send you much people, which shall be all of the house of
Israel: the cities shall be inhabited, and ye decayed places shall be repaired
again. I will provide you with much people and catell, which shall increase and
bring fruit. I will restore you also to your old estate, and show you more
kindness the^ ever ye had before: whereby ye shall know, yt I am the LORD. Ye
people will I send unto you (o my folk of Israel (which shall have the in
possession, and thou shall be their inheritance, so that thou shall no more be
LORD God: For so much as they say unto you: thou art an eater up of men, and
a waister of thy people: therefore thou shall eat no mo men, nether destroy
thy people any more, says the LORD God. And I will not suffer the, for to
hear thine own confucion among the Gentiles from hensforth. Thou shall not
bear the reprofe of the nations, ner cast out thine own people enymore,
says the LORD God.

Morouer, the word of the LORD came unto me, saying: O thou son of man,
when the house of Israel dwelt upon their own ground, they defiled them
selves with their own ways and ymaginacions: so that in my sight their way
was like the uncleanness of a menstruous woman. Wherefore I poured my wrothfull
displeasure upon them, because of the blood that they had shed in the land,
and because of their Idols, wherewith they had defiled them selves. I scatred
them also among the Heithen, so that they were strowed about in the lo^des.
Acordinge to their ways and after their own inuencions, so did I punysh them.

(...). 2. c (...). 52. b
and come in among them, they dishonored my holy name: so that it was said
of them: Are these the people of God, and must go out of their own land? Then
spared I my holy name, which ye house of Israel had dishonored among the
Gentiles, to whom they came. Therefore tell ye house of Israel: Thus says the
LORD God: I do not this for yor sakes (O house of Israel) but for my holy
names sake, which ye dishonored among the Heithen, when ye came to them.
Therefore, I will halowe my great name again, which among the Gentiles is euel
spoken of: for ye your selves have dishonored it among them. And the
Gentiles shall know, that I am the LORD, when I am honored in you before
their eyes, says ye LORD God.

As for you, I will take you from among the Heithen, and gather you together
out of all countrees, and bring you again into your own land. (...)
Then will I pour clear water upon you, and ye shall be clean: Ye from all
your uncleanness and from all yor Idols shall I cleanse you. A new heart also
will I give (...)
and a new sprete will I put in to you: As for that stony heart, I will take it
out of your body, and give you a fleszshy heart. (...)
I will give you my sprete among you, and can se you to walk in my
commandments, to keep my laws, and to fulfill them.

And so ye shall dwell in the land, that I gave to yor forefathers, and ye
shall be my people, and I will be your God. I will help you out of all your
uncleaness, I will call for the corn, and will increase it, and will let you
have no honger. I will multiply the fruits of the trees and ye increase of the
field for you, so that ye shall bear no more reprofe of honger among the
Heithe^. Then shall ye remember yor own wicked ways, and your ymaginacio^s,
which were not good: so that ye shall take displeasure at your own selves, by
reason of your sins and abhominacions.

But I will not do this for your sakes (says LORD God) be ye sure of it.
Therefore (o ye house of Israel) be ashamed of your sins. Morouer, thus
says the LORD God: what time as I shall cle^se you from all your offenses,
then will I make the cities to be occupied again, and will repair the places
that be decayed. The desolate land shall be builded again, which before time
lay waist, in the sight of all them, that went by. Then shall it be said:
This waist lord is become like a garden of pleasure, and the void, desolate
and broken down cities, are now strong, and fensed again. Then the residue
of the Heithen that lie round about you, shall know, that I am the LORD,
which repair that was broken down, and plant^ again, that was made waist.
Even I the LORD have spoken it, and will do it in deed.

Thus says the LORD God: I will yet once be found again of ye house of
Israel, and do this for them: I shall increase them as a flock of men. (...)
Like as the holy flock and the flock of Jerusalem are in the hie solemn
feasts: so shall also the wild waisted cities be filled with flocks of men:
and they shall know, that I am the LORD.

The XXXVII. Chapter.
LORD came upon me, and carried me out in the sprete of the LORD, and let me
down in a plain field, that lay full of bones, and he led me round about
by them* and behold, the bones that lay upon the field, were very many, and
marvelous dry also. Then said he unto me: Thou son of man: think thou
these benes may live again? I answered: O LORD God, thou know. And he
said unto me: Prophecy thou upon these bones, and speak unto them: Ye dry
bones, hear the word of the LORD. Thus says the LORD God unto these
bones: Behold, I will put breath in to you, that ye may live: I will give you
synowes, and make flesh grow upon you, and cover you over with skin: and so
give you breath, (...)
that ye may live, and know, that I am the LORD.

(...). 15. a
So I prophesied, as he had commanded me. And as I was prophecienge, there came
a noise and a great mocion, so that the bones ran every one to another. Now
when I had looked, behold, they had synowes, and flesh grew upon them: and
above they were covered with skin, but there was no LORD God: Come (o thou
air) from the four wyndes, and blow upon these slain, that they may be
restored to life. So I prophesied, as he had commanded me: Then came the
brethtn to them, and they received life, and stood up upon their fete, a
marvelous great sort.

Morouer, he said unto me: Thou son of man, these bones are the whole house
of Israel. (...)
Behold, they say: our bones are dried up, our hope is gone, we are clean
cut of. Therefore prophecy thou, and speak unto them. Thus says the LORD
God: Behold, I will open your graves (o my people) and take you out of your
sepulcres, and bring you in to the land of Israel again. So shall ye know
yt I am the LORD, when I open your graves, and bring you out of them. My
sprete also will I put in you, and ye shall live: I will set you again in your
own land, and ye shall know, that I am the LORD, which have said it, and
fulfilled it in deed.

The word of the LORD came unto me, LORD God: Behold, Osee ^. b
I will take the stock of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim and of the
trybes of Israel his fellows, and will put them to the stock of Judah, and make
them one stock, and they shall be one in my hand. And the two sticks where
upon thou wrytest, shall thou have in thine hand, that they may se, and shall
say unto them:

Thus says the LORD God: behold, I will take away the children of Israel
from among the Heithen, unto whom they be gone, and will gather them together
on every side, and bring them again in to their own land: ye I will make
one people of the^ in ye land, upon the mountains of Israel, and they all
shall have but one king. They shall

David my servant shall be their king, Eze 34. ^ Ioh 10. b
and they all shall have one shepherde only. They shall walk in my laws, and my
commandments shall they both keep and fulfill. They shall dwell in the land,
that I gave unto Jacob my servant, where as your fathers also have dwelt. Ye
eue^ in the same land shall they, their children, and their childers children
dwell for evermore: and my servant David shall be their everlasting prince.
Morouer, I will make a bond of peace with them, which shall be unto them an
everlasting covenant. I will sattle the^ also, and multiply them, my
Sanctuary will I set among the^ for evermore.

My dwellinge shall be with them, ye I will be their God, and they shall be my
people. Thus the Heithen also shall know, that I the LORD am ye holy maker of
Israel: when my Sanctuary shall be among them for ever more.

The XXXVIII. Chapter.
LORD came unto me, saying: Thou son of man, turn thy face toward Gog in
the land of Magog, which is the chief prince at Mesech and Tubal: prophecy
against him, and say: ^ze. 39.
Thus says the LORD God: O Gog thou chief prince of Mesech and Tubal: ^po.
20. c
behold, I will upon the, and will turn the about, and put a bytt in thy
chawes: I will bring the forth and all thine host, both horse and horsemen,
which be all weapened of the best fashion: a great people, that handle
altogether spears, shyldes, and swerdes: the Perses, Moryans and with them the
Lybians, which all bear shyldes and helmettes: Gomer, and all his hoostes: the
house of Thogorma out of the north quarters, and all his hoostes, ye and much
people with the.

Therefore prepare the, set thy self in array with all thy people, that are come
unto the by heaps, and be thou their defense. After many days thou shall be
visited, and in the latter years thou shall come in to the lord, that has
been destroyed with the swearde, and now is replenished again with diverse
people upon the mountains of Israel, which have long lain waist. Ye they be
brought out of the nations, and dwell all safe. Thou shall come up like a
stormy wether, to cover the lord, and as it were a darcke cloud: thou with
all thine hoostes, and a great multitude of people with the.

LORD God: At the same time shall many things come in to thy mind, so that
thou shall ymagyn myschefe, and say: I will up to yonder plain land, saying
they sit at ease, and dwell so safely (for they dwell all without any walls,
they have nether bars nor doors) to spoil them, to rob the^, to lay hand
upon their so well inhabited wildernesses: against that people, yt is gathered
together from among the Heithe^, which have gotten catell and good, and dwell
in the myddest of the land. Then shall Saba and Dedan and the merchants of
Tharsis with all their Worthies, say unto the: Art thou come to rob? Have thou
gathered thy people together, because thou will spoil? to take silver and
gold: to carry away catell and good: and to have a great pray?

Therefore, o thou son of man, thou shall prophecy, and say unto Gog: Thus
says the LORD God: In that day thou shall know, that my people of Israel
dwells safe: and shall come from thy place, out of the north parts: thou and
much people with the, which ride upon horses, whereof there is a great multitude
and an innumerable sort. Ye thou shall come upon my people of Israel, as a
cloud to cover the lord. This shall come to pass in the latter days: I will
bring the up in to my land, that the Heithen may know me, when I get me
honor upon the (o Gog) before their eyes.

Thus says the LORD God: Thou art he, of whom I have spoken before time, by
my servants ye prophets of Israel, which prophesied in those days and
years, that I should bring the upon them. At the same time, LORD God) shall
my indignacio^ go forth in my wrath. For in my gelousy and hot displeasure I
have devised, (...)
that there shall be a great trouble in the land of Israel at that time. The
very fyszshes in the sea, the fowls of the air, the beestes of the field, and
all the men yt are upon the earth, shall tremble for fear of me.

The hills also shall be turned up side down, the stayres of stone shall fall,
and all walls shall syncke to the ground. I will call for a swearde upon them
in all my mountains, says the LORD God: so that every man's swearde shall be
upon another. With pestilence and blood will I punysh him: stormy rain and
hale stones, fire and brymstone, will I cause to rain upon him and all his
heap, ye and upon all that great people that is with him. Thus will I be
magnified, honored, and known among the Heithen: that they may be sure, how
yt I am ye LORD.

The XXXIX Chapter.
Therefore o thou son of man, prophecy LORD God: Behold, o Gog: (...)
thou chief prince at Mesech and Tubal, I will upon the, and turn the about,
and carry the forth, and led yt from the north parts, and bring the up to
the mountains of Israel. As for thy bow, I will smite it out of thy left
hand, and cast thine arowes out of thy right hand. Thou with all thine heap,
and all the people that is with the, must fall upon the mountains of Israel.
Then will I give the unto ye fowls and wild beasts of the field, to be
devoured: there must thou lie upon the field: for eue^ I the LORD have spoken
it, says the LORD God.

LORD. I will make also the name of my holiness to be known among my people
of Israel: and I will not let my holy name be euel spoken of enymore: but the
very Heithen also shall know, that I am the LORD, the holy one of Israel.
Behold, it comes, and shall be fulfilled in deed, says the LORD God. This
is the day, whereof I have spoken: They that dwell in ye cities of Israel, shall
go forth and set fire upon the weapens, and burn them: shyldes and speres,
bows and arowes, bylles and clubbes: seven years shall they be burning
thereof, so that they shall else bring no sticks from ye field, nether have
need to hew down any out of the wodde: For they shall have weapens ynew to
burn. They shall rob those that robbed them, and spoil those that spoiled
them, says ye LORD God.

LORD God. They shall ordene men also to be deed buriers, ever goinge through
the lord, and appoynte them certain places to bury those in, which remain
upon the field, that the land may be cleansed. From end to end shall they
seek, and that v^ months long. Now those that go through the land, where
they se a man's bone, they shall set up a token by it, till the deed buriers
have buried it also, in the valley of the people of Gog. And the name of the
cite shall be called Hamona: Thus shall they make the land clean.

And thou son of man: thus says the LORD God: Speak unto all the fowls
and every bird, ye and to all the wild beasts of the field: heap you
together and come, gather you round about upon my slaughter, that I have
slain for you: even a great slaughter upon the mountains of Israel: eat
flesh, (...). 19. d.
and drink blood. Ye shall eat ye flesh of the worthies, and drink the
blood of the princes of the land: of the wethers, of the lambs, of the
goats, and of the oxen that be all slain at Basan. Eat ye fat your belly
full, and drink blood, till ye be droncken of the slaughter, which I have
slain unto you. Fyl you at my table, with horses and strong horsemen: with
captains and all me^ of war, says the LORD God.

I will bring my glory also among the Gentiles, that all the Heithen may
semy judgment, that I have kept, and my hand which I have laid upon them:
that ye house of Israel may know, how that I am ye LORD their God, from that
day forth. And the Heithen shall know, that where as

For the which cause I hyd my face from them, and delivered them in to the
hondes of their enemies, that they might all be slain with (...). Acordinge to
their un clennesse (...) unfaithful dealinges, so have I entreated them, and
hyd my face from them. Therefore thus says ye LORD God: Now will I bring
again the captyues of Jacob, and have mercy upon the whole house of Israel,
and be gelous for my holy names sake. All their confucion and offense that they
have done against me, shall be taken away: and so safely shall they dwell in
their land, that no man shall make them a frayed. And when I have brought the^
again from among the people, when I have gathered them together out of their
enemies lands, and am praised in them before many Heithen: then shall they
know, that I am the LORD their God, which suffered them to be led in to
captiuyte among the Heithen, but now have brought them again in to their own
land, and not left one of them yonder.

After that, will I hyde my face no more from them, but will pour out my sprete
upon the house of Israel, Eze. 36. d
says the LORD God.

The xl. Chapter.
IN the xxv year of our captiuyte, LORD upon me, and carried me forth: even
in to the land of Israel brought heme in the visions of God: and set me down
upon a marvelous hie mountain, whereupon there was a buyldinge (as it had been
of a cite) toward the north.

Thither he carried me, and behold, there was a man, whose similitude was like
brass, which had a threde of flax in his hand, and a meterodde also. He stood
in the door, and said unto me: marcke well with thine eyes, harken to with
thine ears, and fasten it in thine heart, whatso ever I shall show the, for to
the intent that they might be showed the, therefore art thou brought hither. And
what soever thou seyst, thou shall certify the house of Israel thereof.

Behold, there was a wall on the outsyde round about the house: the
meterodde that he had in his hand, was six cubits long and a spanne. So he
measured the breadth of the buyldinge, which was a meterodde, and the

The chambers of the door eastwarde, were three on every side: alike broad and
long. The pilers also that stood of both the sides, were of one measure. After
this, he measured the wydenesse of the door: which was x cubits, and the heyth
of the door xiij cubits. The edge before the cha^bres was one cubite b^ode
upon both the sides, and the chambres six cubits wide of either side. He
measured ye door from the rygge of one chamber to another, whose wydenesse was
xxv cubits, and one door stood against another. He made pilers also lx cubits
hie, round about the court door. Before the inward part unto the fore
enter of the ynnermer door, were fifty cubits. The chambers and their pilers
within, round about unto ye door, had side wyndowes: So had the fore entries
also, whose wyndowes went round about within. And upon the pilers there
stood date trees.



After that; he brought me to the south side, where there stood a door toward
ye south: whose pilers and porches he measured, these had the first measure,
and with their porches they had wyndowes round about, like the first
^yndowes. The heyth was I cubits, ye (...) xxv, with steps to go up upon:
his (...) stood before him, with his pilers and da^^ trees on either side. And
the door of the ynnermer court stood toward the south, and he measured from
one door to another an C cubits. So he brought me in to ye ynnermer

He brought me also in to the ynmost court upon the east side, and measured
the door, acordinge to ye measure before said. His cha^bers, pilers and porches
had even the same measure, as the first had: and with his porches he had
wyndowes round about. The heith was l cubits, ye breadth xxv cubits: His
porches reached unto the vttemost court: his pilers also had date trees on
either side, and viij steps to go up upon. And he brought

In the door porche, there stood on either side two tables for the slaughtinge:
to slaye the brent offringes, sin offringes and trespace offringes thereupon.
And on the out side as men go forth to the north door, there stood two tables.
Four tables stood on either side of the door, that is viij tables, whereupon
they slaughted. Four tables were of hewn stone for the burnt offringes, of a
cubite and a half long and broad, and one cubite hie: whereupon were laid ye
vessels and ornaments, which were used to, the burnt and slain offeringes,
when they were slaughted. And within there were hokes four fyngers broad,
fastened round about, to hang flesh upon, and upon the tables was laid the
offringe flesh. On the outsyde of the ynnermer door were the syngers chambers
(...) the inward court beside ye north door (...) against the south. There
stood one also (...) side the east door north ward.

(...). ^2. a (...). 2. f
(...) keep the habitacion: and this toward (...) north, is the prestes that
wait upon the altar: which be the sons of Sadoch, that do service before
the LORD in stead of the children of Leui. So he measured the fore court,
which had in length an C cubits, and as much in breadth by the four corners.
Now the altar stood before the house: And he brought me to the fore enter of
the house, and measured the walls by the enter door: which were five cubits
long on either side. The thickness also of the door on either side, was three
cubits. The length of the porche was xx cubits. the breadth xj. cubits, and
upon steps went men up to it: by the walls also were pilers, on either side
one.

The XLI. Chapter.


And he said unto me: this is the holiest of all. He measured also the wall of
the house, which was six cubits. The chambres yt stood round about ye
house, were every one four cubits wide, and one stood hard upon another,
whereof there were xxxiij. And there stood posts beneth by the walls round
about the house, to bear the^ up: but in ye wall of ye house they were not
fastened: The

And he measured the length of the buyldinge before and behind with the
cha^bers upon both the sides: and it contained an C. cubits. The ynnermer
temple, the porch of the forecourte, ye side posts, these three had side
wyndowes, and pilers round about over against the posts, from the ground up
to the wyndowes: The wyndowes them selves were syled over with bordes: and thus
was it above the door, unto the ynmost house, and without also: Ye the whole
wall on every side both within and without was syled over with great bordes.
There were Cherubins and date trees made also, so that one date tree stood ever
betwixt two Cherubins: One Cherub had two faces, ye face of a man lokinge
aside toward the date tree, and a lions face on the other side. Thus was it

The bypostes of the temple were four squared, and the fashion of the
Sanctuary was, even as it appeared unto me before in ye vision. The table was of
wodde, three cubits hie and two cubits long: his corners, the length and the
walls were of wodde. And he said unto me: This is the table, that shall stand
before the LORD. The temple and the holiest of all had either of them two
doors, and every door had two little wickettes which were folden in one upon
another, on every side two. And upon the doors of the temple there were made
Cherubins and date trees, like as upon the walls: and a great thick balke of
wodde was before on the outsyde of the porche. Upon both the sides of the
walls of the porche, there were made deep wyndowes and date trees, having
beams and balkes, like as the house had.

The XLII. Chapter.




Their intraunce, fashion and doors were all of the same manner. Ye even like
as the other chamber doors were, so were those also of the south side. And
before the way toward LORD, must eat the most holy offringes: and there
must they lay the most holy offringes: meat offringes, sin offringes and
trespace offringes, for it is an holy place. When the prestes come therein, they
shall not go out in to the fore court: but (seeing they be holy) they shall
leave the clothes of their ministracion, and put on other garments, when they
have any thing to do with the people.

Now when he had measured all the ynnermer

The XLIII. Chapter.
SO he brought me to ye door, that turns (...)
when I went in, what time as the cite should have been destroyed: and like
the vision that I saw by the water of Cobar. (...)
Then fell I upon my face, but the glory of the LORD came in to the house
through the east door. So a wind took me up, and brought me in to ye ynnermer
court: and behold, the house was full of the glory of the LORD.

I herd one speakinge unto me out of the house, and there stood one by me,
that said unto me: O thou son of man, (...)
this rowme is my seat, and the place of my fotesteppes: where as I will dwell
among the children of Israel for evermore: so that the house of Israel shall no
more defyle my holy name* nether they, ner their kings, through their whordome,
through their hie places, and through the deed bodies of their kings: which have
builded their thresholdes in manner hard upon my thresholdes, and their posts
almost at my posts: so that there is but a bare wall betwixt me and them.

Thus have they defiled my holy name with their abhominacions, that they have
committed. Wherefore I have destroyed them in my wrath: But now they shall put
away their whordome and the deed bodies of their kings out of my sight, that
I may dwell among them for evermore. (...)
Therefore (o thou son of man) show thou the household of Israel a temple,
that they may be ashamed of their wickedness, and measure them selves an
example thereat.

And when they be ashamed of all their works, then show them the form and
fashion of the temple: the coming in, the goinge out, all the manner and
descripcion thereof, ye all the uses and ordinances of it, yt they may keep
and fulfill all the fashions and customs thereof.



(...). ^7. a
The altar was four cubits hie, and from the altar upward stood four
horns, and it was xij cubits long and xij cubits broad, LORD God: these
are the ordinances and laws of the altar, in the day when it is made, to
offer burnt offringes, and to sprenkle blood there upon. (...). 44. c
To the prestes, to ye Levites that be of the sede of Sadoch, and tread before
me to do me service, says the LORD God: Unto these give thou a young
bullock, for a syn offringe: and take the blood of him and sprenkle his four
horns withal, and the four corners of the altar coueringe, with the ledge
that goes round about: Leui. 16* ^
here with shall thou cleanse it, and reconcile it. Thou shall take the bullock
also of the syn-offringe, and burn him in a several place with out the
Sanctuary.

The next day, take a gootbuck without blemish for a syn offringe, to
reconcile the altar LORD, Leui. 22. c
and let the pressed cast salt thereupon, Leui. 2. b
and give them so unto the LORD for a burntoffringe. Seven days shall thou
bring, every day a gootbucke. A young bullock and a ram of the flock
(both without blemish) shall they offer. Seven days shall they reconcile and
cleanse the altar, and offer upon it. When these days are expired, then upon
the viij day and so forth, the prestes shall offer their burnt offringes and
health offringes upon ye altar: so will I be merciful unto you, says the
LORD God.

The XLIIII. Chapter.
AFter this, he brought me again to ye LORD unto me: This door shall be still
shut, and not opened for any man to go through it, but only for the LORD God of
Israel: ye he shall go through it, else shall it be shut still. The prince himself
shall come through it, that he may eat bred before the LORD. At the porche
shall he come in, and there shall he go out again. Exo 40. ^ 24. d Nu. 9. c 3.
Reg. 8. b 2. Par. 7. ^
Then brought he me to the door, upon the north side of the house. And as I
looked about me, behold, the glory of the LORD filled the house: and I fell
down upon my face. So the LORD spoke unto me: O thou son of man, fasten
this to thine heart, behold, and take dilligent head to all that I will say
unto the, concerning all the ordinances of the LORD and all his laws:
pondre well with thine heart the coming in of the house and the goinge forth
of the Sanctuary: and tell that obstinate household of Israel: Thus says the
LORD God: O house of Israel, ye have now

Thus with all your abhominacions ye have broken my covenant, and not kept
the holy ordinances of my Sanctuary* but set kepers of my Sanctuary, even
after your own mind. Therefore thus says ye LORD God: Of all the
strangers that dwell among the children of Israel, no stranger (whose heart
and flesh is not circumcised) shall come within my Sanctuary: No ner the Levites
that be gone back fro me, and have disceaued the people of Israel with
erroures, goinge after their Idols: therefore shall they bear their own
wickedness. Should they be set and ordened to ministre, under the doors of the
house of my Sanctuary? and to do service in the house: to slaye burnt offringes
and sacrifices for ye people: to sto^de before them, and to serve them: seeing
the service that they do them, is before their Idols, and cause the house of
Israel to stomble through wickedness?

^. Reg. 2. f
For the which cause I have pluckte out mine hand over them (says the LORD)
so that now they must bear their own iniquyte, and not to come nigh me, to
serve me with their preasheade, in my Sanctuary, and most holiest of all: that
they may bear their own shame and abhominacions, which they have done.
Should I use them to be porters of the house, and to all the service Eze. 43. d
48. b
that kept the holy ordinances of my Sanctuary, when the children of Israel
were gone fro me: shall come to me, to do me service, to stand before me, and
to offer me the fat and the blood, says the LORD God.

They shall go in to my Sanctuary, and tread before my table, to do me
service, and to wait upon mine ordinances. Now when they go in at the doors
of the ynnermer court, they shall put on lynnynge clothes, so that no wollyne
come upon them: while they do service under the doors of ye ynnermer court,
and within. They shall have fair lynnynge bonettes upon their heads, and
lynnynge breches upon their loins, which in their labor they shall not put
about them: And when they go forth to the people in to the outward court,
they shall put of the clothes, wherein they have ministered, and lay them in the
habitacion of the Sanctuary, and put on other apparel, lest they onhalowe ye
people with their clothes.

They shall not shave their heads, ner norish Leui. 19. f 21. a
but round their heads only. All the prestes that go in to the ynmost court,
Leui. 10. c ^1. b Ose. 1. a 3. a
shall drink no wine. They shall mary no wydowe, nether one that is put from
her huszbonde: but a maid of the sede of the house of Israel, or a wydowe,
that has had a pressed before.

They shall show my people the difference between the holy and unholy, (...)
betwixt the clean and unclean. If any discord arise, they shall discern it,
and give sentence after my judgments. My solemn feasts, my laws and
ordinances shall they keep, and halowe my Sabbathes. (...)
They shall come at no deed person, to defyle them selves: (except it be
father or mother, son or daughter, brother or sister that has had yet no
husbonde) in soch they may be defiled.

And when he is cleansed, there shall be rekened unto him vij days: and if he go
into the Sanctuary again to do service, he shall bring a syn offringe says
the LORD God. They shall have an heretage, (...)
ye I my self will be their heretage: else shall ye give the^ no possession in
Israel, for I am their possession. The meat offringe, syn offringe and trespace
offringe shall they eat, and every dedicate thing in Israel, shall be theirs.
The firstlinges of all the first fruits, and all fre will offringes shall be the
prestes.

Ye shall give unto the pressed also the firstlinges of your dowe, that God may
prospere the resydue. (...)
But no deed carrion shall the pressed eat, ner soch as is devoured of wild
beestes, fowls or catell.

The XLV. Chapter.
WHen ye deuyde the lord by the lot, LORD, (...)
to be holy from other lands: namely, xxv M meteroddes long, and x M broad.
This shall be holy, as wide as it is round about. Of this part there shall be
long unto the Sanctuary v C meteroddes in all the four corners, and l cubits
wide round about to the suburbs. And from this meausre, namely of xxv M
metteroddes long, and x M broad, thou shall measure, wherein the Sanctuary and
the holiest of all may stand.

The resydue of that holy ground shall be the prestes, which do service in the
Sanctuary of the LORD, and go in before the LORD to serve him, that they may
have rowme to dwell in.

As for the Sanctuary, it shall stand for it self: and to the Levites the serve
in that house, there shall be given xx habitacions, of the xxv M length and x M
breadth: ye shall give also unto the cite a possession of v M meteroddes broad,
and xxv M long, beside the part of ye Sanctuary: that shall be for the whole
house of Israel. (...)
Upon both the sides of the Sanctuarys part, and by the cite, there shall be
given unto the prince, what so ever lies over against the cite, as far as
reaches westwarde and eastwarde: which shall be as long as one part, from ye
west unto ye east.

This shall be his own lord in Israel, that my princes be no more chargeable
unto my people. And soch as remains yet over in the land, shall be given to
the house of Israel LORD God: O ye princes, ye have now oppressed and
destroyed enough: now leave of, handle now acordinge to the thing, that is
equal and laufull: and thrust out my people no more, says ye LORD God. Ye
shall have a true weight, a true Epha, and a true Bat.

^^ui. 19. g ^^ut 25. c (...). 20. b
The Epha and the Bat shall be a like. One Bat shall co^teyne ye tenth part of an
Homer, and so shall one Epha do: their measure shall be after ye Homer. One Sycle
makes xx. Geras. (...). 10. b (...)* 27. d (...) g
So xx. Sycles, and xxv. and xv. Sycles make a pound. This is the Heave
offrynge, that ye shall give to be heaued: namely, the xvj. part of an Epha,
out of an Homer of wheat: and the xvj. part of an Epha, out of an Homer of
barlie. The oil shall be measured with the Bat: even the x. part of one Bat
out of a Cor.

Ten Battes make one Homer: for one Homer makes ten Battes. And one la^be from
two hundredth sheep out of the pasture of Israel, for a meat offrynge, burnt
offrynge and health offrynge, to reco^cile them, says the LORD God. All the
people of the land shall give this heave offrynge with a frewil. Again, it
shall be the princes part to offer burnt offrynges, meat offrynges and drynk
offrynges unto the LORD, in the holy days, new Moons, Sabbathes, and in all
the hye feasts of the house of Israel. The syn offrynge, meat offering, brent
offering and health offringe shall he give, to reco^cile LORD God: The first
day of the first month thou shall take a yo^ge bullock without blemysh, and
cleanse the Sanctuary.

So the pressed shall take of the blood of ye syn offrynge, and sprenkle it upon
the posts of the house, and upon the four corners of the altar, with the
door posts of the ynnermer court. And thus shall thou do also the seventh
day of ye month (for soch as have sinned of ignorance, or being disceaued)
to reconcile the house withal. Upon ye xiiij. day of the first month ye shall
keep Easter. Seven days shall the feast continue, ^xo. 12 a (...)* 23. a (...).
16. a
wherein there shall no sower ner leue^ded bred be eaten.

Upon the same day shall ye prince give for himself and all the people of the
land, a bullock for a syn offringe. And in the feast of the seven days he
shall offer every day a bullock and a ram, that are with out blemysh, for a
burnt offrynge unto the LORD: and an he gaote daily for a syn offrynge. For
the meat offrynges he shall give ever an Epha to a bullock, an Epha to a ram,
and an Hin of oil to an Epha. Upon ye xv. day of the seventh month, he shall
keep the seven days holy one after another, eue^ as the other vij. days: with
the syn offrynge, burnt offringe, meat offrynge, and with the oil.

The XLVI. Chapter.
THus says the LORD God: ye door

On the same manner shall the people of the land also do their worshipe before
the LORD, without this door upon the Sabbathes and new Moons. This is now the
burnt-offrynge, that the prince shall bring unto the LORD upon the Sabbath:
six lambs without blemysh, and a ram without blemysh, and an Epha for a meat
offringe, with ye ram. As for the lambs, he may give as many meat offrynges
to them, as he will, and an Hin of oil to an Epha. In the day of the new
month, it shall be a young bullock with out blemysh, six lambs and a ram also
without blemysh. With the bullock he shall give an Epha, and with the ram an
Epha also for a meatofferinge: but to ye lambs, what he may come by: And ever
an Hin of oil to an Epha. When the prince comes, he shall LORD in the hye
solemn feast, as many as come in by the north door to do worshipe, shall go
out again at the south door. And they that come in at the south door, shall go
forth again at ye north door. There shall none go out at the door where he came
in, but shall go forth right over on the other side, and the prince shall go in
and out among them.

Upon the solemn and hie feast days, this shall be the meatofferynge: An Epha
to a bullock, and an Epha to a ram: and to the lambs, as many as he will, but
ever an Hin of oil to an Epha. Now when the prince brings a burntofferynge
or an health offering with a fre will unto the LORD, the east door shall be
opened unto him, yt he may do with his burnt and healthofferynges, LORD a
lamb of a year old without blem^sh for a burntofferynge: this shall he do
every morning. And for a meatofferynge he shall give the sixte part of an
Epha, and the third part of an Hin of oil (to myngle with the cakes) every
morning. Ye this shall be a daily meatofferinge unto the LORD, for an
everlasting ordinance: and thus shall the lamb, the meatofferynge and oil be
given every morning, for a daily burntofferinge.

Morouer, thus says the LORD God: If the prince give a gift unto any of his
sons, then shall it be his sons heretage perpetual, yt he may possess
it. But if he will give one of his servants some of his heretage, (...). 25. b
(...). 36. c
it shall be his to the fre year, and the^ to return again unto ye prince:
for his heretage shall be his sons only. (...). 21. a (...). 9. b
The prince also shall take none of the peoples enheritaunce, ner put the^ from
their possession: but to his own sons shall he give his possession, that my
people be not scatred abroad, but that every man may have his own.



The XLVII. Chapter.
AFter this he brought me again before (...)
there came forth the water upon the right side. Now when the man yt had the
meterodde in his hand went out unto the east door, he measured a M. cubits,
and the^ he brought me through ye water, eue^ to the ancles: so he measured yet
a thousand, and brought me through ye water again unto the knees: yet measured
he a thousand, and brought me through the water unto the loins. After this he
measured a thousand again, then was it soch a river, yt I might not wade
through it: The water was so deep, that it was needful to have swymmed, for it
might not be waded over. And he said unto me: have thou seen this, o thou
son of man? and with that, he brought me to the river banck again.

Now when I came there, there stood many trees upon either side of the river
ba^cke. Then said he unto me: This water that flows out toward the east,
and runs down in to the plain field, comes into the sea: and from the sea it runs out, and makes the waters whole. Ye all that live and move,
where unto this river comes, shall recover. And where this water comes,
there shall be many fysh. For all that comes to this water, shall be lusty and
whole. By this river shall the fyszshers stand from Engaddi unto En Eglaim, and
there sprede out their nets: for there shall be great heaps of fysh, like as
in the main see. As for his claye and pyttes, they shall not be whole, for why,
it shall be occupide for salt.

By this river upon both the sides of the (...)
but ever be ripe at their months, for their water runs out of the
Sanctuary. His fruit is good to eat, and his leaf profitable for medycine.
Thus says the LORD God: Let this be the border, wherein ye shall deuyde the
land unto the xij. trybes of Israel, with the line. Part it indifferently
unto one as unto another: (...)
of the which lord I swore unto your fathers, that it should fall to your
enheritaunce.

This is the border of the land upon the northsyde, from the main see, as men
go to Zadada: namely, Hemath, Berotha, Sabarim: from the borders of Damascus
and Hemath unto Hazar Tichon, that lies upon the coasts of Hauera^. Thus the
borders from the sea forth, shall be Hazar Euan, the border of Damascus the
north, and the borders of Hemath: that is the north part.

The east side shall ye measure from Haueran and Damascus, from Galead and the
land of Israel by Iordane and so forth, from the sea coast, that lies
eastwarde: and this is the east part.

The south side is, from Thamar forth to the waters of strife unto Cades,
(...). 10. b (...). 17. b
the river, to the main see: and that is the south part.



This land shall ye part among you, acordinge to the trybes of Israel, and
deuyde it to be an heretage for you, and for the strangers that dwell among
you, and begette children.

(...) 19 g (...). 10. d (...) 24 c
For ye shall take them among the children of Israel, like as though they were
of your own household and country, and they shall have heretage with you
among the children of Israel.

Look in what trybe the stranger dwells, in the same trybe shall ye give him
his heretage, says the LORD God.

The XLVIII. Chapter.


Upon the borders of Nephtali from the east quarter unto the west, shall
Manasses have his portion. Upon the borders of Manasses from the east side unto
the west, shall Ephraim have his portion. Upon the borders of Ephraim from the
east part unto the west, shall Ruben have his portion. Upon the borders of
Ruben from the east quarter unto the west, shall Judah have his portion. Upon the
borders of Judah from the east part unto the west, ye shall set a side one
porcio^ of xxv.M. meteroddes long and broad (like as another portion from the
east side unto the west,) wherein the Sanctuary shall sto^de.

As for the portion, that ye shall separate LORD, it shall be xxv.M. long, Eze.
45.
and x.M. broad. Which separated holy portion shall belong unto these: namely
to the prestes, toward the north xxv.M. and toward the west x.M. broad,
toward the east x.M. broad also, and toward the south xxv.M. long, wherein
the Sanctuary of the LORD shall stand. Ye this same place shall be the
prestes, yt are of the children of Sadoch, Eze. 43. and 44.
and have kept my holy ordinance: which went not astraye in the error of
the children of Israel, like as the Levites are gone astraye: and this
separated piece that they have of the land, shall be the most holy, hard upon
the borders of the Levites. And next unto the prestes, shall the Levites have
xxv.M. long and x.M. broad. This shall be on every side xxv.M. long, and x.M.
broad. Of this porcio^ they shall sell nothing, ner make any permutacion
thereof, lest the chief of the land fall unto other, for it is hallowed unto the
LORD.

The other v.M. after the breadth, yt lies

The suburbs hard upon the cite, shall have toward the north, L. and ij.C:
toward the south, L. and two C: toward the east, L. and two C: toward the
west also, L. and two C. As for the residue of the length, that lies hard upon
the separated holy ground: namely, x.M. toward the east and x.M. toward the
west, next unto the holy porcio^: it and the increase thereof shall serve for
their meat, that labor in the cite. They that labor for the wealth of the
cite, shall manteine this also, out of what tribe so ever they be in Israel.

All that is separated of the xxv.M. long and xxv.M. broad on the four
parts, yt shall ye put a side for the separated portion of the Sanctuary, and
for the possession of ye cite. The resydue upon both the sides of the Eze. 45. a
shall belong to the prince, before the place of ye xxv.M. unto the east end,
and before the place of ye xxv.M. westwarde, unto the borders of ye cite: this
shall be ye princes porcio^. This shall be the holy place, and the house of the
Sanctuary shall stand in the myddest. Morouer, from the Levites and the cities
possession, yt lie in the myddest of the princes part: look what remains
betwixt the border of Judah and the border of Ben Iamin, it shall be the princes.

Now of the other trybes.

From the east part unto the west, shall Ben Iamin have his portion. Upon the
borders of Ben Iamin from the east side unto ye west, shall Symeon have his
portion. Upon the borders of Symeo^ from the east part unto the west, shall
Isachar have his portion. Upon the borders of Isachar from the east side unto
the west, shall Sabulon have his portion. Upon the borders of Sabulon from the
east part unto the west, shall Gad have his portion. Upon the borders of Gad
southwarde, the coasts shall reach from Thamar forth unto the waters of strife
to Cades, and to the

^ume. 32 ^s. 13.14.
This is ye lord with his porcio^s, which ye shall distribute unto the trybes of
Israel, says ye LORD God. Thus wide shall the cite reach: upon the north
part v C and iiij M measures. The ports of the cite, shall have the names of
the trybes of Israel. Three ports of ye northsyde: One Ruben, another Judah, the
third Leui.

Upon ye east side, v C and iiij M measures, with ye three ports: The one Joseph,
another Be^ Iamin, the third Dan. Upon the south side v C and iiij M measures,
with the three ports: the one Symeon, another Isachar, the third Sabulon. And
upon the west side v C and iiij M measures, with three ports also: the one Gad,
another Asser, the third Nephtali. Thus shall it have xviij M measures round
about. And from that time forth, ye name of the cite shall be: the LORD is
there.

The end of the Prophet Ezechiel.
The Prophet Daniel.
What Daniel conteyneth.
Chap. I. Daniel, Ananias, Misael and Asarias are chosen to learn Caldeish, and
to sto^de before the king. Chap. II. Daniel expounds the kings dream.
Chap. III. The three children will not worshipe the image, they be cast in the
fire, but God delyuereth them. Chap. IIII. Another dream expounded. Chap. V
Daniel reads the writing on the wall, and declares it. Chap. VI. Daniel is
cast in the Lions (...). Chap. VII. The vision of the four beestes. Chap.
VIII. Of the Ram and the got. Chap. IX. The prophecy of the seventy we^es
and of Christ. Chap. X. Another vision showed to Daniel. Chap. XI.XII. Certain
reuelacions of things for to come: some, of the delyueraunce from the
captiuyte of Babylon: some, of the destruction of Jerusalem: some, concerning
the latter days.
The first. Chapter.
IN ye third year of ye reign (...) 24 a (...). ^6. c
and beseged it: and the LORD delivered Ioachim the king off Judah in to his
hand, with certain ornaments of the house off God, which he carried away
unto the land of Sennar, to the house of his god and there brought them in to
his gods treasury. And the king spoke unto Asphenes ye chief chamberlayne,
that he should bring him certain of the children of Israel, that were come of
the kings sede and of princes, yo^ge spryngaldes with out any blemish but
fair and well favored, instruct in all wisdom, conning and vndersto^dinge:
which were able to stand in the kings palace, to read, and to learn for to
speak Caldeish.

Unto these the king appointed a certain portion of his own meat and of the
wine, which he drancke himselff, so to norish the^ three year: that afterward
they might stand (...) 43. f (...). 1. b (...). 1^. a
ner ye wine which he dronke. And this he desired off the chief cha^berlayne,
lest he should defyle himselff. So God gave Daniel favor and grace before ye
chief chamberlayne, that he said unto him: I am afraid off my lord the
king, which has appointed you your meat and drink: lest he spy your
faces to be worse liking then the other spryngaldes of your age, and so ye
shall make me loose my head unto ye king.



Thus Melassar took away their meat and wine, and gave them potage therefore.
God gave now these four spryngaldes conning and learning in all scripture and
wisdom: but unto Daniel specially, he gave understanding off all visions and
dreams.

The II. Chapter
IN the second year off the reign of Job. 7. b Dan. 4. a 5. a
where through his sprete was vexed, and his sleep brake from him. Then the
king commanded to call together all ye soythsayers, charmers, witches and
Caldees, for to show the king his dream. So they came, and stood before the
king. And the king said unto them: I have dreamed a dream, and my sprete
was so troubled therewith, yt I have clean forgotten, what I dreamed. Upon this,
the Caldees answered the king in the Syrians speech: O king, God save thy
life for ever. Show thy servants the dream, and we shall show the, what it
means. The king gave the Caldees their answer, and said: It is gone fro
me: If ye will not make me understand the dream with the interpretacion
theroff, ye shall dye, and your houses shall be prysed. But yff ye tell me the
dream and the meaning thereof, ye shall have off me gifts, rewards and
great honor: only, show me the dream and the significacion of it. They
answered again, and said: the king must show his servants the dream, and
so shall we declare, what it means.

Then the king answerde, saying: I perceive Upon this, the Caldees gave
answer before the king, and said: there is no man upon earth, that can tell
the thing, which ye king speaks of: Ye there is nether king prince ner
LORD, that ever axed soch things at a soythsayer, charmer or Caldeer: for it
is a very hard matter, that the king requires. Nether is there any, that can
certify the king theroff, except the gods: whose dwellinge is not among
the creatures.

Dan. 7. d Luc. 1. c Job. 34. b Iere. 27. a Dan. 4. c Job. 32. b
he puts down kings, he sets up kings: he gives wyszdome unto the
wise, and vndersto^dinge to those that understood he opens the deep
secrets: he knows ye the thing that lies in darcknesse, for the light
dwells with him. 1. Ioh. 1. b
I thank the, and praise the (O thou God off my fathers) that thou have lent
me wyszdome and strength, and have showed me the thing, that we desired off
the, for thou have opened the kings matter unto me.

Upon this went Daniel in unto Arioch, (...)
that shows the king Nabuchodonosor, what is for to come in the latter days.

Thy dream, and that which thou have seen in thine head upon thy bed, is
this* O king, thou did cast in thy mind, what should come herafter: So he
that is the opener off mysteries, tells the, what is for to come. As for me,
this secret is not showed me, for any wiszdome that I have, more then any
other living: but only that I might show

This thou saw, till the time that (without any hondes) there was hewn off
a stone which smote the image upon the fete, (...)
that were both off iron and earth, and brake the^ to poulder: then was the
iron, the earth, the copper, the silver and gold broken altogether in pieces:
and became like the chafe off corn, that the wind blows away from ye
somer floores, that they ca^ no more be found. But the stone that smote the
image, became a great mountain, which fulfylleth the whole earth: This is the
dream. And now will we show before the king, what it means.

O king, thou art a king off kings: (...)
For the God off heaven has given the a kingdom, riches, strength and
majesty: and has delivered the all things, that are among ye children off
men: the beasts off the field, and the fowls under the heaven, and given the
dominion over them all. Thou art that golden head. After yt there shall arise
another kingdom, which shall be less then thine. The third kingdom shall
belyke copper, and have dominacion in all lo^des. The fourth kingdom shall be
as strong as iron. For like as iron brusseth and breaks all things: Ye
even as iron beats every thing down, so shall it beat down and destroy.

Where as thou saw the fete and toes, part of earth and part off iron:
that is a divided kingdom, which nevertheless shall have some off the iron
ground mixte with it, for so much as thou have seen the iron mixte with the
claye.

The toes of the fete that were part off iron and part off claye, signifieeh:
that it shall be a kingdom partly strong and partly weak. And where as thou
saw iron myxte with claye: they shall myngle them selves with ye sede off
simple people, and yet not continue one with another, like as iron will

(...) 9. b
In the days off these kings, shall the God of heaven set up an everlasting
kingdom which shall not perish, and his kingdom shall not be given over to
another people: Ye the same shall break and destroy all these kingdoms, but
it shall endure for ever.

And where as thou saw, that without any hondes there was cut out of the
mount a stone, (...). 12. c
which brake the iron, the copper ye earth, the silver and gold in pieces: by
that has ye great God showed the king, what will come after this. This is a
true dream, and the interpretacion of it is sure.

Then the king Nabuchodonosor, fell down upon his face, and bowed him self
unto Daniel, and commanded that they should offer meat offrynges and sweet
odoures unto him.

The king answerde Daniel, and said: Ye off a treuth, your God is a God
above all gods, a LORD above all kings, and an opener of secrets: seeing
thou can discover this mystery. So the king made Daniel a great man, and
gave him many and great gifts.

He made him ruler off all the countrees of Babylon, and lord of all the
nobles, that were at Babylon. Now Daniel entreated the king for Sydrac, Misac
and Abdenago, so that he made them rulers over all the offices in the land off
Babylon: but Daniel himself remained still in the court by the king.

The III. Chapter.


Now when they stood before the image, which Nabuchodonosor set up, the bedell
cried out with all his might: O ye people, kynreddes and tunges, to you be it
said: that when ye hear the noise off the trompettes, which shall be blown, with
yt harpes, shawmes, Psalteries, Symphonies and all manner off Music: ye fall
down and worshipe the golden image, yt Nabuchodonosor the king has

Now were there certain men off the Caldees, that went even then and accused
ye Jews, and said unto king Nabuchodonosor: O king, God save thy life for
ever. Thou being king have given a-commau^deme^t, that all men when they
hear the noise off the trompettes, harpes, shawmes, psalteries, symphonies and
all the other melodies: shall fall down and bow them selves toward the
golden image: who so the^ fell not down and worshipped not, that he should be
cast in to an hot burning oven. Now are there certain Jews, whom thou have
set over the offices of the land off Babylon: namely, Sydrac, Dan. 2. g
Misac and Abdenago. These men (o king) regard not thy commandment, ye
they will not serve thy gods, ner bow them selves to the golden image, that
thou have set up.

Then Nabuchodonosor in a cruel wrath and displeasure, commanded, yt Sidrac,
Misac and Abdenago, will not ye serve my gods? nor bow your selves to the
golden image, that I have set up? well, be ready herafter, when ye hear the
noise of the tro^pettes, blown with the harpes, shawmes, psalteries,
symphonies and all ye other melodies: that ye fall down, and worshipe the
image which I have made. But yff ye worshipe it not, ye shall be cast immediately
in to an hot burning oven. Let se, what god is there, yt may deliver you out
of my hondes?

Sydrac, Misac and Abdenago answered the king, and said: O Nabuchodonosor, we
ought not to co^sente unto ye in this matter, for why: our God whom we serve,
is able to keep us from the hot burning oven (O king) and can right well
deliver us out off thy hondes. Nu. 16. g
And though he will not, yet shall thou know (o king) that we will not serve
thy gods, ner do reverence to the image,

So these men were bound in their cotes, hosen, shues with their other
garments, and castin to the hot burning oven: for the kings commandment
was so strate, and the oven was exceadynge hot. As for the men that put in
Sydrac, Misac and Abdenago, the flame off the fire destroyed them. And these
three men Sydrac, Misac and Abdenago fell down in ye hot burning oven, Esa.
43. a
being fast bound.

Then Nabuchodonosor the king marueled, and stood up in all haist: he spoke
unto his council and said: did not ye cast these three men bound in to the
fire? They answered, and said unto the king: Ye o king. Actu. 9. a Dan. 10.
b
and nothing corrupt: and the fourth is like an angel to look upon. Upon this
went Nabuchodonosor unto the mouth of the hot burning oven: he speak also,
and said: O Sydrac, Misac and Abdenago, ye servants of the hye God: go
forth, and come hither. And so Sydrac, Misac, and Abdenago went out of the
fire. Then the dukes, lords and nobles, and the kings council came together
to se these men, upon whom the fire had no manner of power in their bodies: (...)
In so much that the very hair of their head was not burnt, and their clothes
unchanged: Ye there was no smell of fire felt upon them.

Then spoke Nabuchodonosor, and said: Blessed be the God of Sidrac, (...)
Misac and Abdenago: which has sent his angel, (...) defended his servants,
that put their trust in him: yt have altered the kings commandment, and
ioperde their bodies there upon ^^ther then they would serve or worshipe any
other god, except their own God only. Therefore I will and commau^de, that all
people, kynreddes and tunges* which speak any blasphemy against the God of
Sydrac, Misac and Abdenago, shall dye, and their houses shall be prysed: Because,
(...)
there is no God yt may save, as this. So the king promoted Sidrac, Misac and
Abdenago, in the land of Babylon.

Nabuchodonosor king, unto all people, (...)
kynreddes and tunges that dwell upon the whole earth: peace be multiplied
among you I thought it good to show the tokens and marvelous works, yt ye
hye God has wrought upon me O how great are his tokens, (...)
and how mighty are his wonders? His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and
his power lasts for ever and ever.

The IIII. Chapter.
I Nabuchodonosor being at rest in mine house, and florishinge in my palace,
saw a dream, which made me afraid: and the thoughts that I had upon my bed,
with the visions of mine head, troubled me. Then sent I out a commission, (...)
that all they which were of wiszdome at Babilo^ should be brought before me,
to tell me the interpretacion of the dream. So there came the soythsayers,
charmers, Caldees and coniurers of deuels: to whom I told the dream, but what
it betokened, they could not show me: till at the last, there came one Daniel
(otherwise called Balthazar, acordinge to the name of my God) which has the
sprete of the holy gods in him: to whom I told the dream, saying: O
Balthazar, thou prince of saythsayers: For so much as I know, that thou have
the sprete of the holy gods, and no secret is hyd from the: tell me therefore,
what ye vision of my dream (yt I have seen) may signify. I saw a vision in
my head upon my bed: and behold, there stood a tree upon the ground, which
was very hye, great and mighty: ye heyth reached unto the heaven, and the
breadth extended to all the ends of the earth: his leaves were fair, he had
very much fruit, so yt every man had enough to eat therein.

The beasts of the field had shadows under it, and the fowls off the air
dwelt in the bows thereof. Shortly, all creatures fed of it. I saw in my head
a vision upon my bed: and behold, a watcher (eue^ an holy angel) came down
from heaven, and cried mightily,

That man's heart off his shall be taken from him, and a beasts heart shall be
given him, till seven years be come and gone upon him.

This erande of the watcher, is a commandment grounded and sought out in the
council off him, that is most holy: to learn men for to understand, that the
highest has power over the kingdoms off men, and gives them, to whom it likes
him, and brings the very outcastes off men over them. This is the dream, yt
I king Nabuchodonosor have seen.

Therefore o Balthazar, tell thou me what it signifies: for so much as all the
wise men off my kingdom are not able to show me, what it means. But thou
can do it, for ye sprete of the holy Gods is in the.

LORD, this dream happen to thine enemies, and the interpretacion to thine
adversaries. As for the tree that thou saw which was so great and mighty,
whose heyth reached unto the heaven, and his breadth in to all the world: whose
leaves were fair, and the fruit much: under the which the beasts of the field
had their habitacion, and upon whose branches the fowls of the air did sit:

Even thou (o king) art the tree, great and strong. Thy greatness
increases, and reaches unto the heaven, so does thy power to the ends of the
earth. But where as the king saw a watcher even an holy angel, that came
down from heaven, and said: hew down the tree, and destroy it: yet leave the
groun-of the rote in the earth, and bind him upon the plain field with
cheynes off iron and stele: He shall be wet with the dew off heaven, and his
part shall be with the beestes of the field, till seven years be come and gone
upon him: This (o king) is ye interpretacio^, ye it is the very deuyce of
him, yt is highest of all, and it touches my LORD the king.

Thou shall be cast out fro men, and thy dwellinge shall be with the beestes of
the field: with grass shall thou be fed like an ox. Thou must be wet with the
dew of the heaven: ye seven years shall come and go upon the, till thou
know, that the highest has power upon the kingdoms of men, and gives Dan. 2.
c Iere. 27. a
where as it was said, that the rote of the tree should be be left still in the
ground: it betokens, yt thy kingdom shall remain whole unto ye, after thou
have learned to know, that the power comes from heaven. Wherefore (o king) be
content with my council, that thou may lowse thy sins with righteousness,
and thine offenses with mercy to poor people: for soch things shall prolonge
thy peace. All these things touch the king Nabuchodonosor.

So after xij. months, the king walked up and down in the paalace off the
kingdom off Babylon, and said: This is the great cite off Babilo^, which I
myself (with my power and strength) have made a kings court, for the honor
off my magesty. While these words were yet in the kings mouth, there fell a
voice from heaven, sayengt: O king Nabuchodonosor, to the be it spoken: Thy
kingdom shall depart from the, thou shall be cast out of men's company: thy
dwellinge shall be with the beestes off the field, so that thou shall eat grass
like as an ox, till seven years be come and gone over the: even until thou
know, that the highest has power upon the kingdoms off men, and that he may
give them, unto whom it pleases him.

The very same hour was this matter fulfilled upon Nabuchodonosor: so that he
was cast out off men's company, and ate grass like an ox. His body was wet
with the dew of heaven, till his hayres were as great as Aegles feathers, and
his nales like birds claws.

When this time was past, I Nabuchodonosor Dan. 3. f


He handles acordinge to his will, among ye powers of heaven and among the
inhabitours of the earth: Psalm. 134. a
and there is none that may resist his hand, Job. 42. b
or say: what do thou? At the same time was mine understanding given me
again, and I was restored to the honor of my kingdom, to my dignite, and to
mine own shappe again. My greatestates and princes sought unto me, and I was
set in my kingdom again, so that I had yet greater worshipe.

The^ did I Nabuchodonosor, loaue, magnify and praise the king of heaven: for
all his works are true, and his ways right. As for those that go on proudly,
he is able to bri^ bring them down.

The V. Chapter.
Balthazar the king made a great bancket to his thousand lords: ^. Par. 46.
c
that the king and his lords (with his queen and concubynes) might dri^ke
therout.

So they brought the golden vessel, that was taken out of the temple of the
LORDS house at Jerusalem. Then the king and his lords with his queen and
concubines drunk out of them. They drunk wine, and praised their Idols of
gold, silver, copper, iron, wodde and stone.

In the very same hour there appeared fyngers, as it had been of a man's hand
writynge, right over against the candelsticke upon the plain wall in the
kings palace: and the king saw the palm of ye hand yt wrote. Iere. 50. a
Then changed the king his countenance, and his thoughts troubled him: so
that the joints off his body shoke, and his knees smote one against the other.
Wherefore the king cried mightily, Dan. 2. a
that thy should bring him the charmers, Caldees and

Upon this, came all the kings wise men: but they could nether read the
wrytinge, (...) show the king what it signified. The^ was the king sore
afraid, in so much, that his color changed, and his lords were so
sorevexed. So by reason off this matter, yt had happened to the king and his
lords, the queen went up herself in to the bancket house, and spoke unto the
king, saying: O king God save thy life for ever: Let not yt thoughts
trouble the, and let not thy countenance be changed. For why: there is a man
in ye kingdom, that has the sprete off the holy gods within him, as it was
seen in thy fathers days. He has understanding and wisdom like the gods.
Ye the king Nabuchodonosor thy father made this man chest of the soythsayers,
charmers, Caldees and

Then was Daniel brought before the king. So the king spoke unto Daniel, and
said: Art thou that Daniel, one off the presoners of Judah, whom my father the
king brought out of Iewry? I have herd speak of the, that thou have the
sprete of the holy gods, experience and vndersto^dinge, and that there has
been great wisdom found in the. Now have there been brought me, wise and
conning charmers, to read this writing, and to show me the meaning theroff:
But they could not tell me, what this matter signified. Then herd I say, yt
thou can expound darcke things, and declare hard doutes. Well than, if
thou can rode this writing, and show me the meaning thereof: thou shall be
clothed with purple, have a cheyne of gold about thy neck, and rule the third
part of my kingdom.

Daniel answered, and said before ye king: As for thy rewards, keep them to
thy self, or give ye rych gifts to another: (...)
yet not thelesse, I will read the writing unto ye king, and show him the
interpretacion thereof O king, God the highest gave unto Nabuchodonosor thy
father, ye dignite of a king, (...)
with worshipe and honor: so yt all people, kynreddes and tunges stood in awe and
fear of him, by reason off the hye estate, that he had lent him. For why: he
slew, whom he would: he smoke, whom it pleased him. Again: whom he would, he
set up: and whom he list, he put down. (...) 4. d
But because his heart was so proud, and his stomach set fast unto
wylfulnesse: he was deposed from his kyngly trone, and his magesty was taken
from him. He was shot out from among men, his heart was like a beestes heart,
and his dwelling was with the wild Asses: he was feign to eat grass like an
ox, and his body was wet with the dew off the heaven: till he knew, that the
highest had power upon the kingdoms of men, and sets over them, whom he list.

LORD off heaven, so that the vessels off his house were brought before the:
that thou, and thy lords, with thy queen and concubynes, might drink wine
therout: And have praised the Idols of silver and gold, copper and iron, off
wodde and stone: As for the God, in whose hand consists thy breath and all
thy ways: thou have not loaued him. (...) 17. c


Therefore is the palm off this hand sent hither from him, to token up this
wrytinge, And this is the scripture, that is written up: Mane, Thetel, Phares.
Now the interpretacion off the thing is this: Mane, God has nombred thy
kingdom, and brought it to an end: Thetel, Thou art weyed in the balaunce,
and art found to light: Phares, Thy kingdom is dealt in parts, and given to
the Medes and Perses.

Then commanded Balthazar, to cloth Daniel with purple, to hang a cheyne off
gold about his neck, and to make a proclamacion concerning him: that he
should be the ruler off the third part off his kingdom. (...) 7. b 21 a ^. a
The very same night was Balthazar the king off the Caldees slain, and Darius
out of Media took in the kingdom, being lxij. year off age.

The VI. Chapter.


But Daniel exceaded all these princes and lords, for the sprete off God was
plenteous in him: so that the king was minded to set him over the whole
realm. Wherefore the princes and lords sought, to pyke out in Daniel some
quarrel against the kingdom: yet could they find none occasion ner fawte upon
him. For why: he was so faithful, yt there was no blame ner dishonesty found
in him.

Then said these men: we will get no quarrel against this Daniel, except it
be in the law off his God. Upon this, went the princes and lords together
unto the king, and said thus unto him: king Darius, God save thy life for
ever.

All the great estates off the realm: as ye

So Darius made the writing, and confirmed it. Now when Daniel understood that
the writing was made, he went in to his house: and the wyndowes of his hall
toward Jerusalem stood open. There kneled he down upon his knees, three times
a day: there he made his peticion, and praised his God, like as his manner was
to do before time.

Then these men made search, and found Daniel making his peticion, and
prayenge unto his God. So they came to the king,

Then answered they, and said unto the king: Daniel one of the presoners of
Judah (O king) regards nether the ner thy statute, that thou have made, but
makes his peticion three times a day. When the king herd these words, he
was sore grieved, and would have excused Daniel, to deliver him, and put off the
matter, unto the Son went down, to the intent that he might save him.

These men perceiving the kings mind, said unto him: know this (o king)
that the law off the Medes and Perses is, that the commandment and statute
which the king makes, ^ani. 14. c
may not be altered. Then the king bad them bring Daniel, and they cast him
into the Lions den.

The king also spoke unto Daniel, and said:

So the king went in to his palace, and kept him sober all night, so that
there was no table spread before him, nether could he take any sleep. But be
times in the morning at the break off the day, the king arose, and went in
all haist unto the den off the Lions.

Now as he came ny^ unto ye de^ne, he cried with a piteous voice unto Daniel: Ye
ye ki^ge spoke, and said unto Daniel: O Daniel, thou servant off the living
God, Is not thy God (whom thou allwaye seruest) able to deliver the from the
lions? Daniel said unto the king: O king, God save thy life for ever:

Dan. 3. e Act. 12. c Iud. 14. c ^. Re. 17. e Heb. 11. f
My God has sent his angel, which has shut the lions mouths, so that they
might not hurt me. For why: mine vngiltynesse is found out before him. And as
for the (o king) I never offended the.

Hest. 2. b Dani* 14. g
them, their children and their wives. So the lions had the mastry of them, and
brake all their bones a sonder, or ever they came at the ground.

Dan. 3. f
After this, wrote king Darius unto all people, kynreddes and tunges, that
dwelt in all lands: peace be multiplied with you: My commandment is, in all
my dominion and kingdom, that men fear and stand in awe off Daniels God:

Dani. 14. f 7. c
For he is the lyuinge God, which abides ever: his kingdom shall not fail,
and his power is everlasting. It is he that delyuereth, Esa. 43. b Osee. 13. b
Dan. 3. f.
and saves: he does wonders and marvelous works, in heaven and in earth: he
has preserved. Daniel from the power of the lions. (...)
This Daniel prospered in the reign off Darius and Cirus of Persia.

The VII. Chapter.
IN the first year off Balthazar king

The first was as a lion, and yet had he Aegles wings. I saw, (...)
that his wings were plucte from him, and he taken away from the earth: that
he stood upon his fete as a man, (...)
and that there was given him a man's heart.

Behold, the second be was like a Beer, and stood upon the one side. (...)
Among his teth in his mouth he had iij great long teth and it was said
unto him: Arise, eat up much flesh.

Then I looked, and behold, there was another like unto a Leoparde: this had
wings as a foul, even four upon the back. This be had four heads, and
there was power given him. (...)
After this I saw in a vision by night, and behold: the fourth be was
grymme and horrible, and marvelous strong. It had great iron teth, it
devoured, and destroyed, and stamped the residue under fete. It was far
unlike the other beestes that we^^ before it: for it had ten horns, (...)
wheroff I took good head.

And behold, there came up among the^, another like horn, before whom there
were three of the first horns pluckte away. Behold, this horn had eyes like
a man, and a mouth speaking presumptuous things. (...)
I looked till the seats were prepared, and till the old aged sat him down.
His clothinge was as white as snow, and the hayres of his head like the pure
woll.

His trone was like the fiery flame, and his wheles as the burning fire. There
drew forth a fiery stream, and went out from him. A thousand times a
thousand served him, x.M. times ten thousand stood before him. The judgment
was set, and the books opened Then took I head there unto, because of the voice
of the proud words, which that horn spoke.

I beheld, till the beast was slain, and his body destroyed, (...). 1^. d
(...). 19. d 20. c
and given over to be brent in the fire.

As for the power of the other beestes also, it was taken away, but their
lives were prolonged for a time and season. I saw in a vision by night, and
behold: there came one in the clouds of heaven like the son of a man,
(...). 13. c ^ct. 1. b (...). 1. a
which went unto the old aged, before (...). 2. a (...). 28. c (...). 12. d
that all people, trybes and tunges should serve him. His power is an
everlasting power, which shall never be put down: and his kingdom endures
incorrupt. My heart was vexed, and I Daniel had a troubled sprete within me,
(...) ^4. f
and the visions off my head made me afraid: till I gat me unto one off them
that stood by, (...). 9. d
to know the treuth, concerning all these things. So he told me, and made
me understood the interpretacio^ of these things.

These four great beasts, are four kings which shall arise out of the
earth. These shall take in the kingdom off the saints of the most highest, and
possess it still more and more for a long season. After this I required
diligently to know the treuth, concerning the fourth be, which was so
far unlike the other beestes, and so horrible: whose teth were of iron, and
his nales off brass: which devoured and destroyed, and stamped the resydue
under his fete. (...). 13. a 17. c.
I desired also to know the treuth, as touching the ten horns that he had
upon his head, and this other which came up afterward, before whose face the^
fell down three: which horn had eyes and a mouth that spoke presumptuous
things, and looked with a grimmer visage then his fellows.

I beheld, and the same horn made battle against the saints, ye and gat
the victory off them: until the time, that the old aged came, that the
judgment was given to the chefest saints: and till the time, that ye saints
had the kingdom in possession.



^ach. 1. e
The ten horns, are ten kings that shall arise out of that kingdom, after who^
there shall stand up another, which shall be greater then the first.

He shall subdue three kings, and shall speak words against the highest off
all: he shall destroy the saints of the most highest and think, that he may
change times and laws. They shall be given under his power, until a time,
two times, Dan. 2. c Apoc. 12. ^
and halff a time.

But the judgment shall be kept, so that his power shall be taken from him, for he
shall be destroyed, and perish at the last. As for the kingdom, power and all
might that is under the heaven: it shall be given to the holy people off the
most highest, Luc. 1. c Dan. 14 f
whose kingdom is everlasting, ye all powers shall serve and obey him. Thus
far exte^de ye words.

Nevertheless, I Daniel was so vexed in my thoughts, that my countenance
changed, Luc. 2. c
but the words I kept still in my heart.

The VIII. Chapter.
IN the third year off the reign of Dan. 2. a
which lies in the land off Elam) and in ye vision, me thought I was by the
river off Vlai.

Then I looked up, and saw: and behold there stood before the river, a ram,
which had horns: and these horns were hye, but one was hyer then another, and
the highest came up last. I saw that this ram puszhed with his horns, against
the west, against the north, and against the south: so that no beestes might
stand before him, ner defend them from his power: but he did as him listed,
and waxed greatly. I took head unto this, and then came there an hegoate from
the west, over the whole earth, and touched not the ground.

This goat had a marvelous goodly horn betwixt his eyes, and came unto the
ram, that had the two horns (whom I had seen a fore by the river side) and
ran fearcely upon him with his might. I saw him draw nigh unto the ram,
being very fearce upon him: ye he gave him soch a stroke, that he brake his
two horns:

Nether had the ram so much strength as to stand before him: but he kest him
down, trodde him under his fete: and no man was able to deliver the ram out
of his power.

The goat waxed exceadinge great, and wyndes off the heaven. Dan. 7. a 11. a
Mac. 1. a
Ye out of one of the leest off these horns, there came up yet another horn,
which waxed marvelous great: toward the south, toward the east, and toward
the fair pleasant land. It grew up to the host off heaven, whereof it did
cast some down to the ground, and off the stars also, and trod them under
fete.

Ye it grew up unto the prince off the host, from whom the daily offeringe
was taken, and the place off his Sanctuary casten down. And a certain season
was given unto it, against the daily offeringe (because of wickedness) that
it might cast down the verite to the ground, and so to prospere in all
things, that it went about. Upon this I herd one off the saints speaking,
which saint said unto one that axed this question:

How long shall this vision off the daily sacrifice and of the waistinge
abhominacion endure: that the Sanctuary and the power shall so be trodden under
foot? And he answered him: Unto the euenyinge and the morninge, even two
thousand and three hundredth days: then shall the Sanctuary be cleansed again.



Then said he unto me: O thou son of man, marcke well, for in the last time
shall this vision be fulfilled. Now as he was speaking unto me, I waxed
faynte, so that I suncke down to the ground. But he took hold upon me, and
set me up again, saying: Behold, I will show the, what shall happen in the
last wrath: for in the time appointed it shall be fulfilled.

The ram which thou saw with the two horns, is the king off the Medes
and Perses: but the goat is the king of Greek land: the great horn that
stood betwixt his eyes, that is the pryncipall king. But where as it brake,
and four other rose up in the stead: it signifies, that out of this people
shall stand up four kingdoms, but not so mighty as it.



He shall be mighty and strong, but not in his own strength. He shall destroy
above measure, and all that he goes about, shall prospere: he shall slaye the
strong and holy people. And through his craftynes, falsede shall prospere in
his hand, his heart shall be proud, and many one shall he put to death in his
welthynesse. He shall stand up against the prince off princes, but he shall be
destroyed without hand. (...)
And this vision that is showed unto the, is as sure as the evenynge and the
morning. Therefore write thou up this sight, (...)
for it wylbe long or it come to pass.

Upon this was I Daniel very faynte, so that I lay sick certain days: but
when I rose up, I went about the kings business, and marueled at the
vision, nevertheless no man knew of it.

The IX. Chapter.
IN the first year off Darius the son (...)
which was of the sede off the Medes, and was made king over the realm of the
Caldees: Ye even in the first year off his reign, I Daniel desired to know
the yearly nombre out of the books, (...)
whereof the LORD spoke unto Jeremy the prophet: that Jerusalem should lie
waist lxx. years: and I turned me unto God the LORD, (...)
for to pray and make mine intercession, with fasting, sack cloth and ashes I
prayed before the LORD my God, and knowleged, saying:

O LORD, thou great and fearful God, thou that kepest covenant and mercy
with them, which love the, and do thy commandments: We have sinned, we have
offended, (...)
we have been disobedient and gone back: ye we have departed from all thy
precepts and judgments.

We would never follow thy servants the prophets, that spoke in thy name to
our kings and princes to our forefathers, and to all the people off the
land. (...)
O LORD, righteousness belongs unto the, unto us pertayneth nothing but
open shame: as it is come to pass this day unto every man of Judah, and to
them that dwell at Jerusalem:

Ye unto all Israel, whether they be far or nigh: through out all lands,
wherein thou have strowed them, because of the offenses that they had done
against the.

Ye o LORD, unto us, to our kings and princes, to our forefathers: even to
us all, that have offended the, (...) 105. a
belongs open shame. LORD our God, pertayneth mercy and forgiveness. As
for us, we are gone back from him, and have not obeyed the voice of the LORD
our God, to walk in his laws, which he laid before us by his servants the
prophets: (...). 1. d (...). 7. b
ye all Israel have transgressed, and gone back from thy law, so that they
have not herkened unto thy voice.

(...)
Wherefore the curse and ooth, that is written in the law of Moses the servant
of God (against whom we have offended) is poured upon us. And he has
performed his words, (...)
which he spoke against us, and against our judges that judged us: to bring
upon us soch a great plage, as never was under heaven, like as it is now come
to pass in Jerusalem. Ye all this plage, as it is written in the law of
Moses, is come upon us. Yet made we not our prayer before the LORD our God,
that we might turn again from our wickedness, and to be learned in thy
verite. Therefore has ye LORD made haist, to bring this plage upon us: for
the LORD our God is rightuous, in all his works which he does: for why, we
would not harken unto his voice.

LORD our God, thou that with a mighty hand have brought thy people out of
Egipte, (...). 2. b (...). 14
to get thy self a name, which remains this day: we have sinned (o LORD)
and done wickedly against all thy righteousness: yet let thy wrothfull
displeasure be turned away (I beseke the) from thy cite Jerusalem thy holy
hill. And why? for our sins sake and for the wickedness of our
forefathers: is Jerusalem and thy people abhorred, of all them that are about
us. Now therefore (O our God) hear the prayer of thy servant, and his
intercession: O let thy face shine over thy sanctuary, that lies waist.

O my God, enclyne thine ear, and harken (at the leest for thine own sake)
open thine eyes: behold how we be desolated, ye and the cite also, which is
called after thy name: For we do not cast our prayers before the in our own
righteousness, no: but only in thy great mercies. O LORD, hear: O forgive
LORD: O LORD considre, tarry not ouerlonge: but for thine own sake do it, O
my God: for thy cite and thy people is called after thy name.

LORD my God, for the holy hills sake of my God: ye while I was yet speakinge
in my prayer, behold, the man Gabriel Dan. 2. c 8. a
and touched me about ye offeringe time in the evening. He infourmed me, and
spoke unto me: O Daniel (said he) I am now come, to make the understand it:
For as soon as thou begannest to make thy prayer, it was so diuysed, and
therefore am I come to show the. And why? Da^. 10. c. d
for thou art a man greatly beloved.

Wherefore, pondre the matter well, that thou may learn, to understand the
vision. Lxx. wekes are determed over thy people, and over thy holy cite: that
the wickedness may be consumed, that the sin may have an end, that the
offense may be reconciled, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, to
fulfill ye visions and the prophets, and to anoynte the most holy one.
Understood this 1. Par. 36. d 1. Esd. 1. a
that from the time it shall be concluded, to go and repair Jerusalem again,
unto Christ (or the anointed) prince: there shall be seven wekes. Then shall the
streets and walls be builded again lxij. wekes, but with hard troublous
time. Afther these lxij. wekes, shall Christ be slain, and they shall have no
pleasure in him. Then shall there come a people with the prince, and destroy
the cite and the sanctuary: and his end shall come as the water floude. But the
desolacion shall continue till the end of the batell.

He shall make a strong bond with many, for the space of a weke: and when the
weke is half gone, he shall put down the slain and meat offringe. Matt. 24.13.
Mar. 13. b
And in the temple there shall be an abominable desolacio^, till it have
destroyed all. And it is concluded, yt this waistinge shall continue unto the
end.

The X. Chapter.
IN the third year of king Cirus of

He understood the matter well, and perceived what the vision was. At the same
time, I Daniel mourned for the space of three wekes, so that I had no lust to
eat bred: as for flesh and wine, there came none within my mouth: No, I did
not ones anoynte my self, till the whole three wekes were out.

Upon the xxiiij. day of the first month, I was by the great floude, called
Tigris: I lift up mine eyes, and looked: and behold, a man clothed in lynnynge,
^an. 7. b Apo. 1. c
whose loins were gyrded up with fine gold of Araby: his body was like the
Chrisolite stone, his face (to look upon) was like lightenynge, his eyes as the
flame of fire, his arms and fete were like fair glisteringe metal, but the
voice of his words was like ye voice of a multitude.

Dan. 3. e Act. 9. a
I Daniel alone saw this vision, the men that were with me, saw it not: but a
great Dan. 9. b
thou well beloved man: take good head of the words, that I shall say unto ye,
and sto^de right up, for unto yt am I now sent.

And when he had said these words, I stood up tremblinge. Then said he unto
me: fear not Daniel: for why, sense the first day that thou set thine heart
to understand, and did chasten thy self before thy God: thy words have
been herd. And I had come unto the when thou begannest to speak, had not the
prince over the kingdom of the* Perses with stand me xxj. days. But lo,
Michael one of the chief princes, ^osu. 5. d Dan. 12. a
came to help me, him have I left by the king of Persia, and am come to show
the, what shall happen unto thy people in the latter days: for it will be long
yet or the vision be fulfilled.

Dan. 9. b
saying: O thou man so well beloved, fear not: be content, take a good heart
unto the, and be strong. So when he had spoken unto me, I recovered, and
said: Speak on my lord, for thou have refreszshed me. The^ said he: know
thou wherefore I am come unto ye? now will I go again to fight with the prince
of the Perses. As soon as I go forth, lo, the prince of Grekelonde shall come.
Nevertheless, I will show the the thing, yt is fast noted in the scripture of
treuth. And as for all yonder matters, there is none that helps me in them,
but Michael your prince.

The XI. Chapter.
ANd in the first year of Darius of Media, (...)
And as soon as his kingdom comes up, it shall be destroyed, (...)
and divided toward ye four wyndes of the heaven. They yt come after him,
shall not have soch power and dominion as he: but his kingdom shall be scatred,
ye even among other the^ those. And the king of ye south shall be migthier,
then his other princes. Against him there shall one make himself strong, and
shall rule his dominion with great power.

But after certain years they shall be joined together, and the kings daughter
of the south shall come to the king of the north, for to make fre^dshipe, but
she shall not obtain the power of that arm, nether shall she* be able to
endure through his might: but she, and soch as brought her (ye and he yt begat
her, and conforted her for his time) shall be delivered up. Out of ye branches
of her rote, there shall

The^ the king of ye south shall be angry, and shall come forth to fight against
the king of the north: Ye he shall bring a great multitude of people
together, and a great heap shall be given into his hand: these shall he carry
away with great pride, for so much as he has cast down so many thousands,
nevertheless he shall not prevail. For ye king of ye north shall gather (of the
new) a greater heap of people then before, and come forth (after a certain
time and years) with a mighty host and exceadinge great good.



So after yt he has taken truce with him, he shall handle disceatfully: that he
may get up, and over come him with a small flock: and so with craftynesse to
get him to ye fattest place of the land, and to deal otherwise, then either
his fathers or grau^d fathers did. For he shall destroy the thing, ye they had
robbed and spoiled, ye and all their substance: ymagenynge thoughts against
the strong holds, and that for a time. His power and heart shall be sterred up
with a great army against the king of the south: where through the king of the
south shall be moved then unto batell, with a great and mighty host also.
Nevertheless, he shall not be able to stand, for they shall conspyre against
him. Ye they yt eat of his meat, shall hurt him: so that his host shall
fall, and many be slain down.

These two kings shall be minded to do myschefe, and talk of disceate at one
table: but they shall not prospere: for why, 2. Mac. 5. ^
the end shall not come yet, unto the time appointed. The^ shall he go home
again in to his own land with great good, and set his heart against the
holy covenant, he shall be busy against it, and then return home. At the time
appointed he shall come again, and go toward the south: So shall it happen
otherwise then at the first, yet ones again. And why, the ships of Cythim
shall come upon him, that he may be smytten and turn again: Nu. 24. d
yt he may take indignacion against the covenant of holiness, to meddle against
it. Ye he shall turn him, and draw soch unto him, as leave the holy covenant.

He shall set mighty men to vnhalowe the

Ye some of those which have understanding shall be persecuted also: yt they
may betryed, purified and cle^sed, till the time be out: for there is yet
another time appointed. The king shall do what him list, he shall exalte and
magnify himself against all, that is God. 2. ^he. 2
Ye he shall speak marvelous things against the God of all gods, wherein he
shall prospere, Apoc. 15
so long till the wrath be fulfilled, for the conclusion is devised already. He
shall not regard the God of his fathers, but his lust shall be upon women: Ye
he shall not care for any God, for he shall magnify himself above all. In his
place shall he worshipe the mighty Idols: and the god whom his fathers knew
not, shall he honor with gold and silver, with precious stones and pleasant
Jewels.

This shall he do, sekinge help and sucoure Soch as will receive him, and take
him for God, he shall give them great worshipe and power: ye and make them
lords of the multitude, and give them the land with rewards. In the latter
time, shall the king of the south strive with him: and the king of the north
in like manner shall come against him with charettes, horsemen and with a great
navy of ships. He shall come in to the lands, destroy and go through: he shall
enter also in to the fair pleasant land. Many cities and countrees shall
decay, Apo. 12. c
except Edom, Moab and the best of the children of Ammon, which shall escape
from his hand. He shall stretch forth his ho^des upon the countrees, and the
land of Egipte shall not escape him. For through his goinge in, he shall have
dominion over the treasures of silver and gold, and over all the precious
Jewels of Egipte, Lybia and Ethiopia Nevertheless the tydinges out of the east
and the north shall trouble him, Apo. 11. c
for the which cause he shall go forth to destroy and curse a great multitude.
The tents of his palace shall he pytch betwixt the two sees, upon the hill of
the noble sanctuary, ^po. 19. d (...). c
for he shall come to the end of it, and then shall no man help him.

The XII. Chapter.
^po 19. c
which stondeth on thy peoples side, shall arise up, for there shall come a time
of trouble, ^at. 24. b
soch as never was, sens there began to be any people, unto that same time.
Then shall thy people be delivered, ye all those that be found written in the
book. ^oh. 5. c ^ Cor. 15. c
Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake: some to
everlasting life, some to perpetual shame and reprofe. ^att. 13. c
The wise (soch as have taught other) shall glister, as the shyninge of heaven:
and those that have instruct the multitude unto godliness, shall be as the
stars, world without end.

(...). 10. a
which stood above upon the waters of the floude: when he held up his right
and left hand unto heaven, and swear by him which lives for ever: (...)
that it shall tarry for a time, two times and half a time: and when the power of
the holy people is clean scatred abroad, the^ shall all these things be
fulfilled.

I herd it well, but I understood it not. (...)
they shall regard it. And from ye time forth that the daily offering shall be
put down and the abominable desolacion set up, there shall be a thousand two
hundredth and xc. days. O well is him, that waits, and comes to the
thousand iij.C. and xxxv. days. Go thou thy way now, till it be ended: take
thy rest, and bide in thy lot, till the days have an end.

The end of the prophet Daniel.
The Prophet Oseas
What Oseas conteyneth.
Chap. I. God refuses the Jews, and ma^eth himself to the Gentiles. Chap. II.
Plage over the Jews, that will not amend: A promise of mercy to those that
will repent. Chap^ III. The merciful love of God, toward the same unthankful
people. Chap. IIII. The sins of the prestes and of the people, with reprofe
for the same. Chap. V. Against the prestes that disceaue the people. Chap. VI.
The unthankfulness of the People: Again, the loving kyndnesse of God. Chap.
VII. No medycine can help, so sore are they wounded with ydolatry. Chap. VIII.
Idolatry in Samaria and Israel. Chap. IX. Punyszhment upon Israel for Idolatry.
Chap. X. The unthankfulness of Israel. The calfe in Samaria, for the which and
soch like abhominacions, he tells them of destruction. Cha. XI.XII. God
calls them again, with rehearsinge his benefits done to them before. Chap.
XIII. He shows them their wickedness, and punyszhment for the same. Chap.
XIIII. He cries and exorteth the people to convert, promisynge swetely and
louyngly to receive them.


This is the word of the LORD, that came unto Oseas the son of Beeri, (...)
in the days of Osias, Ioathan, Achas and Ezechias kings of Judah: and in the
time of Jeroboam the son of Ioas king of Israel.

The first Chapter.
LORD spoke unto Oseas, he said unto him: Go thy way, (...). b (...) 4. d
take an harlot to thy wife, and get children by her: for the ^ode has
committed great whordome against the LORD. So he went, and took Gomer ye
daughter of Deblaim: which conceived, and brought forth a son. And the LORD
said unto him: (...)
call his name Iesrael, for I will shortly avenge the blood of Iesrael upon the
house of Iehu, and will bring the kingdom of the house of Israel to an end.
Then will I break the bow of Israel, in the valley of Iesrael.

(...)
but forget them, and put them clean out of remembrance. (...)
Nevertheless I will have mercy upon the house of Judah, and will save them, even
through the LORD their God. But I will not deliver them through any bow, swearde,
batel, horses or horsemen.

Now when she had weened Loruhama, she conceived again, and bare a son. Then
said he: call his name Lo Ami (that is to say, not my people.) For why? ye
are not my people, therefore will not I be yours. And though the nombre of the
children of Israel be as the sonde of the sea, (...)
which can nether be measured ner told: Yet in the place where it is said
unto them, ye be not my people: even there shall it be thus reported of them:
they be ye children of the living God. Then shall the children of Judah and the
children of Israel be gathered together again, (...)
and chose them selves one head, and then depart out of the land: for great
shall be the day of Iesrael.

The II. Chapter.
TEll your brethren, that they are my Iere. 3. a
nether am I her huszbo^de: unless she put away her whordome out of my sight,
and her aduoutry from her breasts. If no, I shall strype her naked, and set her,
even as she came in to ye world: Eze. 16. a
Ye I shall lay her waist, and make her like a wilderness, and slaye her for
thyrste. I shall have no pite also upon her children, Ioh. 8. d
for they be the children of f^rnicacion.

Their mother has broken her wedlock, and she that bare them, is come to
co^fucion. 4. Re. 17*
For she said: I will go after my lovers, that give me my water and my bred, my
woll and my flax, my oil and my drink. But I will hedge her way with
thorns, and stop it, that she shall not find her fotestoppes: and though she
run after her lovers, yet shall she not get them: she shall seek them, Leui.
15. c
but not find them. Then shall she say: well, I will go turn again to my
first huszbonde, for at yt time was I better at ease, then now. But

Wherefore now will I go take my corn and wine again in their season, Eze. 16.
b
and fet again my woll and my flax, which I gave her, to cover her shame.
Iere. 13. c
And now will I dyscouer her foolishness, even in the sight of her lovers, and
no man shall deliver her out of my hondes. Morouer, I will take away all her
mirth, her holy days, her newmoones, Deu. 16. c
her Sabbathes and all her solemn feasts: I will destroy her vynyardes and
fyge trees. though she says: lo, here are my rewards, that my lovers have
given me. I will make it a wodde, and the wild beestes shall eat it up: I will
punysh her also for the days of Baal, wherein she censed him, Iud. ^. b 10. b
deckynge him with her earynges and cheynes: when she followed her lovers, and
forgot me, says the LORD.

Wherefore behold, I will call her again, bring her in to a wilderness, and
speak friendly unto her: there will I give her her vynyardes again, Iosu. 7. d
ye and the valley of Achor also, to show her hope and comfort. Then shall
she sing there as in the time of her youth, and like as in the day when she
came out of the land of Egipte. Iudic. 5. a Exo. 15. a
Then (says the LORD) Leui. 26. a
Then will I make a covenant with them, with the wild beasts, with the
fowls of the air, and with euerythinge that crepeth upon the earth.

Esa. 2. a
As for bow, sword and batel, I will destroy soch out of the land, and will
make them to sleep safely. Eze. 16. b
Thus will I mary the unto mine own self for evermore: ye even to my self will
I mary the, in righteousness, in equity, in loving kyndnesse and mercy. In
faith also will I mary the unto my self, and thou shall know the LORD. At the
same time will I show my self friendly and gracious unto ye heavens, says the
LORD: and the heavens shall help the earth, and the earth shall help the
corn, wine and oil, and they shall help Iesrael. I will sow them upon earth,
for a sede to mine own self, and will have mercy upon her, yt was without
mercy. And to the^ which were not my people, To. 9. c 1. Pet. 2. b
I will say: thou art my people. And he shall say: thou art my God.

The III. Chapter.
LORD to me: Go yet ye way and wowe an aduouterous woman, Eze. 44. d
who^ thy neighbor loves, as ye LORD does the children of Israel: how be it
they have respect to strange gods, Esa. 28. a Amos 6. a
and love the wine kannes. So I gat her for xv. syluerlinges, and for an Homer
and an half of barlye, and said unto her: Thou shall bide with me alonge
season, but se that thou playest not the harlot, and look thou meddle with none
other man, and then will I keep my self for the.

2 Par. 25. a Dan. 3. d
without offering and altar, without pressed and reuelacion. But afterward
shall the children of Israel convert, and seek the LORD their God, Eze. 34. d
and David their king: and in ye latter days they shall worshipe the LORD,
and his loving kyndnesse.

The IIII. Chapter.
LORD, o ye children of Israel: For the LORD must punysh the^, yt dwell in the
land. And why? There is no faith fullness, there is no mercy, there is no
knowledge of God in the lord: but swearinge, lye^ge, ma^slaughter, the ft and
aduoutry have gotten the ouerhande, and one blood giltynesse follows another.
Therefore shall the land be in a miserable case, and all they that dwell therein,
shall mourn. The beasts in the field, the fowls in ye air, and the fishes in
the sea shall dye. Yet is there none, that will chaste^ nor reprove another. The
prestes which should refourme other me^, are become like the people.

Therefore stomblest thou in ye day time and* the prophet with the in the
night. I will bring thy mother to silence, and why? (...)
my people perish, because they have no knowledge. Saying then that thou have
refused understanding, therefore will I refuse ye also: so that then shall
no more be my pressed. And for so much as thou have forgotten the law of thy God.
I will also forget thy children. The more they increased in multitude, the more
they sinned against me, therefore will I chaurge their honor in to shame. They
eat up the sins of my people, and courage them in their wickedness. (...)
Thus the pressed is become like the people. Wherefore I will punysh them for
their wicked ways, and reward them acordinge to their own ymaginacions* They
shall eat, and not have enough: They have used whordome, therefore shall they
not prospere: and why? they have forsaken the LORD, and not regarded him.

Whordome, wine and dronckennesse take the heart away. My people axe council
at their stocks, their staff must tell them. For an whorish mind has
disceaued them, so yt they commit fornicacion against their God. They make
sacrifice upon the hie mountains, and burn their incense upon the hills, ye
among the oaks, groves and buszshes, for there are good shadows. Therefore yor
daughters are become harlottes, and your spouses have broken their wedlock I
will not punish yor daughters for being defiled, and yor brydes that became
whores: (...)
saying the fathers themselves have meddled with harlottes, and offered with
unthrifts: but the people that will not understand, must be punyshed.

Though thou Israel art disposed to play ye harlot, yet should not thou have
offended, o Judah: (...)
thou should not have run to Galgala, ner have gone up to Bethaue^, nor
have sworn: the LORD lives. For Israel is gone back, like a wa^ton cow.
The LORD therefore shall make her feed, as ye la^be yt go^eth astraye. And where
as Ephraim is become partaker of Idols, well, let him go. Their droncke^nesse
has put the^ back, and brought them to whordome. Their rulers love rewards,
bring (say they,) to their own shame. A wind shall take hold of their
feathers, and they shall be confounded in their offeringes.

The V. Chapter.
Eze. 8. b (...). 23. d
I know Ephraim well enough, and Israel is not hyd fro me: for Ephraim is
become an harlot, and Israel is defiled. They are not minded to turn unto
their God, for they have an whorish heart, so yt they can not know the LORD.

(...) 7. b
But the pride of Israel will be rewarded him in his face, ye both Israel and
Ephraim shall fall for their wickedness, and Judah with them also. (...). 3. b
(...). 4. (...). 14. a
They shall come with their sheep and bullockes to seek ye LORD, but they shall
not find him, for he is gone from them. As for the LORD, they have refused
him, and brought up bastard children: a month therefore shall devour them
with their porcions.

(...). 19. d (...). ^7. b
Yet are the princes of Judah become like them, that remove the londemarckes,
therefore will I pour out my wrath upon them like water. Ephraim is oppressed,
and can have no right of the law: for why? they follow ye doctrynes of men.
Therefore will I be unto Ephraim as a moth, and to the house of Judah as a
caterpiller.

(...). 1^. b (...). 28. c
When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah his disease: Ephraim went unto
Assure, and sent unto king Iareb: yet could not he help you, ner ease you of
your pain. I am unto Ephraim as a lion, and as a lions whelpe to the house of
Judah. Even I, I will spoil them, and go my way. I will take them with me, and
no man shall rescue them. I will go, and return to my place, till they wax
faint, and seek me.

The VI. Chapter.
LORD: (...)
for he has smytten us, and he shall heal us: He has wounded us, and he shall
bind us up again: after two days shall be quycken us, in the third day he
shall raze us up, so that we shall live in his sight. Then shall we have
understanding, and endeavor our selves to know the LORD. He shall go forth
as the spring of the day, and come unto us as the evening and morning rain
upon the earth. Pro. 16.


O Ephraim, what shall I do unto the? O Judah, how shall I entreat the? seeing
your love is like a morning cloud, and like a dew yt goes early away.
Therefore have I cut Matt. 9.12. a
Ye in the knowledge of God, more then in burnt sacrifice. But even like as
Adam did, Genesis 3. b
so have they broken my covenant, and set me at naught. Galaad is a cite of
wicked doers, of malicious people and bloudshedders. The multitude of the
prestes is like an heap of thieves, murderers and blood thurstie: for they
have wrought abhominacion. Iere. 1^. b
Horrible things have I seen in the house of Israel, there plays Ephraim the
harlot, and Israel is defiled: but Judah shall have an harvest for himself, when
I return the captiuyte of my people.

The VII. Chapter.
WHen I undertake to make Israel

They have devoured their own judges, all their kings are fallen: yet is
there none of the^ yt calls upon me. Therefore must Ephraim be mixte among ye
Heithen. Ephraim is become like a cake, yt no man turns: strangers have
devoured his strength, yet he regards it not: he waxes full of gray hairs,
yet will he not know it: and ye pride of Israel is cast down before their
face, Osee ^. a
yet will they not turn to the LORD their God, ner seek him, for all this.

Ephraim is like a dove, that is begyled, and has no heart. ^. Re* 1^. b
Now call they upon the Esa. 1. a
Woe be unto them, for they have forsaken me. They must be destroyed, for they
have set me at naught. ^. Pet. 2. a Matt. 15. a Esa. 29. d Eze. 33. f
I am he that have redeemed them, and yet they dyssemble with me. They call not
upon me with their hearts, but lie youlinge upon their beds. Where as they
come together, it is but for meat and drink, and me will they not obey. I
have taught them, and defended their arm, yet do they ymagin myschefe against
me. They turn them selves, but not a right, and are become as a broken bow.
Their princes shall be slain with the swearde, for the malice of their tunges,
soch blasphemies have they learned in the land of Egipte.

The VIII. Chapter.
LORD: Deu. 31. d
for they have broken my covenant, and transgressed my law. Israel can say
unto me: thou art my God, we know the: but he has refused the thing that is
good, therefore shall the enemy follow upon him. ^. Re. 12. c
They have ordened kings, but not through me: they have made princes, and I
must not know of it. Of their silver and gold have they made them images,
^ze. 7. d
to bring them selves to destruction.

^. Re. 12. d
Thy calfe (O Samaria) shall be taken away. for my wrothfull indignacion is gone
forth against the. How long will it be, or they can be cleansed? For the calfe
came from Israel, the work man made it, therefore can it be no God, but even to
a spyders web shall ye calfe of Samaria be turned. They have sown wind,
therefore shall they reepe a storm.



^. Re. ^7. a Eze. 16. b
Ephraim gives rewards to get lovers, therefore are they scatred among the
Heithe^, there will I gather them up. They shall soon be weery of the burden of
kings and princes. Ephraim has made many aulters to do wickedness, therefore
shall the aulters turn to his sin. Though I show the^ my law never so much,
they count it but strange doctrine. Where as they do sacrifice, offeringe the
flesh and eatinge it: the LORD will have no pleasure therein: but will remember
their wickedness, and punysh their sins. Israel turns again into Egipte,
(...)
they have forgotten him that made them, they build churches, (...)
and Judah makes many strong cities: therefore will I send a fire into their
cities, and it shall consume their places.

The IX. Chapter.
DO not thou triumph (O Israel) make (...)
Therefore shall they no more enjoy the cornefloores and wine presses, and their
sweet wine shall fail the^. They will not dwell in the LORDS land, (...)
but Ephraim turns again in to Egipte, and eats unclean things among
the Assirians. They pour out no wine for a drinkofferinge unto the LORD,
nether give they him their slain offeringes: but they be unto them as mourners
meats, wherein all they that eat them, are defiled. For the bred that they
have soch lust unto, shall not come in the house of the LORD. What will ye do
then in the solemn days, and in the feast of the LORD? lo, they shall get
them away for the destruction, Egypt shall receive them, and Noph shall bury
them.

The nettles shall ouergrowe their pleasant goods, and burres shall be in their
tabernacles. Be ye sure (O Israel) the time of (...)
and have destroyed the^ selves, like as they did before time at Gabaa. Therefore
their wickedness shall be remembered, and their sins punyshed.

I fande Israel like grapes in the wilderness, and saw their fathers as the
first fyges in ye top of ye fyge tree. But they are gone to Baal Peor, (...)
and run away fro me to yi shame full Idol, and are become as abominable
as their lovers Ephraim flies like a bird, so shall their glory also: In so
much, yt they shall nether begette, conceive ner bear children.

(...)
like as Tyrus, but now must she bring her own children forth to the man
slayer.

O LORD thou shall give them: what shall thou give them? give them an
unfruitful womb and dry breasts. (...) 4. d
All their wickedness is done at Galgal, there do I abhor them. For the
ungraciousness of their own inuencions, I will drive them out of my house. I
will love them no more, for all their princes are unfaithful. Ephraim is hewn
down, their rote is dried up, so yt they shall bring no more fruit: ye and
though they bring forth any, yet will I slaye even the best beloved fruit of
their body. My God shall cast them away, for they have not been obedient unto
him, therefore shall they go astraye among the Heithen.

The X. Chapter.
(...)
ye the more fruit he had, the mo aulters he made: ye more good I did to their
land, the more frendshipe showed they to their images. Their heart is divided,
therefore will they be destroyed. The LORD shall break down their images, he
shall destroy their aulters. Then shall they say: we have no king, for why? we
have not feared the LORD. And what shall then the king do to us? They common
together, and swear vain oothes: they be co^federate together, therefore
grows their punishment, as the wedes in the forowes of the land.

They that dwell in Samaria have worshipped the calfe of Bethaue^: therefore
shall the people mourn over them, ye and the prestes also, that in their
welthynesse reioysed with them: and why? it shall pass away (...)
cover us, and to the hills: fall upon us.

O Israel, thou have sinned as Gabaa did before time, (...) ^9. a
where they remained: should not the batel then come upon the wicked children,
as well as upon the Gabaonites? I will chasten them, even after mine own desire,
the people shall be gathered together over them, when I punysh them for their
great wickedness. Ephraim was unto me, as a cow that is used to go to plowe,
therefore I loved him, and fell upon his fair neck. I drove Matt. 11. ^
and Jacob played the huszbo^de man: that they might sow unto righteousness,
and reap the fruits of weldoynge: yt they might plowe up their fresh land,
and seek the LORD, till he came, and learned them righteousness.

But now they have plowed them wickedness, therefore shall they reepe sin, and
eat the fruit of lies. Saying thou put thy confidence in thine own ways,
and leanest to ye multitude of thy worthies: there shall grow a sedicion among
thy people. All ye strong cities shall be laid waist, Iud. 8. c
even as Salmana was destroyed with his familiers, through him that was avenged
of Baal, in the day of batel, where ye mother perished with her children. Even
so shall it go with you (o Bethel) because of your malicious wickedness. Like as
the morning goes away, so shall the king of Israel pass.

The XI. Chapter.
WHen Israel was yo^ge, I loved him: Exo. 3. b 6. b Matt. 2. c
But ye more they were called, the more they went back: offering unto Idols,
and censynge images. Exo. 32. b 3. Re. 12. e 4. Re. 16. ^
I learned Ephraim to go, and bare them in mine arms, but they regarded not me,
that would have helped them. I led them with coardes of frendshipe, and with
bonds of love. I was even he, that laid the yocke upon their necks. I gave
them their fodder myself, Exo. 16. c
yt they should not go again in to Egipte: And now is Assure their king: For
they would not turn unto me. Therefore shall ye swearde begin in their cities,
the stoare that they have lickened unto, shall be destroyed and eaten up: and
that because of their own ymaginacions. My people has no lust to turn unto
Esa. 10. a 28. b Matt. 2^. Luc. 11. d
but they ease them not of their burden.

What great things have I given the, o Ephraim? how faithfully have I
defended the, o Israel? Genesis 19. e Deu. 29. d
have I dealt with the as with Adama? or have I entreated the like Seboim? No,
my heart is otherwise minded. Ye my mercy is to fervent: therefore have I not
turned me to destroy Ephraim in my wrothful displeasure. For I am God and no
man, I am even that holy one in the myddest of the, though I came not within
the cite.

The LORD roareth like a lion, that they may follow him: (...). 5. a
Ye as a lion roareth he, that they may be afraid, like the children of the sea: that they may be scarred away from Egipte, as men scarre birds: and
frayed away (as doves use to be) from the Assiria^s land: and that because I
would have them tarry at home, says the LORD. But Ephraim goes about me
with lies, and the house of Israel dyssembleth. Only Judah holds him with God,
and with the true holy things.

The XII. Chapter.
^. Re. 16 b ^^a. 57. b
The LORD has a court to hold with Judah, and will punysh Jacob: After their
own ways and acordinge to their own inuencions, shall he recompense them. He
took his brother by the hele, when he was yet in his mothers womb: ^en. 25 a
^en. 32. d ^en. 35. b
and in his strength he wrestled with God. He strove with the Angel, and gat
the victory: so that he prayde and desired him. He fande him at Bethel, and
there he talked with us.

Ye the LORD God of hoostes, even ye LORD him self remembered him: Then turn
to thy God, keep mercy and equity, and hope still in thy God. But the merchant
^po. 3. c
Ephraim thinks thus: Tush, I am rich, I have good enough: In all my works
shall not one fawte be found, that I have offended. Yet am I the LORD thy God,
eue^ as when I brought the out of the land of Egipte, and set the in thy
tents, and as in the hye feast days.

I have spoken through the prophets, and showed diverse visions, and declared
my self by the ministracion of ye prophets. But at Galaad is the abhominacion,
they are fallen to vanyte. At Galgal they have slain oxen: Deu. 12. a ^4. b
and as many heaps of stones as they had in their lord forowes, so many
aulters have they made. Jacob fled into the land of Siria, and Israel served
for a wife, and for a wife he kept sheep. Genesis 28. a


By a prophet the LORD brought them out of Egipte, and by a prophet he
preserved the^. But Ephraim has provoked him to displeasure through his
abhominacions: therefore shall his blood be poured upon him self, and the LORD
his God shall reward him his blasphemies.

The XIII. Chapter.
THe abhominacion of Ephraim is come Esa. (...) Eze* (...) Osee (...) Osee (...)
And now they sin more and more: of their silver, they make them molten
images, like the Idols of the Heithen, and yet all is nothing but the work of
the craftesman. Not withsto^dinge they preach of the same: who so will kiss the
calves, offreth to men. Therefore they shall be as the morning cloud, and as the
dew that early passes away: and like as dust that ye wind takes away from
the floor, and as smoke that goes out of ye chymney.

I am the LORD thy God, (...)
which brought the out of the land of Egipte: that thou should know no God
but me only, and that thou should have no Savior but only me. (...)
I took diligent head of the in the wilderness that dry land. But when they
were well fed and had enough, they waxed proud, (...)
Therefore will I be unto them as a lion, and as a leoparde in ye way to the
Assirians. I will come upon them as a she beer, that is robbed of her welpes,
and I will break that stubburne heart of theirs. There will I devour them as a
lion: ye the wild beasts shall tear them.

O Israel, thou do but destroy thy self, (...)
In me only is thy help. Where are thy kings now, that should help the in
all thy cities? Ye and thy judges, of whom thou saydest: give me a king and
princes? well, (...)
I gave the a king in my wrath, and in my displeasure will I take him from the
again. The wickedness of Ephraim is bound together, and his sin lies hyd.
Therefore shall

O death, I will be thy death: o hell, (...)
I will be thy stynge. Yet can I se no comforth, for when he is now the
goodliest among the brethren, the east wind (even the wind of the LORD)
shall come down from the wilderness, and dry up his condytes, and drink up
his wells: he shall spoil the treasure of all pleasant vessels.

As for Samaria, they shall be made waist, (...)
and why? they are disobedient unto their God. They shall perish with the
swearde, their children shall be slain, and their women bygg with child shall be
rypte up.

The XIIII. Chapter.
LORD thy God, (...)
for thou have taken a great fall through thy wickedness. Take these words
with you, when ye turn to the LORD, and say unto him: O forgive us all our
sins, receive us graciously, and then will we offer ye bullockes of our
lyppes unto the. (...). 13. c ^sal 91. a
Assure shall be no more our helper, nether will we ride upon horses any more. As
for the works of our hondes, we will no more call upon them: For it is thou
that art our God, thou show ever mercy unto the fatherless.

O (if they would do this) I should heal their sores: ye with all my heart
would I love them: so yt my wrath should clean be turned away from them. Ye I
would be unto Israel as the dew, and he should grow as ye lylie, and his rote
should break out as Libanus.

O Ephraim, what have I to do with Idols any more I will graciously hear him,
and led him forth. I will be unto the as a grene Fyrre tree, upon me shall thou
find thy fruit. Who so is wise, shall understand this: and he yt is right
enstructe, will regard it. For ye ways of the LORD are rightuous, soch as be
godly will walk in them: As for the wicked, they will stomble therein.

The end of the prophet Oseas.
The Prophet Joel.
What Joel conteyneth.
Chap. I. He shows Israel, that all their glory and outward ceremonies, shall
be put down and cease. Chap. II. The plages are great, wherefore he would
have them to mourn: yet if they will amend, they may hope for grace. Chap.
III. How the people are brought again, and their enemies punished.
The first Chapter.
LORD, that came unto Joel the son of Phatuel: Hear o ye elders: po^dre
this well, all ye that dwell in the lord: if ever there happened soch a thing
in your days, or in ye days of your fathers. Tell your children of it, and
let them show it unto their children, and so they to certify their posterite
thereof. Exo. 10. ^
Look what the caterpiller has left, yt has the greshopper eaten up: what
the greshopper left, that has the locuste eaten up: and what the locuste has
left, that has the blastinge consumed. Wake up ye dronckardes, and weep:
mourn all ye wine suppers, because of your sweet wine, for it shall be taken
away from your mouth. Ye a mighty and an innumerable people shall come up
in to my land: these have teth like the teth of lions, and chaftbones like the
lyones. Deu. 32.
ses. They shall make my vinyarde waist, they shall pyll of the barckes of my
fygetrees, strype them bare, cast them away, and make the branches white.

Make ye moan as a virgin does, yt gyrdeth LORD: and the prestes ye LORDS
ministers shall mourn. The field shall be waisted, the land shall be in a
miserable case: for the corn shall be destroyed, the sweet wine shall come to
confucion, and the oil utterly desolate. The huszbo^de men and the wine
gardeners shall look piteously and make lamentacion, for the wheat wine and
barley, and because the harvest upon the field is so clean destroyed. The grape
gatherers shall make great moan, when the vynyarde and fygetrees be so utterly
waisted. Ye all the pomgarnettes, palmtrees, apletrees, and the other trees of
the field shall wyther away. Thus the merry cheer of the children of men shall
come to confucion.

Gyrde you, and make yor moan, o ye prestes: mourn ye ministres of the altar:
go your way in, and sleep in sack cloth, o ye officers of my God: for the
meat and drynkofferynge shall be taken away from the house of yor God. Proclaim
a fasting, call the congregation, LORD yor God, and cry unto the LORD:
alas, Joel. 2. c
alas for this day. And why? the day of the LORD is at hand, and comes as
a destroyer from the Almighty. Shall not ye meats be taken away before our
eyes, the mirth also and joy from the house of our God? The sede shall perish
in the ground, the garners shall lie waist, the floores shall be broken down,
for the corn shall be destroyed. 3. Re. 18. a
O what a sighinge make the catell? the bullockes are very euel likynge,
because they have no pasture: and the sheep are fameszshed away.

O LORD, to the will I cry: for the fire has consumed the goodly pastures of
the wilderness, and the flame has brent up all the trees of the field. Ye
the wild beestes cry also unto the: for the water ryuers are dried up, and
the fire has consumed the pastures of the wilderness.

The II. Chapter.
LORD comes, ^^ph. 1. c ^mos 5. c
and is hard at hand: a darcke day, a gloomynge day, a cloudy day, ye and
a stormy day, like as the morning spredeth out upon the hills: Namely, a
great and mighty people: soch as have not been sens ye beginning, nether shall
be after them for evermore. Before him shall be a consumynge fire, and behind
him a burning flame. The land shall be as a garden of pleasure before him, but
behind him shall it be a very waist wilderness, and there is no man, that shall
escape him. They are to look upon like bayrded horses, and run like horse
men. They skyppe up upon ye hills, as it were the sound of charettes: as the
flame of fire that consumes the straw, and as a mighty people ready to the
batell.

(...) 3. c ^att. 24 c
the Son and Moon shall be darckened, and the stars shall withdraw their
shine. The LORD shall show his voice before his host, for his host is
great, strong and mighty to fulfill his commandment. This is ye great and
marvelous fearful day of the LORD: And who is able to abide it?

LORD: Turn you unto me with all your hertes, ^poc. 6. c (...). 4. c ^. a
with fasting, weeping and mourning: rent your hertes, and not your
clothes. Turn you unto the LORD your God, ^^al. 85. a (...) 4. a
for he is gracious and merciful, long sufferynge and of great compassion:
and ready to pardone wickedness. Then (no doubt) he also shall turn, and forgive:
and after his chastenynge, he shall let your increase remain, for meat and
drynck offerynges un to the LORD your God? Joel (...)
Blow out with the tro^pet in Sion, proclaim a fasting, call the
congregation, and gather the people together: warn the congregation, gather
the elders, bring the children and suclynges together. Let ye brydegrome go
forth of his chamber, and the bryde out of her closet. Let the prestes serve
the LORD betwixt the porch and ye altar, wepinge and saying: be favorable
(o LORD) be favorable unto thy people: let not thine heretage be brought to
soch confucion, lest the Heithen be lords thereof. Wherefore (...)
where is now their God?

Then shall the LORD be gelous over his land, and spare his people: ye ye
LORD shall answer, and say unto his people: Behold, I will send you corn,
wine and oil, so that ye shall have plenty of them: and I will no more give you
over to be a reprofe among the Heithen. Again, as for him of the north, I
shall drive him far from you: and shute him out in to a dry and waist land,
his face toward the east see, and his hinder parts toward the vttemost see.
The stynke of him shall go up, and his fylthy corrupcion shall fall upon
himself, because he has dealte so proudly. Fear not (o land) but be glad and
rejoice, for the LORD will do great things. Be not ye afraid nether (o ye
beasts of the field) for the pastures shall be grene, and the trees shall bear
their fruit: the fygetrees and vinyardes shall give their increase.

Be glad then (o ye children of Sion) and LORD your God, for he has given
you the teacher of righteousness: and he it is yt shall send you down shuwers
of rain, early and late in the first month: (...)
so that ye garners shall be full of corn, and the presses plenteous in wine
and oil. And as for the years that ye greszshopper, locuste, blasstinge and
caterpiller (my great host, which I sent among you) have eaten up, I shall
restore them to you again: so that ye shall have enough to eat, and be
satisfied: and praise the name of the LORD your God, that so maruelously has
dealte with you.

And my people shall never be confounded any more: Ye shall well know, that I
am in the myddest of Israel, and that I am your God: ye and that there is
none other, and my people shall no more be brought to confucion.

After this, will I pour out my sprete upon (...)
and yor sons and yor daughters shall prophecy: yor old me^ shall dream
dreams and your young men shall se visions: (...)
Ye in those days I will pour out my sprete upon servants and maidens. I
will show wonders in heaven above, and tokens in the earth beneth: blood and
fire, and the vapoure off smoke. The Son shall be turned in to darcknesse, and
ye Moon in to blood: before ye great and notable day off the LORD come.
And the time shall come: yt who so ever calls on the name of the LORD, (...)
10. b
shall be saved. For upon the mount Sion and at Jerusalem, there shall be a
salvation, like as the LORD has promised: ye and among the other remnaunt,
whom the LORD shall call.

The III. Chapter.
(...) ^6. a ^7.28. (...)* 1. b
Thou Tirus and Sido^ and all ye borders of the Philistynes: what have ye to do
with me? Will ye defye me? well: if ye will needs defye me, I shall recompense
you, even upon your head, and yt right shortly: for ye have taken away my
silver and gold, my fair and goodly Jewels, and brought them in to your gods
houses. The children also of Judah and Jerusalem have ye sold unto the Greeks,
that ye might bring the^ far from ye borders of the ^rowne countrees.

(...)
where ye have sold them, and will reward you even upon your head. Your
sons and your daughters will I sell through the hondes of the children of
Judah, and so they shall give them forth to sell, unto the^ of Saba, a people of
a far country: for the LORD himself has said it. Cry out these things
among the Gentiles, proclaim war, wake up the giauntes, let them draw nigh,
let the^ come up all the lusty warryours of the^. Make you sweardes of your
ploweshares, (...)
and spears of your syckles and sythes. Let ye weak man say: I am strong.
Mustre you, and come, all ye Heithe^ round about: gather you together, there
shall the LORD lay all thy giauntes to the ground. Let the people arise, and
get them to the valley of Iosaphat: for there will I sit, and judge all Heithe^
round about.

Lay to your sythes, Apo. 14. d
for the harvest is ripe: come, get you down: the wynepresse is full, ye the
wynepresses run over, for their LORD is nigh in ye valley appointed. The
Son and Moon shall be darckened, Joel. 2. b Esa. 13. b
and the stars shall withdraw their light. The LORD shall roar out of Sion,
and cry out of Jerusalem, Iere. 25. d
that the heavens and the earth shall quake withal. But the LORD shall be a
defense unto his own people, and a refuge for the children of Israel. Thus
shall ye know, yt I the LORD your God dwell upon my holy mount of Sion. Then
shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no strangers go through her any more.
Then shall the mountains drop sweet wine, and the hills shall flow with
mylcke, Amos. 9. c
All the ryuers of Judah shall have water enough, and out of the LORDS house,
there shall flow a spring, to water ye broke of Sitim: but Egipte shall be laid
waist, and Edo^ shall be desolate: Iere 46. a Iere. 49. b
because they have dealte so cruelly with the children of Judah, and shed
innocent blood in their land. Again, Judah shall be inhabited for evermore, and
Jerusalem from generation to generacio^: for I will not leave their blood
vnauenged. And the LORD shall dwell in Sion.

The end of the prophet Joel.
The Prophet Amos.
What Amos conteyneth.
Chap. I. He prophecyeth against Damascus, Gasa, Tire, Edom and Ammon. Chap.
II. Punishment upon Moab, Judah, and Israel. Chap. III. God warns before he
punysh. Chap. IIII. He shows them their wickedness, and the plages fo: the
same, and exorteth the^ to amend. Chap. V. He complayneth for the captyuyte
off Israel. Chap. VI. He reproves the welthy, ydyll and delicate people,
tellinge them their destruction. Chap. VII. The punishment off the people
showed by diverse visions. Chap. VIII. A vision against the covetous people and
false waightes. The hunger of Gods word. Chap. IX. Plages upon Judah. The power
off God. The receauynge off the Heithen. Conversion off the Jews.
The first. Chapter.
4. Re 15. a 4. Re. 14. c
two year before ye earthquake And he said: The LORD shall roar out off
Sion, Iere. 25. d Joel. 3. c
and show his voice from Jerusalem: so that ye pastures of the shepherdes shall
be in a miserable case, and ye top of Charmel dried up.

Thus says the LORD: for three and four wickednesses of Damascus, Esa. 17. a
Iere. 49. d
I will not spare her: because they have throszhed Galaad with yro^ f^ales: But I
will send a fire in to ye house of Hazael, the same shall consume the palaces of
Benadab. Thus will I break the bars off Damascus, and rote out the inhabiter
from the field of Auen, and him yt holds the LORD. Thus says the LORD:
For three and four wickednesses of Gaza, I will not spare her: Zach. 9. c
because they make the presoners yet more captyue, and have driven the^ in to
the lord of Edom. Therefore will I send a fire in to ye walls of Gaza, which
shall devour her houses. I will rote out the^ yt dwell at Asdod and him yt
holds the scepter of Ascalon, and stretch out mine hand over Accaron, that
the remnaunt of the Philistines shall perish says the LORD.

Thus says the LORD: For three and four wickednesses off the cite off Tire,
I will not spare her: Joel. 3. a
because they have increased ye captiuyte of the Edomites, and have not
remembered the brotherly covenant. Therefore will I send a fire into the walls
off Tire, 3. Re. 5. a
that shall consume her palaces. Thus says LORD: For three and four
wickednesses of Edom I will not spare him, Ab^. 1. a Iere. 49. b Genesis 27. g
because he persecuted his brother with the sword, destroyed his mothers
womb, bare hatred very long, and so kept indignacion all way by him.
Therefore will I send a fire in to Thema^, which shall devour the palaces of
Bosra.

Thus says the LORD: For three and four wickednesses of the children off
Ammon, ^ere. 49. a Eze. 21. d 25. a
I will not spare them: because they rypte up the women great with child in
Galaad, to make the borders of their lands the wyder Therefore I will kyndle a
fire in the walls of Rabbath, that shall consume her palaces: with a great
cry, in the day of batel, in tempest and in the day off storm: so that
their king shall go in to captiuyte, he and his princes together, says the
LORD.

The II. Chapter.
THus says the LORD: For three and ^sa. ^^ 16 a Ier. (...)
I will not spare him: because he brent the bones off the king of Edom to
ashes. Therefore will I send a fire in to Moab, which shall consume ye palaces
of Carioth: so yt Moab shall perish with a noise, and the sound of a shawme. I
will rote out the judge from among them, and slaye all his princes with him,
says the LORD. Thus says the LORD: (...)
for three and four wickednesses of Judah, I will not spare him: because he has
cast aside the law of the LORD, and not kept his commandments: for why,
they would needs be disceaued with the lies, that their forefathers followed.
Therefore will I send a fire in to Judah, which shall consume the palaces of
Jerusalem.

Thus says the LORD: For three and four (...)
Yet destroyed I the Amorite before them, that was as hie as the Cedre trees,
and as strong as the oaks: notwithsto^dinge I destroyed his fruit from above,
and his rote from under.

Again: I brought you out of the land (...)
and led you xl. years through the wilderness, that ye might have the
Amoriters land in possession. I raised up prophets among your children, and
absteyners among your yo^ge men. Is it not so, o ye children of Israel,
says the LORD? But ye gave the absteyners wine to drink, (...)
ye ye commanded the prophets, saying: Prophecy not. Behold, I will crasshe
you in sonder, like as a wayne crassheth, yt is full of sheaues: so that ye
swifte shall not escape, nether the strong be able to do any thing: no, the
giaunte shall not save his own life. The archer shall not abide, and the swifte
off foot shall not escape. The horsma^ shall not save his life, and he that is
as ma^ly of stomach as a giaunte, shall in that day be feign to run his way
naked, says the LORD.

The III. Chapter.
Hear, what the LORD speaks un (...) 6. a
except he have gotten somthi^ge? Does a bird fall in a snare upon ye earth
where no fouler is? Takes a man his snare up from the ground, before he catch
somewhat? Cry they out Alarm with the trompet in the cite, and the people not
afraid? Comes there any plage in a cite, without it be the LORDS doing?
Now does the LORD God no manner of thing, but he tells his secret before
unto his servants ye prophets. When a lion roareth, who will not be afraid?
Seeing then that the LORD God himself speaks, who will not prophecy?

Preach in the palaces at Asdod, and in the palaces off the land off Egipte,
and say: gather you together upon the mountains off Samaria, so shall ye se
great murthur and violent oppression among them: for why, they regard not
the thing that is right, says the LORD: they gather together evil gotten
goods, and lay up robbery in their houses.

Therefore, thus says the LORD God: LORD: like as an hyrdeman takes two
legs or a piece off an ear out off the Lions mouth: Even so the children of
Israel (that dwell in Samaria, having their couches in the corner, and their
beds at Damascus) shall be plucte away. Hear, and bear record in the house
of Jacob (says the LORD God of hoostes) that when I begin to vyset the
wickedness of Israel, (...)
I will vyset ye aulters at Bethel also: so that the horns of the altar
shall be broken of, and fall to the ground.

As for the winter house and summer house, I will smite them down: and the
houses of yuery, ye and many other houses shall perish, and be destroyed,
says the LORD.

The IIII. Chapter.
Hear this word, o ye fat kyne, that LORD has sworn by his holiness: The
days shall come upon you, that ye shall be lift up upon spears, and your
posterite carried away in fyssher pannes. Ye shall get you out at the gappes
one after another, and in Armon shall ye be cast away, says the LORD.

Ye came to Bethel for to work ungraciousness, and have increased your sins
at Iosu. 16. a 3. Re. 12. c Osee. 4. c Osee. 9. c 12. b
Ye brought your sacrifices in the morning, and your tithes unto the third
day. Ye made a tha^kofferinge off leven, ye promised frewillofferinges, and
proclaimed them. Soch lust had ye, o ye children of Israel, says the LORD
God. Therefore have I given you idle teth in all your cities, and scarceness
off bred in all your places: yet will ye not turn unto me, says the LORD.
When there were but three months unto ye harvest, I withelde the rain from
you: Deu. 11. b 28. b Iere. 14. ^ Joel. 3. c
ye I rayned upon one cite, and not upon another one piece off ground was
moystured with rain, and the ground that I rayned not upon, was dry.
Wherefore two (ye three) cities came unto one, to drink water: but they were
not satisfied, yet will ye not turn unto me, says ye LORD.

I have smyten you with drouth and blastinge: and look how many orchardes,
vinyardes, LORD. Pestilence have I sent among you, as I did in Egipte: Exo.
9. b
your young men have I slayen with ye sword, and caused your horses be taken
captyue: I made the stynckinge sauoure of your tents to come up in to your
nostrels: Yet will ye not turn unto me, says the LORD. Some off you have I
overthrown? Genesis 19. b 2. Pet. 2 b
as I ouerthrewe Sodom and Gomorre: so that ye were as a brande plucte out of
the fire. Yet will ye not turn unto me, says the LORD. Therefore, thus will
I handle the again (O Israel) ye even thus will I handle the. Make the ready
then to mete thy God, o Israel. For lo, he makes the mountains, he ordeneth
the wind, he shows man what he is about to do: he makes the morning and
the darcknesse, he treads upon the hye places off the earth: ye LORD God of
hoostes is his name.

The V. Chapter.
LORD God: Where as there dwelt a M. in one cite, there shall be left scarce an
C. therein: and where ye re dwelt an C. there shall scarce ten be left for the
house off Israel. Nevertheless, thus says the LORD unto ye house of Israel:
Seek after me, and ye shall live, but seek not after Bethel. Come not at Galgal,
and go not to Bersaba: for Galgal shall be carried away captyue, and Bethel
shall come to naught Seek the LORD, yt ye may live: lest the house of Joseph
be brent with fire and consumed, and lest there be none to quench Bethel.

Ye turn the law to wormwod, and cast down righteousness unto the ground.
The LORD makes the vij. stars and the Oryons, Job. 9. a
he turns the night into day, and off the day he makes darcknesse. He
calls ye Am. 9. b
the LORD is his name. Herayseth destruction upon the mighty people, and
brings down the strong hold: but they owe him euel will, yt reproves them
openly: and who so tells the^ the plain treuth, they abhor him. For so
much the^ as ye oppress ye poor, Deu. 28. c Soph. 1. c
and rob him of his best sustenaunce: therefore, whereas ye have builded
houses off square stone, ye shall not dwell in them. Maruelo^s pleasant
vynyardes shall ye plant, but the wine of the^ shall ye not drink: and why? as
for the multitude of your wickednesses and your stout sins, Exo. 23. a
Mich. 3. a
I know them right well. Enemies are ye off the rightuous, ye take rewards,
ye oppress the poor in judgment. Therefore the wise must now be feign to hold
his tu^ge, so wicked a time is it.

Seek after the thing that is good, and not evil, so shall ye live: ye the
LORD God off hoostes shall be with you, acordinge to your own desire. Hate
the evil, and love the good: Psalm. 96. b Deu. 17. a To. 12. b
set up right again in the port: and (no doubt) the LORD God of hoostes
shall be merciful unto the remnaunt of Joseph. Yff LORD God, the God of
hoostes) there shall be mourninge in all streets, ye they shall say i^ every
street: alas, alas. They shall call the housbonde man to lamentacio^, and soch
as can mourn, to mourning. In all vynyardes there shall be heaviness, for I
will come among you, says the LORD. Woe be unto them that desire the day
off ye LORD: Wherefore would ye have it? As for that day of the LORD, it
shall be darcke and not clear: Ye like as when a man runs from a lion, and a
Beer meteth with him: or, when he comes into the house, and leeneth his hand
upon the wall, a serpent byteth him* Shall not the day of the LORD be darcke,
(...)
and not clear? shall it not be cloudy, and no shine in it?

I hate and abhor your holy days, and (...)
And though ye offer me brentofferinges and meatofferinges, yet have I no
pleasure therein: As for your fat thankofferynges, I will not look upon them.
Away with that noise of thy songs, I will not hear thy plays of music: but
se that equity flow as the water, and righteousness as a mighty stream. O
ye house of Israel, gave ye me offeringes and sacrifices those xl. years long
in the wilderness? (...)
Yet have ye set up tabernacles to your Moloch, and images of your Idols, Ye
and the star of your god Rempha, (...)
figures which ye made to worshipe them. Therefore will I cause you be carried
away beyond Damascus, says the LORD, whose name is the God off hoostes.

The VI. Chapter.
WOE be to the proud welthy in Sio^, (...)
which hold them selves for the best of the world, and rule the house of
Israel, eue^ as they list. Go unto Calne, and se: and from thence get you to
Hemath the great cite, and so go down to Gath of the Philistines: be they
better at ease then these kingdoms, or the border of the ir land wyder then
yours? Ye are taken out for the euel day, even ye that sit in the stole of
wylfulnesse: Ye that lie upon beds off yuery, and use your wantonness upon
your couches: ye that eat the best lambs of ye flock, and the fattest
calves off the droaue: ye that sing to the lute, (...)
and in playenge off instruments compare your selves unto David: ye that
drink wine out of goblettes, and anoynte youreselues with the best oil, but
no man is sorry for Ioseps hurt. Therefore now shall ye be the first of them,
that shall be led away captyue, and the lusty chere of the wylfull shall come
to an end.

The LORD God has sworn even by LORD God of hoostes: (...)
) I hate the pride of Jacob, and I abhor his palaces: and I will give over the
cite, with all that is therein: so that though there remain ten men in one house,
they shall dye. So their next kynszfolckes and the deed buriers shall take
them, and carry away their bones, and say unto him, that is in the ynnermer
house: is there yet any mo by ye? And he shall answer: they are all gone, hold
thy tunge (shall he say) for they would not remember the name of the LORD.
(...)


Behold, the LORD is minded to smite the great houses, so that they shall
decay: and the little houses, that they shall cleue a sunder. Who can run
with horses, or plowe with oxen upon the hard rocks off stone? For why, ye have
turned true judgment in to bytternesse, and the fruit of righteousness in to
wormwod: Ye even ye, that rejoice in vain things: ye that say: have not we
optayned horns in our own strength? Well, take heed, o ye house off Israel,
says the LORD God of hoostes: I will bring a people upon you, which shall
trouble you, from the way that goes toward Hemath, unto the broke in the
medowe.

The VII. Chapter.
LORD God showed me soch a vision: behold, there stood one that made
greszshoppers, even when the corn was shutynge forth, after the king had
clipte his sheep. Now when they undertook to eat up all the grene things in
ye lord, I said: O LORD God, be merciful, I beseke the: who should else
help up Jacob, that is brought so low? So the LORD was gracious therein, and
the LORD said: well, it shall not be. Again, ye LORD showed me this vision:
behold, the LORD God called the fire to punysh withal, and it devoured the
great deep: ye it consumed a part allredy. Then said I: O LORD God, hold
thy ne hand: for who should else help up Jacob that is brought so low? So the
LORD was merciful therein, and the LORD God said: well, it shall not be.

LORD stood upon a plastered wall, and (...)
a masons trowell in his ho^de. And the LORD said unto me: Amos, what seist
thou? I answered: a masons trowell. Then said the LORD: behold, I will lay
the trowell among my people of Israel, and will no more ouersee them: but the
hye hilchapels off Isaac must be laid waist, and the churches off Israel made
desolate: and as for the house of Jeroboam, I will stand up against it with
the sword. (...) 17. a
Upon this sent Amasias the pressed to Bethel unto Jeroboam the king of Israel,
(...) 17. a
saying: Amos makes the house off Israel to rebel against the, the land ca^
not away with his words. For Amos says: Jeroboam shall dye with the sword,
and Israel shall be led away captyue out of their own land. And Amasias
said unto Amos: Get the hence (thou that can se so well) and fle in to the
land of Judah: get the there thy living, and prophecy there: Esa. ^0. b
and prophecy no more at Bethel, for it is the kings chapel, and the kings
court.

Amos answered, and said to Amasias: Zach. 13. a
Now as I was breaking down molberies, and going after the catell, the LORD
took me, and said unto me: Go thy way, and prophecy unto my people of Israel.
And therefore, hear thou now the word off the LORD: Thou say: prophecy not
against Israel, and speak nothing against the house off Isaac. Wherefore thus
says the LORD: Thy wife shall be defiled in ye cite, yt sons and daughters
shall be slain with the sword, and thy land shall be measured out with the line:
Thou thy self shall dye in an unclean land, and Israel shall be driven out off
his own country.

The VIII. Chapter.
THe LORD God showed me me this vision: and behold, there was a mau^de LORD
unto me: the end comes upon my people of Israel, I will no more ouersee them.
In that day shall the songs off the temple be turned in to sorrow, says the
LORD God. Many deed bodies shall lie in every place, and be cast forth
secretly. Hear this, O ye yt oppress the poor, Esa. 5. b
and destroy the nedy in ye land, saying: When will the new month be gone,
that we may sell vytale, and ye Sabbath, that we may have scarceness of
corn: to make the buszshel less, and the Sycle greater? We shall set up false
waightes, yt we may get the poor under us with their money, and the nedy also
for shues: ye let us sell the chafe for corn.

The LORD has sworn against the pride of Jacob: Am. 6. b
these works of theirs will I never forget. Shall not the land tremble, and
all they that dwell therein, mourn for this? Shall not their destruction come
upon them like a water stream, and flow over the^, LORD God) I shall cause
ye Son to go down at noone, Iere. 15. b
and the land to be darcke in the clear day. Your hye feasts will. Tob. 2.
a
I turn to sorrow, and your songs to mourning: I will bring sack cloth upon
all backs, and baldnes upon every head: ye soch a mourning will I send
them, Iere. 6. d
as is made upon an only begotten son, and they shall have a miserable end.

Behold, the time comes (says the LORD God) yt I shall send an hunger in
to ye earth: not the hunger of bred, ner the thyrst of water: but an hunger to
hear the word off the LORD: so that they shall go from the one see to the
other, ye from ye north unto ye cast, runnynge about to seek the word of ye
LORD, and shall not find it. In that time, shall the fair virgins and the
young men perish for thyrst, ye even they that swear in the offense off
Samaria, and say: as truly as thy God lives at Dan, and as truly as ye God
lives at Bersaba. These shall fall, and never rise up again.

The IX. Chapter.
LORD stondinge upon the altar, and he said: smite the door cheke, that the
posts may shake withal. For their covetousness shall fall upon all their
heads, and their posterite shall be slain with the sword. They shall not fle
away, there shall not one off them escape, ner be delivered. Though they were
buried in the hell, my hand shall fetch them from thence: Psalm. 138. a Abd. 1. a
though they clymme up to heaven, yet shall I cast them down: though they hyde
them selves upon the top of Carmel, yet shall I seek them out, and bring them
from thence: Though they crepe down fro my sight in to the deep of the sea, I
shall command the serpente, even there to byte them. Yff they go away before
their enemies i^ to captyuyte, then shall I command the sword, there to
slaye them.

Thus will I set mine eyes upon them, for their harm and not for their wealth.
For when the LORD God of hoostes touches a land, it co^sumeth away, and all
they that Am. 8. a ^. Re. 8. g
as the floude in Egipte. He that has his dwellinge in heaven, and groundeth
his tabernacle in the earth: He that calls the waters of the sea, Amos. 5. b
and pours them out upon the plain ground: his name is the LORD. O ye
children off Israel, are ye not unto me, even as the Morians, says the LORD?
have not I brought Israel out off the land off Egipte, the Philistynes from
Capthor, Genesis ^^. b
and the Sirians from Cyr? Behold, the eyes of the LORD are upon the realm
that synneth, (...)
to rote it clean out of the earth: Nevertheless, I will not vterly destroy the
house of Jacob, says the LORD.

For lo, this I promise: though I siffte ye house of Israel among all nations
(like as they use to sifte in a syue) yet shall not ye smallest grauel stone
fall upon the earth: But all the wicked doers of my people, that say: Tush,
the plage is not so nigh, to come so hastily (...)
that is fallen down, and hedge up his gappes: and look what is broken, I shall
repair it: Ye I shall build it again, as it was before time, yt they may
possess the remnaunt of Edom, ye and all soch people as call upon my name with
the^, says the LORD, which does these things*

Behold, the time comes (says the LORD) that the plowman shall overtake ye
mower, and ye treader off grapes, him that sows sede. (...)
The mountains shall drop sweet wine, and the hills shall be fruitful, and
I will turn the captyuyte of my people of Israel: they shall repair the waist
cities, and have the^ in possession: they shall plant vinyardes, and drink the
wine thereof: they shall make gardens, and enjoy the fruits off the^. And I will
pla^te them upon their own ground, so that I will never rote them out again
from their land, which I have given the^ says the LORD thy God.

The end of the prophet Amos.
The Prophet Abdy.
What Abdy conteyneth.
Chap. I He prophecyeth against the proud stomachs of the Edomites, that
vexed the Israelites in their aduersite. He shows, what plages shall come upon
them.
The first Chapter.
THis is the vision that was showed LORD God spoken upon Edo^: (...)
We have herd of the LORD yt there is an embassage sent among the Heithen:
Up, let us arise, and fight against them. Behold, I will make ye small among
the Heithen, so that thou shall be utterly despised. (...). 49. c
The pride of thine heart has lift the up, thou that dwell in ye strong
holds off stone, and have made the an hye seat: Thou say in thine heart:
who shall cast me down to the ground? But though thou wentest up as hye as the
Aegle, (...) 9 a (...). 2. b
and maydest thy nest above among the stars: yet would I pluck the down
from thence. If ye thieves and robbers came to ye by-night, thou taking thy
rest: should they not steal, till they had enough? if the grape gatherers came
upon the, would they not leave the some grapes? But how shall they ripe Esau,
and seek out his treasures?

^sa. 29. c ^ Cor. 1. c
and those that have understanding, from the mount of Esau? Thy giauntes (o
Theman) shall be afraid, for through the slaughter they shall be all over thrown
upon the mount of Esau. Shame shall come upon the, for ye malice that thou
shewedest to thy brother Jacob: ye for evermore shall thou perish, and that
because of the time, (...) 17. c (...). 20. c
when thou did set thyself against him, even when the enemies carried away
his host, and when the aleauntes came in at his ports, and cast lottes upon
Jerusalem, and thou thyself wast as one of them.



Thou shall send out no man against their host, in the day of their
aduersite: nether shall thou sto^de wayringe enymore at ye corners of the
streets, to murthur soch as are fled, or to take them presoners, that remain
in the day of their trouble. For the day off the LORD is hard by upon all
Heithen. Like as thou have done, (...). ^0 c (...). 3. b
so shall thou be dealte withal, ye thou shall be rewarded even upon thine
head. For like wise as ye have droncken upon mine holy hill, so shall all
heithen drink continually: ye drink shall they, and swalowe up so that ye
shall be, as though ye had never been.

But upon the mount Sion, there shall a Zach. 2.
and the house of Jacob shall possess even those, that had them selves before in
possession. Morouer, the house of Jacob shall be a fire, Iere. 5. c
the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau shall be the straw: which
they shall kyndle and consume, so that nothing shall be left of the house of
Esau, for the LORD himself has said it. They of the south shall have the
mount of Esau in possession: and look what lies upon the ground, that shall
the Philistynes have: the plain feldes shall Ephraim and Samaria possess: and
the mountains of Galaad shall Ben Iamin have. And this host shall be the
children of Isreal's presoners: Now what so lies from Canaan unto Sarphad, and
in Sepharad, that shall be under the subieccion of Jerusalem: and the cities of
the south shall enheret it. Thus they that escape upon the hill off Sion, shall
go up to punysh the mount off Esau, Zac. 14. b
and the kingdom shall be the LORDS.

The end off the prophet Abdy.
The Prophet Jonas.
What Jonas conteyneth.
Chap. I. God sends Jonas unto Niniue, he fleyth, and is cast in to the sea.
Chap. II. A fysh swaloweth up Jonas, which cries unto God, and prayseth him,
and the fysh casts him out again upon the land. Chap. III. God sends him
again to Niniue, to show them the punishment for to come, if they will not
repent: they amend, and God is merciful to them. Chap. IIII. Jonas is angry,
and complayneth of God, which refourmeth him.
The first Chapter.
THe word of the LORD came 4. Re. 14 Ione 3 a Genesis 10. ^
and get the to Niniue that great cite: and preach unto them, Genesis 18. ^
how yt their wickedness is come up before me. And Jonas made him ready to fle
unto Tharsis from the presence of the LORD, and gat him down to Ioppa: where
he found a ship ready for to go unto Tharsis. So he paid his fare, and
went aborde, that he might go with them unto Tharsis from the presence of the
LORD. But the LORD hurled a great wind in to the sea, and there was a
mighty tempest in the sea: so that the ship was in ioperdy of goinge in
pieces. Then the maryners were afraid, and cried every man unto his god: and
the goods that were in the ship, they cast in to the sea, to lighten it off
them. But Jonas gat him under ye hatches, where he laid him down and slombred.

^osu. 7. c
And so they cast lottes, and the lot fell upon Jonas.

The^ said they unto him: tell us, for whose cause are we thus troubled? what
is thine occupacion? whence come thou? what country man art thou, and of
what nation? He answered them: I am an Ebrue, and I fear the LORD God of
heaven, which made both the sea and dry land. Then were ye men exceadingly
afraid, and said unto him: why did thou so? (for they knew, that he was
fled from the presence of the LORD, because he had told them) and said
morouer unto him: What shall we do unto the, that the sea may cease from
troublinge

Nevertheless, the men assayed with rowinge, to bring the ship to lord:
but it would not be, because the sea wrought so, and was so troublous against
them. Wherefore they cried unto the LORD, and said: O LORD, Deu. 21. b
let us not perish for this man's death, nether lay thou innocent blood unto
our charge: for thou (o LORD) have done, even as thy pleasure was.

So they took Jonas, and cast him in to the sea, and the sea left ragynge. And
the men feared the LORD exceadingly, doing sacrifices and making vows unto
the LORD.

The II. Chapter.
LORD prepared a great fyshe, to swalow up Jonas. So was Jonas in the belly of
the fysh, Matt. 12. d
three days and three nights. And Jonas prayed unto the LORD his God, out of
the fysshes belly, and said: (...)
In my trouble I called unto ye LORD, and he herd me: out off the belly off
hell I cried, and thou herdest my voice. Thou had cast me down deep in ye
midst off the sea, and the floude compased me about: (...)
ye all thy wawes and rowles of water went over me, I thought that I had been
cast away out of thy sight: but I will ye again look toward thy holy temple.

The waters compased me, even to the very LORD my God) have brought up my life
again out of corrupcion. When my soul faynted within me, I thought upon the
LORD: and my prayer came in unto the, even in to thy holy temple, They that
hold of vain vanyties, will forsake his mercy. But I will do the sacrifice with
the voice of thankesgeuynge, and will pay that I have vowed: for why? salvation
comes of the LORD. And ye LORD spoke unto ye fysh, and it cast out Jonas
again upon the dry land.

The III. Chapter.
THen came the word of the LORD unto Jonas again, saying: up, and (...)
and preach unto them the preachinge, which I bade the. So Jonas arose, and
went to Niniue at the LORDS commandment. Niniue was a great cite unto God,
namely, off three days journey.

And Jonas went to, and entered in to ye cite: even a days journey, and cried,
saying: There are yet xl. days, and then shall Niniue be overthrown. (...)
And the people of Niniue believed God, and proclaimed fasting* and arrayed them
selves in sack cloth, as well the great as the small of them. And the tydinges
came unto ye king of Niniue, which arose out off his seat, and did his
apparel off, and put on sack cloth, and sat him down in ashes.

And it was cried and commanded in (...)
ox or sheep taist ought at all: and that they nether feed ner drink water:
but put on sack cloth both man and be, and cry mightily unto God: ye se
that every man turn from his evil way, and from the wickedness, (...)
yt he has in hand.

Who can tell? God may turn, and repe^te, and cease from his fearce wrath,
that we perish not. And when God saw their works, how they turned from their
wicked ways: (...)* 38. b
he repented on the evil, which he said he would do unto them, and did it not.

The IIII. Chapter.
LORD, and said: O LORD, was not this my saying (I pray the) when I was
yet in my country? therefore I haisted rather to fle unto Tharsis, for I know
well enough that thou art a merciful God, full of compassion, long
sufferinge, and of great kyndnesse, and repentest when thou should take
punishment. And now o LORD, take my life fro me (I beseke the) for I had
rather dye then live. (...). 19. a
Then said the LORD: art thou so angry? And Jonas gat him out of the cite,
and sat down on ye east side thereof: and there made him a both, and sat under
it in the shadow, till he might se, what should chance unto the cite.

And the LORD God prepared a wild vine, which sprange up over Jonas, that he
might have shadow above his head, to deliver him out of his pain. And Jonas
was exceadinge glad of the wild vine. But upon the next morrow against the
spring of the day, the LORD ordened a worm, which smote the wild vine, so
that it wethered away. And when the Son was up God prepared a fervent east
wind: and the Son beat over the head of Jonas, that he faynted again, and
wyszshed unto his soul, that he might dye, and said: It is better for me to
dye, the^ to live. And God said unto Jonas: Art thou so angry for the wild
vine? And he said: ye very angry am I even unto the deeth. And the LORD
said: thou have compassion upon a wild vine, whero^ thou bestowdest no
labor, ner may dest it grow: which sprange up in one night and perished in
another: And should not I then have compassion upon Niniue that great cite,
wherein there are above an C. and xx. thousand persons, yt know not their
right ho^de from the left, besides much catell?

The end of the prophet Jonas.
The Prophet Micheas.
What Micheas conteyneth.
Chap. I. He reproves the people off Israel and Judah for their wickedness and
Idolatry: he tells them their punishment with mourning. Chap. II. He
rehearses their abhominacions. Chap. III. He reproves the rulers and the
prophets, as cause of the peoples misery. Chap. IIII.V. He prophecyeth of the
salvation off Gods people in Christ, of his kingdom, and power of his gospel.
Chap. VI. Another reprofe. Outward offeringes are excluded, and here is
declared what God requires off man. Chap. VII. The sum off the things
before said The little flock of the faithful.
The first Chapter.
THis is the word of the LORD, that came unto Micheas 4. Re. 15. ^ 2. Pa. 27.
^ 4. Re. 16. ^ 4* Re. 18. and.19.
in the days of Ioathan, Achas and Ezechias kings of Judah: which was showed
him upon Samaria and Jerusalem.

Hear all ye people, Deu. 32. a Esa. 1. a
marcke this well o earth, and all that therein is: Ye the LORD God himself be
witness among you, even ye LORD from his holy temple. For why? behold, the
LORD shall go out of his place, and come down, and tread upon the hie things
of the earth. The mountains shall consume under him, Esa. 26. ^
and the valleys shall cleue asunder: like as wax co^sumeth at the fire, and as
ye waters run downwarde. And all this shall be for the wickedness of Jacob,
and the sins of the house of Israel.

But what is the wickedness of Jacob? 3. Re. 12. ^ 3. Re. 11. a 4. Re. 16 21. a
Which are the hye places of Judah? Is not Jerusalem? Therefore I shall make
Samaria an heap of stones in the field, to lay about the vynyarde: her
stones shall I cast in to the valley, and discover her fou^dacio^s. All her
images shall be broken down and all her wynnynges shall be brent in the fire: ye
all her Idols will I destroy: for why, they are gathered out of the hyre of an
whore, Deu. 23.
and in to an whores hyre shall they be turned again. Wherefore I will mourn and
make lamentacion, bare and naked will I go: I must mourn like ye drago^s, and
take sorrow as ye Estriches: for their wound is past remedy: And why? it is
come in to Judah, and has touched ye port of my people at Jerusalem allredy.
Weep not, lest they at Geth perceive it. ^. Re. 1. ^


LORD, even in to the port of Jerusalem. The great noise off the charettes
shall fear them, 4. Re. 18. c
that dwell at Lachis, which is an occasion of ye sin of ye daughter of Sion,
for in the came up the wickednesses of Israel. Ye she sent her coursers in to
the land of Geth.

The houses of lies will disceaue the kings of Israel. And as for the (o thou
that dwell at Morassa) I shall bring a possessioner upon the, and the plage
of Israel shall reach unto Odolla. Make the balde, and shave the, because of thy
tender children: Make the clean balde as an Aegle, for they shall be carried
away captyue from the.

The II. Chapter.
^. Re. 21. a
they rob men off their houses.

Thus they oppress a man for his house, and every man for his heretage.
Therefore thus says the LORD: Behold, against this household have I devised
a plage, Am. 5. b
wherout ye shall not pluck your necks: Ye shall no more go so proudly, for it
will be a perlous time. In that day shall this term be used, and a mourning
shall be made over you on this manner: We be utterly desolate, the portion off my
people is translated. When will he part unto us the land, that he has taken
from us?

Nevertheless there shall be noman to deuyde LORD. Nu. 33. f
Tush, hold your tunge (say they) It shall not fall upon this people, we
shall not come so to confucion, says the house off Jacob. Is the sprete off
the LORD so clean away? or is he so minded? Treuth it is, my words are
friendly unto them that live right: but my people does the contrary, therefore
must I take part against them: for they take away both cote and cloak from
the simple.

Ye have turned your selves to fight, the women off my people have ye shot out
from their good houses, and taken away my excellent gifts from their children
Up, get you hence, for here shall ye have no rest.

Because off their Idolatry they are corrupt, and shall myserably perish. Yff
I were a fleshly fellow, and a preacher of lies and told them that they might
sit bebbinge and bollynge, and be droncken: O that were a prophet for this
people.

But I will gather the in deed (o Jacob) and drive the remnaunt off Israel all
together. I shall carry them one with another, as a flock in the fold, and as
the catell in their stalles, that they may be disquieted of other men.

Who so breaks the gappe, he shall go before. They shall break up the port,
and go in and out at it. Their king shall go before them, and the LORD shall be
upon the head of them.

The III. Chapter.
Hear, o ye heads of the house of Jacob, (...)
what were laufull and right? But ye hate the good, and love the evil: ye
pluck of men's skynnes, and the flesh from their bones: Ye eat the flesh of my
people, and flay of their skin: ye break their bones, ye choppe them in
pieces as it were in to a cauldron, and as flesh into a pot. Now the time shall
come, (...)
that when they call unto the LORD, he shall not hear them, but hyde his face
from them: because that through their own ymaginacio^s, they have dealte so
wickedly.

And as concerning the prophets that LORD says against them: (...)
When they have any thing to byte upon, then they preach that all shall be well:
but if a man put not some thing in to their mouths, they preach of war
against him.

Therefore your vision shall be turned to night, and your prophecyenge to
darcknesse. (...)
The Son shall go down over those prophets, and the day shall be darcke unto
them. Then shall the vision seers be ashamed, and ye says sayers confounded:
ye they shall be feign (all the pack of the^) to stop their mouths, for they
have not Gods word. As for me, I am full of strength, (...)
and of ye sprete of ye LORD, full of judgment and boldness: to show the
house of Jacob their wickedness, and the house of Israel their sin.

A^a. ^. b ^ Re. 8. a (...). ^1. b (...). 5. b (...). 6. b
and Jerusalem with doing wrong. O ye judges, ye give sentence for gifts: O
ye preastes, ye teach for lucre: O ye prophets, ye prophecy for money. Yet will
they be taken as those that hold upon God, and say: Is not the LORD among
us? Tush, there can no misfortune happen us. Iere. ^6. d ^ere. 9. b ^ Re 9. b
L^c. 19 d 21* a
Therefore shall Sion (for your sakes) be plowed like a field: Jerusalem shall
become an heap of stones, and the hill of ye temple shall be turned to an hye
wodde.

The IIII. Chapter.
Isa. ^. a ^eui. ^6. g
that the hill off the LORDS house shall be set up hyer the^ any mountains or
hills: Ye the people shall preese unto it, and the multitude off the Gentiles
shall haist them thither, saye^ge: Come, let us go up to the hill of the LORD,
and to the house of the God of Jacob: that he may teach us his way, and that
we may walk in his paths.

^eui* 24. d Psalm. 49. a
For the law shall come out off Sion, and the word of God from Jerusalem, and
shall give sentence among the multitude off the Heithen, and refourme the
people off far countries: so that of their swerdes they shall make plowshares,
and sythes off their spears.

Esa. 11. b Esa. 65. d
ye they shall no more learn to fight: but every man shall sit under his
vinyarde and under his fyge tree, and no man to fraye him away: for the mouth
off ye LORD of hoostes has spoken it. Therefore, where as all people have
walked every man in ye name of his own god, we will walk in the name of our
God for ever and ever. At the same time (says the LORD) will I gather up the
lame and the outcastes, ^^ph. 3. d
and soch as I have chastened: and will give issue unto the lame, and make of
ye outcastes a great people: Luc. 1. c
and the LORD himself shall be their king upon the mount Sion, from this time
forth for evermore. Genesis 3^. d
And unto the (O thou tower of Eder, thou strong hold off the daughter Sion)
unto the shall it come: eue^ the first lordshipe and kingdom of the daughter
Jerusalem. Why the^ art thou now so heavy? is there no king in the? are thy
councelers away that thou art so payned, as a woman in her travail?

And now (o thou daughter Sion) be sorry, LORD shall lowse the from the hand
off thine enemies.

Now also are there many people gathered together against the, saying: what,
Mich. 5. ^
Sion is cursed, we shall se our lust upon her. But they know not the
thoughts off the LORD, they understand not his council, Esa. 14. d
that shall gather them together as the sheeues in the barn. Therefore get the
up (o thou daughter Sion) and throsshe out the corn: For I will make thy horn
iron, and thy claws brass, that thou may grynde many people: their goods
shall thou appropriate unto the LORD, and their substance unto the ruler off
the whole world.

The V. Chapter.
AFter that shall thou be robbed thy Matt. 2. Ioh. 7. ^
art little among the thousands off Judah, Out off the shall come one unto me,
which shall be ye gouernoure i^ Israel: whose outgoinge has been from the
beginning, and from everlasting. In the mean while he plageth them for a
season, until the time that she (which shall bear) have borne: then shall the
remnaunt of his brethren be converted unto ye children of Israel. He shall
stand fast, and give fode in the strength of the LORD, Eze. 34 Ioh. 10. Romans 1
and in the victory of the name of ye LORD his God: and when they be
converted, he shall be magnified unto the farthest parts of the world.

Then shall there be peace, so that the Assirian may come in to our land, and
tread Genesis 10 Mich. 4
and the land of Nymrod with their naked weapens. Thus shall he deliver us from
the Assiria^, when he comes within our land, and sets his foot within
our borders. And the remnaunt of Jacob shall be among the multitude of people,
as the dew of the LORD, and as the drops upon the grass, that tarieth for
no man, and waits of no body. Ye the residue of Jacob shall be among the
Gentiles and the multitude off people, Genesis 4
as the lion among the beestes of ye wodde, and as the lions whelpe among a
flock of sheep: which (when he goes through) treads down, teareth in pieces,
and there is no man that can help. Thine hand shall be lift up upon thine
enemies, and all thine adversaries shall perish.

LORD) that I will take thine horses from the, and destroy thy charettes. I
will break down the cities off thy land, and overthrow all thy strong
holds. Deu. 18. b
All witchcraftes will I rote out of thine hand, there shall no mo
soythsayenges be within the. Thine Idols and thine images will I destroy out
of yt so that thou shall no more bow thy self unto the works of thine own
hondes. Thy groves will I pluck up by the rotes, and break down thy cities.
Thus will I be aue^ged also, upon all Heithen that will not hear.

The VI Chapter.
LORD says: Up, ^sa 58. a
reprove the mountains, and let the hills hear thy voice. O Hear the
punishment of the LORD, ye mountains, and ye mighty foundacio^s of ye earth:
for the LORD will reprove his people, and reason with Israel: O my people, what
have I done unto the? or wherein have I hurt the? give me answer. ^xo. 14* c
Because I brought the from the land of Egipte, and delivered the out of the
house of bondage? Because I made Moses, ^u. 12. a
Aaron and Miriam to lead the? Remember (o my people) what Balach the king of
Moab had ymagined against the, (...) 22.23 24.25.
and what answer that Balaam the son of Be or gave him, from Sethim unto
Galgal: yt ye may know the loving kyndnesses of ye LORD.

LORD? shall I bow mykne to the hye God? Shall I come before him with brent
offeringes, and with calves of a year old? Has the LORD a pleasure in many
thousand rams, or innumerable streams of oil? Or shall I give my firstborne
for mine of fences, and the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? I will
show the (O man) what is good, and what the LORD requires off the: Namely,
to do right, to have pleasure in loving kyndnesse, to be lowly, and to walk
with thy God: ^sa. 1. d.
that thou may be called a cite of the LORD, and that thy name may be
righteousness. Hear (o ye trybes) who would else give you soch warning?
Should I not be displeased, (...). 19. g (...). 25. c (...). 20. b (...). ^5. b
for the unrighteous good in the houses of the wicked, and because the measure
is minished? Or sh^lde I ius^fie the false balaunces and the bag of
disceatfull weightes, among those that be full off riches vnrightuously
gotten: where the citesyns deal with falsede, speak lies, and have
disceatfull tunges in their mouths?

Therefore I will take in hand to punysh (...)
Thou shall fle, but not escape: and those yt thou would save, will I deliver
to the sword. Thou shall sow, but not reap: (...)
thou shall press out olyues, but oil shall thou not have, to anoynte thy
self withal: thou shall tread out sweet must, but shall drink no wine. Ye
keep the ordinances of Amri, (...)
and all the customs of the house of Achab: ye follow their pleasures,
therefore will I make the waist, and cause ye inhabiters to be abhorred, O my
people: and thus shall thou bear thine own shame.

The VII. Chapter.
WOE is me: I am become as one, that (...)
They labor all to shed blood, and every man hunteth his brother to death:
yet they say they do well, when they do evil. As the prince will, so says
the judge: yt he may do him a pleasure again. The great man speaks what
his heart desires, and ye hearers allow him. The best off the^ is but as a
thistle, and the most rightuous of them is but as a b^ere in the hedge. But
when the day of thy preachers comes, yt thou shall be vysited: the^ shall
they be waisted away. Let no man believe his friend, (...)
ner put his confidence in a prince. Keep the port of thy mouth, from her yt
lies in thy bosom: (...)
for ye son shall put his father to dishonor, the daughter shall rise against
her mother, ye daughter in law against her mother in law: and a man's foes
shall be even they of his own household.

Nevertheless I will look up unto ye LORD, (...)
yet ye LORD is my light. I will bear the punishment of the LORD (for why, I
have offended him) till he sit in judgment upon my cause, and se that I have
right. He will bring me forth to the light, and I shall se his rightuosnesse.

She that is mine enemy shall look upon it, Re 1^. a
and be confounded, which now says: Where is thy LORD God? Mine eyes shall
behold her, when she shall be trodden down, as the claye in the streets. (...)
The time will come, that thy gappes shall be made up, and the law shall go
abroad: and at that time shall they come unto the, from Assure unto the strong
cities, and from the strong cities unto the river: from the one see to the
other, from the one mountain to the other.

Notwtstondinge the land must be waisted, because of them that dwell therein,
and for the fruits of their own ymaginacions. Therefore feed thy people with
thy rod, the flock of thine heretage which dwell desolate in the wodde: that
they may be fed upon the mount of Charmel, Basan and Galaad as before time.
Marvelous things will I show them, (...) 14. a
like as when they came out of Egipte. This shall the Heithen se, and be
aszshamed for all their power: (...) ^9. d
so that they shall lay their hand upon their mouth, and stop their ears.
(...)
They shall lick the dust like a serpent, and as the worms of the earth, yt
tremble in their holes. They shall be afraid of the LORD our God, and they
shall fear ye.

Where is there soch a God as thou? that pardonest wickedness, and forgeuest the
offenses of the remnaunt of thine heretage? He keeps not his wrath for ever.
And why? his delight is to have compassion: (...)
he shall turn again, and be merciful to us: he shall put down our
wickednesses, and cast all our sins in to the botome of the sea. Thou shall
keep thy trust with Jacob, and thy mercy for Abraham, like as thou have sworn
unto our fathers long agoo.

The end of the prophet Micheas.
The Prophet Naum.
What Naum conteyneth.
Chap. I. He prayseth the power and goodness of God: he reproves the
Ninevites, because they despised the council and punishment of God. Chap. II.
He descrybeth unto them the terryblenesse of the plage. Chap. III. He reproves
the abhominacions of the malicious cite, and ^^heweth them of their punishment.
This is the heavy burden of Niniue, which Naum of Elchos did write, as he saw
it.

The first Chapter.
THe LORD is a gelous God, and a taker of vengeance: ye a taker of
ve^geaunce is ye LORD, and wrothfull. Deu. 5. b
The LORD takes vengeance of his enemies, and reserueth displeasure for his
adversaries. The LORD suffers long, To. 2. a Exo. 34. a Iere. 30. b
he is of great power, and so innocent, that he leaves no man fautlesse
before him. The LORD goes forth in tempest and stormy wether, the clouds are
the dust of his fete. When he reproves the sea, he dries it up, and turns
all the floudes to dry land. Basan is desolate, Charmel and the pleasure of
Libanus waisteth away. The mountains tremble for him, the hills consume. At
the sight of him, the earth quaketh: ye the whole world, and all that dwell
therein. Iere. 10. b Esa. 34. a Abac. 3. a Soph. ^. b
Who may endure before his wrath? Or who is able to abide his grymme
displeasure? His anger takes on like fire, and the hard rocks burst in
sunder before him.

Full gracious is the LORD, and a strong LORD on this manner? (Tush, when he
has once made an end, there shall come no more trouble.) For like as the
thorns that stick together, and as the dry straw, so shall the dronckardes
be consumed together, even when they be full. There come out of ye soch as
ymagin myschefe, and give ungracious council against the LORD.

Therefore thus says the LORD: Let the^ be as well prepared, ye and as many
as they can, yet shall they be hewn down, and pass away. And as for the, I
will vex the, but not utterly destroy the. And now will I break his rod from
thy back, and burst thy bonds in sonder. But the LORD has given a
commandment concerning the, that there shall come no more sede of thy name.
The carved and casten images will I rote out of the house of thy god. Mich. 5. ^
Thy grave shall I prepare for the, and thou shall be confounded.

The II. Chapter.
Behold, upon the mountains come Esa. 52. b To. 10. c
that brings good tydinges, and preaches peace. O Judah, keep thy holy days,
perform thy promyses: for Belial shall come no more in the, he is utterly roted
out.

The scaterer shall come up against the, and lay sege to the castle. Look thou
well to the streets, make thy loins strong, arm thy self with all thy might:
for the LORD shall restore again the glory of Jacob, like as ye glory of
Israel. The destroyers have broken them down, and marred the wine branches.
The shylde of his giauntes glistereth, his men of war are clothed in purple.
His charettes are as fire, when he makes him forward, his archers are well
deckte and trimmed. The charettes roll upon the streets, and welter in the hye
ways. They are to look upon like cressettes of fire, and go swyftly, as the
lightenynge.

^ob. 14. b ^oph. 2. c
and groan within their hertes. Niniue is like a pole full of water, but then
shall they be feign to fle. Stand, sto^de, (shall they cry) and there shall not
one turn back. Away with the silver, away with the gold: for here is no
end of treasure. There shall be a multitude of all manner costly ornaments. Thus
must she be spoiled, emptied and clean striped out: that their hertes may be
melted away, their knees tremble, all their loins be weak, and their faces
black as a pot.

Where is now the dwellinge of the lyo^s, and the pasture of the lions whelps?
where the lion and the lioness went with the whelps, and no man frayed them
away? But the lion spoiled enough for his young ones, and devoured for his
lioness: he filled his dens with his pray, and his dwellinge place with that
he had rauyszshed. Behold, I will upon the (says the LORD of hoostes) and
will set fire upon thy charettes, that they shall smoke withal, and the sword
shall devour thy young lions. I will make an end of thy spoylinge from out of
the earth, and the voice of thy messaungers shall no more be herd.

The III. Chapter.
^ze. 24. a ^bac. 2. b
and will not leave of from rauyszshinge. There a man may hear scourginge,
ruszshinge, the noise of the wheles, the crienge of the horses, and the
rollinge of the charettes. There the horse men get up with naked swerdes, and
glisterynge spears: There lies a multitude slain, and a great heap of deed
bodies: There is no end of deed coarses, ye men fall upon their bodies: And
that for the great and many fold whord^me, of the fair and beutifull harlot:
which is a mastresse of wychcraft, ye and sells the people through her
whordome, and the nations through her wichcraft.

Behold, (...)
I will upon the (says the LORD of hoostes) and will pull thy clothes over thy
head: that I may show thy nakedness among the Heithen, and thy shame among
the kingdoms. I will cast dyrte upon yt, to make the be abhorred, and a gasynge
stock: Ye all they that look upon the, shall starte back, and say: Niniue is
destroyed.

Who will have pity upon the? where shall

Behold, thy people with in the are but (...)
the sword shall destroy the, ye as ye locuste does, so shall it eat the up.
It shall fall heuely upon the as the locustes, ye right heuely shall it fall
upon the, even as the greshoppers. Thy merchants have been mo then the
stars of heaven: but now shall they sprede abroad as the locustes, and fle
their way: Thy lords are as the greshoppers, and thy captains as the
multitude of greshoppers: which when they be cold, remain in ye hedges: but
when the Son is up, they fle away, and no man can tell where they are
become. Thy shepherdes are aslepe (o king of Assure) thy worthies are laid
down: ye people is scatred abroad upon the mountains, and no man gathers
them together again. Thy wound can not be hyd, thy plage is so sore. All they
that hear this of the, shall clappe their hands over the. For what is he, to
who^ thou have not allwaye been doing hurt?

The end of the prophet Naum.
The Prophet Abacuc.
What Abacuc conteyneth.
Chap. I. He complayneth unto God of the wickedness of the people, and
threateneth them with the plage of God. Chap. II. He reproves the cuvetous and
unrighteous men. Chap. III. A prayer of the prophet.
The first Chapter.
(...) 2^. a
O LORD, how long shall I cry, and thou will not hear? (...) ^3. a
How long shall I complain unto the, suffrynge wrong, and thou will not
help? Why let thou me se weerynesse and labor? Tyranny and violence are
before me, power ouergoeth right: for the law is torn in pieces, and there can
no right judgment go forth. And why? the ungodly is more set by then the
rightuous: this is the cause, yt wrong judgment proceeds. Behold among the
Heithen, (...)
and look well: wondre at it, and be abaszshed: for I will do a thing in your
time, which though it be told you, ye shall not believe.

(...)
which shall go as wide as the land is, to take possession of dwellinge places,
that be not their own. A grymme and boysteous people is it, these shall sit in
judgment and punyshe. Their horses are swifter then the cattes of the
mountain, and byte sorer then ye wolves in ye evening. (...)
Their horsemen come by great heaps from far, they fle hastily to deuor as
the Aegle. They come all to spoil: out of them comes an east wind, which
blows and gathers their captyues, like as the sonde. They shall mock the
kings, and laugh the princes to scorn. They shall not set by any strong
hold, for they shall lay ordinance against it, and take it. Then shall they
take a fresh courage unto them, to go forth and to do more evil, and so ascrybe
that power unto their God. (...) 45. a (...). d


But thou o LORD my God, my holy one, LORD, thou have ordened them for a
punyshme^t, and set them to reprove the mighty. Thine eyes are clean, thou
may not se evil, thou can not behold ye thing that is wicked. Iere. 12.
a Psalm. 36. a
Wherefore then do thou look upon the ungodly, and hold thy tunge, when the
wicked deuoureth the man that is better the^ himself? Thou make men as the
fish in the sea, and like as the crepinge beestes, that have no gyde. They take
up all with their angle, they catch it in their net, and gather it in their
yarne: whereof they rejoice and are glad. Therefore offer they unto their net,
and do sacrifice unto their yarne: because that through it their portion is
become so fat, and their meat so pleteous. Wherefore they cast out their net
again, and never cease to slaye the people.

The II. Chapter.
I Stood upon my watch, and set me LORD answered me, and said: Write the
vision planely upon thy tables, that who so comes by, may read it: for ye
vision is yet far of for a time, Dan. 9. d
but at ye last it shall come to pass, and not fail. And though he tarry, yet
wait thou for him, Heb. 10. d
for in very deed he will come, and not be slack. Behold, who so will not
believe, his soul shall not prospere: but the just shall live by his faith. To.
1. b
Like as the wine disceaueth the dronckarde, even so the proud shall fail and
not endure. He opens his desire wide up as the hell, and is as insatiable as
death. Pro. 30. b
All Heithen gathers he to him, and heapeth unto him all people.

But shall not all these take up a proverb Abdi. 1. c
Saying thou have spoiled many Heithen, therefore shall the remnaunt of the
people spoil the: because of men's blood, and for the wrong done in the
land, in the cite and unto all them that dwell therein.

Woe unto him, Esa. 5. b
that couetously gathers evil gotten goods in to his house: that he may
set his nest an hye, Abdi. 1. a
to escape from the power of mysfortune. Thou have devised ye shame of thine
own house, for thou have slain to much people, and have wilfully offended: so
that the very stones of the wall shall cry out of it, ^uc. 19. d
and the tymbre that lies betwixt the joints of the buyldinge shall answer.
^ze. 24. a Nau^ 1. a Mich. 3. c
Woe unto him, yt buyldeth the town with blood, and maynteneth ye cite with
unrighteous. Shall not the LORD of hoostes bring this to pass, that the
labors of the people shall be brent with a great fire, and that the thing
where upon the people have weeried them selves, shall be lost? For the earth
shall be full of knowledge of the LORDS honor, Exo. 9. c Nu. 14 c Esa. 11. b
like as the waters that cover the sea.

Gen 9. d
that he may se his preuyte^s. Therefore with shame shall then be filled, in
stead of honor. Drink thou also, till thou slombre withal: for the cup
of the LORDS right ho^de shall compass the about, and shameful spewinge in
stead of thy worshipe. For the wrong that thou have done in Libanus, ^ere.
50. ^ Abdi. 1. c
shall ouerwhelme the, and the wild beasts shall make the afraid: because of
men's bleude, and for the wrong done in the land, in the cite, and unto all
soch as dwell therein.

What help than will ye image do, whom the workman has fashioned? Or the vain
cast image, wherein because the craftesman puts his trust, therefore makes he
domme Idols? Woe unto him, that says to a piece of wod: arise, and to a domine
stone: stand up. For what instruccio^ may soch one give? Behold, it is laid
over with gold and silver, Psalm. 10. a
and there is no breath in it. But the LORD in his holy temple is he, whom all
the world should fear.

The III. Chapter. A prayer of the prophet Abacuc for the ignorant.
LORD, when I herd speak of ye, I was afraid. The work yt thou have taken
in hand, shall thou perform in his time, O LORD: and when thy time comes,
thou shall declare it. In thy very wrath thou think upon mercy. God comes
from Theman, and the holy one from the mount of Pharan. Sela.

His glory covers the heavens, and the earth is full of his praise. His shine
is as ye son, and beams of light go out of his hondes, there is his power
hid. Destruccio^ goes before him, and burning cressettes go from his fete. He
stondeth, and measures the earth: He looks, and the people consume away, the
mountains of ye world fall down to powlder, and the hills are feign to bow
them selves, for his goinges are everlasting and sure.

I saw, that the pauilions of the Morians and the tents of the land of
Madian were vexed for weerynesse. Wast thou not angry (o LORD) in the waters?
was not thy wrath in the floudes, and thy displeasure in the sea? yes, when
thou sattest upon thine horse, and when thy charettes had the victory. Thou
shewdest thy bow openly, like as thou had promised with an ooth unto the
trybes. Sela. (...)


Thou did deuyde the waters of the (...)
The Son and Moan remained still in their habitacion. Thine arowes went out
glisteringe, and thy spears as the shine of the lightenynge. (...)
Thou trodest down the land in thine anger, and did thro^^ she the Heithen
in thy displeasure. Thou c^^mest forth to help thy people, to help thi^^
anointed. Thou smotest down the head in the house of the ungodly, and
discoueredest his foundacions, eue^ unto ye neck of him. Sela.

Thou cursest his septers, the captain of his men of war: which come as a
stormy wind to s^atre me abroad, and are glad when they may eat up ye poor
secretly. Thou make a way for thine horses in the sea, even

For the fyge trees shall not be grene, and the vynes shall bear no fruit. The
labor of ye olyue shall be but lest, and the land shall br^nge no corn: the
sheep shall be taken out of ye fold, and there shall be no catell in ye stalles.
But as for me, I will be glad in the LORD, and will rejoice in God my Savior.
(...)
The LORD God is my strength, he shall make my fete as the fete of hertes: and
he which gives ye victory, shall bring me to my hye places, synginge upon my
psalms.

The end of the prophet Abacuc.
The Prophet Sophony.
What Sophony conteyneth.
Chap. I. He prophecieth of plages for to come upon Judah. Chap. II. He exorteth
them to amend, that they may escape the wrath of God: and shows the
Gentiles their punishment. Chap. III. Punishment because of the wickedness of
the Jews: whom God therefore refused, and chose the Heithen.
The first Chapter.
LORD, which came unto Sophony the son of Chusi, the son of Gedolias, the
son of Amarias ye son of Hezechias: in the time of Josias the son of
Amonkinge of Judah. (...)
I will gather up all things in the land (says the LORD) I will gather up
man and be: I will gather up the fowls in the air, and the fysh in the sea
(to the great decay of the wicked) and will utterly destroy the men out of
the land, says the LORD. I will stretch out mine hand upon Judah, and upon
all soch as dwell at Jerusalem. Thus will I rote out the remnaunt of Baal from
this place, and the names of the Kemuryns and prestes: ye and soch as upon
their house tops worshipe and bow them selves unto the host of heaven:
which swear by the LORD, (...)
and by their Malchom also: which starte a back from ye LORD, and nether seek
after the LORD, ner regard him.

LORD God, for the day of the LORD is at hand: (...)
ye the LORD has prepared a slain offeringe, and called his gestes thereto.
And thus shall it happen in the day of the LORDS a slaynofferynge: (...)
I will vyset the princes, the kings children, and all soch as weere strange
clothinge. In the same day also will I vyset all those, that tread over the
thresholde so proudly, which fill their lords house with robbery and falsede. At
ye same time (says the LORD) there shall be herd a great cry from the
fyshporte, and an howlinge from ye other port, and a great murthur from the
hills. Howl ye that dwell in the myll, for all the merchant people are gone,
and all they that were laden with silver, are roted out.

(...)
and vyset them that continue in their dregs, and say in their hertes: Tush,
the LORD will do nether good ner evil. Their goods shall be spoiled, and their
houses laid waist. Amo^ 5. b
They shall build houses, and not dwell in them: they shall plant vynyardes,
but not drink the wine thereof. Joel. 2. a
For the great day of the LORD is at hand, it is hard by, and comes on a
pace. Horrible is ye tydinges of the LORDS day, then shall the giaunte cry
out: for that day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and heaviness, a day
of utter destruction and mysery, a darcke and glomynge day, a cloudy and
stormy day, a day of the noise of trompettes and shawmes, against the strong
cities and hie towers. I will bring ye people into soch vexacion, that they
shall go about like blind me^, because they have sinned against the LORD.
Their blood shall be shed as the dust, and their bodies as the mire. Eze. 7. d
Nether their silver ner their gold shall be able to deliver the^ in that
wrothfull day of the LORD, but the whole land shall be consumed through the
fire of his gelousy: Soph. 3. b
for he shall soon make clean ryddaunce of all them that dwell in the land.

The II. Chapter.
COme together and gather you, O ye LORD come upon you, ye or the day of the
LORDS sore displeasure come upon you. Seek the LORD all ye meke hearted upon
earth, ye that work after his judgment: 4. Re. 20. a Ione 3. a
seek righteousness, seek lowlynesse: that ye may be defended in the
wrothfull day of ye LORD. For Gaza shall be destroyed, Esa. 14. ^ Iere. 47. a
Eze. 25. c
and Ascalon shall be laid waist: They shall cast out Aszdod at the noone day,
and Accaron shall be pluckte up by the rotes.

Woe unto you yt dwell upon the sea coost, ye murthurous people: the word of ye
LORD shall come upon you. O Canaan thou land of the Philistynes, I will
destroy the, so that there shall no man dwell in the any more: and as for the sea coost, it shall be hyrdmens cotages and sheep foldes: ye it shall be a
portion for soch as remain of the house of Judah, to feed there upon. In ye
houses of Ascalon shall they rest toward night: for the LORD their God shall
vyset the^, and turn away their captyuite. I have herd the despite of Moab,
and Esa. 15.1^ Iere. 48. a Eze. ^5. b
how they have shamefully entreated my people, and magnified them selves within
the borders of their land. Therefore as truly as I live (says the LORD of
hoostes the God of Israel) Moab shall be as Sodom, and Ammon as Gomorra: even
dry thorn hedges, salt pittes and a perpetual wyldernes. The residue of my
folk shall spoil them the remnaunt of my people shall have them in
possession. This shall happen unto them for their pride, Zach. 2. b
because they have dealte so shamefully with the LORD of hoostes people, and
magnified them selves above them. The LORD shall be grymme upon them, and
destroy all the gods in the land. Esa. 2. c
And all the Isles of the Heithen shall worshipe him, every man in his place.

4. Re. 19 f Esa 47. b 34. c
that said in her heart: I am, and there is else none. O how is she made so
waist, yt the beestes lie therein? Who so goes by, mocketh her, and poynteth at
her with his finger.

The III. Chapter.
LORD, nether will she hold her to her God. Her rulers within her are as
roaringe lions: Eze. 22. c Mich. 3. c Abac. 1. b
her judges are as wolves in the evening, which leave nothing behind them
till the morrow. Her prophets are light persons and un faithful men: her
prestes vnhalowe the Sanctuary, and do wrong under the pretense of the law.
But the just LORD that does no unright, was among them, every morning
shewinge them his law clearly, and ceased not. But the ungodly will not learn
to be aszshamed. Therefore will I rote out this people, and destroy their
towers: ye and make their streets so void, that no man shall go therein. Their
cities shall be broken down, so that no body shall be left, ner dwell there any
more.

LORD) until the time that I stand up: for I am determed, to gather the
people and to bring the kingdoms together, that I may pour out mine anger,
ye all my wrothfull displeasure upon them. (...)
For all the world shall be consumed with the fire of my gelousy. And then will I
cleanse the lips of the people, that they (...) euerychone call upon the name
of the LORD, and serve him with one sh^lder. So^^ as I have subdued, and my
children also whom I have scatred abroad, shall bring me presents beyond the
waters of Ethiopia.

In that time shall thou no more (...) (...)
for I will take away the proud boosters of thine honor from the, so that
thou shall no more tryumphe because of my holy h^ll. In the also will I leave a
small poor simple people, which shall trust in the name of the LORD. The
remnaunt of Israel shall do no wickedness, ner speakelyes: nether shall there any
disceatful tunge be found in their mouths. For they shall be fed, and take
their rest, and no man shall make them afraid. Give th^^kes o daughter Sio^, be
joyful o Israel: rejoice and be glad from thy whole heart, o daughter
Jerusalem, for the LORD has taken away thy punishment, and turned back
thine enemies. The king of Israel, even the LORD himself is with the: so that
(...) no more to fear any myszfortune.

In that time it shall be said to Ierusa^lem: fear not, and to Sion: let not
thine h^ndes be slack, for the LORD thy God is with the, it is he that has
power to save: he has a special pleasure in the, and a marvelous love toward
the: ye he reioyseth over the (...) gladness. Soch as have been in heuyn^sse,
will I gather together, and take out of thy congregation: as for the shame and
(...) that has been laid upon the, it shall be f^^re from the. And lo, in yt
time will I destroy^ all those that vex the: (...)
I will help the (...) and gather up the cast a way: ye I will get them
honor and praise in all lo^des, where they have been put to shame. At ye same
time will I bring you in, and at the same time will I gather you. I will get you
a name and a good report, among all people of the earth, when I turn back
your captiuyte before your eyes, says the LORD.

The end of the prophet Sophony.
The Prophet Aggeus.
What Aggeus conteyneth.
Chap. I. He exorteth the people to build up the temple, and reproves their
long tarie^ge. Chap. II. He gives the rulers a courage. Of the orname^tes and
glory of the second temple, whereby is understood the church of the faith
full.
The first Chapter.
Esd. 6. a ^an. 5. c (...) a
in the vj. month the first day of the month, came the word of the LORD
(by the prophet Aggeus) unto Zorobabel the son of Salathiel ye prince of
Judah, Esd. ^. a Esd. ^.3. ^.5
and to Iesua the son of Iosedec the ^ye pressed, saying: Thus speaks the
LORD of hoostes, and says: This people does say: The time is not yet come
to build up the LORDS house. Then spoke the LORD by the prophet Aggeus and
said: Ye yor selves can find time to dwell in syled houses, ^ere. 2^. b
and shall this house lie waist? Considre now your own ways in your hertes
(says ye LORD of hoostes) ye sow much, but ye bring little in: Leui. 25. d
^ich. 6. b ^ice 4. b ^ala. 3. b
Ye eat, but ye have not enough: ye drink, but ye are not filled: ye deck
your selves, but ye are not warm: and he yt earneth any wage, puts it in a
broken purse.

LORD of hoostes: Consider your own ways in your hertes, get you up to the
mountain, fetch wod, and build up to the house: ^ Re. 8. d
that it may be acceptable unto me, and that I may show mine honor, says
the LORD. Ye looked for much, and lo it is come to little: and though ye bring
it home, yet do I blow it away. And why so, says the LORD of hoostes? Eue^
because that my house lies so waist, ^ Cor. 3. b ^. c ^ Cor 6. c
and ye run every man unto his own house. Wherefore the heaven is forbydde^
to give you any dew, and the earth is forbidden to give you increase. ^eut. 28.
d
I have called for a drouth, both upon the land and upon the mountains, upon
corn, upon wine and upon oil, upon every thing that the ground brings
forth, upon men and upon catell, ye and upon all handy labor.

Now when Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, and Iesua the son of Iosedec the
hye pressed with the remnaunt of the people, herd the voice of the LORD their
God, and the words of the prophet Aggeus (like as the LORD their God had sent
him) the people did fear the LORD, Then Aggeus the LORDS angel said in the
LORDS message unto the people: I am with you, Deuteronomy. 7 ^ 31. g Agg. 2. a Iere. 46
1. Esd. 5 a
says the LORD. So the LORD waked up the sprete of Zorobabel the prince of
Judah, and the sprete of Iesua the son of Iosedec the hye pressed, and the
sprete of the remnaunt of all the people: yt they came and labored, in the
house of the LORD of hoostes their God.

The II. Chaptyr.
Upon the xxii^j. day of the sixte month, LORD by the prophet Aggeus,
saying: speak to Zorobabel the son of Salathiel prince of Judah, and to
Iesua the son of Iosedec the hye pressed, and to the residue of ye people, and
say: Who is left among you, 1. Esd. 3. ^
that saw this house in her first beuty: But what think ye now by it? Is it
not in your eyes, eue^ as though it were nothing? Nevertheless be of good
chere, Deu. 31. Iosu. 1. ^
o Zorobabel (says the LORD) be of good conforte, o Iesua thou son of
Iosedec, hye pressed: take good hearts unto you also, all ye people of the land,
says the LORD of hoostes, and do acordinge to the word (for I am with you,
Agg. 1.
says the LORD of hoostes) like as I agreed with you, when ye came out of
the land of Egypt: and my sprete shall be among you, fear ye not.

For thus says the LORD of hoostes: Heb. 12
the sea and the dry lord: Ye I will move all Heithen, and the comfort of
all Heithen shall come, and so will I fill this house with honor, says the
LORD of hoostes. The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, Deuteronomy. ^
says the LORD of hoostes. Thus ye glory of the last house shall be greater
the^ the first, says the LORD of hoostes: and in this place will I give
peace, says the LORD of hoostes.

The xxiiij. day of the ix month in these conde year of king Darius, came
the word of the LORD unto the prophet Aggeus saying: Thus says ye LORD
God of hoostes: Axe the prestes concerning the law, and say: Iere. 11*
If one bear holy flesh in his cote lap, and with his lap do touch the
bred, potage, wine, oil or any other meat: shall he be holy also? The prestes
answered, and said: No. Then said Aggeus: Now if one being defiled with a
deed carcass, touch any of the se: shall it also be unclean? The prestes gave
answer and said: ye, it shall be unclean. Leui. 5.11. d Nu. 19.
The^ Aggeus answered, and said: Even so is this people and this nation before
me, says ye LORD: and so are all the works of their ho^des, ye and all
that they offer, is unclean.

LORD: that when ye came to a corn heap of xx. busshels, ^gg. 1. a
there were scarceten: and that when ye came to the wine press for to pour
out L. pottes of wine, there were scarce xx. For I smote you with heat,
blastinge and hale stones in all the labors of your hondes: yet was there
none of you, that would turn unto me, says the LORD. Considre then from
this day forth and before, namely, from the xxiiij. day of the ix. month,
unto the day that the foundation of the LORDS temple was laid: chapter 8. b
Marck it well, Is not the sede yet in the barn? have not the vynes, the
fygetrees, the pomgranates and olyue trees been yet unfruitful? but from this
day forth, I shall make them to prospere.

Morouer the xxiiij. day of the month came the word of the LORD unto Aggeus
again, saying: Speak to Zorobabel the prince of Judah, and say: I will shake
both heaven and earth, and overthrow the seat of the kingdoms, ye and
destroy the mighty kingdom of the Heithe^. I will overthrow the charettes,
and those that sit upon them, so that both horse and man shall fall down, every
man through his neghbours sword. And as for the, o Zorobabel (says the LORD
of hoostes) thou son of Salathiel, my servant: I will take the (says the
LORD) at the same time, and make the as a seale^ for I have chosen the, says
the LORD of hoostes.

The end of the prophet Aggeus.
The Prophet Zachary.
What Zachary conteyneth.
Chap. I. He exorteth the people, not to be disobedient to the voice of God, as
their forefathers were, but to convert: and he shows them joyful things in
visions. Chap. II. Visions, signifienge the delyueraunce out of the captiuyte
of Babylon, and the redemption in Christ. Chap. III. A vision in Iesua,
signifienge the LORD Jesus our hye pressed. Chap. IIII. Another vision, wherein
Zorobabel is conforted with his little nombre of people. The right mystery hereof
belongs unto Chap. V. The wrath of God for the (Christ* sins of the people.
Chap. VI. A vision, wherein is declared the almighty power of God, which gives
peace or war at his pleasure. Chap. VII. What the true fast is: namely, to
keep judgment and justice, a man to do good to his neighbor, to defend the
widdowe and the fatherless, to do no man wrong, etc. Chap. VIII. Cause of all
the wrath of God: yet if men will turn, he is merciful. Chap. IX. The joyful
calling of the Heithe^. Chap. X. Through corporal promises, the prophet ledeth
men unto the promises that are fulfilled in Christ: and threateneth punishment
unto the false prophets and shepherdes. Chap. XI. Of secret mysteries, and of
the destruccio^ of the second temple. God is a good shepherde. Chap. XII. The
punishment which the LORD devised for Israel. Chap XIII. Of wells and
clensynge, which belong to the time of Christ. Chap. XIIII. The plage of the
Jews. The taking up of Jerusalem the church of God.
The first Chapter.
IN the eight month of the second LORD unto Zachary the son of Barachias,
the son of Addo, (...)
the prophet, saying: The LORD has been sore displeased at your
forefathers. And say thou unto them: thus says the LORD of hoostes. Turn
you unto me (says the LORD of hoostes) and I will turn me unto you, (...)
says the LORD of hoostes. Iere. (...) Psalm. (...)
Be not ye like your forefathers, unto whom the prophets cried before time,
saye^ge: Thus says the LORD God of hoostes: (...)
Turn you from your evil ways, and from your wicked ymaginacions. But they
would not hear, (...)
ner regard me, says the LORD. What is now become of your forefathers and
the prophets? are they yet still alive? But did not my words and statutes
(which I commanded by my servants yt prophets) touch yor forefathers? Upon
this, they gave answer and said: like as ye LORD of hoostes devised to do
unto us, acordinge to or own ways and ymaginacions, even so has he dealte
with us.

Upon the xxiiij. day of the xj. month LORD unto Zachary the son of
Barachias, the son of Addo the prophet, saying: I saw by night, and lo,
there sat one upon a read horse, (...)
and stood still among the Myrte trees, that were beneth upon the ground: and
behind him were there read, spreckled and white horses.

Then said I: O my LORD, what are these? And the angel that talked with me,
said unto me: I will show the what these be. And the man that stood among
the Myrte trees, answered and said: These are they, whom the LORD has sent
to go through the world. And they answered the angel of the LORD, that stood
among the Myrte trees, and said: We have gone through the world: and behold,
all the world dwell at case, and are careless.

Then the LORDS angel gave answer and said: O LORD of hoostes, how long
will thou be unmerciful to Jerusalem and to the cities of Judah, ^ere. 25. b
(...). b (...). 1. a
with whom thou have been displeased now these lxx. years? So the LORD gave a
loving and a confortable answer, unto the angel that talked with LORD of
hoostes: I am exceadynge gelous over Jerusalem and Sion, and sore displeased at
the careless Heithen: for where as I was but a little angry, they did their
best that I might destroy them. Therefore thus says the LORD: ^^ch. ^. a
I will turn me again in mercy toward Jerusalem, so that my house shall be
builded in it, says the LORD of hoostes: ye and the plommet shall be laid
abroad in Jerusalem, says the LORD of hoostes.

Cry also, and speak: thus says the LORD of hoostes: My cities shall be in
good prosperity again, the LORD shall yet conforte Sion, and chose Jerusalem.
Then lift I up mine eyes and saw, and behold, four horns. And I said unto
the angel, that talked with me: what be these? he answered me: (...)
These are ye horns, which have scatred Judah, Israel and Jerusalem abroad. And
ye LORD showed me iiij. carpenters. Then said I: what will these do? He
answered, and said: Those are the horns, which have so strowed Judah abroad,
that no man durst lift up his head: But these are come to fraye them away,
and to cast out ye horns of the Gentiles, which lift up their horn over the
land of Judah, to scatre it abroad.

The II. Chapter.
^ze. 43. b Apo. ^1. c
a man with a measure line in his hand. Then said I: whether go thou? And
he said unto me: To measure Jerusalem, that I may se how long and how broad
it is. And behold, the angel that talked with me, went his way forth. Then
went there out another angel to mete him, and said unto him: Run, speak to
this yongeman, and say: Jerusalem shall be inhabited without any wall, for ye
very multitude of people and catell, yt shall be therein. Deuteronomy. 4 Zach. ^
Ye I myself (says the LORD) will be unto her a wall of fire round about,
and will be honored in her.

O get you forth, O fle from the land of ye north (says the LORD) ye, Iere.
23. ^
whom I have scatred in to the four wyndes under heaven, says the LORD.
Save thy self, o Sion: thou that dwell with ye daughter of Babylon, for thus
says the LORD of hoostes: Iere. 2. a 20. d. 30 Psalm. 1^. ^ Esa. 14 ^
for who so touches you, shall touch the aple of his own eye. Behold, I will
lift up mine hand over them: so that they shall be spoiled of those, which
before served them: and ye shall know, that the LORD of hoostes has sent me.

Be glad, and rejoice, o daughter of Sion: Exo. 25 Matt. 2^
for lo, I am come to dwell in the myddest of the, says the LORD. At the
same time there shall many Heithen cleue to the LORD, and shall be my people.
Thus will I dwell in the myddest of the, and thou shall know, that the LORD of
hoostes has sent me unto the. The LORD shall have Judah in possession for his
part in the holy ground, and shall chose Jerusalem yet again. Soph. ^
Let all flesh be still before the LORD, for he is risen out of his holy place.

The III. Chapter.
ANd he showed me Iesua ye hye pressed, LORD, Psalm. 10 Matt. ^ Jude 1. ^
and Satan stood at his right hand to resist him. And the LORD said unto
Satan: The LORD reprove the (thou Satan) ye the LORD that has chosen
Jerusalem, reprove the. Is not this a brande taken out of the fire? Now Iesua
was clothed in unclean raiment, and stood before the angel: which answered and
said unto those, yt stood before him: take away ye foul clothes from him.
And unto him he said: Behold, I have taken away thy sin from the, and will
deck the with change of rayme^t. He said morouer: set a fair myter upon his
head. So they set a fair myter upon his head, and put on clothes upon him,
and the angel of ye LORD stood there. Then the angel of the LORD LORD of
hoostes: If thou will walk in my ways, and keep my watch: thou shall rule my
house, and keep my courts, and I will give the place among these that stand
here. Hear o Iesua thou hye pressed, thou and thy friends that dwell before the,
for they are wo^derous people. (...). 47. a ^ach. 6. b ^ere. 2^. a ^* c ^sa.
28. c Pet. ^. a (...). ^3. a
Behold, I will bring forth the branch of my servant: for lo, the stone
that I have laid before Iesua: upon one stone shall be vij. eyes. Behold, I
will hew him out (says the LORD of hoostes) and take away the sin of
that land in one day. Then shall every man call for his neighbor, under the
vine and under ye fygetre, says the LORD of hoostes.

The IIII. Chap.
(...). 11 a
and upon every lamp vij. stalks: And ij. olyue trees thereby, one upon the
right side of the boll, and the other upon the left side. So I answered, and
spoke to the angel yt talked with me, saying: O my lord what are these? The
angel that talked with me, answered and said unto me: know thou not what
these be? And I said: No, my lord. He answered, and said unto me: This is
the word of the LORD unto Zorobabel, saying: Nether through an host of men,
ner through strength, (...) 11. a
but through my sprete, says ye LORD of hoostes. What art thou (thou great
mountain) before Zorobabel? thou must be made eauen. (...). 28. c
And he shall bring up the first stone, so that men shall cry unto him: good
luck, good luck.

LORD came unto me, (...). 1. a
saying: The hondes of Zorobabel have laid ye foundation of this house, his
hondes also shall fynishe it: that ye may know, ^eut. 18. d
how that the LORD of hoostes has sent me unto you. For he that has been
despised a little season, shall rejoice, when he seyth the tynne weight in
Zorobabels hand. The vij. eyes are the LORDS, which go through the hole
world. Then answered I, and said unto him: What are these two olyue trees
upon the right and left side of the candilsticke? I spoke morouer, and said
unto him: what be these ij. olyue branches which (through ye two golden pipes)
empty them selves in to the gold? He answered me, and said: know thou
not, what these be? And I said: No, my lord. Then said he: These are the two
olyue branches, ^poc. 11. a
that stand before the ruler of the whole earth.

The V. Chapter.
LORD of hoostes) so yt it shall come to the house of the thief, (...)
and to the house of him, that falsely swears by my name: and shall remain in
his house, and consume it, with the tymbre and stones thereof. The^ the angel
that talked with me, went forth, and said unto me: lift up thine eyes and se,
what this is yt goes forth. And I said: what is it? He answered: this is a
measure goinge out. He said morouer: Even thus are they (yt dwell upon the
whole earth) to look upon. And behold,

Then lift I up mine eyes, and looked: and behold, there came out ij. women,
and the wind was in their wings (for they had wings like the wings of a
Storke) and they lif^ up the measure betwixt the earth and the heaven. Then
spoke I to the angel, yt talked with me: whyther will these bear the measure? And
he said unto me: (...)
in to the land of Synear, to build them an house: which when it is prepared,
the measure shall be set there in his place.

The VI. Chapter.
MOrouer I turned me, liftynge up (...)
In the first charet were read horse, In the second charet were black horse,
In ye third charet were white horse, In ye fourth charet were horses of
diverse colors, and strong. Then spoke I, and said unto the angel that
talked with me: O lord, what are these* The angel answered, and said unto me:
(...)
These are the iiij. wyndes of the heaven, which be come forth to sto^de before
the ruler of all ye earth. That with the black horse went in to the land of
the north, and the white followed the^, and the sprekled horses went forth
toward the south. These horses were very strong, and went out: and sought to
go and take their journey over the whole earth. And he said: get you hence,
and go through the world. So they went through out the world. Then cried he
upon me, and spoke unto me, saying: Behold, these that go toward ye north,
shall still my wrath in the north country.

LORD came unto me, saying: Take of the presoners that are come from Babylon:
namely, Heldai, Tobias and Idaia: and come thou the same day, and go in to the
house of Josias the son of Sophony. Then take gold and silver, and make
crowns thereof, and set them upon the head of Iesua the son of Iosedec, the
hie pressed, and speak unto him: Thus says the LORD of hoostes: Behold, the
man whose name is the branch: ^ach 3. b ^sal. 126. a
and he that shall spring up after him, shall build up the temple of the
LORD: ye even he shall build up the temple of the LORD. Apo. 4. b ^ b
He shall bear the praise, he shall sit upon the LORDS trone, and have the
dominacion.

(...). 109. a ^^b. 5.6 ^* 8.9.10
A pressed shall he be also upon his trone, and a peaceable council shall be
betwixt them both. And the crowns shall be in the temple of the LORD, for a
remembrance unto Helem, Tobias, Idaia and Hen the son of Sophony. And soch
as be far of, shall come and build the temple of the LORD: that ye may
know, how that the LORD of hoostes has sent me unto you. And this shall come
to pass, if ye will harken diligently unto the voice of the LORD your God.

The VII. Chapter.
LORD came unto Zachary in the fourth day of the ix. month, which is calls
Casle^: what time as Sarasar and Rogomelech and the men that were with them,
sent unto Bethel for to pray before ye LORD: and that they should say unto
the prestes, which were in the house of the LORD of hoostes, and to the
prophets: Should I weep in the fyfte month, Re. 25. b
and absteyne, as I have done now certain years? Then came the word of the
LORD of hoostes unto me, saying: Speak unto all the people of the land, and
to the prestes, and say: when ye fasted and mourned in the v and vij. month
(now this lxx. years) did ye fast unto me? ^^re. 41. a ^* Re. ^5. d
When ye ate also and drunk, did ye not eat and drink for your own selves?
Are not these the words, which the LORD spoke by his prophets before time,
when Jerusalem was yet inhabited and welthy, she and the cities round about
her: when there dwelt me^, both toward the south and in the plain countrees?

LORD came unto Zachary, saying: Thus says ye LORD of hoostes: Execute
true judgment: show mercy and loving kyndnesse, Zach. ^ Exo. 22. Leui. 19 Job
24. a Iere. 7. a
every man to his brother: Do the wyddowe, the fatherless, the stranger, and
poor no wrong: and let no man ymagen evil against his brother in his heart.
Iere. 7. ^
Nevertheless they would not take heed, but turned their backs, and stopped
their ears, that they should not hear. ye they made their hertes as an
Adamant stone, lest they should hear the law and words, 2. Pet. 1. ^
which the LORD of hoostes sent in his holy sprete by the prophets before time.

Wherefore the LORD of hoostes was very wroth at them. And thus is it come to
pass, Iere. 11. ^
that like as he spoke and they would not hear: even so they cried, and I
would not hear (says the LORD of hoostes) but scatered them among all
Gentiles, whom they knew not. Thus the land was made so desolate, yt there
traualed no man in it nether to ner fro, for that pleasant land was utterly
laid waist.

The VIII. Chapter.
SO the word of the LORD came LORD of hoostes: I was in a great gelousy
over Sion, ye I have been very gelous over her in a great displeasure. thus
says the LORD of hoostes: I will turn me again unto Sion, and will dwell in
the myddest of Jerusalem: Esa. 1. d
so that Jerusalem shall be called a faithful and true cite, the hill of the
LORD of hoostes, ye an holy hill.

Thus says the LORD of hoostes: There shall yet old men and women dwell
again in the streets of Jerusalem: ye and soch as go with staves in their
hondes for very age. The streets of the cite also shall be full of young boys
and damselles, playnge upon the streets.

Thus says the LORD of hoostes: if the residue of this people think it to
be impossible in these days, should it therefore be impossible in my sight,
Mat. 1^
says the LORD of hoostes? Thus says the LORD of hoostes: Behold, I will
deliver my people from Iere. 3. f Heb. 8. ^ Apo. 21. ^
and I will be their God, in trenth and righteousness. Thus says the LORD
of hoostes: let your hondes be strong, ye that now hear these words by the
mouth of the prophets, which be in these days that the foundation is laid
upon the LORD of hoostes house, that the temple may be builded. For why? Agg.
1. ^
before these days nether men ner catel could win any thing, nether might
any man come in and out in rest, for trouble: but I let every man go against
his neighbor.

Nevertheless I will now entreat the residue of this people no more, as before
time (says the LORD of hoostes) but they shall be a sede of peace. ^gg. 2. c
The vynyarde shall give her fruit, the ground shall give her increase, and the
heavens shall give their dew: and I shall cause the remnaunt of this people, to
have

For thus says the LORD of hoostes: like as I devised to punysh you, what
time as your fathers provoked me unto wrath (says the LORD of hoostes) and
spared not: Even so am I determed now in these days, for to do well unto the
house of Judah and Jerusalem, therefore fear ye not. Now the things that ye
shall do, ^e. 4. c chapter 7. b ^a. 2 b
are these: Speak every man the treuth unto his neighbor, execute judgment
truly and peaceably within your ports, none of you ymagyn evil in his heart
against his neighbor, and love no false oothes: for all these are the things
that I hate, says the LORD. And the word of the LORD of hoostes came unto
me, saying: thus says the LORD of hoostes:

Thus says the LORD of hoostes: There shall yet come people, and the
inhabiters of many cities: and they that dwell in one cite, (...)
shall go to another, saying* Up, let us go, and pray before the LORD, ^^t us
seek the LORD of hoostes, I will go with you. Ye much people and mighty
Heithen shall come and seek the LORD of hoostes at Jerusalem, and to pray
before the LORD. Thus says the LORD of hoostes: In that time shall ten men
(out of all manner of languages of the Gentiles) take one Jew by the hemme of
his garment, and say: we will go with you, for we have herd, that God is
among you.

The IX. Chapter.
LORD shall be received at Adrach, and Damascus shall be his offering: for the
eyes of all me^ and of the trybes of Israel shall look up unto the LORD. The
borders of Hemath shall be hard thereby, Tyrus also and Sidon, for they are very
wise. (...)
Tyrus shall make hirself strong, heap up silver as the sonde, and gold as
the claye of the streets. Behold, the LORD shall take her in, and have her in
possession: he shall smite down her power in to the sea, (...)
and she shall be consumed with fire. This shall Ascalon se, and be afraid. Gaza
shall be very sorry, so shall Accaron also, (...)
because her hope is come to confucion. For the king of Gaza shall perish, and
at Ascalon shall no man dwell.

Strangers shall dwell at Aszdod, and as for ye pride of ye Philistynes, I shall
rote it out. Their blood will I take away from their mouth, (...)
and their abhominacio^s from among their teth. Thus they shall be left for
our God, ye they shall be as a prince in Judah, and Accaron like as Iebusi. And
so will I compase my house round about with my men of war, goinge to and
fro: that no oppressoure come upon them any more. For that have I seen now with
mine eyes.

Rejoice thou greatly, o daughter Sion: Esa. (...) Ioh. (...)
thy king comes unto the, even the rightuous and Savior: Lowly and simple
is he, he rydeth upon an ass, and upon the foale of an ass. I will rote out
the charettes from Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem, the batel bows
shall be destroyed. He shall give the doctrine of peace unto the Heithen, Psalm.
(...)
and his dominion shall be from the one see to the other, and from the floudes to
the ends of the world.

Thou also through the blood of thy covenant: Esa (...) Apo. (...)
shall let thy presoners out of the pytte, wherein is no water. Turn you now to
the strong hold, ye that be in preson, (...)
and long sore to be delivered: And this day I bring the word, that I will
reward the dubble again. For Judah have I bent out as a bow for me, and
Ephraim have I filled.

Thy sons (o Sio^) will I raise up against LORD God shall be seen above the^,
and his darts shall go forth as the lightenynge. The LORD God shall blow the
trompet, and shall come forth as a storm out of the south.

The LORD of hoostes shall defend the^, (...)
they shall consume and devour, and subdue them with slynge stones. They shall
drink and rage, as it were through wine. They shall be filled like ye basens, and
as ye horns of ye altar. The LORD their God shall deliver the^ in ye day, as
the flock off his people: for the stone^s off his Sanctuary shall be set up in
his land. O how prosperous and goodly a thing shall that be? The corn shall
make the young men cheerful, and the new wine the maidens.

The X. Chapter.
LORD then bytymes to give you the latter rain, so shall the LORD make
clouds, (...)
and give you rain enough for all the increace off the field: For vain is the
answer of Idols. The soythsayers se lies, and tell but vain dreams: the
comforth that they give, is nothing worth. Therefore go they astraye like a
flock of sheep, and are troubled, because they have no shepherde. (...)
My wrothfull displeasure is moved at the shepherdes, and I will vyset the
goats. For the LORD of hoostes will graciously vyset his flock (the house of
Judah) and hold them as a goodly fair horse in the batell. (...). 12. d (...).
1^. b
Out of Judah shall come the helmet, the nale, the batelbowe, and all the princes
together. They shall be as the giauntes, which in the batell tread down the
mire upon ye streets. They sha^ fight, for ye LORD shall be with them, so that
the horsemen shall be confounded.

LORD am their God, and will hear them. Ephraim shall be as a giaunt, and their
heart shall be cherefull as through wine: Ye their children shall se it, and be
glad, and their heart shall rejoice in the LORD. I will blow for them and
gather them together, for I will redeem them. They shall increace, as they
increased before. I will sow the^ among the people, yt they may think upon me
in far countrees: they shall live with their children, and turn again. I will
bring them again also from the land of Egipte, and gather them out of
Assiria. I will carye them in to ye land of Galaad and to Libanus, and they
shall want nothing. He shall go upon the sea of trouble* and smite the sea
wawes: so yt all the deep floudes shall be dried up. The proud boostinge of
Assure shall be cast down, (...) 10. a ^at. 29
and the scepter off Egipte shall be taken away. I will comfort them in the
LORD, that they may walk in his name, says the LORD.

The XI. Chapter.
OPen thy doors (o Libanus) that the

Thus says the LORD my God: Feed the sheep of ye slaughter, which shall be
slain of those that possess them: yet they take it for no sin, but they yt
sell the^, say: The LORD be thanked, I am rich: Ye their own shepherdes
spare them not. Therefore will I no more spare those that dwell in the land
(says the LORD) but lo, I will deliver the people, every man in to his
neghbours hand, and in to the ho^de of his king: that they may smite the
land, and out off their hondes will not I deliver them.

I myself fed ye slaughter sheep (a poor flock verily) and took unto me two
staves: Apo. 22. ^
nether had they any delight in me. Then said I: I will feed you no more, the
thing that dies, let it dye: and that will perish, let it perish, and let the
re^naunt eat, every one the flesh of his neighbor. I took also my loving
meke staff, and brake it, that I might disanuil the conuenaunt, which I made
with all people, And so it was broken in that day.

Then the poor simple sheep that had a respect unto me, knew thereby, that it
was the word of the LORD. And I said unto them: yff ye think it good,
bring hither my price: if no, then leave. So they wayed LORD said unto me:
Matt. 27* ^
cast it unto the potter (a goodly price for me to be valued at of them) and I
took the xxx. syluers pens, and cast them to the potter in the house of the
LORD.

Then brake I my other staff also (namely woe) that I might lowse the brother
head betwixt Judah and Israel. And the LORD said unto me: Take to the also
the staff off a foolish shepherde: for lo, I will raise up a shepherde in the
land, which shall not seek after the things that be lost, ner care for soch
as go astraye: he shall not heal the wounded, he shall not norish the thing
that is whole: but he shall eat the flesh off soch as be fat, and tear their
claws in pieces.

O Idols shepherde, that leaves the flock. The sword shall come upon his arm
and upon his right eye. His arm shall be clean dried up, and his right eye
shall be sore blinded.

The XII. Chapter. The heavy burden which ye LORD has devised for Israel.
LORD, which spread the heavens abroad, Esa. 40. c 4. c. 45. b Genesis 2. b
laid the foundation of the earth, and gives man ye breath of life: Behold,
I will make Jerusalem a cup of surfeit, unto all the people yt are round
about her: Ye Judah himself also shall be in the sege against Jerusalem. zac.
14. c
At the same time will I make Jerusalem an heavy stone for all people, so that
all soch as lift it up, shall be toarne and re^te, and all the people of the
earth shall be gathered together against it.

In that day (says ye LORD) I will make all horses abashed, and those that
ride upon them, to be out of their wits. I will open mine eyes upon the house
of Judah, and smite all the horses of the people with blyndnesse. And the
princes of Judah shall say in their hertes: The inhabiters off Jerusalem shall
give me consolacion in the LORD off hoostes their God. In that time will I
make Abd. 1. d ^mo^. 1. a
and like a cress het off fire among the straw: so that they shall consume all
the people round about them, both upon the right hand and the left.
Jerusalem also shall be inhabited again: namely, in the same place where
Jerusalem stondeth.

The LORD shall preserve the tents off Judah like as before time: so that the
glory of the house of David and the glory of the cytesyns of Jerusalem, shall be
but little regarded, in comparison off the glory off Judah. In that day shall
the LORD defend the citesyns of Jerusalem: so that the weakest then among
them shall be as David: and the house of David shall be like as Gods house, Re. 17.
f
and as the angel off the LORD before them.

At the same time will I go about to destroy ^ze. 36. d ^oel. 2. f ^ct. 2. b
Morouer, upon the house off David and upon the citesyns off Jerusalem, will I
pour out the sprete of grace and prayer: so that they shall look upon me, (...)
whom they have pearsed: and they shall be weep him, as men mourn for their
only begotten son: Ye and be sorry for him, as men are sorry for their first
child.

Then shall there be a great mourning at Jerusalem, (...)
like as the lamentacion at Adremnon in the field off Maggadon. (...)
And the land shall bewail, every kynred by the^ selves: The kynred off the
house of David them selves alone, and their wives by them selves: (...)
The kynred off the house of Nathan them selves alone, and their wives by them
selves: The kynred off the house of Leui the^ selves alone, and their wives by
them selves: The kynred of the house of Semei them selves alone, and their
wives by them selves: In like manner, all the other generacio^s, euerychone by
them selves alone, and their wives by them selves.

The XIII. Chapter.
IN that time shall the house off David (...)
to wash of sin and uncleanness. And then (says the LORD off hoostes) I
will destroy the names of Idols out off the land: Esa. (...)
so that they shall no more be put in remembrance.

As for the false prophets also and the unclean sprete, (...)
I shall take them out of the land: So that if any off them prophecy any more,
his own father and mother that begat him, shall say unto him: Thou shall dye,
(...)
for thou speak lies under the name off the LORD: Ye his own father and
mother that begat him, shall wound him, when he prophecyeth. And then shall
those prophets be confounded, every one off his vision when he prophecieth:
nether shall they weere sack clothes any more, to disceaue me^ with all. But he
shall be feign to say: (...)
I am no prophet: I am an husbonde man, for so am (...)
And yff it be said unto him: How came these wounds then in thine hondes? He
shall answer: Thus am I wounded in the house off mine own friends.

Arise (o thou swearde) upon my shepherde, and upon the prince of my people,
(...)
says the LORD of hoostes: Smite the shepherde and the sheep shall be scatred
abroad, and so will I turn mine hand to the little ones. And it shall come to
pass (says the LORD) that in all the land two parts shall be roted out,
(...)
but the third part shall remain therein. And the same third part will I
bring through the fire, (...). ^3. a (...). 43. a (...). ^6. a (...) 6^. b
(...). 1. b (...). a (...) 3. a (...) 1. a
and will cleanse them, as the silver is cleansed: Ye and try them, like as
gold is tried.

Then shall they call upon my name, and I will hear them: I will say: it is my
people. And they shall say: LORD, my God.

The XIIII. Chapter.
LORD comes, that thou shall be spoiled and robbed: for I will gather
together all the Heithen, to fight against Jerusalem: so that the cite shall be
won, the houses spoiled, and the women defiled. The half of the cite shall go
away in to captiuyte, and the residue of the people shall not be carried out of
the cite.

After that shall the LORD go forth to fight against those Heithen, as men use
to fight in the day of batell. The^ shall his fete sto^de upon the mount
oliuete, that lies upon the east side of Jerusalem. And ye mount olyuete shall
cleue in two, eastwarde, and westwarde so yt there shall be a great valley: and
the halff mount shall remove toward the north, and the other half toward the
south.

And ye shall fle unto the valley of my hills, for the valley off the hills
shall reach unto Asal. Ye fle shall ye. like as yefled for the earthquake in
the days off Osias (...) ^1. a
And the LORD my God shall come, and all sanctes with him. In that day shall it
not be light, (...). c
but cold and frost. This shall be that special day, which is known unto the
LORD: nether day ner night, but about the evening time it shall be light. In
that time shall there waters of life run out from Jerusalem: (...)
the half part of them toward the east see, and the other half toward the
vttemost see, and shall continue both somer and winter. And the LORD himself
shall be king over all the earth. (...)


At that time shall there be one LORD only, and his name shall be but one. Men
shall go about the whole earth, as upon a field: from Gibea to Remmon, and from
ye south to Jerusalem* She shall be set up, and inhabited in her place: (...)
From Ben Iamins port, unto the place of the first port, (...)
and unto ye corner port: and from the tower of Hanael, unto the kings wine
presses. There shall men dwell, and there shall be no more cursinge, but
Jerusalem shall be safely inhabited.

This shall be the plage, wherewith ye LORD will smite all people, that have
fought against

In that day shall the LORD make a great sedicion among them, so that one
man shall take another by the hand, and lay his hondes upon the hondes of his
neighbor. Judah shall fight also against Jerusalem, zach. 12. a
and the goods of all the Heithen shall be gathered together round about:
gold and silver and a very great multitude off clothes. And so shall this
plage go ouerhorses, mules camels, asses and all the beasts that shall be in
the hooste, like as yonder plage was.

Every one that remains then of all ye people, which came against Jerusalem,
shall go up yearly, to worshipe the king (even ye LORD of hoostes) and to keep
the feast off tabernacles. Nu. 29. b Leui. 23. f 3. Esd. 5. e 2. Mac. 1. b
And look what generation upon earth goes not up to Jerusalem, for to worshipe
the king (even the LORD of hoostes)

This shall be the plage wherewith ye LORD will smite all Heithen, that come not
up to keep the feast of tabernacles: Ye this shall be the synneplage of Egipte
and the synneplage of all people, that go not up to keep the feast of
tabernacles.

At that time shall the rydinge geer of ye horses be holy unto the LORD, and
the kettels in the LORDS house shall be like the basens before the altar: ye
all the kettels in Jerusalem and Judah, shall be holy unto the LORD of hoostes:
and all they that slay^ offeringes, shall come and take of them, and dight them
therein. And at that time there shall be no mo Cananites in the house of the
LORD.

The end off the prophet Zachary.
The Prophet Malachy.
What Malachy conteyneth.
Chap. I. The benefits of God, showed specially unto Israel before all other:
Again, the punishment of the vnthanfulnesse, unfaithfulness and covetousness
of the prestes and the people. Chap. II. He threatens punishment and confucion
unto the prestes, and commands men to love their wives. Chap. III. Of
Christ's coming, and of him that makes ready his way before him. Off the
abrogacion of the old* leuiticall prest-heade. Of the power of the judge for
to come and of that fearful day.
The first Chapter. The heavy burden which the LORD shows against Israel by
Malachy.
I Have loved you, says ye LORD: and yet ye say: wherein have thou loved us?
Was not Esau LORD? yet have I loved Jacob, Genesis 25. c To 9 b Iosu. 24. a Genesis
36. a
and hated Esau: Ye I have made his hills waist, and his heretage a
wilderness for drago^s. And though Edom said: well, we are destroyed, we will
go build up again the places that be waisted: yet (says ye LORD of
hoostes) what they builded, that brake I down: so that it was called a cursed
land, Abd. 1. a
and a people, whom the LORD has ever been angry withal.

Your eyes have seen it, and ye your selves must confess, that ye LORD has
brought the land of Israel to great honor. Should not a son honor his
father, and a servant his master? If I be now a father, where is mine honor?
Exo. 20. a Deu. 32. a
if I be the LORD, where am I feared? says the LORD of hoostes.

Now to you prestes, that despise my name. LORD is not to be regarded. If ye
offer ye blind, is not yt evil? And if ye offer the lame and sick, Leu. 22. ^
Eze. 43. c
is not that evil? Ye offer it unto thy prince, shall he be content with the,
or accept thy person, says the LORD of hoostes?

And now make your prayer before God, that he may have mercy upon us: for
soch things have ye done. Shall he regard your persons (think ye) says
the LORD of hoostes? Ye what is he among you, that will do so much as to shut
ye doors, or to kyndle ye fire upon mine altar for naught? I have no pleasure
in you, says the LORD off hoostes: and as for the meatofferinge, I will not
accept it at your hand. (...)
For from the rysinge up of ye son unto ye goinge down (...)
my name is great among the Gentiles: Ye in every place shall there sacrifice
be done, and a clean meatofferinge offered up unto my name: for my name is
great among the Heithe^, says the LORD of hoostes. But ye have unhallowed
it, in that ye say, the altar of ye LORD is not to be regarded, and the
thing that is set thereupon, not worthy to be eaten.

Now say ye: It is but labor and travail, and thus have ye thought scorn
at it, (says the LORD off hoostes) offering robbery, ye the lame and the
sick. Ye have brought me in a meatofferynge, should I accept it of your
hand, says the LORD? Cursed be the dyssembler, which has in his flock one
that is male, and when he makes a vow, offers a spotted one unto the LORD.
For I am a great king (says the LORD of hoostes) and my name is fearful
among the Heithen.

The II. Chapter.
ANd now (o ye prestes) this commandment LORD off hoostes) I will send a
curse upon you, (...)
and will curse your blessings: ye curse them will I if ye do not take heed.
Behold, I shall corruppe your sede, and cast donge in your faces: even the
donge of your solemn feasts and it shall cleue fast upon you. And ye shall
know, that I have sent this commandment unto you: that my covenant which I
made with Leui, might stand, says ye LORD of hoostes.

I made a covenant of life and peace with him: this I gave him, that he might
stand in awe of me: and so he did fear me, and had my name in reverence. The
law of treuth was in his mouth, and there was no wickedness found in his
lips. He walked with me in peace and equity, (...)
and did turn many one away from their sins. For the prestes lips should
be sure knowledge, that men may seek the law at his mouth, for he is a
messaunger of the LORD of hoostes. But as for you, ye are gone clean out off
the way, and have caused the multitude to be offended at the law: ye have
broken the covenant of Leui, (...)
says the LORD of hoostes. Therefore will I also make you to be despised, and
to be of no reputacion among all ye people: because ye have not kept my
ways, but been parciall in the law.

Have we not all one father? Has not one God made us? (...). 4. a (...). 7. b
^. c
why does every one off us then despise his own brother, and so break the
covenant of our fathers? Now has Judah offended: ye the abhominacion is done
in Israel and in Jerusalem, (...). 9. a (...)* ^1. c
for Judah has defiled the Sa^ctuary of the LORD, which he loved, and has
kept the daughter of a strange God. But the LORD shall destroy the man that
does this (ye both the master and the scolar) out off the tabernacle of Jacob,
with him that offreth up meatofferynge unto the LORD off hoostes. Now have ye
brought it to this point again, that the altar of the LORD is covered with
tears weeping and mourning: so that I will no more regard the meatofferynge,
nether will I receive or accept any thing at your ho^des.

LORD made a covenant betwixt ye and the wife off thy youth, thou have
despised her: Yet is she thine own co^panyon and married wife.

So did not (...)
the one, and yet had he an excellent sprete. What did then the one? He sought
the sede promised of God. Therefore look well to your sprete, and let no man
despise ye wife of his youth. If thou hate her, put her away, says the
LORD God of Israel and give her a clothinge for the scorn, says the LORD
of hoostes. Look well then to your sprete, and despise her not. Ye grieve the
LORD with your words, and yet ye say: wherwithall have we grieved him? In
this, that ye say: All that do evil are good in the sight of God, and soch
please him. Or else where is the God that punysheth?.

The III. Chapter.
(...)
and the LORD whom ye would have, shall soon come to his temple, ye even the
messaunger of the covenant whom ye long for.

Behold, he comes, says the LORD of hoostes. But who may abide the day
of his coming? Who shall be able to endure, when he appears? For he is like a
goldsmythes fire, and like wasshers soap. He shall sit him down to try and to
cleanse ye silver, he shall pourge the children of Leui, and purify them like as
gold and silver: that they may bring meatofferinges unto the LORD in
righteousness. Then shall the offeringe of Judah and Jerusalem be acceptable unto
the LORD, like as from the beginning and in the years before time. I will
come and punysh you, and I my self will be a swift wytnes against the witches,
against the aduouterers, against false swearers: ye and against those, that
wro^geously keep back the hyrelynges dewty: which vex the wyddowes and the
fatherless, and oppress the stranger, and fear not me, says the LORD of
hoostes. For I am the LORD yt change not, and ye (o children of Jacob) will
not leave of: ye are Deu. ^1. f 4. Re. 17. c
and sens ye time of your forefathers have ye not kept them.

Turn you now unto me, and I will turn me unto you, says the LORD of
hoostes. Zach. 1. a
Ye say: Wherein shall we turn? Should a man use falsede and disceate with God,
as ye use falsede and disceate with me? Yet ye say: wherein use we disceate
with the? In Tithes and heave offerynges. Leui. 27. d Agg. 1. a b
Therefore are ye cursed with penury, because ye dyssemble with me, all the
sort of you.

Bring every Tithe in to my barn, yt there may be meat in mine house: and
prove me withal (says the LORD of hoostes) if I will not open the wyndowes
of heaven unto you, and pour you out a blessinge with plenteousnesse. Ye I
shall reprove the consumer for your sakes, so that he shall not eat up the
fruit of your ground, nether shall ye vynyarde be baren in the field, says
ye LORD of hoostes: In so much that all people shall say, that ye be blessed,
for ye shall be a pleasant lord, says the LORD off hoostes.

Ye speak hard words against me, says LORD. And yet ye say: What have we
spoken against the? Ye have said: It is but lost labor, to serve God: What
profit have we for keeping his commandments, Job. 21. b Psalm. 72. b
and for walkinge humbly before the LORD off hoostes? Therefore may we say,
Job. 21. a Iere. 12. ^
that the proud are happy, and that they which deal with ungodliness, are
set up: for they tempte God, and yet escape.

But they that fear God, say thus one to another: The LORD co^sidreth and
hears it. Ye it is before him a memorial book written for soch as fear the
LORD, and remember his name. And in the day that I will make (says ye LORD
of hoostes) they shall be mine own possession: and I will favor them, like as
a man favors his own son, that does him service. Turn you therefore, and
considre what difference is betwixt the rightuous and ungodly: betwixt him
that serves God, and him that serves him not.

Psalm. 17. a
and all the proud, ye and all soch as do wickedness, shall be straw: and the
day that is for to come, shall burn the^ up (says the LORD of hoostes) so
that it shall leave them nether rote ner branch. But unto you that fear my
name, shall the Son of righteousness arise, and health shall be under his
wings. Ye shall go forth, and multiply as ye fat calves. Ye shall treaded (...)
ye ungodly: for they shall be like the (...) under the soles of your fete, in
the day yt I shall make, says the LORD of hoostes.

Remember the law of Moses my servant, (...)
which I committed unto him in ^reb for all Israel, (...)
with the statutes and ordinances. Behold, I will send you (...) y^ prophet:
before the coming off the day of the great and fearful LORD. He shall
(...) the hertes of the fathers to their children and the hertes of the
children to their fathers, (...)
that I come not, and smite the earth with cursynge.

The end of the prophet Malachy.
APOCRIPHA The books and treatises which among the fathers of old are not
rekened to be of like authorite with the other books of the bible, nether are
they found in the Canon of the Hebrew.

The third book of Eszdras. The fourth book of Eszdras. The book of Tobias.
The book of Judith. Certain chapters of Hester. The book of Wyszdome.
Ecclesiasticus. The Storye of Susanna. The Storye of Bell. The first book of
the Machabees. The second book of the Machabees.


Unto these also belongs Baruc, whom we have set among the prophets next
unto Jeremy, because he was his scrybe, and in his time.



The transzlatoure unto the reader.
THese books (good reader) which be called Apocrypha, are not judged among the
doctors to be of like reputacion with the other scripture, as thou may
perceive by S. Jerome in epistola ad Paulinum. And the chief cause thereof is
this: there be many places in them, that seem to be repugnaunt unto the open
and manifest truth in the other books of the bible. Nevertheless I have not
gathered them together to the intent that I would have them despised, or little
set by, or that I should think them false, for I am not able to prove it: Ye
I doubt not verily, if they were equally conferred with the other open
scripture (time, place, and circumstaunce in all things considered) they
should nether seem contrary, ner be untruly and peruersly aledged. Treuth it
is: A ma^s face can not be seen so well in a water, as in a fair glass: nether
ca^ it be showed so clearly in a water that is stered or moved, as in a still
water. These and many other darck places of scripture have been sore stered and
myxte with blind and cuvetous opynions of men, which have cast soch a mist
before the eyes of ye simple, that as long as they be not co^ferred with the
other places of scripture, they shall not seem other wise to be understand,
then as cuvetousnes expounds them. But who so ever thou be that read
scripture, let the holy ghost be thy teacher, and let one text expound another
unto the: As for soch dreams, visions and darck sentences as be hyd from thy
understanding, commytte them unto God, and make no articles of them: But let
the plain text be thy gyde, and the sprete of God (which is the author thereof)
shall led the in all truth.

As for the prayer of Salomo^ (which thou find not herin) ye prayer of
Azarias, and the sweet song that he and his two fellows song in the fire: the
first (namely the prayer of Solomon) read thou in the eight chapter of the
third book of the kings, so that it appears not to be Apocryphum: The other
prayer and song (namely of the three children) have I not found among any of
the interpreters, but only in the old latin text, which reports it to be
of Theodotios translacion. Nevertheless, both because of those yt be weak and
scrupulous, and for their sakes also that love soch sweet songs of
thankesgeuinge: I have not left them out: to the intent that the one should
have no cause to complain, and that the other also might have the more
occasion to give thanks unto God in aduersite, as the three children did in the
fire. Grace be with the. Amen.

The third book of Eszdras.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I. The virtuous king Osias renueth the service of God, sets the
prestes in their order, and holds the feast of Easter. Of his death. Of
Iechonias his son. Of king Ioachim and Sedechias. Chap. II. God moves king
Cyrus to deliver the presoners, like as he promised by the prophet Jeremy. Of
king Artaxerses, by whose auctorite the Jews are forbidden to build up
Jerusalem. Chap. III. Of the feast that king Darius made, and of the three
young men that wrote every one his sentence, to prove who might say the best.
The first shows his mind. Chap. IIII. The second goes about to prove his
sentence the wisest, but Zorobabel gets the victory, for the truth bears
ever the bell. Darius commands to build up Jerusalem again. Chap. V. What
they be and how many, that come again to Jerusalem out of the captiuyte of
Babylon. The temple and the altar are builded again. The Heithen withstonde
them. Chap. VI. The officers in Syria labor unto king Darius, to forbid the
buyldinge of the temple at Jerusalem: but he commands to keep the ordinance
that king Cyrus made before. Chap. VII. The adversaries minds are satisfied,
the buyldinge is fynished, and the Passover holden. Chap. VIII. How Eszdras
and the other (being discharged by the letters and commau^deme^t of king
Artaxerses) go up to Jerusalem. The complaynte concerning those, that were
defiled and unclean. Chap. IX. Of the council that was taken, as touching
the unclean marriage.


The first Chapter.
LORD, (...). 23. a Re. 23. c
and slew ye Passover the xiiij. day of the first month. He set ye prestes
also in order (acordi^ge to their daily courses) being arrayed in long
garments in the temple of the LORD. And he spoke unto the Levites the holy
ministers of Israel, that they should halowe them selves unto the LORD, to set
the holy ark of the LORD, in the house that king Salomo^ the son of David
had builded and said: Ye shall no more bear the Arc upon yor shulders. Now
serve yoor LORD, and take the charge of his people of Israel, after your
vyllagies and your trybes: acordinge as king David the king of Israel has
ordened, and acordinge as Solomon his son has honorably prepared: Ye look
yt ye all do service in the temple, acordinge to the ordringe and distribucion
of the pryncipall me^ which are appointed out of the trybes, to do service for
the children of Israel. (...). 12^ d
Kill ye Passover, and prepare offeringes for yor brethren, and do according
to the commandment of ye LORD, which he gave unto Moses. And unto ye people
yt was found, Josias gave xxx. thousand of sheep, lambs, kyddes and goats,
and three thousand oxe^. These the king (of his kyngly liberalite) gave unto
the people, acordinge as he had promised: and to the prestes (for the
Passover) he gave two thousand sheep and an hundredth oxe^. Morouer Iechonias
and Semeias and Nathanael brethren, and Hasabias, Iehiel and Iosabad, gave them
to the Passover, five thousand sheep and five hundredth bullockes.

And when these things were brought to pass, the prestes and the Levites
stood goodly in their order, and had the vnleuended bred through out ye trybes.
And after the ordringe of the pryncipall men in the trybes, they offered unto
the LORD in the sight of the people, acordinge as it is written in the book of
Moses, Exo. 12*
and so they roasted the Easter-lambe as acordinge was. As for the
tha^kofferinges and the other, they dight the^ in kettels and pottes, and set
them before the people with good will, and afterward before them selves and the
prestes. For the prestes offered the fatt, until the time was expyred, but the
Levites prepared for them selves and for their brethren the children of Aaron.
The syngers also ye children of Asaph. stood in their order, acordinge as David
had devised. So did Asaph, Zachary and Iedithu^, which were appointed by the
king. Morouer the porters and dorekepers stood by the doors and yt diligently,
so yt none went out of his stondinge and service: for their brethren (the
Levites) prepared for them. Thus were all things performed, that belonged to
the offringe of the LORD. In that day they held the Passover, and offered
thankofferinges beside ye sacrifice of ye LORRDE, acordinge to ye commandment
of king Josias.



So the children of Israel which were the^ present held an honorable
Passover, and the LORD) and ye things yt were written of hi^ in times past,
concerning those yt sinned and were ungodly against ye LORD before all
people, and yt sought not the word of ye LORD upon Israel. After all these
acts of king Josias, Pharao ye king of Egipte went up, 4. Re. 2^ ^. Par. 25.
and came toward Carcamis by Euphrates, and Josias went to mete hi^. Then
sent the king of Egipte unto Josias, saying: what have I to do with ye, o king
of Judah? I am not sent of ye LORD to fight against ye, for my war is upon
Euphrates, go thou ye way home again in all ye haist. And Josias would not
turn again upon his charet, but undertook to fight against him, and herkened
not unto ye word of ye prophet, which he told him out of the mouth of God,
but pitched a battaill against him in ye field of Mageddo. And the princes
preassed to king Josias. Then said the king unto his servants: (...). 2^. f
Carry me away out of the battayll, for I am sore wounded. And immediately his
servants took him away out of the front of the battayll. Then satt he up
upon the second charett, came to Jerusalem, dyed, and was buried in his
fathers sepulcre. And in all Iewry they mourned for Josias, ye the rulers also
with their wives made lame^tacion for him unto this day: And this was done ever
still in Israel.

(...). 23. f (...). 36. a
and made him king in ye stead of Josias his father, when he was xxxiij.
year old. And he reigned over Israel three months. And the king of Egipte
put him down, yt he should not reign in Jerusalem, and raised up a taxinge of
the people: namely, an C. talentes of silver and one tale^t of gold. The king
of Egipte also made Ioachim his brother king of Judah and Jerusalem. As for
the^ of the kings council with the king himself and Zaraceles his brother, he
took the^, and carried the^ away presoners in to Egipte. Five and twenty year
old was Ioachim, when he was made king in the land of Judah and Jerusalem,
and he did evil before the LORD. After this, Nabuchodonosor Reg. ^. c
and carried him unto Babilo^. Nabuchodonosor also took all ye vessel yt were
hallowed in the temple of the LORD, and all ye Jewels, and carried the^ unto
Babylon, and brought the^ in to his own temple at Babylon. Of his uncleanness
and ungodliness, it is written in ye book of the acts of ye kings. And Ioachim
his son reigned in his stead: He was made king being xviij. year old,
and reigned but three months and x. days in Jerusalem, and did evil before
the LORD. So after a year, Nabuchodonosor sent and caused him be brought unto
Babylon with ye holy vessels of ye LORD, and made Sedechias his brother king of
Judah and Jerusalem, when he was xxj. year old: and he reigned xj. year.

And he did evil also in ye sight of ye LORD, and cared not for ye words yt
were spoken unto hi^ by ye prophet Jeremy at ye mouth of the LORD. Iere. (...)
And where as he had made on ^oth unto king Nabuchodonosor, he manswor^
himself, and fell from him having a stiff neck and heart, and tra^sgressed all
ye statutes and ordinances of the LORD God of Israel. The rulers also and
heads of ye people of the LORD did much evil, and became ungodly, more the^
the Heithen, being defiled in all manner of abhominacio^s: Ye and defiled ye
holy temple of the LORD at Jerusalem. And the God of their fathers sent his
messaungers unto the^, to turn LORD was wroth with his people for their
ungodliness, and till he caused the kings of ye Caldees to come up, which slew
their young men with the sword, ye even in the compass of their holy temple,
and spared no body, nether young ner old, nether maiden ner young man: but
they were all delivered in to the power of the kings of ye Caldees, and all
the holy vessels of the LORD and the kings treasures took they, and carried
them unto Babylon. As for the house of the LORD, (...)
they bre^t it, and brake down the walls of Jerusalem, set fire upon her
towers, destroyed all her noble buyldinges and brought them to naught, and the
people that were not slain with the sword, they carried unto Babylon.

Thus became they ye presoners and bo^deme^ of ye king of Babylon, till they
were delivered and raygned for them selves, when the words of the LORD were
fulfilled, which he promised them by the mouth of the prophet Jeremy, and till
the land had her rest: namely, all the time yt it lay wayest, (...)
had it rest and quyetnes lxxvij. years.

The II. Chapter.
NOw wha^ king Cyrus reigned over (...)
and wha^ the LORD would perform the word yt he had promised by the mouth
of the prophet Jeremy: the LORD raised up the sprete of Cyrus, the king of
the Persia^s, so yt he caused this wrytinge to be proclaimed through out his
whole realm, saying: Thus says the king of ye Persians: The LORD of
Israel that hye LORD has made me king of the lord, and commanded me to
build him an house at Jerusalem in Iewry. If there be any now of your people,
ye LORD be with him, and go up with him to Jerusalem. And all they that dwell
round about yt place, shall help the^, whether it be with gold, with silver,
with gifts, with horses and necessary catell, and all other things that are
brought with a fre will to the house of the LORD at Jerusalem.

Then the pryncipall me^ out of the trybes LORD had moved) to go up, and to
build the house of the LORD at Jerusalem. And they that were about them,
helped them with all manner of gold, and silver, and catell also and with many
liberal gifts, and this did many one, whose mind was stered up thereto. King
Cyrus also brought forth the vessels and ornaments, that were hallowed unto the
LORD (which Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon had carried away from
Jerusalem, and consecrated them to his Idol and image) and delivered them to
Mithridatus his treasurer, and by him they were delivered to Salmanasar ye
debyte in Iewry. And this was the no^bre of them: Two thousand and iiij.C.
silver boules, xxx. silver basens, xxx. basens of gold, ij.M. and iiij.C.
vessels of silver, and a thousand beside. All the vessels of gold and silver
were v.M.viij.C. and lx. These were nombred unto Salmanasar, and them that were
come again with him to Jerusalem out of the captiuyte of Babylon. Now in the
time of king Artaxerses the king of Persia, these men: Balemus and
Mithridatus, Sabellius, Rathimus, Balthemus, Semelius ye scrybe, and other that
dwelt in Samaria and in other places under ye dominion thereof, Wrote a letter
unto king Artaxerses, wherein they complained unto the king of them in Iewry
and Jerusalem. The letter was made after this manner:



Then wrote the king to Rathimus the

Now when Rathymus and Sabellius the scrybe and the rulers in the land had red
the wrytinge of king Artaxerses, they gatt them together, and came in all the
haist to Jerusalem with an host of horsemen, and with much people of foot, and
forbad them to build. And so they left of from buyldinge of the temple, unto
the second year of king Darius.

The III. Chapter.
King Darius made a great feast unto

Then the three young men, that kept the kings person, and watched his body,
commoned among them selves, and spoke one to another: Let every one of us say
some thing, and look whose sentence is wyser and more excellent then the
other, unto him shall king Darius give great gifts, and clothe him with
purple. He shall give him vessels of gold to drink in, clothes of gold and
coueringes: he shall make him a costly charett and a bridle of gold, he shall
give him a bonet of white sylke and a chain of gold about his neck: ye he
shall be the second and pryncipall next unto king Darius, and that because of
his wyszdome, and shall be called ye kings kynsman.



^ro. 20. a
and overcomes them ye drink it: it disceaueth the mind, and brings both
the poor man and ye king to dotage and vanite. Thus does it also with the
bondsman and with the fre, with the poor and rych: it takes away their
understanding, and makes them careless and merry, so that none of them
remembers any heaviness, dett or dewtie: It causes a man to think also that ye
thing which he does, is honest and good: and remembers not that he is a
king, nor yt he is in auctorite, and yt he ought not to do soch things.
Morouer, when men are drynckinge, they forgett all frendshipe, all brotherly
faithfulness and love: but as soon as they are droncke^, they draw out the
sword and will fight: and wha^ they are laid down from the wine, and so risen
up again, they can not tell what they did. Judge ye now, Is not wine the
strongest? For who would else take in hand, to do soch things? And when he had
spoken this, he held his tongue.

The IIII. Chapter.
THen the second (which had said, yt (...)
A man leaves his father yt brought him up, he leaves his own natural
country, and cleueth unto the woman: ye he ioperdeth his life with the woman,
and remembers nether father, ner mother, ner country. By this then ye must
needs know, yt women have ye domynion over you.

Does it grieve you? A man takes his sword and goes his way to steal, to
kill, to murder, to sail upon the sea, and seyth a lion, and goes in the
darcknes: and when he has stolen, disceaued and robbed, he brings it unto
his love. Again, a man loves his wife better then father and mother: ye many
one there be, that run out of their wits and become bondmen for their wives
sakes: many one also have perished, and have been slain, and have sinned
because of women.



O ye men, are not women then stronger? Great is the earth, and hie is the
heaven that do these things. Then the king and the princes looked one upon
another. So he began to speak of the truth: O ye men, are not weme^
stronger? Great is the earth, hye is the heaven, swyft is the course of the
Son, he compaseth the heaven round about, (...). 1. a
and fetches his course again to his own place in one day. Is he not
excellent that does this? ye great is the truth, and stronger then all
things. All the earth calls upon the truth, the heaven prayseth it, all
works shake and tremble at it, and with it is no unrighteous thing. Wine is
unrighteous, the king is unrighteous, women are unrighteous: all the children
of men are unrighteous, ye all their works are unrighteous, and there is no
truth in them, in their unrighteousness also shall they be destroyed and
perish. (...). 40. a (...) 116. a
As for ye truth, it endures, and is allwaye strong: it lives, and
co^quereth for evermore world without end.



And with that he held his tongue, and all ye people cried and said: Great is
the truth, and above all. Then said the king unto him: Axe what thou will,
more then is appointed in the wrytinge, and I shall give it the, for thou art
found wyser then thy companyons: thou shall sytt nexteme, and be my kynsman.
Then said he unto the king: Remember thy promise and vow, which thou have
vowed and promised (in the day when thou came to the kingdom) to build up
Jerusalem, and to send again all the vessels and Jewels, that were taken
away out of Jerusalem: which Cyrus separated, when he offered in Babylon, and
would send them again. And thy mind was to build up the temple, which the
Edomites bre^t, when Jerusalem was destroyed by the Caldees. This only (O
king) is the thing that I require, this is ye majesty, which, I desire and
axe of the: that thou perform the vow, which thou with thine own mouth have
made unto the king of heaven.

Then Darius the king stood up, and kyssed 2. Esd. 2 ^ 3. Esd. 6. ^
and wrote a letter unto all the debytes and shreues, to all ye lords and
nobles, yt they should conveye him forth, and all them yt would go up with him.
He wrote a letter also unto all ye shreues yt were in Celosyria and Phenices,
and unto Libanus, yt they should harle cedre trees from Libanus unto Jerusalem,
to build ye cite withal. Morouer he wrote unto all ye Jews that were gone
out of his realm in to Iewry because of the fredome, yt no officer, no ruler
ner shreue should come to their doors: and that all their land* which they had
conquered, should be fre and not tributary: And that the Edomytes should give
over the cities and vyllagies of the Jews, which they had taken in: ye and
that they should yearly give xx. tale^tes to ye buyldinge of the temple, until
the time that it were fynished: and to the daily halowinge of the brent
offeringes (as it is commanded) ten talentes yearly also: And yt all they
which come from Babylon to build the cite, should have fre liberty, they and
their children, and all the prestes.

He wrote the greatness also, and commanded

He gave over also all the vessel yt Cyrus had separated from Babylon: and all
yt Cyrus had given in commandment, ye same charged he also, yt it should be
done, and sent unto Jerusalem. Now when this young man was gone forth, he
turned his face toward Jerusalem, and praised ye king of heaven, and said:
Of ye comes victory, (...). 1. a
of the comes wyszdome and clearness, and I am thy servant. Blessed art
thou, which have given me wyszdome: the will I praise, O LORD, thou God of
our fathers.

And so he took the letters, and went unto Babylon: And when he came there, he
told this unto all his brethren yt were at Babilo^, and they praised ye God of
their fathers, yt he had given them refreszshinge and lyberte to go up, and to
build Jerusalem and the temple (which is there called after the name of the
LORD) and they reioysed with instruments and gladness, seven days long.

The V. Chapter.


And these are the names of the me^, which went up out of the vyllagies
acordinge to the trybes. Of the prestes, the son of Phineas, the son of
Aaron: Jesus the son of Iosedec, ^att. 1. b
Ioachim the son of Zorobabel the son of Salathiel (of the kynred of David,
out of the kynred of Phares, of the trybe of Judah) which spoke wonderful
things under Darius the king of Persia, Esd. 4. b
in ye second year of his reign in the first month of Nisan.

These also are they of Iewry, which came up and turned Again unto Jerusalem,
out of the captiuyte that Nabuchodonosor ye king of Babylon had brought unto
Babylon. And every man sought his portion again in Iewry, his cite, they that
came with Zorobabel, and with Jesus, Nehemias, Saraias, Raelaias, Elimeus,
Emmanius, Mardocheus, Beelserus, Mechpsa, Rochor, Oliorus, Emonias, one of
their princes.



The prestes: The sons of Ieddus: The sons of Euther: The sons of El
Iasib, iij.C. and lxxij. The sons of Emerus, ij.C. and lij. The sons of
Fasurius, iij.C. and lvij. The sons of Carea, ij.C. and xxvij. The Levites:
The sons of Jesus in Caduhel and Banus, and Serebias, and Edeas, seventy and
four.

The whole nombre of these from xij. years,

The prestes that served in the temple: The sons of Sell, the sons of
Gaspha, the sons of Tobloch, the sons of Caria, the sons of Sub, the
sons of Heliu, the sons of Labana, ye sons of Armacha, ye sons of Acub,
the sons of Vtha, the sons of Cetha, the sons of Aggab, the sons of
Obey, the sons of Anani, the sons of Canna, ye sons of Geddu, ye sons
of An, ye sons of Radin, ye sons of Desanon, the sons of Nechoba, the
sons of Caseba, the sons of Goza, the sons of Ozul, the sons of Sinona,
the sons of Atra, ye sons of Hastem, ye sons of Asiana, ye sons of
Manei, ye sons of Nasisin, ye sons of Accufa, ye sons of Agista, ye
sons of Azui, ye sons of Fauon, the sons of Phasalon, the sons of
Meeda, the sons of Susa, the sons of Cared, ye sons of Barcus, the sons
of Sarea, ye sons of Coesi, ye sons of Nasit, ye sons of Agista, the
sons of Pedon: Solomon his sons, the sons of Asophot, the sons of
Phazida, the sons of Celi, ye sons of Dedon, the sons of Gaddahel, the
sons of Zapheus, ye sons of Aggia, the sons of Sacharet, ye sons of
Sabathe^, the sons of Saroneth, ye snones of Malsit, ye sons of Ania, ye
sons of Sasus, ye sons of Addus, ye sons of Suba, ye sons of Eura, ye
sons of Rahotis, the sons of Phasphat, ye sons of Malmon. All these
mynistred in the Sanctuary, and were servants of Solomon: even iiij.C. and
lxxxij.



Their heads also and the rulers in the trybes, when they came to Jerusalem,
and would build and set up ye temple of God again in his place, they gave
(after their abylite) unto the temple, to ye treasure and to ye service of the
Sa^ctuary, xij.M. pounds of gold, v. thousand of silver, and an hundredth
prestes garments. And so dwelt the prestes and the Levites, and the people yt
went out to Jerusalem and in the country there about, the syngers also and
the porters, every one of Israel in his own land.

So when the seventh month came, and 1. Esd. ^. a
they came all with one consent in to the court, which was before ye east
door. And there stood Iesua the son of Iosedec and his brethren ye prestes,
and Zorobabel the son of Salathiel and his brethren, settinge up an altar,
to offer brent sacrifices upon it, as it is written in ye law of Moses.

There came people also of other countrees, and the Heithen out of all lands
set up the altar in his place, and offered sacrifices and brent offerynges unto
the LORD in the morning. And so they held the feast of tabernacles, as it is
commanded in the law. Leu^. 23. f
And daily offered they as acordinge was, and made the sacrifices appointed,
the offeringes also of the Sabbathes and of the new Moons, and all holy
feasts. 1. Esd. 3. b
And all they that vowed offerynges unto the LORD, began at the new Moon of
ye seventh month to offer unto God, for the temple of the LORD was not yet
builded. And they gave unto the Masons and Carpe^ters, money, meat and drink
with cheerfulness. Unto them of Sydon also and Tire they gave carts, yt they
should carry Cedre trees from Libanus to be ieastes and beams, and that they
should make ships in the haven of Ioppa, acordinge as it was appointed and
ordained, by Cyrus king of the Persians.

And in the second year they came in to the temple of God at Jerusalem. In
the second month began Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, Eccl^. 49. and c
and Iesua the son of Iosedec, and their brethren the prestes and Levites,
and all they that were come unto Jerusalem out of the captiuyte of Babylon, and
laid the foundation of the temple, in the new Moon of the second month in
the second year yt they were come in to Iewry and Jerusalem. And they
appointed the LORD: so Iesua and his sons and his brethren all the Levites
stood together, and performed the law and ordinance in the house of the
LORD.

And the prestes stood and had their garments and trompettes, and the Levites,
the sons of Asaph had Cymbals, geuynge thanks, and praises unto the LORD,
acordinge as David the king of Israel had ordained. 1. Par. 17. b
And the song that they did sing unto the LORD, was after this manner: O
sing unto the LORD, Psalm. 135. a
for he is gracious, and his goodness upon Israel endures for ever. And all the
people blew out with trompettes, and sunge with loud voice, praysynge the
LORD together in the rearinge up of the house of the LORD. There came also
from among the prestes and Levites the rulers and elders, acordinge to the
trybes and kynreds (soch as had seen the house before) to the buyldinge of this
temple with great cry and great mourning, many also with trompettes and
great joy: In so much, that the trompettes might not well be herd for the
weeping and mourning. For the common people blew goodly upon the trompettes.

^. Esd. 4. a
to know what that tro^pettynge and noise of shawmes might be. And they
perceived yt it was they which were come again out of captiuyte, and would
build the temple a new unto the LORD God of Israel. So they went to
Zorobabel and Iesua and to the rulers of the vyllages, and said unto them:
Shall we build with you also? for we like wise have herd your LORD, and we
walk after the same manner, from the days of Aszbazareth the king of Assiria,
which brought us hither. Then Zorobabel and Iesua and the rulers of the
villages of Israel said unto them: It is not mete, that ye should build the
temple of our God with us: we our selves alone will build unto the LORD, Esd.
^. a
like as Cyrus the king of the Persians has commanded us,

But the Heithen in the land laid them selves against those that were in
Iewry, held up the buyldinge from them, laid wait upon them preuely, stopped
soch as brought any thing to them, forbad them to build, and hyndered those
that made the^ passage, that the buyldinge should not be fynished: and this
continued so long as king Cyrus lived: and so they put of the buyldinge for
the space of two year, until ye reign of king Darius.

The VI. Chapter.
Es. 5. a
Aggeus and Zachary the son of Addo prophesied upon them in Iewry and
Jerusalem, in the name of the God of Israel. Then Zorobabel the son of
Salathiel and Iesua the son of Iosedec stood up, (...)
and began to build the house of the LORD at Jerusalem, when the prophets
of the LORD helped them.

At the same time came Sysennes the under shreue in Syria and Phenices, with
the landlordes and his companyons, and said unto them: Who has bydden and
commanded you to build the house? to make the rofe and all other things
again? And who are the work men, that build them? Nevertheless the elders of
the Jews had soch grace of the LORD, that they would not be let (though they
were provoked thereto) but builded on still, until the time that king Darius
were certified thereof, and an answer received from him. The letter that these
men sent unto king Darius, was after this manner:

Sysennes the under shreue in Syria and LORD, which made heaven and earth: and
as for this house, (...)
it has been builded and set up before time by the great and mighty king of
Israel. But when our fathers provoked God unto wrath, and sinned against the
God of Israel, (...)
he gave the^ over in to the power of Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon the king
of the Caldees, which brake down ye house and bre^t it, and carried away the
people presoners unto Babylon.

Nevertheless, in the first year that king (...)
Cyrus the king wrote and commanded to build up this house again: and all
the ornaments that Nabuchodonosor carried away from Jerusalem unto Babylon,
and appropriated unto his own temple: those brought Cyrus forth again, and
delivered them to Zorobabel and to Salmanasar the vndershreue, commaundynge
them, yt they should bring those same ornaments again to Jerusalem in to ye
temple, and to begin from yt time forth, to build the temple again in his
own place. The^ Salmanasar laid the foundation of ye LORDS house at
Jerusalem, and ever sense have they builded, and yet is it not ended. And
therefore (O king) if thou thynkest it good, let it be sought in the Lybraries
and rolls of king Cyrus: if it be found the^, that it is done with the
council and consent of king Cyrus, and if our lord ye king be so minded,
let him write unto us thereof.

(...)
and so at Egbathanis in a little cite in Media there was found soch a
wrytinge: In the first year of the reign of Cyrus, the same king Cyrus
commanded, yt the house of the LORD at Jerusalem should be builded again
(and odoures to be made there contynually unto the LORD) whose heyth shall be
ten cubits, ye breadth lx. cubits and iiij. square with three hewn stones, with a
lofte of tymbre of the same country, ye with a new loft, and the expenses thereof
to be given of ye house of king Cyrus. And the orname^tes of gold and silver,
yt Nabuchodonosor took out of the house of the LORD at Jerusalem, shall be set
again in the temple at Jerusalem, where they were before. Sysennes also the
vndershreue in Syria and Phenices, ye princes and their companyons, and the
other yt be head rulers in Syria and Phenices, shall not meddle ner have any
thing to do with that place.

LORD whole up: and have ordained them, to help those yt be come out of
captiuyte, till the house of the LORD be fynished: and out of the trybute and
taxinge that is yearly raised up in Syria and Phenices, diligently to give them
a certain sum, to the offering of the LORD: and the same to be delivered
unto Zorobabel the officer: that he therwithall may ordeyne oxen, rams,
lambs, and corn, salt, wine and oil, and that contynually every year: after
the expenses which the prestes that be at Jerusalem, show to be made daily:
(...)
this shall be given unto them without delay, that they may offer sacrifices
daily to the highest God, for the king and for his servants, and to pray for
their lives. Let it be proclaimed also on every side, that who o ever breaks
or despyseth this commandment of ye king, shall be hanged upon a galow (made
of his own good) and all his goods shall be seasoned unto ye king. The LORD
therefore (whose name is there called upon) rote out and destroy all ye kings
and people, that undertake by violence to hinder the same, or to deal
discourteously with the house of the LORD at Jerusalem. I Darius the king have
ordained, that these things shall be done with all diligence.



The VII. Chapter.
THen Sysennes ye vndershreue in Celosyria LORD God of Israel, and after the
deuyce of Cyrus, Darius, and Artaxerses kings of Persia.

And thus was our house fynished, unto LORD God of Israel, acordinge to ye
book of Moses, and the porters by all the doors.

And the children of Israel (with those yt were They that came out of captiuyte,
were not all sanctified together: but the Levites were all sanctified together.
And so all they that came out of captiuyte, killed the easter lamb, for their
brethren, for the prestes and for them selves. And the children of Israel yt
came out of captiuyte, and escaped from all ye abhominacions of the Heithe^,
sought the LORD, and kept the feast of vnleuended bred vij. days long,
eatinge and drinking and were merry before the LORD: yt the LORD had turned
the deuyce of the king of Assiria, and comforted their hands to the works of
ye LORD God of Israel.

The VIII. Chapter.
1. Esd. 7. a
there went unto him Eszdras the son of Saraias, the son of Azarias, the
son of Helchia, ye son of Sallu^, the son of Sadoc, ye son of Achitob,
the son of Amarias, ye son of Azarias, the son of Boccus, ye son of
Abisu, ye son of Phineas, the son of Eleazar, ye son of Aaron ye first
pressed. This Eszdras went up from Babylon (for he had good understanding in ye
law of Moses, yt was given of the LORD God of Israel, to be taught and done
in deed.) And ye king favored him, and did him great worshipe and honor,
after all his desires. There went up with him also certain of ye children of
Israel, of the prestes, of ye Levites, of the syngers, porters, and mynisters
of ye temple at Jerusalem.

In the vij. year of the reign of king Artaxerses, in the v. month, yt is
in the vij. year of the reign, they went from Babylon in the newmoone of the
v. month, and came the hye way to Jerusalem after his commandment, like as
the LORD had prospered their journey. For in these Eszdras gat great
instruccion, yt he should leave none of ye things behind, which were in ye
law and commandments of God. And he taught whole Israel all righteousness
and judgment.

Then came the Secretaries of king Artaxerses, and delivered ye wrytinges (yt
were come from Artaxerses the king) to Eszdras the pressed and reder of the law
of the LORD: And this is ye copye of ye letter: King Artaxerses sends his
gretinge unto Eszdras the pressed and reder of the law of ye LORD: Of
frendshipe and good will I have ordained and charged, if there be any of the
Jews, of ye prestes and Levites in my realm, which desires and is content to
go with the unto Jerusalem, yt he may do it. Therefore if any be minded to bear
the company, let the^ come together, and go with the (like as I am content and my
vij. friends my cou^celers:) to se what they do at Jerusalem and in Iewry, and
keep ye things acordinge as thou have in ye law of the LORD: and to bring
the gifts unto God the LORD LORD to Jerusalem, with the thing yt is given for
the people in the LORDS temple at Jerusalem: Ye that the same silver and
gold may be gathered, and oxen, rams, sheep and goats and other that
belo^ge to these things: and that they may offer sacrifices unto the LORD,
upon the altar of their LORD, which is at Jerusalem.

And what so ever thou and thy brethren will do with the silver and gold, yt do
after ye mind, and after the commandment of the LORD thy God: and like wise
with all the holy vessels, yt are given the for the service of the house of the
LORD thy God: and other things what soever is necessary for the to the work
of the temple, yt shall be given the of the kings treasure: and look what thou
with thy brethren wilt do with the gold and silver, that do after ye will of
the LORD. And I king Artaxerses have commanded the kepers of ye treasures in
Syria and Phenices, that what soever Eszdras the pressed and reder of the law of
the LORD does write, it shall be given him: till an C. talentes of silver, and
of gold in like manner: Of corn also an C. measures, and till an hundredth
vessels of wine, and other plenteous things without nombre. Let all things be
done after the law of ye highest God, that the wrath of God arise not in the
realm of the king and of his sons. I command you also, that ye requyne no
taxinge ner tribute of the prestes, Levites, syngers, and mynisters of the
temple, ner of the writers: and that no man have auctorite to meddle any thing
against them. As for the (O Eszdras) set thou judges and arbitrers in the whole
land of Syria and Phenices, after the wyszdome of God: and learn all soch as
are ignorant in the law of God thy LORD, and let all them that offend
against the law, be punyshed: whether it be with death, with pain, to be
condemned in money, or to be banyshed.

Then said Eszdras ye writer: Blessed be ye God of our fathers, that has
given so good a mind and will in to the heart of the king, to magnify his
house yt is at Jerusalem, and has made me to be accepted in the sight of ye
king, of his council, of his fre^des and of his nobles. And so I was steadfast
in my mind, acordinge as the LORD my God helped me, and I chose out men of
Esd. ^. a
out of the kingdom of Artaxerses: Of the sons of Phares, Gersonius. Of ye
sons of Siemarith, Amenus. Of the sons of David, Accus, the son of
Cecilia.

Of the sons of Phares, Zachary: and with him there turned again an hundredth
and fifty men. Of the sons of the captain of Moabilon, Zaraei, and with him
ij.C. and l. men. Of the sons of Zachnes, Iechonias Zecholi, and with him
ij.C. and l. men. Of the sons of Salamaasias, Gotholie, and lxx. with him. Of
the sons of Zaphacia, Zarias Miheli, and with him lxxx. Of the sons of Job,
Abdias Ieheli, and with him ij.C. and xij. men. Of the sons of Bania,
Salimoth the son of Iosaphia, and with him an C. and lx. men. Of the sons
of Beer, Zachary Bebei, and with him ij.C. and viij. men. Of the sons of
Esead, Johannes Ezechan, and with him Cx. men. Of the sons of Adonica^ those
that were the last, and these are their names: Eliphalam ye son of Gebel and
Semeias, and with him lxx. men. All these called I together by the water Thia,
where we pitched our tents three days, and there I mustered them.

(...)
As for the sons of the prestes and Levites, I found none there. Then sent I
unto Eleazar, and Eccelom, and Masman, and Malobam, and Enaathan, and Samea,
and Ioribimathan, Eunagan, Zachary, Mosollamu^ (these were the leders and men
of experience) and I sent them word, that they should come unto Loddeus, which
was by the place of the treasury, and commanded them that they should speak
unto Loddeus and to his brethren and to those that were in the treasury, to
send us soch me^, as might execute the prestes office in the house of the
LORD our God. And with the mighty hand of our LORD God, they brought unto
us me^ of good experience, from among the sons of Moolius, the son of
Leui, ye son of Israel, Sebebeiam and the sons and his brethren Aszbin and
Anim, of whom there were xviij. From among the children of the sons of
Cananeus, and their sons were xx. men. And of them yt served in the temple,
whom David had ordained, and the pryncipall men that ministered for the work
unto the Levites in the temple, ij.C. and xx. men: whose names are all tokened
up in wrytinge.

Then commanded I a fasting unto LORD, 1. Esd. 8. ^
yt I might desire of him a prosperous journey and a good way for us, ye for
us, for our children and for the catell, because of the layenges awayte: and I
durst not require of the king men of horse and of foot, to conveye us safely
against our enemies, for we had said unto the king, that ye power of the
LORD our God should be with them, that seek him with their whole heart. And
therefore we besought God our LORD earnestly because of these things, and he
was merciful unto us, and herd our prayer. And I separated from among ye
rulers of the people, and from ye prestes of ye temple xij. men, and Sebeia and
Asania, and ten men of their brethren with them. And I weied the^ the gold and
the silver and all ye prestly orname^tes of the house of or God, which the
king and his counsel, and his princes and whole Israel had given. And when I
had weyed it, I gave the^ an Cl. tale^tes in silver, an C. talentes of silver
vessel, an C. talentes of gold, and of golden vessel seven times twenty,
and vessels of other metal (ye of good metal) xij. glisteringe as the gold,
and said unto the^: ye also are holy unto the LORD, and the vessels are holy,
and the gold and the silver is promised unto the LORD the God of or fathers.
Be diligent now and keep it, until the time yt ye deliver it to the rulers of
the people, to yt prestes, to the Levites and to ye pryncipall me^ of the
cities of Israel in Jerusalem, and in the chamber of the house of our God.

So ye prestes and the Levites which received 1. Esd. 8. d
brought it to Jerusalem in to the temple of the LORD. And from Thia we brake
up the xij. day of the first month, till we came to Jerusalem. And when the
third day was past, the weyed gold and silver was delivered in ye house of
the LORD the fourth day, unto Marimoth the son of Ior the pressed, and with him
was Eleazar ye son of Phineas, and with the^ were Iosabdus ye son of
Iesnet, Medias and the son of Banus, and certain of the Levites to the
nombre and to the waighte: and the weight of them was written up the same time.
As for those that were come out of captiuyte, they offered sacrifice unto the
LORD the God of Israel: eue^ xij. oxen for all Israel, lxxxvj. rams, lxxij.
sheep, xij. goats for sin, xij. kyne for a thankofferinge, all to the
sacrifice of the LORD. And ye kings commission delivered they unto ye
stewardes and debytes of the king, and to the vndershreues in Celosyria and
Phenices.

1. Esd. 9. a
Now when these things were done, the rulers came unto me, and said: The
generation of Israel, the princes, ye prestes and Levites, the strange people
and indwellers of the land, have not put away their uncleanness, from the
Cananites, Hethites, Pheresites, from the Moabites, Egipcians and Edomites. For
both they and their sons have mengled them selves with the daughters of them,
and the holy sede is mixte with the outlandish Heithen, and sens the beginning
of their reign have the rulers and heads been partakers of their wickedness.

As soon as I had herd these things, immediately I rent my holy garments,
and pulled out ye hair of my head and my beerd, and sat me down soroufull
and heavy. So all they that were moved through the word of the God of Israel,
came unto me: and I sat still full of heuines until the evening sacrifice.
Then stood I up from fasting, having rent clothes and the holy garment,
kneled down upon my knees, held out my hands unto ye LORD, and said: O
LORD, I am confounded and ashamed before thy face, for our sins are become
many upon our heads, and or wickednesses are exalted unto the heaven: for
sens ye time of or fathers we are in great sin unto this day. And for the
sins of us and or fathers, we with our brethren and with our prestes have been
delivered unto the kings of the earth, in to the sword, and in to captivity,
and became a spoil with confucion and shame unto this day. And now O LORD
God, how great is the mercy yt we have gotten of the? in yt thou have left us
a rote and a name in the place of thy Sanctuary, to discover our light in the
house of ye LORD or God, and given us meat at all times of or ministracion.
And when we were in captiuyte, we were not forsaken of the LORD our God: but
he made the kings of Persia gracious and favorable unto us, so yt they gave
us vytayles and meat, ye and leave to build up the temple of our LORD God
again, to repair the waisted places of Sion, and to dwell in Iewry and
Jerusalem. And now O LORD, what shall we say, having all these things in
possession? For we have broken thy commandments, which thou gave unto us
by the hands of thy servants the prophets, saying: The land yt ye go
unto, and yt is given you for an heretage to have in possession, is defiled
with the uncleanness and fylthynes of the Heithen, and with their abhominacion
have they poluted it altogether. Therefore shall ye not join your daughters
unto their sons, (...)
ner mary yor sons unto their daughters: Morouer, ye shall never seek to make
peace with them, yt ye may increase and eat the best in the land, and yt ye
may denyde ye inheritance of the land unto yor children for evermore. As for
the thing yt now happens unto us, it comes all for or wicked works and
great sins. yet have thou given us soch a rote, yt we are come again in to
or own land: and we are so wicked, yt we have broken thy statutes and
commandments again, and mengled or selves with the uncleanness of the
outlandish Heithen. O LORD, art thou angry with us? will thou rote us clean
out? yt our rote and name remain no more? O LORD God of Israel, thou art
true, for our rote endures yet unto this present day. And behold, now are
we before ye in or sins, now can we not stand before the in them.

And when Eszdras with this prayer had (...)
and lye^ge flatt upon the ground before the temple, there gathered unto him
from Jerusalem a great multitude of men and women, of young men and maidens,
for there was a very great wepinge and mourning in the congregation. So when
Iechonias the son Ieheli one of the children of Israel cried, he said unto
Eszdras: we have sinned against the LORD, because we have married outlandish
women of the Heithe^. Now art thou over all Israel. We will swear an ooth
therefore unto ye LORD, yt we shall put away all or wives which we have taken
of the Heithe^, with their children: like as it is appointed the by or fore
elders. Stand up then, open thou it and declare it plainly unto us acordi^ge
to the law of ye LORD: for the matter belongs unto ye, and we will help
the, quyte thy self manly. So Eszdras arose, and took an ooth of the rulers of
ye prestes and of ye Levites and of all Israel, to do after these things, and
they swear.

The IX. Chapter.
THen Eszdras stood up from the court (...)
and went in to the chamber of Ionathas the son of Nasabus, and remained
there, and ate no meat ner drunk drink, for the multitude of the wickedness
of the people. And there was made a proclamacion in all Iewry and at Jerusalem,
for all soch as were gathered at Jerusalem out of captiuyte, yt who so over
came not to Jerusalem within two or three days (acordinge to the judgment of
the old lords of council) his goods should be taken from him, and he
excluded from the congregation of the captiuyte. And in three days were all
they of the trybe of Judah and Ben Iamin gathered together at Jerusalem, the xx.
day of ye ix. month. And ye whole multitude sat tre^blinge in the court of
the temple, for it was winter. So Eszdras arose up, and said unto them: ye
have done unrighteously, in that ye have taken outlandish wives to marriage, and
so to increase the sins of Israel. And now knowledge the same, and give praise
unto the LORD God of our fathers, and perform his will, departinge from the
Heithen of the land, and from the outlandish wives. Then cried the whole
multitude with loud voice, and said: like as thou have spoken, so will we
LORD in this busynes.

Then Ionathas the son of Ezeli, and Ozias and Thecam received ye charge of
this matter, and Bozoramus, and Leius and Sabatheus helped the^ thereto. After
this, all they stood up yt were come out of captiuyte. And Eszdras the pressed
chose unto him the pryncipall men from among the fathers acordinge to their
names, and in the new moon of the tenth month they sat together, to examen
this matter. And so the matter was a determynge (concerning the men yt had
outlandish wives) until the new moon of the first month. And of the prestes
yt had mixte the^ selves with outlandish wives, there were found: (...). 10. d
Of the sons of Jesus the son of Iosedec and his brethren, Mazeas, Eleazer,
Ioribus and Ioadeus, which offered them selves to put away their wives, and to
offer a ram for their ignorance. And of the sons of Semmeri, Masseas, and
Esses and Ieelech Azarias. Of ye sons of Fosera, Limosias, Hismaen, Nathanea,
Iussio, Ieddus, and Talsas. And of the Levites, Iosabdus, Semeis and Colnis,
Caletas, Facteas, Colnas and Elionas.

And of the sons of Naue, Nones, Afeas, Melchias, Sameas, Simo^, Ben Iamin,
Malchus and Marras. And of the sons of Asom, Carianeus, Mathathias, Bannus,
Eliphalach, Manasses, Semei. Of the sons of Bannus, Jeremy, Moodias, Abramas,
Iohel, Baneas, Peliaas, Iona, Marimoth, Eliasib, Mathaneus, Eliasis, Orizas,
Dielus, Semedius. Zambris and Joseph. Of ye sons of Nobeus, Idelus,
Mathathias, Sabadus, Zecheda, Sedmi, Iesseus, and Baneas. All these had taken
outla^dish weme^ to marriage, and they put the^ away with their children.

The prestes and Levites, and all they yt were of Israel, dwelt at Jerusalem
and through out all ye land, in the new moon of the seventh month, and the
children of Israel were in their dwellynges. And ye whole multitude came 2.
Esd. 8. a
And they spoke unto Eszdras ye hie pressed and reder, yt he would bring ye law
of Moses, which was given of ye LORD God of Israel. So Eszdras the hie pressed
brought the law unto the whole multitude, to man and woman, and to all
prestes, yt they might hear the law, in the new moon of the seventh month.
And he red in ye floor yt is before ye holy port of ye temple, from the
morning early until the evening, before men and women. And they applied
their mind all unto the law.

And Eszdras the pressed and reder of ye law stood up upon a scaffolde of wodd,
which was made therefore: and upon his right hand there stood by him
Mathathias, Samus, Ananias, Azarias, Vrias, Ozechias, and Balsamus: Upon his
left hand stood Faldeus, Misael, Malachias, Abuschas, Sabus, Nabadias, and
Zachary. Then took Eszdras ye book before the whole multitude, for he was ye
pryncipall and had in most honor of the^ all. And wha^ he had red out ye law,
they stood all straight up upon their fete. So Eszdras praised the LORD the
most hye God, the Almighty God of hoostes. And all ye people LORD: Jesus,
Beneas, Sarebias, Iaddimus, Accubus, Sabbatheus, Calithes, Azarias, Ioradus,
Ananias, and Philias the Levites which taught the law of the LORD, and red
the law of the LORD in the congregation, and every man set those before yt
understood the law. Then spoke Atharathes unto Eszdras the hye pressed and
reder, and to the Levites yt taught the multitude, saying: This day is holy
unto the LORD: and all they yt had herd the law, wept* So Eszdras said: ^.
Esd. 8. c
Depart yor way then, and eat the best, and drink the swetest, and send
gifts unto them yt have nothing: for this day is holy unto the LORD, and be
not ye sorry. Then went they their way euerychone, ate and drunk and were
merry, and sent rewards unto the^ yt had nothing, yt they also might eat with
gladness: for they were exceadingly reioysed, through the words that were red
unto them in the law: And so they were all gathered together at Jerusalem to
hold the feast, acordinge to the covenant of ye LORD God of Israel.

The end of the third book of Eszdras.
The IIII book of Eszdras.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I. God reproves the people for their unthankfulness, and rehearses unto
them his own loving mercy, that he may bring the^ again: if they will not
amend, he will chose another people. Chap. II. The Synagoge co^playneth upon
her children* The calling of the Heithen. Chap. III. Eszdras shows of the
excellent works of God, done unto the people, and has a friendly contencion
with God: because he suffers the Babilonians to have the dominion over them,
where as they yet are sinners also. Chap. IIII. The angel rebukes Eszdras, for
taking in hand to seek out the ground of Gods judgment, and instructs him
with fair symilitudes. Chap. V. A communicacio^ of Eszdras and the angel
together. Chap. VI. The angel enfourmeth Eszdras, and answers him to his
questions. Chap. VII. The angel shows Eszdras many secret matters, and
things for to come. Chap. VIII. Eszdras prays for the people, that God will
rather look upon his own loving mercy and the godlynes of few, the^ upon the
wicked sins of many. Chap. IX. Tokens of the time and punishment for to come.
Visions are showed unto Eszdras. Chap. X. A communicacion betwixt Eszdras, and
the woman that appeared unto him. Chap. XI.XII.XIII. Of certain visions and
the interpretacions thereof. Chap. XIIII. God appears unto Eszdras in the
bush, talks with him, and commands him what he shall do. Chap. XV. God
shows Eszdras the punyshme^t that he will send upon the sinful people, and
commands him to tell them the same. Chap. XVI. Punishment upon the Heithen,
and how the people of God shall behave them selves therein.
The first Chapter.
THe second book of ye prophet (...)
the son of Azarias, ye son of Helchia, ye son of Sallu^, the son of
Sadoc, the son of Achitob, the son of Amerias, the son of Azarias, the
son of Maraioth, the son of Sarahias, the son of Vzi, the son of
Boccus, the son of Abisu, the son of Phineas, the son of Eleazar, the
son of Aaron, of the trybe of Leui) which was presoner in the land of the
Meedes, in the reign of Artaxerses king of Persia.

And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying: (...)
Go thy way and show my people their sinful deeds, and their children their
wickednesses, which they have done against me, that they may tell their
childers children the same: for the sins of their fathers are increased in
them. And why? they have forgotten me, and have offered unto strange gods.

It is a people without learning and nourtoure. How long shall I forbear them,
unto whom I have done so much good? Many kings have I destroyed for their
sakes: (...)
Pharao with his servants and all his power have I smytten down and slain:
(...)
All ye nations have I destroyed and roted out before them, and in ye east have
I brought two lands and people to naught, even Tire and Sydon, and have slain
all their enemies. Speak thou therefore unto them, saying: Thus says the
LORD: (...)
I led you through the sea, and have given you sure streets sense the
beginning. I gave you Moses to be your captain, and Aaron to be the pressed:
(...)
I gave you light in a piler of fire, and great wonders have I done among
you: yet have ye forgotten me, says the LORD.

LORD: I gave you quales to eat, Exo. 16. c
and tents for your sucoure: Nevertheless ye murmured, and ascrybed not ye
victory of your enemies unto my name: ye this same day do ye yet murmoure.
Where are the benefits, that I have done for you? When ye were hongrie in the
wilderness, (...). 14. a
did ye not cry unto me: Why have thou brought us in to this wilderness, to
kill us? It had been better for us, to have served ye Egipcians, then to dye in
this wilderness. The^ had I pity upon your mourninges, and gave you Manna to
eat. Ye ate angels food. Wha^ ye were thyrstie, did not I hew ye hardstone,
(...). ^0. b
and caused water enough to flow thereout? For the heat, I covered you with
ye leaves of the trees. A good pleasant fatt land gave I you: I cast out the
Cananites, the Pheresites and Philistynes before you. What shall I do more for
you, says the LORD?

LORD: When ye were in the wilderness, Exo. 15. d
in the water of the Amorites, being a thyrst and blasphemynge my name, I gave
you not fire for your blasphemies, but cast a tree in to ye water, and made the
river sweet. What shall I do unto the, O Jacob? Thou Judah would not obey me.
(...). 32. b
I will turn me to another people, and unto those will I give my name, that
they may keep my statutes. Saying ye have forsaken me, I will forsake you also.
When ye desire me to be gracious unto you, I shall have no mercy upon you. (...)
When ye call upon me, I will not hear you. For ye have defiled your hands
with blood, and your fete are swift to commytt manslaughter. Ye have not
forsaken me (in a manner) but your own selves, says the LORD.

LORD: have I not prayed you, as a father his sons, as a mother her
daughters, and as a norsse her young babes, that ye would be my people, and I
should be your God: that ye would be my children, and I should be your own
father? (...). ^3. d
I gathered you together, as an hen gathers her chekens under her wings.
But now what shall I do unto you? I shall cast you out fro my face. (...)
When ye offer unto me, I shall turn my face from you: for your solemn feast
days, your new moons and your circumcisions have I forsaken. I sent unto
you my servants the prophets, whom ye have taken and slain, and torn their
bodies in pieces, whose blood I will require of your hands, says the LORD.

Thus says the Almighty LORD: Esa. 65. a Romans 10
and they yt never herd me, shall believe in me: and they unto who^ I never
showed token, shall do the thing yt I command the^. They have seen no
prophets, yet shall they call their sins to remembrance, and knowledge the^.
I report me unto the grace, that I will do for the people which is to come,
whose children rejoice in gladness: and though they have not seen me with bodily
eyes, yet in sprete they believe the thing that I say. And now brother,
behold what great worshipe, Esa. 41. c Luc. 13. ^ Matt. ^.
and se ye people that comes from the east, unto whom I will give the
dukedom of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, of Oseas, Amos, and Micheas, of Joel,
Abdy, Jonas, Naum and Abacuc, of Sophony, Aggeus, Zachary and Malachy, which is
called also an angel (or messau^ger) of the LORD.

The II. Chapter.
THus says the LORD: I brought LORD yor God, and done ye thing that is
evil before him. But what shall I now do unto you? I am a wyddow and forsaken:
go your way (o my children) and axe mercy of the LORD. As for me O father, I
call upon the for a witness over the mother of these children, which would not
keep my covenant: yt thou bring them to co^fucion, and their mother to a
spoil, that she bear no more. Let their names be scatred abroad among the
Heithen, let them be put out of the earth, for they have thought scorn of my
covenant.

Woe be unto the Assure, thou that hydest Genesis 19. c
remember what I did unto Sodom and Gomorre, whose land is turned to pitch and
aszshes. Even so also will I do unto all them, that hear me not, says the
Almighty LORD. Thus says the LORD unto Eszdras: Tell my people, yt I will
give them the kingdom of Jerusalem, which I would have given unto Israel.
Their glory also will I take unto me, and give them the ever lasting
tabernacles, which I had prepared for those.

The tree of life shall be unto them a sweet smelling ointment: they shall nether
labor ner be weery. Go ye your way, and ye shall receive it. Pray for yor
selves a few days, that they may dwell therein. Now is the kingdom prepared
for you, therefore watch. Take heaven and earth to witness, for I have broken
the evil in pieces, and created the good, for I live says ye LORD. Mother
enbrace thy children, and bring them up with gladness: make their fete as fast
as a piler, for I have chosen the, says the LORD.

LORD. And for thy help I shall send the my servants Esaias and Jeremy, after
whose council I have sanctified and prepared for the, xij. trees with diverse
fruits, and as many wells flowinge with mylck and honey, and seven mountains,
whereupon there grow roses and lilies, wherein I will fill my children with joy.
Execute justice for the wyddowe, be judge for the fatherless: give to ye
poor: defend the co^fortlesse: clothe the naked: heal the wounded and sick:
laugh not a lame man to scorn: defend the crepell, and lat the blind come in
to ye sight of my clearnes. Keep the old and young within thy walls: ^obi. 1.
d
where so ever thou fyndest the deed, toke^ them, and burye them, and I shall
give the

For when the day of trouble and heaviness comes, other shall weep and be
soroufull, but thou shall be merry and plenteous. The Heithen shall be gelous, but
they shall be able to do nothing against the, says the LORD. My hands shall
cover the, so that thy children shall not se the fire everlasting. Be joyful O
thou mother with thy children, for I will deliver the, says the LORD.
Remember thy deed children, for I shall bring them out of the earth, and show
mercy unto them, for I am merciful, says the LORD Almighty.

Enbrace thy children, until I come and show mercy unto them, for my wells
run over, and my grace shall not fail. I Eszdras LORD upon the mount Oreb,
that I should go unto Israel. But when I came unto the^, they set me at naught,
and despised the commandment of ye LORD. And therefore I say unto you O ye
Heithen, that hear and understand: Look for your shepherde, he shall give you
everlasting rest: for he is nigh at hand, that shall come in the end of the
world. Be ready to the reward of the kingdom, for the everlasting light
shall shine upon you for evermore. Fle the shadow of this world, receive the
ioyfulnes of your glory. I testify my savior openly: O receive the gift yt
is given you, and be glad, geuynge thanks unto him, that has called you to
the heavenly kingdom. Arise up, and stand fast: behold the nombre of those
that be sealed in the feast of the LORD, which are departed from the shadow
of the world, and have received glorious garments of the LORD. Take thy
nombre O Sion, and shutt up thy purified, which have fulfilled the law of the
LORD. The nombre of thy children whom thou longedest for, is fulfilled: beseke
the power of the LORD, that thy people which have been called from the
beginning, may be hallowed.

I Eszdras saw upon the mount Sion a (...)
and they all praised the LORD with songs of thankesgeuynge. And in the
myddest of the^ there was a young man of an hye stature, m^re excellent then
all they, and upon every one of their heads he set a crown, and was ever
higher and higher, which I marueled at greatly. So I axed ye angel, and said:
Sir, what are these? He answered and said unto me: These be they, that have
put of the mortal clothinge and put on the immortal, and have testified and
knowleged the name of God. Now are they crowned, and receive the reward.

Then said I unto the angel: what young person is it, that crowns them,
and gives them the palms in their hands? So he answered and said unto me:
It is ye son of God, whom they have knowleged in the world. Then began I
greatly to commend them, that stood so stiffly for the name of the LORD. And
so the angel said unto me: Go thy way, and tell my people, what manner of
things and how great wonders of the LORD thy God, thou have sen^.

The III. Chapter.
LORD LORD, thou spakest at the beginning, when thou plantedst ye earth (and
that thy self alone) and gave commandment unto ye people, and a body unto
Adam, which was a creature of thy hands, (...). 2. b
and have brethed in him the breath of life: and so he lived before the, and
thou leddest him in to paradyse, which garden of pleasure thy right hand had
planted, or ever the earth was made. And unto him thou gave commandment to
love ye way, which he transgressed, and immediately thou appoyntedest death in
him, and in his generacions. Of him came nations, trybes, people and kynreddes
out of nombre. (...) 6. b
And every people walked after their own will, and did nyce things before the:
and as for thy commandments, they despised them.

(...). 7. b
upon those that dwelt in the world, and destroydest them. And like as the
death was in Adam, so was the water floude also in these. Nevertheless one of
them thou leftest: namely, Noe with his household, of whom come all righteous
me^. And it happened that, when they yt dwelt upon the earth, began to
multiply, and had gotten many children, and were a great people, they began
to be more ungodly then the first.

Now when they all lived so wickedly before the, (...). 12.15
thou did chose the a man from among them, whose name was Abram. Him thou
louedest, and unto him only thou shewdest thy will, and maydest an everlasting
covenant with him, promisinge him, that thou would never forsake his sede.
And unto him thou gave Isaac, (...). 21. a (...) 25. c (...) a
unto Isaac also thou gave Jacob and Esau. As for Jacob thou did chose
him, and put back Esau. And so Jacob became a great multitude.

(...). 19. (...) 4. b
bowinge down the heavens, settinge fast the earth, mouynge the ground,
making the depthes to shake, and troublynge the world: And thy glory went
through four ports of fire, and earth quakes, and wyndes and cold: that thou
might give the law unto the sede of Jacob, and diligence unto the
generacio^ of Israel.

And yet tokest thou not away from the^ that wicked heart, that thy law might
bring forth fruit in them. For the first Adam bare a wicked heart,
transgressed, and was overcome, and so be all they yt are borne of him. Thus
remained weakness with the law in the heart of the people, Romans ^. a
with the wickedness of the rote: so that the good departed away, and the
evil abode still. So the times passed away, and the years were brought to an
end. 1. Re. 16. c 2. Reg. 5. a
Then did thou raise the up a servant: called David, whom thou commaundedst
to build a cite unto thy name, and to offer up incense and sacrifice unto the
therein. This was done now many years.

Then the inhabiters of the cite forsook

I can not perceive how this happens. labo has no fruit. For I have gone
here and there through the Heithe^, and I se, yt they be rych and wealthy, and
think not upon ye commandments. Weye thou therefore our wickedness now in
ye balaunce, and theirs also that dwell in the world, and so shall thy name be
nowhere found but in Israel. Or where is there a people upon earth, yt has
not sinned before the? Or what people has so kept thy commandments? Thou
shall find, that Israel by name has kept thy precepts, but not the other
people and Heithen.

The IIII. Chapter.
LORD. Then said he unto me: Go thy way, weye me the weight of the fire, or
measure me the blast of the wind, or call me again the day that is past.
Then answered I and said: What man borne is able to do that? Why requyrest
thou soch of me? And he said unto me: If I should axe the, how deep dwellinges
are in the sea? Or how great water springes are upon ye firmament? Or how
great water sprynges are in the beginning of the deep? Or which are the out
goinges of Paradise? Peradventure thou would say unto me: I never went
down yet in to ye deep ner hell, nether did I ever clymme up in to heaven.
Nevertheless now have I axed the but only of fire and wind and of the day,
where through thou have trauayled, and from the which thou can not be
separated: and yet can thou give me no answer of them.

Iud. 9. b Par. 25. c
Come let us go, and fight against the sea, that it may depart away before
us, and that we may make us yet more woddes.

The floudes of the sea also in like manner took this deuyce. and said: Come,
let us go up, and fight against the trees of the wodd, that we may make our
land the wyder. The thought and deuyce of the wodd was but vain and nothing
worth, for the fire came, and consumed the wod: The thought of the floudes of
the sea came likewise to naught also, for the sonde stood up and stopped them.

If thou were judge now betwyxte these (...)
even so they that dwell upon earth, may understand nothing, but that which
is upon earth: and he that dwells above the heavens, may only understood
the things, that are above the heavens. Then answered I and said: I beseke
the (O LORD) let me have understanding: for it was not my mind to be curious
of thy hye things, but of soch as we daily meddle with all: namely, wherefore
that Israelis blasphemed of the Heithen, and for what cause the people (whom
thou ever have loved) is given over, to be punyshed of ungodly nations: and why
the law of our fathers is brought to naught, and the written couenauntes come
to none effect, and we pass away out of the world as the greshopers, and
our life is a very fear, and we are not worthy to obtain mercy. What will he
do then unto his name, which is called upon over us? Of these things have I
axed question.

Then answered he me and said: The more (...)
for this world is full of unrighteousness and weakness.

But as concerning the things whereof thou axest me, I will tell the. The evil
is sown, but the destruction thereof is not yet come. If the evil now that is
sown, be not turned vpsyde down, and if the place where ye evil is sown,
pass not away, then can not the thing come yt is sown with ye good. For the
corn of evil sede has been sown in the heart of man from the beginning, and
how much ungodliness has he brought up unto this time? and how much shall he yet
bring forth, until he come in to the barn?

Pondre now by thyself, wha^ ye corn of evil o years few and evil? And he
answered me, saye^ge: Haist not thou to much upon the Highest, for thy haistynes
to be above him is but in vain, thou make to much a do. Did not ye souls
also of the righteous axe question of these things in their holiness, saying:
How long shall I hope of this fashion? When comes the fruit of my barn, and
my reward? And upon this Ieremiel the archangel gave them answer, and said:
^poc. 6. b
Eue^ when the nombre of the seeds is filled in you: for he has weyed the
world in the balaunce: in measure and nombre has he measured the time, and
moves it not, until the same measure be fulfilled. Then answered I and said:
O LORD LORD, now are we all full of sin, and for our sake peradventure it
is not, that the barn of the righteous shall not be filled, because of the
sins of the^ that dwell upon earth.

LORD, that can she not. And he said unto me: In hell the secret places of
souls are like ye preuy chamber of a woman. For like as a woman that
trauayleth, makes haist, when the time and necessite of the birth is at hand:
Eue^ so does she haist to deliver it that is committed unto her. Look what thou
desyrest to se, it shall be showed the from the beginning. Then answered I and
said: If I have found favor in thy sight, and if it be possible, and if I
be mete therefore, show me then, whether there be more to come the^ is past, or
more past then is for to come. What is past, I know: but what is for to come,
I know not.

And he said unto me: Stand up upon ye (...)
ye life, I may not show the, for I am not sent therefore.

The V. Chapter.
Nevertheless, as concerning the tokens, Mat. (...)
but iniquyte shall have the upper hand, like as thou have seen now, and as
thou have herd long agoo. And the land that thou seist now to have rule,
shall thou shortly se waist. But if God grant the to live, thou shall se
after ye third trompet, that the Son shall suddenly shine again in the night,
and the Moon three times in the day, and blood shall drop out of wodd, and
the stone shall give his voice, and the people shall be vnquyete: and even he shall
rule, whom they hope not that dwell upon earth, and the fowls shall flyt, and
the Sodomitysh see shall cast out his fish, and make a noise in the night, which
many shall not know, but they shall all hear the voice thereof.

There shall be a co^fucion also in many places,

To show the soch tokens I have leave, and if thou wylt pray again, and weep
as now, and fast seven days, thou shall hear yet greater things. Then I
awaked, and a fearfulnes went through all my body, and my mind was feeble and
careful, so that I almost swowned withal. So the angel that was come to
talk with me, held me, comforted me, and set me up upon my fete.

And in the second night it happened, yt that leaves his flock in the hands
of wicked wolves. Then said I unto him: Go thy way fro me, and come not nigh
me: and he herd it, and as I said, so went he his way fro me. And so I
fasted seven days, mourning and weeping, like as Vriell the angel commanded
me. And after seven days it happened, that ye thoughts of my heart were very
grievous unto me again, and my soul received ye sprete of understanding, and
I began to talk with the most highest again, and said: O LORD LORD, of every
wod of ye earth and of all the trees thereof, thou have chosen ye one only
vynyarde: and of all lands of the whole world thou have chosen the one pytt:
and of all flowers of the ground thou have chosen the one lylie: and of all
the depthes of the sea thou have filled the one river: and of all builded
cities thou have hallowed Sion unto thy self: and of all ye fowls that are
created, thou have named the one dove: and of all the catell yt are made, thou
have provided ye one sheep: and among all ye multitudes of folks thou have
gotten the one people, and unto this people whom thou louedest, thou gave a
law, yt is proved of all.

LORD, why have thou given this one people over unto many? and upon the one
rote thou have prepared other, and why have thou scatred ye one only people
among many? which tread the^ down, ye which have ever withstonde ye
promyses, and never believed ye couenau^tes? And though thou werest enemy unto
ye people, yet should thou punysh the^ with thine own hands. Now wha^ I had
spoken these words, the angel yt came to me ye night before, was sent unto me,
and said unto me: Hear me, and herke^ to ye thing yt I say, and I shall tell
ye more. And I said: Speak on my LORD. The^ said he unto me: Thou art sore
vexed and troubled for Isreal's sake. Love thou yt people better, then him yt
made them? And I said: No LORD, but of very grefe and compassion have I
spoken. For my reins pain me every hour, because I would have experience of
the way of the most highest, and to seek out part of his judgment. And he said
unto me: that thou may not. And I said: wherefore LORD? Where unto was I
borne then? Or why was not my mothers childesbed then my grave? So had I not
seen the mysery and trouble of Jacob, and the travail of my people of Israel.

LORD LORD, who may know these things, but he that has not his dwelling
with me^? As for me, I am unwise: how may I the^ speak of these things, whereof
thou axest me? The^ said he unto me: like as thou can do none of these
things yt I have spoken of, Even so can thou not find out my judgment, or
in the end the love that I have promised unto my people. And I said: Behold
o LORD, yet art thou nigh unto them that have no end: and what shall they do
that have been before me, or we that be now, or they that shall come after us?
And he said unto me: I will lycken my judgment unto a ring. Like as there is
no slacknesse of the last, even so is there no swiftness of the first. So I
answered and said: Coudest thou not make those (that have been made, and that
be now, and that are for to come) in one, that thou might show thy judgment
the sooner?

Then answered heme and said: The creature

And I said: How have thou said then unto thy servant, that thou living
maker have made the creature living at once, and the creature bare it? eue^ so
might it now also bear them that be present, at once. And he said unto me:
Axe the childeszbed of a woman, and say unto her: If thou bring forth
children, why do thou it not together, but one after another? Pray her
therefore, to bring forth ten children at once. And I said: she can not, but
must do it one after another.

Then said he unto me: Even so have I given a childeszbed unto the earth, for
those that be sown upon it by process of time. For like as a young child
may not bring forth the things that belong to the aged, even so have I
ordened the world which I made.

And I axed and said: Seeing thou have of strength, are of one fashion: and
they that are borne in the time of age (when the childeszbed fails) are other
wise. Consider now thyself, how that ye are less of stature, then those that
were before you, and so are they that come after you, less then ye, as the
creatures which now begin to be old, and have passed over the strength of
youth. Then said I: LORD I beseke the, if I have found favor in thy sight,
show thy servant, by whom do thou vyset thy creature?

The VI. Chapter.


Then answered I and said: which shall be the partynge asunder of the times? Or
when shall be the end of the first, and the beginning of it that follows? And
he said unto me: From Abraham unto Isaac, wha^ Jacob and Esau were borne of
him, Jacobs hand held first the hele of Esau: for Esau is the end of this
world, and Iacobis the beginning of it that follows. The hand of man
betwixt the hele and the hand. Other question (Eszdras) axe thou not.

LORD LORD, if I have found favor in thy sight, I beseke the, show thy
servant the end of thy tokens, whereof thou shewdest me part the last night.
So he answered and said unto me: Sto^de up upon thy fete, and hear the
perfect voice and sound. There shall come a great mocion, but ye place where
thou sto^dest shall not be moved. And therefore when thou hear the words, be
not afraid: for of the end shall the word and foundation of ye earth be
understand. And why? the word thereof trembles and quaketh, for it knows,
that it must be changed at the end. And it happened, that wha^ I had herd
it, I stood up upon my fete and herkened: and behold, there was a voice yt
spoke, and the sound of it was like the sound of many waters, and it said.
Behold, ye days come, yt I will begin to draw nigh, and to vyset them that
dwell upon earth, and will begin to make inquysicion of them, what they be yt
have hurt equity with unrighteousness, and when the low estate of Sion shall be
fulfilled: and when the world, that shall vanish away, shall be ouersealed, then
will I do these tokens.

The books shall be opened before the firmament, Mat. 10. c Mich. 7. a
At that time shall friends fight one against another like enemies, and the
earth shall stand in fear with them.

The sprynges of the wells shall stand still, and in three hours they shall not
run. Who so ever remains from all these thinge^ that I have told the, shall
escape, and se my salvation, and the end of your world. And the men that are
received, shall se it, they that have not taisted death from their birth: and
the heart of the indwellers shall be changed, and turned in to another meaning:
for evil shall be put out, and disceate shall be quenched. As for faith, it shall
flourish, corrupcion shall be overcome: and the truth, which has been so long
without fruit, shall be declared.

And it happened when he talked with me,

If thou will pray yet more, and fast seven days again, I shall tell the more
things, and greater then before: for thy voice is herd before the Highest: for
why? the Mighty has seen thy righteous dealing, he has seen also thy
chastity, which thou have had ever sense thy youth: and therefore has he sent
me to show the all these things, and to say unto the: Be of good comfort,
and fear not, and haist not with ye times that are past to think vain
things, and make no haist of the latter times.

And it happened after this, yt I wept again, and fasted seven days in like
manner, that I might fulfill the three wekes, which he told me. In the eight
night was my heart vexed within me again, and I began to speak before the
Highest: for my sprete was greatly set on fire, and my soul was in distress,
and I said: O LORD, thou spakest unto thy creature from the beginning (even
the first day) and saydest: Genesis 1. a
Let heaven and earth be made, and thy word was a perfect work. And then was
there the sprete, and the darcknesses were yet on every side, and silence:
there was no man's voice as yet from the. Then commaundedst thou a fair light
to come forth out of thy treasures, that thy work might appear and be seen.



Upon the fourth day thou co^maundedst that the Son should give his shine,
and ye Moon her light: the stars did thou set in order, and gave them
a charge, to do service even unto man, that was for to be made. Deu. 4. c
Upon the fifth day thou saydest unto the seventh part (where the waters were
gathered) that they should bring forth diverse beasts, fowls and fishes. And
so it came to pass, that the domme water and without soul, brought forth
living beasts at the commandment of God, that all people might praise thy
wondrous works. Then did thou preserve two souls, ye one thou calldest
Enoch and the other Leuiathan, and did separate the one from the other: for
the seventh part (namely, where the water was gathered together) might not
hold them both. Unto Enoch thou gave one part,

Upon the sixte day thou gave commandment unto the earth, that before the
it should bring forth beasts, catell and all ye crepe, and (besides this)
Adam also, whom thou maydest lord of all thy creatures: Of him come we all,
and the people also, whom thou have chosen specially unto thy self. All this
have I said now and spoken before the, that I might show, how that the world
is made for our sakes. As for the other people which also come of Adam, thou
have said that they are nothing, but be like a spetle, and have lickened the
abundau^ce of them unto a drop (that falls) from the rofe of the house.

And now (O LORD) the Heithe^ which have ever been reputed as nothing, have
bego^ne to be lords over us, and to devour us: but we thy people (whom thou
have called ye first borne, thy only begotten, and thy fervent lover) are given
in to their hands and power. If the world now be made for our sakes, why
have we not the inheritance in possession with the world? How long shall this
endure?

The VII. Chapter.
ANd it happened after that I had spoken out these words, there was sent unto
me an angel (which had been by me also the nights before) and he said unto
me: Up Eszdras, and hear the words that I am come to tell the. And I said:
speak on LORD my God. The^ said he unto me: The sea is set in a wide place,
yt it might be deep and great: but the intrau^ce is narow and small like a
river. For who would go in to the sea, to look upon it, and to rule it? If he
went not through the narow, how might he come in to the broad?

Item, another. A cite is builded and set upon a broad field, and is full of
all goods: the intraunce is narow and sodane, like as if there were a fire at
the right hand, and a deep water at the left, and as it were only one strate
path betwixt the^ both, so small, that there could but one man go there.

If this cite now were given to an heir, and he never went through this
parlous way, how would he receive his inheritance? And I said: It is so,
LORD. Then said he: Even so is Israel also a portion. And why? for their
sakes have I made the world: and when Adam tra^sgressed my statutes, then was
ye thing judged that was done* Then were ye intraunces of the world made
narow, full of sorrow and travail: They are but few and evil, full of parels
and labor. For the intraunces of the fore world were wide and sure, and
brought immortal fruit.



The^ said I: O LORD LORD, thou have ordened in thy law, ^eut. ^. a
that the righteous should inheret these things, but that the unfaithful and
ungodly should perish. Nevertheless the righteous shall suffer strayte things,
and hope for wide: for they that have lived ungodly and suffered strayte
things, shall not se the wide.

And he said unto me: There is no judge above God, and none that has
understanding above the Highest. For there be many yt perish, because they
despise ye law of God that is set before them. For God has given strayte
commandment to soch as come, that they know what they do, and how they
should live: and if they kept this, they should not be punyshed.

Nevertheless they were not obedient unto him, but spoke against him: ymagined
vain things, and purposed to sin, and said morouer, that there was no God,
and that God regarded it not. His ways have they not known, his law have
they despised, and denied his promyses: in his statutes and ordinances have
they not been faithful and steadfast, and have not performed his works.



After these same years shall my son Christ dye, and all men that have life:
and ye world shall be turned in to the old silence seven days, like as in the
fore judgments, so that no man shall remain. And after seven days, the
world that yet awaketh not, shall be raised up, and shall dye corrupt. And the
earth shall restore those that have slepte in her, and so shall the dust those
that dwell in syle^ce, and the secret places shall deliver those that be
committed unto them. And ye ^ost highest shall be openly declared upon the seat
of judgment, and all misery shall vanysh away, and long suffringe shall be
gathered together. But the judgment shall continue, ye truth shall remain, and
faith shall wax strong, the work shall follow, and the reward shall be
showed, the righteousnesses shall watch, and the vnrighteousnesses shall bear
no rule.

Then said I: Abraham prayed first for Genesis 18. ^ Exo. 32. ^ 2. Re. 24 ^ 2.
Par. 6. 3. Re. 17. 4. Re. 18 and 19.
and Moses for the fathers yt sinned in the wyldernes, and he yt came after him
for Israel, in ye time of Achas and Samuel: and David for ye destruction, and
Solomon for them that came in to the Sanctuary, and Helias for those that
received rain, and for the deed, that he might live: and Ezechias for ye
people in the time of Senna cherib: and diverse other in like manner, which have
prayed for many.

Eue^ so now, seeing ye corrupt is grown up, and wickedness increased, and the
righteous have prayed for the ungodly, wherefore shall it not be so now also?

He answered me, and said: This present world is not ye end, there remains
much honor in it, therefore have they prayed for the weak. But the day of
dome shall be the end of this time, and ye beginning of the immortalite for to
come, wherein all corrupcion vanysheth, all volupteousnes is lowsed, all
myszbeleue taken away, righteousness grown, and the verite spronge up. Then
shall no man be able to save him that is destroyed, ner to oppress him yt has
gotten ye victory. I answered the^, and said: This is my have led a pacient
life, where as we have walked in ye most wicked ways of all? and that there
shall be showed a paradyse, whose fruit endures for ever, wherein is fredome and
medycyne, where as we shall not go in? for we have walked in unpleasant places:
And that the faces of them which have absteyned, shall shine above the stars,
where as our faces shall be black and darcke? For while we lived and did
unrighteously, we considered not, that we should suffer therefore after death?

^eut. ^0. d
saying: Chose the life, that thou may live. Nevertheless they believed him
not, nether the prophets after him, No ner me which have spoken unto them,
that heaviness should not reach unto them to their destruction, like as joy is
for to come over those, that have suffered the^ selves to be enfourmed in
salvation.

I answered then and said: I know LORD, that the Highest is merciful, in yt
he has mercy upon them, which are not yet in the world, and upon those also
that walk in his law: (...). 2. a
and that he is pacient and long sufferinge toward those that have sinned in
their works: and that he is liberal to give where as it requires: and that
he is of great mercy, for he multiplieth his loving kyndnesses toward those
that are present, and that are past, and to them which are for to come. For if
he multiply not his mercies, the world shall not be made living, with those
that dwell therein: He gives also, for if he gave not of his goodness, that
they which have done evil, might be eased, the ten thousand part of men
should not be made living. And if the judge forgave not those yt be healed
with his word, and if he would destroy ye multitude that stryueth, there
should be very few left in an innumerable multitude.

The VIII. Chapter.


Even so is it with the work of this world. There be many created, (...)
but few shall be preserved. Then answered I and said: Then swalowe up the
wit (thou soul) and devour the understanding, for thou art agreed to harken
and to give ear, and wyllinge to prophecy: for thou have no longer space
given the, but only to live. O LORD, will thou not give thy servant leave, yt
we may pray before the, and that thou may give sede unto our heart, and
build our understanding, that there may come fruit of it: and that every
one which is corrupt, and bears the state and place of a man, may live?

For thou art alone, and we all are one workmanshipe of thy hands, like as
thou have said, and like as the body is fashioned now in the childeszbed, and
thou geuest the members, and thy creature is preserved in fire and water: and
ix. months does thy work suffer thy creature, which is fashioned in her: but
the thing that preserves and it yt is preserved, shall both be kept together:
and when time is, the childeszbedd delyuereth ye thing, that is kept and
grown in her.

For thou have commanded the breasts

And this I speak now of all men in general, as thou know: but of thy
people, for whose sake I am sorry: and of thy inheritance, for whose cause I
mourn: and of Israel, for whom I am woeful: and for Jacob, for whose sake I am
grieved: therefore begin I to pray before the, for my self and for them, for I
se the fall of us, even of us, that dwell upon earth. But I have herd the
swiftnes of the judge, which is to come: therefore hear my voice, and
understood my words, and I shall speak before the.

This is the beginning of the words LORD, thou that dwell in
euerlastyngnesse, whose eyes are lift up in the air, whose stole is exceadinge
hye, whose glory and majesty may not be comprehended, before whom the hoostes
of heaven stand with tremblinge, whose kepinge is turned in wind and fire,
whose word is true, whose talking is steadfast, whose commandment is
strong, whose ordinance is fearful, whose look dries up the depthes, whose
wrath makes the mountains to melt away, and whose truth bears wytnes: O
hear ye prayer of thy servant, and marck with thine ears the peticion of thy
creature.

For while I live, I will speak: and so long as I have understanding, I will
answer. O look not upon the sins of thy people, which serve yt in the
truth. Have no respect unto the wicked studies of the Heithen, but to the
desire of those that keep thy testimonies with sorrows. Think not upon those
that have walked faynedly before the, but upon them, which with will have
known thy fear.

Let it not be thy will to destroy them, which have had beastly manners, but to
look upon them that have clearly taught thy law. Take thou no indignacion at
them, which are worse then beasts: but love them, that allwaye put their trust
in ye righteousness and glory: for we and our fathers have all the same sickness
and disease, but because of our sins thou shall be called merciful.



(...). 8. g Pa^. 6. f ^oh. 1. b
For of a truth there is no man among them that be borne, but he has dealt
wickedly: and among the faithful there is none, which has not done amysse.
For in this (O LORD) thy righteousness and thy goodness shall be praised and
declared, if thou be merciful unto them, which are not rych in good works.

Then answered he me and said: Some things have thou spoken a right, and
acordinge unto thy words it shall be. For I will not verily consider the work
of them, which have sinned before death, before the judgment, (...) 4. a
before destruccio^ but I will rejoice over the work and thought of ye
righteous. I will remember also the pilgramege, the holymakynge and the reward.
Like as I have spoken now, so shall it come to pass. For as the huszba^d man
sows much sede upon the ground, and planteth many trees, and yet allwaye the
thing that is sown or planted is not all kept safe, nether does it all take
rote: Even so is it of them that are sown in the world, they shall not all be
preserved.

I answered then and said: If I have found LORD) but spare thy people, and
have mercy upon thine own inheritance: O be merciful unto thy creature.

Then answered he me and said: Things present are for the present, and
things to come for soch as be to come. For thou wa^test yet much, seeing thou
may love my creature above me: I have often times drawn nigh unto the, but
never to the unrighteous. In this also thou art marvelous before the Highest, in
that thou have humbled thy self, as it becomes the, and have not regarded
thine own self, yt thou art had in soch honor among the righteous. Therefore
shall great

But understand thou for thy self, and seek out glory for soch as be like the:
for unto you is paradyse opened, the tree of life is planted, the time to come
is prepared, plenteousnes made ready: a cite is builded for you, and a rest is
prepared, ye perfect goodness and wyszdome. The rote of evil is marked from
you, the weakness and moth is hyd from you, and in to hell flies corrupcion in
forgetfulness. Sorrows are vanyshed away, and in the end is showed the
treasure of immortalite. And therefore axe thou no more questions, concerning
the multitude of them that perish. For they have taken liberty, despised the
Highest, thought scorn of his law, and forsaken his ways.

Morouer, they have trodden down his Psalm. 13. a
that there is no God, ye and that wittingly, for they dye. For like as the
thing that I have spoken of, is made ready for you: Eue^ so is thyrst and
pain prepared for them. For it was not his will that man should come to naught:
but they which be created, have defiled the name of him that made them, and are
un than full unto him, which prepared life for them. And therefore is my
judgment now at hand. These things have I not showed unto all men, but unto
few: namely, unto the, and to soch as be like the.

Then answered I and said: Behold O LORD, now have thou showed me the
multitude of the tokens, which thou will begin to do at the last: but at what
time and when, thou have not showed me.

The IX. Chapter.


For like as all that is made in the world, has a beginning and end, and
the end is manifest: Even so the times also of the Highest have plain
begynnynges in wonders and signs, and the end in workynge and in tokens. And
every one that shall be saved, and shall be able to escape by his works and by
faith (wherein ye have believed) shall be preserved from the said parels, and
shall se my savior in my land and within my borders, for I have hallowed me
from the world. Then shall they be in carfulness, which now have abused my
ways: and they that have cast them out despytefully, shall dwell in pains.

Esd. ^. a
I have talked before and now I speak, and will speak also herafter, that
there be many moo of them which perish, then shall be saved, like as the floude
is greater then the drops.

And he answered me, saying: like as the field is, so is also the sede: as the
flowers be, so are the colors also: soch as the workman is, soch is also ye
work: and as the huszband man is himself, so is his huszbandrye also, for it
was the time of the world. And when I prepared for them that are now, or ever
the world was made, where in they should dwell then was there no man that
withstode me. Now when every one was, and the maker

Nevertheless if thou will take upon the yet seven days mo (but thou shall not
fast in them) go thy way then in to ye field of flowers, where no house is
builded, and eat only of the flowers of the field, taist not flesh, drink no
wine, but eat flowers only. Pray unto the Highest contynually, so will I come,
and talk with the.

So I went my way and came in to the LORD, thou yt show thy self unto us,
(...)
thou have declared and opened thy self unto our fathers in the wyldernes, in
a place where no man dwells, in a baren place, when they came out of Egipte,
and thou spakest, saye^ge: Hear me O Israel, and mark my words thou sede of
Jacob. Behold, I sow my law in you, and it shall bring fruit in you, and ye
shall be honored in it for ever. For our fathers which received the law, kept
it not, and observed not thy ordinances and statutes, and the fruit of ye law
was not declared: for it might not, for why? it was thine. For they that
received it, perished, (...)
because they kept not ye thing that was sown in them.

It is a custom when the ground receaueth and drink, that, when it perishes
or is broken wherein a thing is sown, or wherein any thing is put: the things
also perish and are broken, which are sown or putt therein. But unto us it
has not happened so: for we yt have received the law, perish in sin, and
our heart also which received the law: notwithstondinge the law perishes
not, (...). 40. a ^. Tim. 2. a
but remains in his labor.

And when I considered these things in my heart after this manner, I looked
about me with mine eyes, (...). 10. d
and upon the right side I saw a woman, which mourned sore, made great
lamentacion, and wept with loud voice: her clothes were rent in pieces, and
she had aszshes upon her head.



The X. Chapter.


Then let I my meditacions and thoughts fall, that I was in, and spoke to her
in displeasure: Thou foolish woman, seist thou not our heaviness and mourning,
and what happens unto us? how Sion or mother is all woeful and sorry, and how
she is clean brought down and in misery? saying we be all now in heaviness, and
make our moan (for we be all soroufull.) As for the heaviness that thou take,
it is but for one son. Demand the earth, and she shall tell the, that it is
she which ought (by reason) to mourn, for the fall of so many that grow upon
her. For from the beginning all men are borne of her, and other shall come: and
behold, they walk almost all into destruction, and many of them shall be roted
out.

Who should then (by reason) make more mourning, then she, that has lost so
great a multitude? and not thou, which art sorry but for one. But if thou
would say unto me: My mourning is not like the mourning of the earth, for
I have lost the fruit of my body, which I bare with heaviness: as for the earth,
acordinge to the ordinance of ye earth only, so that many are gone away in
her, as it is come to pass: Then say I unto Heb. 12. ^
For if thou iudgest the marck and end of God to be righteous and good, and
receauest his council in time, thou shall be commended therein. Go thy way
then in to the cite to thy husband.

And she said unto me: that will I not do, I will not go in to the cite, but
hear will I dye. So I commoned more with her, and said: Do not so, but be
cou^celed, and follow me: for how many falls has Sion? Be of good comfort
because of the sorrow of Jerusalem. For thou seist that our Sanctuary is laid
waist, our altar broken, our temple destroyed, our playenge of instruments
and synginge laid down, the thankesgeuynge put to silence, or mirth is
vanished away, the light of our candelstick is quenched, ye Arc of the
covenant is taken from us, all our holy things are defiled, and the name
that is called upon over us, is dishonored, our children are put to shame,
our prestes are brent, our Levites are carried away in to captiuyte, our
virgins are defiled, and our wives rauyshed, our righteous men spoiled, and
our children destroyed, our young men are brought in bondage, and our
strong worthies are become weak: and Sion (which seal is ye greatest of all)
is lowsed up from her worshipe: for she is delivered into the hands of them
that hate us.

And therefore shake of ye great heaviness, and putt away the multitude of
sorrows: that the Mighty may be merciful unto the, and that the Highest may
give the rest from ye labor and travail. And it happened, that when I was
talking with her, her face did shine and glyster, so that I was afraied of
her, and mused what it might be. And immediately she cast out a great voice,
very fearful, so that ye earth shoke at the noise of the woman: and I looked,
and behold, the woman appeared unto me no more: but there was a cite builded,
and a place was showed from the ground and foundation.

Then was I afraid, and cried with loud voice, and said: where is Vriel the
angel, Es. 4. a
which came to me at the first? For he has caused me to come in many
consideracions and hye thoughts, and mine end is turned to corrupcion, and my
prayer to rebuke. And as I was speaking these words, he came unto me, and
looked upon me, and I lay as one that had been deed, and mine understanding
was altered, and he took me by the right hand, and comforted me, and set me up
upon my fete, and said unto me: what ayleth the? and why is thine
understanding vexed? and the understanding of thy heart, and wherefore art thou
sorry? And I said: Because thou have forsaken me: and I have done acordynge
unto thy words, Esd. 9. a
I went in to the field, and there have I seen

Then said I: Speak on to me my LORD, forsake me not, lest I dye in vain:
for I have seen that I knew not, and herd that I do not know. Or shall my
understanding be disceaued, and my mind? But now I be seek the, that thou will show thy servant of this wonder. He answered me the^ and said: hear
me, and I shall enfourme the, and tell the wherefore thou art afraid, for the
Highest has opened many secret things unto the.

He has seen that thy way is right, and that thou take sorrow continually
for thy people, and make great lamentacion for Sion: and therefore
understand the vision which thou saw a little while agoo after this manner:
Thou saw a woman mourning, and thou have comforted her: Nevertheless now
seist thou the licknes of the woman no more, but thou thoughtest there was a
cite builded: and like as she told the of the fall of her son, so is this
the answer: The woman whom thou saw, is Sion: and where as she told the,
that she has be ne thirty years unfruitful and baren, those are the xxx.
years, wherein there was no offeringe made in her.

But after xxx. years Solomon builded her, and offered, and then bare the baren
a son. And where as she told the, that she norished him with labor, that
was the dwelling of Jerusalem. But where as the son

And therefore I bad the remain in the field, where no house is builded. For I
knew yt the Highest would show this unto the, therefore I commanded the to go in
to the field, where no foundation ner buyldinge is. For in the place where the
Highest will show his cite, there shall be no man's buyldinge. And therefore fear
not, and let not thine heart be afraid, but go thy way in, and se the glorious
and fair buyldinge, and how great it is, and how great thou think it
after the measure of thine eyes, and then shall thou hear as much as thine
ears may comprehe^de. For thou art blessed above many other, and art called
with the Highest, as ye few. But tomorow at night thou shall remain here, and so
shall ye Highest show the visions of hye things, which he will do unto them that
dwell upon earth in ye last days. So I slepte the same night like as he
commanded me.

The XI. Chapter.
THen saw I a dream: and behold,

Morouer I saw, that the Aegle flew with his wings, and reigned upon earth, and
over all them that dwell upon the earth: and I saw yt all things under heaven
were subject unto him, and no man spoke against him, no not one creature upon
earth. I saw also that the Aegle stood up upon his claws, and gave a sound
with his feathers, and a voice saye^ge after this manner: watch not all together,
sleep every man in his own place, and watch for a time, but let the heads be
preserved at the last. Nevertheless I saw, yt the voice went not out of his
heads, but from the myddest

Then came there a voice unto it, and said: Hear thou yt have kept in the
earth so long, this I say unto the, before thou begynnest to appear no more:
There shall none after ye atteyne unto thy time. Then arose the third, and
reigned as the other before, and appeared no more also. So went it with all the
residue one after another, so yt every one reigned, and the^ appeared no more.
The^ I looked, and behold, in process of time the feathers yt followed were set
up upon the right side, yt they might rule also: and some of the^ ruled, but
within a while they appeared no more: for some of the^



And the fourth came, and ouerwanne all the beasts that were past, and had
power over

The XII. Chapter.
ANd it happened wha^ ye Lyo^ spoke these read, *I saw and behold,
ye head yt before had ye vpperha^de, appeared no more: nether did ye four
wings appear any more, yt came to hi^, and were set up to reign, and their
kingdom was small and full of vproure.

And I saw, and behold, they appeared no more, and ye whole body of ye Aegle
was bre^t, and the earth was in great fear. Then awaked I out of the trance
of my mind, and from great fear, and said unto my sprete: Lo, this have
thou given me, in yt thou searchest out the ways of the Highest: lo, yet am I
weary in my mind, and very weak in my sprete, and little strength is there in
me, for the great fear that I received this night. Therefore will I now beseke
the Highest, yt he will comfort me unto the end, and I said: LORD LORD

And he said unto me: this is the interpretacion of this sight, The Aegle whom
thou saw come up from the sea, is the kingdom which was seen in the vision
of thy brother Daniel, Dan 7.
but it was no expounded unto him, for now I declare it unto the.

Behold, the days come, that there shall rise up a kingdom upon earth, and it
shall be feared above all the kingdoms yt were before it. In the same kingdom
shall xij. kings reign, one after another. For the second shall begin to
reign, and shall have more time the^ the other, and this do ye xij. wings
signify,

And where as thou saw three heads resting, this is the interpretacion: In
his last shall the Highest raise up three kingdoms, and call many again into
the^, and they shall have the dominion of the earth, and of those that dwell
therein, with much labor above all those yt were before the^. Therefore are they
called ye heads of the Aegle: for it is they yt shall bring forth his
wickedness again, and yt shall perform and fynish his last. And where as thou
saw, that ye great head appeared no more, it signifies, that one of them
shall dye upon his bed, and yet with pain, for the two that remain, shall be
slain with the sword. For the sword of the one shall devour the other, but
at the last shall he fall through the sword himself.

And where as thou saw two vnder^^^ges

Therefore write all these things yt thou have seen in a book, and hyde them,
and teach the^ the wise in the people, whose hertes thou know may
comprehe^de and keep these secrets. But wait thou here yi self yet seven
days moo, that it may be showed the, what so ever it pleases the Highest to
declare unto the, and with that he went his way.

And when all the people perceived, yt the like as I commanded them: but I
remained still in the field seven days, as ye angel bad me, and I ate only
of the flowers of the field, and had my meat of the herbs in those days.

The XIII. Chapter.


After these I saw, and behold, there was gathered together a multitude of
me^ out of nombre from the four wyndes of the heaven, to fight against ye man,
that came out from ye see. And I looked, and behold, he graued him self a
great mountain, and flew up upon it. But I would have seen the border or
place, wherout the hill was graven, and I could not.

I saw after these, yt all they which came to fight against him, were sore
afraid, and yet durst they fight. Nevertheless when he saw the fearsnesse and
violence of the people, he nether lift up his hand ner held sword, ner any
weapen: but only (as I saw) he sent out of his mouth as it had been a blast
of fire, and out of his lips ye wind of the flamme: and out of his tongue he
cast out sparks and storms, and they were all myxte together: the blast of
fire, the wind of the fla^mes, and ye great storm, and fell with a russhe
upon ye people, which was prepared to fight and bre^t the^ up euerychone: so
that of the innumerable multitude there was nothing seen, but only dust and
smoke. When I saw this, I was afraid.



Then was I sick through great fear, and I awaked, and said: thou have showed
ye servant all ye wonders from ye beginning, and have counted me worthy, yt
thou might receive my prayer: show me now yet the interpretacion of this
dream. For thus I consider in my understanding: Woe unto them that shall be
left in those days, and much more woe unto the^ that are not left behind: for
they that were not left, were in heaviness.

Now understand I ye things that are laid up in the latter days, which shall
happen unto them, and to those that are not left behind. Therefore are they
come in to great parells, and many necessities, like as these dreams declare.
Yet is it easier, yt he which suffers hurt, come in these, then to pass
away as a cloud out of the world, and now to se ye things yt shall happen in
ye last.

Then answered he me, and said: The interpretacion Mat. 24. ^
one people against another, and one realm against another. When this comes
to pass, then their pains wherewith they shall be punyshed, are lickened unto
the flamme: and with out any labor shall he destroy them, even by the law,
which is compared unto the fire.

4. Re. 17. a
whom Salmanasar the king of Assiria took presoner, and carried them over ye
water, and so came they in to another land.

But they gave them this council, yt they should leave the multitude of the
Heithe^, and to go forth in to a farther country, where never mankind dwelt:
that they might there keep their statutes, which they never kept in their own
land. And so they entered in at the narow passages of the water of Euphrates,
^xo. 14. e ^^su. 3. d
and God showed tokens for the^, and held still the floude till they were
passed over: for through that country there was a great way, namely of a year
and an half journey, for the same region is called Asareth. Then dwelt they
there unto the latter time: and when they come forth again, ye Highest shall
hold still the sprynges of the stream again, that they may go through,
therefore saw thou the multitude with peace. And they that be left behind of
thy people, are those that be found within my border. Now when he destroys
the multitude that is gathered together, he shall defend his people that
remain, and then shall he show them great wonders.

Then said I: O LORD LORD, show

And he said unto me: Like as thou can nether seek out ner know these
things that are in the deep of the sea, even so may thou not se my son,
or those that be with him, but in the time of the day. This is the
interpretacion of the dream which thou saw, therefore thou only art here
lightened: for thou have forsaken thine own law, and applied thy diligence
unto mine, and sought it. Thy life have thou ordered in wyszdome, Reg. 3. ^^ou.
7. a
and have called understanding thy mother, and therefore have I showed the ye
treasure of the Highest. After three days I will show the more, and talk with the
at more large, ye heavy and wondrous things will I declare unto the.

Then went I forth in to ye field, geuynge praise and thanks greatly unto
God, because of his wonders which he did in time, and because he governs the
same, and soch (...) is in time, and there I satt three days.

The XIIII. Chapter.
Upon the third day I satt under an LORD, and stood up upon my fete. (...)
The^ spoke he unto me: In the bush did I appear unto Moses, and talked with
him, wha^ my people served in Egipte, and I sent him, and led my people out of
Egipte, and brought him upon ye mount Sion, where I held him by me a long
season, and told him my wondrous works, and showed him ye secrets of the
times, and the end, and commanded him, saye^ge: These words shall thou
declare, and not hyde the^. And now I say unto the, that thou lay up in thine
heart the dreams that thou have seen, and the interpretacions which I have
showed the: for thou shall be received of all, thou shall be turned and remain
with my council, and with soch as be like the, until ye times be ended. For the
world has lost his youth, and the times begin to wax old. For the time is
divided in to twolue parts, and ten parts of it are gone all ready, and half
of the tenth part: yet remains there that, which is after ye half of ye
tenth part.

Therefore prepare and order thy house, and (...)
the more shall (...) wickedness increase, in them that dwell upon earth. For
the truth is fled far away, and lesynge is hard at hand. For now ha^^teth
the vision to come, that thou have seen.

Then answered I and said: Behold LORD, I will go as thou have commanded me,
and refourme the people which are present. But they yt shall be borne
afterward, who will exhort or rebuke the^? Thus the world is set in darcknes,
and they yt dwell therein, are which was written in thy law, that men may find
the path, and that they which will live in the latter days, may live.

And he answered me, saye^ge: Go yt way, gather thy people together, and say
unto the^, that they seek the not for xl. days, but look thou gather the many
box trees, and take with the Sarea, Dabria, Selemia, Echanus and Asial, these
five, which are ready to write swiftly, and come hither, and I shall light a
ca^dle of vndersto^dinge in thine heart, which shall not be put out, till the
things be performed which thou shall begin to write. And then shall thou
declare some things openly unto the perfect, and some things shall thou show
secretly unto ye wise. Tomorow this hour shall thou begin to write.

(...)
which they kept not, which ye also have tra^sgressed after the^. Then was
this land and the land of Sion parted among you by the lot to possess. But
yor fathers and ye yor selves also have done unrighteousness, and have not kept
the ways which the Highest commanded you. And for so much as he is a righteous
judge, he took from you in time the thing that had given you. And now are ye
here and yor brethren among you. Therefore if so be that ye will subdue yor own
understanding, and refourme your heart, ye shall be kept alive, and after
death shall ye opteyne mercy. For after death shall the judgment come, when we
shall live again: and then shall the names of the righteous be manifest, and ye
names of the ungodly with their works shall be declared. Let no man therefore
come now unto me, ner axe any question at me these xl. days.

(...)
The^ opened I my mouth, and behold, he reached me a full cup, which was
full of water, but the color of it was like fire. And I took it and drank. And
wha^ I had dronken it, my heart had understanding, and wyszdome grew in my
breast: for my sprete was kept in remembrance, and my mouth was opened and
shut no more. The Highest gave understanding unto the five men, yt they wrote ye
hye things of the night, which they understood not. But in the night they ate
bred: as for me, I spoke in the day, and held not my tongue by night. In xl.
days, they wrote two hundredth and four books.

And it happened wha^ the xl. days were fulfilled, that the Highest spoke,
saying: The first that thou have written, speak openly, yt the worthy and
unworthy may read it. But keep ye lxx. last, yt thou may show it only to
soch as be wise among thy people. For in them is the spring of
vndersto^dinge, the fountain of wyszdome, and the stream of knowledge. And I
did so.

The XV. Chapter.
Beheld, speak thou in the ears of LORD: and cause them to be written in a
letter, for it is the truth. Fear not the ymaginacio^s against yt, let not ye
unfaithfulness of them trouble the, that speak against the. For all the
unfaithful shall dye in their unfaithfulness. Behold says the LORD, I will
bring plages upon the world: ye sword, honger, death and destruction, for
wickedness has the upper hand in all ye earth, and their shameful works are
fulfilled.

Therefore says the LORD: I will hold Apo. 6. b and 19. a
the innocent blood of the troubled cries unto me, and the souls of the
righteous complain co^tynually: and therefore (says the LORD) I will surely
aue^ge, and receive unto me all the innocent blood from among them.

Behold, my people, Psalm. 43. c Romans 8. c 1. Co. 4. b
is led as a flock of sheep to be slain, I will not suffer them now to dwell in
Egipte, but will bring them ou^ with a mighty hand and a stretched out arm,
and smite it with plages as before, and will destroy all the land off it.
Egipte shall mourn, and the foundacions of it shall be smytten with the plage and
punishment, yt God shall bring upon it.

They that till ye ground, shall mourn, for their seeds shall be destroyed
through the blastinge of their pride ye cities shall be brought in fear, ye
houses shall shake, and men shall be afraid. A man shall have no pity upon his
neighbor, but one shall provoke another unto battayll, to spoil their goods
because of the honger of bred, and because of the great trouble.

Behold, I gather and call together all the LORD God: My right hand shall not
spare ye sinners, and my sword shall not cease over them, that shed the
innocent blood upon earth. The fear is gone out from his wrath, and has
consumed the foundacions of the earth, and the sinners like the straw that is
kindled. Woe worth them that sin, and keep not my commandments, says the
LORD. I will not spare them. Go your way ye children from violence, defyle
not my Sanctuary: for the LORD knows all the^ that sin against him, and
therefore delyuereth he them unto death and destruccio^: For now are the plages
come upon the world, and ye shall remain in the^. For God shall not deliver
you, because ye have sinned against him.



And then shall the Dragons have the upper hand, not remembringe their birth,
and shall turn about swearinge together in great power, to persecute them.
But these shall be afraid, and keep silence at their power, and shall fle: and
one out of the land of the Assirians shall besege the^, and consume one of
the^, and in their host shall be fear and dread, and strife among their
kings.

Behold clouds from the east, and from

And then shall there come great raynes from ye south and from the north, and
part from the west, and from the stormy wind from the east, and shall shutt
them up again, and the cloud which he raised up in wrath, and the star to
cause fear toward ye east and west wind, shall be destroyed, and the great
clouds shall be lift up, and ye mighty clouds full of wrath, and the star,
that they may make all the earth afraid and the^ yt dwell therein, and that
they may pour out over all places an horrible star, fire and h^le and
flyenge swerdes, and many waters: yt all feldes may be full, and all ryuers,
and they shall break down the cities and walls, mountains and hills, all
trees, wod, and the grass of the meadows, and all their fruit. And they shall
go steadfast unto Babylon, and m^ke her afraid, they shall come to her and
besege her: the star and all wrath shall they pour out upon her.

Then shall the dust and smoke go up unto the heaven, and all they that be
about her, shall bewail her: and they that remain under her, shall do service
unto them that have put her in fear. And thou Asia yt co^fortest thyself also
upon the hope of Babylon, and art a worshipe of her person: Woe be unto the
thou wretch, because thou have made thyself like unto her, and have decte ye
daughters i^ who^dome, that they might tryumphe and please thy lovers, which
have allwaye desired to committee whordome with the: thou have followed the
abominable cite in all her works and invencions.

Therefore says God: I will send plages upon the, wyddowhode, pouerte, ho^ger,
wars, and pestilence, to waist thy houses with destruction and death, and the
glory of thy power shall be dried up as a flower, when ye heat aryseth yt is
sent over the. Thou shall be sick as a poor wife that is plaged and beaten of
women: so yt the mighty and lovers shall not be able to receive the. Would I so
hat^ the says the LORD? If thou had not allwaye slain my chosen,
exaltinge the stroke of thy hands, and said over their death, when thou wast
dronke^: set forth the betw^^ of thy countenance.

The reward of thy whordome shall be recompensed the in thy bosom, therefore
shall thou receive (...)
reward.

LORD) even so shall God do unto the, and shall deliver the in to the plage. Thy
children shall dye of honger, and thou shall fall through ye sword. Thy cities
shall be broken down, and all thine shall perish with the sword in ye field. They
yt be in ye mountains shall dye of honger, and eat their own flesh, and
drink their own blood for very ho^ger of bred and thyrst of water. Thou
unhappy shall come through the sea, and receive plages again.

In the passage they shall cast down the slain cite, and shall rote out one
part of ye land, and consume the portion of thy glory. They shall tread the
down like stuble, and they shall be thy fire and shall consume the: thy cities
and thy land, thy wod and thy fruitful trees shall they burn up with the
fire. Thy children shall they carry away captyue, and look what thou have, they
shall spoil it, and mar the beauty of thy face.

The XVI. Chapter.
LORD sends the plages, and what is he that will drive them away? The fire
is kyndled and gone forth in his wrath, and what is he that will quench it? He
shall cast lightenynges, and who shall not fear? He shall thonder, and who shall
not be afraid? The LORD shall threaten, and who shall not utterly be beaten to
poulder at his presence? The earth quaketh, and the foundacions thereof: ye see
aryseth up with wawes from the deep, and the floudes of it are vnquyete, and the
fishes thereof also before the LORD, and before the glory of his power. For
strong is his right hand that holds the bow, his arowes that he shuteth,
are sharp, and shall not mysse, when they begin to be shot in to ye ends of
the world.



Behold, vitayles shall be so good cheap

Even so in those days there shall be three LORD, hear these things, and marck
the^. Behold, the word of the LORD, O receive it: behold, the plages draw
nigh, and are not slack in tarienge. Like as a trauaylinge woman, which after ye
ix. month bri^geth forth a son, when the hour of the birth is come, an
hour two or three before that the pains come upon her body, and when the child
comes to the birth, they tarry not the twincklynge of an eye: Eue^ so shall
not ye plages be slack to come upon earth, and the world shall mourn, and
sorrows shall come upon it on every side.

Cor. 7. d
Who so occupies marchau^dies, as he that wynneth not: and he that buyldeth,
as he that shall not dwell therein: he that sows, as one yt shall not reap: he
that twysteth the vynyarde, as he that shall not gather the grapes: they that
mary, as they that shall get no children: and they yt mary not, ^sal. 126. a
^ro. 10 c ^ccli. 11. b
as the wyddowes: and therefore they yt labor, labor in vain. For strangers
shall reap their fruits, and spoil their goods, over throw their houses,
and take their children captyue, for in captiuyte and honger shall they get
children. And they that occupy their marchaundies with robbery, how long deck
they their cities, their houses, their possessions and persons? the more will
I punysh them for their sins, says the LORD. Like as an whore enuyeth an
honest woman, so shall righteousness hate iniquyte, when she decketh her self,
and shall accuse her to her face, when he comes that defends, which shall
make inquysicio^ for all sin upon earth. And therefore be not ye like there
unto, ner to the works thereof: for or ever it be long, iniquite shall be taken
away out of the earth, and righteousness shall reign among you.

LORD God and his glory: I have not sinned. Behold, the LORD knows all ye
works of men, their ymaginacions, their thoughts and their hertes. Gene. 1. a
For he spoke but the word: let the earth be made, and it was made: let the
heaven be made, and it was made. In his word were ye stars made, and he
knows the nombre of them. He searches the ground of the deep, and the
treasures thereof: he has measured the sea, and what it conteyneth. He has
shut the sea in the myddest of the waters, and with his word has he hanged the
earth upon the waters. He spredeth out the heaven like a vowte, upon the waters
has he founded it. In the deserte and dry wyldernes has he made sprynges of
water, and poles upon the top of the mountains, yt the floudes might pour
down from ye stony rocks to water the earth. He made man, and put his heart in
the myddest of ye body, and gave him breath, life and understanding, ye and
the sprete of ye Almighty God, which made all things, and has searched the
ground of all the secrets of the earth.

He knows your ymaginacions and inue^cions, LORD searched and sought out
all yor wo^kes, and he shall bewraye you all. And when yor sins are brought
forth, ye shall be ashamed before men, and your own sins shall be your
accusers in that day. What will ye do? Or how will ye hyde your sins before
God and his angels? Behold, God himself is the judge, fear him, leave of from
your sins, and forget your vnrighteousnesses, and meddle no more with them:
so shall God led you forth, and deliver you from all trouble. For behold, the
heat of a great multitude is kyndled over you, and they shall take away
certain of you, and feed the idle with Idols: and they that consent unto them,
shall be had in derision, laughed to scorn, and trodden under foot.

For unto the places there shall be a place, and in the next cities a great
insurreccion upon those that fear ye LORD. They shall LORD, their goods
shall they take from them, and shute them out of their houses. Then shall it be
known who are my chosen, and they shall be tried as the gold in the fire. Hear
O ye my beloved, says the LORD: behold, the days of trouble are at hand,
but I will deliver you from the same. Be not ye afraied, despair not, for God
is your captain.

Who so keeps my commandments and precepts (says the LORD God) let not
your sins weye you down, and let not your vnrighteousnesses be lift up. Woe
be unto the^ that are subdued unto their sins, and tangled in their
wickednesses: like as a field is hedged in with buszshes, and the path thereof
covered with thorns, yt no man may travail through: and so is he taken, and
cast in the fire, and brent.

The end of the IIII. book of Eszdras.
The book of Tobias.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I. Of the kynred, life and godly conversation of Tobias. Chap. II, The
loving compassion that Tobias shows in burye^ge the deed, for the which
cause he is hated and persecuted. God nurtoureth him with blyndnes. His wife
casts him in the teth. Chap. III. Tobias prays hertely unto God, for the
trouble and captiuyte of himself and the people. Of Sara the daughter of
Raguel. Chap. IIII. Tobias teaches his son in the fear of God. Chap. V. The
son obeys the father, and goes his eara^de. God prouydeth mercifully for
him, and sends his angel to be his gyde. Chap. VI. In their journey they
take a fish, whereof the angel commands him to keep the heart, the gall and
the lever, and tells him whereto it is good. Chap. VII. They come to Raguel,
which receaueth them louyngly, and marieth his daughter Sara unto Tobias. Chap.
VIII. Tobias goinge to bed with his wife, ordreth him self as the angel bad
him, and so both he and his wife are preserved from evil. Chap. IX. Tobias
sends the angel unto Gabelus for the money. Chap. X. Tobias father and
mother long sore for his coming: And Raguel seeing that he can keep him no
longer, sends him away with his wife. Chap. XI. They return home, and are
welcomed joyfully. Old Tobias has his sight again. They rejoice
altogether, and give thanks unto God. Chap. XII. The father and the son
would feign reward the angel. He will have nothing: but shows them what he
is. Chap. XIII. Tobias the elder prayseth God, and exorteth other me^, to be
thankful unto him. Chap. XIIII. Tobias being now old, prophecieth the
destruccio^ of Niniue, and the prosperous health of Israel. The son forsakes
the sinful cite, as his father bad him, and goes to his father in law.
The first Chapter.


Though he was taken presonner in the days of Salmanasar king of the
Assirians, (...). 17. a
nevertheless being in captiuyte, he forsook not ye way of truth: In so much
that what so ever he might get, he parted it daily with his felowpresoners
and brethren, that were of his kynred. And though he were younger the^ all in
the trybe of Nephtali, yet did not he behave himself childeshly in his works.
And when all the other went to ye golden calves, 3. Re. 12. ^
which Jeroboam the king of Israel had made, he himself alone fled all their
companies, and gat him to Jerusalem unto the temple of the LORD, and there
worshipped ye LORD God of Israel, Exo. 22. d and 23. c Deuteronomy. 12. a 18. a. 26. a
faithfully offeringe all his first fruits and tithes, so that in the third
year he ministered all the tithes unto the strangers and conuertes. These and
soch like things did he acordinge to the law of God, when he was yet but
young.

But when he was a man, he took out of Nu. 36. c
and of her he begat a son, whom he called after his own name, and taught
him from his youth up, to fear God, and to refrain from all sin.

Now when he with his wife, his son and with all his kynred was come in
captivity unto Niniue, what time as they all are of the meats of the Heithe^,
Genesis 43. ^ Iudit. 12. ^
he kept his soul, and was never defiled in their meats. And for so much as
he was myndefull of the LORD in all his heart, Iere. 40. ^
God gave him favor in the presence of Salmanasar the king, which gave him
power to go where he would, and so had he liberte to do what him list.

So went Tobias unto all them that were Matt. 25.
and gave them wholesome exortacions. And when he came to Rages a cite of the
Medes, having Some read: * ten tal^^tes of gold.
ten tale^tes of silver (of ye things where with the king had honored him)
and saw among a great company of people of his kindred, one Gabelus (which
was of his own trybe) being in necessite, he gave him the said weight of
silver under an handwritinge.

After a long season when Salmanasar the king was deed, and Sennacherib his
son reigned in his stead, which hated the children of Israel, Tobias went
daily through out all his kynred, and comforted them, and gave of his goods to
every one of the^, as much as he might: he fed the hongrie, clothed the naked,
and buried the deed and slain, and that diligently.

And when Sennacherib the king came 4. Re. 19. ^
as God punyshed him for his blasphemy) and in his wrath slew many of the
children of Israel, Tobias buried their bodies. 4. Esd. 2. c
But when it was told the king, he commanded to slaye him, and took away
all his goods. Nevertheless Tobias with his son and with his wife fled his
way, and was hyd naked, for there were many that loved him. But after xlv.
days the king was slain of his own sons. Then came Tobias again to his
house, and all his goods were restored unto him.

The II. Chapter.
LORD Tobias made a good feast in his house, and said unto his son: Go yt
way and bring hither some of our trybe, soch as fear God, that they may
make merry with us. And wha^ he was gone, he came again, and told his father,
that one of the children of Israel lay slain upon the street. And immediately
he leap from his table, left the feast, came fasting to the deed coarse, took
him and bare him preuely in to his house, yt when the Son was down, he might
safely burye him. And wha^ he had hyd the coarse, he ate his meat with
mourning and fear, remembrynge ye words, that the LORD says by the
prophet Amos: ^mos 8. b ^ Mac. 1. b
your hye feasts shall be turned to sorrow and heaviness.

^obi. 1. d
and have scarce escaped the danger of death, and buriest thou the deed
again? Nevertheless Tobias fearinge God more then the king, took the bodies of
the slain, hyd them in his house, and buried them at mydnight.

^eu. 8. a (...). 13. a (...). 9. a (...). a
This tentacion did God suffer to happen unto him, that they which came after,
might have an example of his patience, like as of holy Job. For in so much as
he ever feared God from his youth up, and kept his commandments, he was not
heavy against God, that the plage of blyndnes chau^sed unto him, but remained
steadfast in the fear of God, and thanked God all the days of his life.

Job 4. ^
for ye which thou have done allmes and buried the deed? But Tobias rebuked
the^, and spoke: Say not so, for we are the children of holy men, Tobi* ^
and look for the life, which God shall give unto them, that never turn their
believe from him. Anna his wife went daily to the weeuynge work, Ephe ^
and look what lyuinge she could get with the labor of her hands, she brought
it. And it happened yt she took a kyd and brought it home.

And when her huszband herd it cry, he said: look yt it be not stolen, (...)
restore it again to the owners: for it is not laufull for us, to eat or to
touch any thing of theft. Then was his wife angry, and said: Job 1. ^
Now is thy hope become vain openly, and thy allmes deeds are manifest. With
these and soch like words did she cast him in the tethe.

The III. Chapter.
THen Tobias took it heuely, and with tears LORD, thou art righteous, and all
thy iudgme^tes are true, ye all ye ways are mercy, faithfulness and judgment.
Psalm. ^^
And now O LORD be myndefull of me, and take no vengeance of my sins,
nether remember my myszdedes ner ye myszdedes of my elders. For we have not
been obedient unto ye commandments, therefore are we spoiled, brought in to
captiuyte, in to death, in to derision and shame unto all nations, among who^
thou have ^catred us. And now O LORD, ye judgments are great, for we have
not done acordi^ge to ye commandments, nether have we walked innoce^tly
before ye. And now O LORD, de^le with me acordinge to thy will, and command
my sprete to be received in peace, for mere erpedie^t were it for me to dye,
the^ to live.

At the same time it happened, that Sara

LORD, saying: Blessed be thy name O God of or fathers, which when thou art
wroth, show mercy, and in the time of trouble thou forgeuest the sins of
them, that call upon the. Unto the O LORD turn I my face, unto the lift I up
mine eyes. I beseke ye O LORD, lowse me out of the bonds of this rebuke, or
else take me utterly away from of ye earth. Thou know LORD, that I never
had desire unto man, and that I have kept my soul clean from all uncleanly
lust. I have not kept company with those that pass their time in sport,
nether have I made my self partaker with them that walk in light behauoure.
Nevertheless an huszbande have I consented to take, not for my pleasure, but in
thy fear.

(...)
For why? thy council is not in ye power of man. But who so ever loves the
and serves the a right, is sure, that if his life be tempted and proved, it
stands in the tryenge: and if he endure in patience, he shall have a reward
and be hylie crowned: and if he be in trouble, that God (no doubt) shall deliver
him: and if his life be in chastenynge, that he shall have leave to come unto
thy mercy.

For thou have no pleasure in our dampnacion: and why? after a storm thou
make ye wether fair and still: after wepinge and heaviness thou geuest great
joy. Thy name O God of Israel, be praised for ever. At the same time were both
their prayers herd in the sight of the magesty of the Highest God. And Raphael
the holy angel of the LORD was sent to help the^ both, whose prayers came
together before God.

The IIII. Chapter.
(...)
bury thou my body, and hold thy mother in honor all the days of her life.
For thou ought to remember, what and how great parels she suffered for ye in
her womb. And wha^ she also has fulfilled the time of her life, bury her
beside me. Have God in thy thought all the days of thy life, and bewarre, lest
at any time thou consent unto sin, Romans 6. b
and lest thou let slip the commandments of the LORD our God.

Give allmes of thy goods, and turn never LORD shall not be turned away from
the. Be merciful after ye power. If thou have much, give ple^teously: if thou
have little, do thy diligence, gladly to give of that little. For so gatherest
thou thy self a good reward in the day of necessite. For allmes delyuereth
Some reader * from all sin and from d^^ath.
from death, and suffers not the soul to come in darcknes. A great comfort
is allmes before the hye God, unto all them that do it.

My son, keep the well from all whordome, 1. Tess. 4. ^
and (beside thy wife) se that no fault be known of the. Let never pride have
rule in thy mind ner in thy word, Genesis 3. a
for in pride began all destruction.

Who so ever works any thing for the, Deu. 24. ^
and look that thy hired servant wagies remain not by the over night. Matt.
7. a
Look that thou never do unto another man, the thing that thou would not
another man should do unto the. Eat thy bred with the hongrie and poor, Luc.
14. ^
and cover the naked with thy clothes. Set thy bred and wine upon the buryall
of the righteous, and do not thou eat and drink thereof with the sinners. Axe
ever council at ye wise.

Be allwaye thankful unto God, and be seek him, that he will order thy ways,
and that what: so ever thou deuysest or take in hand, it may remain in
him. I certify the also my son, that (when thou wast yet but a bab) I
delivered ten talentes of silver unto Gabelus, at Rages a cite of the Medes,
Tobi. 1. ^
and his handwritinge have I by me. And therefore seek some means, how thou
may come by him, and receive of him ye said weight of silver, and give him
his handwritynge again.

My son, be not afraid: truth it is, we led here a poor life: Romans 8. ^
but great good shall we have, if we fear God, and depart from all sin,
and do well.

The V. Chapter.
THen answered Tobias his father, and his father answered him, and said: I
have his handwritinge by me, which when thou show him, immediately he shall
pay the. But go thy way now, and get the some faithful man to go with ye for
an hyre, that thou may receive ye money, while I am yet living.



And Tobias said unto him? know thou the way, that ledeth unto the country
of ye Medes? He answered: I know it well, and all those streets have I gone
often times, and have lodged with our brother Gabelus, that dwells in Rages a
cite of ye Medes, which lies upon the mount Egabthanis. Tobias said unto him:
I pray the, tarry for me, till I have told my father these things. Then went
Tobias in, and told his father all. At ye which his father marueled, and
prayed, that he would come in unto him.



The angel Raphael said unto him: Axest thou after the kynred of an
hyrelinge, or sekest thou a gyde for thy son to go with him? But that I make
the not careful, I am Azarias the son of great Hananias. And Tobias
answered: Thou art come of a great kynred, but I pray ye, be not displeased,
that I desired to know thy kynred. The angel said unto him: Thy son shall I
led forth safely, and bring him whole to the again.

(...)
The staff of our age have thou taken away, and sent him from us.

Would God that money had never been, for the which thou have sent him away.
If we had been content with or pouerte, this had been great riches unto us, that
we saw our son here. Then said Tobias unto her: weep not, our son shall
come to us again safe and sound, and thine eyes shall se him. For I trust,
that ye good angel of God shall bear him company, and order well all the
things that he does: so that he shall come to us again with joy. At these
words his mother left of from weeping, and held her tongue.

The VI. Chapter.
SO Tobias went on his way, and a LORD, he comes upon me. And the angel
said unto him: Take him by the cheke blade, and draw him to the. And he did
so, and drew him upon the land, and the fish began to leap at his fete.

The^ said the angel unto him: Take out

The angel answered him and said: If thou layest a piece of the heart upon the
coals, the smoke thereof dryueth away all manner of evil spretes, whether it
be from man or from woman, so that from thence forth ye same shall come no more
unto them. The gall is good to anoynte or to struck ye eyes withal, where as
there is any blemish in them, so shall they be whole.

And Tobias said unto him: where wilt (...)
The angel answered and said: Here is a nigh kinsman of thine, one Raguel by
name, which has a daughter called Sara, and has nether son ner daughter but
her. All his good belongs unto the, and thou must mary his daughter: and
therefore desire her at her father, and he shall give her the to wife. Then
answered Tobias and said: As I understand, she has been married unto seven
huszbandes, and they all are deed: and I have herd say, that the deuell slew
them. I am afraid therefore, lest soch things happen unto me also: which if it
came to pass (saying I am the only son of my father and my mother) I should
bring the^ in their age with sorrow to their graves.

^ess. 4. a (...) b
and give them selves to their own lust, even as it were an horse and Moole,
which have no understanding: upon soch has ye deuell power. But when thou
take her, and art come in to the chamber, witholde thy self from her three
days, and give thy diligence unto nothing but unto prayer with her. ^obi. 8. b


And in the first night roast the lever of the fish, and the deuell shall be
dryue^ away. The second night shall thou be received in to the company of the
holy patriarchs. The third night shall thou opteyne the blessinge of God, so
that whole children shall be borne of you. After the third night take the maiden
in the fear of God, and more for the desire of children, then for any fleshly
lust: that in the sede of Abraham thou may obtain the blessinge in children.

The VII. Chapter.
^obi. 9. b
and said: Gods blessing have thou my son, for thou art the son of a good
virtuous man. And Anna his wife and Sara his daughter wept also.

Now wha^ they had talked together, Raguel

And while he stood so in doubt, and gave the young man no answer, the angel
said unto him: Fear not to give him thy daughter, for unto this man that
fears God, belongs thy daughter to wife, therefore might none other have her.

The^ said Raguel: I doubt not, but God Tob. 6
but I will give her unto the: So he took the righthande of his daughter, and
gave her in to the right hand of Tobias, and said: The God of Abraham, the
God of Isaac and the God of Jacob be with you, join you together, and fulfill
his blessing in you. And they took a letter and made a wrytinge of the
marriage. And then made they merry, and praised God. And Raguel called Anna his
wife unto him, and bad her prepare another chamber, and thither he brought Sara
his daughter, and she wept. Then said he unto her: Be of good cheer my
daughter, the LORD of heaven give the joy, for the heaviness that thou have
suffered.

The VIII. Chapter.
NOw after yt they had supped, they 1. Cor. ^
and ouermorow: for these three nights will we reconcyle our selves with God:
and when the third holy night is past, we shall join together in ye deutye of
marriage. For we are the children of holy men, and we may not come together as
the Heithen, yt know not God.

(...). 6. d
yt he would preserve them. And Tobias said: O LORD God of o fathers, praised
be thou of heaven and earth of the sea, wells, and floudes, and of all the
crea, tures that be therein. Thou maydest Adam of the moulde of the earth,
(...). 2. b
and gave him Eua for an helper. And now LORD thou know that it is not
because of voluptuousnes, that I take this sister of mine to wife, but only
for the love of childen, in whom thy name be blessed for ever. And Sara said:
have mercy upon us (O LORD) have mercy upon us, and let us both come whole and
sound to a good age.



So she sent a maiden to se, which when she came in to the chamber, she found
them whole and sound, slepynge together. And so she came again, and brought
good tydinges. LORD, and said: Praised be thou o LORD God of Israel, For it
is not happened unto us, as we thought. For thou have dealte mercifully with
us, and put away from us the enemy that persecuted us, and have showed mercy
unto yonder two beloved. O LORD, cause the^ to magnify the more perfectly,
and to offer the the sacrifice of thy praise, and of their health: that all
people may know, yt thou only art God in all the earth.



And Raguel charged Tobias, to remain with him two wekes. As for all the good
yt he had, he gave Tobias ye one half of it, and made this wrytinge, that the
half which remained, should fall unto Tobias after their death.

The IX. Chapter.
THen Tobias called unto him the angel,

Then took Raphael four of Raguels servants, and two Camels, and went unto
Rages the cite of the Medes: and when he had found Gabelus, he gave him his
handwrytynge, and received all ye money. He told him also of Tobias ye son
of Toby, how all things had happened, and caused him to come with him to ye
marriage. Now when he came in to Tob. ^
for thou art the son of a right verteous and just man, and of one yt fears
God, and gives great allmes. And blessing have ye wife, and yor elders, that
ye may se yor children, and your childers children, unto the third and
fourth generacio^, and that your sede may be blessed of ye God of Israel,
which reigns world without end. And when they all had said Amen, they
went to the feast, but with the fear of the LORD held they the feast of the
marriage.

The X. Chapter.
NOw while yo^ge Tobias made long Tob ^
thou comfort of our life, thou hope of our generation? Saying all ye
things that we have are only in the, we should not have sent the away from
us.



But Raguel said unto his son i^ law: O tarry here, and I shall send a
messau^ger unto thy father Tobias, to tell him yt thou art in good health.
Tobias said unto him: I am sure, that my father and my mother count every
day, and that their hertes are sorry.

LORD be with you in your journey, and bring you forth safe and sound, that
ye may find all things in good case with your elders, and that mine eyes
may se your children, before I dye.

So the elders enbraced their daughter, kyssed her, and let her go, exortinge
her to honor her father and mother in law, to love her huszbande, to rule
well her huszsholde, to keep her house in good order, and to show her self
fautlesse.

The XI. Chapter.


LORD thy God, and give thanks unto him: then go to thy father, and kiss
him, and struck his eyes over with the gall of ye fish, that thou have brought
with the. For be sure, that his eyes shall straight way be opened, and thy
father shall se the light of heaven, and shall rejoice at the sight of the. Then
the dog that had been with them in their journey, ra^ne before, and came as a
messau^ger, and wagged with his tail for gladness.

So ye blind father arose, and began to

Now when they had worshipped and thanked God, they satt down. Then took
Tobias of the fishes gall, and anointed his fathers eyes: and tarried half an
hour, and then began the blemysh to go out of his eyes, like as it had been
the white szkynne of an egg: which Tobias took and drew from his eyes, and
immediately he received his sight.

Then they praised God, he and his wife, LORD God of Israel, I give the praise
and thanks, for thou have chastened me, and made me whole. And lo, now do I se
my son Tobias. After seven days came Sara his sons wife also whole and
sound with all ye household and catell, with camels and much money of his
wives, and with the money that he had received of Gabelus: and he told his
father and his mother all the benefits, which God had done for him, by the man
that led him. Achior also and Nabath Tobias sister sons came and were glad,
and reioysed with him, by reason of all the good that God had showed unto him.

And so for ye space of seven days they made merry, and were right joyful
euerichone.

The XII. Chapter.
THe^ Tobias called his son unto him caused me to get my wife, he drove the
evil sprete from her, he has been occasion of gladness to her father and
mother: he delivered me, that I was not devoured of the fish, he has made the
to se the light of heaven, ye we all have received great good of him. How
should we worthily deserve these things unto him? But I pray the my father,
that thou will desire him, if happlie he will voutsafe, to take with him the
half of all that we have brought.

Some read * unto you.
unto us. It is good to hyde the Kings secret, but to show and to praise ye
works of God, it is an honorable thing. Prayer is good with fasting, and to
give allmes is better, then to hoorde up treasures of gold. Tob. 4. b Dani. 4.
d
For allmes delyuereth from death, cleanses sin, and causes to find
everlasting life, But they that do sin and unrighteousness, are ye enemies of
their own souls.

Tob. 2. a
When thou praydest with tears, and burydest the deed, and leftest thy dinner,
and hyddest the deed in thy house upon the day time, that thou might burye
them in the night, I offered thy prayer before the LORD. And because thou wast
accept and beloved of God, it was necessary, that tentacion should try the.
And now has the LORD sent me to heal the, Prou. 3. b
and to deliver Sara ye sons wife from the evil sprete. For I am Raphael an
angel, one of the seven that stand before God.



You thought that I did eat and drink with you, Genesis 18. a and 19. a Iud. 13.
c
but I use meat that is invisible, and drink that can not be seen of men.

Now therefore is ye time that I must turn again, unto him that sent me: but
be ye thankful unto God, and tell out all his wondrous works.

And when he had spoken these words, he was taken away out of their sight, so
yt they saw him no more. Then fell they down flat upon their faces by the
space of three hours, and praised God: and when they rose up, they told all
his wo^derous works.

Then XIII. Chapter.
THen old Tobias opened his mouth, LORD and said: Great art thou o LORD
for evermore, and thy kingdom world without end: for thou scourgest and
healest, (...)
thou ledest unto hell, and bryngest out again, and there is none yt may
escape thy hand. O give thanks unto ye LORD ye children, of Israel, and
praise him in the sight of the Heithe^. For among the Heithen which know him
not has he scatred you, to the intent that ye should show forth his marvelous
works: and cause them for to know, that there is none other God almighty
but he. He has chastened us for our myszdedes, and for his own mercy sake
shall he save us.

Considre then, how he has dealt with you, and praise him with fear and dread,
and magnify the everlasting king in yor works.

I will praise him even in the land of my LORD all ye his chosen, hold the
days of gladness, and be thankful unto him. (...)
O Jerusalem thou cite of God, the LORD has punyshed the for the works of
thine own hands. O praise the LORD in thy good things, and give thanks to
the everlasting God, that he may build up his tabernacle again in ye, that
he may call again unto the, all soch as be in captiuyte, and that thou may
have joy for evermore. With a fair light shall thou shine, and all ye ends
of ye world shall honor the. (...)
The people shall come unto the from far, (...)
they shall bring gifts, and worshipe ye LORD in the, and thy land shall they
have for a Sanctuary, for they shall call upon the great name in the.

Cursed shall they be that despise the, and all they that blaspheme the, shall be
conde^pned: LORD. Blessed are they all yt love ye, and be glad of thy peace.
Praise thou the LORD o my soul, for the LORD our God has delivered his
cite Jerusalem from all her troubles. I will count my self happy, if my sede
remain to se ye clearnes of Jerusalem.

The gates of Jerusalem shall be builded with Saphyre and Smaragde, and all the
co^pase of her walls with precious stones. (...)
All her streets shall be paued with white Marblestone, and in all her streets shall
Alleluya be sunge. Praised be ye LORD, which has exalted her, yt his kingdom
may be upon her for evermore, Amen. And so Tobias made an end of his talking.

The XIIII. Chapter.
(...) 42. c (...). a
he lived two and xl. years, and saw his childers children. Now when he was
an hundredth and two year old, he dyed, and was buried honorably in Niniue.
For when he was six and fifty years of age, he lost the sight of his eyes,
and wha^ he was three score year old, he gat his sight again. The residue of
his life led he in joy, and increased well in the fear of God, and departed
in peace.

(...) 23 (...) c
for the word of the LORD can not fail, and our brethren that are scatred
out of the land of Israel, shall come thither again. And the whole land of it
that has been waist, (...)
shall be filled: and the house of God that was brent in it, shall be builded
again, and all soch as fear God shall return thither: the Heithen also shall
forsake their Idols, and come to Jerusalem, and dwell there, and all the kings
of the earth shall be glad of her, and worshipe the LORD God of Israel.

(...)
Serve the LORD in faithfulness, seek after his will, and do the thing that
pleases him. Command your children yt they do right, give allmes, be
myndefull of God, and ever to be thankful unto him in truth and with all
their power. Hear me therefore my children, and abide not here: but in what
day so ever ye have buried your mother beside me, get you from hence. For I
se, that the wickedness of it shall bring it to destruction and end.

LORD, and his kynsfolkes buried him. And all his posterite continued in a
good life, and holy conversation: so that they were loved and accepted both of
God and men, and of all the people of the land.

The end of the book of Tobias.
The book of Judith.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I. Of the noble cite Egbathanis. Of Nabuchodonosor the king of the
Assirians, of his victory and power. Chap. II. The insatiable desire that
Nabuchodonosor had to reign: of his host and tyra^nye. Chap. III. Diverse
kings and princes yield themselves for fear. The tyranny of Holofernes and
pride of the king. Chap. IIII. The Jews are afraid and careful for
Jerusalem and the temple, make their land strong, prepare them selves to the
battayll, call upon God, and Eliachim the pressed comfort them. Chap. V.
Holofernes takes indignacion at the children of Israel, because they go about
to defend them selves. Achior bears witness to the truth. Chap. VI. Achior
for telling the truth is taken* and delivered unto the people of the Jews:
unto whom he tells all the matter, which moves the people to cry upon God.
Chap. VII. Holofernes lays sege to Bethulia. The children of Israel cry upon
God Holofernes takes the water from them, so that they in the cite have great
thyrst, and are impatient. Osias comfort them, and appoynteth five days to
the grace of God. Chap. VIII. Judith reproves the elders that set^ a time to
the mercy of God: she exorteth the people to ame^deme^t and to prayer,
rehearses the benefits of God, and tells them her deuyce. Chap. IX Judith
goes in to her oratory, and prays fervently unto God, for the deliuerau^ce
of her people. Chap. X. Judith decketh herself of the best fashion, takes her
mayde^ with her, and goes forth by night in to Holofernes tent. Chap. XI.
Judith tells Holofernes the cause of her coming, which pleases him well
Chap. XII. Holofernes commands to entreat her well, and gives her liberty
to go in and out to her prayer, makes a great supper, byddeth her to it, and
is dronken. Chap. XIII. Judith seeks oportunite, prays unto God for
strength, smyteth of the head of dro^ken Holofernes, and brings it in to the
cite, where the people rejoice and praise God. Chap. XIIII. Holofernes head is
stickte up upon the walls, the children of Israel fall upon their enemies,
which take their flight. Achior comes in to the nombre of the people of God.
Chap. XV. Holofernes host are out of their wits after his death, the
Israelites follow upon the^, the other cities of Israel help them, they win
great spoils, and co^me^de Judith. Chap. XVI. Judith syngeth praise unto the
LORD. The people come together unto Jerusalem to give thanks and praise unto
the LORD How Judith made her end.
The first Chapter.


So in ye twolft year of his reign it happened, that Nabuchodonosor ye king
of the Assirians (which reigned in the great cite of Niniue) fought against
Arphaxat, and overcame hi^ in ye great field called Ragau, beside Euphrates
and Tigris and Iadason in the field of Erioth the king of the Elikes.

^. Mac. 1. a
and his heart was lift up: and he sent unto all them that dwelt in Celicia, in
Damascus, in Libanus, and unto the Heithen that dwelt in Carmel and Cedar, and
to soch as dwelt in Galile in the great field of Eszdrelo^, to all them that
were in Samaria, and beyond the water of Iordane unto Jerusalem and the whole
land of Iesse unto the mountains of Ethiopia. Unto all these did
Nabuchodonosor the king of ye Assirians send messaungers. But they all with one
consent would not agree unto him, and sent the messaungers again empty, and
put the^ away without honor. Then Nabuchodonosor the king took indignacio^
at all those lands, and swear by his trone and by his kingdom, that he would
be avenged of all these countrees.

The II. Chapter.
(...)
Thou shall spare no realm, all strong cities shall thou bring in subieccion
unto me.

Then Holofernes called together all the

And when he was gone past the borders

The III. Chapter.


(...). 5. a
went forth to mete him as he came, and received him honorably with garlandes
and torches, with daunses, tabrettes and pipes.



The IIII. Chapter.
LORD, as he had done to other cities and their temples. So they sent in to
all Samaria round about unto Jericho, took in and occupied all the tops of
the mountains, made fast the towns with walls, and prepared corn for them
against the battayll.

Eliachim also ye pressed wrote unto all the^ that dwelt toward Eszdrelon (which
lies over against ye great field by Dotha Im) and unto all those by whom men
might have passage unto them, that they should take in the ways of the
mountains, whereby there might be any way and passage to Jerusalem, and yt
they should hold diligent watch, where any strate way was betwixt ye
mountains. And the children of Israel did, as LORD had commanded them. And
all the people, Eccli. 35.
cried earnestly, and humbled their souls with fastinges and prayers, they and
their wives. The prestes put on hayrie clothes, and laid the young babes
before the temple of the LORD, and covered the altar of the LORD with an
hayrie clothe. And with one acorde cried they unto the LORD God of Israel,
that their children should not be given in to a pray, and their wives in to a
spoil, yt their cities should not be laid waist, and yt their Sanctuary
should not be unhallowed, and so they to be a shame and rebuke unto the Heithen.

Then Eliachim the hye pressed of the LORD LORD will hear your peticions, if
ye co^tynue steadfast in fastinges and prayers in ye sight of the LORD.
Remember Moses the servant of the LORD, Exo. 17.
which overthrew ye Amalechites (that trusted in their might and power, in
their host, in their shildes, in their charettes and horsemen) not with
weapens, but with holy prayers. Even so shall all the enemies of Israel be, if
ye continue in this work, that ye have begone. So upon this exortacion they
continued in prayer before the LORD: In so much that they which offered brent
sacrifices unto the LORD, ^ffred the offringes unto ye LORD, being arrayed in
hayrie clothes, and had aszshes upon their heads. And they all besought God
from their whole heart, yt he would vyset his people of Israel.

The V. Chapter.
ANd word came to Holofernes the people is this, yt keeps in the mountains?
Or what manner of cities are they? What is their power? Or what manner of host
have they? Who is their captain? And why do they despise us (more then all
those that dwell in the east) and come not forth to mete us, Iudit. ^. b
yt they might receive us with peace?

Iudit. 11. b
Then Achior the captain of all the Ammonites answered, and said: Sir, if it
please the to hear me, I will tell the truth before the concerning this
people that dwell in the mountains, and there shall no lie go out of my mouth.

Genesis 11. d
they dwelt first in Mesopotamia, for they would not follow ye gods of their
fathers that were in the land of the Caldees, and so forsook they the customs
of their forefathers (which had many gods) and worshipped one God, that made
heaven and earth: which also commanded them that they should go from thence,
and dwell at Haran. Genesis 41. g and 46. a Exodi 1. a and 12. f Galat. 3. c
Now when there came a derth in to ye whole land, they went down to Egipte,
and there they dwelt four hundredth years, in ye which they multiplied so
greatly, that their host might not be nombred. And when the king of Egipte
oppressed them, ^xodi 1. b and 5. b
and subdued the^ in buyldinge of his cities with making of claye and brick,
they cried unto God their LORD, which punyshed the whole land of Egipte with
diverse plages.

^xo. 12. c and 14. b
and the plage ceased, and then followed after the^, to take the^, and to
bring the^ again in to his service, while they were flyenge away, the God of
heaven opened ye see, so yt the waters stood fast upon both the sides as a
wall, and these went through the botome of the sea dry shod, In the which
place wha^ an innumerable people of the Egipcians followed upon them, they were
so overwhelmed with the waters, that there remained not one, to tell the^ that
came after, how it happened.

^xo. 15. d ^xo. 1^. f ^eut. 8. a
There were ye bitter waters made sweet for the^, that they might drink, and
xl. years had they meat from heaven. Where so ever they went (without bow
and arowe, without bukler or sword) their God fought for the^, and caused the^
to have the victory. Ye no man was able to hurt this people, except it were
so, yt they departed unfaithfully from ye worshippinge of the LORD their God.
(...)
But as often as they worshipped any other beside their God, he gave them over to
be spoiled, to be slain, and to be put to confucion. Nevertheless as often as
they were sorry for departing from the worshipe of their God, the same God of
heaven gave them power and strength to withsto^de their enemies.

Morouer they slew the king of the Cananites, Iebusites, Pherezites, Ethites,
Eu^tes (...)
and took their lo^des and cities in possession: and so long as they sinned
not in ye sight of their God, it went well with them, for their God hates
unrighteousness. For in times past when they went out of ye way, (...)
which God had given them, yt they should walk in it, they were destroyed in
diverse battayles of many nations, and many of them were carried away presoners
into a strange country. But now lately they have turned themselves again unto
the LORD their God, (...)
and are come together again out of the countrees where they were scatred
abroad: and thus have they conquered these mountains and dwell therein: and as
for Jerusalem where their Sanctuary is, they have it again in possession.

And therefore my lord, make dilligent inquisicion, (...)
for their God shall defend the^, and so shall we be a shame to all ye world.

Now when Achior had spoken out these words, all the princes of Holofernes
were wroth, and thought to slaye him, and said one to another: what is he
this, which darre say, yt ye children of Israel are able to withsto^de
Nabuchodonosor the king and his host? where as they are an vnwapened people,
without strength or vndersto^dinge of ye fettes of war? That Achior therefore
may know, yt he has disceaued us, we will go up in to ye mountains: and when
the mighty men of the^ are taken, he also shall be stickte with the sword, yt
all people may know, that Nabuchodonosor is the God of the earth, and that
there is none other without him.

The VI. Chapter.
SO when they had left of speakinge, (...)
that the people of Israel shall be defended of their God, I will show the, that
there is no God but Nabuchodonosor. Ye when we slaye them all as one man, (...)
thou also shall perish with them through the sword of the Assirians, and all
Israel shall be destroyed with the, and the^ shall thou feel, that
Nabuchodonosor is the LORD of the whole earth. The^ shall the sword of my
knyghthode go through ye sides, and thou shall fall down stickte among the
wounded of Israel, and shall not come to thy self again, but be utterly
destroyed with the^. But if thou thynkest thy prophecy to be true, why do
thou then change thy color? why art thou afraid? Thynkest thou that my
words are not able to be

So Holofernes commanded his servants to take Achior, and to carry him unto
Bethulia, and to deliver him in to the hands of the children of Israel. Then
Holofernes servants took him, and went through the plain field. But when
they drew nigh unto the mountains, the slynge casters came out against them:
Nevertheless they gat them away by the side of the mountain, and bound Achior
hand and foot to a tree, and so left him bound with wythies, and turned again
unto their lord.

Notwithsto^dinge the children of Israel went down from Bethulia, came unto
him, lowsed him, brought him to Bethulia, set him in the myddest of the people,
and axed him what the matter was, that the Assiria^s had left him bound.

(...). 5. b
what answer he gave Holofernes, to the thing that he axed him, and how
Holofernes people would have slain him for so saying, and how Holofernes
himself was wroth, and commanded him for the same cause to be delivered unto
ye Israelites: that when he over came the children of Israel he might command
Achior also to be put to death with diverse torments, because he said: (...).
5. f
the God of heaven is their defender.

And wha^ Achior had plainly told out all these things, all the people fell
down upon their faces, praysinge the LORD, and poured out their prayers
together unto the LORD, with a general complaynte and weeping, and said: O
LORD God of heaven and earth, behold their pride, and look upon our
lowlynes, and consider how it stands with thy saints, and make it to be
known, yt thou forsakest not those, which hold them fast by the, and how yt
thou bring the^ low, yt presume of the^ selves, and make their boast in
their own strength. So when the wepinge and LORD or God then shall give his
servants this liberte, God be with the also among us: so yt if it please yt,
thou with thine may dwell with us.

Now when Osias had ended the council, he took him in to his house, and made a
great supper, called all the elders to it, and so they refreszshed them selves
after the fasting. And afterward was all the people called together, which
made their prayers all the night long in the congregation, and be sought the
God of Israel for help.

The VII. Chapter.
THe next day Holofernes commanded Iudit. 2. ^
There were an C. and xx. thousand fightinge men on foot, and two and twenty
thousand horsemen, beside the preparynge of them yt were won, and came to
them on every side out of the countrees and cities which he had taken. All
these prepared them selves unto the battayll against the Israelites, and came
on by the hill side, unto the topp that looks over against Dothaim, from the
place which is called Belma, unto Chelmon yt lies toward Eszdrelon.

Now when the children of Israel saw so pleasure then for necessite.

Then went the Ammonites and the Moabites unto Holofernes, and said: The
children Iudit. 16. a


Exo. 17. a
God be judge betwixt us and the, for thou have dealt evil with us: thou
would not speak peaceably with the king of the Assirians, therefore has God
sold us in their hands, and there is no man to help us, where as we are
brought down before their eyes in thirst and great destruction. Therefore
gather now together all the people that be in the cite, that we may all yield
our selves wyllingly unto ye people of Holofernes: for better it is yt we be
captyue and praise the LORD with our lives, then to be slain and perish,
and to be laughed to scorn and shamed of every man when we se our wives and
children dye before our eyes. We take heaven and earth this day to record,
and the God of our fathers (which punysheth us acordinge to the deseruynge of
our sins) and give you warning, yt ye give up the cite now in to ye power
of Holofernes host, that our end may be short with the sword, which else
shall endure long for want of water and for thirst.

^sal. 105. a
we have dealt wickedly. Thou yt art gracious, have mercy upon us, punysh our
unrighteousness with thine own scourge, and give not those over that knowledge
the, unto a people which knows the not, lest they say among the Heithen:
Psalm* (...)
where is their God?

And when they were so weery with this crienge and weeping, that they held
their tunges, Osias stood up with watrye eyes, and said: (...)
O take good hertes unto you (dear brethren) and be of good cheer, and let us
wait yet these five days for mercy of the LORD: peradventure he shall cut
away his indignacion, and give glory unto his name. But if he help us not
when these five days are past, we shall do as ye have said.

The VIII. Chapter.
ANd it happened when these words LORD greatly, and there was no body that
speak an evil word of her.

Wha^ this Judith herd, how Osias had promised the people, (...)
that after the fyffte day he would give up ye cite unto the Assirians, she
sent for the elders Chambri and Charmin: and when they came to her, she said:
what thing is this, wherein Osias has consented, yt if God help not within
five days, he will give over the cite to the Assirians? What are ye, that ye
tempte the LORD? This deuyce optayneth no mercy of God, but provoke him unto
wrath and displeasure. Will ye set the mercy of ye LORD a time, and appoynte
him a day after your will?

LORD is pacient, let us rather amend our selves, pouringe out tears, and
besekynge him of grace. (...)
For God threateneth not as a man, nether will he be provoked unto wrath as the
children of men. And therefore let us hertely fall down before him, and serve
him with a meke sprete, and with weeping eyes say unto the LORD, that he
deal with us acordinge to his own will and mercy: that like as our heart is
now vexed, and brought low through the pride of them, it may so be comforted
through his grace: in so much as we follow not the sins of our fathers, which
forsook their God, and worshipped other gods: (...)
for the which sin they perished with the sword, were spoiled and brought to
shame of all their enemies. As for us, we know none other God but only him,
for whose comfort let us tarry with meekness. He shall require and make
inquisicion for our blood, from the vexacions of our enemies: (...)
he shall bring down all the Heithen, that rise up against us, and put them to
dishonor, eue^ the LORD our God.

(...) a (...) 32. f
yt they might be proved, if they worshipped their God a right. They ought to
remember, how our father Abraham being tempted, (...) 17. a (...) 1^. a
and tried through many tribulacions, was found a lover and friend of God. So
was Isaac, (...) 28. b (...) b (...) ^2. a
so was Jacob, so was Moses, and all they that pleased God, being tried through
many troubles, were found steadfast in faith. Again, they that received not
their tentacions with the fear of God, but put the^ selves forth with
vnpaciency and murmuring against God, (...) 11. a (...) a (...) 1^. a
perished of the destroyer, and were slain of serpents. And therefore should
not we undertake to be avenged, for the thing that is done unto us: but to
considre, that all these punyshmentes are far less then our sins and
myszdedes: Beleuynge also, that this correccion comes unto us (as to the
servants of God) for amendment, ^om. 5. d
and not for our destruction.

Then said Osias and the elders unto Judith: 1. cor. 14. d 1. Ioh. 4. a 1.
Tess. 5. c
that my words are of God, then prove my council and device, if it be of God:
and beseke God, that he will bring my council to a good end.

Thus have I devised: Iudit. 10. b
Ye shall sto^de this night before the port, and I will go forth with Abra my
mayde^: Pray ye therefore unto God, that he will graciously remember his people
of Israel within five days, as ye have said. As for the thing that I go in
hand withal, axe ye no questions of it, till Iopen it unto you myself: do ye
nothing else, but pray unto the LORD your God for me. Then Osias the prince
of the people of Judah said unto her: Go thy way in peace, the LORD be with
the, that we may be avenged of our enemies, And so they went from her again.

The IX. Chapter.
NOw wha^ they were gone their way, LORD, and cried unto him, saying: O LORD
God of my father Symeon, Genesis 34. ^
which gave him a sword for a defense against the enemies, that used
violence and wilfulnes, and that rauyshed ye vyrgin and put her to dishonesty.
Thou that gave their wives in to a pray, and their daughters in to
captiuyte, and all their pray for a spoil unto thy servants, which bare a
zele unto the, help me wyddow, O LORD my God, I beseke ye. For thou have done
all things from the beginning, and look what thou have taken in hand and
devised, it came ever to pass. For all thy ways are prepared, and thy
judgments are done in thy everlasting fore knowledge. O look now upon the
armies of the Assirians, like as it was thy pleasure sometime to look upon the
host of the Egipcians, when they being weapened, Exo. 14. ^
persecuted thy servants, and put their trust in their charettes, horsemen,
and in the multitude of their men of war. But thou lokedest upon their host,
castinge a thick darcknes before them: and when they came in to the deep, the
waters overwhelmed them.

Eue^ so LORD let it go with these, that of war, Psalm. 45. b
in their charettes, arowes and spears, and know not, that thou only art
our God, which destroyest wars from the beginning, and that thou art the
LORD. O lift up thine arm now like as ever from ye beginning, and in thy
power bring their power to naught, cause their might to fall in thy wrath.
They make their boast, yt they will vnhalowe and defyle thy Sanctuary, and to
waist the tabernacle of ye name, and to cast down the horn of thine altar
with their sword. Bring to pass (O LORD) yt the pride of the enemy may be
cut down with his own sword: that he may be taken with the snare of his
eyes in me, and yt thou may smite him with the lips of my love. O give me
a steadfast mind, that I may despise him and his strength, and that I may
destroy him.

^udic. 4. d and 5. d ^. Par. 14. c 16. b. 20. a ^udic. 7. a Psalm. 146. b
if the hand of a woman overthrow him. For thy power (O LORD) stondeth not
in ye power of men, nether have thou any pleasure in the strength of horses.
There was never proud person that pleased the, but in the prayer of the
humble and meke has thy pleasure been evermore.

O thou God of the heavens, thou maker of the waters, and LORD of all
creatures, hear me poor woman, calling upon the, and putting my trust in
thy mercy. Remember thy covenant O LORD, ^ccli. 36. a
and mynister words in my mouth, and stablysh this deuyce in my heart, that thy
house may continue still in holiness, and that all the Heithen may know and
understood, that thou art God, and that there is none other but thou.

The X. Chapter.
LORD, she rose up from the place, where she had lain flat before the LORD,
and called her maid, went down in to her house, laid ye hayrie cloth from
her, ^udit. 16. b
put of the garments of her wyddowhode, waszshed her body, anointed her self
with precious things of sweet sauoure, broyded and plated her hair, set an
hooue upon her head, and put on soch apparel as belongs unto gladness,
slippers upon her fete, armelettes, spanges, earynges, finger rings, and
deckte herself with all her best array.

The LORD gave her also a special beutye and fayrnesse (for all this deckinge
of her self was not done for any volupteousnesse and pleasure of the flesh, but
of a right discrecion and virtue, therefore did the LORD increase her bewtye)
so yt she was exceadinge amyable and welfauoured in all men's eyes. She gave her
maid also a bottell of wine, a pot with oil, pottage, cakes, bred and chese,
and went her way.

Now when she came to the port of the LORD, and went out at ye port, she
and her maid.

And as she was goinge down the mountain, it happened that about the spring
of the day, the spies of ye Assirians met with her, and took her, saying:
whence come thou? Or whither go thou? She answered: I am a daughter of ye
Hebrews, and am fled from them, for I know, that they shall be given unto you to
be spoiled: because they thought scorn to yield the^ selves unto you, that
they might find mercy in your sight. Therefore have I devised by my self after
this manner: I will go before the prince Holofernes, and tell him all their
secrets, and will show him, how he may come by them, and win them, so that
not one man of his host shall perish.

And when these men had herd her words, again, at their lords
commmaundement.

The XI. Chapter.


And Judith said unto him: Sir, under stand the words of thy handmayden: for
if thou will do after ye words of thy ha^dmayden, the LORD shall bring thy
matter to a prosperous effect. As truly as Nabuchodonosor a lord of the land
lives, and as truly as his power lives, which is in the to the punishment of
all men that go wrong, all men shall not only be subdued unto him through the,
but all the beestes also of ye field. For all people speak of thy prudent
actiuyte, and it has ever been reported, how thou only art good and mighty
in all his kingdom, and thy discrecion is commended in all lands.

(...). 5* a
and it is well known, what thou commau^dedst to do unto him. For this is
plain and of a suretye, that our God is so wroth with us (by the reason of
our sins) that he has showed by his prophets unto the people, how that for
their sins he will deliver them over unto the enemy. And for so much as the
children of Israel know that they have so displeased their God, they are sore
afraid of the. They suffer great honger also, and for want of water, they
are deed now in a manner. Morouer, they are appointed to slaye all their catell,
that they may drink the blood of them: and are purposed to spend all the
holy ornaments of their God (which he has forbydde^ the^ to touch) for corn,
wine and oil. Saying now that they do these things, it is a plain case, yt
LORD has sent me unto ye, to show the these things. For I thy handmayden
worshipe God even here now beside the, and thy hand maiden shall go forth, and
I will make my prayer unto God, and he shall tell me, when he will reward the^
their sin: then shall I come and show the, and bring the through the myddest
of Jerusalem, so that thou shall have all ye people of Israel, as the sheep
without a shepherde: there shall not so much as one dog barck against the, for
these things are showed me by the prouydence of God: and for so much as God is
displeased with them, he has sent me to tell the the same.

These words pleased Holofernes and all

The XII. Chapter.
THen commanded he her to go in, Genesis 34. f
As for the meat that thou have commanded to give me, I may not eat of it
as now (lest I displease my God) but will eat of soch as I have brought with
me. Then said Holofernes unto her: If these things that thou have brought
with the fail, what shall we do unto the? And Judith said: As truly as thou
lyuest my lord, thy hand maiden shall not spend all this, till God have
brought to pass in my hand, the things that I have devised.

So his servants brought her in to the LORD. Then commanded Holofernes his
chamberlaynes, that she should go out and in at her pleasure, to pray unto her
God those three days.

And so in the night season she went forth in to the valley of Bethulia, and
wasszhed hirself in the wellwater. Then went she up, and besought the LORD
God of Israel that he would prospere her way, for the delyueraunce of his
people. And so she went in, and remained clean in her tent, till she took her
meat in the evening.

Upon ye fourth day it happened, yt Holofernes Go yi way, and council this
Hebruesse, that she may be willing to consent to keep company with me. For it
were a shame unto all the Assirians, that a woman should so laugh a man to
scorn, that she were come from him vnmedled withal.

Then went Vagao unto Judith, and said: Let not the good daughter be afraid,
to come in to my lord, that she may be honored before him, that she may
eat and drink wine, and be merry with him. Unto whom Judith answered: Who am
I, that I should say my lord nay? what so ever is good before his eyes, I
shall do it: and look what is his pleasure, that shall I think well done, as
long as I live.



The XIII. Chapter.
^ccli. 31. c
So was Judith alone in the chamber. As for Holofernes, he lay upon the bed
all droncken, and of very dronkennes fell a sleep.

Then commanded Judith her maiden, to sto^de without before the door, and to
wait. And Judith stood before the bed, making her prayer with tears, and
moved her lips secretly, and said. Strength me O LORD God of Israel, and
have respect unto the works of my hands in this hour, that thou may set
up thy cite of Jerusalem, like as thou have promised: O grant that by the I
may perform the thing, which I have devised through the believe that I have
in the.

LORD God in this hour, and with that, she gave him two strokes upon the
neck, and smote of his head. Then took she the canapy away, and rolled the
deed body aside. Immediately she gat her forth, and delivered the head of
Holofernes unto her maiden, and bad her put it in her walett.

And so these two went forth together after their custom, as though they
would pray, and so passed by the host, and came through the valley unto the
port of the cite. And Judith cried a far of unto ye watch men upon the
walls: Open the gates (said she) for God is with us, which has showed his
power in Israel. And when they herd her voice, they called the elders of the
cite together. And they came all to mete her, little and great, young and old,
for they thought not that she should have come so soon. So they lighted
candels, and gathered about her euaerichone: but she went up into an hye
place, and caused silence to be proclaimed.

When every man now held his tongue, LORD our God, for he has not despised,
ner forsaken them, that put their trust in him: and in me his hand maiden he
has performed his mercy, which he promised unto the house of Israel: ye in
my hand this same night has he slain the enemy of his people.

And with that she took forth the head of Holofernes out of the walett, and
showed it them, saying: Behold the head of Holofernes the captain of the
Assiria^s, and this is the canapy, wherein he lay in his dronkennes: where the
LORD our God has slain him by the hand of a woman.

But as truly as the LORD lives, his angel has kept me, goinge thither,
remayninge there, and coming hither again from thence. And the LORD has
not suffered me his handmayden to be defiled, but without any fylthynes of sin
has he brought me again unto you: and yt with great victory, so that I am
escaped, and ye delivered. O give thanks unto him euerychone, (...)
for he is gracious, and his mercy endures for ever.

So they praised the LORD altogether, LORD has blessed the in his power,
for through the he has brought our enemies to naught.

And Ozias ye chief ruler of the people of Israel, said unto her: Blessed art
thou of the LORD the hye God, above all women upon earth.

Blessed be the LORD the maker of heaven and earth, which has gyded ye a
right to wound and to smite of the head of the captain of our enemies. For
this day he has made thy name so honorable, that thy praise shall never come
out of the mouth of me^, which shall all way remember ye power of the LORD:
saying thou have not spared thine own self, but put the in ieoperdy,
consideringe the anguysh and trouble of thy people, and so have helped their
fall before God or LORD. And all the people said: Ame^, Amen.

(...)* 16. a
When Achior saw Holofernes head* he fell down upon his face to the ground
for very anguish and fear, so yt he swowned with all. But after that he was
come again to himself, he fell down before her and praised her, saye^ge:
Blessed art thou of thy God in all the tabernacles of Jacob: for all the people
that hear of thy name, shall praise the God of Israel because of the.



The XIIII. Chapter.


Then Achior seeing the power of God which he had showed unto the people of
Israel, fell of from his Heithenish believe, and put his trust in God, and let
him self be circumcided: and so was he nombred among the people of Israel, he
and all his posterite unto this day.

Now as soon as it was day, they stickte

But when the captains and princes and all the chief in the king of the
Assirians host came together, they said unto the chamberlaynes: Go your way
in, and wake him up, for the myse are crepte out of their holes, and darre
provoke us unto battayll. 1. Re. 14. ^


Then went Vagao in to his chamber,

But wha^ he had herkened perfectly with his ears, and could perceive no
sterynge, he went nyer to the bed, and lift it up, and then saw he the deed
body of Holofernes lyenge there without a head, weltred in his blood upon the
earth. Then cried he with loud voice, and with weeping rent his clothes, and
went in to Iudiths tent, and found her not: And so he leapte out unto the
people, and said: one woman of ye Jews, has brought all Nabuchodonosors
people to shame. For lo, Holofernes lies upon the ground, and has no head.

When the chief of the assirians host herd that, they rent their clothes,
and there fell an intolerable fear and tremblinge upon them, so yt their
minds were sore afraid. And there was an exceadynge great cry in the whole
host.

The XV. Chapter.
NOw when all the host herd that Holofernes was headed, their mind and
council fell from them: and soch a fear came upon them, that they undertook
to defend themselves by flyenge away: one spoke not to another, but hanged
down their heads, left all behind them, and made haist to escape from the
Hebrews: for they herd, that they were haistinge to come after with their
weapens, and so they fled by the ways of the feldes, and through all the foot
paths of the dales.

And when ye children of Israel saw that they fled, they followed upon them,
and went down with tro^pettes, blowinge and making a great cry after the^.
As for the Assirians, they had no order, and kept not the^ selves together,
but fled their way. Nevertheless the children of Israel fell upon them with
one company and order, and discomfited as many as they might get. And Osias
sent messaungers unto all the cities and countries of Israel.



LORD comforted the, and blessed shall thou be for ever. And all people said:
so be it, so be it.

In thirty days could the people of Israel scarce gather up the spoils of
the Assirians. But all that belonged unto Holofernes, and had been his
specially, (whether it were of gold, of silver, precious stones, clothinge and
all ornaments) they gave it unto Judith. And all the people reioysed, both
women, maidens, and young people, with pipes and harpes.

The XVI. Chapter.
THen sange Judith this song unto LORD: Begin unto the LORD upon the
tabrettes, singe unto the LORD upon the cymbals. O sing unto him a new song
of thankesgeuynge, be joyful and call upon his name. Psalm. (...)
It is the LORD that destroys wars, even the LORD is his name. Which has
pitched his tents in the myddest of his people, that he might deliver us from
the hand of all our enemies. Assure came out of the mountains in the
multitude of his strength. His people stopped the water brokes, (...)
and their horses covered the valleys. He purposed to have bre^t up my land,
and to slaye my young men with the sword.

He would have carried away my children LORD hurt him, and delivered him in
to the hands of a woman, which brought him to confucion. For their mighty was
not destroyed of the young men. It was not the sons of Titan that slew him,
nether have the great giauntes set them selves against him: but Judith the
daughter of Merari with her fair bewtye has discomfited him, and brought him to
naught. (...)
For she laid away her widows garment, and put on the appared of gladness
in the reioysinge of the children of Israel. She anointed her face, and bound
up her hair in an hooue, to begyle him. Her slippers rauyshed his eyes, her
bewtye captyuated his mind, (...)
with the sword smote she of his neck. The Persians were astonnyed at her sted
fastness, and the Medes at her boldness. Then howled the armies of ye
Assirians, when my simple appeared, dry of thyrst. The sons of the daughters
have LORD my God. Let us sing a song of tha^kesgeuynge unto the LORD, a new
song of praise will we sing unto our God. LORD, LORD, thou art a great
God, mighty in power, whom no man may overcome. All thy creatures should
serve the, for thou spakest but the word, (...)
and they were made: thou sent thy sprete, and they were created, and no man
may withstonde thy voice. The mountains shall move from the foundacions with
the waters, the stony rocks shall melt before the like wax. But they that
fear the, shall be great with ye in all things. Woe unto the people that rise
up against my generation, for the almighty LORD will avenge him self of
them, and in the day of judgment will he vyset them. For he shall give fire and
worms in to their flesh, that they may burn and feel it for evermore.

LORD. And wha^ they were purified, they offered all their brent sacrifices and
their promised offerynges. And Judith offered all Holofernes weap^ns, and all
the Jewels, that ye people had given her, (...). b (...). 13 b
and the canapy that she took from his bed, and hanged them up unto the LORD.
The people was joyful, as the use is: and this joy by reason of the victory,
with Judith, endured three months.

So after these days every man went home again, and Judith was in great
reputacion at Bethulia, and right honorably taken in all the land of Israel.
Unto her virtue also was chastity joined, so yt after her huszbonde Manasses
dyed, she never knew man all the days of her life. Upon the hye solemn days
she went out with great worshipe. She dwelt in her huszbandes house an
hundredth and five year, and left her hond^ maiden fre, and dyed, and was
buried beside her huszbande in Bethulia. And all the people mourned for her
seven days. (...)
So long as she lived, there was none that troubled Israel, and many years
also after her death.

The day wherein this victory was gotten, was solemply holden, and rekened of
the Jews in the nombre of the holy days, and is yet greatly holden of the
Jews ever sense, unto this day.

The end of the book of Judith.
The chapters in the book of Hester, which are not found in the text of the
Hebrew, but in the Greek and Latin.
The XI. Chapter after the Latin. In this chapter is descrybed the dream of
Mardocheus.
(...)
ye son of Cisei of ye trybe of Ben Iamin a Jew: which had his dwelllynge in
Susis, a man of great reputacio^, and excellent among all them that were in
the kings court (Nevertheless he was one of the presoners, 4. Reg. 24 d
Iere. 24. a
whom Nabuchodonosor the king of Babilo^ had carried away from Jerusalem unto
Babylon with Iechonias the king of Judah.) In the second year of the reign of
great Artaxerses in the first day of ye month Nisan, had this Mardocheus
soch a dream: He thought he herd a great tempest, horrible thonder clappes,
erthquakes, and great vpror in ye land: and yt he saw two great drago^s,
ready to fight one against another. Their cry was great. At the which
roaringe and cry all Heithen were up, to fight against ye righteous people.
And ye same day was full

Now when Mardocheus had seen this dream, he awoke, and mused steadfastly in
his heart, what God would do: and so he desired to know all the matter, and his
mind was there upon until the night.

The XII. Chapter. In this chapter is declared, how Mardocheus utters the
treason of the two servants against the king, and therefore does the king
reward him.
AT the same time dwelt Mardocheus Hest. 2. d and 6. a
to lay their cruel hands upon the king Artaxerses: and so he certified the
king thereof. Then caused the king to examen ye two gelded with torments. And
when they had granted it, they were put to death.

This the king caused to be put in ye Cronicles for an everlasting
remembrance, and undertook to hurt Mardocheus and his people, because of the
two chamberlaynes that were put to death.

The XIII. Chapter. The copy of the commandment, which ki^ge Artaxerses (by
the entisinge of Ama^) sent out in to all countres, for the destruction of the
Jews. The prayer of Mardocheus.
Hest. 1. a and 16. a
over an hundredth and seven and twe^tye lands, sends his friendly salutacion
unto all the princes and debytes of the countrees, which be subject unto his
dominion. When I was made lord over many people, and had subdued the whole
earth unto my dominion, my mind was not with crueltye and wrong to exalte
myself by the reason of my power: but purposed with equity allwaye and gentylnes,
to govern those that be under my iuriszdiccion, and wholly to set them in a
peaceable life, and thereby to bring my kingdom unto tranquylite, that men
might safely go through on every side, and to renew

But Mardocheus thought upon all the LORD, and made his prayer unto him,
saying: O LORD LORD, thou valeaunt and almighty king (for all things are
in thy power, and if thou will help and deliver Israel, there is no man that
can withsto^de ner let the: for thou have made heaven and earth, and what
wondrous thing so ever is under the heaven: thou art LORD of all things,
and there is no man, yt can resist the O LORD) Thou know all things, thou
wotest LORD, that it was nether of malice, ner presumpcion, ner for any desire
of glory, that I would not bow down myself ner worshipe yonder proud
presumptuous Aman (for I would have been content, and yt with good will, if it
might have done Israel any good, to have kyst eue^ his fotesteppes) but that I
did it, because I would not set the honor of a man in the stead of the
glory of God, and because I would worshipe LORD. And this have I done in no
pride ner presumpcion.

And therefore O LORD thou God and king, have mercy upon thy people for they
ymagyn how they may bring us to naught, ye their mind and desire is to
destroy and to overthrow the people, that has ever been thine enheritaunce
of old. O despise not thy porcio^, which thou have delivered and brought out
of Egipte for thine own self. Hear my prayer, and be merciful unto ye
people, who^ thou have chosen for an heretage unto thyself. Turn our
complaynte and sorrow in to joy, that we may live O LORD, and praise thy
name. O LORD, suffer not ye mouths of them that praise the, to be destroyed.

All ye people of Israel in like manner cried as earnestly as they could unto
the LORD, for their death and destruction stood before their eyes.

The XIIII. Chapter. Of the sorrow, complaynte and prayer of queen Hester.
QVene Hester also being in the battayll of death, resorted unto the LORD,
laid away her glorious apparel, and put on the garments that served for
sighinge and mourning. In the stead of precious ointment, she scatred ashes
and do^ge upon her head: and as for her body, she humbled it, and brought it
very low, All the places where she was wo^te to have joy before, those filled
she with ye hair, yt she pluc^^ out hirself. She prayed also unto the LORD
God of Israel with these words:

O my LORD, thou only art our king, help me desolate woman, which have no
helper but ye, for my misery and destruction is hard at my hand. Fro my youth
up I have herd out of the kynred of my father, (...). 4. c (...) 7. d
that thou tokest Israel from among all people (and so have our fathers of
their fore elders) that they should be thy perpetual inheritance, and look
what thou did promise the^, thou have made it good unto the^.

LORD, we have sinned before the, (...). 12. c
therefore have thou given us in to the hands of our enemies, because we
worshipped their gods. LORD thou art righteous. Nevertheless it satisfies
the^ not, that we are in bitter and heavy captiuyte and oppressed among them,
but thou have laid their hondes upon the hondes of their gods: so that they
begin to take away, the thing that thou with thy mouth have ordened and
appointed: to destroy thine inheritance, to shut and to stop ye mouths of
them that praise the, to quench the glory and worshipe of thy house and thine
altar, and to open the mouths of the Heithen, yt they may praise the power
and virtue of the gods, and to magnify the fleshly king for ever.

LORD, give not thy cepter unto the^ that be nothing, lest they laugh us to
scorn in our misery and fall: but turn their deuyce upon them selves, and
punysh him, that has begone the same over us, and set him to an exampls.
Think upon us O LORD, and show thy self in ye time of our distres and of
our trouble. Strength me O thou king of gods, thou LORD of all power, give
me an eloque^t and pleasant speech in my mouth before the Lion. (...)
Turn his heart in to ye hate of our enemy, to destroy him, and all soch as
consent unto him. But deliver us with thy hand, and help me desolate woman,
which have no defense ner helper but only ye. LORD thou know all things,
thou wotest that I love not the glory and worshipe of the unrighteous, and that
I hate and abhor the bed of the vncircu^cyded and of all Heithen.

LORD. O thou God of Abraham, O thou mighty God above all, hear the voice of
them, that have none other hope, and deliver us out of the hand of ye wicked,
and deliver me out of my fear.

The XV. Chapter. Queen Hester appears before the king, with an heavy heart
for the trouble of her people, and God turns the kings heart.
ANd upon ye third day it happened, Hester. 5. a
and put on her glorious apparel, and decte hirself goodly (after that she had
called upon God, which is the beholder and Savior of all things) took two
maids with her: upon the one she leaned her self, as one yt was tender: the
other followed her, and bare the train of her vesture. The shine of her bewtye
made her face rose colored. The similitude of her face was cheerful and
amyable, but her heart was soroufull for great fear. She went in through all
the doors, and stood before the king. The king sat upon the trone of his
kingdom, and was clothed in his goodly array, all of gold, and set with
precious stones, and he was very terryble. He lift up his face, that shone in
the clearnes, and looked grymly upon her. Then fell the Queen down, was pale
and faint, leaned her self upon the head of the maid that went with her.

Nevertheless God turned ye kings mind, Prou. 21. a
that he leap out of his seat for fear, and gat her in his arms, and held
her up till she came to herself again. He gave her loving words also, and
said unto her: Hester, what is the matter? I am ye brother, be of good cheer,
thou shall not dye: for our commandment touches the commons, not the. Come
nigh. And with that he held up his golden wande, and laid it upon her neck,
and enbraced her friendly, and said: talk with me. The^ said she: Genesis 33. b
2. Re 19. c
I saw the (O lord) as an angel of God, and my heart was troubled for fear
of thy majesty and clearness. For excellent and wonderful art thou (O lord)
and thy face is full of amyte. But as she was thus speaking unto him, she fell
down again for fayntnes: for the which cause the king was afraid, and all
his servants comforted her.

The XVI. Chapter. A copye of the commandment, which king Artaxerses caused
to be proclaimed in all the countrees of his domynion, for the wealth of the
Jews.




Hester 3. a
What time now as Aman the son of Amadathu ye Macedonyan (a stranger verily
of the Persians blood, and far from our goodness) was come in among us as
an aleaunt, and had optayned the frendshipe that we bear toward all people,
so that he was called our father, and had in hye honor of every man, as the
next and pryncipall unto the king, he could not forbear him self from his
pride, has undertaken not only to rob us of the kingdom, but of our life.

With manyfolde disceate also has he desired

And upon this ye shall publish and set up

Morouer, among the hye solemn days that ye have, ye shall hold this day
also with all gladness: that now and in time to come, this day may be a
remembrance to good, for all soch as love the prosperity of the Persians: but
a remembrance of destruction to those that be sedicious unto us.

All cities and lo^des that do not this, shall horribly perish and be destroyed
with the sword and fire, and shall not only be no more inhabited of men, but be
abhorred also of ye wild beasts and fowls.

The book of Wyszdome.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I. An exortacio^ for judges and rulers to love wyszdome. The sprete of
wyszdome hates falsede, disfimulacion and Ypocrysie, rebukes unrighteousness
and abhors wicked doers. Chap. II. The ymaginacio^s and thoughts of the
ungodly, how they give the^ selves over unto sin, and persecute all virtue
and truth. Chap. III. The felicite and health of godly people, though they be
put here to trouble and heaviness: Again, what sorrow shall happen to the
ungodly and their children. Chap. IIII. To live chaist and godly withal, is
commendable. A disprayse of the wicked. The honor of verteous age. The
shameful death of the ungodly. Chap. V. How the just men shall sto^de against
the wicked, that have put them here to trouble and what sorrow shall come upon
the ungodly. Again, what joy shall happen to the righteous, which have God
himself for their defense. Chap. VI. An exortacion unto soch as be in rule and
auctorite, to receive wyszdome. A comme^dacion of wyszdome. Chap. VII. All men
have like intrau^ce in to the world: yet who so calls upon God for wyszdome,
shall have his desire The profit that comes by wyszdome passes all other
things. Chap. VIII. Wiszdome should be received in youth. He that marieth
himself unto her, shall obtain love of God and men. Chap. IX. A prayer unto
God for the gift of wyszdome. Chap. X. What profit and good came by wyszdome in
the old time. Chap. XI. How wiszdome ledeth the righteous, and how the ungodly
are punyshed through the mighty hand of God. Chap. XII. God is merciful and
suffers long, to the intent that sinners should amend. Chap. XIII. Vain are
they that have not the knowledge of the living God, but turn unto to the
creatures: unhappy are they that honor images. Chap. XIIII. The worshippinge
of images. The power of God. Punishment of them that make images, and of soch
as worshipe them. How images came up first. The honouringe of images is the
cause, beginning, and end of all myschefe. Chap. XV. The faithful have
respect unto God and not unto images. Chap. XVI. God punishes the wicked, but
defends the godly, and that by great wonders. Chap. XVII. Of the great
darcknesse in Egipte, and blyndnesse of the ungodly. Chap. XVIII. How God
destroyed the firstborne of Egipte. Gods people eat the easter lamb joyfully,
the Egiptians mourn, God punysheth the sinners in the wilderness, Moses
entreats for the people. Chap. XIX. Like as the wicked are ever synnynge more
and more, so does the wrath of God never cease, till they be destroyed. Of
them that were punyshed in the time of Loath.


The first Chapter.
O Set your affeccion upon wyszdome, 3. Reg. 3 Psalm. 2. b
ye that be judges of the earth. Have a good opinion of the LORD, and seek him
in the synglenesse of heart. 2. Par. 15*
For he will be found of them that tempte him not, and appears unto soch as
put their trust in him. As for froward thoughts, they separate from God, but
virtue (if it be allowed) refourmeth ye unwise. And why? wyszdome shall not
enter in to a froward soul, ner dwell in the body that is subdued unto sin.
For the holy ghost abhors feigned nurtoure, and withdraws himself from ye
thoughts that are without understanding: and where wickedness has the upper
hand, he flies from thence. Galat. 5.
For the sprete of wyszdome is loving, gentle and gracious, and will have no
pleasure in him that speaks evil with his lips. For God is a witness of
his reins, a true searcher out of his heart, and an hearer of his tongue. Esaie
6. a Iere. 23. d Acto. 7. ^
For the sprete of ye LORD fylleth the round compass of the world, and ye
same that vpholdeth all things, has knowledge also of the voice.

Therefore he that speaks unrighteous 3. Re. 2. g Matt. 6. a Heb. 4. b
nether may he escape the judgment of reprofe. And why? inquysicion shall be
made for the thoughts of the ungodly, and the report of his words shall come
unto God, so that his wickedness shall be punished. For the ear of gelousy
hears all things, and the noise of the grudginges shall not be hydd. Therefore
bewarre of murmuringe, which is nothing worth, and refrain your tongue from
slander. For there is no word so darck and secret, Luce 12. a
that it shall go for naught: and the mouth that speaks lies, slays the
soul.

O seek not your own death in ye error Deuteronomy. 4. c
destroy not your selves through the works of your own hands. For God has
not made death, nether has he pleasure in the destruction of the living. For
he created all things, that they might have their being: ye all the people
of the earth has he made that they should have health, that there should be no
destruction in them, and that the kingdom of hell should not be upon earth
(for righteousness is everlasting and immortal, but unrighteousness brings
death.) Nevertheless, the ungodly call her unto them both with words and
works, and while they think to have a friend of her, they come to naught: for
the ungodly that are confederate with her and take her part, are worthy of
death.

The II. Chapter.
(...) 7. a ^at. 22 b Cor. 15. d
and when a man is once gone, he has no more joy ner pleasure, nether know we
any man yt turns again from death: for we are borne of naught, and we shall
be herafter as though we had never been. For our breath is as a smoke in our
nostrels, and ye words as a sparck to move our heart. As for or body, it
shall be very aszshes yt are quenched, and or soul shall vanish as ye soft air.
Our life shall pass away as ye trace of a cloud, and come to naught as ye
mist yt is dryue^ away with the beams of ye Son, and put down with the heat
thereof. Our name also shall be forgotten by little and little, and no man shall
have our works in remembrance.

Par. 30. c ^sa. 22. b (...) 56. c ^ap. 5. b
and after or end there is no returning, for it is fast sealed, so yt no man
comes again. Come on therefore, let us enjoy ye pleasures yt there are, and
let us soon use ye creature like as in youth. We will fill our selves with good
wine and ointment, there shall no flower of the time go by us. We will crown or
selves with roses before they be wythered. There shall be no fair medowe, but or
lust shall go through it. Let every one of you be partaker of our
volupteousnes. Let us leave some token of or pleasure in every place, for yt is
our portion, else get we nothing. Let us oppress the poor righteous, let us
not spare the wyddowe ner old man, let us not regard ye heads yt are gray
for age. Let ye law of unrighteousness be our auctorite, for ye Ioh. (...)
Esa. (...)
It greueth us also to look upon him, for his life is not like other men's, his
ways are of another fashion. He counts us but vain persons, he with draws
him self from or ways as from fylthynes: he commends greatly ye latter end
of the just, and makes his boast yt God is his father. Let us se then if his
words be true, let us prove what shall come upon him: so shall we know what
end he shall have. For if he be ye true Psalm. (...)
he will receive him and deliver him from the hands of his enemies. Let us
examen him with despitefull rebuke and tormentinge, that we may know his
dignite and prove his patience. (...)
Let us condemn him with the most shameful death: for like as he has spoken,
so shall he be rewarded.

Soch things do the ungodly ymagin, and go astraye, for their own wickedness
has blinded them. As for the mysteries of God, they understand them not: they
nether hope for the reward of righteousness, ner regard the worshipe that
holy souls shall have. For God created man to be vndestroied, ye after the
image of his own licknesse made he him. Genesis (...)
Genesis (...)
Nevertheless through envye of the deuell came death in to the world, and they
that hold of his side, do as he does. (...)


The III. Chapter.
But the souls of ye righteous are in (...)
and ye pain of death shall not touch the^. (...)
In ye sight of the unwise they appear to dye, and their end is taken for
very destruction. The way of the righteous is judged to be utter destruction,
but they are in rest. And though they suffer pain before men, (...)
yet is their hope full of immortalite. They are punished but in few things,
nevertheless in many things shall they be well rewarded. For God proves them,
and fyndeth the^ mete for himself: ye as the gold in the furnace does he try
them, and receaueth them as a brent offeringe, and when ye time comes they
shall be looked upon.

The righteous shall shine as the sparks (...)
They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over ye people, and their LORD
shall reign for ever. They yt put their trust in him, shall understand the
truth, and soch as be faithful, will agree unto him in love: for his chosen
shall have gifts and peace. (...)
But the ungodly shall be punyshed acordinge to their own ymaginacio^s, for they
have despised the righteous, and forsaken the LORD.

Whosoever despyseth wyszdome and nurtor, he is unhappy, and as for the hope of
soch, it is but vain, their labors unfruitful, and their works
unprofitable. Their wives are indiscreet, and their children most ungodly.
Their creature is cursed. Blessed is rather ye baren and undefiled, which has
not known the sinful bed: she shall have fruit in the reward of the holy
souls. And blessed is ye gelded, (...)
which with his hands has wrought no unrighteousness, ner ymagined wicked
things against God. For unto him shall be given ye special gift of faith, and
the most

The IIII. Chapter.
(...). 17. b (...) 1 a (...). 7. c
Though they be grene in the branches for a time, yet shall they be shaken with
the wind: for they stand not fast, and through the vehemence of the wind they
shall be roted out. For the vnparfecte branches shall be broken, their fruit
shall be unprofitable and sower to eat, ye mete for nothing. And why? all the
children yt are borne of the wicked, must bear record of the wickedness
against their fathers and mothers, when they be axed. But though the righteous
be overtaken with death, yet shall he be in rest.

(...). 11. a
he translated him. Ye suddenly was he taken away, to the intent yt
wickedness should not alter his vndersto^dinge, and yt ypocrisye should not
begyle his soul. For ye crafty bewitchinge of lies make good things darck,
ye unsteadfastness also and wickedness of voluptuous desire, turn aside ye
understanding of ye simple. Though he was soon deed, yet fulfilled he much
time. For his soul pleased God, therefore haisted he to take him away from
among ye wicked. This the people se, and understand it not: they lay not up
soch things in their hertes, how yt ye loving favor and mercy of God is upon
his saints, and yt he has respect unto his chosen.

Thus ye righteous yt is deed, condemns LORD has taken him away. And why?
they se him and despise him, therefore shall God also laugh the^ to scorn: So
yt they the^ selves shall dye here after (but without honor) ye in shame among
ye deed for evermore. For without any voice shall he burst those yt be puffed up,
and remove the^ from ye foundacions, so yt they shall be laid waist unto the
highest. They shall mourn, and their memorial shall perish. So they being
afraid shall remember their sins, and their own wickedness shall bewraye
the^.

The V. Chapter.
THen shall ye righteous stand in great Matt. 19.
and taken away their labors. When they se it, they shall be vexed with horrible
fear, and shall wonder at the haistynesse of ye sodane health: groninge for
very distress of mind, and shall say within them selves (having inward
sorrow, and mourning for very anguysh of mind):

These are they, whom we sometime had in derision, and iested upon. We fools
thought their life very madness, Sap. 3. a
and their end to be with out honor. But lo, how they are counted among the
children of God, and their portion is among the saints. Therefore we have
erred from the way of truth, ye light of righteousness has not shyned unto
us, and the Son of vndersto^dinge rose not up upon us. We have weeried or
selves in ye way of wickedness and destruction. Tedious ways have we gone:
but as for the way of the LORD, we have not known it.

What good has or pride done unto us? 1. Par. 30. Sap. 2. b
All those things are passed away like a shadow, and as a messaunger
rennynge before: as a ship yt passes over the wawes of the water, which when
it is gone by, the trace thereof can not be found, Pro. ^0. b
nether ye path of it in the floudes. Or as a bird yt flies through ye air,
and no man can se any token where she is flowen, but only hears the noise of
her wings, beatinge the light wind, partinge the air through the veheme^ce of
her goinge, and flies on shaking her wings, where as afterward no toke^ of
her way can be found. Or like as when an arowe is shot at a marck, it
parts the air, which immediately comes together again, so that a man can
not know where it went through. Even so we in like manner as soon as we were
borne, began immediately to draw to our end: and have showed no token of
virtue, but are consumed in our own wickedness.

^ob 8. a Psalm. 1. b Pro. 10. d and 11. a ^ac. 1. b
like as thynne scomme yt is scatred abroad with the storm: like as ye smoke
which is dispersed here and there with the wind, and as ye remembrance of a
stranger yt tarieth for a day, and the^ departs.

^sal. 39. a
But ye righteous shall live for evermore: their reward also is with the LORD,
and their remembrance with the Highest. Therefore shall they receive a glorious
kingdom and a beutifull crown of the LORDS hand: for with his right hand
shall he cover the^, and with his own arm shall he defend the^. His gelousy
also shall take away the harness, and he shall wape^ ye creature to be aue^ged
of ye enemies. He shall put on righteousness for a breast plate, ^phe. 6. b
and take sure judgment in stead of an helmett. The invyncible shylde of
equite shall he take, his cruel wrath shall he sharpe^ for a spear, and the
whole compase of the world shall fight with him against the unwise.



The VI. Chapter.
Eccls. 9. d
Hear therefore (O ye kings) and understand: O learn ye yt be judges of the
ends of the earth. Give are ye yt rule ye multitudes, and delight in much
people. Romans 13. a
For the power is given you of the LORD, and the strength from the Highest:
which shall try yor works and search out yor ymaginacio^s: How that ye being
officers of his kingdom, have not executed true judgment, have not kept the
law of righteousness, ner walked after his will. Horribly and that right soon
shall he appear unto you: for an hard judgment shall they have yt bear rule.
Mercy Eccl^. (...)
but they that be in auctorite shall be sore punyshed. For God which is LORD
over all, shall except no ma^s person, nether shall he stand in awe of any
man's greatness: for he has made ye small and great, and cares for all
alyke. But the mighty shall have ye sorer punyshme^t.

Unto you therefore (o ye kings) do I speak, yt ye may learn wyszdome and not
go amysse: for they yt keep righteousness shall be righteously judged: and they yt
are learned in righteous things, shall find to make answer. Wherefore set yor
lust upon my words, and love the^, so shall ye come by nurtor. Wyszdome is a
noble thing, and never faydeth away: ye she is easily seen of the^ that love
her, and found of soch as seek her. She preue^teth them yt (...)
Now the kepinge of ye laws is perfeccion and an incorrupt life, and an
incorrupt life makes a man familier with God. And so the desire of wyszdome
ledeth to ye kingdom everlasting. If yor delight be the^ in royal seats and
(...)
yt ye may reign for ever more. O love the light of wyszdome, all ye yt be
rulers of the people. As for wyszdome, what she is, and how she came up, I will
tell you, and will not hyde the mysteries of God from you: but will seek her out
from ye beginning of the natiuyte, and bring the knowledge of her in to light,
and will not keep back the truth: Nether will I have to do with co^sumynge envye,
for soch a man shall not be partaker of wiszdome. But the multitude of the wise
is the welfare of the world, and a wise king is the vpholdinge of the people.
O receive nourtoure then through my words, and it shall do you good.

The VII. Chap.
I Myself also am a mortal man, like (...)
and in my mothers womb was I fashioned to be flesh: In the time of ten
months was I brought together in blood through the sede of man, and the
commodious appetite of sleep. When I was borne, I received like air as other
men, and fell upon the earth (which is my nature) crienge and wepinge at the
first, as all other do. I was wrapped in swadlinge clothes, and brought up with
great cares. For there is no king yt has had any other beginning of birth.
All men then have one intraunce unto life, (...) 1. c (...). 6. b
and one goinge out in like manner.

(...)
As for precious stone I compared it not unto her: for all gold is but gravel
unto her, and silver shall be counted but claye before her sight. I loved her
above welfare and beutie, and purposed to take her for my light, for her shine
can not be quenched. All good things came to me with her, (...). b (...) 6. d
and innumerable riches through her hands. I was glad in the^ all, for this
wyszdome went before me, and I knew not yt she is the mother of all good
things. Now as I myself learned unfeignedly, so do I make other men partakers of
her, and hyde her riches from no man: for she is an infinite treasure unto men,
which who so use, become partakers of the love and frendshipe of God, and are
accepted unto him for the gifts of wyszdome.

God has granted me to talk wisely, and (...). 3. a
or understanding and knowledge of all or works. For he has given me ye true
science of these things: so that I know how ye world was made, and the
powers of ye eleme^tes: ye beginning, endinge and myddest of ye times: how the
times alter, how one goes after another, and how they are fulfilled: ye course
of the year: the ordinances of the stars: the natures and kinds of
beasts: the furiousness of beasts: the power of ye wyndes: the ymaginacions
of me^: the deuersities of young plants: the virtues of roots, and all soch
things as are secret and not looked for, have I learned. For the worckmaster of
all things has taught me wyszdome. In her is ye Heb. 1. a
for she is ye bryghtnes of ye euerlasti^ge light, ye undefiled myrror of ye
majesty of God, and ye image of his goodness. And for so much as she is one,
she may do all

The VIII. Chapter.
WYszdome reaches from one end to another LORD of all things himself loves
her. For she is ye scolemastresse of ye nurtor of God, and ye choser out of his
works. If a man would desire riches in this life, what is richer then
wiszdome, ye works all things? (Thou will say:) understanding works.
What is it among all things, yt works more the^ wyszdome? If a man love
virtue and righteousness, let him labor for wyszdome, for she has great
virtues. And why? she teaches sobernes and prudence, righteousness and stre^gh,
which are soch things as me^ can have nothing more profitable in their life.
If a man desire much Job. 2^. ^
wha^ I speak, they shall look upon me: and if I talk much, they shall lay
their hands upon their mouth. Morouer, by the means of her I shall obtain
immortalite, and leave behind me an everlasting memorial, among the^ yt
come after me. I shall set ye people in order, and the nations shall be subdued
unto me. Horrible tyrauntes shall be afraid, when they do but hear of me:
among the multitude I shall be counted good, and mighty in battayll. Wha^ I
come home, I shall find rest with her: for her company has no bytternes, and her
felashipe has no tediousness, but mirth and joy.



But when I grew to more understanding, I came to an undefiled body.
Nevertheless when I perceived that I could not keep myself chaist, except God
gave it me (and yt was a point of wyszdome also, to know whose gift it was) I
stepte unto the LORD, and besought him, and with my whole heart I said after
this manner:

The IX. Chapter.
LORD of mercies, 3. Reg. 3. b Genesis 1
(thou yt have made all things with yi word, and ordained man through thy
wyszdome, yt he should have dominion over ye creature, which thou have made: yt
he should order ye world acordinge to equite and righteousness, and execute
judgment with a true heart) give me wyszdome, which is ever about ye seat. and
put me not out from among ye children: for I thy servant and son of ye
handmayden, Psalm. 115. b
am a feeble person, of a short time, and to yo^ge to the understanding of
judgment and ye laws. And though a man be never so parfecte among the
children of men, yet if thy wyszdome be not with him, he shall be nothing
regarded. 1. Par. 29. b 2. Par. 1. a
But thou have chosen me to be a king unto ye people, and the judge of thy
sons and daughters.

P^o. 8. c (...). 1. a
which also was with ye when thou maydest ye world, and knew what was acceptable
in thy sight, and right in thy commandments. O send her out of thy holy
heavens and from the trone of thy majesty, that she may be with me, and
labor with me: that I may know, what is acceptable in ye sight. For she
knows and understands all things: and she shall led me soberly in my
works, and preserve me in her power. So shall my works be acceptable, and then
shall I govern thy people righteously, and be worthy to sit in my fathers
seat. For what man is he, (...)
that may know the council of God? Or, who can think what the will of God
is? For the thoughts of mortal men are miserable, and our forecastes are but
uncertain. And why? a mortal (...)
and the earthy mansion keeps down the understanding yt museth upon many
things. Very hardly can we discern the things that are upon earth, and
great labor have we, or we can find the things which are before our eyes:
Who will then seek out the ground of the things that are done in heaven? Oh
LORD, who ca^ have knowledge of ye understanding and meaning, except thou
give wyszdome and send thy holy ghost from above? that the ways of them which
are upon earth may be reformed: yt men may learn ye things that are
pleasant unto the, and be preserved through wyszdome.

The X. Chapter.
WYszdome preserved ye first man, who^ (...)
wha^ he was created alone, brought him out of his offense, took him out of the
moulde of ye earth, and gave him power to rule all things. When the
unrighteous went away in his wrath from this wyszdome, ye brotherheade
perished through ye wrath of murthur. Again, (...)
wha^ ye water destroyed ye whole world, (...)
wyszdome preserved the righteous through a poor tree, whereof she was gouerner
herself. Morouer wha^ wickedness had gotten ye vpperhande, so yt the nations
were puffed up with pride, (...)
she knew ye righteous, preserved him fautlesse unto God, and laid up sure
mercy for his children. She preserved the righteous, (...)
when he fled from the ungodly yt perished, what time as ye fire fell down
upon ye v. cities: Like as yet this

And for a toke^ of a remembrance of the unfaithful soul, there stands a
piler of salt. For all soch as regarded not wyszdome, gat not only this hurt,
that they knew not the things which were good, but also left behind them
unto me^, a memorial of their foolishnes: so yt in the things wherein they
sinned, they could not be hydd. But as for soch as take heed unto wyszdome, she
shall deliver them from sorrow.

(...)
wyszdome led him the right way, showed him ye kingdom of God, gave him
knowledge of holy things, made him rich in his labors, and brought to pass
the things that he went about. In ye disceatfulnes of soch as defrauded him,
she stood by him, and made him rich. She saved him from the enemies, and
defended him from ye disceauers. She made him strong in battayll, and gave him
the victory, yt he might know, how that wyszdome is stronger then all things.
(...). ^7. c (...). 7. b
When the righteous was sold, she forsook him not, but delivered him from
sinners. She went down with him in to the dongeon, and failed him not in the
bands: (...) 41 f
till she had brought him the cepter of ye realm, and power against those that
oppressed him. As for them that had accused him, she declared them to be liars,
and brought him to perpetual worshipe.

(...). 1. b (...). 45.
from the nations that oppressed them. She entered in to the soul of the
servant of God, and stood by him in wonders and tokens against the horrible
king. She gave ye righteous the reward of their labors, and led them forth a
marvelous way: on the day time she was a shadow unto them, and a light of
stars in the night season. (...). ^4. f
She brought them through the reed see, and carried them through the great water.
She drowned their enemies in the sea, and brought them out of the deep. So the
righteous took the spoils of the ungodly, and praised thy holy name (o LORD)
and magnified thy victorious hand with one acorde. (...)
For wyszdome opens the mouth of ye domme, and makes ye tongues of babes to
speak.

The XI. Chapter.
(...). 1^. a
so yt they went through ye wyldernes yt was not inhabited, and pitched their
te^tes in ye waist deserte. They stood against their enemies, and were avenged
of their adversaries. (...) 17. b (...) a
Wha^ they were thirsty, they called upon ye, and water was given them out of
ye rok, and their thirst slockened out of ye hard stone. For by ye things,
where through their enemies were punished, were they helped in their need. For
unto the enemies thou gave ma^s blood in stead of living water. And where
as they had scarceness in ye rebuke when the children were slain, thou gave
unto thine own a plenteous water unlooked for: declaringe by the thyrst yt was
at that time, how thou would bring thine own unto honor, and slaye their
adversaries.

For when they were tried and nourtured with Deuteronomy. 8. a
they knowleged how the ungodly were judged, and punyshed through ye wrath of
God. These have thou exorted as a father, and proved the^: but unto ye other
thou have been a boysteous king, laid hard to their charge, and condemned
the^. Whether they were absent or present, their punyshme^t was alyke. For
their grefe was dubble: namely, mourning, and ye remembrance of things past.
But wha^ they perceived yt their punishme^tes did the^ good, they thought upon
the LORD, and wondered at ye end. For at the last they held much of him, of
who^ in ye out castinge they thought scorn, as of an abiecte. Nevertheless ye
righteous did not so when they were thirsty: but euenlike as ye thoughts of
ye foolish were, so was also their wickedness. Where as certain me^ now (through
Sap. 12. e Romans 1. c
thou sendedst a multitude of domme beasts upon them for a vengeance: yt they
might know, that look where withal a man synneth, by the same also shall he be
punyshed. For unto thy allmighty hand, that made the world of naught, it was
not impossible, Leui. 26. d Sap. 16. a Iere. 8. c
to send among them an heap of Beeres, or wood lyo^s, or cruel beasts of
a strange kind, soch as are unknown, or spoute fire, or cast out a smokinge
breath, or shote horrible sparks out of their eyes: which might not only
destroy them with hurtinge, but also kill them with their horrible sight. Ye
without these beestes might they have been slain with one wind, being
persecuted of their own works, and scatered abroad through the breath of thy
power.

Nevertheless thou have ordered all things Romans 2. ^
because they should amend. For thou love all the things that are, and
hate none of the^ who^ thou have made: nether did thou ordeyne or make any
thing of evil will.

How might any thing endure, if it were not ye will? Or how could any thing be
preserved, except it were called of ye? But thou sparest all, for all are
thine, o LORD, thou lover of souls.

The XII. Chapter.
LORD, how gracious and sweet is thy sprete in all things? Therefore
chastenest thou the^ measurably that go wrong, and warnest them, concerning
the things wherein they offend: thou speak unto them (o LORD) and exortest
the^ to leave their wickedness, and to put their trust in the. Deuteronomy. 9. a 12. d.
18. b
As for those old inhabiters of thy holy land, thou might not away with
them, for they committed abominable works against the: as wytch craft,
sorcery and Idolatry: they slew their own children without mercy: they ate up
men's bowels, and devoured the blood: Ye because of soch abhominacio^s,
myszbeleues and offeringes, thou slewest the fathers of the desolate souls by
the hands of our fathers: that ye land which thou love above all other,
might be a dwellinge for the children of God.

Exo. 23. d Deuteronomy. 7. d
or with cruel beestes, or with one rough word to destroy the^ together: But
ye mind was to drive the^ out by little and little, geuinge the^ time and place
to amend: knowinge well, yt it was an unrighteous nation and wicked of nature,
and yt their thought might never be altered. For it was a cursed sede from ye
beginning, and feared no man: Yet have thou pardoned their sins. For who will
say unto the: why have thou done yt? Or who will sto^de against thy judgment?
Or who will come before ye face an aue^ger of unrighteous me^? Or who will blame
1. Pet. 5. a
For there is none other God but thou, yt carest for all things: yt thou
may declare how yt ye judgment is not unright. There darre nether ki^ge, ner
tyrau^t in ye sight require acco^ptes of them, who^ thou have destroyed.

For so much the^ as thou art righteous ye self, thou ordrest all things
righteously, and punishest eue^ hi^ yt has not deserved to be punyshed, ^ob 9.
b
and take him for a stranger and an aleaunt in ye lord of ye power. For ye
power is ye beginnynge of righteousness: and because thou art LORD of all
things, therefore art thou gracious unto all. When men think ye not to be of a
full strength, thou declarest ye power: and boldly delyuerest thou them over yt
know ye not. But thou LORD of power iudgest quyetly, and ordrest us with
great worshipe, for thou may do as thou will.

By soch works now have thou taught

Wherefore where as men have lived ignorau^tly and unrighteously, thou have
punyshed (...)
eue^ through ye same things that they worshipped. For they went astraye very
long in ye way of error, and held ye beestes (which eue^ their enemies
despised) for gods, living as children of no understanding. Therefore have
thou sent a scornful punishment among them, as among the chidre^ of
ignorance. As for soch as would not be reformed by those scorns and rebukes,
they felt the worthy punishment of God. For ye things yt they suffered, they
bare the^ vnpacie^tly, being not content in them but vnwyllinge. And when they
peryshed by ye same things that they took for gods, they knowleged then,
that there was but one true God, whom before they would not know: therefore came
ye end of their dampnacion upon them.

The XIII. Chapter.
Vain are all men, which have not ye knowledge of God: as were they that (...)
that of himself is everlasting. Nether took they so much regard of the
works that are made, as to know, who was the craftesman of them: but some
took the fire, some the wind or air, some ye course of ye stars, some ye
water, some took Son and Moon, or the lights of heaven which rule ye earth,
for gods. (...)
But though they had soch pleasure in their beuty, that they thought them to
have been gods: yet should they have known, how much more fayrer he is that
made them. For the maker of beuty has ordened all these things. Or if they
marueled at the power and works of the^, they should have perceived thereby, yt
he which made these things, is mightier then they.

LORD thereof?

But unhappy are they, and among the deed is their hope, that call the^ God
which are but the works of men's hands: gold, silver and the thing, that is
found out by conning, the similitude of beasts, or any vain stone that has
been made by hand of old. (...) 44. b (...). 10. a
Or as when a carpenter cutteth down a tree out of the wodd, and pareth of



The XIIII. Chapter.
Again, another man purposinge to sail Exo. 14. d
and a sure path in the myddest of ye wawes: declaringe thereby, yt thou have
power to help in all things, ye though a man went to the sea without
ship. Nevertheless, yt ye works of ye wyszdome should not be vain, thou
have caused an arc to be made: Genesis 6. c
and therefore do men commytte their lives to a small piece of wod passinge over
the sea in a ship, and are saved.

For in the old time also wha^ the proud Genesis 7. b
he (in who^ the hope was left to increase ye world) went in to the ship,
which was governed through thy hand, and so left sede behind him unto ye
world. For happy is ye tree where through righteousness comes: but cursed is
the image of wod, yt is made with hands, ye both it and he yt made it: He,
because he made it: and it, because it was called God, where as it is but a
frail thing. For the ungodly and his ungodliness are both like abominable
unto God. Psalm. 7. a
Even so ye work and he yt made it also shall be punyshed together. Therefore
shall there a plage come upon the images of the Heithen: for out of the creature
of God they are become an abhominacion, a temptacion unto the souls of men,
and a snare for the fete of the unwise. And why? the sekinge out of images is
the beginnynge of whordome, and the bringinge up of them is the destruction of
life. For they were not from the beginning, nether shall they continue for
ever. The welthy ydilnes of who^ they would honor) to the intent that with
great diligence they might worshipe him which was far of, as though he had
been present. Again, the syngular connyn be of the craftesman gave the
ignorant also a great occasion to worshipe images. For the workman wyllinge
to do him a pleasure that set him a work, labored with all his conning to
make the image of the best fashion.

Morouer, this was not enough for them that they erred in the knowledge of God:
but where as they lived in the great wars of ignorance, those many and
great plages called they peace. Deuteronomy. 1^. b ^ere. 7. a and 19. a
For either they slew their own children and offered them, or did sacrifice in
the night season, or else held unreasonable watches: so that they kept nether
life ner marriage clean: but either one slew another to death maliciously, or
else grieved his neighbor

Therefore comes a great plage upon them, and that worthily: for they have an
evil opinion of God, geuinge head unto Idols, swearinge unjustly to disceaue,
and dispysinge righteousness. For their swearinge is no virtue, but a plage of
them that sin, and goes ever with the offense of the ungodly.

The XV. Chapter.


Nevertheless, they that love soche evil

Notwithstanding, he cares not ye more

All the enemies of thy people and yt hold (...)
for they judge all the Idols of the Heithe^ to be gods, which nether have
eyesight to se, ner noses to smell, ner ears to hear, ner fingers of hands
for to grope: and as for their fete, they are to slow to go. For man made
them, and he that has but a borrowed sprete, fashioned them. But no man can
make a God like unto him: for saying he is but mortal himself, it is but
mortal that he makes with unrighteous hands. He himself is better then they
whom he worshippeth, for he lived though he was mortal, but so did never they.
Ye they worship beestes also* which are most miserable: for compare things
that can not feel unto them, and they are worse then those. Yet is there not
one of these beestes, that with his sight ca^ behold any good thing, nether
have they given praise ner thanks unto God.

The XVI. Chapter.
(...). 11. g
to the intent yt (by the things which were showed and sent unto them) they yt
were so gredy of meat, might be withdrawn even from the desire that was
necessary. But these within short time were brought unto pouerte, and taisted
a new meat. For it was requisite yt (without any excuse) destruction should
come upon those which used tyranny, and to show only unto the other, how
their enemies were destroyed. (...). ^1. a
For when the cruel woodnesse of the beestes came upon them, they peryshed
through the stinges of the cruel serpents*

THE, O sauio of all. So in this thou shewdest thine enemies, yt it is thou,
which deliuerest from all evil. As for the^ when they were bytten with
greshoppers and flies, (...). 10. d
they died, for they were worthy to perish by soch: But nether the teth of
dragons ner of venymous worms over came ye children, for thy mercy was ever by
them and helped the^. Therefore were they punyshed to remember thy words, but
hastily were they healed again: lest they should fall in to so deep
forgetfulness, that they might not use thy help.

LORD) which heals all things. It is thou (o LORD) yt have the power of
life and death: (...). 32. f (...). b
thou ledest unto deaths door, and bring up again. But man through
wickedness slays his own soul, and when his sprete goes forth, it turns
not again, nether may he call again ye soul yt is taken away: It is not
possible to escape yi hand. For ye ungodly yt would not know ye, were
punyshed by ye strength of thine arm: (...) 9. c
with strange waters, hales and raynes were they persecuted, and through fire
were they consumed. For it was a wondrous thing that fire might do more then
water which que^cheth all things: but ye world is ye aue^ger of the
righteous. Some time was ye fire so tame, yt the beestes which were sent to
punysh ye ungodly, brent not: and yt because they should se and know, yt they
were persecuted with the punyshme^t of God. And sometime brent the fire in the
water on every side, yt it might destroy ye unrighteous nacio^ of the earth.
Again, thou have fed thine own people Exo. 16. ^
and sent the^ bred ready from heaven (without their labo) being very
pleasant and well gusted. And to show thy riches and swetnesse unto thy
children, thou gave every one their desire, so yt every man might take what
liked him best. But the snow and yse abode the violence of the fire, and
melted not: yt they might know, yt the fire burninge in the hale and rain,
destroyed ye fruit of ye enemies: ye fire also forgatt his strength again, yt
ye righteous might be norished. For ye creature yt serves ye (which art ye
maker) is fearse in punyshinge ye unrighteous, but it is easy and gentle to do
good, unto soch as put their trust in the. Therefore did all things alter at
the LORD) who^ thou love, Deuteronomy. 8. ^ Matt. 4 ^
might know, yt it is not nature and the growinge of fruits yt fedeth me^, but
yt it is ye word, which preserves the^ yt put their trust in the. For look
what might not be destroyed with the fire, as soon as it was warmed with a little
Son beam, it melted: yt all men might know, yt thanks ought to be given
unto ye before ye Son rise, and yt thou ought to be worshipped before ye
day spring. For ye hope of ye unthankful shall melt away as the winter yse,
and perish as water, yt is not necessary.

The XVII. Chapter.
Great are thy iudgme^tes (o LORD) Romans 11. ^
therefore men do err, yt will not be reformed with thy wyszdome. For when the
unrighteous thought to have thy holy people in subiecio^, they were bound with
the bands of darcknes and long night, shutt under ye rofe, Exo. 10. ^
thinkinge to escape ye euerla^tinge wiszdome. And while they thought to be hyd
in ye darcknesse of their sins, they were scatered abroad in ye very myddest
of the darck coueringe of forgetfulness, put to horrible fear and wonderously
vexed. For the corner where they were, might not keep them from fear: because
ye sound came down and vexed them: ye many terryble and strange visions
made them afraid.

^^od. 7. b
it came to derisio^, and the proud wyszdome was brought to shame. For they yt
promised to drive away the fearfulnes and dread from ye weak souls, were
sick for fear the^ selves, and that with scorn. And though none of ye wonders
feared the^, yet were they afraid at the beestes which came upon the^, and at
ye Hissynge of the serpe^tes: In so much that with tre^blinge they swowned, and
said they saw not ye air, which no man yet may escape.

(...). 45. a
Fearfulnes is nothing else, but a declaringe yt a man seeks help and
defense, to answer for him self. And look how much less the hope is within,
the more is ye un certaynte of the matter, for the which he is punished. But
they yt came in ye mighty night, slepte ye sleep yt fell upon the^ from under
and from above: sometime were they afraid through ye fear of ye wonders, and
sometime they were so weak, yt they swowned withal: for an hasty and sodane
fearfulnes came upon the^. Afterward, if any of the^ had fallen, he was kept
and shutt in preson, but without chains. But if any dwelt in a vyllage, if he
had been an hyrd or huszbandman, he suffered intolerable necessite: for they
were all bound with one chain of darcknesse.



The XVIII. Chapter.
Nevertheless thy saints had a very (...)
and thou gave them the Son for a fre gift without any hurt. Reason it
was, that they should want light and to be put in the preson of darcknes, which
kept thy children in captiuyte, by whom the incorrupt light of the law of ye
world was for to be given. When they thought to slaye (...)
and yet preserved to be leder unto the other) thou broughtest out the whole
multitude of the children, (...)
and destroydest these in the mighty water. Of that night were our fathers
certified before, that they knowinge unto what oothes they had given crede^ce,
might be of good cheer. Thus thy people received ye health of the righteous,
but the ungodly were destroyed. For like as thou have hurt our enemies, so
have thou promoted us whom thou calledest before. For the righteous children of
the good men offered secretly, and ordered the law of righteousness unto unite:
yt the just should receive good and evil in like manner, singinge praises unto
ye father of all men. Again, there was herd an inconvenient voice of the
enemies, and a piteous cry for children that were bewailed. The master and the
servant were punyshed

Nether were ye lyuinge sufficient to bury ye deed, for in ye twincklinge of an
eye, (...)
the noblest nation of the^ was destroyed. As often as God helped the^ before, yet
would it not make the^ believe: but in ye destruction of ye first borne they
knowleged, that it was ye people of God. For while all things were still, and
wha^ ye night was in ye myddest of her course, thy Almighty word (o LORD)
leapte down from heaven out of ye royal trone, as a rough man of war, in ye
myddest of ye land yt was destroyed: and ye sharp sword performed yi
strait commandment, sta^dinge and fyllinge all things with death: ye it
stood upon ye earth and reached unto the heaven. Then the sight of the evil
dreams vexed them suddenly, and fearfulness came upon them vnawarres.



The tentacion of death touched the righteous also, and among the multitude in
the wilderness there was insurreccion, but thy wrath endured not long. For
the fautlesse man went in all the haist, (...) 16 g
and took the battayll upon him, brought forth the weap^ of his ministracion:
even prayer and ye ce^sours of reco^cilinge, set himself against ye wrath, and
so brought the misery to an end: declaringe thereby, that he was thy servant.
For he overcame not the multitude with bodily power, ner with weape^s of might:
but with the word he subdued him that vexed him, puttinge the in remembrance
of the ooth and covenant made unto the fathers. For when the deed were fallen
down by heaps one upon another, he stood in the myddest, pacified the wrath,
and parted ye way unto the living. (...). b. c
And why^ in his long garment was all the beuty, and in the four rows of the
stones was the glory of the fathers graue^, and thy majesty was written in the
crown of his head. Unto these the destroyer gave place, and was afraid of
them: for it was only a tentacion worthy of wrath.

The XIX. Chapter.
(...)* 14. a
they devised another foolishnes: so that they persecuted them in their
flienge, whom they had cast out before with prayer. Worthy necessite also brought
them unto this end, for they had clean forgotten the things yt happened unto
them before. But the thing that was wantynge of their punishment, was requysite
so to be fulfilled upon them with torments: that thy people might have a
marvelous passage through, and that these might find a strange death.

LORD) which had delivered them. And why? they were yet myndefull of the
things, that happened while they dwelt in the land: how the ground brought
forth flies insteade of catell, and how ye river scrauled with the multitude of
frogs in stead of fyszshes.

But at the last they saw a new creacion Exo. 16. c Nu. 11. g
what time as they were disceaued with lust, and desired delicate meats. For
when they were speakinge of their appetite, the quales came up unto them from
the sea, and punyshmentes came upon ye sinners, not without the tokens which
came to pass before by the veheme^ce of ye streams: for they suffered worthily
acordinge to their wickednesses, they dealt so abhominably and churlishly with
strangers. Some received no unknown gestes, some brought ye strangers in to
bondage that did them good. Beside all these things there were some, that not
only received no strangers with their wylles, but persecuted those also, ^.
^oh. b
and did the^ much evil, that received the^ gladly. Therefore were they
punyshed with blyndnesse, like as they that were covered with sodane darcknesse
at the doors of the righteous: Genesis 19. ^ 4. Re. 6. ^
so yt every one sought ye intraunce of his door.

Thus the elements turned in to them selves, LORD) and brought them to
honor: thou have not despised them, but allwaye and in all places have thou
stand by them.

The end of the book of wyszdome.
Ecclesiasticus called Jesus Syrac The prologe of Jesus the son of Syrac unto
his book.
MAny and great me^ have declared wyszdome unto us out of ye law, out of ye
prophets and out of other that followed the^. In the which things Israel ought
to be commended, by the reason of doctrine and wiszdome: Therefore they that
have it and read it, should not only the^ selves be wise there through, but
serve other also with teachinge and wrytinge.

After that my graundfather Jesus had given diligent labor to read the law,
the prophets and other books that were left us of our fathers, and had well
exercised himself therein: he purposed also to write some thing of wyszdome and
good manners, to the intent that they which were wyllinge to learn and to be
wise, might have the more understanding, and be the more apt to lead a good
conversation.

Wherefore I exorte you to receive it louyngly, to read it with diligence, and
to take it in good worth: though our words be not so eloquent as the famous
orators. For the thing that is wryttin in the Hebrew tongue, sounds not so
well when it is translated in to another speech. Not only this book of mine,
but also the law, the prophets, and other books sound far other wise, then
they do, when they are spoken in their own language.

Now in the XXXVIII. year when I came in to Egipte in the time of Ptolomy
Euerges, and continued there all my life, I gat liberty to read and write
many good things. Wherefore I thought it good and necessary, to bestow my
diligence and travail to interpret this book. And consideringe that I had
time, I labored and did my best to perform this book, and to bring it unto
light: that the strangers also which are disposed to learn, might apply them
selves unto good manners, and live acordinge to ye law of ye LORD.

What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I. All wyszdome comes of God, for he only is wise The fruit of Gods
fear. Chap. II. An exortacion unto patience and to the fear of God. Chap.
III. A doctrine for children, how they should honor father and mother: and
how men ought to be gentle and lowly. Chap. IIII. Wyszdome lerneth to be
merciful and loving unto every man. What reward wyszdome gives, to them
that love her and seek her. Chap. V. Let no man trust in his riches, let no man
lean upon his own power, let no man despise the mercy and long sufferynge of
God. Chap. VI. Of true and false frendshipe. An exortacion to harken unto
wyszdome. Chap. VII. Many goodly lessons and docume^tes. Chap. VIII. He
teaches to bewarre of strife, to think scorn of no man, to avoyde
suerryshipp, to bewarre of branelesse and cruel people. Chap. IX. How me^
should behave them selves with their wives, and how old frendshipe ought nor
to be broken andc. with many other good lessons. Chap. X. Of judges and rulers
of the people. How pride ought to be eschued. Chap. XI. Many good instruccions.
Chap. XII. How and to whom a man should do good. Chap. XIII. How the poor
should keep himself from the rich. Chap. XIIII. The unfaithfulness and
wickedness of rich nygardes. An exortacion to do good and to cleue unto
wyszdome. Chap. XV. The profit that comes of the fear of God and of
wyszdome, which the wicked will not receive. Chap. XVI. The multitude of evil
children is not good, for the grace of God is not among the ungodly. The
patience, mercy, and wyszdome of God. Chap. XVII. How God made man, endewed him
with gifts, opening his will and law unto him: but chose Israel out of all
people. Chap. XVIII. The wyszdome of God and order of his works, which no man
may comprehend. The days of man are short. God suffers long, rebukes and
teaches all soch as will receive nurtoure. Chap. XIX. Many good lessons of
wyszdome. Chap. XX. Men ought to give warning, to exorte and to rebuke: but
not to be cruel, violent or malicious. Of silence, and speakinge, and how to
bewarre of lies. Chap. XXI. All manner of sins ought to be eschued The
difference of the wise and foolish. Chap. XXII. A fool will not be reformed
nor rebuked. Be faithful unto thy neighbor and friend. Chap. XXIII. A
faithful prayer unto God, to preserve the mouth and tongue from noisome words
and oothes, and the heart from evil thoughts. How great abhominacion aduoutry
is. Chap. XXIIII. A commendacion of wyszdome. Chap. XXV. There is nothing
better, then an honest verteous woman. Again, there is nothing worse then an
evil, ungodly, and froward woman. Chap. XXVI. A commendacion and praise of a
good honest woman, and how noisome an evil wife is. Chap. XXVII. Many goodly
sentences. Chap. XXVIII. Men ought not to take vengeance, but every man to
forgive his neighbor, and not to bear evil will ner to strive. What harm
comes of false tongues and slaunderers. Chap. XXIX. How me^ should have
compassion and lend unto their neghbours: and how they that borowe, ought to
behave them selves again. Of unadvised suertieshipe. How every man ought to be
content with that he has, and not to be chargeable unto other. Chap. XXX. Who
so loves his children, teaches them, nurtoreth them and chasteneth the^.
Health is a noble gift. Chap. XXXI. The misery of the cuvetous. How one should
be have him self at the table, and be measurable in meat and drink. What
harm comes of drynkinge to much wine. Chap. XXXII. To be set in rule and
dignite, should not make a man proud and hye minded, but to fear, to be
diligent and faithful unto them, that are committed unto him andc. with other
good lessons. Chap. XXXIII. How God ought to be feared, and his law kept. The
difference of days and of men. The ordringe of children and household. Chap.
XXXIIII. The hope of the ungodly is vain: the righteous shall be preserved, for
he puts his trust in God, which will not be reconciled with offeringes, but
with an innocent life. Chap. XXXV. The offringe that pleases God is to keep
his commandments, to be thankful, merciful, and to cease from sin God is
the defender of wyddowes, fatherless, and oppressed, and hears their prayer.
Chap. XXXVI. An earnest prayer unto God for help against the enemies. The
praise of an honest woman. Chap. XXXVII. Of true and false fre^dshipe. Good
council ought to be sought at them, which are verteous and fear God, but
first at God himself. Of wyszdome and soberness. Chap. XXXVIII. Phisicians and
medicyns ought not to be despised, but used as a gift of God: nevertheless God
himself is first to be sought in all sickness. Men should be measurable in
mourninge for the deed, and prepare them selves also unto death. Every workman
ought to be diligent in his labor, and to please God with kepinge his
commandments. Chap. XXXIX. Wyszdome and the fear of God excel all other
things. All things are made to serve the faithful. Chap. XL. The life of man
is a battayll. All things pass away, but the truth abides for ever. The
liberal and loving conditions of the righteous. The vnfaithfullnes and
nigardnesse of the ungodly. Chap. XLI. Death is fearful unto the wicked, but a
joy unto the righteous. The cursinge of the ungodly. A good name is a noble
thing. What the things be, whereof a man ought to be ashamed. Chap. XLII.
Where one ought not to be ashamed. The care and bringinge up of children. The
power and wyszdome of God. Chap. XLIII. The beuty of the firmament, where by the
power and wyszdome of God is known, and should by right be praised. Chap.
XLIIII. A commendacion and praise of the old fathers. Chap. XLV. Of the
faithful worthies, and their noble acts. Of the presthode and offeringes. The
punishment of the sedicious. Chap. XLVI. The manlynesse of Iosue and Caleb. Of
the rulers in Israel, unto the time of faithful Samuel. Chap. XLVII. Of
Nathan, David and Solomon. Chap. XLVIII. Of Elyas, Ezechias and Esaias. Chap.
XLIX. The acts of good Josias. The decay of Jerusalem. Of the prophets and
patriarckes. Chap. L. A comme^dacion of Simeon the son of Onias. Chap. LI. A
prayer of Jesus Syrac. Wyszdome calls the ignorant unto her.


The first Chapter.
ALl wyszdome comes LORD, 3. Re. 3. ^ and 4. c Job 28. c Iacobi 1.
and has been ever with him, and is before all time. Who has nombred ye sonde
of the sea, ye drops of the rain and the days of time? Who has measured
the heyth of heaven, ye breadth of the earth and the depenesse of the sea? Who
has sought out the ground of Gods wiszdome, which has been before all
things? Wiszdome has been before all things, Romans 11.
and the understanding of prudence from everlasting. (Gods word in the heyth
is the well of wyszdome, and the everlasting commandments are the intraunce
of her.) Unto whom has ye rote of wyszdome been decla^red? Or who has known
her wit? Unto whom has the doctrine of wyszdome been discovered and showed?
and who has understand the many fold entrau^ce of her?

There is one: eue^ the Highest, the maker of acordinge to his gift: he gives
her richely unto them that love him. The fear of the LORD is worshipe and
triu^phe, gladness and a joyful crown. The fear of the LORD makes a merry
heart, gives gladness, joy and long life. Who so fears the LORD, it shall
go well with him at the last, and in the day of his death he shall be blessed.

LORD is the beginning of wyszdome, ^^al. 110. b (...). 9. b
and was made with the faithful in the mothers womb: it shall go with the
chosen women, and shall be known of ye righteous and faithful. The fear of the
LORD is ye right Gods service, that preserves and justifies the heart, and
gives mirth and gladness. Who so fears the LORD, shall be happy: and when
he has need of comfort, he shall be blessed. To fear God is the wiszdome that
makes rich, and brings all good with her. She fylleth the whole house with
her gifts, and the garners with her treasure. The fear of the LORD is the
crown of wyszdome, and gives plenteous peace and health. He has seen her and
nombred her: knowledge and understanding of wyszdome has he poured out as
rain: and them that held her fast, has he brought unto honor.

LORD is the rote of wyszdome, and her branches are long life. (In the
treasures of wyszdome is understanding and devotion of knowledge, but wyszdome
is abhorred of sinners.) The fear of the LORD dryueth out sin, for he that
is without fear, can not be made righteous, and his wilful boldness is his
own destruction. A pacie^t man will suffer unto the time, and the^ shall he have
ye reward of joy. A good vndersto^dinge will hyde his words for a time, and
many men's lips shall speak of his wyszdome. In the treasures of wyszdome is
the declaracion of doctrine, but the sinner abhors the worshipe of God. My
son, if thou desire wiszdome, keep the commandment, and God shall give her
unto the: for the fear of the LORD is wyszdome and nurtoure, he has pleasure
in faith and loving meekness, and he shall fill the treasures thereof. Be not
obstinate and unfaithful to the fear of the LORD, and come not unto him with
a duble heart. Be not an ypocrite in the sight of men, and take good head what
thou speak. Marck well these things, lest thou happen to fall and bring
thy soul to dishonor, and so God discover thy secrets, and cast the down
in the myddest of the congregation: because thou would not receive the fear
of God, and because thy heart is full of faynednes and disceate.

The II. Chapter.
MY son, if thou will come in to ye Matt. (...) Tim. (...) 2. Pe^. (...)
stand fast in rightousnes and fear, and arm thy soul to tentacion: sattle
thine heart, and be pacie^t: bow down thine ear, receive the words of
understanding, and shrencke not away, when thou art entysed. Hold the fast
upon God, join thy self unto him and suffer, that thy life may encreace at
the last. What so ever happens unto the, receive it: suffer in heaviness, and
be pacient in thy trouble. Sap. 3 ^ Pro. (...)
For like as gold and silver are tried in the fire, even so are acceptable men
in the furnace of aduersite. Believe in God, and he shall help the: order thy
way a right, and put thy trust in him. Hold fast his fear, and grow therein*
O ye yt fear the LORD, take sure hold of his mercy: shrencke not away from
him, that ye fall not. O ye that fear ye LORD, believe him, and your reward
shall not be emptye. O ye that fear ye LORD, put your trust in him, and
mercy shall come unto you for pleasure. O ye yt fear ye LORD, set yor love
upon him, and yor hertes shall be lightened.

Considre the old generacions of men (o Psalm (...) Esa* (...)
was there ever any one confounded, that put his trust in the LORD? Who ever
continued in his fear, and was forsaken? Or whom did he ever despise, that
called faithfully upon him? For God is gracious and merciful, he forgeueth
sins in ye time of trouble, and is a defender for all them yt seek him in ye
truth. Woe be unto him that has a dubble heart, wicked lips and evil
occupied hands, and to the sinner yt goes two manner of ways. Woe be unto them
that are lowse of heart, which put not their trust in God, and therefore shall
they not be defended of him. Woe be unto them that have lost patience, forsaken
the right ways, and are turned back in to froward ways. What will they do,
when the LORD shall begin to vyset the^?

They that fear ye LORD, will not mystrust (...)
will keep his commandment. They that fear the LORD, will seek out ye things
that are pleasant unto him: and they that love him, shall fulfill his law.
(...)
They that fear ye LORD will prepare their hertes, and humble their souls in
his sight. (They that fear the LORD, keep his commandments, and will be
pacient, (...) 24. c (...) d
till they se himself) saying: better it is for us to fall in to the hands of
ye LORD, then in to the hands of men: for his mercy is as great as him self.

The III. Chapter.
(...) b (...) b (...). 5. a
that ye may be safe. For the LORD will have the father honored of the
children, and look what a mother commands her children to do, he will have it
kept. Who so honors his father, his sins shall be forgiven him: and he
that honors his mother, is like one that gathers treasure together. Who so
honors his father, shall have joy of his own children: and when he makes
his prayer, he shall be herd. He that honors his father, (...) 5. a
shall have a long life: and he that is obedient for ye LORDS sake, his
mother shall have joy of him.

LORD, honors his father and mother, and does them service, as it were unto
the LORD himself. Honor thy father in deed, in word and in all patience,
(...) ^7. d (...) 49. a (...). a
that thou may have his blessinge: for the blessinge of ye father buyldeth
up the houses of the children, but the mothers curse roteth out the
foundacions. Rejoice not when thy father is reproved, for it is no honor unto
the, but a shame. For the worshipe of a man's father is his own worshipe, and
where the father is without honor, it is the dishonesty of the son. My
son, make much of thy father in his age, and grieve him not as long as he
lives. And if his understanding fail, have patience with him, and despise him
not in thy strength. For the good deed that thou show unto thy father, shall
not be forgotten: and when thou thy self want, it shall be rewarded the (and
for thy mothers offense thou shall be recompensed with good, ye it shall be
founded for the in righteousness) and in the day of trouble thou shall be
remembered: thy sins also shall melt away, like as the yse in ye fair warm
wether.

(...)
The greater thou art, the more humble thy self (in all things) and thou shall
find favor in the sight of God. For great power belongs only unto God, and
he is honored of the lowly.

Seek not out the things that are above thy capacite, Pro. 25. d Romans 12. a
and search not the ground of soch things as are to mighty for the: but look
what God has commanded the, Deuteronomy. 4. a
think upon that allwaye, and be not curious in many of Some read * thy works.
his works. For it is not needful for the, to se with thine eyes, ye things yt
are secret. Make not thou to much search in superfluous things, and be not
curious in many of his works: for many things are showed unto the already,
which be above ye capacite of men. The medlinge with soch has begyled many a
man, and tangled their wits in vanite. Now he that loves parell, shall per^sh
therein.

An hard heart shall fair evil at ye last Psalm. 40. a Dan. 4. d Math. 5. a
and mercy reconcyleth sins. God has respect unto him yt is thankful: he
thinks upon him against the time to come: so that when he falls, he shall
find a strong hold.

The IIII. Chapter.
MY son, defraude not the poor of Deuteronomy. 15. a Mat. 25. c
and turn not away thine eyes from him that has need. Despise not an hongrie
soul, and defye not the poor in his necessite: grieve not the heart of him that
is helpless, and withdraw not the gift from ye needful. Refuse not the
prayer of one that is in trouble, and turn not away thy face from the nedy.
Cast not thine eyes aside from ye poor, yt thou give him not occasion to
speak evil of the. For if he complain of yt in the bytternes of his soul,
his prayer shall be herd: eue^ he yt made him, shall hear him. Be courteous unto
ye company of the poor, humble thy soul unto the elder, and bow down ye
head to a man of worshipe. Let it not grieve the to bow down thine ear unto
the poor, but pay thy dett, and give him a friendly answer, and yt with
meekness.

Deliver him yt suffers wrong from ye hand Genesis 14. ^ Exo. 2. b
and be not faint hearted wha^ thou sit in judgment. Be merciful unto ye
fatherles as a father, and be in stead of an huszba^de unto their mother: so
shall thou be as an obedient son of ye Highest, and he shall love the more the^
yi mother does. Wiszdome bretheth life in to her children, receaueth the^ yt
seek her, and will go before the^ in ye way of righteousness. He yt loves her,
loves life: and they yt seek her diligently, shall have great joy. They yt
keep her, shall have the heretage of life: for where she enters in, there is
the blessinge of God. They that honor her, shall be ye servants of the holy
one: and they that love her, are beloved of God. Who so gives ear unto her,
shall judge the Heithe^: and he that has respect unto her, shall dwell safely.



^phe. 5. b
and for ye life shame not to say ye truth. For there is a shame yt brings
sin, ^ath. 10. e
and there is a shame that brings worshipe and favor. ^eui. 19. d
Accept no person after thine own will, that thou be not confounded to thine
own decay. Be not ashamed of ye neghbor in his aduersite, and keep not back
ye council wha^ it may do good, nether hyde ye wyszdome in her beuty. For in
the tongue is wyszdome known, so is understanding, knowledge and learning in
the talkinge of the wise, and steadfastness in ye works of righteousness. In no
wise speak against the word of treuth, but be ashamed of the lies of thine
own ignorance. Shame not to confess thine error, and submit not thyself
unto every man because of sin. Withstand not ye face of the mighty, and
strive not against the stream. But for the truth strive thou unto death, and
God shall fight for the against thine enemies. Be not haystie in thy tongue,
nether slack and negligent in thy works. Be not as a lion in thine own house,
destroyinge thy household folks, and oppress^nge them yt are under the. Let
not thine hand be stretched out to receive, Act. 20. c
and shutt when thou should give.

The V. Chapter.
TRust not unto thy riches, and say (...)
(For it shall not help in the time of vengeance and temptacion) Follow not
the lust of thine own heart in thy strength, and say not: tush, how should I,
or who will cast me down because of my works? for doutles God shall avenge it.
And say not: I have committed mo sins, butt what evil has happened me? For
the Almighty is a pacient rewarder. (...)
Because yt sin is for given ye, be not therefore without fear, nether heap
one sin upon another. And say not: tush, the mercy of the LORD is great,
(...)
he shall forgive my sins, be they never so many. For like as he is merciful,
(...)
so goes wrath from him also, and his indignacion comes down upon sinners.

Make no tarie^ge to turn unto ye LORD, (...)
Trust not in wicked riches for they shall not help in the day of punishment
and wrath. Be not carried about to every wind, and go not in to every way:
for so does the sinner that has a dubble tongue (Stand fast in ye way of ye
LORD) be steadfast in thy understanding, abide by ye word, and follow the
word of peace and righteousness. Be gentle to hear ye word of God, that thou
may understand it, and make a true answer with wyszdome. (...)
Be swift to hear, but slow and pacient in geuinge answer. If thou have
understanding, shappe thy neghbor an answer: If no, lay thine hand upon ye
mouth: lest thou be trapped in an indiscreet word, and so co^fou^ded. Honor
and worshipe is in a ma^s wise talkinge, but yt tongue of ye indiscreet is his
own distruccio^. (...)
Be not a preuy accuser as long as thou lyuest, and use no slander with thy
tongue. For shame and sorrow goes over the thief, and an evil name over him
that is dubble tonged: but he that is a preuy accuser of other men, shall be
hated envyed and confounded. Se that thou justify the small and great alyke.

The VI. Chapter.
BE not ye neghbours enemy for ye fre^des dishono, and who soever bears
envye and a dubble tongue, offends. (...)
Be not proud in the deuyce of thine own understanding, lest ye leaves
wyther, and ye fruit be destroyed, and so thou be left as a dry tree* For a
wicked soul destroys him that has it, makes him to be laughed to scorn of
his enemies, (and brings him to the portion of the ungodly. (...)
) A sweet word multiplieth friends, and pacifieth the^ yt be at variaunce, and
a thankful tongue will be plenteous in a good man. Hold frendshipe with many,
nevertheless have but one counceler

(...). b (...) 3^. b (...). 7. a (...) c
If thou gettest a friend, prove him first, and be not haistie to give him
credence. For some man is a friend but for a time, and will not abide in the
day of trouble. And there is some friend that turns to enemyte, and takes
part against the: and if he know any hurt by the, he tells it out. Again,
some friend is but a companyon at the table, (...)
and in the day of need he contynueth not. But a sure friend will be unto yt
even as thine own self, and deal faithfully with thy household folk. If thou
suffer trouble and aduersite, he is with the, and hydeth not him self from the.
Depart from thine enemies, ye and bewarre of thy friends.

LORD, shall find him. Who so fears the LORD, shall prospere with friends:
and as he is himself, so shall his friend be also My son, receive doctrine
from thy youth up, so shall thou find wyszdome till thou be old. Go to her as
one that ploweth, and sows, and wait pacie^tly for her good fruits. (...)
For thou shall have but little labor in her work, but thou shall eat of her
fruits right soon. O how exceadi^ge sharp is wiszdome to unlearned men? an
unsteadfast body will not remain in her. Unto soch she is as it were a
twichstone, and he casts her from him in all the haist: for wyszdome is with
him but in name, there be but few yt have knowledge of her. (But with them that
know her, she abides eue^ unto ye appearinge of God.)

Give ear (my son) receive my doctrine, (...). 11. c
and take her yock upon thy neck: bow down thy shulder under her, bear her
patiently, and be not weery of her bands. Come unto her with ye whole heart,
and keep her ways with all thy power. Seek after her, and she shall be showed
the: and wha^ thou have her, forsake her not. For at the last thou shall find
rest in her, and that shall be turned to thy great joy. Then shall her fetters
be a strong defense for the, and her yock a glorious raiment. For the bewtye
of life is in her, and her bands are the couplinge together of salvation. Ye
a glorious raiment is it, thou shall put it on, and the same crown of joy
shall thou weere.

My son, if thou will take heed, thou Eccli. 8. a
that thou may hear all godly sermons, and that the worthy sentences escape
the not. And if thou seist a man of discrete understanding, get the soon
unto him, and let thy foot tread upon the steps of his doors. Psalm. 1. a
Let thy mind be upon the commandments of God, and be earnestly occupied in
his laws: so shall he stablish ye heart, and give ye wyszdome at thine own
desire.

The VII. Chapter.
DO no evil, so shall there no harm Labo not unto man for any lordshipe,
nether unto the king for the seat of honor. Psalm. 142. Eccls. 7. c Job 9.
a. c Luc. 19. b
Justify not thy self before God (for he knows the heart) and desire not to
be reputed wise in the presence of the king. Make no labor to be made a
judge, except it so were, yt thou coudest mightily put down wickedness: for if
thou should sto^de in awe of ye presence of the mighty, thou should fail
in geuynge sentence. Offend not in ye multitude of the cite, and put not
thyself among the people. Eccli. 12.
Bind not two sins together, for in one sin shall thou not be unpunished.
Say not: tush, God will look upon the multitude of my oblacions, and when I
offer to the highest God, he will accept it.

Be not faint hearted when thou make 1 Reg. 2. ^
and set up again. Accept no lesynge against thy brother, nether do the same
against thy friend. Use not to make any manner of lie, for the custom thereof is
not good. Make not many words, when thou art among the elders: and when thou
prayest, make not much bablinge. Mat. 6. b Eccli. 1. c To. 12. b
Let no laborious work be tedious unto the, nether the huszbandrie which the
Almighty has created. Make not thy boast in the multitude of thy wickedness,
but humble thy self even from thine heart: and remember that the wrath shall not
be long in tarienge, and that the vengeance of the flesh of ye ungodly is a
very fire and worm. Ge^e not over thy friend for any good, ner thy faithful
brother for the best gold.

LORD, for ye gift of her honesty is above gold. ^eui. 19. c
Where as thy servant works truly, entreat him not evil, ner the Hyrelinge
that is faithful unto the. Love a discrete servant as thine own soul,
defraude him not of his liberty, nether leave him a poor man. ^eut. 25. a
If thou have catell, look well to them: and if they be for thy profit, keep
them. If thou have sons, bring them up in nurtor and learning, ^ccli. 30. a
and hold the^ in awe from their youth up. If thou have daughters, keep their
body, and show not thy face cherefull toward the^. Marye ye daughter, and so
shall thou perform a weighty matter: but give her to a man of
understanding. If thou have a wife after thine own mind, forsake her not:
(but commit not thy self to the hateful.)

^ccli. 3. a ^obi. 4. a
Honor thy father from thy whole heart, and forgett not the sorofull travail
that thy mother had with the: remember that thou wast borne through them, and how
can thou reco^pense them the things that they have LORD with all ye soul,
and honor his ministers. Love thy maker with all thy strength, ^eut. 12. c
and forsake not his servants. Fear the LORD with all thy soul, (...). 18.
b. c
and honor his prestes. Give the^ their portion of the first fruits and
increase of ye earth, like as it is commanded the: give the^ ye shulders, and
their appointed offeringes, and firstlinges, Reach thine hand unto the poor,
that God may bless the with plenteousnes. ^alat. 6. b
Be liberal unto all men living, yet let not but do good even to them that
are deed. (...). 1. d


(...). 12. b
Let not them that weep be without comfort, but mourn with soch as mourn. Let
it not grieve the to vyset the sick, (...). 25. c
for that shall make the to be loved. What so ever thou take in hand,
remember the end, and thou shall never do amysse.

The VIII. Chapter.
^att. 5. e
lest he happen to bring up an hard quarrel against ye. (...)
For gold and silver has undone many a man, ye eue^ ye hertes of kings has
it made to fall. Strive not with a man that is full of words, and lay no
sticks upon his fire. Keep no company with the unlearned, lest he give thy
kynred an evil report. (...)
Despise not a man that turns himself away from sin, and cast him not in
the teth withal: but remember yt we are frail euerychone. (...)
Think scorn of no man in his old age, for we wax old also. Be not glad of
the death of thine enemy, but remember that we must dye all the sort of us
(and feign would we come in to joy. (...)
) Despise not the sermons of soch elders as have understanding, but acquaunte
thy self with the wise sentences of them: for of them thou shall learn wyszdome
and the doctrine of understanding, and how to serve great men without
complaynte.

Go not from ye doctrine of the elders, for (...)
If thou lendest him, count it but lost. Be not suertie above ye power: if
thou be, then think surely to pay it. Go not to law with the judge, for he will
judge acordinge to his own honor. Travail not by the way with him yt is
branelesse, lest he do the evil: (...)
for he follows his own wilfulnes, and so shall thou perish through his folly.

Strive not with him that is angry and (...)
and go not with him in to ye wyldernes: for blood is nothing in his sight,
and where there is no help, he shall murthur ye. Take no council at fools,
(...)
for they love nothing but the things that please themself. Make no counsel
before a stranger, for thou can not tell what will come of it. Open not
thine heart unto every man, lest he be vntha^full to the, and put the to reprofe.

The IX. Chapter.
BE not gelous over ye wife of thy bosom, yt she show not some shrewed not a
mayde^, that thou be not hurt in her bewtye. (...) 5. a
Cast not thy mind upon harlottes in any manner of thing, lest thou destroy
both thy self and thine heretage. Go not about gasinge in every layne of the
cite, nether wa^dre thou abroad in the streets thereof. Turn away thy face
from a beutyfull woman, (...) 5. c
and look not upon the fayrnesse of other.

(...) 34. a (...) 11 a (...) 10. (...) 12
for through it the desire is kyndled as it were a fire. (An aduouterous woman
shall be trodden under foot as mire, of every one that goes by the way. Many a
man wonderinge the bewtye of a strange woman, have been cast out, for her
words kyndle as a fire.) Sytt not with another man's wife by any means, lie not
with her upon the bed, make no words with her at ye wine: lest thine heart
consent unto her, and so thou with thy blood fall in to destruction. Forsake
not an old friend, for the new shall not be like him.

A new friend is new wine: let him be old, and thou shall drink him with
pleasure. Desire not ye honor and riches of a sinner, for thou know not
what destruction is for to come upon him. Delight not thou in the thing that
the ungodly have pleasure in: being sure, that the ungodly shall not be
accepted until their grave.

(...) c (...) 2. b
and meddle with soch as be wise and have understanding. Let just men be thy
gestes, let thy mirth be in the fear of God, let the remembrance of God be in
thy mind, and let all thy talking be in the commandments of the Highest. In
the hands of craftesmen shall the works be commended, so shall the princes of
the people in the wyszdome of their talking. A man full of words is perlous
in his cite: and he that is temerarious and past shame in his talkinge, is to
be abhorred.

The X. Chapter.
^. Re. 12. a
An unwise king des^royeth his people, but where they that be in auctorite are
men of understanding, there the cite prospers.

The power of the earth is in the hand of God, and when his time is, he shall
set a profitable ruler upon it. In the hand of God is the power of man, and
upon the scrybes shall he lay his honor. Remember no wrong of thy neighbor,
Leui. 19. c
and meddle thou with no unrighteous works. Pride is hateful before God and men,
and all wickedness of the Heithen is to be abhorred. Iere. 27. a Dan. 4. c
Because of unrighteous dealinge, wrong, blasphemies and diverse disceate, a
realm shall be translated from one people to another.

There is nothing worse then a cuvetous

And though the phisician show his help never so long, yet in conclucion it
goes after this manner: to day a king, tomorow deed. For when a man dies, he
is the heir of serpents, beasts and worms. The beginning of man's pride, is
to fall away from God: and why? his heart is gone from his maker, for pride is
the origenall of all sin. Who so takes hold thereof, shall be filled with
cursinges, and at ye last it shall over throw him. Therefore has the LORD
brought the co^gregacions of the wicked to dishonor, and destroyed them unto
the end.

God has destroyed the seats of proud Sap. 6. b Luc. 1. d 14. b 18. b
God has wythered the rotes of the proud Heithen, and planted the lowly
among them. God has overthrown the lands of the Heithen, Genesis 19. ^
and destroyed them out of the ground. He has caused them to wyther away, he
has brought them to naught, and made the memorial of them to cease from out
of the earth. (God has destroyed the name of the proud, and left the name of
ye humble of mind.) Pride was not made for man, nether wrothfulnes for men's
children. The sede of men that fears God, shall be brought to honor: but ye
sede which transgresses the commandments of ye LORD shall be shamed. He yt
is the ruler among brethren, is holde^ in honor among them, and he
regards soch as fear the LORD.

The glory of the rich, of the honorable

Despise not thou the just poor man, and magnify not ye rich ungodly. Great
is the judge and mighty in hono, yet is there none greater, then he yt fears
God. Unto ye servant that is disceete, Pro. 17. a
shall the fre do service. He that is wise and well nurtoured, will not grudge
when he is reformed, and an ignorant body shall not come to honor. 2. Re.
12. c
Be not proud to do thy work, and dispare not in the time of aduersite. Pro.
12. b
Better is he yt labors, and has plenteousnes of all things, then he yt is
gorgious, and wants bred.



The XI. Chapter.
Genesis 41. f Dan. 6. a
shall lift up his head, and shall make him to sytt among great me^. Commend
not a man in his bewtye, nether despise a man in his utter appearau^ce. The Bey
is but a small beast among the fowls, yet is her fruit exceadi^ge sweet. Be
not proud of thy raiment, and exalte not thyself in the day of thy honor:
Acto. 12. d
for ye works of the Highest only are wonderful: ye glorious, secret and
unknown are his works. Many tyrauntes have been feign to sit down upon the
earth, 1. Reg. 15. f Hest. 6.7
and ye vnlickly has worn ye crown Many mighty me^ have been brought low,
and the honorable have been delivered in to other men's hands. Deuteronomy. 13. b
and.17. b Iosu. 7. c and.22. c
Condemn no man, before thou have tried out the matter: and when thou have
made enquisicion, then refourme righteously. Give no sentence before thou have
herd the cause, Pro. 18. b
but first let men tell out their tails.

Strive not for a matter that touches Mat. 19. c 1. Ti. 6. b
and if thou wylt be rich, thou shall not get it: and though thou rennest ye
way before, yet shall thou not escape. There is some man that labors, Pro.
10. c
and the more he weerieth himself, the less he has. Again, some man is
slothful, has need of help, wa^teth strength, and has great pouerte, and
Gods eye looks upon him to good, sets him up from his low estate, (...)
and lifts up his head: so that many men marvel at him, and give honor
unto God.

Prosperity and aduersite, life and death, LORD. (...)
(Wyszdome, nurtoure and knowledge of ye law are with God: love and ye ways of
good are with him. Error and darcknes are made for sinners: and they that
exalte them selves in evil, wax old in evil.) The gift of God remains for
the righteous, and his good will shall give prosperity for ever. Some man is rich
by living nygardly, and yt is the portion of his reward, in that he says:
now have I gotten rest, and now will I eat and drink of my goods myself
alone. (...)
And yet he considers not, that the time draws nigh, yt he must leave all
these things unto other men, and dye himself. Stand thou fast in thy
covenant, and exercise thy self therein, and remain in the work unto ye age.
Continue not in the works of sinners, but put thy trust in God, and bide in
thine estate: for it is but an easy thing in ye sight of God, to make a poor
man rich, and that suddenly. The blessinge of God haisteth to ye reward (...)
and when it goes not well with the, have a good hope, that it shall be better.
For it is but a small thing unto God, in the day of death to reward every
man acordinge to his ways. The aduersite of an hour makes one to forgett all
pleasure, and when a man dies, his works are discovered. Praise no body
before his death, for a man shall be known in his children.

Bring not every man in to thine house, neghbo. For he turns good unto
evil, and slaundreth the chosen. Of one sparck is made a great fire, and an
ungodly man lays wait for blood. Bewarre of the disceatfull, for he
ymagineth wicked things, to bring yt in to a perpetual shame. If thou take
an aleau^t unto ye, he shall destroy the in unquietness, and drive the from
thine own ways.

The XII. Chapter.
When thou wylt do good, know to Do good unto the righteous, ^alat. 6. b ^.
Tim. 5. a
and thou shall find great reward: though not of him, yet (no doubt) the
LORD him self shall reward the. He sto^deth not in a good case, that is
allwaye occupied in evil, and gives no allmes: for the Highest hates the
sinners, and has mercy upon them that show the works of repentance. Give
thou unto soch as fear God, and receive not a sinner: As for the ungodly and
sinners, he shall recompense vengeance unto them, and keep them to the day of
wrath. Give thou unto the good, and receive not the sinner: do well unto him
that is lowly, but give not to the ungodly. Let not the bred be given him, that
he be not mightier then thy self therein. For so shall thou receive twyse as
much evil, in all the good that thou do unto him: And why? the Highest hates
sinners, and shall reward vengeance to the ungodly.



(...) 7. a
Who will have pite of the charmer, that is stynged of ye serpent, or of all
soch as come nigh ye beasts? Eue^ so is it with him yt keeps company with a
wicked man, and lappeth him self in his sins. For a season will he bide with
the, but if thou stomble, (...) 4^. b
he tarieth not. An enemy is sweet in his lips, he can make many words and
speak many good things: Ye he can weep with his eyes, but in his heart he
ymagineth, how to throw the in to the pytte: and if he may find oportunyte,
he will not be satisfied with blood. If aduersite come upon the, thou shall find
him there first: and though he prete^de to do ye help, yet shall he undermine
ye. He shall shake his head, and clape his hands over yt for very gladness, and
while he makes many words, he shall dysguyse his countenance.

The XIII. Chapter.
(...) 7. a
and he that is famyliar with ye proud, shall clothe himself with pride. He
takes a burden upon him, that accompanyeth a more honorable man then him
self. Therefore keep no familiarite with one that is richer then thy self. How
agree the ketell and the pott together? for if ye one be smytten against the
other, it shall be broken. The rich deals unrighteously, and threateneth
withal: but ye poor being oppressed and wro^geously dealt withal, suffers
scarceness, and gives fair words. If thou be for his profit, he uses the:
but if thou have nothing, he shall forsake the. As long as thou have any
thing of thine own, he shall be a good fellow with the: Ye he shall make the a
bare man, and not be sorry for the. If he have need of the, he shall defraude
the: and (with a preuy mock) shall he put the in an hope, and give the all good
words, and say: what want thou? Thus shall he shame yt in his meat, until
he have supte the clean up twyse or thryse, and at the last shall he laugh the
to scorn. Afterward, when he seyth that thou have nothing, he shall forsake
the, and shake his head at the.

Bewarre, that thou be not disceaued and

(Now wha^ thou hear his words, make 2. Cor. 6. ^
What felishippe should an holy man have with a dog? How can the rich and the
poor agree together? The wild ass is the lions pray in the wilderness, even
so are poor men the meat of the rich. Like as the proud may not away with
lowlynes, even so does the rich abhor the poor. If a rich man fall, his
friends set him up again: but when the poor falls, his friends forsake
him. If a rich man fall in to an error, he has many helpers: he speaks
proud words, and yet men justify him.



The XIIII. Chapter.
^ccli. 19. c and 25. c (...). ^. a
and is not pricked with the conscience of sin. Happy is he that has had no
heaviness in his mind, and is not fallen from his hope. It becomes not a
cuvetous man and a nygarde, to be rich: and what should a nygarde do with
gold? He that with all his carefulnes heapeth together unrighteously,
gathers for other folks, and another man shall make good chere with his
goods. He yt is wicked unto him self, how should he be good unto other me^?
How can soch one have any pleasure of his goods? There is no thing worse,
then when one disfauoureth himself, and this is a reward of his wickedness. If
he do any good, he does it not knowinge thereof, and against his will, and at
the last he declares his ungraciousness. A nygarde has a wicked eye, he
turns away his face, and despyseth his own soul. A covetous man's eye has
never enough in the portion of wickedness, (...). 27. c ^ccl^. 1. a
until the time that he wither away, and have lost his own soul.

LORD his due offeringes. Remember yt death tarieth not, and how yt the
covenant of the grave is showed unto the: (for the covenant of this world
shall dye the death. Eccli. 4. a ^obi. 4. b ^uc. 16. b
) Do good unto yt friend before thou dye, and acordinge to thy abylite reach
out thine hand, and give unto ye poor. Be not dispoynted of ye good day, and
let not ye portion of ye good day ouerpas the. Shall thou not leave thy
trauayles and labors unto other men? In the deuydinge of the heretage give and
take, and sanctify thy soul. Work thou righteousness before thy death, for in
ye hell there is no meat to find. All flesh shall fade away like grass, Esa.
4^. ^ Pet. ^ Jacob. ^
and like a florishinge leaf in a grene tree. Some grow, some are cast down:
even so is ye generation of flesh and blood: one comes to an end, another
is borne.

All transitory things shall fail at the

The XV. Chapter.
HE that fears God, will do good: and (...)
With ye bred of life and understanding shall she feed him, (...)
and give him the water of wholesome wyszdome to drink. If he be constant in
her, he shall not be moved: and if he hold him fast by her, he shall not come
to co^fucion. She shall bring him to honor among his neghbours, and in the
myddest of the congregation shall she open his mouth. With the sprete of
wyszdome and understanding shall she fill him, and clothe him with the garment
of glory. She shall heap the treasure of mirth and joy upon him, and give him
an everlasting name to heretage. Foolish men will not take hold upon her, but
soch as have understanding, will mete her, for she is far from pride and
disceate. Men that go about with lies, will not remember her: (but men of
truth shall be found in her, even unto the beholdinge of God.) Praise is not
semely in the mouth of ye ungodly, for he is not sent of ye LORD. For of God
comes wyszdome, and the praise shall stand by the wyszdome of God, and shall
be plenteous in a faithful mouth, and the LORD shall give her unto him.

LORDS fault that I am gone by, for thou shall not do ye thing that God
hates. Say not thou: he has caused me to go wrong, for he has no need of
the ungodly. God hates all abhominacion of error, and they that fear God
will love no soch. (...)
God made man from the beginning, and left him in the hand of his council.
He gave him his commandments and precepts: if thou will observe the
commandments, and keep acceptable faithfulness for ever, they shall preserve
ye. He has set water and fire before the, (...)
reach out thine hand unto which thou will. Before man is life and death, good
and evil: look what him likes, shall be given him. For the wyszdome of God is
great and mighty in power, and beholds all men contynually. (...) 33. b
The eyes of the LORD are upon them that fear him, and he knows all the
works of man* He has commanded no man to do ungodly, nether has he given
any man leave to sin.

The XVI. Chapter.
(...)
and among unfaithful people shall the wrath be kyndled.

(...)
which were destroyed, trustinge to their own strength. Nether spared he them,
among whom Loath was a stranger: but smote them and abhorred them because of
the pride of their words. (...) 19. c
He had no pity upon them, but destroyed all the people, that were so stout
in sin. (...) ^4. c (...) 2^ f
And for so much as he ouersawe not the six hundredth thousand, that gathered
them selves together in ye hardness of their heart: it were marvel if one
being hardnecked, should be fre. For mercy and wrath is with him: (...)
he is both mighty to forgive, and to pour out displeasure. Like as his mercy
is great, eue^ so is his punishment also, he judges a man acordinge to his
works. The ungodly shall not escape in his spoil, and the long patience of
him that shows mercy, shall not bide behind. All mercy shall make place unto
every man acordinge to the deseruynge of his works, (and after the
understanding of his pilgremage.)

Say not thou: I will hyde my self from

My son, harken thou unto me, and learn

The XVII. Chapter.
BOd shope man of the earth, and turned Gene. 1. c
He gave him the nombre of days and certain time, ye and gave him power of
the things that are upon earth. He clothed him with strength, and made him
after his own licknes. He made all flesh to stand in awe of him, so that he
had the dominion of all beasts and fowls. Genesis 2. d
He made out of him an helper like unto him self, and gave them discrecion and
tongue, eyes and ears, and a heart to understand, and filled them with
instruccion and understanding. He created for them also the knowledge of the
sprete, filled their heart with understanding, and showed them good and evil.
He set his eye upon their hertes, declaringe unto them his great and noble
works: (that they should praise his holy name together, rejoice of his
wonders, and be tellinge of his noble acts. ^xo. 20. a ^eut. 4.5. and 9.
) Besides this, he gave them instruccion, and the law of life for an heretage.
He made an everlasting covenant with them, and showed them his righteousness
and judgments. They saw his glory with their eyes, and their ears herd the
majesty of his voice. And he said unto them: bewarre of all unrighteous
things. He gave every man also a commandment concerning his neighbor.

^om. 13. a ^eut. 4. c and 10. c
He has set a ruler upon every people, but Israel is ye LORDS portion. All
their works are as the Son in ye sight of God, and his eyes are allwaye
lokynge upon their ways. All their vnrighteousnesses are manifest unto him,
and all their wickednesses are open in his sight. The mercy yt a man shows is
as it were a purse with him, ^ccli. 29. b
and a man's good deed preserves him as the apple of an eye. At the last shall
he awake, ^att. 25. c
and reward every man upon his head as he has deserved, and shall turn them
together in to the nethermost parts of the earth. ^cto. 3. c
But unto them that will repent, he has given the way of righteousness. As for
soch as be weak, he comfort the^, suffers them, and sends them the
portion of ye verite. O turn then unto the LORD, forsake thy sins, make thy
prayer before the LORD, do the less offense, turn again unto the LORD,
forsake thine unrighteousness, be an utter enemy to abhominacion (learn to know
the righteousness and judgments of God, stand in the portion that is set
forth for the and in the prayer of the most hye God. Go in to the portion of
the holy world, with soch as be lyuinge and give thanks unto God.)

LORD in the hell? Abide not thou in the error of the ungodly, ^sal. 6. a
^sa. 38. d
but give him thanks before death. As for ye deed, thankfulness perishes
from him as nothing. Give thou thanks in thy life, ye while thou art living
and whole shall thou give thanks, and praise God and rejoice in his mercy. O
how great is the loving kyndnesse of the LORD, and his merciful goodness
unto soch as turn unto him? For all things may not be in man: and why? the
son of man is not immortal, and he has pleasure in the vanyte of wickedness.
What is more clear the^ the Son? yet shall it fail. Or what is more wicked,
then the thing that flesh and blood has ymagined? and that same shall be
reproved. The LORD seyth the power of the hye heaven, and all are but earth
and aszshes.

The XVIII. Chapter.
HE that lives for evermore, made all (...)
God only is righteous, and remains a victorious king for ever. Psalm (...)
Ecc^ (...)
Who shall be able to express the works of him? Who has sought out the ground
of his noble acts? Who shall declare the power of his greatness? Or, who will
take upon him to tell out his mercy? As for the wondrous works of ye LORD,
there may nothing be taken from them, nothing may be put unto them, nether
may the ground of them be found out. But when a man has done his best, he
must begin again: and when he thinks to be come to an end, he must go
again to his labor. What is man? Whereto is he worth? What good or evil can
he do? (...)
If the nombre of a man's days be almost an hundredth year, it is much.

Like as the drops of rain are unto ye (...)
so are these few years to the days everlasting. Therefore is ye LORD
pacient with them, and pours out his mercy upon them. He saw and perceived
the thoughts and ymaginacions of their heart, that they were evil: therefore
heaped he up his merciful goodness upon them, and showed them the way of
righteousness. The mercy that a man has, reaches to his neighbor: but ye
mercy of God is upon all flesh. He chasteneth, he teaches and nourtureth: ye
even as a shepherde turns again his flock, so does he all them that receive
chastenynge, nurtoure and doctrine. Merciful is he unto them, (...)
that stand in awe of his judgments.

My son, when thou do good, make (...)
but a gracious man gives them both. A fool shall cast a man in the tethe, and
that roughly, (...)
and a gift of the nygarde puts out ye eyes. Get the righteousness before
thou come to judgment: Learn before thou speak, and go to physic or ever thou
be sick: ^ Cor. 11. d
examen and judge thy self, before the judgment come, and so shall thou find
grace in the sight of God. Humble thy self before thou be sick, and in time of
thy disease show thy conversation. Let not to pray allwaye, and stand not in
fear to be reformed unto death, for the reward of God endures for ever.
Before thou prayest, prepare thy soul, and be not as one yt tempts God.
Think upon the wrathful indignacion that shall be at the end, and the hour of
ve^geaunce, wha^ HE shall turn away his face. (...)
When thou have enough, remember the time of honger: and when thou art rych,
think upon the time of pouerte and scarceness.

(...). 6. b (...) 13. b
Follow not thy lusts, but turn ye from thine own will. For if thou geuest
thy soul her desires, it shall make thine enemies to laugh the to scorn. Take
not thy pleasure in great volupteousnes, and meddle not to much withal. Make
not to great cheer of the thing that thou have won by avauntage: lest thou
fall in to pouerte, and have nothing in thy purse.

The XIX. Chapter.
(...). 19. g ^ ^eg. 11 a
shall fall by little and little. Wine and women make wise men re^nagates, and put
men of understanding to reprofe: and he that accompanies aduouterers shall
become a wicked man. Mothes and worms shall have him to heretage, ye he shall
be set up to a greater example, and his soul shall be roted out of the nombre.
(...) 22. c
He that is haistie to give credence, is light minded, and does against
himself. Who so reioyseth in wickedness, shall be punished: he that hates to be
reformed, his life shall be shortened: and he that abhors bablinge of words,
quenches wickedness. (He that offends against his own soul, shall repent it:
and he that reioyseth in wickedness, shall be punyshed.)

Rehearse not a wicked and churlish word Eccli. 22 and ^7.
If thou have herd a word against ye neighbor, let it be deed within the:
and be sure, thou shall have no harm thereby. A fool trauaileth with a word,
like as a woman that is payned with bearinge of child. Like as an arowe shot
in a dogs thye, so is a word in a fools heart. Leui. 19 Matt. 18
Tell thy friend his fault, lest he be ignorant, and say: I have not done it,
or if he have done it, that he do it no more. Reprove thy neighbor, that he
keep his tongue: and if he have spoken, that he say it no more.

Tell thy neighbor his fault, for often times Eccli. 14 and 25. ^ Jacob. ^
For what is he, yt has not offended in his tongue? Give thy neighbor
warning, before thou threaten him, and give place unto the law of the LORD.
The fear of God is all wyszdome, and he that is a right wise man keeps the
law. As for the doctrine of wickedness, it is no wyszdome, and the prudence of
sinners is no good understanding: it is but wickedness and abhominacion and a
blasphemynge of wyszdome. A simple man of small understanding that fears
God, is better then one that has much wyszdome, and transgresses the law of
the Highest.

A craftye sotell man can be wise, but he Matt. 6. ^
and disguyseth it: and because he should not be known, he preuenteth the.

And though he be so weak that he can do the no harm, yet when he may find
oportunyte, he shall do some evil. A man may be known by his face, and one
that has understanding, may be perceived by the look of his countenance. A
man's garment, laughter and going, Eccli. 21.
declare what he is.

The XX. Chapter.
SOme man reproves his neghbo often Eccli. 31. ^
Again, some man holds his tongue, and he is wise and discrete. It is much
better to give warning and to reprove, then to bear evil will: for he that
knowlegeth him self openly, shall be preserved from hurt and destruction. Like as
when a chamberlayne through desire and lust defyleth a maiden, even so is it
with him that uses violence and unrighteousness in ye law: (O how good a
thing is it, a man yt is reproved, to show openly his repentance? for so
shall thou escape wylfull sin.)

Some man keeps silence, and is found wise: but he that is not ashamed what
he says, is hateful. Some man holds his tongue, because he has not the
understanding of the language: and some man keeps silence, (...) 3. a ^ccli.
32. a
waytinge a conuenyent time. A wise man will hold his tongue till he se
oportunyte, but a wanten and an indiscreet body shall regard no time. He that
uses many words, shall hurt his own soul: and he that takes auctorite upon
him unrighteously, shall be hated.

Some man has often times prosperity in wicked things: Again, some man gets
much, and has harm and loss. There is some gift that is nothing worth:
Again, there is some gift, whose reward is dubble. Some man gets a fall
for being to proud, and some comes to worshipe from low estate. Some man
bieth much for a little price, and must pay for it seven fold.

(...). 6. a
but the favors of fools shall be poured out. The gift of the unwise shall do
the no good, for his eyes are seven fold. ^ccli. 18. c
He shall give little, and say he gave much: he opens his mouth and cries
out, as it were one that cries out wine. To day he lends, tomorow he axeth
it again, and soch a man is to be hated. The fool says: I have no friend, I
have no thank for all my good deeds: ye even they that eat my bred, speak
no good of me. O how often, and of how many shall he be laughed to scorn? He
takes a more perlous fall by soch words, then if he fell upon the ground:
even so shall the falls of wicked men come haistely. In the mouth of him that
is untaught, are many inconvenient and unmeet words. A wise sentence shall not
be allowed at the mouth of the fool, for he speaks it not in due season.



A wise man shall bring himself to honor (...)
and he that has understanding shall be set by among great men. He that
tylleth his land, Pro. (...)
shall increase his heap of corn: he that works righteousness, shall be
exalted, and he that pleases great men, shall escape much evil. (...)
Rewards and gifts blind the eyes of the wise, and make him domme, that he
can not tell me^ their fautes. Wyszdome that is hyd, and treasure that is
hoorded up, (...)
what profit is in them both? Better is he that keeps his ignorance secret,
then a man that hydeth his wyszdome.

The XXI. Chapter.
MY son, if thou have sinned, do it (...)
but pray for thy foresynnes, that they may be for given the. Fle from sin,
even as from a serpent: for if thou come to nigh her, she will byte the. The
teth thereof are as the teth of a lion, to slaye the souls of men. The
wickedness of man is as a sharp two edged sword, which makes soch wounds
that they can not be healed.

Strife and wrongeous dealinge shall waist away a man's goods, and through
pride a rich house shall be brought to naught: so the riches of the proud shall be
roted out. The prayer of the poor goes out of the mouth, and comes unto the
ears, (...)
and his vengeance (or defense) shall come, and yt haistely. Who so hates to
be reformed, it is a token of an ungodly person: but he that fears God,
will remember himself. A mighty man is known afar of by his tongue, but he
that has understanding, perceaueth that he shall have a fall.

Who so buyldeth his house with other (...)
The congregation of the ungodly is like stubble gathered together, their end
is a flamme of fire. The way of the ungodly is set with stones, but in their
end is hell, darcknes, and pains. He that keeps the law, will hold fast
the understanding thereof, and the end of the fear of God is wyszdome. He
that is not wise, will not be taught in good: but the unwise man abounds in
wickedness: and where bytternes is, there is no vndersto^dinge. The knowledge of
the wise shall flow like water that renneth over, and his council is like a
fountain of life.

(...) 19. d
A fool lifts up his voice with laughter, but a wise man shall scarce laugh
secretly.

Learning is unto a wise man a Jewel

The lips of the unwise wylbe telling foolish things, but ye words of soch
as have understanding, shall be weyed in the balaunce. The heart of fools is in
their mouth, but the mouth of the wise is in their heart. When the ungodly
curses the blasphemer, he curses his own soul. (...) 19. d
A preuy accuser of other men shall defyle his own soul, and be hated of every
man: (but he that keeps his tongue and is discrete, shall come to honor.)

The XXII. Chapter.


Who so teaches a fool, is even as one Genesis 50. b
Seven days do men mourn for him that is deed, but the lamentacion over the
unwise and ungodly should endure all the days of their life.

Talk not much with a fool, and go not Pro. 27. a
salt and a lo^pe of iron is easier to bear, then an unwise, foolish, and
ungodly man. Like as the band of wodd bound together in the foundation of the
house can not belowsed, eue^ so is it with ye heart yt is stablished in ye
thought of counsel. The thought of the wise, shall nether fear ner be offended
at any time.

Like as a fair playstred wall in a winter

neghbo in his pouerte, that thou may rejoice with him also in his
prosperity. Abide steadfast unto him in ye time of his trouble, that thou may
be heir with him in his heretage. Like as the vapor and smoke goes out at the
oven before ye fire, even so evil words, rebukes and threatenynges go before
bloudsheddinge. Be not ashamed to defend yi friend: as for me, I will not hyde
my face from him, though he should do me harm. Who so ever hears it, shall
bewarre of him. Who shall set a watch before my mouth, ^^al. 140
and a sure seal upon my lips, yt I fall not with the^, and yt my tongue
destroy me not?

The XXIII. Chapter.
LORD, father and gouernoure of my life, leave me not in their ymaginacio^ and
council. Oh let me not fall in soch reprofe. Who will keep my thought with ye
scourge, and the doctrine of wyszdome in mine heart? that he spare not mine
ignorance, that I fall not with them, lest mine ignoraunces increase, that
mine offenses be not many in nombre, and that my sins exceade not: lest I
fall before mine enemies, and so my adversary rejoice. O LORD, thou father and
God of my life, leave me not in their ymaginacion. O let me not have a proud
look, but turn away all volupteousnes fro me. Take fro me the lusts of the
body, let not the desires of uncleanness take hold upon me, and give me not over
in to an unshamefast and obstinate mind.

^xo. 20. b ^ccli. 27. d ^att. 5. d
) Let not thy mouth be accustomed with swearinge, for in it there are many
falls. Let not the namynge of God be continually in ye mouth: for like as a
servant which is often punyshed can not be without some sore, even so what so
ever he be yt swears and names God, shall not be clean pourged from sin. A
man that uses much swearinge, shall be filled with wickedness, and the plage
shall never go from his house. If he begyle his brother, his fault shall be upon
him: if he knowledge not his sin, he makes a dubble offense: and if he swear
in vain, he shall not be found righteous, for his house shall be full of plages.

^eui. 24. c
) But they yt fear God, eschew all soch and lie not weltringe in sin. Use
not ye mouth to dishonest and filthy talking, for in it is the word of sin.
Ephe (...)
Remember yi father and thy mother, wha^ thou art set among great men: lest
God forget yt in their sight, and lest ^^ou dotinge in thy custom, suffer
rebuke. and wyshe not to have been borne, and so curse the day of thy
natiuite. The man that is accustomed with the words of blasphemy, (...)
will never be reformed all ye days of his life. To sin twyse is to much,
but the third brings wrath and destruction. An whote stomach can not be
quenched (eue^ like a burning fire) till it have swalowed up somthi^ge: eue^
so an unchaste man has no rest in his flesh, till he have kyndled a fire.

All bred is sweet to an whoremonger, he will not leave of, till he have his
purpose. A Esa (...)
I am compassed about with darcknes, the walls cover me, no body seyth me:
whom need I to fear? The Highest will not remember my sins. (He understands
not that his eyes se all things, for all soch fear of me^ dryueth away the
fear of God from him: for he fears only the eyes of men, and considers
not that the eyes of the LORD are clearer then the Son, beholdinge all ye
ways of men and the ground of the deep, and lokynge even to men's hertes in
secret places. The LORD God knew all things or ever they were made, and
after they be brought to pass also he looks upon them all. (...)
The same man shall be openly punyshed in ye streets of ye cite, and shall be
chased abroad like a young horse foale: and when he thinks leest upon it, he
shall be taken, Thus shall he be put to shame of every man, because he would not
understand the fear of the LORD. And thus shall it go also with every wife yt
leaves her huszbande, and gets enheretaunce by a strange marriage. First,
she has been unfaithful unto the law of ye Highest: Secondly, (...)
Thirdly, she has played ye whore in aduoutry, and gotten her children by
another man. She shall be brought out of ye co^gregacio^, and her children shall be
looked upon. Her children shall not take rote: and as for fruit, her branches
shall bri^ge forth none. A shameful report shall she leave behind her, and her
dishono shall not be put out. And they yt remain, shall know, yt there is
nothi^ge better, the^ ye fear of God: and yt there is nothing sweter, then to
take heed unto the commandments of the LORD. A great worshipe is it to
follow ye LORD, for long life shall be received of him.

The XXIIII. Chapter.


(...)
and shall not leave of unto the world to come. (...)
In the holy habitacion have I served before him, and so was I stablished in
Sion. (...). 13^. b
In ye holy cite rested I in like manner, and in Jerusalem was my power. I took
rote in an honorable people, even in the portion of ye LORD and in his
heretage, and kept me in ye fulness of the saints. I am set up an hye like a
Ceder upon Libanus, and as a Cypers tree upon the mount Hermon: I am exalted
like a palm tree in Cades, and as a rose pla^te in Jericho: As a fair olyue
tree in the field, and am exalted like as a plantayne tree by the water side. I
have given a smell in the streets, as ye Cynamom and Balm, that has so good a
sauoure: ye a sweet odoure have I given, as it were Myrre of the best.

(...)
As ye vine have I brought forth fruit of a sweet sauoure, and my flowers are
ye fruit of hono and riches. I am the mother of bewtye, of love, of fear, of
knowledge and of holy hope. In me is all grace of life and truth: Ioh. 14. a
In me is all hope of life and virtue. O come unto me, all ye that be desirous
of me, and fill your selves with my fruits: for my sprete is sweter then honey,
and so is my inheritance more then the honey comb: the remembrance of me
endures for evermore. They that eat me, shall have the more honger: and they
that drink me, shall thyrste the more. Who so herkeneth unto me, shall not come
to confucion: and they that work in me, shall not offend. They that make me to
be known, shall have everlasting life.

All these things are the book of life, the covenant of the Highest, and the
knowledge of the truth. Exo. 20. ^ and 24. a
Moses commanded the law in the precepts of righteousness for an heretage
unto the house of Jacob, and committed ye promyses unto Israel (Out of David
his servant HE ordened to raise up a most mighty king, Psalm. 131. ^ Act. 2. d
syttinge in the seat of honor for evermore. Deuteronomy. 4. ^ and 29. b
) This fylleth with wyszdome like as the floude of Phison, and as ye floude of
Tigris, when the new fruits are a growinge.

This brings a plenteous understanding, Iosu. 3. ^
as Iordane in the time of harvest. This makes nurtor to break forth as the
light, and as the water Gihon in ye harvest. The first has not known her
perfectly, no more shall the last seek out ye ground of her. For her thought is
fuller the^ the sea, and her council is profounder then the great deep.

I wyszdome have cast out floudes. I am as a great waterbroke out of ye river.
I am as the river Dorix, and as a water condyte am I come out of the garden of
pleasure. I said: I will water the garden of my young plants, and fill the
fruit of my birth. So my waterbroke became exceadinge great, and my river
approached unto the sea. For I make doctrine to be unto all me^ as light as the
fair morning, and I shall make it to be ever the clearer. (I will pearse
through all the lower parts of the earth, I will look upon all soch as be a
sleep, and lighten all the^ that put their trust in the LORD.) I shall yet
pour out doctrine, like as prophecy, and leave it unto soch as seek after
wyszdome, and their generacions shall I never fail, unto the holy everlasting
world. Behold, how that I have not labored for my self only, but for all
them yt seek after ye truth. Eccli. ^3. b


The XXV. Chapter.
^en. 13. b ^om. 12. a
which be also allowed before God and men: The vnyts of brethren, the love of
neghbours, and man and wife that agree well together. ^ccl. 40. d


Three things there be which my soul hates, and I utterly abhor the life of
them: A poor man that is proud. A rich man that is a liar, ^en. 18. b
and an old body that doteth and is unchaste.

If thou have gathered nothing in thy youth, what wylt thou find the^ in
thine age? O how pleasant a thing is it, wha^ gray headed men are discrete,
and when the elders can give good council? O how co^ly a thing is wyszdome
unto aged men? ye understanding and council is a glorious thing. The crown
of old men is to have much experience, and ye fear of God is their worshipe.

^ccli. 14. a and 19. c ^aco. 3. a
and that has not fallen with his tongue, and yt has not been feign to serve
soch as are unmeet for him. Well is him, yt fyndeth a faithful friend: and well
is him, which talks of wiszdome to an ear yt hears him. O how great is
he, yt fyndeth wyszdome and knowledge? Yet is he not above him, that fears the
LORD. The fear of God has set itself above all things. Blessed is ye man,
unto who^ it is granted to have the fear of God. Unto who^ shall he be
lickened, yt keeps it fast? The fear of God is the beginning of his love,
and the beginning of faith is to cleue fast unto it. The heaviness of the heart
is all the punishment, and the wickedness of a woman goes above all. All
punishment and plage is nothing in comparison of the plage of the heart, eue^
so all wickedness is nothing to the wickedness of a woman.

Pro. 21. c
I will rather dwell with a lion and dragon, then to keep house with a wicked
wife. The wickedness of a woman changes her face, she shall moffell her
countenance as it were a Beer, and as a sack shall she show it among the
neghbours. Her husband is brought to shame among his neghbours, and wha^ he
hears it, it makes him to sighe. All wickedness is but little to the
wickkednes of a woman, ye portion of the ungodly shall fall upon her.

Like as to clymme up a sondy way is to (...)
Look not to narowly upon the bewtye of a woman, lest thou be provoked in
desire toward her. The wrath of a woman is dishonor and great confucio^. If
a woman get the mastrie, then is she contrary to her huszbande. A wicked wife
makes a sorry heart, an heavy countenance and a deed wound. (...)
Of the woman came ye beginning of sin, and through her we all are deed. Give
thy water no passage, no not a little, nether give a wicked woman her will. If
she walk not after thy hand, she shall confound the in the sight of thy
enemies. Cut her of then from thy flesh, that she do not allwaye abuse the.

The XXVI. Chapter.
Happy is the man that has a virtuous (...)
A dronken woman is a great plage, for she can not cover her own shame.

The whordome of a woman may be (...)
hold her straightly, lest she abuse hirself through ouermoch liberte. Bewarre of
all the dishonesty of her eyes, and marvel not if she do against the. Lik as
one that goes by the way and is thyrstie, so shall she open her mouth, and
drink of every next water that she may get.

By every hedge shall she sit her down, and open her quyuer against every
arowe. A loving wife reioyseth her huszbande, and fedeth his bones with her
wyszdome. A woman of few words is a gift of God, and to a well nurtured mind
may nothing be compared.

LORD, so is a virtuous wife ye bewtye of all her house. Like as the clear
light is upon ye holy ca^delstick, so is the bewtye of the face upon an honest
body. (...) 5. d
Like as the golden pilers are upon the sockettes of silver, so are the fair
legs upon a woman that has a constant mind. (Perpetual are the fou^dacions
that be laid upon a whole stonye rock, so are ye commandments of God upon
an holy woman.)

LORD has prepared him unto the sword. There be two manner of things, which
me thyncke to be herd and perylous. A merchant can not lightly keep him from
wrong, nether a tauerner himself from sin.

The XXVII. Chapter.
LORD, his house shall soon be overthrown. Like as when one sifteth, the
fylthynes remains in the syue: So, remains there some unclean thing (...)
so does tentacion of trouble try righteous men. The tree of the field is
known by his fruit, so is the thought of ma^s heart known by his words.
Praise no man except thou have hard him, for a man is known by his words.
If thou folowest righteousness, thou shall get her, and put her upon yt as a
fair garment. (And thou shall dwell with her, and she shall defend the for
ever, and in ye day of knowledge thou shall find steadfastness.) The birds
resort unto their like, so does the truth turn unto them that be occupied
withal. The lion wayteth for ye pray: so do the sins lurk upon the works
of wickedness. The talkinge of him that fears God, is nothing but wyszdome:
as for a fool, he changes as ye Moon. If thou be among the indiscreet,
keep thy word to a convenient time, but among soch as be wise, speak on
hardely. To. 12. b Col. 4. a
The talkinge of fools is abhominacio^, and their Eccli. 23. b
stops the ears.

The strife of the proud is bloudsheddynge, and their blasphemynge is heavy to
hear. Who so discovers secrets, Eccli. 19. b and 22. d
leseth his credence, and fyndeth no friend after his will. Love thy friend,
and bind thyself in faithfulness with him: but if thou bewrayest his secrets,
thou shall not get him again: For like as the man is that destroys his
enemy so is he also that deals falsely in the frendshipe of his neighbor.

Like as one that lets a bird go out

He that wyncketh with the eyes, Pro. 10. b
ymagineth some evil, and no man shall take him from it. When thou art present,
he shall hylie commend and praise thy words: but at the last he shall turn
his tail, and slander thy saying. Many things have I hated, but nothing so
evil, for the LORD himself also abhors soch one.

Who so casts a stone an hye, it shall fall Exo. 21. b
and he that smyteth with gyle, wounds himself. Who so diggeth a pytt, shall
fall therein: Hest. 7. b Psalm. 7. b Pro. 26. c Eccle. 10. a
and he that lays a snare, shall be taken in it himself. Who so gives a
wicked noisome council, it shall come upon himself, and he shall not know
from whence. The proud blaspheme and are scornful, but vengeance lurketh
for them as a lion. They that rejoice at the fall of ye righteous, shall be
taken in ye snare, anguysh of heart shall consume them before they dye Anger and
rigorousnes are two abominable things, and ye ungodly has them both upon him.

The XXVIII. Chapter.
LORD, Deuteronomy. 32. c Romans 12. c Mat. 5. b ^. b. 1^. b
which shall surely keep him his sins. Forgive thy neighbor the hurt that he
has done the, and so shall thy sins be forgeuen the also, when thou prayest.
A man that bears hatred against another, how darre he desire forgiveness of
God? He that shows no mercy to a man which is like himself, how darre he axe
forgiveness of his sins? If he that is but flesh, bears hatred and keeps
it, who will entreat for his sins? Remember the end, and let enmyte pass,
which seeks death and destruction, and abide thou in ye commandments.
Remember ye commandment, so shall thou not be rigorous over ye Eccli. 8. a
Bewarre of strife, and thou shall make ye sins fewer. For an angry man
kyndleth variaunce, and the ungodly disquyeteth fre^des, and puts discord
among them that be at peace. The more wodd there is, the more vehement is the
fire: Pro. 26. c
and the mightier yt men be, the greater is the wrath: and the longer the
strife endures, the more it burns.

Eccli. 21. d
The slaunderer and dubble to^gued is cursed, for many one that be friends
sets he at variaunce. The third tongue has disquieted many one, and driven
them from one land to another. Strong cities has it broken down, and
overthrown the houses of great men. The third tongue has cast out many an
honest woman, and robbed them of their labors. Who so harkeneth unto soch,
shall never find rest, and never dwell safely. The stroke of ye rod makes
yedders, but the stroke of the tongue smyteth the bones in sunder. There be many
that have perished with the sword, but many mo through the tongue.

LORD, shall fall therein: and it shall burn them, and no man shall be able to
quench it. It shall fall upon the^ as a Lyo^, and devour them as a leparde.
Thou he^gest ye goods with thorns: why do thou not rather make doors and
bars for ye mouth? Thou weiest thy gold and silver: why do thou not weye
thy words also upon the balaunce? Bewarre, that thou slide not in thy tongue,
and so fall before thine enemies, that lay wait for the.

The XXIX. Chapter.
WHo so will show mercy, let him lend unto his neighbor: (...)
and he that is able, let him keep the commandment. Lend unto thy neighbor
in time of his need, and pay thou thy neighbor again in due season. Keep thy
word, and deal faithfully with him, and thou shall allwaye find the thing
yt is necessary for the. There have been many, that when a thing was lent
them, rekened it to be found: and made them travail and labor, that had
helped them. While they receive any thing, they kiss the hands of soch as
give them, and for their neghbours good they humble their voice. But when they
should pay again they keep it back, and give evil words, and make many
excuses by reason of the time: and though he be able, yet gives he scarce the
half again, and rekeneth ye other to be found. And if he with old not his
money, yet has he an enemy of him, and that undeserved.

He pays him with cursinge and rebuke (...)
Gather thy treasure after the commandment of ye Highest, and so shall it bring
the more profit the^ gold. Lay up the allmes in the hand of the poor, and it
shall keep the from all (...). (A man's allmes is as a purse with him, (...)
shall keep a man's favor as the apple of an eye: and afterward shall it
arise, and pay every man his reward upon his head.) It shall fight for the
against thine enemies, better then the shylde of a giaunte, or spear of the
mighty.

A good honest man is suertye for his neighbor, but a wicked person lets
him come to shame. Forget not the frendshipe of thy suertye, for he has given
his soul for ye. The ungodly despyseth ye good deed of his suertye, and the
unthankful and ignorant leaves his suertie in danger. (Some man promyseth
for his neighbor: and when he has lost his honesty, he shall forsake him.)
Suertishipe has destroyed many a rich man, and removed them as the wawes in
ye see. Mighty people has it driven away, and caused the^ to wandre in
strange countrees. An ungodly man transgressynge the commandment of the
LORD, shall fall in to an evil suertishipe: and though he force himself to get
out, yet shall he fall in to judgment. Help thy neighbor out after thy power,
and bewarre, yt thou thy self fall not in soch dett. The chief thing that
keeps in the life, (...)
is water and bred, clothinge and lodginge, to cover the shame.

(...) 36. b (...). 6. b (...). 13. a
the^ delicate fair among the strange. Be it little or much yt thou have,
hold the content withal (and thou shall not be blamed as a vagabounde:) for a
miserable life is it, to go from house to house: and where a man is fremde, he
darre not open his mouth. Though one be lodged, and have meat and drink, yet
shall he be taken as unworthy, and hear many bitter rough words, namely thus:
Go thy way thou stranger, and prepare a table (for thy self) and feed me also
of that thou have. Away thou stranger (so, that he regards his honor
no more) my brother comes in to my house, and so he tells him the necessite
of his house. These things are heavy to a man that has understanding: namely,
the forbyddinge of ye house, and that the le^der casts him in the teth.

The XXX. Chapter.
(...) ^3. c (...) 2^. b
that he may have joy of him afterward (and that he grope not after his
neghbours doors. (...). 6. a
) He yt teaches his son, shall have joy in him, and need not be ashamed of
him among his aquantau^ce. Who so enfourmed and teaches his son, greueth ye
enemy, and before his friends he may have joy of him. Though the father dye,
yet is he as though he were not deed: for he has left one behind him that is
like him. In his life he saw him, and had joy in him, and was not sorry in his
death, (nether was he ashamed before ye enemies.) For he left behind him an
auenger against his enemies, and a good doer unto the friends. For the life of
children he shall bind the wounds together, and his heart is grieved at every
cry. An untamed horse wylbe hard, and a wanton child will be wylfull. If thou
bring up thy son delicatly, he shall make ye afraid: and if thou play with
him, he shall bring the to heaviness. Laugh not with him, lest thou weep with him
also, and lest thy teth be set on edge at the last.

Give him not liberte in his youth, and excuse Eccli. 7. ^
Bow down his neck while he is young, hytt him upon the sides while he is yet
but a child, lest he wax stubburne, and give no more force of ye (and so
shall thou have heaviness of soul.) Teach thy child, and be dilligent therein,
lest it be to thy shame. Better is the poor being whole and strong, the^ a
man to be rich, and not to have his health. Health and welfare is above all
gold, and an whole body above all treasure. There is no riches above a sound
body, and no joy above the joy of the heart. Death is better then a wretched
life, or contynuall sickness. The good things yt are put in a close mouth, are
like as when meat is laid upon ye grave.

What good does the offeringe unto an Bell. ^
Eue^ so is it also with the rich, whom God makes seek: he seith it with his
eyes, and groneth thereafter, and is even as a gelded man, that lies with a
vyrgin and sygheth. Pro. 12. d 15. b. 17. d Eccli 38. Pro. 14.
Give not over thy mind in to heaviness, and vex not thy self in thine own
council. The joy and chearfulnes of the heart is the life of man, and a man's
gladness is the prolonginge of his days. Love thine own soul, and comfort
thine heart: as for sorrow and heaviness, drive it far from ye, 2. Cor. 7.
for heaviness has slain many a man, and brings no profit. Zele and anger
shorten the days of the life: carefulnes and sorrow bring age before the time.
Unto a merry heart every thing has a good taist, that he eats.

The XXXI. Chapter.
Travail and carefulnes for riches 1. Tim. 6. b
and makes the flesh to consume. When one lies and takes care, he waketh
ever up, like as great sickness breaks the sleep. The rich has great labor
in gatheringe his riches together, and then with the pleasure of his riches he
takes his rest and is refreshed. But who so labors and prospers not, he
is poor: and though he leave of, yet is he a beggar. He that loves riches,
shall not be justified: and who so follows corrupcio^, shall have enough
thereof. Eccli. 8. a
Many one are come in great mysfortune by the reason of gold, and have found
their destruction before them. It is a tree of falling unto them that offer it
up, and all soch as be foolish fall therein. Blessed is the rich, which is
found without blemysh, and has not gone after gold, ner hoped in money and
treasures. Where is there soch one? and we shall commend him, and call him
blessed, for great things does he among his people. Who so is tried, and
found perfect in soch things, shall be commended and praised. Who might
offend, and has not offended? Who could do evil, and has not done it?
Therefore shall his good be stablished, and the whole congregation shall declare
his allmesses. If thou sytt at a great man's table, open not thy mouth wide
upon it, and make not many words. Remember, that an evil eye is a shrew.

^att. 7. a
Ponder by thy self what thy neighbor would feign have, and be descrete in
every point. Eat the thing that is set before the, manerly, as it becomes
a man: ^ccli 37. d
and eat not to much, lest thou be abhorred. Leave thou of first of all
because of nurtoure, lest thou be he whom no man may satisfy, which may
turn to thy decay. Wha^ thou syttest among many men, reach not thine hand
out first of all. O how well content is a wise man with a little wine? so yt in
sleep thou shall not be seek thereof, ner feel any pain. A sweet wholesome sleep
shall soch one have, and feel no inward grefe. He ryseth up by times in ye
morning, and is well at ease in him self. But an insatiable eater slepeth
vnquyetly, and has ache and pain of the body. If thou felest that thou have
eaten to much, arise, go thy way, cast it of thy stomach, and take thy rest.

^om. 12. b
In all thy works be diligent and quycke, so shall there no sickness happen unto
the. ^ro. 22. a
Who so is liberal in dealing out his meat, many men shall bless him and
praise him with their lips: and the same is a sure token of his love and
faithfulness. But he yt is unfaithful in meat, the whole cite shall complain
of him: and that is a sure experience of his infidelite and wickedness. ^phe. 5.
b ^udit. 13. a
Be not thou a wine bebber, for wine has destroyed many a man. The fire
proves ye hard iron, even so does wine prove the hertes of the proud, when
they be droncken.

Wine sorbely droncken, quyckeneth the Psalm. (...) Pro. (...)
thou shall be temperate. What life is it, yt may continue without wine? Wine
was made from the beginning to make men glad (and not for dronkennes) Wine
measurably dronke^ is a reioysinge of the soul and body. But if it be dronken
with excess, it makes bytternes and sorrow unto the mind. Dronke^nes fylleth
the mind of the foolish with shame and ruin, mynisheth the strength, and
makes wounds. (...)
Rebuke not thy neighbor at ye wine, and despise him not in his mirth. Give
him no despytefull words, and preasse not upon him with contrary sayenges.

The XXXII. Chapter.
IF thou be made a ruler, pride not thy (...)
but be thou as one of the people. Take diligent care for them, (...)
and look well thereto: and when thou have done all thy duty, sit the down,
that thou may be merry with them, and receive a crown of honor. Talk
wisely and honestly, for wyszdome becomes the right well. Hinder not musyck.
Speak not, where there is no audyence: (...)
and pour not forth wyszdome out of time, at an importunyte. Like as the
Carbuncle stone shyneth, that is set in gold, so does a song garnysh the wine
feast: and as ye Smaragde that is set in gold, so is the swetnes of Musyck by
ye mirth of wine.

Thou young man, speak that becomes

Who so fears the LORD, will receive LORD, shall find the judgment, and
their righteousness shall be kyndled as a light. An ungodly man will not be
reformed, but can help him self with the example of other in his purpose. A
man of understanding despyseth no good council: but a wild and proud body
has no fear. My son, do nothing without advisement, so shall it not repent
the after ye deed. Go not in the way where thou may fall, ner where thou
may stomble against the stone. Give not yi self in to a laborious slypery
way, and bewarre of thine own children. In all thy works put thy trust in
God from thy whole heart, for that is the kepinge of the commandments. Who so
believes Gods word, takes head to the commandments: and he that puts
his trust in ye LORD, shall want nothing.

The XXXIII. Chapter.
LORD shall deliver him. A wise man hates not ye law, but an ypocryte is as
a ship in a raginge water. A man of understanding gives credence unto the
law of God, and ye law is faithful unto him. Be sure of the matter, then
talk thereof: Be first well instruct, the^ may thou give answer. The heart
of ye foolish is like a cartwhele, and his thoughts run about like the
axell tree. Like as a wild horse that neyeth under every one yt sytteth upon
him, so is it with a scornful friend. Why does one day excel another,
seeing all the days of the year come of the Son? The wyszdome of the LORD
has so parted them a sunder, and so has he ordened the times and solemn
feasts. Some of them has he chosen and hallowed before other days. And all
men are made of the ground, and out of the earth of Adam.

LORD sundered them, and made their ways of diverse fashions. Some of them
has he blessed, made much of them, hallowed them, and claymed them to himself.
But some of the^ has he cursed, brought the^ low, and put the^ out of their
estate. (...) 9. c
Like as ye claye is in the potters hand, and all the ordrynge thereof at his
pleasure: so are men also in the hand of him yt made the^, so that he may
give them as it likes him best. Against evil is good, and against death is
life: so is the ungodly against soch as fear God. Behold thus all the works
of the Highest, and there are ever (...)
two against two, and one set against another. I am awaked up last of all, as
one that gathers after in harvest. In the gifts of God and in his blessing
I am increased, and have filled my wine press, like a grape gatherer. Behold,
Ecclesia^^tici. 24. ^
how I have not labored only for my self, but for all soch as love nurtoure
and wyszdome.

Hear me O ye great men of the people, yo ears ye rulers of ye congregation.
Give not ye son and wife, ye brother and friend power over the, while thou
lyuest: and give not away thy substance and good to another, lest it repent
the, and thou be feign to beg therefore thy self. As long as thou lyuest and
have breath, let no man change the: For better it is thy children to pray the,
then yt thou should be feign to look in their hands. In all thy works be
excellent, that thy honor be never stained. At the time when thou shall end
thy days, and fynish thy life, distribute thine inheretau^ce. The fodder, the
whyppe, and the burden belongs unto the Ass: Meat, correccion, and work
unto the servant.

If thou set thy servant to labor, thou Eccli. 7. c
let him be unto the as thine own soul, for in blood have thou gotten him.
If thou have a servant, hold him as thy self, for thou have need of him as of
thy self. If thou intreatest him evil, and kepest him hard, and make him to
be proud, and to run away from ye, thou can not tell, what way thou
shall seek him.

The XXXIIII. Chapter.
Unwise people begyle them selves with have disceaued many a man, and they
failed, that put their trust therein.

LORD, sto^deth in awe of no man, and is not afraid, for the LORD is his
hope and comfort.

LORD: In who^ puts he his trust? who is his strength? For the eyes of the
LORD have respect unto them, that love him. He is their mighty proteccion,
and strong ground: A defense for the heat, a refuge for the hot noone day,
a sucore for stomblynge, and an help for falling. He sets up the soul,
and lighteneth ye eyes: He gives health life, and blessing. He that gives an
offeringe of unrighteous good, his offering is refused: and the scornful
dealinges of the unrighteous please not God. God has no delight in the
offerynges of ye ungodly, ^ro. 15. a
nether may sin be reconcyled in the multitude of oblacions. Who so brings
an offering out of ye goods of ye poor, does eue^ as one yt kylleth ye son
before ye fathers eyes.

Deu. 24. c ^ccli. 7. c
He that defraudeth ye laborer of his hyre, is a blood shedder. Wha^ one
buyldeth, and another breaks down, what profit have they then but labor?
When one prays, and another curses, whose voice will the LORD hear? Nu. 1^.
b
He that washes himself because of a deed body, and then touches the deed
again, what does his waszshinge? Pro. 26. b ^. Pet. 2. b
So is it with a man that fasteth for his sins, and does them again: who will
hear his prayer? Or what does his fasting help him?

The XXXV. Chapter.
Iere. 7. c
He that holds fast the commandment, offreth the right health offrynge. He
yt is thankful and recompenseth, offreth fine flower. (...)
Who so is merciful and gives allmes, yt is the right thank offrynge. God
has pleasure, wha^ one departs from sin: and to forsake unrighteousness
reco^cileth us with him. Thou shall not appear emptye before ye LORD, (...)
for all soch is done because of ye commandment. The offeringe of ye
righteous makes ye altar fatt, and a sweet smell is it before ye Highest. The
offering of the righteous is acceptable unto God, and shall never be forgotten.
(...)
Give God his hono with a cheerful eye, and keep not back the firstlinges of
ye hands. In all thy gifts show a merry countenance, (...)
and halowe thy tithes unto God with gladness. Give unto God, (...)
acordinge as he has enriched and prospered their look what thine hand is
able, yt give with a cheerful eye: for the LORD recompenseth, and gives ye
seven times as much again.

Give no unrighteous gifts, for soch will LORD is a righteous judge, (...)
and regards no man's person: He accepts not the person of the poor,
but he hears ye prayer of ye oppressed. (...)
He despyseth not ye desire of ye fatherles, ner ye wyddow, when she pours
out her prayer before him. Does not God se ye tears, yt run down ye chekes
of the wyddow? Or hears he not the complaynte, over soch as make her to wep^*
Who so serves God after his pleasure, shall be accepted, and his prayer reaches
unto the clouds. The prayer of him yt humbles himself, (...)
goes through ye clouds, till she come nigh. She will not be comforted, ner go
her way, LORD will not be slack in coming, ner tarry long: till he have
smytte^ in sonder ye backs of ye unmercifully, and avenged himself of ye
Heithen: till he have taken away ye multitude of ye cruel, and broken the
cepter of the unrighteous: till he give every man after his works, and reward
them as they have deserved: till he have delivered his people, mayntened their
cause, and reioysed them in his mercy. O how fair a thing is mercy, in the
time of anguysh and trouble? It is like a cloud of rain, yt comes in ye
time of a drouth.

The XXXVI. Chapter.
Have mercy upon us O LORD, thou Lift up thine hand over the outla^dish
Heithen, yt they may learn to know thy might and power. Like as thou art
hallowed in us before them, so bring to pass, yt thou may be magnified also
in them before us: yt they may know the, like as we know the. For there is
none other God, but only thou O LORD. Renew the tokens, and change the
wondrous works. Show thine hand and thy right arm gloriously. Raise thy
indignacion, and pour out thy wrath. Take away the adversary, and smite the
enemy. Make ye time short, remember thy covenant, that ye wondrous works
may be praised. Let the wrath of the fire consume them, that live so careless:
and let them perish, that do ye people hurt. Smite in sonder the head of the
princes, that be our enemies, and say: there is none other but we.

LORD have mercy upon the people yt has ye name, (...) 4. f
and upon Israel, whom thou have lickened to a first borne son. O be merciful
unto Jerusalem the cite of thy Sanctuary, ye cite of thy rest. (...) 6. g
Fill Sion with thy unspeakable virtues, and yi people with thy glory. Give
wytnes unto ye creature, whom thou maydest from the beginning, and raise up
the prophecies yt have been showed in thy name. Reward them yt wait for the,
yt thy prophets may be found faithful. O LORD hear the prayer of thy
servants, acordinge to ye blessinge of Aaron over thy people: that all they
which dwell upon earth, (...) 6. d
may know, that thou art the LORD the eternal God, which is from
everlasting.

(...). 2. b
so does an heart of understanding marck false words. A froward heart gives
heaviness, but a man of experience lifts him up again. The woman receaueth
every man, yet is one daughter better then another. A fair wife reioyseth her
huszbande, and a man loves nothing better. If she be loving and virtuous
withal, then is not her huszbande like other men. He that has gotten a
virtuous woman, has a goodly possession: she is unto him an help and piler
where upon he rests. Where no hedge is, there the goods are spoiled: and
where no houszwife is, there ye fre^dles mourns. Like as there is no credence
given to a robber, yt goes from one cite to another: So is not ye man believed,
that has no nest, and must turn in, where he may abide in the night.

The XXXVII. Chapter.
EVery friend says: I will be friendly Eccli. 6. b
There is some companyon, which in prosperity reioyseth with his friend: but in
the time of trouble, he takes part against him. There is some co^panyon, that
mourns with his friend for the belly sake: but when trouble comes, he takes
hold of the shylde. Forget not thy friend in thy mind, and think upon him in
yi riches. Every counceler brings forth his council: Nevertheless there is
some, yt counceleth but for his own profit. Eccli. 8. ^ and 9. c
Bewarre of ye counceler, and be aduysed before whereto thou will use him, for he
will give counsel for him self. Lest he cast the lot upon the, and say unto
the: Thy way and purpose is good, and afterward he stand against the, and
look what shall become of the.

Axe no counsel at him, yt suspecketh ye for labo.) Take no soch folks to
counsel, but be dilligent to seek counsel at a virtuous man, yt fears God,
soch one as thou know to be a keeper of ye commandments, which has a
mind after thine own mind, and is sorry for ye wha^ thou sto^blest.

And hold thy council fast in thine heart: that declare a changed heart,
wherout there springs evil and good, death and life, and a masterfull tongue
that bableth much. Some man is apt and well instruct in many things, and yet
very unprofitable unto himself. Some man there is, that can give wise and
prudent council, and yet is he hated, and contynueth a beggar: for that grace
is not given him of God, to be accepted. Another is robbed of all wiszdome, yet
is he wise unto him self, and the fruit of vndersto^dinge is faithful in his
mouth.

^ Cor. 6. c and 10. c
For all things are not profitable for all men, nether has every soul
pleasure in every thing. Be not gredy in every eating, ^ccli. 31. b
and be not to haistye upon all meats. For excess of meats brings siknes,
and glotony comes at the last to an unmeasurable heat. Through glotony have
many one perished: but he that dyeteth him self temperatly, prolongeth his life.

The XXXVIII. Chapter.
LORD has created medecyne of the earth, and he that is wise, will not abhor
it. Exo. 15. d 4. Re. 4. c
Was not ye bitter water made sweet with a tree? that men might learn to know
the virtue thereof. The LORD has given men wyszdome and understanding, yt he
might be honored in his wo^derous works. With soch does he heal men, and
takes away their pains: Of soch does the Apotecary make a confeccion, yet
can no man perform all his works. For of ye LORD comes prosperous wealth
over all ye earth.

LORD, Esa. 38 a ^. Pa^. 16. c
and he shall make the whole. Leave of from sin, and order thy hands a right:
cle^se thine heart from all wickedness. Give a sweet sauoured offrynge, and ye
fine flower for a token of remembrance: make the offrynge fatt, as one that
gives the first fruits, and give rowme to the Phisician* For ye LORD has
created him: let him not go from the, for thou have need of him. The hour may
come, yt the seek may be helped through them, when they pray unto ye LORD, yt
he may recover, and get health to live longer. He that synneth before his
maker, shall fall in to the hands of the Phisician.

My son, bring forth thy tears over (...)
as if thou had suffered great harm thy self: and the^ cover his body
after a conuenyent manner, and despise not his buryall. Enforce thy self to
weep, and provoke thy self to mourn, and make lamentacion expediently, (...)
and yt a day or two, lest thou be evil spoken of: and then comfort thy self
because of the heaviness. (...)
For of heaviness comes death, the heaviness of ye heart breaks strength.
Heaviness and pouerte greueth the heart in tentacion and offense. Take no heaviness
to heart, drive it away, and remember the last things. Forget it not, for
there is no turnynge again. Thou shall do him no good, but hurt thy self.
Remember his judgment, thine also shall be likewise: unto me yesterdaye, unto the
to day. Let the remembrance of the deed cease in his rest, (...)
and comfort thy self again over him, seeing his sprete is departed from him.

The wyszdome of the scrybe is at co^uenyent labo, shall be wise. He that holds
ye plough, and has pleasure in proddynge and dryuynge ye oxen, and goes
about with soch works, he can speak of oxen. He sets his heart to make
forowes, and is diligent to give ye kyne fodder. So is every carpenter also and
work master, that labors still night and day: he carueth, graueth and
cutteth out, and his desire is in sondrye conning things, and his heart
ymagineth, how he may conyngly cast an image, his diligence also and watchinge
perfourmeth the work. The yronsmyth in like manner bydeth by his stythie, and
does his diligence to labor the iron. The vapoure of the fire brenneth his
flesh, and he must fight with the heat of the furnace. The noise of the Hammer
sounds ever in his ears, and his eyes look still upon the thing yt he
makes. He has set his mind there upon, that he will make out his work, and
therefore he watches, how he may set it out, and bring it to an end.

So does the potter sit by his work, he diligent and careful in all his
doings, and his labor and work is without nombre. He fashioneth the claye
with his arm, and with his fete he te^pereth it. His heart ymagineth how he may
make it pleasant, and his diligence is to cleanse the oven. All these hope in
their hands, and every one thinks to be conning in his work. Without these
may not the cities be manteyned, inhabited ner occupied: yet come they not hye
in the congregation: they understand not the covenant of ye law: they can
not declare equity and judgment: they can not find out the darck sentences:
but through them shall the creature of ye world be manteyned: their prayer
concerns only the work and labor of co^ninge.

The XXXIX. Chapter.
LORD yt made him, and to pray before the highest God. He opens his mouth in
prayer, and prays for his sins.

LORD will, he shall be filled with the sprete of understanding, yt he may then
pour out wise sentences, and give thanks unto the LORD in his prayer. He
shall order his deuyce, and led his knowledge aright, and give him
understanding of secret things. He shall show forth the science of his
lerninge, and rejoice in the covenant of the law of the LORD. The whole
congregation shall commend his wyszdome, and it shall never be put out. The
remembrance of him shall never be forgotten, and his name shall continue from
one generation to another. (...) 44. b
His wyszdome shall be spoken of, and the whole congregation shall openly declare
his praise. While he lives, he has a greater name the^ a thousand beside:
and after his death, the same name remains unto him. Yet will I speak of mo
men of understanding, for I am full as the Moon.

LORD, show his praise with your lips. Ye even with the song of your
lips, with harpes and playenge, and in geuinge thanks unto him, say after
this manner: Genesis 1. d
All ye works of the LORD are exceadinge good, and all his commandments
are mete and convenient in due season.

A man need not to say: what is yt? what is that? Genesis 7. d
for at time convenient they shall all be sought. At his commandment ye water
was as a wall, and at the word of his mouth ye waters stood still. In his
commandment is every thing acceptable and reconcyled, and his health can not
be minished. The works of all flesh are before him, and there is nothing hydd
from his eyes. He seith from everlasting to everlasting, and there is
nothing to wonderful or hye unto him. A man need not to say then, what is
this, or that? For he has made all things to do good unto man. His blessing
shall run over as the stream, and moisture the earth like a floude of water.
Like as he makes the water for drouth, so shall his wrath fall upon the
Heithen.

His ways are plain and right unto ye just, but the ungodly stomble at them.
Ose. 14. ^ Romans 8. ^
For the good are good things created from the beginning, and evil things
for the ungodly. All things necessary for the life of man are created from the
beginning: water, fire, iron and salt, meel, Eccli. 29. ^ 1. Ti. 4. a
wheat and honey milk and wine, oil and clothinge. All these things are
created for the best to the faithful: But to the ungodly shall all these
things be turned to hurt and harm. There be spretes that are created for
vengeance, and in their rigorousnes have they fastened their torments. Matt.
2^.
In the time of the end they shall pour out their strength, and pacify ye
wrath of him that made them. Fire, hayle, Eccli 40.
honger and death: all these things are created for vengeance.

The teth of wild noisome beestes, the scorpions, serpents, and the sword
are created also for vengeance, to the destruction of the ungodly. They shall
be glad to do his commandments: and when need is, they shall be ready upon
earth: and when their hour is come, they shall not ouerpasse the commandment
of the LORD.

Therefore have I taken a good courage unto me from the beginning, and thought
to put these things in wrytinge, and to leave the^ behind me. (...). 1. d
All ye works of the LORD are good, and he gives every one in due season,
and when need is, So that a man need not to say: this is worse then that. For
in due season they are all pleasant and good: And therefore praise the LORD
with whole heart and mouth, and give thanks unto his name.

The XL. Chapter.


^ccli. 39. c ^en. 7. d ^en. 3. d ^ccli. 41 b
these things are all created against the ungodly, and for their sakes came
the floude also. All that is of the earth, shall turn to earth again: and all
waters ebb again in to the sea. All brybes and unrighteousness shall be put
away, but faithfulness and truth shall endure for ever. The substau^unce and
goods of ye ungodly shall be dried up and syncke away as a water floude, and
they shall make a sound like a great thonder in the rain.

^ccli. 41 b
and ye unclean rotes upon the hye rocks shall be roted out before the gras by
the water side and upon the river banks.

Frendlynes and liberalite in the increase and blessing of God, is like a
paradise and garden of pleasure: soch mercy also and kindness endures for ever.
^. Tim. ^ Ph^^. 4 ^
To labo and to be content with that a man has, is a sweet pleasant life: and
that is to find a treasure above all treasures. To beget children and to
repair the cite, makes a perpetual name: but an honest woman is more worth
the^ they both. Wine and mynstrals ye rejoice the heart, but the love of
wyszdome is above them both.

Pypinge and harpinge make a sweet noise, Eccl. ^^
but above them both is a wife that agrees with her huszbande. One brother
helps another in the time of trouble, but allmes shall deliver more then they
both. Gold and silver fasten the fete, but a good council is more pleasant
then they both. Temporal substance and strength lift up the mind: but the
fear of the LORD more then they both. The fear of the LORD wants
nothing, and needs no help. The fear of ye LORD is as a pleasant garden
of blessing, and nothing so bewtyfull as it is. My son, led not a beggars
life, for better it were to dye the^ to beg. Who so looks to another man's
table, takes no thought for his own living how to uphold his life, for he
fedeth himself with other men's meat. But a wise and well nurtoured man will
bewarre thereof. Beggynge is sweet in the mouth of the unshamefast, but in his
belly there burns a fire.

The XLI. Chapter.
O Death, how bitter is the remembrance LORD over all flesh. (...)
And why would hou be against this pleasure of ye Hiest* Whether it be ten,
an hundredth, or a thousand years: death axeth not how long one have lived.

^ccli 40. c
and their posterite shall have perpetual shame and confucion. The children
complain of an ungodly father: and why? for his sake they are rebuked and
despised. Woe be unto you (O ye ungodly) which have forsaken the law of ye
highest God: If ye be borne, ye shall be borne to cursynge: if ye dye, ye curse
shall be your portion.

(...) 40. b
All that is of ye earth, shall turn to earth again: so go the ungodly also out
of ye curse in to destruction. The sorrow of men is in their body: but ye name
of the ungodly shall be put out, for it is nothing worth. Labor to get the a
good name, (...) 22. a
for that shall continue su^er by the, then a thousand great treasures of
gold. A good life has a no^bre of days, but a good name endures ever.

My children, keep wyszdome in peace: for (...) ^0. d
what profit is in the^ both? A man that hydeth his foolishnes, is better then
a man that hydeth his wyszdome. Therefore be ye turned at my words: for it is
not good, in all things and allwaie to be ashamed. True faith must prove and
measure it.

Be ashamed of whordome before father and mother: Be ashamed of lesynge before
the prince and men of auctorite: Of sin, before the judge and ruler: Of
offense, before the congregation and people: Of unrighteousness, before a
companyon and friend: Of theft, before ye neghbours. As for the truth of God
and his covenant, be not ashamed thereof. (...). 1. b


Be ashamed to lie with thine elbowes upon the bred: Be ashamed to look upon
harlottes: Be ashamed to turn away thy face from thy friend: Be ashamed to
take and not to give: Be ashamed also to look upon another man's wife, and to
make many tryflinge words with her maiden, or to stand by her bedsyde. Be
ashamed to vpbrade thy friend: and when thou geuest any thing, cast him not in
the teth withal.

The XLII. Chapter.
neghbo and companyon: to distribute the heretage unto ye friends: to be
diligent to keep true measure and weight: to be content, whether thou gettest
much or little: to deal truly with temporal goods in byenge and selling: to
bring up children with diligence: to correcke an evil servant: to keep that
thine is from an evil wife: to set a lock where many hands are: what thou
delyuerest and geuest out to be kept, to tell it, and to weye it: to write up
all the out geuynge and receauynge: to enfourme ye unlearned and unwise: Of the
aged, that are judged of the young. If thou be dilligent in these things, truly
thou shall be learned and wise and accepted of all men.

The daughter makes ye father to watch Eccli. 26 b
lest she cause thine enemies laugh the to scorn, and the whole cite to give
yt an evil report, and so ^hou be feign to hear thy shame of every man, and
be confounded before all ye people. Eccli. 25. d
Behold not every bodies bewtye, and have not much dwelling among women. For
like as the worm and moth comes out of clothinge, Genesis 3. b
so does wickedness come of women.

It is better to be with an evil man, then LORD, and declare the thing yt I
have seen. In ye words of ye LORD are his works. The Son ouerloketh all
things with his shine, and all his works are full of ye clearnes thereof. Has
not the LORD brought to pass, that his saints should tell out all his
wo^derous works, which the almighty LORD has stablyshed? All things
endure in his glory. He seeks out the ground of the deep and the heart, and he
knows all their ymaginacion and wyszdome. For ye LORD knows all science,
and he looks in to ye token of the time. Job. 24. a Esa. 29. c
and discloseth things that are secret. No thought may escape him, nether
may any word be hyd from him. He has garnyshed the hye excellent works of
his wyszdome, and he is from everlasting to everlasting. Unto him may
nothing be added nether can he be mynished, he has no need also of any
council. O how amiable are all his works, and as a spark to look upon? They
live all, and endure for ever: and when so ever need is, they are all obedient
unto him. They are all dubble, one against another: he has made nothing that
has fault or blemysh. Deuteronomy. 3^. a
He has stablyshed the goods of euerychone: and who may be satisfied with
his glory, when he seith it?

The XLIII. Chapter.
^sal. 8. a
the bewtye of the heaven in his glorious clearnes. The son when it
appears, declares the day in ye goinge out of it, a marvelous work of the
Highest. At noone it burns ye earth, and who may abide for the heat thereof?
Who so keeps an oven when it is hot, three times more does the Son burn
upon ye mountains, when it bretheth out the fyrie beams and shyneth: with the
brightness of it, it blyndeth the eyes. Great is the LORD that made it, and in
his commandment he causes it to run haistely.

Genesis 1. b
The Moon also is in all, and at convenient season it shows the times, and is
a token of the time. The token of the solemn feast is taken of the Moon,
^xo. 12. a
a light that mynisheth and increases again. The Month is called after the
Moon, it grows wonderously in her chaunginge.

LORD lighteneth in the heyth. In his holy work they continue in their order,
and not one of them fails in his watch. Genesis 9. b
Look upon ye rain bow, and praise him that made it: very bewtifull is it in
his shine. He compaseth the heaven about with his clearnes and glory, the
hands of the Highest have be^ded it. Through his commandment he makes the
snow to fall, and the thonder of his judgment to smite hastily. Through his
commandment the treasures are opened, and the clouds fle as the fowls. In
his power has he strengthened the clouds, and broken the hayle stones.

The mountains melt at ye sight of him, the wind blows according to his
will. The sound of his thonder beats ye earth, and so does the storm of the
north: the whirle wind also lights down as a fethered foul, casts out
and spredeth the snow abroad: and as the greshoppers that destroy all, so
falls it down. The eye marueleth at ye bewtye of the whytenesse thereof, and
the heart is afraied at the rain of it. He pours out the frost upon earth,
like salt, and when it is frosen, it is as sharp as the prycke of a thistle.

When the cold northwynde blows,

(In his word he stylleth the wind,) In his council he sets the deep, and
(the LORD) Jesus planted it. They that sail over the sea, tell of his parels
and harms: and when we hear it with our ears, we marvel thereat. For there
be strange wondrous works, diverse manner of nyce beestes and whall fishes.
Through him are all things set in good order and performed, and in his word
all things endure.

I speak much, but I can not sufficiently LORD after all o power, for he is
great in all his works. Psa^ ^
The LORD is to be feared ye very great is he, and marvelous is his power.
Praise the LORD, and magnify him as much as ye may, yet does he far far
exceade all praise. (...)
O magnify him with all your power, and labor earnestly, yet are ye in no
wise able sufficiently to praise him. Who has seen him, (...)
that he might tell us? Who can magnify him so greatly as he is? For there are
hyd yet greater things the^ these be: as for us, we have seen but few of his
works. For the LORD has made all things, and given wyszdome to soch as
fear God.

The XLIIII. Chapter. A commendacion of the old virtuous fathers.
LEt us commend the noble famous glorious acts has the LORD done, and
showed his great power ever sens ye beginning. The noble famous men reigned
in their kingdoms, and bare excellent rule. In their wyszdome and
understanding, they followed the council showed in the prophecies. (...)
They led the folk through the council and wyszdome of the scrybes of the
people. Wise sentences are found in their instruccion. They sought the
swetenes and melody of Music, and brought forth the pleasant songs in
scripture. They were rich also, and could comfort and pacify those that
dwelt with them. All these were very noble and honorable men in their
generacions, and were well reported of in their times. These have left a name
behind them, so that their praise shall allwaye be spoken of. Afterward there
were some, whose remembrance is gone. (...)
They came to naught and perished, as though they had never been: and became as
though they had never been borne, ye and their children also with them.

(...) 49. c (...) c
Enoch walked right and acceptably before the LORD: therefore was he translated
for an example of amendeme^t to ye generacions. (...) 6. b (...).
Noe was a steadfast and righteous man: and in the time of wrath he became a
reco^cylinge. Therefore was he left a remnaunt unto the earth, when the floude
came. An everlasting covenant was made with him, (...)
that all flesh should perish no more with ye water.

(...) a (...) a
in glory was there none like unto him. He kept the law of the Highest, and
came in to a covenant with him. He set the covenant in his flesh, (...) 22. a
and when he was tempted, he was found faithful. Therefore swore God unto him
with an ooth, that he would bless all people in his sede, that he would
multiply and increase him as the dust of the earth, and to exalte his sede as
the stars: ye and that his sede should have ye possession and inheretaunce
of the land from see to see, and from the river unto ye borders of the land.

With Isaac did he stablish ye same covenant, for Abraham his fathers sake.
Genesis 26^ a
Ye yt gracious blessing and health of all men, and covenant did he stablysh
with Isaac, and made it to rest upon the head of Jacob. He knew him, Genesis 28.
c 29.30.
in that he prospered him so well and richely, and gave him an heretage, and
sundered his portion by it self, Iosu. 18.19
and parted it among the twolue trybes. Merciful men brought he out of him,
which found favor before all flesh.

The XLV. Chapter.
MOses beloved of God and me^, whose Exo. 11. a Act. 7. c
him has the LORD made like in the glory of the saints, and magnified him so
that the enemies stood in awe of him, through his words he did great wonders.
He made him great in the sight of kings, gave him commandment before his
people, and showed him his glorious power. He stablyshed him with faithfulness
and mekenes, Number. 12. a
and chose him out of all men. For he herd his voice, and led him in the
darcke cloud, and there he gave him the commandments, ye the law of life
and wyszdome, Exo. 19.20
that he might teach Jacob the covenant, and Israel his laws.

He chose Aaron his brother also out of ye Exo. 4. c
and made him soch like. An everlasting covenant made he with him, Exo. 28. a
and gave him the presthode in the people. He made him glorious in bewtifull
array, and clothed him with the garment of honor. He put perfect joy upon
him, and gyrded him with strength. He deckte him with side clothes and a
tunycle, with an ouerbody cote also and gyrdle. Round about made he him
belles of gold, and that many: that when he went in, Exo. 28. f
the sound might be herd, that they might make a noise in the Sanctuary, and
give the people warning. The holy garment was wrought and broderd with gold,
yalow sylke and purple. And in the brestlappe there was a goodly work, Exo.
28. c
wherein was fastened light and perfectness.

Upon ye same also there was a work fastened and set with costly precious
stones, all bound with gold: and this he brought in his mynistracion. The
stones also were fastened for a remembrance, after the twolue trybes of
Israel. Upon his mytre there was a plate of pure gold, a graven image of
holiness, a famous and noble work, garnished, and pleasant to look upon.
Before him were there seen no soch fair orname^tes, and these it behooved hi^
allwaye to use: There might none other put them on, but only his children and
his childers children perpetually. Daily performed he his burnt offeringes
two times. Leui. 8. a
Moses filled his hands, and anointed him with holy oil.

LORD, and make odours for a sweet sauoure and remembrance, that he should
reconcyle the people of the LORD with him again. Deu. 17. c and 21. a Mal. 2.
a
He gave him auctorite also in his commandments and in ye covenant, that he
should teach Jacob the statutes and testimonies, and to enfourme Israel in his
law.

Number. 16. a
and had envye at him in the wyldernes: namely, they that were of Dathan and
Abirams side, and the furious congregation of Chore. This the LORD saw, and
it displeased him, and in his wrothfull indignacion were they consumed. A
great wonder did he upon them, and consumed them with the fire. Number. 17. b
Besides this, he made Aaron yet more honorable and glorious. He gave him an
heretage, and parted the first fruits unto him. Exo. 25. f Leui. 24. b
Unto him specially he appointed the bred for sustenaunce (for the prestes ate
of ye offerynges of the LORD) this gave he unto him and his sede. Deuteronomy. 12. b
and 18. a Eze. 44. d
Else had he no heretage ner portion in ye land and with the people. For the
LORD himself is his portion and enheritaunce.

Number. 25. c
because he had ye zele and fear of the LORD. For when the people were turned
back, he put him self forth right soon, and that with a good will, to pacify
the wrath of the LORD toward Israel. Therefore was there a covenant of peace
made with him, yt he should be the principal among the righteous and the
people, that he and his posterite should have the office of the presthode for
ever (Like as there was made a covenant with David of the trybe of Judah, that
from among his sons only there should be a king: And that Aaron also and
his sede should be the heretage, to give us wyszdome in o heart, to judge his
people in righteousness: that his goods should not come in to forgetfulness, and
that their honor might endure for ever.

The XLVI. Chapter.
MAnly and strong in battaill was Jesus (...)
which in stead of Moses ye prophet was given to be captain of the people
(which acordinge unto his name was a great savior unto the elect of God) to
punysh the enemies, that rose up against Israel, yt Israel might obtain their
inheritance. O how great, noble and excellent was he, (...)
when he lift up his hand, and drew out his sword against the cities? Who
stood so manly before him? For the LORD himself brought in the enemies. (...)
Stood not the Son still at his commandment, and one day was as long as
two? He called upon the Highest and most mighty, wha^ ye enemies preassed upon
him on every side: and the LORD herd him with the hayle stones. They smote ye
Heithenish people mightily, and in fallinge down they slew all ye adversaries,
so that the Heithe^ knew his host, and all his defense, that the LOR- himself
fought against them, for he followed upon the mighty men of them.

In the time of Moses also he and Caleb (...)
which stood against the enemies, withelde the people from sin, and stylled
ye wicked murmuring. And of six hundredth thousand people of foot, they two
were preserved, (...)
when they were brought in to the heretage, namely, a land that flows with
milk and honey. The LORD gave strength also unto Caleb, (...)
which remained with him unto his age: so that he went up in to the hye places
of the land, and his sede conquered the same for an heretage: that all the
children of Israel might se, how good a thing it is, to be obedient unto the
LORD. And the judges or rulers (every one after his name) whose heart went not
a whoringe, ner departed from ye LORD, and that forsake not the LORD
unfaithfully, whose remembrance has a good report: Ye their bones flourish
out of their place, and their name shall never be changed.

Samuel the prophet beloved of the LORD, (...)
and anointed the princes over the people. In the law of the LORD ruled he,
and judged the congregation, and the LORD had respect unto Jacob. The prophet
was found diligent in his faithfulness: ye in his faithfulness was the
faithfulness of the vision known. He called upon ye LORD the mighty, (...)
wha^ the enemies preassed upon him on every side, what time as he offered the
suckynge lambs. And the LORD thondred from heaven, and maid his voice to be
herd with a great noise. He discomfited the princes of Tire, and all the rulers
of the Philistynes. Re. 12. a
Before his last end he made protestacion in the sight of the LORD and his
anointed, that he took nether substance ner good of any man, no not so much as
a shue: and no man might accuse him. After this he told, that his end was at
hand, and showed the king also his end and death: and from ye earth lift he
up his voice in the prophecy, yt the ungodly people should perish.

The XLVII. Chapter.
Re. 12 a
there rose up a prophet called Nathan: For like as the fat is taken away from
the offrynge, so was David chosen out of the children of Israel. He took his
pastyme with the lions as with kyddes, and with bears like as with lambs. Slew he
not a giaunte when he was yet but young, (...) 17. f
and took away the rebuke from his people? what time as he took the stone in
his hand, and smote down proud Goliath with the slynge? For he called upon the
highest LORD, which gave him strength in his right hand, so that he overthrew
the mighty giaunte in the battayll, that he might set up the horn of his
people again.

(...)
and made him to have a good report in the praise of the LORD, yt he should
weere a crown of glory. For he destroyed the enemies on every side, (...)
roted out the Philistynes his adversaries, and brake their horn in sunder,
like as it is broken yet this day. In all his works he praised ye Highest and
Holiest, and ascrybed the honor unto him. With his whole heart did he praise
and love him that made him. (...) 25. a
He set syngers also before the altar, and in their tune he made sweet songs.
He ordained to keep the holy days worship fully, and that the solemn feasts
through the whole year should be honorably holde^, with praysinge the name of
the LORD, and with synginge by times in the morning in the Sanctuary.

LORD took away his sins, and exalted his horn for ever. (...) ^2. c
He gave him ye covenant of the kingdom, and the trone of worshipe in Israel.
After him there rose up the wise son called Solomon, (...)
and for his sake he drove ye enemies away far of. This Solomon reigned with
peace in his time (for God gave him rest from his enemies on every side, that
he might build him an house in his name, and prepare the Sanctuary for ever)
like as he was well i^structe in his youth and filled with wyszdome and
vndersto^dinge, as it were with a water floude. He covered and filled the whole
land with similitudes and wise prudent sentences.

His name went abroad in the Isles, because LORD God, which is called the God
of Israel. He gathered gold as tynne, 3. Re. 10.
and he had as much silver as lead. He was moved in inordinate love toward
women, 3. Re. 11. a
and was overcome in affeccion. He stained his hono and worshipe, ye his
posterite defiled he also, in bringinge the wrath of the LORD upon his
children, and sorrow after his joy: so yt his kingdom was divided, 3. Re. 12.
and Ephraim became an unfaithful and an unconstant kingdom. 2. Re. 7. ^
Nevertheless God forsook not his mercy, nether was he utterly destroyed because
of his works, yt he should leave him no posterite.

As for ye sede yt came upon him (which he 3. Re. 12. 3. Re. 12.
Roboa^ which turned away the people through his council, and Jeroboam ye
son of Nabat, which caused Israel to sin, and showed Ephraim the way of
ungodliness: In so much that their sins and myszdedes had the upper hand so
sore, that at the last they were driven out of the land for the same: Ye he
sought out and brought up all wickedness, till the vengeance came upon them.

The XLVIII. Chapter.
THen stood up Elias the prophet as 3. Re. 17. a
and his word br^^t like a creshett. He brought an ho^ger upon the^ and in his
zele he made them few in nombre. (For they might not away with the
commandments of the LORD.) Through the word of the LORD he shut the
heaven, and three times brought he the fire down. 3. Re. 18. ^ 4. Re. 1. c
Thus became Elias honorable in his wondrous deeds. Who may make his boost to
be like him? 3. Re. 17. c
One that was deed raised he up from death, and in the word of ye Highest he
brought him out of the grave again. He cast down kings and destroyed them,
and the honorable from their seat. Upon the mount Syna he herd the
punishment, and upon Horeb the judgment of the vengeance. He prophesied
recompensynge unto kings, and ordained prophets after him. Re. 19. c ^ Re. 2.
c
He was taken up in the storm of fire, in a charett of horses of the LORD. He
was ordained in the reprouynges in time, to pacify the wrath, to turn ye
hertes of the fathers unto the children, Luc. ^. a
and to set up the trybes of Jacob again. Blessed were they that saw the, and
were garnished in love: for we live in life.

^. Re. 2. c ^. 4.
While he lived he was afraid of no prince, and no man might overcome him.
There could no word disceaue him, ^. Re. 13. a ^. Re. 56. ^. 13. ^. Re. 18. b
and after his death his body prophesied. He did wonders in his life, and in
death were his works marvelous. For all this, the people amended not, nether
departed they from their sins: till they were carried away presoners out of
the land, and were scatred abroad in all countrees, so that of them there
remained but a very little people, and a prince unto ye house of David. Howbeit
some of them did right, and some heaped up ungodliness.

^. Par. 32. a
dygged through the stony rock with iron, and made up a well by the water side.
^. Re. 18. c ^sa. ^6. a
In his time came Sennacherib up, and sent Rabsaches, lift up his hand against
Sion, and defied them with great pride. The^ trymbled their hertes and hands,
so yt they sorowed like a woman trauaylinge with child. So they called upon
the LORD, which is merciful, and lift up their hands before him. Immediately
the LORD herd the^ out of heaven, and delivered them by the hand of Esaias. ^.
Re. 19. g
He smote the host of the Assirians, and his angel destroyed the^. For
Ezechias had done the thing that pleased the LORD, and remained steadfastly in
the way of David his father. Which Esaias was great and faithful in his
visions. ^. Re. 20 b ^sa. 38. b
In his time ye Son went backwarde, and he lengthened the kings life. With
a right sprete prophesied he, what should come to pass at the last: and to
soch as were soroufull in Sion he gave consolacion, wherwhith they might
comfort them selves for evermore. He showed things yt were for to come and
secret, or ever they came to pass.

The XLIX. Chapter.
^. Re. 22. a and 23. ^. Pa. 34. a
His remembrance shall be sweet as honey in all mouths, and as the playenge of
Music by the wine. He was appointed to turn the people again, and to take
away all abhominacions of ye ungodly. He directed his heart unto the LORD, and
in the time of the ungodly he set up the worshipe of God again. All kings
(except David, Ezechias and Josias) committed wickedness: for even ye kings of
Judah also forsook ye law of God. For they gave their horn unto other, their
hono and worshipe also to a strange people.

Therefore was the elect cite of the Sa^ctuary (...)
and the streets thereof lay desolate and waist: for they entreated Jeremy
evil, which nevertheless was a prophet ordained from his mothers womb, that he
might rote out, break of, and destroy: (...)
and that he might build up, and plant again. Ezechiel saw the glory of the
LORD in a vision, which was showed him upon the charet of the Cherubins. For
he thought upon the enemies in ye rain, to do good unto soch as had ordered
their ways a right. And the bones of the twolue prophets flourish from out of
their place: for they gave comfort and consolacion unto Jacob, and delivered
the^ faithfully. How shall we praise Zorobabel, (...)
which was as a ringe in the right hand?

So was Jesus also the son of Iosedec: (...)
and set up the Sanctuary of ye LORD again, which was prepared for an
everlasting worshipe. (...)
And Nehemias is allwaye to be commended, which set up for us the walls yt
were broken down, made the ports and bars again, and builded our houses
of the new. (...)
But upon earth is there no man created like Enoch, for he was taken up from ye
earth. And Joseph, which was lord of his brethren, and the vpholder of his
people: His bones were covered and kept. Seth and Sem were in great honor
among ye people: and so was Adam above all the beasts, wha^ he was created.

The L. Chapter.
Simon the son of Onias the hye (...)
which in his life set up the house again, and in his days made fast the
temple. The heyth of ye temple also was founded of him, the dubble buyldinge,
and the hye walls of the temple. In his days the wells of water flowed out,
and were exceadinge full as the sea. He took care for his people, and delivered
them from destruction. He kept his cite and made it strong, that it should
not be beseged. He dwelt in honor and worshipe among his people, and
enlarged the intraunce of the house and the court. He gives light as the
morning star in the myddest of the clouds, and as ye Moon when it is full.
He shyneth as the Son in the temple of God. He is as bright as ye rain bow
in ye fair clouds, and florisheth as the flowers and roses in the spring of
ye year, and as the lilies by the ryuers of water: Like as the branches upon
the mount Libanus in time of Summer: as a fire and ince^se that is kyndled:
Like as an whole ornament of pure gold, set with all manner of precious stones:
and as an olyue tree that is fruitful: and as a Cypres tree which grows up an
hye.



Then began ye sons of Aaron to sing, and to blow with trompettes, and to
make a great noise, for a remembrance and praise unto the LORD. Then were
the people afraid, and fell down to the earth upon their faces, to worshipe
the LORD their God, and to give thanks to Almighty God. They sunge goodly
also with their voices, so that there was a pleasant noise in ye great house
of the LORD. And the people in their prayer besought the LORD the Highest, that
he would be merciful, till the honor of ye LORD were performed. Thus ended
they their mynistracion and service.

LORD, and to rejoice in his name. He began yet once also to pray, that he
might openly show the thankesgeuynge before the Highest, namely thus: O give
praise and thanks (ye all) unto the LORD our God, which has ever done noble
and great things: which has increased our days from or mothers womb, and
dealt with us acordinge to his mercy: that he will give us the ioyfulnes of
heart, and peace for our times in Israel. Which faithfully keeps his mercy for
us evermore, and allwaye delyuereth us in due season.

There be two manner of people, that I abhor

I Jesus the son of Sirac Eleazarus of Jerusalem, have tokened up these
informacions and docume^tes of wyszdome and understanding in this book, and
poured out the wyszdome out of my heart. Blessed is he that exercises him self
therein: and who so takes soch to heart, shall be wise. If he do these things,
he shall be strong in all. For the light of the LORD ledeth him.

The LI. Chapter. A prayer of Jesus the son of Sirac.
I Thank the O LORD and king, LORD unto death, for my life drew nigh unto
hell.

They co^pased me round about on every LORD, and upon thy acts that thou
have done ever of old: namely, yt thou delyuerest soch as putt their trust in
the, and ryddest them out of ye hands of the Heithen. Thus lift I up my prayer
from the earth, and prayed for delyueraunce from death. I called upon the LORD
my father, that he would not leave me with out help, in the day of my trouble
and in the time of the proud. I praised thy name contynually, yeldinge honor
and thanks unto it: and so my prayer was herd. Thou sauedest me from
destruction, and delyueredest me from ye unrighteous time. Therefore will I
aknowlege and praise the, and magnify ye name of the LORD.



LORD has given me a new tongue, wherewith I will praise him. O come unto me ye
unlearned, and dwell in ye house of wyszdome: withdraw not your selves from
her, but talk and common of these things, for your souls are very thirsty.
I opened my mouth, Esa. 35. a
and spoke: O come and bye wyszdome without money, bow down your neck under
her yock, and your soul shall receive wyszdome. She is hard at hand, and is
content to be found. Behold with your eyes, Eccli. 6. c
how that I have had but little labor, and yet have found much rest. O
receive wyszdome, and ye shall have plenteousnes of silver and gold in
possession. Let your mind rejoice in his mercy, and be not ashamed of his
praise. Wyrke his work by times, and he shall give you your reward in due
time.

The end of Ecclesiasticus, other wise called Jesus the son of Syrac.
The prayer of Azarias and the song of ye three children after Theodotios
translacion: which words are written in ye third chapter of Daniel after the
old text in Latin.
ANd they walked in the myddest LORD. Asarias stood up, and prayde on this
manner, Even in the myddest of the fire opened he his mouth, and said: Blessed
be thou (o LORD God of or fathers) right worthy to be praised and honored is
yt name of thine for evermore: for thou art righteous in all ye things yt thou
have done to us: Ye faithful are all ye works, ye ways are right, and ye
iudgme^tes true. In all ye things yt thou have brought upon us, and upon the
holy cite of or fathers (even Jerusalem) thou have executed true judgment: Ye
acordinge to right and equity have thou brought these things upon us, because
of our sins.

For why? we have offended, and done wickedly, departing from the: In all
things have we trespaced, (...)
and not obeyed thy commandments, ner kept the^, nether done as thou have
bydden us, yt we might prospere. Wherefore, all yt thou have brought upon us,
(...)
and every thing yt thou have done to us, thou have done them in true
judgment: As in delyueringe us in to the hondes of our enemies, among ungodly
and wicked abhominacions, and to an unrighteous king, ye ye most froward
upon earth. And now we may not open or mouths, we are become a shame and
reprofe unto ye servants, and to the^ yt worshipe the.

Yet for thy names sake (we beseke the) give us not up for ever, break not thy
covenant, and take not away thy mercy from us, for thy beloved Abraham's sake,
for thy servant Isaacs sake, and for thy holy Isreal's sake: to whom thou have
spoken and promised, yt thou would multiply their sede as ye stars of
heaven, and as the land yt lies upon ye se^ shore. For we (o LORD) are
become less the^ any people, and be kept under this day in all the world,
because of our sins: So there now we have nether prince, duke, prophet, burnt
offering, sacrifice, oblacio^, ince^se^^^ Sanctuary before the.

Nevertheless, in a contrite heart and an humble sprete let us be received, yt
we may opteyne thy mercy. Like as in the burnt offering of rams and
bullockes, and like as in thousands of fat lambs: so let or offrynge be in
thy sight this day, (...)
yt it may please ye, for there is no co^fucion unto them, yt put there trust
in the. And now we follow the with all or heart, we fear the, and seek thy
face. Put us not to shame, but deal with us after thy loving kyndnesse, and
acordinge to the multitude of thy mercies. Deliver us by thy miracles (o LORD)
and get thy name an honor: that all they which do thy servants evil, may
be confounded. Let them be ashamed through thy Almighty power, and let their
strength be broken: that they may know, how that thou only art the LORD God,
and honor worthy through out all the world.

And the kings servants yt put them in, ceased not to make the oven hot
with wild fire, dry straw, pitch and fagottes: so that the flamme went out
of the oven upon a xlix. cubits: ye it took away, and brent up those
Caldees, yt it gat hold upon beside the oven. But the angel of the LORD came
down in to the oven to Asarias and his fellows, and smote ye flamme of the
fire out of the oven, and made the myddest of the oven, as it had been a cool
wind blowinge: so that the fire nether touched them, grieved them, ner did them
hurt. Then these three (as out of one mouth) praised, honored, and blessed God
in the furnace, saying:

(...)
Blessed be thou, o LORD God of our fathers: for thou art praise and honor
worthy, (...)
ye and to be magnified for evermore. Blessed be ye holy name of thy glory,
for it is worthy to be praised, and magnified in all worlds. Blessed be thou
in the holy temple of ye glory, for above all things thou art to be praised,
ye and more then worthy to be magnified for ever. Blessed be thou in the trone
of ye kingdom, for above all thou art worthy to be well spoken of, and to be
more then magnified for ever. Blessed be thou, that lokest through the deep,
(...)
and syttest upon the Cherubyns: for thou art worthy to be praised, and above
all to be magnified for ever. Blessed be thou in ye firmament of heaven, for
thou art praise and honor worthy for ever.

O all ye works of the LORD: speak good of ye LORD, praise him, and set him
up for ever.

(...)
O ye angels of the LORD, speak good of the LORD: praise him, and set him up
for ever.

O ye heavens, speak good of the LORD: praise him, and set him up for ever.

O all ye waters that be above the firmament, speak good of the LORD: praise
him, and set him up for ever.

O all ye powers of the LORD, speak good of the LORD: praise him, and set
him up for ever.

O ye Son and Moon, Psalm. 148. a
speak good of the LORD: praise him, and set him up for ever.

O ye stars of heaven, Psalm. 1^5. a
speak good of the LORD: praise him, and set him up for ever.

O ye schowers and dew, speak good of the LORD: praise him, and set him up
for ever.

O all ye wyndes of God, speak good of ye LORD: praise him, and set him up
for ever.

O ye fire and heat, speak good of ye LORD: praise him, and set him up for
ever.

O ye winter and summer, speak good of the LORD: praise him, and set him up
for ever.

O ye dewes and frostes, speak good of the LORD: praise him, and set him up
for ever.

O ye frost and cold, speak good of the LORD: praise him, and set him up for
ever.

O ye yse and snow, speak good of the LORD: praise him and set him up for
ever.

O ye nights and days, speak good of the LORD: praise him, and set him up
for ever.

O ye light and darcknesse, speak good of the LORD: praise him, and set up
him for ever.

O ye lightenynges and clouds, speak good of the LORD: praise him, and set
him up for ever.

O let the earth speak good of the LORD: ye let it praise him, and set him
up for ever.

O ye mountains and hills, speak good of the LORD: praise him, and set him
up for ever.

O all ye grene things upon the earth, speak good of the LORD: praise him,
and set him up for ever.

O ye wells, speak good of the LORD: praise him, and set him up for ever.

O ye sees and floudes, speak good of the LORD: praise him, and set him up
for ever.

O ye whalles and all that live in the waters, speak good of the LORD: praise
him, and set him up for ever.

O all ye fowls of the air, speak good of the LORD: praise him, and set him
up for ever.

O all ye beasts and catell, speak good of ye LORD: praise him, and set him
up for ever.

O ye children of men, speak good of the LORD: praise him, and set him up for
ever.

O let Israel speak good of the LORD, praise him, and set him up for ever.

O ye prestes of ye LORD, speak good of the LORD: praise him, and set him up
for ever.

Psalm. 112. a 134. a. and 133. a Apo. 19. a
O ye servants of the LORD, speak good of the LORD: praise him, and set him
up for ever.

O ye spretes and souls of the righteous, speak good of ye LORD: praise him,
and set him up for ever.

O ye holy and humble men of heart, speak ye good of the LORD: praise ye him,
and set him up for ever.

O Ananias, Asarias and Misael, speak ye good of the LORD: praise ye him, and
set hi^ up for ever. Iere. 20. c
Which has delivered us from ye hell, kept us from ye hand of death, rydde
us from the myddest of the burning flamme, Esa. 43. a 1. Mac. 2. f
and saved us eue^ in the myddest of ye fire. Psalm. 104. a 103. a. 106. a. 116.
a and 13^. a
O give thanks therefore unto ye LORD: for he is kind hearted, and his mercy
endures for ever. O all ye devout men, speak good of the LORD, even the God
of all gods: O praise him, and give him thanks, for his mercy endures
world without end.

The story of Susanna which is the XIII. chapter of Daniel after the Latin.
LORD speaks of: All the wickedness of Babylon, comes from ye elders (yt
is) from ye judges, which seem to rule the people. These came offt to Ioachims
house, and all soch as had any thing to do in the law, came thither unto them.

Now when the people came again at

When they returned again, they came together, enqueringe out ye matter
betwixt them selves: ye the one told ye other of his wicked lust. The^
appointed they a time, when they might take Susanna alone.

It happened also yt they spyed out a convenient (...)
and thought to wash her self in the garden, for it was an hot season: And
there was not one person there, except the two elders, yt had hyd them selves,
to behold her. So she said to her maidens: go set me oil and soap, and shut
the orcharde door, yt I may wash me. And they did as she bad them, and shut
the orcharde door, and went out them selves at a back door, to fet the thing
yt she had commanded: but Susanna knew not, yt ye elders lay there hyd
within. Now when the maidens were gone forth, ye two elders gat them up, and
ran upon her, saying: now, the orcharde doors are shut, that no man can se
us: we have a lust unto the, therefore consent unto us, and lie with us.

If thou will not, we shall bring a testimonial LORD: and with that, she
cried out with a loud voice the elders also cried out against her.

Then ran there one to the orcharde door, and smote it open. Now when the
servants of the house herd ye cry in ye orcharde, they ruszshed in at the
back door, to se what the matter was. So when the elders told them, the
servants were greatly ashamed, for why, there was never soch a report made

These two elders stood up in the myddest of the people, (...)
and laid their hondes upon ye head of Susanna: which wept, and looked up
toward heaven, for her heart had a sure trust in the LORD. And the elders
said: As we were walkinge in the orcharde alone, this woman came in with her two
mayde^s: whom she sent away from her, and sparred ye

The common sort believed them, as those yt were the elders and judges of the
people, and so they condemned her to death. Susanna cried out with a loud voice,
and said: O everlasting God, (...)
thou sercher of secrets, thou yt know all things a fore they come to
pass: thou wotest, yt they have borne false wytnes against me: and behold, I
must dye, where as I never did any soch things, as these men have maliciously
invented against me. And ye LORD herd her voice. For when she was led forth
to death, ye LORD raised up ye sprete of a yo^ge child, whose name was
Daniel, (...)
which cried with a loud voice: I am clean from this blood. The^ all ye people
turned the^

Wherefore the people turned again in all the haist. And the elders (that is,
the principal heads) said unto him: come sit down here among us, and show
us this matter, seeing God has given the as great honor, as an elder. And
Daniel said unto them: 3. Reg. 3. d
Put these two aside one from another and then shall I hear them. When they
were put a sunder one from another, he called one of them, and said unto him: O
thou old canckerde carle, that have used thy wickedness so long: thine
ungracious deeds which thou have done before, are now come to light. For thou
have given false judgments, thou have oppressed the innocent, and letten the
guilty go fre, where as yet the LORD says: Exo. 23. a Pro. 17. c
The innocent and righteous se thou slaye not. Well than, if thou have seen her,
tell me, under what tree saw LORD has received the sentence of him, to cut
ye in two.

Then put he him aside, and called for the other, and said unto him: O thou
sede of Canaan, but not of Judah: Fayrnesse has disceaued the, and lust has
subverted thine heart. Thus dealte ye before with the daughters of Israel, and
they (for fear) consented unto you: but the daughter of Judah would not abide
your wickedness. Now tell me than, under what tree did thou take them
speakinge together? He answered: under a pomgranate tree. Then said Daniel unto
him: very well, now thou leyst also even upon thine head. The messaunger of the
LORD stondeth waytinge with the sword, to cut the in two, and to slaye you
both.

With that, all the whole multitude gave a great shoute, and praised God,
which allwaye delyuereth them yt put their trust in him. And they came upon the
two elders, Psalm. 1^. a
(whom Daniel had conuicte with their own mouth: that they had given false
witness) and dealte with them, Deu. 19. d Prou. 19. a
even likewise as they would have done with their neghbouresse: Ye they did
acordinge to the law of Moses, and put them to death. Thus the innocent blood
was saved the same day.

The^ Helchias and his wife praised God for their daughter Susanna, with
Ioachim her huszbonde and all ye kinrede: that there was no dishoneste found
in her. From that day forth was Daniel had in great reputacio^ in the sight
of ye people.

The end of the story of Susanna.
The story of Bell, which is the xiiij. Chapter of Daniel after the Latin.
Deuteronomy. 4. c and 5. a Exo. 20. a Deuteronomy. 6. d Matt. 4. a
he answered and said: Because I may not worshipe things, that be made with
hondes, but the living God, which made heaven and earth, and has power upon
all flesh. The king said unto him: think thou not, yt Bell is a living
God? Or seist thou not, how much he eats and drynketh every day? Daniel
smyled, and said: O king, disceaue not thyselfe: This is but made of claye
within, and of metal without, nether eats he ever any thing. Eccle 30. e


Then the king was wroth, and called Leu. 24. c
for he has spoken blasphemy against Bell. And Daniel said unto the king: let
it so be, acordinge as thou have said. The prestes of Bell were lxx. beside
their wives and children. And the king went with Daniel in to the temple of
Bell. So Bells prestes said: Lo, we will go out, and set thou ye meat there (O
king) and pour in the wine: then shutt the door fast, and seal it with thine
own signet: and tomorow when thou come in, if thou fyndest not, that Bell
has eaten up all, we will suffer death: or else daniel, that has lied upon us.
The prestes thought them selves sure enough, for under ye altar they had

So when they were gone forth, the king set meats before Bell. Now Daniel had
commanded his servants to bring aszshes and these he siffted through out all
the temple, that the king might se. Then went they out, and sparre the door,
sealinge it with ye kings signet, and so departed. In ye night came the
prestes with their wives and children (as they were wont to do) and ate and
drunk up all. In the morning be times at the break of the day, the king
arose, and Daniel with him. And the king said: Daniel, are the seals whole
yet? He answered: Ye (o king) they be whole. Now as soon as he had opened
the door, the king looked unto ye altar, and cried with a loud voice: Great^
art thou o Bell, and with the is no disceate. Then laughed Daniel, and held the
king, that he should not go in, and said: Behold the pauement, marcke well,
whose fotesteppes are these? The king said: I se the fotesteppes of men,
women and children.

Therefore the king was angry, and took (...)
For the which cause ye king slew them, and delivered Bell in to Daniels
power, which destroyed him and his temple.

And in that same place there was a great dragon, which they of Babylon
worshipped. And ye king said unto Daniel: say thou, yt this is but a god
of metal also? lo, he lives, he eats and drinks: so yt thou can not
say, that he is no lyuinge God, therefore worshipe him. Daniel said unto ye
king: I will worshipe the LORD my God, (...)
he is ye truelyuynge God: as for this, he is not the God of life. But give me
leave (o king) and I shall destroy this dragon without swearde or staff. The
king said: I give ye leave. Then Daniel took pitch, fat and hairie woll,
and did seyth them together, and made lompes thereof: this he put in ye Drago^s
mouth, and so ye dragon barst in sonder: and Daniel said: lo, there is he whom
ye worshipped.

When they of Babylon herd that, they



Now when ye king saw, that they russhed in so sore upon him, and that
necessite constrained him, (...)
he delivered Daniel unto them: which cast him in to the lions den, where he
was six days. In the den there were seven lions, and they had given them
every day two bodies and two sheep: which then were not given them, that they
might devour Daniel.

LORD said unto Abacuc: go carry the meat that thou have in to Babylon, unto
Daniel, which is in ye lyo^s den. And Abacuc said: LORD, I never saw
Babylon: and as for the den, I know it not. (...)
Then the angel of the LORD took him by the top, and bare him by the hair
of the head, and (through a mighty wind) set him in Babylon upon the den.
And Abacuc cried, saying: O Daniel thou servant of God, (...)
have, take the breakfast, yt God has sent ye. And Daniel said: O God, have
thou thought upon me? well, thou never faylest them that love the. So Daniel
arose, and ate: and the angel of the LORD set Abacuc in his own place again
immediately.

(...)
o LORD God of Daniel: and he drew him out of the den. As for those that
were ye cause of his destruccio^, (...)
he did cast the^ in to the den, and they were devoured in a moment before
his face.

After this, wrote the king unto all people, kynreddes and tunges, that dwelt
in all countrees, saying: peace be multiplied with you. My commandment is,
in all the dominyon of my realm: that men fear and stand in awe of Daniels
God, (...)
for he is the living God, which endures ever: his kingdom abides
incorrupt, Luc. 1. c Esa 43. b Ose. 13. b Dan. 3. f
and his power is everlasting. It is he that can deliver and save: he does
wonders and marvelous works in heaven and in earth, for he has saved Daniel
from the power of the Lions.

The end of the Storye of Bell.
The first book of the Machabees,
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I. Of the power of Alexander king of Macedonia. Of certain unfaithful
Israelites. Of the great tyranny of Antiochus, and how miserably he destroys
Jerusalem: which God suffers to be plaged, because they have forsaken him.
Chap. II. How fervently Matathias and his sons strive for the honor of God
and welfare of the people: How swetely he exorteth his sons (eue^ in the
hour of his death) to be sted fast in the law of God. Chap. III. Of Judas
Machabeus that worthy captain, and of his noble acts against Antiochus. Chap.
IIII.V. Of the glorious victory, that God gave Judas against Gorgias and
Lisias: how they win the cite, and cleanse the temple again, and how they
fight afterward against the Heithen. Chap. VI. Antiochus besegeth Elymas in
Persia. Judas lays sege to the castelar Jerusalem, the king goes about to
help the^ that are therein. Chap. VII. The tyranny of Demetrius. They take
truce with the people of God, and keep it not. Chap. VIII. Judas hearing how
reasonable the Romans are, seeks for to make peace with them. Chap. IX. How
Judas was slain in the bataill and how there came up derth after his death.
Ionathas was captain after him, and gatt the victory of Bachides. Chap. X. Of
Alexander the son of Antiochus. Demetrius makes peace with Ionathas, and so
does Alexander afterward. Ptolomy gives his daughter Cleopatra unto
Alexander. Demetrius defyeth Ionathas. Chap. XI. Ptolomy ryseth against
Alexander and Ionathas, and promyseth to give Demetrius his daughter, whom he
had given allredy unto Alexander. The death of Alexander and Ptolomy* the
reign of Demetrius. Demetrius and Ionathas are friends. Alexanders son
takes the kingdom upon him. Chap. XII. The Jews write unto the Romans and
Sparcians to renew the old frendshipe. Triphon receaueth Ionathas with fair
words, and then causes him and his to be slain. Chap. XIII. After the death
of Ionathas is Simon his brother made Captain of the people which goes forth
against Triphon, and burieth his brother. Triphon slays Antiochus haynously.
Simon makes peace with Demetrius, and lays sege to Gaza. Chap. XIIII.
Demetrius seeks help against Tripho^. Demetrius is taken. Peace in Iewry.
Simo^ rules well. The Romans and they of Sparta renew the peace with Simon.
Chap. XV. Antiochus writes louyngly unto the Jews, and persecuteth Triphon.
He breaks the bond with the Jews. Chap. XVI. The faithfulness of Symo^ and
his sons. Ptolomy szlayeth them disceatfully, and betrayeth the land.
The first Chapter.
^udit. 1. b
Now when he had gathered a mighty strong host, and subdued ye lo^des and
people with their princes, so that they became tributaries unto hi^: he fell
sick. And when he perceived that he must needs die, he called for his noble
estates (which had been brought up with him of children) and parted his
kingdom among them, ^an. 7. a and 8. b
while he was yet alive. So Alexander raygned xij. year, and then dyed.

After his death fell the kingdom unto his princes, and they optayned it every
one in his rowme, and caused them selves to be crowned as kings: and so did
their children after them many years, and much wickedness increaced in the
world. Out of these came yt ungracious rote, noble Antiochus ye son of
Antiochus the king (which had been a pledge at Rome) and he reigned in ye
Cxxxvij. year of the reign of the Greeks. ^. Mac. 8. a


Deuteronomy. 7. a ^udic. 2. a
saye^ge: Let us go and make a covenant with the Heithen, yt are round about
us: for sense we departed from them, we have had much sorrow. ^ere. 44. c
So this deuyce pleased them well, and certain of ye people took upon the^ for
to go unto ye king, which gave them license to do after the ordinance of the
Heithen. (...)
Then set they up an open scole (at Jerusalem) of the laws of the Heithe^, and
were no more circumcised: but forsook ye holy Testamente, and joined them selves
to ye Heithe^, and were clean sold to do myschefe. (...)


So when Antiochus began to be mighty in his kingdom, he went about to
obtain ye land of Egipte also, that he might have the dominion of two
realms. Upon this entered he in to Egipte with a strong host, with charettes,
elephantes, (...)
horsemen and a great nombre of ships, and began to war against Ptolomy
the king of Egipte. But Ptolomy was afraid of him, and fled: and many of his
people were wounded to death. Thus Antiochus wa^ne many strong cities, and
took away great good out of the land of Egipte.

And after that Antiochus had smytten (...)
and came up to Jerusalem with a mighty people: and entered proudly into ye
Sanctuary, and took away the golden altar, the candilsticke and all ye
orname^tes thereof: the table of the shewbred the pouringe vessel, the chargers,
the golden spones, the vale, the crowns and golden apparel of the temple, and
brake down all. He took also the silver and gold, the precious Jewels, and
the secret treasures that he found. And when he had taken away altogether,
caused a great murthur of men, and so fulfilled his malicious pride, he
departed in to his own land.

Thus there arose great heuinesse and misery in all the land of Israel. The
princes and the elders of the people mourned, the yo^ge men and the maidens
were defiled, and the fair beutye of women was changed: the brydegrome and
the bryde took them to mourning: the land and those that dwelt therein, was
moved: for all the house of Jacob was brought to confucion.



(...). 5. c
which came to Jerusalem with a great multitude of people, speaki^ge peaceable
words unto the^, but all was disceate: for when they had given him credence,
he fell suddenly upon the cite, and smote it sore, and destroyed much people of
Israel. (...)
And when he had spoiled the cite, he set fire on it, castinge down houses and
walls on every side. (...)
The women and their children took they captive, and led away their catell.
Then builded they the castle of David with a great and thick wall, and with
mighty towers, and made it a strong hold for them. Beside all this they set
wicked people and ungodly men to keep it, stoared it with weapens and vytales:
gathered the goods of Jerusalem, and laid the^ up there: thus became it a
theuysh castle.

And this was done to lay wait for the people that went in to the Sanctuary,
and for the cruel destruction of Israel. Thus they shed innocent blood on
every side of ye Sanctuary, and defiled it: In so much that the citesyns were
feign to depart, and the cite became an habitacion of strangers, being
desolate of her own sede, for her own natyues were feign to leave her. Her
Sa^ctuary was clean waisted, her holy days were turned in to mourning, (...)
her Sabbathes were had in derision, and her honor brought to naught. Look how
great her glory was before, so great was her confucion, and her joy turned in
to sorrow.

(...)
that all the people should be one. Then they left every man his law, and all
the Heithen agreed to the commandment of king Antiochus: Ye many of the
Israelites consented there unto, offering unto Idols, and defylinge the
Sabbath. So the king Antiochus sent his messaungers with his commission unto
Jerusalem, and to all ye cities of Judah: that they should follow ye laws of
the Heithe^, and for bad either burnt offering, meat offering or peace
offering to be made in the temple of God, and that there should no Sabbath ner
hye feast day be kept: but commanded, that the Sanctuary and the holy people
of Israel should be defiled.

He commanded also that there should be set up other altares, temples and
Idols: to offer up swynes flesh and other unclean beasts: that men should
leave their children uncircumcised, to defyle their souls with all manner of
uncleanness and abhominacions: that they might so forget the law, and change
all the holy ordinances of God: and that who so ever would not do acordynge to
the commandment of king Antiochus, should suffer death. In like manner
commanded he through out all his realm, and set rulers over the people, for
to compel them to do these things, commaundinge the cities of Judah to do
sacrifice unto Idols.

Then went the people unto the Heithen by heaps, forsook the law of the
LORD, and committed much evil in the land: ye and chaced out the secret
Israelites, which had hyd them selves in corners and preuy places. The xv. day
of the month Iere. 36. c
they brent them in the fire, and rent them in pieces. What so ever he was that
had a book of the Testament of the LORD found by him, ye who so ever
endeavored himself to keep the law of the LORD, the kings commandment was,
yt they should put him to death. And through his anctorite they executed these
things every month, upon the people of Israel that were found in the cities.

The five and twentye day of the month, 2. Ma. ^. b
what time as they did sacrifice upon the altar (which stood in the stead of
the altar of the LORD) acordinge to the commandment of king Antiochus,
they put certain women to death, which had caused their children to be
circumcised: Not only that, but they hanged up the children by the necks
through out all their houses, and slew the circumcisers of them.

Yet were there many of the people of Israel, which determed in them selves,
that they would not eat unclean things: but chose rather to suffer death,
then to be defiled with unclean meats. So because they would not break the
blessed law of God, they were cruelly slain. And this great tyranny
increased very sore upon the people of Israel.

The II. Chapter.
IN those days there did sto^de up one Matathias the son of Symeon the pressed
(out of the kynred of Ioaris) from Ie Jerusalem, and dwelt upon the mount of
Modin, and had v. sons: Iho^ called Gaddis: Simon, called Thasi: Judas, other
wise called Machabeus: Eleazer, other wise called Abaron: and Ionathas, whose
surname was Apphus. These saw the evil, yt was done among the people of Judah
and Jerusalem. And Matathias said: Woe is me, alas that ever I was borne, to se
this misery of my people, and ye piteous destruccio^ of the holy cite: and thus
to sit so still, it being delivered in to the hondes the enemies, Her
Sanctuary is come in to the power of strangers, 1. Mac. 1. b
her temple is, as it were a man yt has lost his good name. Her precious
ornaments are carried away captyue, her old men are slain in the streets,
and her young men are fallen through the swearde of the enemies.

What people is it, that has not some possession in her kingdom? Or who has
not gotten some of her spoils? All her glory is taken away. She was a Queen,
and now she is become an handmayde. Behold our Sanctuary, our bewtye and
honor is waisted away, and defiled by the Gentiles. What helps it us then
to live? And Matathias rent his clothes, he and his sons, and put sack cloth
upon them, and mourned

Then came the men thither which were sent of king Antiochus, to compel soch
as were fled in to the cite of Modin, for to do sacrifice and to burn incense
unto Idols, and to forsake the law of God. So, many of the people of Israel
consented and enclyned unto them, but Matathias and his sons remained
steadfast. Then spoke the commissioners of king Antiochus, and said unto
Matathias: Thou art a noble man, of hye reputacion and great in this cite,
having fair children and brethren. Come thou therefore first, and fulfill the
kings commandment, like as all the Heithen have done, ye and ye men of
Judah, and soch as remain at Jerusalem: so shall thou and thy children be in ye
kings favor, and enriched with gold, silver and great rewards.

Matathias answered, and spoke with a loud voice: Though all nations obey the
king Antiochus, and fall away every man from keeping ye law of their
fathers: though they consent to his commandments, yet will I and my sons
and my brethren, not fall from the law our fathers. God forbid we should:
that were not good for us, that we should forsake the law and ordinances of
God, and to agree unto the commandment of king Antiochus. Therefore we will do
no soch sacrifice, nether break the statutes of or law, to go another way.
(...)
And when he had spoken these words, there came one of the Jews, which openly
in the sight of all, did sacrifice unto the Idols upon the altar in the cite
of Modin, acordinge to the kings commandment.

When Matathias saw this, it grieved (...)
like as Phinees did unto Zambri the son of Salomi. And Matathias cried with
a loud voice through ye cite, saying: Who so is fervent in the law, and will
keep ye covenant, let him follow me. So he and his sons fled in to the
mountains and left all that ever they had in ye cite. (...)
Many other godly men also departed in to the wilderness with their children,
their wives and their catell, and remained there: for the tyranny increaced so
sore upon them.

Now when the kings servants and (...)
Then began they to fight against them nevertheless they gave them none
other answer, nether cast they one stone at them, ner made fast their preuy
places, but said: We will dye all in our innocence, heaven and earth shall
testify with us, that ye put us to death wrongeously. Thus they fought against
them upon the Sabbath, and slew both men and catell, their wives and their
children, to the nombre of a thousand people.

When Matathias and his friends herd then shall they the sooner rote us out of
the earth. So they concluded among the^ selves at the same time, saying: What
so ever he be that comes to make battayll with us upon the Sabbath day, we
will fight against him, and not dye all, as or brethren yt were murthured so
haynously. Upon this came the Synagoge of the Jews unto the^: strong men of
Israel, all soch as were fervent in the law. And all they that were fled for
persecucion, came to help them, and to stand by them: In so much that they
gathered an host of men, and slew the wicked doers in their gelousy, and the
ungodly men in their wrath. Some of the wicked fled unto the Heithen, and
escaped.

Thus Matathias and his friends went about, and destroyed the aulters, and
circumcided the children, that had not yet received circumcision: as many as
they found within ye coostes of Israel: and followed mightily upon the children
of pride, and this act prospered in their hondes: In so much, that they kept
the law against the power of the Gentiles and the kings, and gave not over
their dominion unto wicked doers.



(...). ^. e (...). 11. d (...). 4. d (...). ^^. a (...). 44. c (...). 41. f
(...). 21. c (...). 4^. f
Remember Abraham, was not he found faithful in tentacion, and it was reckened
unto him for righteousness? Joseph in time of his trouble kept the
commandment, and was made a lord of Egipte. Phinees our father was so
fervent for the honor of God, that he optayned the covenant of an
everlasting presthode. (...). ^7. d (...). 1* a
Iosue for fulfillinge the word of God, was made the captain of Israel. (...)
14. a
Caleb bare record before the congregation, and received an heretage. (...).
24 c
David also in his merciful kyndnesse, optayned the trone of an everlasting
kingdom. (...)
Elias being gelous and fervent in the law, was taken up in to heaven.
Hananias, Asarias and Misael remained steadfast in faith, (...)
and were delivered out of the fire. In like manner Daniel being unguilty, (...)
was saved from the mouth of the Lions.

And thus ye may considre through out Heb. 11. b
that who so ever put their trust in God, were not over come. Mat. 10. ^ Esa.
51. c and 40. ^ 1. Pet. 1. d Jacob. 1. ^ Eccll. 14. ^ Psalm. 26. and 30. d
Fear not ye then the words of an ungodly man, for his glory is but donge and
worms: to day is he set up, and to morrow is he gone: for he is turned in to
earth, and his memorial is come to naught. Wherefore (o my sons) take good
hertes unto you, and quyte your selves like men in the law: for if ye do the
things that are commanded you in the law of the LORD your God, ye shall
optaine great honor therein.

And behold, I know that your brother Simon is a man of wyszdome: se that ye
give ear unto him allwaye, he shall be a father unto you. As for Judas
Machabeus, he has ever been mighty and strong from his youth up: let him be
your captain, and order the battayll of ye people: Thus shall ye bring unto
you all those that favor the law, and se that ye avenge the wrong of your
people, and recompense the Heithen again, and apply your selves whole to the
commandment of the law. So he gave them his blessinge, and was laid by his
fathers: and dyed in the Cxlvj, year at Modin, where his sons buried him in
his fathers sepulcre, and all Israel made great lamentacion for him.

The III. Chapter.
THen stood up Judas Machabeus in Josephus cap. 8.9.^ 12. Antiq
and all his brethren helped him: and so did all they that held with his
father, and fought with cherefulnesse for Israel. So Judas gat his people
great honor: He put on a breast plate as a giaunte, and arrayed him self with
his harness, and defended the host with his swearde. In his acts he was like
a lion, and as a lions whelpe roaringe at his pray. He was an enemy to the
wicked, Psalm 100. ^ 2. Mac. 8. ^
and hu^ted them out: and brent up those, that vexed his people: So that his
enemies fled for fear of him, and all the workers of ungodliness were put to
trouble: soch luck and prosperity was in his hand. This grieved diverse
kings, but Jacob was greatly reioysed through his acts, and he gat him self a
great name for ever.

He went through the cities of Judah, destroyenge the ungodly out of them,
turnynge away the wrath from Israel, and receauynge soch as were oppressed:
and the fame of him went unto the vttemost part of ye earth. Then Appollonius
(a prince of Syria) gathered a mighty great host of the Heithen and out of
Samaria, to fight against Israel. Which when Judas perceived, he went forth to
mete him, fought with him, slew him, and a great multitude with him: the
remnaunte fled, and he took their substance. Judas also took Appollonius own
swearde, and fought with it all his life long.



Re. 14. a
But Judas said: It is a small matter for many to be overcome with few: Ye
there is no difference to the God of heaven, to deliver by a great multitude
or by a small company: Par. 25. b
for the victory of the battle stondeth not in the multitude of the host, but
LORD himself shall destroy the^ before our face: therefore be not ye afraid
of them.



As soon as he had spoken these words, he leapte suddenly upon the^. Thus was
Seron smytten, and his host put to flight* and Judas followed upon them beyond
Bethoron unto the plain field: where there were slain eight hundredth men of
them, and the residue fled in to the land of the Philistynes. Then all the
Heithen on every side were afraid for Judas and his brethren: so yt the
rumoure of him came unto the kings ears, for all the Gentiles could tell of
the wars of Judas.

So when king Antiochus herd these

Nevertheless when he saw, that there was not money enough in his
treasuries, and that through the discord and persecucion, which he made in ye
land (to put down ye laws that had been of old time) his customs and
tributes of the land were my niszshed: he feared that he was not able for to
bear the costs and charges any longer, ner to have soch gifts, to give so
liberally as he did a fore, more then the kings that were before him.

Wherefore he was heavy in his mind, and thought to go in to Persides, (...)
for to take tributes of ye land, and so to gather much money. So he left
Lysias (a noble man of the kings blood) to ouersee the kings busynesses,
from the water Euphrates unto the borders of Egipte: and to keep well his son
Antiochus, till he came again.

Morouer, he gave him half of his host (...)
Thus the king took the other part of the host, and departed from Antioch (a
cite of his realm) over the water of Euphrates, in the hundredth and xlvij.
year, and went through the hye countrees.

And Lysias chose unto him Ptolomy the son of Doriminus, (...)
Nycanor and Gorgias mighty men, and the kings friends. These he sent with
xl. thousand footmen and vij. thousand horsemen, for to go in to ye land of
Judah, and to destroy it, as the king commanded. So they went forth with all
their power, and came to Emmaus in to the plain field. When the merchants
herd the rumoure of them, they and their servants took very much silver and
gold, for to bye the children of Israel to be their bond men. There came unto
them also yet moo men of war on every side, out of Syria and the from the
Palestynes.



^^ac 3. d
As for Jerusalem, it lay void, and was as it had been a wilderness. There
went no man in nor out at it, and the Sanctuary was trodden down. The
aleauntes kept the castle, there was the habitacion of the Heithen. The mirth
of Jacob was taken away, the pype and the harp was gone from among them.

The Israelites gathered them together, and came to Maspha before Jerusalem:
for in Maspha was the place where they prayed aforetyme. (...). 7. b
So they fasted that day, and put sack clothes upon them, cast aszshes upon
their heads, rent their clothes, and laid forth the books of the law
(wherout ye Heithen sought the licknesse of their images) and brought the
prestes ornaments, the firstlinges and the Tithes. They set there also the
absteyners (which had fulfilled their days) before God, (...) 6. a
and cried with a loud voice toward heaven, saying: what shall we do with
these? and whither shall we carry them away?



They blewe out the trompettes also with aloude voice. Then Judas ordened
captains over the people: (...). 1^. d
over thousands, over hundredes, over fifty, and over ren. But as for soch as
builded them houses, married wives, planted them vynyardes, and those that were
fearful: Deu. 20 Iudic. 7
he commanded them every man to go home, acordinge to ye law. So the host
removed, and pitched upon the South side of Emmaus.

And Judas said: Arm your selves, be strong (o my children) make you ready
against tomorow in the morning, that ye may fight with these people, which
are agreed together to destroy us and our Sanctuary. Better is it for us to
dye in battayll, then to se our people and our Sanctuary in soch a miserable
case. Nevertheless, Matt. 6. ^ Luc. 11. a
as ye will is in heaven, so be it.



The IIII. Chapter.
THen took Gorgias five thousand Iosephu ubisupr^
and a thousand of the best horsemen: and removed by night, to come nigh where
ye Jews host lay, and so to slaye them suddenly. Now the men that kept the
castle, were the co^ueyers of them. Then arose Judas to smite the chief and
pryncipall of the kings host at Emmaus, for the army was not yet come
together. In the mean season came Gorgias by night in to Judas tents: and
when he found no man there, he sought them in the mountains, and thought they
had been fled away because of him. But when it was day, Judas showed himself
in ye field with three thousand men only, which had nether harness ner
sweardes to their minds.

But on the other side, they saw that the Heithen were mighty and well
harnessed, and their horsemen about them, and all these well expert in fettes
of war Then said Judas to ye men that were with him: Fear not ye the
multitude of them, Deu. 20.
be not afraid of their violente runnynge: remember how our fathers were
delivered in the reed see, Exo. 14. ^
when Pharao threatened them with a great host. Even so let us also cry now
toward heaven: 1. Mac. 9. ^
and the LORD shall have mercy upon us, and remember the covenant of our
fathers, ye and destroy this host before our face this day: And all
Heithen shall know, that it is God himself, which delyuereth and saves Israel.

Then the Heithen lift up their eyes: and when they saw that they were
coming against them, they went out of their tents in to the battayll: and
they that were with Judas, blewe up the trompettes. So they buckled together,
Mac. 8. d
and the Heithen were discomfited, and fled over the plain field: but the
hynmost of them were slain. For they followed upon them unto Assaremoth, and in
to the feldes of Idumea toward Azot and Iamnia: so that there were slain of
them upon a three thousand men. So Judas turned again with his host, and
said unto the people: Be not gredy of ye spoils, we have yet a battayll to
fight: for Gorgias and his host are here by us in the mountains, but stand
ye fast against our enemies, and overcome them: then may ye safely take the
spoils.



So Judas turned again to spoil the tents, where they gat much gold and
silver, precious stones, purple and great riches. Thus they went home, and
sunge a Psalm of thankesgeuynge and praised God in heaven: ^udit. 13. c ^sal.
106. a 17. a. 135. a and 105. a
for he is gracious, and his mercy endures for ever: And so Israel had a
great victory in that day.

Now all the Heithen that escaped, came and told Lysias every thing as it
happened. Wherefore Lysias was sore afraid and grieved in his mind, because
Israel had not gotten soch mysfortune as he would they should, ^. Mac. 3. c
nether as the king commanded. The next year folowinge, gathered Lysias
three score thousand chosen men of foot, and five thousand horsemen, to fight
against them.

^. Re. 7. g
in the hand of thy servant David, and gave the host of the Heithe^ in to
the hand of Ionathas (the son of Saul) and of his weapen bearer. (...)


Put this host now in to the hand of ye people of Israel, and let them be
confounded in their multitude and horsemen. Make them afraid, and discomforth
the boldness of their strength, yt they may be moved through their destruction.
Cast them down through the swearde of thy lovers, then shall all they that know
thy name, praise the with thankesgeuynge.

So they stroke the batell, and there were slain of Lysias host, five
thousand men. Then Lysias seeing the discomfetynge of his men, and the
manlynesse of the Jews, how they were ready, either to live or to dye like men:
He went unto Antioche and chose out men of war: that when they were gathered
together, they might come again in to Iewry. Then said Judas and his
brethren: behold, our enemies are discomfited: Let us now go up, to cle^se
and to repair the Sanctuary.



Upon this, all the host gathered them (...)
Now when they saw the Sanctuary laid waist, the altar defiled, the doors
brent up, the shrubbes growinge in the courts, like as in a wod or upon
mountains, ye and that the prestes Celles were broken down: They rent their
clothes, made great lamentacion, cast aszshes upon their heads, fell down
flat to the ground, made a great noise with the trompettes, and cried toward
heaven.

Then Judas appointed certain men to fight against those which were in the
castle, till they had cleansed the Sanctuary. So he chose prestes yt were
undefiled, soch as had pleasure in the law of God: and they cleansed the
Sanctuary, and bare out the defiled stones in to an unclean place. And for so
much as the altar of burn offerynges was unhallowed, he took aduysement, what
he might do withal: so he thought it was best to destroy it (lest it should
happen to do them any shame) for the Heithen had defiled it, and therefore they
brake it down. As for the stones, they laid them up upon the mountain by the
house in a convenient place: till there came a prophet to show, what should be
done with them.

(...). ^0 d (...). 27. a (...). ^. g
and builded a new altar soch one as was before, and made up the Sanctuary
within and without, and hallowed the courts. They made new ornaments, and
brought ye candilsticke, the altar of incense, and the table in to the temple.
The incense laid they upon the altar, and lighted the lamps which were upon
the candilsticke, that they might burn in the temple. They set the shewbred
upon the table, and hanged up the vale, and set up ye temple, as it was before.
And upon the xxv. day of the ix. month (which is called the month of Casleu)
in the C. xlviij. year: (...) 10. a
they rose up by times in the morning for to do sacrifice (acordinge to the
law) upon the new burnt offrynge altar, that they had made: after the time
and season that ye Heithen had defiled it. The same day was it set up again,
with songs pipes, harpes and cymbales.

(...). 7. b
offering burntsacrifices and thank offeringes with gladness. They deck to
the temple also with crowns and shyldes of gold, and hallowed the ports and
celles, and hanged doors upon them. Thus was there very great gladness among
the people, because the blasphemy of the Heithe^ was put away.

So Judas and his brethren with the whole congregation of Israel, ordened, that
the time of the dedicacion of ye altar should be kept in his season from
year to year, (...). 10. c
by the space of viij. days, from the xxv. day of the month Casleu: ye and
that with mirth and gladness.

And at the same time builded they up ye mount Sion with hye walls and strong
towers round about: lest ye Gentiles should come and tread it down, as they
did before. (...)
Therefore Judas set men of war in it, to keep it: and made it strong, for to
defend Bethsura: that the people might have a refuge against the Edomites.

The V. Chapter.
IT happened also that when ye Heithen Iosephu^ cap. 12. ^ bro 12.
how that the altar and the Sanctuary were set up in their old estate: it
displeased them very sore, wherefore they thought to destroy the generation of
Jacob that was among them: In so much that they began to slaye and to
persecute certain of ye people. Then Judas fought against the children of Esau
in Idumea, Eze. 25. c and 35. a
and against those which were at Arabathane (for they dwelt round about ye
Israelites) where he slew and spoiled a great multitude of the^. 2. Ma. 10.
He thought also upon the malice and unfaithfulness of the children of Bean, how
they were a snare and stop unto ye people, and how they laid wait for them
in the hie way: wherefore he shut them up in to towers, and came unto them,
condemned them, and brent up their towers, with all that were in them.

Afterward went he against the children of Ammon, whereof he found a mighty
power and a great multitude of people, with Tymothy their captain. So he
stroke many battayls with them, which were distroyed before him. And when he
had slain them, he wanne Gazer the cite, with the towns belonginge thereto,
and so turned again in to Iewry. The Heithen also in Galaad gathered them
together, against the Israelites that were in their quarters, to slaye them:
but they fled to the castle of Datheman, and sent letters unto Judas and his
brethren, saying: The Heithen are gathered

While these letters were yet a readinge, behold, there came other messau^gers
from Galilee, with rent clothes: which told even the same tydinges, and
said, that they of Ptolomais, of Tirus and of Sidon were gathered against
them, and that all Galilee was filled with enemies to destroy Israel. When
Judas and ye people herd this, they came together (a great congregation) to
deuyse, 2. Mac* 8.
what they might do for their brethren, that were in trouble and beseged of
their enemies. And Judas said unto Simon his brother: chose ye out certain
men, and go deliver thy brethren in Galilee: As for me and my brother Ionathas,
we will go in to Galaadithim. So he left Josephus ye son of Zachary, and
Asarias, to be captains of the people and to keep the remnaunt of the host in
Iewry, and commanded them, saying: Take the oversight of this people, and se
that ye make no war against the Heithen, until the time that we come again.
And unto Simon he gave three thousand men for to go into Galilee, but Judas
himself had eight thousand in to Galaadithim.



So Judas and his host turned in all the haist in the wilderness toward
Bosor, and wanne the cite, slew all the males with the swearde, took all their
goods, and set fire upon the cite. And in the night they took their iourneye
from thence, and came to the castle. And by times in the morning when they
looked up, behold, there was an innumerable people bearing laders and other
instruments of war, to take the castle and to overcome them.

When Judas saw that the battayll began, and that the noise thereof went up
and range in to the Heaven, and that there was so great a cry in the cite: He
said unto his host: fight this day for your brethren. And so came behind
their enemies in three companies, and blewe up the trompettes, and cried in
their prayer to God.

But as soon as Tymothis host perceived that Machabeus was there, they fled
from him, and ye other slew them down right sore: so that there were killed
of them that same day, almost eight thousand men. Then departed Judas unto
Maspha, laid sege unto it and wanne it, slew all the males in it, spoiled it,
and set fire upon it. From thence went he and took Casbon, Mageth, Bosor and
the other cities in Galaad.

After this gathered Timothy another (...)
which pitched their tents before Raphon beyond the water. Judas sent to spy
the host, and they brought him word again, saying: All the Heithen that be
round about us, are gathered unto him, and the host is very great: Ye they
have hired the Arabians to help them, and have pitched their tents beyond
the water, and are ready to come and fight against the. So Judas went on to
mete them.

And Timothy said unto the captains of his host: when Judas and his host
come nigh the river: if he go over first, we shall not be able to withstonde
him: for why, he will be to strong for us. But if he darre not come over, so
that he pitch his tente beyond the water: then will we go over, for we shall be
strong enough against him. Now as soon as Judas came to the river, he
appointed certain scrybes of the people, and commanded them, saying: se that
ye leave none behind upon this side of ye river, but let every man come to the
battayll. So he went first over unto them, and his people after him.

And all the Heithen were discomfited before him, and let their weapens fall,
and ran in to the temple that was at Carnaim. Which cite Judas wanne, and
brent the temple with all yt were in it: So was Carnaim subdued, and might not
withsto^de Judas. Then Judas gathered all the Israelites that were in
Galaadithim, from ye leest unto the most, with their wives and their children
(a very great host) for to come in to the land of Judah.

So they came unto Ephron, which was (...)
and lay in their way. For they could not go by it, nether of the right hand
ner of the left, but must go through it. Nevertheless they that were in the
cite, would not let them go through, but walled up the ports with stones. And
Judas sent unto the^ with peaceable words, saying: Let us pass through your
land, (...). 10. c
that we may go in to our own country: there shall no body do you harm, we
will but only go through. But they would not let them in.

Wherefore Judas commanded a proclamacion to be made through out the host, that
every man should keep his order: and so they did their best like valeaunt men.



And Judas beseged the cite all that day and all that night, and so wanne it:
where they slew as many as were males, and d^^troyed the cite, and spoiled it,
and went through all the cite over them that were slain. Then went they over
Iordane in to the plain field before Bethsan. And Judas helped those forward
that came behind, and gave the people good exortacion all ye way through, till
they were come in to the land of Judah. Thus they went up unto the mount Sion,
where they offered with mirth and thankesgeuynge: (...)
because there were none of them slain, but came home again peaceably.

Now what time as Judas and Ionathas were in the land of Galaad, and Simon
their brother in Galilee before Ptolomais: Then Josephus the son of Zachary
and Asarias the captains, hearing of the acts that were done and of the
battles that were stricken, said: Let us get us a name also, and go fight
against the Heithen that are round about us.

(...). 5. b
Nevertheless they came not of the sede of these men, by whom Israel was helped.
But the men that were with Judas, were greatly commended in the sight of all
Israel and all Heithen, where so ever their name was herd upon, and the people
came unto them byddinge them welcome.

After this went Judas forth with his brethren, and fought against the
children of Esau, in the land yt lies toward the south where he wanne the
cite of Hebron and the towns that lie beside it: and as for the walls and
towers round about it, he brent them up. Then removed he to go in to the
lord of the Philistines, and went through Samaria. At the same time were there
many prestes slain in ye battayll, which wilfully and without advysement went
out for to fight to get them honor. And when Judas came to Azot in the
Philistynes land, he brake down their altares, Deuteronomy. 7.
brent the images of their Idols, spoiled the cities, and came again in to the
land of Judah.

The VI. Chapter.
NOw when king Antiochus trauayled Iosephu^ cap. 13. ^ 12. anti. 2. Ma. 9.
he herd that Elymas in Persia was a noble and plenteous cite in silver and
gold, and that there was in it a very rich temple: where as were clothes, cote
armoures and shyldes of gold, which Alexander the son of Philippe king of
Macedonia had left behind him. Wherefore he went about to take the cite and
to spoil it, but he was not able: for ye citise^s were warned of it, and
fought with him. And so he fled, and departed with great heaviness, and came
again in to Babylon. Morouer there came one which brought him tidinges in
Perside, 1. Mac. 3. and. 4.
yt his hoostes which were in the land of Judah, were driven away, and how
that Lisias went forth first with a great power, and was driven away of the
Jews: how they had won the victory, and gotten great goods out of the
hoostes that peryshed: how they had broken down the abhominacion, which he set
up upon the altar at Jerusalem, 1. Mac. 1.
and fenced the Sanctuary with hye walls, like as it was before: ye and
Bethsura his cite also.

So it chanced, that when the king had for his grefe was ever more and more,
so yt he saw he must needs dye. Therefore he sent for his friends, and said
unto them: ye sleep is gone fro mine eyes, for ye very sorrow and vexacio^ of
heart yt I have. For when I considre in my mind ye great aduersite yt I am
come unto and the floudes of heaviness which I am in, where as before time I was
so merry, and so greatly set by (by reason of my power) Again, co^sideringe ye
evil yt I have done at Jerusalem, from whence I took all ye riches of gold
and silver yt were in it, and sent to fetch away the inhabitours of Iewry
without any reason why: I know, yt these troubles are come upon me for the
same cause. And behold, I must dye with great sorrow in a strange land.

Then called he for one Philippe a friend of his, whom he made ruler of all his
realm and gave him the crown, his robe and his ring: that he should take his
son Antiochus unto him and bring him up, till he might reign himself. Mac.
9 b. c. d. e
So the king Antiochus ^^sephus ^^pi. 14 (...). 12 Mac. ^. d
he ordened Antiochus his son (whom he had brought up) to reign in his
fathers stead) and called him Eupator. Now they that were in the castle (at
Jerusalem) kept in the Jews round about the Sa^ctuary, and sought ever
still to do them harm, for the strengthenynge of the Heithen.

Wherefore Judas thought to destroy them, and called all the people together,
yt they might lay sege unto them. So they came together in the Cl. year, and
beseged the^ layenge forth their ordinance and instruments of war. Then
certain of them yt were beseged went forth (unto whom some ungodly men of
Israel joined the^ selves also) and went unto the king, saye^ge: How long
will it be, or thou punysh and avenge our brethren? We have been ever minded to
do thy father service, to walk in his statutes, and to obey his
commandments: Therefore our people fell from us, and where so ever they
found any of us, they slew them: and they have not only meddled with us, but
with all our countrees: and behold, this day are they beseginge the castle
at Jerusalem, and have made up the strong hold in Bethsura: Ma. 4. g
And if thou do not preuente them right soon, they will do more then these,
and thou shall not be able to overcome them.

Ma. 13. a
and called all his friends, the captains of his footmen and of all his horse
men together. He hired men of war also out of other realms and out of the
Isles of the sea, which came unto him. And the nombre of his host was an
hundredth thousand footmen, and twentye thousand horsemen, and xxxij.
Elephantes well exercised to battayll These came through Idumea unto Bethsura,
and beseged it a long season, (...)
and made diverse instruments of war against it. But the Jews came out and
brent them, and fought like men. Then departed Judas from the castle at
Jerusalem, and removed ye host toward Bethza cara^ over against the kings
army.

So the king arose before the day, and brought the power of his host in to
ye way to Bethzacaran, where the hoostes made them to the battayll, blowynge
the trompettes. (...)
And to provoke the Elephantes for to fight, they showed them the sap of reed
grapes and molberies. And divided the Elephantes

As for the remnaunt of the horsemen, he set them upon both the sides in two
parts with trompettes, to provoke the host, and to stere up soch as were
slow in the army. And when the Son shone upon their shyldes of gold and
stele, the mountains glistered again at them, and were as bright as the
creszshettes of fire. The kings host also was divided, one part upon the hie
mountains, the other low beneth: so they went on, taking good head, and
kepinge their order. And all they that dwelt in the land, were afraid at the
noise of their host, when the multitude went forth, and when the the weapens
smote together, for the host was both great and mighty. Judas also and his
host entered in to the battayll, and slew vj.C. men of the kings army.

Now when Eleasar the son of Saura did se one of ye Elephantes deckte with the
kings badge, and was a more goodly be the^ the other: He thought ye king
should be upon him, and ioperde himself to deliver his people, and to get him a
perpetual name.

Wherefore he ran with a courage unto the Elephante in the myddest of the
host, smytinge them down of both the sides, and slew many about him. So
went he to the Elephantes fete, and gat him under him, and slew him: then
fell the Elephante down upon him, and there he dyed. Judas also and his men
saying the power of the king and the mighty violence of his host, departed
(...). 4. g


But when they came out of the cite (because they had no vytales within, (...)
and the land lay untilled) the king took Bethsura, and set men to keep it,
and turned his host to the place of the Sanctuary, and laid sege to it a
great while. Where he made all manner ordinance: handbowes, fyrie darts,
rackettes to cast stones, scorpions to shute arowes, and slings. The Jews
also made ordinance against theirs, and fought a long season.

But in the cite there were no vytayles, for it was the seventh year of the
wars, and those Heithen that remained in Iewry had eaten up all their stoare.
And in the Sanctuary were few men left, for the hunger came so upon them, that
they were scatered abroad every man to his own place.

So when Lysias herd, that Philippe (whom Antiochus the king while he was yet
lyuinge, (...)
had ordened to bring up Antiochus his son, that he might be king) was come
again out of Persia and Media with the kings host, and thought to obtain
the kingdom: He gat him to the king in all the haist and to the captains

The VII. Chapter.
IN the Clj. year came Demetrius ye 2. Ma. 14. ^
unto a cite of the sea coast, and there he bare rule. And it chanced, that
when he came to Antioch the cite of his Progenitors, his host took Antiochus
and Lysias, to b^ynge them unto him. But when it was told him, he said: let
me not se their faces. So the host put them to death. Now when Demetrius was
set upon the trone of his kingdom, there came unto him wicked and ungodly men
of Israel: whose captain was Alcimus, that would have been made hye pressed.
These men accused the people of Israel unto the king, saying: Judas and his
brethren have slain thy friends, and driven us out of our own land.
Wherefore send now some man (to whom thou geuest credence) that he may go and
se all the destruction, which he has done unto us and to the kings land, and
let him be punished with all his fre^des and favorers.

Then the king chose Bachides a friend 1. Mac. 1. ^
for they saw yt they were come with a great host

After this came ye scribes together unto Alcimus and Bachides, trustinge the
best unto them. And first, ye Assideans required peace of them, saying:
Alcimus ye pressed is come of the sede of Aaron, how can he disceaue us? So they
gave them loui^ge words, and swore unto them, and said: we will do you no
harm, nether your friends: and they believed them. But the very same day took
they lx. men of them, and slew the^: acordinge to ye words yt are written:
Psalm. 78. ^
They have cast ye flesh of ye sanctes, and shed their blood round about
Jerusalem, and there was noma^ yt would bury the^.



Now when Judas saw all the myschefe that Alcimus and his company had done
(ye more then the Heithe^ them selves) unto the Israelites: He went forth
round about all the borders of Iewry, and punyshed those unfaithful
rennagates, so that they came no more out in to the country. So when Alcimus
saw, that Judas and his people had gotten the vpperhande, and that he was not
able to abide them: he went again to the king, and said all the worst of
them that he could. Then the king sent Nicanor, one of his chief princes
(which bare evil will unto Israel) and commanded him, that he should utterly
destroy the people.

^. Ma. 15. a
there shall be no war betwixt me and you: I will come with a few men, to se
how ye do, with frenshipe. Upon this he came unto Judas, and they saluted one
another peaceably: but the enemies were appointed to take Judas by violence.
Nevertheless it was told Judas, yt he came unto him but under disceate:
wherefore he gat him away from him, and would se his face no more. When Nicanor
perceived yt his council was bewrayed, he went out to fight against Judas,
beside Capharsalama: Where there were slain of Nicanors host, v.M. men: the
residue fled unto the castle of David.

After this came Nicanor up unto mount Sion: and the prestes with the elders of
the people went forth to salute him peaceably, and to show him ye burnt
sacrifices yt were offered for the king. But he laughed the^ to scorn, mocked
the^, defiled their offeringes, and spoke diszdanedly, ye and swore in his
wroth, saying: If Judas and his host be (...)
as soon as ever I come again (and fair well) I shall burn up this house.
With that, went he out in a great anger. Then the prestes came in, and stood
before the altar of the temple, wepinge and saying: For so much as thou (o
LORD) have chosen this house, (...)
that thy name might be called upon therein, and yt it should be an house of
prayer and peticion unto thy people: (...)
Be avenged of this man and his host, and let them be slain with ye swearde:
remember the blasphemies of them, and suffer them not to continue any longer.

When Nicanor was gone from Ierusasalem, he pitched his tente at Bethoron, and
there an host met hi^ out of Siria. And Judas came to Adarsa with iij.M. me^,
and made his prayer unto God, saying: O LORD, because the messaungers of
king Senacherib blasphemed the, the angel went forth, and slew an Clxxxv.
thousand of them: (...)
Even so destroy thou this host before us to day that other people may
know, how that he has blasphemed thy Sanctuary: and punysh him, acordinge to
his maliciousness.



And so the hoostes stroke the field, the thirtente day of the month Adar:
and (...)
they cast away their weapens and fled: but the Jews followed upon them an
whole days journey, from Adazer unto Gazara, blowinge with the trompettes, and
making tokens after them. So the Jews came forth of all the towns there
about, and blewe out their horns upon them, and turned against them: Thus
were they all slain, and not one of them left.



Then they took their substance for a pray, and smote of Nicanors head and
his right hand (which he held up so proudly) and brought it with them, (...)
and hanged it up before Jerusalem. Wherefore the people were exceadingly
reioysed, and passed over that day in great gladness. And Judas ordened,
that ye same day (namely the xiij. day of ye month Adar) should be kept in
mirth every year. Thus the land of Judah was in rest a little while.

The VIII. Chapter.
(...)
ye and to find the^ good suerties and plege: Besides all this, how they had
taken from him India, Media and Lydia (his best lands) and given them to king
Eumenus. Again, how they perceiving

Then Judas chose Eupolemus the son this charge at the Romans pleasure, and
take nothing from them therefore. Again if the people of the Jews happen
first to have war, the Romans shall stand by the^ with a good will,
acordinge as the time will suffer: Nether shall they give unto the Jews enemies,
vytales, weapens, money ner ships. Thus are the Romans content to do, and
shall fulfill their charge without any disceate.

Acordinge to these articles, the Romans made the bond with the Jews. Now
after these articles (said they) if any of the parties will put to them, or
take any thing from them: they shall do it with the consent of both: and what
so ever they add then unto them or take from them, it shall stand fast. And
as touching the evil that Demetrius has done unto the Jews, we have written
unto him, saying: Wherefore layest thou thy heavy yocke upon the Jews our
friends and lovers? If they make any complaynte of the again unto us, we shall
defend them, and fight with the by see and by land.

The IX. Chapter.
1. Mac. 7. f ^ose. ca. 17 libro 32.
he proceeded further to send Bachides and Alcimus again in to Iewry, and
those that were in the right wynge of his host, with them. So they went forth
by the way that ledeth unto Galgala, and pitched their tents before Mesaloth
which is in Arbellis, and wanne the cite, and slew much people. In ye first
month of the Clij. year, they brought their host to Jerusalem, and rose up
and came to Berea, with xx.M. footmen, and ij.M. horsemen.

Now Judas had pitched his tente at Laisa, with three thousand chosen men. And
when they saw the multitude of the other army yt it was so great, they were
sore afraid, and many conveyed them selves out of the host, In so much yt
there abode no mo of them but viij.C. men. When Judas saw that his host
failed him, and that he must needs fight: it brake his heart, yt he had no time
to gather them together: wherefore the man was in extreme trouble. Nevertheless
he said unto them, yt remained with him: Up, let us go against our enemies,
peraduanture we shall be able to fight with them. But they would have stopped
him, saying: we shall not be able, therefore let us now save our lives, and
turn again to or brethren, and then will we fight against the^, for we are
here but few. And Judas said:

Now when they which were of the left wynge, saw that the right side was
discomfited, they persecuted Judas and them that were with him. Then was there a
sore battayll, for many were slain and wounded of both the parties, Judas also
himself was killed, and the remnaunt fled. So Ionathas and Symo^ took Judas
their brother, and buried him in his fathers sepulcre in the cite of Modin. And
all the people of Israel made great lamentacion for him, and mourned long,
saying: Alas, that this worthy should be slain, which delivered ye people of
Israel. As for other things pertayninge to ye battayls of Judas, the nobles
acts that he did and of his worthynesse: they are not written, for they were
very many.

And after the death of Judas, wicked me^ (...)
and there arose all soch as work ungodliness. In those days was there a
great derth in the land, and all the country gave over them selves and theirs
unto Bachides. So Bachides those wicked men, and made them lords in the land.
These sought out and made search for Judas friends, and brought them unto
Bachides: which avenged himself upon the^ with great despite. And there came
so great trouble in Israel, as was not sens the time that no prophet was seen
there.

Then came all Judas friends together, and said unto Ionathas: For so much as
thy brother Judas is deed, there is none like him to go forth against or
enemies, against Bachides, and soch as are adversaries unto our people.
Wherefore this day we chose the for him, to be our prince and captain to
order our batell. And Ionathas took the governance upon him at the same time,
and ruled in stead of his brother Judas. When Bachides gat knowledge thereof, he
sought for to slaye him: But Ionathas and Simon his brother, perceiving that,
fled in to ye wilderness of Thecua with all their company, and pitched their
te^tes by the water pole of Asphar.

Which when Bachides understood, he came over Iordane with all his host upon
ye Sabbath day. Now had Ionathas sent his brother Ihon (a captain of the
people) to pray his friends the Nabuthites, yt they would lend them their
ordinance, for they

So they lift up their eyes, and looked: and behold, there was much a do, and
great repair: for the brydegrome came forth, and his fre^des and his brethren
met them with tympanys, instruments of music, and many weape^s. Then Ionathas
and they that were with him, rose out of their skoukinge places against them,
and slew many of them. As for the remnaunt, they fled in to ye mountains, and
they took all their substance. Thus the marriage was turned to mourning, and
ye noise of their melody in to lamentacion. And so when they had avenged the
blood of their brother, they turned again unto Iordane.

Bachides hearing this, came unto ye very border of Iordane with a great
power upon the Sabbath day. And Ionathas said to his company: let us get up,
and fight against our enemies: for it stondeth not (...). ^0. a (...). 4. b
Wherefore cry now unto heaven, that ye may be delivered from the power of
your enemies. So they stroke the batell. And Ionathas stretched out his hand
to smite Bachides, but he fled bacwarde. Then Ionathas and they yt were with
him leapte in to Iordane, and swymmed over Iordane unto him, and there were
slain of Bachides side that day, a thousand men.

Therefore Bachides with his host turned again to Jerusalem, and buylte up ye
castles and strong holds that were in Iewry, Jericho, Emaus, Bethoron,
Bethel, Tha^nata, Phara and Thopo, with hye walls, with ports and with locks:
and set men to keep them, yt they might use their malice upon Israel. He walled
up Bethsura, Gazara and the castle at Jerusalem also, and provided them with men
and vytales: He took also the chefest men's sons in the country for pledges,
and put them in the castle at Jerusalem to be kept.

Afterward in the C.liij. year in the second month, Alcimus commanded,
that ye walls of the ynmost Sanctuary should be destroyed, and the buyldinges
of ye prophets also. And when he began to destroy the^, ye things yt he
went about, were hyndered: for he was smytten with a palsy, and his mouth

So they went and gave Bachides this council, which arose to come with a great
host, and sent letters privily to his adherentes which were in Iewry, to take
Ionathas and those yt were with him: but they might not, for the other had
gotten knowledge of their deuyce. And Ionathas took L. men of the country (which
were the ryngleders of them) and slew them. Then Ionathas and Simon with their
company departed unto the cite Bethbessen, which lies in the wilderness, and
repaired the decay thereof, and made it strong. When Bachides knew this, he
gathered all his host, and sent word to them that were of Iewry. The^ came he
and laid sege to Bethbessen, and fought against it a long season, and made
instruments of war. Now Ionathas

As for Simon and his company, they went out of the cite, and bre^t up the
instruments of war, and fought against Bachides, and disco^fited him. And
Bachides was sore vexed, because his council and travail was in vain.
Wherefore he was wroth at ye wicked men (that gave him council to come in to
their land) and slew many of them. Then purposed he with his company to go
away in to his own country: whereof when Ionathas had knowledge, he sent
embassitours unto him, for to make peace with him, and yt he should deliver him
his presoners again. To the which Bachides consented gladly, and did acordinge
to his desire: ye and made an ooth, that he should never do him harm all the
days of his life. So he restored unto him all the presoners that he had taken
out of the land of Judah, and the^ turned and went his way in to his own
land, nether proceeded he any further to come unto ye borders of Judah. Thus
Israel had no more war. And Ionathas dwelt at Machmas, and began there to
govern the people, and destroyed the ungodly men out of Israel.

The X. Chapter.
^osephus ^ap. 2.3. li^ro 13.
and took Ptolomais, whose citisens received him, and there he reigned. When
Demetrius herd thereof, he gathered an exceadinge great host, and went forth
against him to fight. Wherefore Demetrius sent letters unto Ionathas with
loving words, and praised him greatly. For he said: we will first make peace
with him, before he bind him self with Alexander against us: else he shall
remember the evil that we have done against him, his brother and his people.
And so he gave Ionathas leave to gather an host, to make weapens, Mac. 9. c
and to be confederate with him, and commanded the pledges that were in the
castle, to be delivered unto him.



Then came Ionathas to Jerusalem, and red the letters in the audience of all
the people, and of them that were in ye castle. And therefore were they sore
afraid, because they herd, that the king had given him license to gather an
host. Thus were the pledges delivered unto Ionathas, which restored them to
their elders. Ionathas also dwelt at Jerusalem, and began to build up and

Now when king Alexander herd of ye promises yt Demetrius had made unto
Ionathas, and when it was told him of ye batels and noble acts, which he and
his brethren had done, and of the great trauayles that they had taken: he
said: where shall we find soch a man? well, we will make him our friend, and
be confederate with him. Upon this he wrote a lettre unto him, with these words:
king Alexander saluteth his brother Ionathas. We have herd of the, yt thou
art a valeaunt man, and mete to be or friend: wherefore this day we ordene the
to be the hye pressed of thy people, and to be called the kings friend. Upon
this, he sent him a purple clothinge and a crown of gold) yt thou may
considre what is for our profit, and keep frendshipe toward us.

So in the vij. month of the C.lx. year of many charges, and give you
rewards.

And now I discharge you and all ye Jews from tributes, I forgive you the
customs of salt, and release you of the crown taxes, of the third part of
sede, and half of the fruit of trees, which is mine own dewty. These I leave
for you, from this day forth: so that they shall not be taken of the land of
Judah ner of the three cities which are added

All the sole^pne feasts, Sabbathes, New mones, the days appointed, the three
days before and after the feast shall be fre for all the Jews in my realm:
so that in them no man shall have power to do any thing, or to move any
business against any of them in any manner of cause. There shall xxx.M. also of
the Jews be written up in the kings host, and have their wages paid, as all
other men of war of the kings should have: and of them shall be ordened
certain, to keep the kings strong holds: ye and some of them shall be set
over the kings business, that they may faithfully deal with the same. The
Jews also shall have princes of their own, and walk in their own laws, as
the king has commanded in the land of Judah.

And the three cities that are fallen unto Iewry from the country of Samaria and
Galilee: shall be taken as Iewry, and be under one: nether be subject to any
strange lord, but to the hye pressed. As for Ptolomais and the land
pertayninge thereto, I give it unto the Sanctuary at Jerusalem, for the
necessary expe^ces of the holy things. Morouer,

Item, who so ever they be that fle unto the temple at Jerusalem or within the
liberties thereof, where as they are fallen in to the kings danger for any
manner of busynes, they shall be pardoned, and all the goods that they have in
my realm, shall be fre. For the buyldinge also and repayringe of the work of
the Sanctuary, expenses shall be given out of the kings Checker: Ye and for the
making of the walls round about Jerusalem, for the breakinge down of the
old, and for the settinge up of the strong holds in Iewry, shall ye costs
and charges be given out of the kings Checker.

But when Ionathas and the people herd these words, 1. Mac. 7. b
they gave no credence unto them, nether received them: for they remembered the
great wickedness that he had done unto Israel, and how sore he had vexed
them. Wherefore they agreed unto Alexander, for he was a prince that had dealte
friendly with them, and so they stood by him allwaye. The^ gathered king
Alexander a great host, and brought his army against Demetrius. So ye two
kings stroke battayll together, Josephus ca. 5. lib. 1^
but Demetrius host fled, and Alexander followed after and fell upon them. A
mighty sore field was it, continuynge till the Son went down, and
Demetrius was slain the same day.

And Alexander sent embass^tours unto

Then wrote king Alexander unto Ionathas, that he should come and mete him. So
he went honorably unto Ptolomais, and there he met the two kings, and gave
them great presents of gold and silver, and found

So it happened that when his accusers saw the worshipe which was proclaimed of
him, and yt he was clothed in purple: they fled euerychone. And the king made
much of him, wrote him among his chief friends, made him a duke, and partaker
of his dominion. Thus Ionathas went again to Jerusalem with peace and
gladness. Josephus ^ap. 6. lib. (...). Antiq.
In the Clxv. year came Demetrius the son of Demetrius from Creta in to his
fathers land: whereof when Alexander herd tell, he was right sorry, and
returned unto Antioche. And Demetrius chose Appollonius (which had the
governance of Celosyria) to be his captain. ^. Mac. 3. a


So he gathered a great host and came unto Iamnia, and send word unto
Ionathas the hye pressed, saying: Darrest thou with stand us thy self alone? As
for me, I am but laughed to scorn and shamed, because thou prouest thy
strength against us in the

Which say, that your foot is not able to stand before our face, for thy
fathers have been twyse chaced in to their own land. And now, how wylt thou
be able to abide so great an host of horsemen and fotemen in the field, where
as is nether rock, stone ner place to fle unto?

When Ionathas herd the words of Appollonius, he was moved in his mind:
wherefore he chose x. thousand men and went out of Jerusalem, and Simon his
brother met him for to help him: And they pitched their tents at Ioppa, but
the cite kept him forth, for Ioppa was an hold of Appollonius. Then Ionathas
laid sege to it, and they that were in the cite, for very fear let him in:
and so Ionathas wanne Ioppa. Appollonius hearing of this, took three thousand
horsemen, with a great host of foot, and went as though he would go to
Azotus, and came Immediately in to the plain field: because he had so many
horsemen, and put his trust in the^. So Ionathas followed upon him to Azotus, and
there they stroke the battayll. Now had Appollonius left a M. horsemen behind
them pryuely in the te^tes. And when Ionathas knew that soch wait was laid
behind them, they went round about the enemies host, and shot darts at
the people from the morning to the evening. As for Ionathas people, they
kept their order as he had commanded them, and the enemies horses were ever
labouringe.

Then brought Simon forth his host, (...)
and bre^t up the temple of Dagon with all them that were fled in to it.

Thus were slain and bre^t well nigh viij. thousand men. So Ionathas removed
the host from thence, and brought them to Ascalon: where ye men of the cite
came forth, and met him with great worshipe. After this went Ionathas and his
host again to Jerusalem, with great substance of good. And when king
Alexander herd the se things, he thought to do Ionathas more worshipe, and
sent him a colar of gold, as the use is to be given unto soch as are of the
kings next blood. He gave him also ye cite of Accaron (with the lands
belonging thereto) in possession.

The XI. Chapter.
ANd ye king of Egipte gathered an (...)
(like the sonde yt lies upon the sea shore) and many ships: and went
about through disceate to obtain ye kingdom of Alexander, and to join it
unto his own realm. Upon this he took his iourneye in to Syria, and was
letten in to the cities, and me^ came forth to mete him: for king Alexander
had commanded them so to do, because he was his father in law. Now when
Ptolomy entered in to any cite, he left me^ of war to keep it, and this he
did through out all ye cities. And when he came to Azotus, they showed him the
temple of Dagon and Azotus that was brent up, Mac. 10. i
with the other things which were destroyed, the deed bodies cast abroad, and
ye graves that they had made by the way side, for soch as were slain in the
field: And told the king that Ionathas had done all these things, to the
intent they might get him evil will. But the king said not a word thereto.

And Ionathas met the king with great honor at Ioppa, where they saluted one
another, and took their rest. So when Ionathas had gone with ye king, unto the
water that was called Eleutherus, he turned again to Jerusalem. Now Ptolomy
had gotten the dominion of the cities unto Selencia upon the sea coost,
ymaginynge wicked councels against Alexander, and sent embassitours unto
Demetrius, saying: Come, let us make a bond betwixt us, so shall I give the
my daughter that Alexander has, and thou shall reign in thy fathers kingdom.

Thus he took his daughter from him, gave her unto Demetrius, and forsook
Alexander, so that his malice was openly known. And Ptolomy came to Antioche,
where he set two crowns upon his own head: the crown of Egipte and of Asia.
In the mean season was king Alexander in Cilicia, for they that dwelt in
those places, had rebelled against him. But when Alexander herd of this, he
came to war against him. So king Ptolomy brought forth his host and met him
with a mighty power, and chaced him away. Then fled Alexander in to Araby,
there to be defended, and king Ptolomys honor increased. And Zabdiel the
Arabian smote of Alexanders head, and sent it unto Ptolomy. But the third
day after, died king Ptolomy himself: and they whom he had set in the strong
holds, were slain of those that were within ye cities. And Demetrius reigned
in ye hundredth and seven and sixty year.



And though certain ungodly men of his own people made complayntes upon him,
yet the king entreated him, 1. Ma. 10. ^
like as his predecessors had done before: and promoted him in the sight of
all his friends, confirmed him in the hye presthode with all the worshipe yt he
had before, and made him his chief friend. Ionathas also desired the king that
he would make Iewry fre, with the three head cities of Samaria and the lands
pertayninge thereto: 1. Ma. 10.
upon this did Ionathas promise him three C. talentes. Where unto the king
consented, and gave Ionathas wrytinge of the same, conteyninge these words:
king Demetrius sends gretinge

King Demetrius sends gretinge unto Lasthenus his elder. For the faithfulness
that our friends the people of the Jews keep unto us, and for the loving
kyndnesse which they bear toward us: we are determed to do them good.
Wherefore we ordene all ye coostes of Iewry with the three cities, Lyda and
Ramatha (which are added unto Iewry from Samaria) and all ye lo^des pertayninge
there unto, to be freely separated for soch as do sacrifice in Jerusalem: both
concerning the payme^tes which the king took yearly before time, and ye fruits
also of the earth and trees. As for other tithes and tributes yt belonged unto
us, we discharge the^ thereof from this time forth. In like manner we grant
unto the^ all the customs of salt and crown taxes, which were brought unto
us. And this fredome shall they have firm and steadfast, from this time forth
for evermore. Therefore se yt ye make a copy of these or letters, and deliver it
unto Ionathas: that it may be kept upon ye holy mount in a convenient place.

^ Mac. 12. c
Now was there one Triphon (that had been of Alexanders part before) which when
he saw that all the host murmured against Demetrius: he went to Emalcuel the
Arabian (that brought up Antiochus the son of Alexander) and lay sore upon
him, to deliver him this young Antiochus: that he might reign in his fathers
stead. He told him also what great evil Demetrius had done, and how his me^
of war loved him not: and so remained there a long season.

And Ionathas sent unto king Demetrius, to drive them out which were in the
castle at Jerusalem and in the other refugies, for they did Israel great
harm. So Demetrius sent word unto Ionathas, saying: I will not only do these
things for the and thy people, but at time convenient I will do both the and
thy people great worshipe. But now thou shall do me a pleasure, if thou will
send me men to help me: for all mine army is

Then the king called for the Jews help, which came unto him all together,
and went abroad through the cite, and slew the same day an C.M. men: set fire
upon the cite, gat many spoils in that day, and delivered ye king. So when
the citesyns saw that the Jews had gotten their will of the cite, and they
them selves dispoynted of their purpose: they made their supplicacion unto the
king, saye^ge: Grant us peace, and let the Jews cease from troublinge us
and the cite, and upon this they cast away their weapens. Thus they made
peace, and ye Jews gat great worshipe in the sight of the king, and in the
sight of all that were in his realm, and were spoken of through out the
kingdom: and so they came again to Jerusalem with great goods.



Upon this he sent him golden vessel to be served in, and gave him leave to
drink in gold, to be clothed in purple, and to weere a colar of gold, He
made his brother Simon also captain, from the coostes of Tyrus unto the
borders of Egipte. Then Ionathas took his journey, and went through ye cities
beyo^de the water (of Iordane) and all the men of war of Syria gathered the^
unto him for to help him. So he came unto Ascalon, and they of the cite
received him honorably: and from thence went he unto Gaza, but they would not
let him in: wherefore he laid sege unto it, burning up and spoylinge the
places that were about the cite.



And the citesyns of Gaza submytted themselves put them out from thence, took
the cite, and set me^ to keep it. And Ionathas with his host came to the water
of Genesar, and by times in the morning gat them to the plain field of Azor.

And behold, the hoostes of the Heithen met the^ in the field, and laid watch
for the^ in the mountains: so yt when Ionathas came against the^, the other
(which were laid to watch) rose out of their places, and fought, and they that
were of Ionathas side, fled every man: and there was not one of the^ left,
except Matathias the son of Absalomus, and Judas the son of Calphi the
captain of the host. The^ Ionathas rent his clothes, laid earth upon his
head, made his prayer, and turned again to the^ in ye field: where they
fought together, and he put them to flight. Now when his own me^ yt were fled,
saw this: they turned again unto him, and helped him to follow upon all their
enemies unto their tents at Cades. So there were slain of the Heithen the
same day, iij.M. men, and Ionathas turned again to Jerusalem.

The XII. Chapter.
IOnathas seeing that ye time was (...)
and to other places in like manner. So they went unto Rome and entered in to ye
council, and said: Ionathas ye hye pressed and the people of ye Jews sent us
unto you, for to renew ye old fre^dshipe and bond of love. Upon this ye
Romans gave the^ fre pasportes, yt me^ should led the^ home in to ye lord
of Judah peaceably. And this is ye copy of the lettres that Ionathas wrote unto
the Sparcians:

Ionathas ye hye pressed with ye elders, prestes, and the other people of ye Jews,
send gretinge unto ye Sparcia^s their brethren. There were lettres sent long
agoo unto Onias ye hye pressed, from Arius which than reigned among you: that ye
are our brethren, as the wrytinge made thereupon specifieth. And Onias
entreated the embassitoure that was sent, honorably, and received ye lettres:
wherein there was mention made of the bond of love and

And though we have had great troubles and wars, so that the kings about
us have foughten against us: yet would we not be grievous unto you ner to other
of our lovers and friends in these wars. For we have had help from heaven,
so that we are delivered, and our enemies subdued. Wherefore we chose Numenius
the son of Antiochus and Antipater the son of Jason, and sent them unto
the Romans, for to renew the old bond of frendshipe and love with them. We
commanded them also to come unto you, to salute you, and to deliver you or
lettres, concerning the renouacion of or brotherhode. And now ye shall do right
well, to give us an answer there unto.

And this is the copy of the wrytinge, o mind unto you: Our catell and goods
are yours and yours, ours. These things have we commanded to be showed unto
you.

When Ionathas herd, that Demetrius princes were come forth to fight against
him with a greater host the^ before, he went from Jerusalem, and met the^ in
the lord of Hemath, for he gave them not space to come in to his own country.
And he sent spies unto their tents, which came again and told him, that they
were appointed to come upon him in the night season. Wherefore when the Son
was gone down, Ionathas commanded his men to watch all ye night, and to be
ready with weapens for to fight: and set watchmen round about the host. But
when the adversaries

Then Ionathas followed upon the^, but he might not overtake them, for they were
gone over the water Eleutherus. So Ionathas departed unto ye Arabia^s (which
were called Zabadei) slew them, and took their goods. He proceeded furthur
also, and came unto Damascus, and went through all that country. But Simon his
brother took his journey and came to Ascalon and to the next strong holds:
departinge unto Ioppa, and wanne it. For he herd, that they would stand of
Demetrius party: wherefore he sent me^ of war in the cite, to keep it. After
this came Ionathas home again, and called the elders of the people together:
and devised with the^ for to build up the strong holds in Iewry, and the
walls of Jerusalem, to set up an hye wall betwixt the castle and ye cite,
for to separate it from the cite, that it might be alone, and that men should
nether bye nor sell in it.



Upon this they came together for to build up the cite: and for much as the
wall upon the broke of the west side (called Caphetheta) was fallen down, they
repaired it. And Simon set up Adiada in Sephela, and made it strong, settinge
ports and locks upon it. ^ Ma. 11. c ^osephus ^api. 19. ^^bro. 13.
to be crowned, and to slaye the king Antiochus: he was afraid that Ionathas
would not suffer him, but fight against him. Wherefore he went about to take
Ionathas, and to kill him.

So he departed, and came unto Bethsan. Then went Ionathas forth against him
to the battayll with fourtye thousand chosen men, and came unto Bethsan also.
But when Triphon saw that Ionathas came with so greae an host to destroy
him, he was afraid: and therefore he received him honorably, commended him unto
all his friends, gave him rewards, and commanded his men of war to be as
obedient unto him as to himself.

And said unto Ionathas: why have thou caused this people to take soch
travail, seeing there is no war betwixt us? Therefore send them home
again, and chose certain me^ to wait upon the, and come thou with me to
Ptolomais: for I will give it the, with the other strong holds, men of war and
their officers: As for me, I must depart, this is only ye cause of my
coming. Ionathas believed him, and

Now as soon as Ionathas entered in to Ptolomais, the citesyns sparred the
gates of the cite, and took him, and slew all them with the sword, that came
in with him. Then sent Triphon an host of footmen and horsemen in to Galilee
and in to the great plain field, to destroy all Ionathas company. But when
they knew that Ionathas was taken, and all they slain that waited upon him:
they took council together, and came forth ready to the battayll. So when they
which followed upon them, saw, that it was a matter of life, they turned back
again. As for the other, they went in to ye land of Judah peacealy, and
bewailed Ionathas, and them that were with him right sore. And Israel made
great lamentacion. The^ all the Heithen yt were round about them, sought to
destroy the^. For they said: now have they no captain, nor any man to help
them. Therefore let us overcome them, and rote out their name from among men.

The XIII. Chapter.
NOw when Simon herd that Triphon (...)
and I am left alone. And now let not me spare mine own life in any manner of
trouble, for I am no better then my brethren: but will avenge my people and the
Sanctuary, our children and our wives: for all the Heithen are gathered
together, to destroy us of very malice.

At these words the hearts of the people were kyndled together, so that they
cried with a loud voice, saying: Thou shall be o captain in stead of Judas
and Ionathas thy brethren, order thou our batell, and what so ever thou
commaundest us, we shall do it. So he gathered all the men of war, making
haist to fynish all the walls of Jerusalem, which he made strong round
about.

But when Triphon knew that Simon stood up in stead of his brother Ionathas,
and that he would war against him: he sent messaungers unto him, saying:
Where as we have kept Ionathas thy brother, it is for money that he is owing
in the kings account, concerning the business yt he had in hand. Wherefore
send now an C. tale^tes of silver and his two sons for suertie, that when he
is lette^ forth he shall not forsake us: and we shall send him again.
Nevertheless Simon knew, that he dyssembled in his words: yet commanded he
the money and children to be delivered unto him: lest he should be the greater
enemy against ye people of Israel, and say: because he sent him not the money
and the children, therefore is Ionathas deed.



The^ sent Simon for to fet his brothers deed coarse, and buried it in Modin
his fathers cite. So all Israel bewailed him with great lamentacion, and
mourned for him very long. And Simon made upon the sepulcre of his father and
his brethren a building hye to look unto of fre stone behind and before: and
set up seven pylers, one against another (for his father, his mother and four
brethren) and set great pilers round about, with arms upon them for a
perpetual memory, and carved ships beside the arms: yt they might be seen
of me^ saylinge in the sea. This sepulcre which he made at Modin, stondeth yet
unto this day.

Now as Tripho^ went forth to walk with Josephus capite 10^ libro 1^
he slew him traitorously, and reigned in his stead, crowned himself king of
Asia, and did much evil in the land. Simon also buylte up the castles in
Iewry, making them strong with hye towers, great walls, ports and locks,
and laid up vytales in the strong holds. And Simon chose certain men, and
sent them to king Demetrius: to desire him, yt he would discharge the land
from all bondage, for Triphon had spoiled it very sore. Where upon Demetrius
the king answered him, and wrote unto him after this manner:

Demetrius ye ki^ge sends gretinge unto Simon the hye pressed his friend, with
the elders and people of the Jews. The golden crown and precious stone yt ye
sent unto us, have we received: and are ready to make a steadfast peace with
you, ye and to write unto our officers, for to release you, concerning the
things wherein we made you fre: and the appointment yt we make with you, shall be
firm and stable. The strong holds which ye have builded, shall be your own.
As for any over sight or fawte committed unto this day, we forgive it, and the
crown tax that ye ought us also. And where as was any other tribute in
Jerusalem, it shall now be no tribute: and look who are mete among you to be in
our court, let them be written up, that there may be peace betwixt us.

Thus the yock of the Heithen was taken 1. Mach^. 14. d
and prince of the Jews.

In those days went Simon unto Gaza, and beseged it round about, where he
set up ordinance of war. And wanne a tower, which he took. So they that gat
in to the tower leapte into the cite, which was in a great fear: In so much
that the people of the cite rent their clothes, and clymmed up upon the walls
with their wives and children, besekynge Simon to be at one with them, saying:

O reward us not after o wickedness, but be gracious unto us, and we shall do ye
service. LORD. So when he had cast all abhominacio^s out of the cite, he set
soch men in it as kept the law of God, and made the cite strong, and builded
a dwellinge place for himself.

Now when they in the castle at Jerusalem were kept so strately, that they
could not come forth ner in to country, and might nether bye ner sell: they
were very hungry, and many of them famished to death: In so much that they
besought Simon to be at one with them, which he granted them. So he put them
out from thence, and cleansed the castle from fylthynesse. And upon the xxiij.
day of the second month in the Clxxj. year they entered in to it with
thankesgeuynge and branches of palm trees, with harpes, crowdes, cymbals, and
lutes, synginge psalms and songs of praise unto God, for that the great
enemy of Israel was over come.

And Simon ordened that the same day should be kept every year in gladness,
and made strong the hill of the temple that was beside the castle, where he
dwelt him self with his company. Simon also perceiving that Ihon his son was
a mighty man of arms, made him captain of all the hoostes, and caused him to
dwell at Gaza.

The XIIII. Chapter.
IN the Clxxij. year gathered king

Simon wanne the cite of Ioppa also for an haven town, and made it an
intraunce in to the Isles of the sea. He enlarged the borders of his people, and
conquered them more land: He gathered up many of their people that were
presoners: he had the dominion of Gaza, Bethsura and the castle, which he
cleansed from fylthines, and there was no man that resisted him: So that every
man tylled his ground in peace, the land of Judah and the trees gave their
fruit and encreace. The (...)
For he made peace through out the land, and Israel was full of mirth and joy.

Every man sat under his vine and fyge trees and there was no man to fraye them
away. There was none in ye land to fight against them, for then the kings
were overcome. He helped those that were in aduersite among his people, he was
diligent to se ye law kept: as for soch as were ungodly and wicked he took
the^ away. He set up ye Sanctuary, and increased the holy vessels of the
temple.

When ye Romans and Sparcians had gotten word, yt Ionathas was deed, they
were right sorry. But when they herd yt Simon his brother was made hye pressed in
his stead, and how he had won the land again with the cities in it: they
wrote unto him in tables of laton, to renew the frendshipe and bond of love,
which they had made before with Judas and Ionathas his brethren. (...)
Which writings were red before the congregation at Jerusalem.

And this is the copy of the lettres, that yo embassitours that were sent unto
o people, certified us of your worshipe, honor and prosperous wealth: we
were glad of their coming, and have written the earande which they spoke
before the council of the people: namely, that Numenius the son of
Antiochus, and Antipater the son of Jason the Jews embassitours are come
unto us, for to renew the old frendshipe with us. Upon this the people
consented, that the men should be honorably entreated, and that the copy of
their earande should be written in the special books of the people, for a
perpetual memory unto the Sparcians: ye and that we should send a copy of
the same unto Simon the great pressed.



The xviij. day of ye month Elul in the Clxxij. year in the third year of
Simon the hye pressed, in the great congregation of ye prestes, rulers of the
people, and elders of the country at Asaramel, were these words openly
declared:



After that would their enemies have trodden their holy things under foot,
destroyed their land, and utterly waisted their Sanctuary. Then Simon
withstode them, and fought for his people, spent much of his own money,
weapened the valeaunt men of his people, gave them wages, made strong ye
cities of Judah, with Bethsura that lies upon the borders of Iewry, (where the
ordinance of their enemies lay sometime) and set Jews there for to keep it.



And king Demetrius confirmed him in

So all the people consented to allow Simon, and to do acordynge to these
words. Simon also himself took it upon him, and was content to be the hye
pressed, the captain and prince of the Jews and prestes, and to govern them
all. And they commanded to make this writing in tables of laton, and to
fasten it unto the compass of the Sanctuary in an open place: and to lay up a
copy of the same in the treasury, that Simon and his posterite might have it.

The XV. Chapter.
MOrouer, king Antiochus the son of Demetrius sent lettres from

Wherefore I have gathered a great host and made ships of war: that I may
go through the country, and be avenged of them which have destroyed our land,
and waysted many cities in my realm. And therefore now I make the fre also from
all the tributes, whereof all kings my progenitors have discharged the, and
from other customs (where from they have released the) what so ever they be:
Ye I give the leave to smite money of thine own within thy land. As for
Jerusalem, I will that it be holy and fre: and all the weapens and houses of
defense which thou have builded and kepest in thine hondes, shall be thine.
Where as any thing

In the Clxxiiij. year went Antiochus in to his fathers land, and all the
men of war came together unto him, so that few were left with Triphon. So
the king Antiochus followed upon him, but he fled unto Dora, which lies by the sea side: for he saw yt there was myschefe coming unto him, and that his
host had forsaken him. Then came Antiochus unto Dora with an hundredth and
twentye thousand men of arms upon foot, and eight thousand horsemen. So he
compased the cite round about, and ye ships came by the sea. Thus they
vexed the cite by land and by water, in so much that they suffered no man to go
in nor out.

In the mean season came Numenius (and they that had been with him) from the
cite of Rome, 1. Ma. 14. d
having lettres written unto the kings and prouyncies, wherein were contained

The same words wrote the Romans also unto Demetrius the king, to Atta^us,
Araba, Arsaces and to all regions: as Samsanes, to them of Sparta, Delo, Mio^,
Sydon, Caria, Samos, Pamphilia, Lycia, Alicarnassum, and to ye Rhodes: to
Faselis, Coo, Sida, Arado, Gortyna, Gnydum, to Cypres and to Cyren. And of
every lettre they sent a

He sent Athenobius also a friend of his unto Simon, for to reason with him,
saying: Ye witholde fro me Ioppa and Gaza (with the castle that is at
Jerusalem) which are cities of my realm, whose borders ye have destroyed, and
done great evil in the land, having the dominacio^ in many other places of
my kingdom. Wherefore deliver now ye

So Athenobius the kings friend came to Jerusalem, and when he saw ye great
worshipe and honor of Symo^ in gold, silver and so great plenty of
ornaments: he marveled, and told Simon as the king commanded him. Then
answered Simon and said unto him: As for us, (...)
we have nether taken other men's land, ner witholde^ them, but only our
fathers heretage, which our enemies had unrighteously in possession a certain
time. This heretage of our fathers have we challenged in process of time. And
where as thou co^playnest concerning Ioppa and Gaza, they did great harm to
or people and in o land, yet will we give an C. talentes for them.

Nevertheless Athenobius answered him not one word, but turned again
wrothfully unto ye king, and told him all these words, and the great
dignite of Simon with all that he had seen, and the king was very angry. In
the mean time fled Triphon by ship unto Orthosaida. Then the king made
Cendebeus captain of the sea coost, and gave him an host of footmen and
horsemen, co^maundinge him to remove ye host toward Iewry, and to build up
the cite of Cedron, to make up ye ports, and to war against ye people of the
Jews. As for the king himself, he followed upon Triphon. So Cendebe us came
unto Iamnia, and began to vex ye people, to tread down Iewry, to take the
people presoners, (...). 16. b
to slaye the^ and to build up Cedron: where he set horsemen and other men of
war, that they might come forth and go through the streets of Iewry, like as
the king had commanded him.

The XVI. Chapter.
(...). 13. f
what Cendebeus had done among their people. Upon this called Simon two of his
eldest sons, Judas and Ihon, and said unto them: I and my brethren and my
fathers house, have ever from our youth up unto this day, foughten against
the enemies of Israel, and God gave us good fortune to deliver Israel often
times. And now for so much as I am old, be ye in stead of me and my brother,
to go forth and fight for our people, and the help of God be with you. So he
chose xx.M. fightingemen of the country, with horsemen also, which went forth
against Cendebeus and rested at Modin.



In the morning they arose, and went in to ye plain field: and behold, a
mighty great host came against the^, both of fotemen and horsemen. Now was
there a water broke betwixt them, and Ihon removed the host toward them. And
when he saw that the people was afraid to go over ye water broke, he went
over first him self: and the men seeing this, followed him.

1. Man
The enemies fled also unto the towers yt were in ye feldes of Azotus, and
those did Ihon burn up. Thus there were slain ij.M. men of them, and Ihon
turned again peaceably in to Iewry.

And in the field of Jericho was Ptolomy the son of Abobus made captain:
which because he had abundaunce of silver and gold, (for he had married the
daughter of Simon the hye pressed) waxed proud in his mind, and thought to
conquer the lord, ymageninge falsed against Symo^ and his sons, to destroy
the^. Now as Simon was going

So when Simon and his sons were merry and had dronken well, Ptolomy stood up
with his men (who^ he had hyd there) and took their weapens, entered in to the
banckethouse, and slew Simon with his two sons, and certain of his
servants. Soch great unfaithfulness did Ptolomy in Israel, and reco^pensed
evil for good. Then wrote this Ptolomy ye same unto king Antiochus,
requyringe him that he should send him an host to help him: and so should he
deliver him the land, with the cities and tributes of the same. He sent other
men also unto Gaza, for to take Ihon: and wrote unto

The^ ran there one before, and told Ihon in Gaza, that his father and his
brethren were slain, and how that Ptolomy had sent to slaie him also. When
Ihon herd this, he was sore abaszshed, and laid ho^des of them that were come
to destroy him, and slew them: for he know, that they went about to kill
him.

As for other things concerning Ihon: of his wars, of his noble acts
(wherein he behaved him self manfully) of the buyldinge of walls which he made,
and other of his deeds: They are written in the cronicles of his presthode,
from the time forth yt he was made hye pressed after his father.

The end of the first book of the Machabees.
The second book Of the Machabees.
What this book conteyneth.
Chap. I. The Jews write unto Aristobolus of the clensynge of the temple, and
of the feast of tabernacles. Of the fire that was hyd in the pyt. Chap. II.
What Jeremy required of the Jews that were in preson, and of their stories.
Chap. III. The Heithe^ kings held the temple at Jerusalem in honor. The
variaunce betwixt Simon and Onias. What Appollonius and Heliodorus did at
Jerusalem. The punishment of Heliodorus. Chap. IIII. The wickedness of Simon.
The faithfulness of Onias. Jason labors to be hye pressed. Of his
wickedness, and how he was driven away. The alteracion of the presthode.
Andronicus destroys Onias, and God strikes him therefore. Chap. V. Wondrous
things done at Jerusalem. Jason falls upon the cite, handles abhominably,
and yet is feign to fleat the last. The king of Egipte takes the cite again
with great bloudsheddynge. Chap. VI. The king proceeds forth in his tyranny,
as well in other cities where the law of God is kept, as at Jerusalem. All
this sends God for the wickedness of the people. The steadfastness of Eleazar.
Chap. VII. The death of the vij. brethren and their mother. How constante they
are to suffer, rather then to obey the wicked king. Chap. VIII. The
manlynesse of Judas Machabeus, and how Philippe medleth against him Judas
conforteth his people, and overcomes Nicanor. Chap. IX. Of Antiochus and his
pride, and how God punyshed him. Chap. X. Machabeus wynneth the holy cite
again, and cleanses it. Eupator follows his father Antiochus. Judas Machabeus
ordreth him self well. Chap. XI. What Lysias purposes. Judas with stondeth
him, God takes his part. Lysias and Judas are at one. Chap. XII. Timotheus,
Appolonius and other, ymagin treason. Judas Machabeus punysheth them, wynneth
Caspin and other cities. Chap. XIII. Antiochus and Lysias make the^ forth
against the Jews. Judas gathers the people, and byddeth them call upon God,
goes on, and beside Modin strikes a great batell. Chap. XIIII. Of Demetrius
the son of Seleucus. The traiterous dealinge of Alcimus. Nicanor breaks
falsely the bond made with Judas Machabeus. Of the ma^lynes of Razis. Chap.
XV. Nicanors wicked purpose. Judas gives his people godly consolacion Of his
dreams and visions, and how Nicanor perished.
The first Chapter.
THe brethren of ye Jews which

God the LORD be gracious unto you, and think upon his covenant yt he made
with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob his faithful servants: and give you all soch an
heart, (...)
that ye may love and serve him, ye and perform his will with an whole
heart and of a wyllinge mind: He open your hertes in his law and in his
commandments, send you peace: hear your prayers, be at one with you, and
never forsake you in time of trouble. This is hear our prayer for you.

What time as Demetrius reigned, in the Clxix. year, we Jews wrote unto you
in ye trouble and violence that came upon us. In those years after that Jason
departed out of the holy land and kingdom, they brent up the ports, and shed
innocent blood. Then made we our prayer unto ye LORD, (...)


In the Clxxxviij. year ye people yt was at Jerusalem and in Iewry, the
council and Judas himself, sent this wholesome salutacio^ unto Aristobolus
king Ptolomys master, which came of the generation of the anointed prestes:
and to the Jews that were in Egipte: In so much as God has delivered us from
great parels, we thank him hylie, In that we resisted so mighty a king. And
why? he brought men out of Persis by heaps, to fight against us and the holy
cite. For as he was in Persis (namely, ye captain with the great host) he
perished in the temple of Naneas, being disceaued through the deuyce of Naneas
prestes. For as he was purposed to have dwelt there, Antiochus and his fre^des
came thither, to receive much money for a dowry. So when Naneas prestes had
laid forth ye money, he entered with a small company in to the compass of the
temple, and so they shut the temple.

Now when Antiochus entered by opening

Where as we now are purposed to keep the purificacion of the temple upon ye
xxv. day of the month Casleu, we thought necessary to certify you thereof:
that ye also might keep the tabernacles feast day, and the day of the fire,
which was given us when Nehemias offered, after that he had set up ye temple and
the altar. For what time as or fathers were led away unto Persis, ye prestes
(which then sought the honor of God) took ye fire privily from ye altar, and
hyd it in a valley, where as was a deep dry pyt: and therein they kept it,
because the place was unknown to every man. Now after many years when it
pleased God, yt Nehemias should be sent from the king of Persia: he sent the
childers children of those prestes (which had hyd the fire) to seek it. (...).
6. a (...). 16. c
And as they told us, they found no fire, but thick water.



And Nehemias prayer was after this manner: O LORD God maker of all things,
thou fearful and strong, thou righteous and merciful, thou yt art only a
gracious king, only lyberall, only just, Almighty and everlasting, thou
yt delyuerest Israel from all trouble, thou yt have chosen the fathers and
hallowed them: receive the offeringe for the whole people of Israel, preserve
thine own portion, and halowe it. Gather those together, yt are scatred abroad
from us: deliver them yt are under the Heithe^s bondage, look upon them which
are despised and abhorred, yt the Heithen may know and se, how yt thou art or
God: Punyshe them yt oppress, and proudly put us to dishonor. Set ye people
again in thy holy place, (...)
like as Moses has spoken.

(...)
Which when it was done, there was kyndled a flamme of the^ also: but it was
consumed through the light, yt shyned from the altar. So when this matter was
known, it was told the king of Persia, that in the place where the prestes
(which were led away) had hyd fire, there apeared water in stead of fire, and
that Nehemias and his company had purified the sacrifices withal. Then the
king considering and ponderynge ye matter diligently, made him a temple, to
prove the thing yt was done. And when he found it so in deed, he gave the
prestes many gifts and diverse rewards: ye he took them with his own ho^de,
and gave the^. And Nehemias called the same place Nephthar, which is as much to
say as a clensynge: but many men call it Nephi.

The II. Chapter.
IT is found also in the writings of 2. Mac. 1.
He commanded them also, Iere 29. b
yt they should not forget the law and commandments of the LORD, and yt
they should not err in their minds, Baruc. 6.
when they se images of silver and gold with their ornaments. These and soch
other things commanded he them, and exorted them, that they should not let
the law of God go out of their hertes.

It is written also, how the prophet (at ye commandment of God) charged them,
to take the tabernacle and the arc with them: and he went forth unto the
mountain, where Moses clymmed up, and saw ye heretage of God. Deu. ^4.
And when Jeremy came there, he found an open cave, wherein he laid the
tabernacle, ye arc and the altar of incense, and so stopped the hole. There
came certain men together also folowinge him, to marck the place, but they
could not find it. Which when Jeremy LORD shall appear, and the cloud also,
like as it was showed unto Moses: Exo. 13. d
and like as when Solomon desired yt the place might be sanctified, and it was
showed him. 3. Re. 8. b


For he being a wise man, handled honorably and wisely: offering unto God in
ye halowinge of the temple, when it was fynisshed. Leui. 9. d
And like as when Moses prayed unto the LORD, the fire came down from heaven,
and consumed the burnt offeringe: Even so prayed Solomon also, 2. Par. 7. a
and the fire came down from heaven, and consumed the burnt offeringe. And
Moses said: because the syn offering was not eaten, therefore it is consumed.
In like manner Solomon kept the dedicacion (or halowynge) eight days.

Some read: * Nehemias.
Jeremy, were these things put also: and how he made a lybrary, and how he
gathered out of all countrees the books of the prophets, of David, the
epistles of the kings, and of the presents. Even so Judas also, look what he
learned by experience of war, and soch things as has happened unto us, he
gathered the^ all together, and so we have them by us. If ye now desire to have
the same, send some body to fetch them unto you. Whereas we the^ are about to
celebrate the purificacion, we have written unto you. Therefore ye shall do
well, if ye keep the same days. We hope also, that the God (which delivered
his people, and gave them all ye heretage, kingdom, presthode and Sanctuary yt
he promised them in the law) shall shortly have mercy upon us, ^eut. 30. a
and gather us together from under the heaven in to his holy place: for he has
saved us from great parels, and has cleansed the place.

Mac. 6. a
of the shyninges yt came down from heaven upon those, which manfully defended
the Jews. (For though they were but few, yet defended they the whole land,
drove away ye enemies host, recovered again the temple, yt was spoken of
through out all the world, delivered the cite, doing their best yt the law of
the LORD which was put down, might with all tranquilite be restored again unto
the LORD, yt was so merciful unto the^.) As touching Jason also of Cyren, we
have under taken co^pendiously to bring in to one book, the things yt were
comprehended of him in five. For we co^sideringe the multitude of the books,
and how hard it should be for them yt would meddle with stories and acts (and
that because of so diverse matters) have under taken so to comprehend the
stories: that soch as are disposed to read, might have pleasure and pastyme
therein: and that they which are diligent in soch things, might the better
think upon them: ye and that who so ever red them, might have profit thereby.



For he yt buyldeth an house a new, must provide for many things to ye whole
buyldinge: but he that paynteth it afterward, seeks but only what is comely,
mete and convenient to garnysh it withal. Even so do we also in like manner.
And why? He that begins to write a story for the first, must with his
understanding gather the matter together, set his words in order, and
diligently seek out every part: But he that afterward will shorten it, uses
few words, and touches not the matter at the largiest. Let this be sufficient
for a prologe, now will we begin to show the matter: for it is but a foolish
thing to make a long prologe, and to be short in the story it self.

The III. Chapter.
WHat time as the holy cite was inhabited in all peace and wealth, and when the
laws were yet very well kept. (For so was it ordened by Onias the hye pressed
and other godly men, that were enemies to wickedness:) It came thereto, that
even the kings and princes the^ selves did the place great worshipe, (...)
and garnyshed ye temple with great gifts: Inso much that Seleucus king of
Asia of his own rentes bare all the costs belonginge to the service of the
offerynges. (...)
Then Simon of the trybe of Ben Iamin, a ruler of the temple, labored to work
some myschefe in the cite: but the hye pressed resisted him.

Nevertheless when he might not overcome Onias, (...)
he gat him to Appolonius the son of Thersa (which the^ was chief lord in
Celosyria and Phenices) and told him, yt the treasury in Jerusalem was full of
innumerable money, and how that the commons goods (which belonged not unto the
offeringes) were exceadinge great also: ye and how it were possible, that all
these might come under the kings power.

Now when Appollonius had showed the king of the money, as it was told him:
ye king called for Heliodorus his steward, and sent him with a commandment,
to bring him the said money. Immediately Heliodorus took his journey, but
under a color, as though he would go through Celosyria and Phenices to vyset
the cities, but his purpose was to fulfill the kings pleasure. So when he came
to Jerusalem, and was louyngly received of the hye pressed in to the cite: he
told what was determed concerning the money, and showed the cause of his
coming: he axed also, if it were so in deed. Then the hye pressed told him,
that there was soch money laid up for the vpholdinge of weddowes and
fatherless children, and how that a certain of it belonged unto Hyrcanus
Tobias a noble man: and that of all the money (which that wicked Simon had
bewrayed) there were iiij. hundredth talentes of silver, and ij. hundredth of
gold: ye and that it were impossible for those men's meaning to be disceaued,
that had laid up their money in the place and temple (which is had in
worshipe through the whole world) for the mayntenaunce and honor of ye same.
Whereunto Heliodorus answered, yt the king had commanded him in any wise, to
bring him the money.

(...). 22. b
that they should be safely preserved, for soch as commit them unto keeping.
Then who so had looked the hye pressed in the face, it would have grieved his
heart: For his countenance and the chaunginge of his color, declared the
inward sorrow of his mind. The man was all in heaviness, and his body in
fear: whereby they that looked upon him, might perceive the grefe of his heart.
The other people also came out of their houses by heaps unto the common prayer,
because the place was like to come in to confucion. The women came together
through the streets, with hayrie clothes about their breasts.

2 Ma. 10. ^ and 11. b
with a terrible man syttinge upon him, deckte in goodly array, and the horse
smote at Heliodorus with his fore fete. Now he that sat upon ye horse, had
harness of gold upon him.

Morouer there apeared ij. fair and beutifull young men in goodly array, which
stood by him, scourged him of both the sides, and gave him many stripes without
ceassinge. With that, fell Heliodorus suddenly unto the ground. 2. Mac. 5.^
So they took him up (being compased about with great darcknesse) and bare
him out upon a bear. Thus he that came LORD, that he had showed his power
upon his place and temple, which a little before was full of fear and trouble:
and that through the reuelacion of the Almighty LORD it was filled with joy
and gladness.

The^ certain of Heliodorus fre^des prayed Onias, that in all haist he would
call upon God, to grant him his life, which was geuynge up the ghost. So the
hye pressed considered the matter, and lest the king should suspecte that the
Jews had done Heliodorus some evil: he offered an health offering for him.
Now when ye hye pressed had opteyned his peticion, the same young me^ in the same
clothinge apeared, and stood beside Heliodorus, saying: Thank Onias ye hye
pressed, for for his sake has ye LORD granted the yi life: therefore seeing yt
God has scourged ye, Act. 27. c


So Heliodorus offered unto God, made great vows unto him which had granted
him his life, thanked Onias, took his host, and went again to ye king. The^
testified he unto every man, of ye great works of God, yt he had seen with his
eyes. And when the king axed Heliodorus who were mete to be sent yet once
again to Jerusalem, he said: If thou have any enemy or adversary unto thy
realm, send him thither, and thou shall have him punished, if he escape with
his life: for in yt place (no doubt) there is a special power and workinge of
God. For he yt dwells in heaven, vysiteth and defends yt place: and all yt
come to do it harm, he punysheth and plageth the^. This is now ye matter
co^cerninge Heliodorus, and ye kepinge of ye treasury at Jerusalem.

The IIII. Chapter.
^. Ma. ^. a
reported the worst of Onias: as though he had moved Heliodorus unto this, and
as though he had been a brynger up of evil. Thus was he not ashamed to call
him an enemy of ye realm, that was so faithful an ouerseer and defender of
the cite and of his people: ye and so fervent in the law of God. But when the
malice of Simon increased so far, yt through his friends there were certain
manslaughters committed: Onias considered the parell yt might come through this
strife, and how that Appollonius (namely the chief lord in Celosyria and
Phenices) was all set upon tyranny, and Symons malice increased the same: He
gat him to the king, not as an accuser of the citesyns, but as one that by him
self intended the common wealth of the whole multitude. For he saw it was not
possible to live in peace, nether Simon to leave of from his foolishness,
except the king did look thereto.

L, if he might have ye scole of ye children, and that he might call them of
Jerusalem Antiochians. Which when the king had granted, and he had gotten the
superiorite: he began immediately to draw his kinsmen to the custom of the
Heithen, put down the things, that the Jews had set up of love, by Ihon the
father of Eupolemius (which was sent embassitoure unto Rome, for to make the
bond of frendshipe and love.) He put down all the Jaws and Lyberties of the
Jews, and set up wicked statutes. He durst make a fightinge scole under ye
castle, and set fair young men to learn the manners of whores and brodels.



What time as the ^
Olympiades sportes

After iij. year Jason sent Menelaus (the fore said Symons brother) to bear
the money unto ye king, (...)
and to bring him answer of other necessary matters. But he (when he was
praised of ye king for magnifienge of his power) turned ye hye presthode unto
him self, layenge up iij.C. tale^tes of silver for Jason. So when he had gotten
commandments from ye king, he came, having nothing yt becomes a pressed,
but bearinge ye stomach of a cruel tyraunte, and the wrath of a wild brute
be. (...)
Then Jason (which had disceaued his own brother) seeing yt he him self was
begyled also, was feign to fle in to ye lord of ye Ammonites, and Menelaus gat
ye dominion. But as for ye money yt he had promised unto the king, he did
nothing therein, when Sostratus the ruler of ye castle required it of him.
(For Sostratus was the man, yt gathered ye customs) wherefore they were both
called before the king. Thus was Menelaus put out of ye presthode, and
Lysimachus his brother came in his stead. Sostratus also was made lord of the
Cyprians.



Which when Onias knew of a suertye, he reproved him: but he kept him in a
santuary beside Daphnis, that lies by Antioche. Wherefore Menelaus gat him to
Andronicus, and prayed him that he would slaye Onias. So when he came to Onias,
he counceled him craftily to come out of the santuary, geuynge him his hand
with an ooth (how be it he suspecte him) and the^ he slew Onias, without any
regard of righteousness. For the which cause not only the Jews, but other
nations also took indignacion, and were displeased for the unrighteous death of
so godly a man.

LORD rewarded him his punishment, as he had deserved. Now when Lysimachus had
done many wicked deeds in ye temple through the council of Menelaus, and the
voice came abroad: the multitude gathered the^ together against Lisimachus, for
he had carried out now much gold.

So when the people arose and were full of displeasure, Lisimachus armed iij.M.
unthrifts to defend him: a certain tyraunte being their captain, which was
grown both in age and woodnesse. But when the people understood the purpose of
Lysimachus, some gat stones, some good strong clubbes, and some cast aszshes
upon Lisimachus. Thus there were many of the^ wounded, some being slain, and
all the other chaced away. But as for yt wicked churchrobber himself, they
killed him beside the treasury. Of these matters therefore there was kept a
court against Menelaus.

Now when ye king came to Tyrus, they made a co^playnte unto him of Menelaus,

The V. Chapter.
AT ye same time Antiochus made him rumo, as though Antiochus had been deed:
Jason took a M. me^, and came suddenly upon ye cite. The citesyns ra^ne unto ye
walls, at ye last was ye cite taken, and Menelaus fled in to the castle.

As for Jason, he spared not his own citesyns 2. Ma. 4.
Finally (for a reward of his wickedness) he was accused before Aretha the
king of the Arabians: In so much that he was feign to fle from cite to cite,
being despised of every man as a forsaker of the laws, and an abominable
person. And at ye last (as an open enemy of his own natural country and of
the citesyns,) he was driven in to Egipte.

Thus he yt before put many out of their own natyue land, peryshed from home
him self. He went to Lacedemon, thinkinge there to have gotten sucoure by
reason of kynrede. And he that before had casten many one out unburied, was
thrown out him self, no man mourning for him, ner puttinge him in his grave:
so that he nether enjoyed ye burial of a stranger, nether was he partaker of
his fathers sepulcre.



Mac. 1. c
that they should kill and not spare, but slaye down soch as with stood them, or
clymmed up upon ye houses. Thus was there a great slaughter of young men, old
men, women, children and virgins. In iij. days were there slain lxxx. M,
forty thousand put in preson, and no less sold. Yet was he not content with
this, but durst go in to the most holy temple (Menelaus that traytoure to ye
laws and to his own natural country, being his gyde) and with his wicked
hondes took ye holy vessel, which other kings and cities had given thither
for ye garnishinge and hono of ye place: the^ took he in his ho^des unworthily,
and defiled them.

^dit. 5. d
And why? if it had not happened them to have been lapped in many sins, this
Antiochus (as soon as he had come) had suddenly been punished, and shot out for
his presumpcio^: Ma. ^. d
like as Heliodorus was, whom Seleucus the king sent to rob ye treasury.
Nevertheless God has not chosen the people for the places sake, but the place
for the peoples sake: and therefore is the place become partaker of the peoples
trouble, but afterward shall it enjoy the wealth of them. And like as it is
now forsaken in the wrath of allmighty God, so when the great God is
reconcyled, it shall be set up in hye worshipe again.

So when Antiochus had taken a M. and 1. Mac. ^^
led his life there with his company among the wild beestes and upon the
mountains: dwellinge there and eatinge grass, lest they should be partakers
of the fylthynesse.

The VI. Chapter.
NOt long after this, sent the king a 1. Mac. ^^
for to compel ye Jews to altre ye ordinances of ye fathers and the law of
God, to defyle the temple yt was at Jerusalem, and to call it the temple of
Jupiter Olimpius: and yt they should be in Gazarim, as those which dwell at ye
place of Jupiter the harberous. This wicked sedicio^ of ye ungodly was heavy
upon all ye people: For ye temple was full of voluptuousnes bebbinge and
bollinge of ye Heithe^, of ribaudes and harlottes together. The women went in
to ye holy place, and bare in that was not laufull. The altar also was full of
unlawful things, which ye law forbyddeth to lay upon it. The Sabbathes were
not kept, the other solemn feasts of ye land were not regarded To be
plain, there durst no man be a known that he was a Jew.

In the day of the kings byeth they were compelled perforce to offer: and
when ye feast of Bachus was kept, they were constrained to weere garlandes of
yven, and so to go about for the honor of Bachus.

^. Mac. 1. f
whom when they had led round about the cite (the babes hanginge at their
breasts) they cast them down headlinges over the walls. Some yt were crepte
in to dens and had kept the Sabbath, were accused unto Philippe, and brent
in the fire: because that for the fear of God they kept the commandment so
stiffly, and would not defend them selves.

Now I beseke all those which read this book, that they refuse it not for
these falls of aduersite: and judge the things (yt are happened) for no
destruction, but for a chastenynge of o people. And why? When God suffers not
sinners long to follow their own mind, (...) 3. b
but shortly punysheth them, it is a toke^ (...)
But he desyringe rather to dye gloriously the^ to live with shame, offered
himself willi^gly to ye martyrdom. Now when he saw yt he must needs go to it;
he took it pacie^tly: for he was at a point with himself, yt he would consent
to no unlawful thing for any pleasure of life. They yt stood by being moved
with pity (but not a right) for ye old

Yet had I rather first be laid in my grave. 1. Tess. 5. c
For it becomes not mine age (said he) in any wise to dyssemble, whereby many
young persons might think, that Eleazar being lxxx. year old and ten,
were now gone to a strange life: and so through mine ypocrisy (for a little time
of a transitory life) they might be disceaued: by this means also should I
defyle mine age, and make it abominable. For though I were now delivered from
the torments of men, yet should I not escape the hand of almighty God,
Amos. 1. a
nether alive ner deed. Wherefore I will dye manfully,

When he had said these words, immediately he was drawn to the torme^te. Now
they that led him and were mylde a little before, began to take displeasure,
because of the words yt he said: for they thought he had spoken them of an
hye mind. But when he was in his martyrdom, he mourned and said: Thou (O
LORD) which have the holy knowledge, know openly: that where as I might be
delivered from death, I suffer these sore pains of my body: but in my mind I
am well content to suffer them, because I fear the. Thus this man dyed,
leaving ye memorial of his death for an example, not only unto young men, but
unto all ye people, to be steadfast and manly.

The VII. Chapter.
IT happened also that there were vij Leuit. 11. ^
and compelled by the king against the law, to eat swynes flesh: namely with
scourges and lethren whippes. And one of them which was ye chief, said: What
sekest thou, and what requyrest thou of us? As for us, we are ready rather to
suffer death, then to offend the laws of God and the fathers. Then was the
king angry, and bad hear cauldrons and brazen pottes. Which when they were
made hot, immediately he commanded ye tongue of him that spoke first, to be cut
out, to pull the skin over his head, to pair of the edges of his hands and
fete: ye and that in the sight of his mother and the other of his brethren.
Now when he was clean marred, he commanded a fire to be made, and so (while
there was any breath in him) to be fried in the caudron, In the which when he
had been long payned, the other brethren with their mother exorted him to dye
manfully, saye^ge: The LORD God shall regard the treuth, and comfort us, like
as Moses testifies and declares in his song, Deuteronomy. 18. ^
saying: and he will have compassion on his servants.



After him, was the third had in derision: and when he was required, he putt
out his tongue, and that right soon, holdinge forth his hondes manfully, and
spoke with a steadfast faith: These have I of heaven, but now for the law of
God I despise them: for my trust is, that I shall receive them of him again.
In so much that the king and they which were with him, marueled at the young
man's boldness, that he nothing regarded the pains.

Ioh. 5. c
As for the, thou shall have no resurreccion to life.

And when they had spoken to the fifth, they tormented him. Then looked he unto
ye king, and said: Thou have power among me^ (for thou art a mortal man
also yi self) to do what thou will, but think not, yt God has forsaken or
generation. Abide the, tarry still a while, and thou shall se the great power
of God, how he will punysh the and thy sede.

After him they brought the sixte, which being at the point of death, said:
Be not disceaued (o king) for this we suffer for our own sakes, because we
have offended our God, and therefore marvelous things are showed upon us. But
think not thou (which take in hand to strive against God) that thou shall
escape unpunished.

This excellent mother (worthy to be well yo bodies together, but ye maker of
ye world, which fashioned ye birth of man, and began all things. Even he
also of his own mercy shall give you breath and life again, like as ye now
regard not your own selves for his laws sake.

Now thought Antiochus that she had despised him, therefore he let her go with
her reproues, and began to exorte the youngest son (which yet was left) not
only with words but swore unto him with an ooth, yt he should make him a rich and
welthy man (if he would forsake ye laws of his fathers) ye and yt he should
give him, what so ever were necessary for him. But when the young man would not

While she was yet speaking these words, the young man said: Whom look ye
for* Wherefore do ye tarry? I will not obey the kings commandment, but the
law that God gave us by Moses. (...)
As for the that ymaginest all myschefe against the Jews, thou shall not
escape the hand of God: for we suffer these things, because of our sins.



As for me (like as my brethren have done) I offer my soul and my body for ye
laws of o fathers, calling upon God, yt he will soon be merciful unto o
people: ye and with pain and punishment to make the grant, (...)
yt he only is God. In me now and in my brethren ye wrath of allmighty God is
at an end, which righteously is fallen upon all o people. Then ye king being
kyndled in anger, was more cruel upon him then upon all ye other, and took
indignacio^, yt he was so lighty regarded. So this young man dyed undefiled,
and put his trust still in ye LORD. Last of all after ye sons, was ye mother
put to death also. Let this now be enough spoken, concerning ye offringes, and
extreme cruelnesse.

The VIII. Chapter.
LORD, yt he would have an eye unto his people, which was trodde^ down of
every man: to be gracious unto ye temple, yt was defiled of the ungodly: to
have compassion upon ye destruction of the cite, (which was shortly like to be
laid waist) to hear ye voice of ye blood yt cried unto him: to remember ye
most unrighteous deaths of young innocent children, the blasphemies also done
unto his name, and to punysh the^. Now when Machabeus had gathered this
multitude together, (...)
he was to mighty for the Heithen (for ye wrath of ye LORD was turned in to
mercy) he fell upon the towns and cities vnawarres, brent them, took the most
commodious places, and slew many of the enemies. But specially he made soch
chases by night, in so much that his manlynesse was spoken of every were.

1. Mac. 3.^
and gave him of ye common sort of the Heithen no less then xx. M. harnessed
men, to rote out ye whole generation of the Jews, having to help him one
Gorgias a man of war, which in matters concerning battayls had great
experience. Nicanor ordened also the tribute (which the Romans should have
had) to be given unto the king, out of the captiuyte of the Jews, namely
ij.M. talentes. And immediately he sent to ye cities of ye see coost, requyringe
the^ for to bye Jews to be their servants and bond men, promisynge to sell
them lxxx. and ten for one talente: but he considered not the wrath of
allmighty God, yt was to come upon him.

When Judas knew of this, he told the LORD, to deliver the^ from yt wicked
Nicanor, which had sold the^ or ever he came nigh them: and though he would not
do it for their sakes, yet for the covenant that he made with their fathers, and
because they called upon his holy and glorious name. 1. Mac. 5. b
And so Machabeus called his men together, namely about vi.M. exortinge them
not to agree unto their enemies, nether to be afraid for ye multitude of their
adversaries coming against them unrighteously: but to fight manly, Deuteronomy. ^0.
^ 2. Pa. ^0. c
consideringe ye reprofe that they had done to the holy place without cause,
how they had despised and oppressed the cite, ye and destroyed ye laws of the
fathers. For they (said he) trust in their weapens and boldness, Iere. 17. b
Psalm. 19. b
but our confidence is in the allmighty LORD, which in the twincklinge of an
eye may both destroy them that come against us, and all the world.

He exorted them also to call to remembrance 4. Re. 19 g Esa. 37. f 1. Mac. 7.
^
as when there perished an C. and lxxxvM of Sennacheribs people: And of ye
battaill yt they had in Babilo^ against ye Galacians: how yt all the
Macedonia^s yt came to help the^, stood in fear: and how they being but only
vj.M. slew an C. and xx.M. through ye help yt was given them from heaven,
whereby they also had received many benefits.

Through these words ye me^ took good hertes unto the^, ready to dye for the
law and the country. So he set upon every company a captain, one of his own
brethren: Simon, Joseph and Ionathas: geuynge each one xv.C. men. He caused
Eszdras also to read the holy book unto them, and to give them a token of the
help of God.



Then he himself being captain in ye fore front of the battayll, 1. Ma. 4. b
buckled with Nicanor And God was there help, in so much that they slew above
ix.M. me^ and compelled ye more part of Nicanors host to fle, they were
LORD, which had delivered them that day, and showed them his mercy. After the
Sabbath they distributed the spoils to the sick, to ye fatherless, Number. 31.
d 1. Re. 30. e Deu. 20. b
and to wyddowes, and the residue had they them selves with theirs. When this
was done, and they all had made a general prayer: they besought the merciful
LORD to be at one with his servants.

Of those also that were with Timotheus and Bachides, which fought against
them, they slew xx.M. wanne hye and strong holds, and divided moo spoils:
ever geuynge an equal portion unto ye sick, to ye fatherles to wyddowes and
to aged persons. And when LORD brought down, even of them whom he regarded
not: in so much that he put of his glorious rayme^t, fled by see, and came
alone to Antioche with great shame and dishonor, which he gat through the
destruction of his host. Thus he yt promised the Romans to pay the^ their
tribute, when he took Jerusalem: began now to say planely, that God was ye
defender of the Jews, and therefore not possible to wound them, because they
followed ye laws which God had made.

The IX. Chapter.
AT the same time came Antiochus again (...)
For when he came to Persepolis, and undertook to rob the temple and to
subdue the cite, the people ran together and defended them selves, in so much
yt he and his were feign to fle with shame. And so after that flight, it
happened, that Antiochus came again with dishonor. But when he came to
Egbathana, he gat knowledge what was happened unto Nicanor and Timotheus. Now as
he was auauncinge himself in his wrath, he thought he was able to avenge the
injury that was done to them, upon the Jews: and therefore commanded to make
ready his charet, haistinge on his journey without ceassinge: the judgment of
God provoking him, because he had spoken so proudly, that he would come to
Jerusalem, and make it a grave of the Jews. But the LORD God of Israel, that
seith all things, (...)
smote him with an invisible plage, which no man could heal.

For as soon as he had spoken these words,

And so he that thought he might command ye floudes of the sea (so proud was
he beyond the condition of man) and to weye the hye mountains in a pair of
scoales, was now brought down to the ground, and carried upon an horszlytter,
knowlegynge ye manifest power of God upon him: so that yt wicked body of his
was full of worms, (...)
which in his pain fell quyck out of his flesh: In so much yt his host was
grieved with the smell and styncke of him. Thus he that a little before thought he
might reach to the stars of heaven, him might no man now abide ner bear, for
the vehemence of styncke.

LORD, of whom he should have optained no mercy. And as for the cite that he
came unto so haistely, to bring it down to the ground, and to make it a
grave for deed men: now he desires to deliver it fre. And as touching ye
Jews, whom he had judged not worthy to be buried, but would have cast the^ out
for to be devoured of the fowls and wild beasts, saying, that he would have
destroyed both old and young: Now he promises, to make the^ like ye citesyns
of Athens. And where as he had spoiled the holy temple before, now he makes
promise to garnish it with great gifts, to increase the holy orname^tes, and
of his own rentes to bear the costs and charges belonginge to the
offerynges: ye and that he would also become a Jew him self, to go through
every place of the world, and to preach the power of God.



If ye and your children fare well, and if all things go after your mind:
we give great thanks. In my sickness also do I remember you louyngly: for as
I came out of Persia, and was taken with sore disease: I thought it necessary
to care for the common wealth. Nether despare I in my self, but have a good hope
to escape this sickness.

But considering that my father led an host some time in ye hyer places, and
showed who should reign after him, that (if there happened any co^trouersy, or
any hard thing were declared,) they in the land might know their chief
lord, yt there should be no insurreccion: Again, when I pondre by my

Thus that murthurer and blasphemer of God was sore smytte^: (...)
and like as he had entreated other men, so he dyed a miserable death in a
strange country upon a mountain. And his body did Philippe (that went with
him) carry away: which fearing the son of Antiochus, went in to Egipte to
Ptolomy Philometor.

The X. Chapter.
MAchabeus now and his company (through LORD) wanne the temple and the cite
again, 1. Mac. 4.
destroyed the aulters and chapels that the Heithe^ had builded through the
streets: Exo. 20.
cleansed the temple, made another altar of brick stone, and after ij. years
they offered sacrifices, set forth the incense, the lights and show bred.
When that was done, they fell down flat upon the ground, and besought the
LORD, that they might come no more in to soch trouble: but if they sinned any
more against him, he him self to chasten them with mercy, and not to come in
the hondes of those aleauntes and blasphemous men.

Now upon the same day that ye strangers poluted the temple, it happened that
on the very same day it was cleansed again namely, 1. Mac. 4. ^
the xxij. day of the month called Casleu. They kept viij. days in
gladness,

How Antiochus then (that was called the noble) dyed, it is sufficiently told.
Now will we speak of Nicanor the son of that wicked Antiochus, how it
happened with him: and so with few words to comprehend the aduersite that
chaunsed in ye wars. When he had taken in the kingdom, he made one Lysias
(which had been captain of the host in Phenices and Syria) ruler over the
matters of the realm. For Ptolomy that was called Macron, being a ruler for
the Jews (and specially, to sit in judgment for soch wrong as was done unto
them) undertook to deal peaceably with them. For the which cause he was
accused



Now when Gorgias was gouernoure of the same places, he took strangers and
undertook often times to war with ye Jews. Morouer the Idumeans that held the
strong holds, received those that were driven from Jerusalem, and took in
hand to war also. But they that were with Machabeus, besought and prayed
unto the LORD, ^ Mac. 5. a
that he would be their helper: and so they fell in to the strong holds of
the Idumeans, and wanne many places by strength: Soch as came against them they
slew, and killed no less (of all together) then twentye thousand.
Nevertheless some (no less then nyn^ thousand) were fled in to two strong
towers, having all manner of ordinance to withstonde them.

lay in the towers: took lxx.M. drachmas, and let some of them escape. But
when it was told Machabeus what had happened, he called ye captains of the
people together, accusynge those persons, that they had sold the brethren
for money, and let their enemies go. So he slew those traitors, and
immediately went in hand with the ij. towers. And when they had ordered them
selves manly with their weapens and hondes, they slew in ye two castles moo
the^ twenty thousand.

Now Timotheus whom the Jews had overcome before, (...)
gathered a multitude of strange people, brought an host also of horsemen of
the Asians, to win Iewry by strength. But when he drew nigh, Machabeus (...)
being gyrded with hayrie cloth about their loins, fell down before ye altar,
and besought the LORD that he would be merciful to them, but an enemy unto
their enemies, and to take part against their adversaries, acordinge as it is
promised in the law. So after the prayer, (...)
they went on further from the cite: and when they came nigh the enemies, they
prepared them selves against them.



And by times in the morning at ye break of the day, both the hoostes
buckled together. The one part had the LORD for their refuge, (...)
which is the geuer of prosperity, strength and victory. The other had a ma^ly
stomach, which is a captain of war.

The battayll now being great, there apeared unto the enemies from heaven v.
men, ^eg. 6 (...) 3. d (...) 1^. b
upon horszback with brydels of gold, ledinge the Jews, and two of them
having Machabeus betwixt them, yt kept him safe on every side with their
weape^s, but shot darts and lighteninges upon the enemies. where through they
were confounded with blyndnesse and so sore afraid, that they fell down.
There were slain of footmen twenty thousand and five hundredth, and six
hundredth LORD, which had done so great things for Israel, and given them the
victory.

The XI. Chapter.
(...)
like as the other gods houses of the Heithe^ are, and to sell ye prestes
office every year: Not consideringe the power of God, but was wild in his
mind, trustinge in ye multitude of footmen, (...)
in thousands of horsemen, and in his lxxx. Elephantes.

2. Ma. 10. e
they fell to their prayers with weeping and tears before the LORD: and all
the people in like manner besought him, that he would send a good angel to
deliver Israel. Machabeus him self was the first that made him ready to the
battayll, exortynge the other that were with him, to ioperde them selves and to
help their brethren. And when they were goyenge forth of Jerusalem together
with a ready and willing mind, 2. Mac. 3. d
there apeared before the^ upon horszbacke a man in white clothinge with
harness of gold, shakinge his spear. Then they praised ye LORD all
together, which had showed them mercy, and were conforted in their minds: in
so much that they were ready, not only to fight with men, but with ye most
cruel beestes, ye and to run through walls of iron.



Thus they went on wyllingly having LORD merciful unto them. They fell
mightily upon their enemies like lions, brought down xj.M. footmen, xvj.C.
horsemen, put all ye other to flight, many of them being wounded, and some gat
away naked. Ye Lysias him self was feign to fle shamefully, and so to escape.
Nevertheless the man was not with out understanding, but considered by him
self that his power was mynished, and pondred how ye Jews being defended by
the help of Allmighty God, were not able to be overcome: wherefore he sent them
word, and promised, that he would consent to all things which were
reasonable, and to make the king their friend. To the which prayer of Lysias
Machabeus agreed, seeking in all things the common wealth: and what so ever
Machabeus wrote unto Lysias concerning the Jews, the king granted it. For
there were lettres written unto ye Jews from Lysias containing these words:



Now the kings lettre contained these words: King Antiochus sends gretinge
unto his brother Lysias. 2. Ma. 9. b
For so much as our father is now deed, our will is, that they which are in
our realm, live without any insurreccion, and every man to be diligent in his
own matters. We understand also, that the Jews would not consent to our
father, for to be brought unto the custom of the Gentiles, but stiffly to keep
their own statutes: for the which cause they require of us also, to let them
remain still by their own laws.



And this was the lettre, that the king wrote unto the Jews: King Antiochus
sends gretinge unto the council and the other people of the Jews. If ye
fare well, we have our desire: as for us, we are in good health. Menelaus came
and told us, how yt your desire was to come down to your people, which are
with us.

Wherefore those that will come, we give them fre lyberte, unto the xxx. day of
the

The Romans also sent a lettre, containing these words: Quintus Mennius and
Titus Mamlius embassatours of the Romans, send gretinge unto the people of
the Jews. Look what Lysias the kings kynsman has granted you, we grant
you the same also. But as concerning the things which he referred unto the
king, send hither some with speed: and po^dre the mat^er diligently among
your selves, that we may cast ye best to your profit, for we must depart
now unto Antioche. And therefore write shortly again, that we may know your
mind. Fare well. In the hundredth xlviij. year, ye xv. day of the month of
April.

The XII. Chapter.
WHen these couenauntes were made,

When Judas knew of this cruelte showed unto his people, he commanded those
that were with him to make them ready, exortinge them to call upon God the
righteous judge: went forth against those murthurers of his brethren, set fire
in ye haven by night, brent up ye ships, and those that escaped from the
fire, he slew with the swearde. And when he had done this, he departed as
though he would come again, and rote out all them of Ioppa. But when he had
gotten word that the Iamnites were minded to do in like manner unto ye Jews
which dwelt among them, he came upon the Iamnites by night, and set fire in
the haven with the ships: so that the light of the fire was seen at
Jerusalem, upon a ii.C. and xl. furlonges.

Now when they were gone from thence ix. furlonges, in their journey toward
Timotheus: v. thousand men of foot and v. hundredth horsemen of the Arabians
fought with him. So when the batell was earnest, and prospered with Judas
through the help of God: ye residue of the Arabians being overcome, besought
Judas to be at one with them, and promised to give him certain pastures, and
to do him good in other things. Judas thinking that they should indede be
profitable concerning many things, promised them peace: whereupon they shoke
hondes, and so they departed to their tents. Judas went also unto a cite,
which was very fast kept with brydges, fensed round about with walls, and
diverse kinds of people dwellinge therein, called Caspin.



(...)
in the time of Iosue) fell manfully upon the walls, took the cite, and
(through the help of the LORD) made an exceadinge great slaughter: In so much
that a lake of ij. furlo^ges broad which lay thereby, seemed to flow with the
blood of the slain.

Then departed they from thence vij. C. and L. furlonges, and came to Taraca
unto ye Jews that are called Tubianei. But as for Timotheus, they could not
get him there: for (not one matter dispatched,) he was departed from thence,
and had left certain men in a very strong hold. But Dositheus and Sosipater
which were captains with Machabeus, slew those yt Timotheus had left in the
house of defense, even x.M. men. And Machabeus prepared him with ye vj.M. men
yt were about him, set them in order by companies, and went forth against
Timotheus, which had with him an C. and xx.M. men of foot, ij.M. and v.C.
horsemen.

When Timotheus had knowledge of Judas Iudit. 7. f 1. Re. 14. ^ 2. Pa. 20. ^
and wounded with the strokes of their own sweardes. Judas also was very earnest
in folowinge upon them and punyshinge those ungodly, and slew xxx.M. men of
them. Timotheus also himself fell in to the hondes of Dositheus and Sosipater,
whom he besought with many prayers, to let him go with his life: because he had
many of the Jews fathers and brethren in preson, which (if they put him to
death) might be disapoynted. So when he had promised faithfully to deliver them
again acordinge to the condition made, they let him go without harm. for the
health of ye brethren. And when Judas had slain xxv.M, he went from Carnion.

Now after yt he had chased away and 1. Mac. 5. ^
wherein dwelt many diverse people of the Heithen, and ye strong young men
kept the walls, defendinge the^ mightily. In this cite was much ordinance,
and prouysion of darts. 2. Ma. 10. ^
But when Judas and his company had called upon Allmighty God, (which with his
power breaks the strength of the enemies) they wanne the cite, and slew
xxv.M. of them yt were within. From thence went they to the cite of the
Scythians, which lies vj.C. furlonges from Jerusalem. But when ye Jews which
were in the cite testified, that the cite syns dealte louyngly with them, ye
and entreated them kyndly in ye time of their aduersite, Judas and his company
gave them him (which made them his people, and ever defended his own portion
with euydent tokens) that he would preserve them still. So at the commandment
of the captain, they removed from thence, and came to a town called Dessasan.
And Simon Judas brother fell in hand with Nicanor, but through the sodane
coming of the enemies, he was afraid.

Nevertheless Nicanor hearing the manlynes of them that were with Judas, and ye
bold stomachs that they had to fight for their natural country, durst not
prove the matter with bloudsheddinge. Wherefore he sent Possidonius, Theodocius
and Mathias before, to give and to take peace. So when they had taken long
advysement there upon, and the captain showed it unto the multitude: they were
agreed in one mind, to have peace. And they appointed a day to sit upon these
matters quyetly among them selves, ye stoles also were brought and set forth.
Nevertheless Judas commanded certain men of arms to wait in convenient
places, lest there should suddenly arise any evil through the enemies. And so
they commoned reasonably together.



Which lettres when Nicanor had seen, (...)
I shall remove this temple of God in to the plain field, I shall break down
the altar, and consecrate this temple unto Bachus. After these words he
departed.

Then the prestes lift up their hondes toward LORD of all, which have need of
nothing, would that the temple of thy habitacion should be among us.
Therefore now (o most holy LORD) keep this house ever undefiled, which lately
was cleansed. (...)
Now was there accused unto Nicanor, one Razis an Alderman of Jerusalem, a
lover of the whole cite, and a man of good report: which for the kind heart
that he bare unto the people, was called a father of ye Jews. This man often
times (when the Jews were minded to keep them selves undefiled) defended and
delivered them, being content steadfastly to spend his body and his life for
his people.

So Nicanor wyllinge to declare the hate,

Notwithstondynge what time as he myssed of his stroke for haist, and the
multitude fell in violently betwixt the doors: he ra^ne boldly to ye wall, and
cast himself down manfully among the heap of them, which gave soon place to
his fall, so that he fell upon his belly. Nevertheless while there was yet
breath within him, he was kyndled in his mind: and while his blood guszshed
out exceadingly (for he was very sore wounded) he ran through the myddest of
ye people, and gat him to the top of a rock. So when his blood was now
gone, he took out his own bowels with both his hondes, and threw them upon the
people: calling upon the LORD of life and sprete, to reward him this again,
and so he dyed.

The XV. Chapter.
(...)
he thought with all his power to strike a field with him upon a Sabbath day.
Nevertheless the Jews that were compelled to go with him, said: O do not so
cruelly and unkindly, but halowe yt Sabbath day, and worshipe him that seyth
all things. For all this, yet said the ungracious person: (...). ^0. c
Is there a mighty one in heaven, that commanded the Sabbath day to be
kept? And when they said: ye the living God, the mighty LORD in heaven
commanded the seventh day to be kept, (...)
he said: And I am mighty upon earth, to command them for to arm them
selves, and to perform the kings business. Notwithstondinge he might not
have his purpose.



So when their hearts were plucte up, he showed them also the disceatfulnesse
of the Heithen, and how they would keep no covenant ner ooth. Thus he weapened
the^ not with the armoure of shylde and spear, but with wholesome words and
exortacions. He showed them a dream also, wherthorow he made them all glad,
which was this: He thought that he saw Onias (which had been hye pressed, a
virtuous and loving man, sad, and of honest conversation, well spoken, and nee
that had been exercised in godlynes from a child) holdinge up his ho^des
toward heaven, and prayenge for his people. After this

And so they were well conforted through the words of Judas, and took courage
unto the^, so that the young men were determed in their minds to fight, and to
bide styfly at it: In so much that in the things which they took in hand,
their boldness showed the same, because the holy cite and the temple were in
parell: for the which they took more care, then for their wives, children,
brethren and kynsfolkes. Again, they that were in the cite, were most careful
for those which were to fight. Now when they were all in a hope that the
judgment of the matter was at ho^de, and the enemies drew nigh, the host being
set in array, the Elephantes and horsemen every one stondinge in his place:
Machabeus considered the coming of the multitude, the ordinance of diverse
weapens, LORD that does wonders, which gives not the victory after the
multitude of weapens and power of the host (but ^o them that please him)
acordinge to his own will. 2. Pa. 14. Iudic. 7.
Therefore in his prayer he said these words:

O LORD, 4. Reg. 19. g Esa. 37. f 1. Mac. 7. 2. Ma. ^.
thou that did send thine angel in the time of Ezechias king of Judah,
and in the host of Sennacherib slewest an hundredth and five and four score
thousand: send now also thy good angel before us (o LORD of heavens) in the
fearfulness and dread of thy mighty arm, that they which come against thy
holy people to blaspheme them, may be afraid. And so he made an end of his
words. Then Nicanor and they that were with him, drew nigh with shawmes and
songs: but Judas and his company with prayer and calling upon God.



With their hondes they smote, but with their hertes they prayed unto the
LORD, and slew no less then xxxv.M. me^: For through the present help of God
they were gloriously conforted.

LORD with a loud voice. And Judas (which was ever ready to spend his body
and life for his citesyns) commanded to smite of Nicanors head, with his arm
and hand, and to be brought to Jerusalem. When he came there, he called all
the people, and the prestes at the altar with those that were in ye castle,
and showed them Nicanors head, and his wicked hand, which he had
presumptuously holden up against the temple of God. He caused ye tongue also of
that ungodly Nicanor to be cut in little pieces, and to be cast to the fowls,
and the cruel man's hand to be hanged up before the temple.

So every man gave thanks unto ye LORD, saienge: blessed be he, that has
kept his place undefiled.



As fo: Nicanors head, he hanged it up upon the hye castle, for an euydent
and plain token of the help of God. And so they agreed all together, to keep
that day holy: namely ye xiij. day of ye month Adar, which in ye Syria^s
language is called ye next day before Mardocheus day. Thus was Nicanor
slain, and from that time forth the Jews had the cite in possession: And here
will I now make an end.

The end^ of the second book of the Machabees.
The new testament.
The gospel of S Matthew. The gospel of S. Mark. The gospel of S. Luke. The
gospel of S. Ihon. The Acts of the Apostles The epistles of S. Paul. The
epistle unto the Romans. The first and second epistle to the Corinthians The
epistle to the Galathians. The epistle to the Ephesians. The epistle to the
Philippians. The epistle to the Colossians. The first and second epistle to
the Tessalonians The first and second epistle unto Tymothy. The epistle unto
Titus. The epistle unto Philemon.
The first and second epistle of S. Peter. The three epistles of S. Ihon. The
epistle unto the Hebrews. The epistle of S. James. The epistle of S. Jude. The
Reuelacion of S. Ihon.




The gospel of S. Matthew.
What S. Matthew conteyneth.
Chap. I. The genealogy of Christ, and marriage of his mother Mary. The angel
satisfies Joseph's mind. Chap. II. The time and place of Christ's birth. The
wise men ofre their presents, Christ flies in to Egipte, the young childern
are slain Christ turns in to Galilee. Chap. III. The baptyme, preachinge and
office of Ihon, and how Christ was baptized of him in Jordan. Chap. IIII.
Christ fasteth and is tempted: he calls Peter, Andrew, James and Ihon, and
heals all the sick. Chap. V. In this Chapter and in the two next folowinge
is contained the most excellent and loving Sermon of Christ in the mount:
Which sermon is the very keye that opens the understanding in to the law.
In this fifth chapter specially he preaches of the VIII. beatitudes or
blessings, of manslaughter, wrath and anger: of aduoutrie, of swearinge, of
suffringe wrong, and of love even toward a man's enemies. Chap. VI. Of Alms,
prayer and fasting. He forbyddeth the careful seeking of wordly things.
Chap. VII. He forbyddeth fooliszh and temerarious judgment, reproves
ypocrisie, exorteth unto prayer, warns to bewarre of false prophets, and so
concludes his sermon. Chap. VIII. Christ cleanses the leper, heals the
captains servant and many other diseases: helps Peter's mother in law,
stilleth the sea and the wind, and dryueth the deuels out of the possessed in
to the swyne. Chap. IX. He heals the palsye, calls Matthew from the custom,
answers for his disciples, heals the woman of the blood issue, helps
Iairus daughter, gives ij. blyndmen their sight, makes a domme man to speak,
dryueth out a deuell. Chap. X. Christ sends out his Xij Apostles to preach in
Iewry, gives them a charge, teaches them, and comfort them against
persecucion and trouble. Chap. XI. Ihon baptist sends his disciples unto
Christ, which gives them their answer, rebukes the unthankful cities, and
louyngly exorteth men to take his yock upon them. Chap. XII. The disciples
pluck the ears of corn, he excuses them, heals the dried hand, helps
the possessed that was blind and do^me, rebukes the unfaithful that would
needs have tokens, and shows who is his brother, sister and mother. Chap.
XIII. The parable of the sede, of the tares, of the mustarde sede, of the
leven, of the treasure hyd in the field, of the perles, and of the nett. Chap.
XIIII. Ihon is taken and headed, Christ fedeth five thousand men with v.
loaves and two fishes, and apeareth by night unto his disciples upon the sea.
Chap. XV. Christ excuses his disciples, and rebukes the scrybes and pharisees
for transgressinge Gods commandment through their own tradicions. The thing
that goes in to the mouth defyleth not the man He delyuereth the woman of
Cananees daughter, heals the multitude, and with vij. loaves and a few little
fishes fedeth iiijM. men, beside women and children. Chap. XVI. The Pharisees
require a token. Jesus warns his disciples of the pharisees doctrine* The
confession of peter. The keys of heaven. The faithful must bear the cross
after Christ. Chap. XVII. The transfiguracion of Christ upon the mount of Tabor
He heals the lunatike and pays tribute. Chap. XVIII. He teaches his
disciples to be humble, and harmless, to avoyde occasions of euel, and one to
forgive another offense. Chap. XIX. Christ gives answer concerning marriage,
and teaches not to be careful ner to love worldly riches. Chap. XX. Christ
teaches by a similitude that God is detter unto no man, and how he is allwaye
calling me^ to his labor He teaches his disciples to be lowly, and gives
ij. blind men their sight. Chap. XXI. He rydeth in to Jerusalem, dryueth the
merchants out of the temple, curses the fyge tree, and rebukes the Pharisees
with the similitude of the ij. sons and of the huszbandmen, that slew soch as
were sent unto them. Chap. XXII. The marriage of the kings son. Tribute to be
given to the Emperor Christ confuteth the opynion of the Saduces concerning
the resurrection, and answers the scrybe unto his questyon. Chap. XXIII.
Christ cries woe over the pharisees scribes and ypocrites, and prophecieth the
destruction of Jerusalem. Chap. XXIIII. Christ shows his disciples the
destruction of the temple, the end of the world, the tokens of the latter
days, and warns the^ to wake, for the world shall suddenly perish. Chap. XXV.
The X. virgins. the talentes delivered to the servants, and of the general
judgment. Chap. XXVI. The Magdalene anoynteth Christ. They eat the easter
lamb and the supper of the LORD, Christ prays in the garden, Judas
betraieth him, Peter smyteth of Malcus ear, Christ is accused by false
witnesses. Peter denies him. Chap. XXVII. Christ is delivered unto Pilate
Judas hangs himself. Christ is crucified among thieves, he dies and is
buried. Watchmen keep the grave. Chap. XXVIII. The resurrection of Christ. The
hye prestes give the soudiers large money, to say that Christ was stolle^ out
of his grave. Christ appears to his disciples, and sends them forth to
preach and to baptyse.
The gospel of S. Matthew.


The first Chapter.
(...)
the son of Abraham. Abraham begat Isaac: (...)
(...)
Isaac begat Jacob: (...). 29. f
Jacob begat Judas and his brethren: Judas begat Phares and Zara^ of Thamar:
(...)
Phares begat Hesrom: (...). 46. b
Hesrom begat Aram: (...) 4. d
Aram begat Aminadab: (...)
Aminadab begat Naasson: (...). 1. a
Naasson begat Salmon: Salmon begat Boos of Rahab: Boos begat Obed of Ruth:
Obed begat Iesse: Iesse begat David the king: (...)


(...)
David the king begat Solomon, of her that was the wife of Vry: Solomon begat
Roboam: Roboam begat Abia: Abia begat Asa: Asa begat Iosaphat: (...). ^6. d
Ioatham begat Achas: (...). ^7. b
Achas begat Ezechias: (...). ^8. d
Ezechias begat Manasses: (...). 20. c
Manasses begat Amon: (...)
Amon begat Josias: (...). 21. c
Josias begat Iechonias and his brethren about the time of the captiuyte of
Babylon. (...)


(...). c (...). 1. a (...). 2. a
And after the captiuyte of Babylon, Iechonias begat Salathiel: Salathiel begat
Zorobabel: Zorobabel begat Abiud: Abiud begat Eliachim: Eliachim begat Azor:
Azor begat Sadoc: Sadoc begat Achin: Achin begat Eliud: Eliud begat Eleasar:
Eleasar begat Matthan: Matthan begat Jacob: Jacob begat Joseph the huszbande of
Mary, of who^ was borne that Jesus, which is called Christ.

All the generacions from Abraham to David are fourtene generacions: From David
unto the captivity of Babylon, are fourtene generacions. From the captivity of
Babylon unto Christ, are also fourtene generacions.

The birth of Christ was on this wise: Some (...) * before they (...) at hom^^
togethe^
before they came together, Luc. 1. b
she was found with child by ye holy ghost, But Joseph her huszbande was a
perfect man, and would not bring her to shame, but was minded to put her away
secretly. Nevertheless while he thus thought, behold, the angel of the LORD
appeared unto him in a dream, saying: Joseph thou son of David, fear not to
take unto the Mary thy wife. For that which is conceived in her, is of ye holy
ghost. She shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name Jesus. Phi.
2. a Act. 4. ^
For he shall save his people from their sins.

All this was done, yt the thing might, be fulfilled, which was spoken of the
LORD by the Prophet, saying: Behold, a maid shall be with child, Esa. 7. c
and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emanuel, which is
by interpretacion, God with us.

Now when Joseph awoke out of sleep he did as the angel of ye LORD bade him,
and took his wife unto him, and knew her not, till she had brought forth her
first borne son, and called his name Jesus. Luc. 2. ^


The II. Chapter.
WHen Jesus was borne at Bethlee^ in Jury, in the time of Herod* the

When Herod ye king had herd this, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with
him, and he gathered all the hye Prestes and Scribes of ye people, and axed of
them, where Christ should be borne. And they said unto him: at Bethleem in
Jury. For thus it is written by the Prophet: And thou Bethleem in the land of
Jury, Mich. 5. a
art not the leest among the Princes of Judah. ^ohan. 7. d
For out of ye shall come unto me the captain, that shall govern my people
Israel.



When they had heard the king, they departed: and lo, the star which they
saw in the east, went before them, till it came, and stood over the place
where the child was. When they saw the star, they were maruelously glad:
and went into the house, and found the child with Mary his mother, and kneled
down and worshipped him, and opened there treasures, Psalm. 71. b ^sa. 60. a
and offered unto him gifts: gold, franckynsence and myrre. And after they were
warned of God in a dream, that they should not go ageine to Herod, they
returned into their own country another way.

When they were departed: behold, the LORD appeared to Joseph in a dream,
saying: arise, and take the child* and his mother, and fly into Egypt, and
abide there till I bring the word. ^xo. 4. d
For He rod will seek the child to destroy him. The^ he arose, and took the
child and his mother by night, and departed into Egypt, and was there unto ye
deeth of Herod, that the thing might be fulfilled which was spoken of the
LORD, by the Prophet, which says: ^zeae. 11. a ^u. ^4. b
out of Egypt have I called my son.

Then Herod perceiving yt he was disceaued of the wise men, was exceeding
wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the children that were in Bethleem, and in
all the coasts there of, as many as were two year old and under, according
to the time which he had diligently searched out of the wise men.

^ere. 31. c
Then was yt fulfilled which was spoken by ye Prophet Jeremy saying: On ye
hills was a voice herd, great mourning, weeping, and lamentacion: Rachel
weeping for her children, and would not be conforted, because they were not.

When Herod was deed: behold, an angel LORD appeared in a dream to Joseph
in Egypt, saying: arise and take the child and his mother, and go into ye
land of Israel. For they are deed, which sought the chyldes life. And he arose
up, and took ye child and his mother, and came into the land of Israel. But
when he herd that Archelaus did raygne in Jury, in ye rowme of his father
Herod, he was afraid to go thither. Notwithstondinge after he was warned of
God in a dream, he turned aside into the parties of Galile, and went and dwelt
in a cite called Nazareth, (...)
to fulfill yt which was spoken by the Prophets: he shall be called a Nazarite.

The III. Chapter.
IN those days Ihon the Baptyst came and preached in the wilderness of Jury,
saying: Amend your selves, the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Ma^^ ^^ Ioha^
^^ Esai. (...)
This is he, of whom it is spoken by ye Prophet Esaias, which says: The voice
of a crier in ye wyldernes, prepare the LORDS way, and make his paths
straight.

This Ihon had his garment of camels here, and a lethre^ gerdell about his
loins. (...)
His meat was locustes and wild honey. Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all
Jury, and all the region round about Jordan, and were baptized of him in
Jordan, co^fessynge their sins.

Now when he saw many of the Pharisees and of ye Saduces come to his baptim,
(...)
he said unto them: ye generacio^ of vipers, who has certified you, that ye
shall escape ye vengeance to come? Bewarre, bring forth due fruits of
pennaunce. Think not now, to say in your selves, we have Abraham to our
father. For I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up
children unto Abraham. Even now is the axe put unto ye rote of the trees: (...)
therefore every tree which brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewe^ down,
and cast into the fire.

I baptize you with water to repentance: (...)
is myghtier the^ I, whose shues I am not worthy to bear. He shall baptize you
with ye holy ghost and with fire: which has also his fan in his hond, and will
pourge his floor, and gadre the wheet into his garner, and will burn ye
chafe with unquenchable fire. Luc. ^^


Then came Jesus from Galile to Jordan, (...)
unto Ihon, to be baptized of him. But Iho^ forbade him, saying: I have need to
be baptized of the: and come thou to me? Jesus answered and said unto him:
Let it be so now. For thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness. Then he
suffered him. Man. ^^ Luc ^^ Ioha^^ ^^
And Jesus as soon as he was baptized, came straight out of the water. And lo,
heaven was open over him: and Ihon saw the spirit of God descend like a dove,
and light upon him. And lo, (...) 4^. a Man. 17. a ^ac. 9. d ^. Pet. 1. d
there came a voice from heaven sayng: This is that my beloved son, in whom is
my delight.

The IIII. Chapter.
(...). 1. b ^uc. 4 a
And the te^pter came to him and said: if thou be the son of God, command,
that these stones be made breed. He answered and said: yt is written: (...)
Man shall not live by bred only, but by every word that proceadeth out of
the mouth of God.

Then the devil took him up into the holy cite, and set him on a pynacle of
the temple, and said unto him: if thou be ye son of God, (...) ^0. b
cast thy sylfe down. For it is written: he shall give his angels charge over
the and with their hands they shall hold the up, that thou^dashe not thy foot
against a stone. And Jesus said unto him: it is written also: (...) ^. c
Thou shall not tempte thy LORD God.

Again, the devil took him up and led him into an exceeding hye mountain,
and showed him all the kingdoms of the world, and all the glory of them, and
said unto (...). ^. c ^eg. 7. a
Then said Jesus unto him: Avoid Satan. For it is written: thou shall worship
the LORD thy God and him only shall thou serve.

Then the deuell left him, and behold, the angels came and ministered unto him.

(...) 1. b (...) 4. b
When Jesus had herd that Ihon was taken, he departed into Galile and left
Nazareth, and went and dwelt in Capernaum, which is a cite upon the sea, in the
coostes of zabulon and Neptalim, yt the thing might be fulfilled which was
spoken by Esaias the Prophet, (...). d (...) ^ a
saying: The land of zabulon and Neptalim, the way of the sea beyond
Jordan, and Galile of the Gentyls, the people which sat in darkness, saw a
great light, and to them which sat in the region and shadow of deeth, light
is bego^ne to shine.

From that time forth began Jesus to preach, and to say: Amend your
selves, ye kingdom of heaven is at hand.

Iere. 16. c Eze. 47. ^
And they straight way left their nets, and followed him.

And when he went forth from thence, he saw other two brethren, James the
son of zebede, and Ihon his brother, in the ship with zebede their father,
mendynge their nets, and called them. And they without tarynge left ye ship
and their father, Mat. 19. d Luc. 5. b
and followed him.

And Jesus went about all Galile, Marc. 1. c
teaching in their synagoges, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and
healed all manner of siknes, and all manner dyseases among the people. And his
fame spread abroad through out all Siria. And they brought unto him all sick
people, that were taken with diverse diseases and gripinges, and the^ yt were
possessed with devils, and those which were lunatyke, and those that had the
palsy: and he healed the^. And there followed him a great nombre of people,
from Galile, and from the ten cities, and from Jerusalem, Marc. 3 a Luc. 6. b
and from the regions that lie beyond Jordan.

The V. Chapter.
WHen he saw the people, he went Luc. 6. c
Blessed are the poor in sprete: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed
are they that mourn: Esa. 61. a and 66.
for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meke: for they shall inheret the
earth. Iere. 31. d
Blessed are they which honger and thyrst for rightewesnes: for they shall be
filled. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are
the pure in heart: for they shall se God. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they
shall be called the children of God. Blessed are they which suffer persecucion
for rightwesnes sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 1. Pet. 4. ^ 1. Pe.
2. c and 3. c
Blessed are ye when men reuyle you, and persecute you, and falsely say all
manner of yuell saynges against you for my sake. Act. 5. c
Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven.

For so persecuted they the Prophets which were before your days.

Ye are ye salt of the earth, but and if the Marc. 9. ^ Luc. 14. ^ Marc. 4. b
Luc. ^. b and 11. c
what can be salted therewith? It is thence forth good for nothing, but to be
cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men. Ye are the light of the world.
A cite that is set on an hill, can not be hid: nether do men light a candell,
and put it under a buszhell, but on a candelstick, and it lights all that are
in the house. Let your light so shine before men, ^ath. 6. a Pet. 2. b
that they may se your good works, and glorify your father which is in
heaven.

Think not, that I am come to destroy the law, or the Prophets: no, I am
not come to destroy them, ^at. 1. c c. d ^uc. 16. c ^uc. 18. d a. 40. a
but to fulfill them. For truly I say unto you: till heaven and earth
periszhe, one iott or one tyttle of the law shall not escape, till all be
fulfilled.

Whosoever breaks one of these least co^maundmentes, ^co. ^. b ^zec. 18. b
and teaches me^ so, he shall be called the leest in the kingdom of heaven, But
whosoever observes and teaches the same shall be called great in the kingdom
of heaven.

For I say unto you: except your rightewesnes exceade the righetewesnes of
the Scribes and Pharisees, ye can not enter in to the kingdom of heaven.

^co. 20. c ^^. b ^eu. 24. d ^eut. 5. c
Thou shall not kill. For whosoever kylleth, shall be in danger of judgment.
But I say unto you: whosoever is angry with his brother, is in danger of the
judgment. Whosoever says unto his brother: Racha, is in danger of ye
counsel. But whosoever says: thou fool, is in danger of hell fire.

(...) 42. b ^ala. 2. b
Therefore when thou offrest thy gift at the altar, and there remembrest that
thy brother has ought against the: leave there thine offrynge before the
altar, and go thy way first, and reconcyle thy self to thy brother, and then
come and offer thy gift.

Agree with thine adversary quicklye, while thou art in the way with him, ^uc.
12. f ^rou. 25. b
lest that adversary deliver the to the judge, and the judge deliver the to the
minister, and then thou be cast in to preson. I say unto the verily: thou
shall not come out thence, till thou have paid the utmost farthinge.

^xo. 20. c ^ccl. 41. c ^^b. 31. a
Ye have herd, how it was said to them of old time: Thou shall not commit
aduoutrie. But I say unto you, that whosoever looks on a wife lustinge after
her, has committed aduoutrie with her already in his heart.

Wherefore if thy right eye offend the, ^eut. 13. a ^arc. 9. c
that one of thy members periszhe, then that thy whole body should be cast in
to hell. Also if thy right hand offend the, cut him of, and cast him from
the. Better ^t is that one of thy me^bres periszh, the^ yt all ye body should
be cast in to hell.

It is said: whosoever puts away his wife, Deu. 24. a Math. ^^. b
let him give her a testimonyall of the deuorceme^t. But I say unto you: Marc.
10. ^ Luc. 16. c
whosoever puts away his wife (except it be for fornicacio^) causes her to
break matrymony. And whosoever maryeth her that is deuorsed, breaks wedlock.

Again, ye have herd, Leuit. ^^ Exo. ^^ Deu. ^^ Iaco. 5. c 2. Para. ^^ Esa.
65. a Mat. (...)
how it was said to the^ of old time: Thou shall not forswear thy self, but
shall perform thine ooth to God. But I say unto you: swear not at all,
nether by heaven, for it is God is seat: nor yet by the earth, for it is his
footstool: nether by Jerusalem, for it is the cite of ye great king: nether
shall thou swear by thy heed, because thou can not make one here white or
black: But your communicacion shall be, ye, ye: nay, nay. Ephe^ ^^
For what soever is more then that, comes of euel.

Ye have herd how it is said: An eye for an eye, a toth for a toth. Exodus ^^
Deu. ^^ Leui. ^^ Luc. ^^
But I say unto

Ye have herd, how it is said: Leui. 4^
thou shall love thine neighbor, and hate thine enemy. But I say unto you:
love your enemies: Bless the^ that curse you: Do good to the^ that hate you:
Romans ^^
Pray for the^ which do you wrong and persecute you, that ye may be the
chyldern of your father which is in heaven: Deuteronomy. ^^
for he makes his son to arise on the euel and on the good, and sends his
rain on the just and unjust. Luc. ^^
For if ye love them which love you, what reward shall ye have? Do not the
Publicans eue^ so? And if ye be friendly to your brethren only: what singular
thing do ye? Do not the Publicans also like wise? Ye shall therefore be
perfect, Leui. ^^
even as your father in heaven is perfect.

The VI. Chapter.
Take heed to your alms, that ye give it not in the sight of men, Luc. ^^
to the unto you: they have their reward. But when thou do alms, let not
thy left, hand know, what thy right hand does, that thine alms may be
secret: and thy father which seith in secret, shall reward the openly.

^. Re. 18. d Esa. 29. c (...) a
And when thou prayest, thou shall not be as ye ypocrytes are. For they love to
sto^de and pray in the synagoges, and in the corners of the streets, to be
seen of men. Verily I say unto you: they have their reward. But when thou
prayest, enter in to thy chamber, ^. Re. 4. d (...). 1^ a
and shut thy door to the, and pray to thy father which is in secret: and thy
father which seith in secret, shall reward the openly.

And when ye pray, babble not much, as (...)
for their much bablynges sake. Be not ye like them therefore. For your father
knows where of ye have need, Romans 8. d
before ye axe of him. After this manner therefore shall ye pray:

(...)
O our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be fulfilled upon earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily
bred. And forgive us our dettes, as we also forgive our detters. And led us
not in to te^ptacion: but deliver us from evil. For thine is the kingdom, and
the power, and the glory for ever. Amen. For if ye forgive other men their
treaspases, your heavenly father shall also forgive you. But and ye will not
forgive me^ their trespases, (...) ^8. d (...) ^1. c
nomo, re shall your father forgive you your trespases.

(...)
Moreover when ye fast, be not sad as ye ypocrytes are. For they disfigure their
faces, that they might be seen of men to fast. Verily I say unto you: they
have their reward. But thou, when thou fastest, annoynte thine heed, and wash
thy face, that it appear not unto men, that thou fastest: but unto thy father
which is in secret: and thy father which seyth in secret, shall reward the
openly.

(...). d (...). 29. b (...). a (...). a
where rust and mothes corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal.
But gather you treasure together in heaven, where nether rust nor mothes
corrupt, and where thieves nether break up nor yet steal. For where your
treasure is, there is your heart also.

(...)
The eye is the light of the body. If thine eye then be syngle, all thy body
shall be full of light: But and if thine eye be wicked, all thy body shall be full
of darckenes: Wherefore if the light that is in the, be darckenes, how great
then shall that darckenes be?

No man can serve two masters. For either he shall hate the one and love the
other: Luc. 16. b
or else he shall lean to the one, and despise the other: Ye can not serve God
and mammon. Luc. 12. c Psalm. 54. c 1. Pet. 5. a
Therefore I say unto you: be not ye careful for your life, what ye shall
eat, or what ye shall drink: nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on. Is
not the life more worth the^ meat, and the body more of value then rayme^t?
Behold the fowls of ye air: for they sow not, nether reepe, nor yet carry in
to the barnes: and yet your heavenly father fedeth the^. Are ye not much
better the^ they?

Which of you (though he took thought therefore) could put one cubit unto his
stature?

Therefore take no thought, saying: what shall we eat, or what shall we
drink? or where with shall we be clothed? After all soch things do the
heithen seek. For your heavenly father knows, that ye have need of all these
things. Seek ye first the kingdom of heaven and the righteousness thereof, 3.
Reg. 3
so shall all these things be ministered unto you.

Care not then for the morrow, for the morrow shall care for it self: Every day
has enough of his own trauayll.

The VII. Chapter.
IVdge not, that ye be not judged: Luc. 6. d Romans 2. Marc. 4.
And with what measure ye meet, with the same shall it be measured to you
again. Why seist thou a moate in thy brothers eye, and perceauest not the
beam yt is in thine own eye? Or why say thou to ye brother: hold, I will
pluck the moate out of thine eye, and behold, a beam is in thine own eye.
Ypocryte, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye, Prou. 18.
and then shall thou se clearly, to pluck out the moate out of thy brothers
eye.

Give not that which is holy, to dogs: nether cast ye your pearls before
swyne, (...). 136. c
lest they tread them under their fete, and the other turn again and all to
rent you.

(...) 29. c ^an. 16. c
Axe, and it shall be given you: Seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it shall be
opened unto you. For whosoever axeth, receaueth: and he that seeks, fyndeth:
and to him yt knocks, (...) 11. b
it shall opened. Is there any man among you, which if his son axed him bred,
would offer him a stone? Or if he axed fyszhe, would he proffer him a serpent?
if ye then which are evil, (...). 6. a
can give your children good gifts: how much more shall your father which
is in heaven, give good things to them that axe him?

Therefore what soever ye would that me^ should do to you, (...) 31. b b. 4. c
(...) 6. c
eue^ so do ye to them. This is the law and the Prophets.

(...). 13. c
and broad is the way, that leads to destruction: and many there be, which
go in thereat. But strayte is the gate, and narowe is the way, which leads
unto life, and few there be that find it.

^^ut. 13. a ^^ha^. 4. a (...) 6. c
Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in shepes clothinge, but inwardly
they are rauenynge wolves, Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather
grapes of thorns? or figs of thistles? Even so every good tree brings
forth good fruit. But a corrupt tree, brings forth evil fruit, A good tree
can not bring forth bad fruit: ^^th. 12. d
another can a rotten tree bring forth good fruit. (...). 11. c ^^th. 3. a c. 3.
b
Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down, and cast
into the fire. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.

^^th. 25. a (...) 6. c (...) 13. c
Not all they that say unto me, LORD LORD, shall enter in to the kingdom of
heaven: but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven.

(...). 19. b
Many shall say to me in that day: LORD, LORD: have we not prophesied in thy
name? Have we not cast out deuyls in thy name? Have we not done many great
deeds in thy name? And then will I knowledge unto them: (...) 6. b ^^th. 25. d
I never knew you, Depart fro me, ye workers of iniquite.

(...). 6. e (...). 2. b
and does the same, I will lycke^ him unto a wise man, which buylthys house
upon a rock: Now when abundaunce of rain descended, and the wyndes blewe and
bet upon that same house, it fell not, because it was grounded on the rock. And
who soever hears of me these sayings, and does the^ not, shall be lyckened
unto a folysh man, which buylt his housse upon the sonde: Iaco ^. b
Now when abu^daunce of rain descended, and the wyndes blewe, and bet upon yt
housse, Eze. 1^ b
it f^ll, and great was the fall of it.

And it came to pass, Marc. ^. b Luc. 4. c
that when Jesus had ended these saynges, the people were astonnyed at his
doctrine. For he taught them as one having power, and not as the Scribes.

The VIII. Chapter.
WHen he was come down from Marc. ^. ^ Luc. 4. b
much people followed him. And lo, there came a leper, and worsheped him,
saying: LORD, if thou wylt, thou can make me clean. And Jesus put forth
his hand, and touched him, saying: I will, be thou clean: and immediately his
leprosy was cleansed? And Jesus said unto him: Se thou tell no man, but go and
show thy self to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded, (...)
in witness to them.

When Jesus was entered into Capernaum, there came unto him a Captain, Luc. ^ a
Johan. ^^
and besought him, saying: Sir, my servant lies sick at home of the palsye,
and is grievously payned. Jesus said unto him: I will come and heal him. The
Captain answered and said: Sir, I am nor worthy, that thou should come
under my rofe, Psalm. ^^
but speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed. For I myself also
am a man subject to ye auctorite of another, and have sowdiers under me. Yet
wha^ I say to one: go, he goes, and to another: come, he comes: and to my
servant: do this, he does it. When Esa. ^^ Luc. ^^
and shall rest with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven: and
the children of the kingdom shall be cast out in to utter darcknes: there shall be
wepinge and gnaszhing of teth. And Jesus said unto ye Captain: go thy way,
and as thou beleuest, so be it unto the. And his servant was healed the same
hour.

And Jesus went in to Peter's housse, (...)
and saw his wives mother lyinge sick of a fever: so he touched her hand,
and the fever left her: and she arose, and ministered unto them.

When the even was come, (...)
they brought unto him many that were possessed with deuylls. And he cast out
ye spirits with a word, and healed all that were sick, that ye thing might
be fulfilled, which was spoken by Esaias the Prophet, saying: He took on him
our infirmities, (...)
and bare our s^^^^neses.

When Jesus saw much people about him, he commanded to go over the water.
(...) 9. f
And there came a scribe and said unto him: master, I will follow the, whyther
so ever thou go. And Jesus said unto him: the foxes have holes, and the
byrddes of the air have nestes, but ye son of man has not whereon to rest
his heed. Another that was one of his disciples, (...)
said unto him: Sir, give me leave first, to go and burye my father. But Jesus
said unto him: follow thou me, and let the deed bury their deed.

And he entered in to a ship, and his disciples followed him. (...)
And behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, in so much that the
ship was covered with wawes, and he was a sleep. And his disciples came unto
him, and awoke him, saying: LORD, save us, we perish. And he said unto
them: why are ye fearful, o ye of little faith? Then he arose, (...)
and rebuked the wyndes and the sea, and there followed a great calm. And the
men marueyled and said: what man is this, that both wyndes and see obey him?

(...)
there met him two possessed of deuyls, which came out of the graves, and were
out of measure fearce, so that no man might go by that way. And behold, they
cried out saying: Oh Jesus thou son of God, what have we to do with the? (...)
Art thou come hither to torment us, before the time be come? And there was a
good way of from them a great heerd of swyne fedinge. (...)
Then the deuyles besought him, saying: if thou cast us out, suffer us to go
our way in to the heerd of swyne. And he said unto them: go your ways.
Then went they out, and departed in to the heerd of swyne. And behold, ye
whoale heerd of swyne was carried with violence headlinge in to the sea, and
perished in the water. The^ the heerdmen fled and went their ways in to the
cite, and told every thing, and what had fortuned unto the possessed of the
deuyls. And behold, all the cite came out and met Jesus. And when they saw
him, they besought him, (...)
for to depart out of their coostes.

The ix. Chapter.
THen entered he into a shipp, and passed over and came in to his own cite.
Marc. 2. a Luc. 5. c Johan. 5. a
they brought unto him a man sick of ye palsy, lyinge in his bed. And when
Jesus saw the faith of the^, he said to the sick of ye palsy: my son, be
of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven the. And behold, certain of the
scribes said in them selves: this man blasphemeth. But when Jesus saw their
thoughts, he said: wherefore think ye evil in your hertes? Whether is it
easier to say: thy sins be forgiven ye, or to say: arise and walk? But
that ye may know, that the son of man has power to forgive sins in
earth, the^ said he unto the sick of ye palsye: arise, take up thy bed, and
go home. Act. 9. ^
And he arose and went home. When ye people saw it, they marueyled, and
glorified God, which had given soch power unto men.

And as Jesus passed forth from thence, Mar. 2. b Luc. 5. d. 15. a
he saw a man sit a receyuinge of custom, named Matthew, and said unto him:
follow me. And he arose, and followed him. And it came to pass as he sat at
meat in the house: behold, many publicans and sinners came and sat down also
with Jesus and his disciples.

When the Pharisees saw that, they said Ose. 6. b Math. 1^. a 1. Tim. 1. c
For I am not come to call the righteous, but ye sinners to repentance,

Then came the disciples of Ihon to him saying: why do we and ye Pharisees fast
so often: Mar. 2. b Luc. 5. c
and thy disciples fast not? And Jesus said unto the^: Can the wedding
children mourn as long as the bridegroom is with them? The time will come,
when the bridegroom shall be taken from them, and the^ shall they fast. No man
peceth an old garment with a piece of new clothe. For then takes he away the
piece again from the garment, and the rent is made greater. Act. 2. b
Nether do men put new wine in to old vessels, for then the vessels break,
and the wine runs out, and ye vessels peryshe, But they pour new wine in
to new vessels, and so are both saved together.

While he thus spoke unto them, behold Marc. ^. c Luc 8. c
and worshipped him, saying: My daughter is eue^ now deceased, but come and
lay ye hand on her, and she shall live. Jesus arose and followed him with his
disciples. ^ar. 5. c ^uc. 8. e ^euit. 15. d
And behold, a woman which was diseased with an issue of blood xij. years, came
behind him, and touched the hem of his vesture. For she said in her silfe: if
I may touch but even his vesture only, I shall be safe. Then Jesus turned him
about, and beheld her, saying: Daughter be of good conforte, thy faith has
made yt safe. And she was made whole, even that same hour.

And when Jesus came into the rulers house, Mar. ^. d Luc. ^. f
and saw the minstrels and the people raginge, he said unto them: Get you
hence, for ye maid is not deed, but slepeth. And they laughed him to scorn.
Ioha^. 11. b
But when the people were put forth, he went in, and took her by the hand, and
the maid arose. And this was noysed through out all that land.

And as Jesus departed thence, two blind me^ followed him, cryinge and saying:
O thou son of David, have mercy upon us. And when he was come home, the
blind came to him, And Jesus said unto them Believe ye, that I am able to do
this? And LORD. Then touched he their eyes, saying: acordinge to your faith,
Mat. 8. b
be it unto you. And their eyes were opened. And Jesus charged the^, saying:
Se that no man know of it. But they departed, and spread abroad his name
through out all the land.

When these were gone out, behold, they brought to him a domme man possessed
of a devil. Mar. 7. d Luc. 11. b
And when the devil was cast out, the domme spoke: And the people merueled
saying: it was never so seen in Israel. But ye Pharisees said: he casts out
deuyls, through the chief devil. Mat. 12. c Mar. 3. b


And Jesus went about in all cities and towns, Mar. 6. a Luc. 13. b
teachinge in their synagoges and preaching ye gospel of ye kingdom, and
healinge all manner sickness and all manner desease among the people. And when he
saw the people, he had compassion on the^, Mar. 6. d
because they were pyned away, and scattered abroad, even as sheep having no
shepherd,

Then said he to his disciples: ye heruest is great, but ye laborers are
few. Wherefore pray the LORD of the harvest, Luc. 10. a 2. Tes 3. a
to send forth laborers into his harvest.

The x. Chapter.
Mar. 3. b Luc. 6. b 9. a. 10. a
and gave them power over unclean spretes, to cast them out, and to heaale all
manner of sicknesses, and all manner of deseases.

The names of the xii. Apostels are these: The first, Simon called Peter: and
Andrew his brother. James the son of Zebede, and Ihon his brother. Philip and
Bartlemew. Thomas, and Matthew the Publican. James the son of Alphe, and
Lebbeus other wise called Taddeus. Simon of Cane, and Judas Iscarioth, which
also betrayed him.

These twolue sent Jesus, and commanded them, saying: Luc. ^^
Go not in to the ways yt lead to the Heithen, and in to the cities of the
Samarita^s enter ye not. But go rather to the lost sheep of the housse of
Israel. (...)
Go and preach, saying: The kingdom of heaven is at hand. Heal the sick,
cleanse the lepers raise the deed, cast out the devils. Act ^^ Ma. ^ Lu. 5. ^
and ^^
Freely ye have received, freely give again. Posses not gold, nor silver, nor
brass in your gerdels, nor yet scrip toward your journey: nether two cotes,
nether shues, nor yet a staff. (...)
For the workman is worthy of his meat. In to what soever cite or town ye
shall come, inquire in it, who is mete for you, and there abide,

And when ye come in to an house, salute ye same. And if the housse be mete for
you, yo peace shall come upon it. But if it be not mete for you, yo peace shall
turn to you again.

And if no man will receive you, ner hear your preachinge, depart out of that
house or that cite, and shake the dust of your fete. Truly I say unto you:
(...)
it shall be easyer for ye land of Sodoma and Gomorra in ye day of judgment,
then for that cite.

Behold, I send you forth as sheep among wolves. Be ye therefore wise as
serpents, and innocent as doves. Beware of men, (...)
for they shall deliver you up to the counsels, and shall scourge you in their
synagoges. And ye shall be brought before princes and kings for my sake, in
witness to them and to the gentyls.

But when they deliver you up, take no (...)
for yt shall be given you, even in that same hour, what ye shall say. For it
is not ye that speak, but the sprete of your father which speaks in you.

The brother shall deliver the brother to deeth, and the father the son. And
the children shall arise against their fathers and mothers, and shall help
them to deeth: and ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake. But he yt
endures to the end, shall be saved. (...)


When they persecute you in one cite, (...)
fly in to another. I tell you for a treuth, ye shall not fynysshe all the
cities of Israel, till the son of man come. The disciple is not above the
master, (...)
nether the servant above the LORD. It is enough for the disciple, to be as
his master, and the servant as his LORD. If they have called the good man of
the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his household so?
Fear them not therefore.

(...)
and nothing secret, that shall not be known. What I tell you in darcknes,
that speak ye in light: and what ye hear in the ear, that preach ye upon the
house tops.

And fear ye not them that kill the body, (...)
and be not able to kill the soul. But rather fear hi^, which is able to
destroy both soul and body in to hell. Are not two sparowes sold for a
farthinge? Yet does there none of the^ light upon the ground without your
father. And now are all ye hayres of your head told. Fear ye not therefore:
ye are of more value then many sparowes.

(...)
Therefore whosoever knowlegeth me before me^, him will I knowledge also before my
father which is in heaven. But who soever denies me before me^, him will I also
deny before my father which is in heaven.

(...)
I came not to send peace, but a sword. For I am come to set a man at
variaunce against his father, and the daughter against her mother, (...)
and the daughter in law against her mother in law: and a man's foes shall be
they of his own household.

(...)
Who so loves father and mother more then me, is not mete for me: and he that
loves son or daughter more then me, is not mete for me. And he yt takes not
his cross and follows me, is not mete for me. Who so fyndeth his life, (...)
shall lose it: and he that loses his life for my sake, shall find it.

He that receaueth you, receaueth me: and who so receaueth me, receaueth him yt
sent me. He that receaueth a prophet in the name of a prophet, (...)
shall receive a prophets reward. He yt receaueth a righteous man in the name
of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward: And who soever
gives unto one of the least of these a cup of cold water only to drink,
(...) 4. c
in ye name of a disciple, verily I say unto you: he shall not lose his reward.

The XI. Chapter.
ANd it came to pass, wha^ Jesus had

When Ihon being in preson herd of the works of Christ, Luc. 7. b
he sent two of his disciples, and said unto him* Art thou he yt shall come, or
shall we look for another? Jesus answered and said unto the^: Go your way and
tell Ihon again, what ye se and hear. The blind se, and the lame go: Esa.
35. a
the lepers are cleansed, and ye deaf hear: the deed arise again, Esa. 61. a
and the gospel is preached to the poor: and blessed is he, that is not
offended at me.

When they went their way, Luc. 7. c
Jesus began to speak unto the people, concerning Ihon: What are ye gone
out for to se in the wyldernes? Would ye se a read shaken with the wind? Or
what are ye gone out for to se? Would ye se a man clothed in soft Mal. 3. a
Marc. 1. a
I send my messau^ger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before the.

Verily I say unto you: Among ye children of women arose there not a greater
then Ihon the baptist. Not withstondinge he that is Some read: * least.
less in the kingdom of Heaven, is greater then he. From the time of Ihon
baptist hither to, ye kingdom of heaven suffers violence, Luc. 16. c
and the violent pluck it unto them. For all the prophets and the law
prophesied unto Ihon. Also if ye will receive it, this is Helias, Luc. 1. a
Mala. 3. d Ihon. 1. b Luc. 7. d
which should come. Who so has ears to hear, let hi^ hear.

But where unto shall I licke^ this generation? It is like unto children which
sit in the market, and call unto their fellows, and say: we have pyped unto
you, and ye would not daunse: We have morned unto you, and ye would not weep.
For Ihon came nether eatinge nor drynkinge, and they say: he has the devil.
The son of man came eatinge and drynkinge, and they say: lo what a glutton
and wine bebber this man is, and a companyon of publicans and sinners? And
wiszdome is justified of her children.

Then began he to vpbrade the cities, Luc. 10. b
Woe unto the Chorasin, Woe unto the Bethsaida: for if the miracles which have
been showed among you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they had repented
long agoo in sack cloth and aszhes. Nevertheless I say unto you: It shall be
easyer for Tire and Sidon in the day of judgment, then for you. And thou
Capernaum which art lift up unto heaven, shall be brought down unto hell. For
if the miracles which have been done in the, had been showed in Sodom, they had
remained unto this day. Nevertheless I say unto you: It shall be easyer for the
land of Sodom in the day of judgment, the^ for the.

Luc. 10. c Prou. 11. a
I praise the (O father and LORD of heaven and earth) that thou have hid these
things from the wise and prudent, and opened the^ unto babes. Even so father,
for so it pleased the. Mat. 28. c Luc. 10. c Johan. 3. e Ioha^. 7. c 8. b. 10. b
All things are given over unto me of my father: and no man knows the son,
but the father: nether knows any man the father, save the son, and he to
whom the son will open it. Come unto me all ye that labor and are laden, and
I will ease you. Eccli. 6. d Iere. 6. c
Take my yock upon you, and learn of me, for I am meke and lowlye of heart, and
ye shall find rest unto your souls: for my yock is easy, ^. Ioha^. 5. a
and my burden is light.

The XII. Chapter.
AT the same time went Jesus through Marc. 2. e Luc. 6. a Dut. 23. d
and began to pluck of the ears of the corn, and to eat. When ye Pharisees
saw that, they said unto him: Behold, thy disciples do that, which is not
laufull to do upon the Sabbath. He said unto them: have ye not red what David
did, when he was hongrie, and they also yt were with him? How he entered in to
the house of God, ^. Re. 21. b
and ate the show breds which were not laufull for him to eat, nether for the^
yt were with him, but only for the prestes? Or have ye not red in the law how
that the prestes in the temple break the Sabbath, and yet are blameless? But
I say unto you: yt here is one greater then the temple. Ose. 6. b Mat. 9. b
But if ye wist what this were (I have pleasure in mercy, and not in offeringe)
ye would not have condemned innocents: For the son of man is LORD even over
the Sabbath.

Marc. 3. a Luc. 6. a
and behold, there was a man which had his hand dried up. And they axed him,
saying: Is it laufull to heal, upon the Sabbath? Luc. 14. b
because they might accuse him. But he said unto the^: Which of you is it, if
he had a sheep fallen in to a pytte upon the Sabbath, (...)
that would not take him, and lift him out? And how much is a man better then a
sheep? Therefore it is lefull to do good upon the Sabbath. Then said he to the
man: Stretch forth thine hand. And he stretched it forth: and it was whole
again like unto the other.

Then went the Pharisees out, (...)
and held a council against him, how they might destroy him. But wha^ Jesus
knew thereof, he departed thence, and much people followed him: and he healed
them all, and charged them, yt they should not make him known: that the thing
might be fulfilled, which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, which says:
Behold, this is my servant, (...)
whom I have chosen: and my beloved, in whom my soul delyteth: I will put my
sprete upon hi^, and he shall show judgment unto the Heithe^. He shall not
strive, ner cry, nether shall any man hear his voice in the streets. A brosed
read shall he not break, and flax that begins to burn shall he not quench,
till he send forth judgment unto victory. And in his name shall the Heithen
trust.

Then was there brought unto him one (...)
in so much yt ye blind and domne both spoke and saw. And all the people were
amassed, and said: Is not this the son of David? (...)
But when the Pharisees herd that, they said: He dryueth the deuyls out none
other wise, but through Beelzebub the chief of the deuyls. Nevertheless Jesus
knew their thoughts, and said unto them: Every kingdom divided within it
self, shall be desolate: and every cite or house divided in it self, may not
continue. So if one Satan cast out another, the^ is he at variaunce within him
self: how may then his kingdom endure? But if I cast out devils through
Beelzebub, through whom do your children cast them out? Therefore shall they be
your judges. But if I cast out the deuyls by the sprete of God then is the
kingdom of God come upon you. Or how ca^ a man enter in to a strong man's
house, (...)
and violently take away his goods, except he first bind the strong man,
and the^ spoil his house? He that is not with me, is against me: and he yt
gathers not with me, scatereth abroad. Therefore I say unto you: (...)
All sin and blasphemy shall be forgeuen unto men, but the blasphemy against
the sprete shall not be forgeuen unto men: And whosoever speaks a word
against the son of man, it shall be forgiven him. (...)
But whosoever speaks against the holy ghost it shall not be forgeuen him,
nether in this world, ner in the world to come.

(...) 7. b (...) 6. c
or else make the tree euel and his fruit euel also. For the tree is known by the
fruit. O ye generacio^ of vypers, how can ye speak good, when ye your selves
are evil? For of ye abundance of ye heart ye mouth speaks. (...)
A good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things:
and an euel man out of his evil treasure, brings forth evil things. But I
say unto you, that of every ydell word that me^ have spoken, they shall give
accomptes at ye day of judgment. Out of thy words thou shall be justified,
L^c. ^9. b ^ Reg. 1. c
and out of thy words thou shall be condemned.

Then answered certain of the scrybes and Pharisees, and said: Master, we
would feign se a toke^ of the. And he answered and said unto the^: (...). 1^.
a (...) b (...). 11. c
This evil and aduouterous generation seeks a token: and there shall no token
be given the^, but the token of the prophet Jonas. (...)
For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the Whalles belly, so shall the
son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. The men
of Ninyue shall rise in the last judgment with this generation, (...). 3. b
and shall condemn it: for they did pe^naunce acordinge to ye preachinge of
Jonas. And behold, here is one greater the^ Jonas. The queen of the south shall
arise in the last judgment with this generation, (...). 10. a (...). 9. a
and shall condemn it: for she came from the vttemost parts of the earth, to
hear ye wyszdome of Solomon: And lo, here is one greater then Solomon.

(...) 11. c
he walks through dry places, sekinge rest, and fyndeth none. The^ says he:
I will turn again in to my house, from whence I went out. And when he
comes, he fyndeth it emptye, swepte and garnyshed. Then goes he his way,
and takes unto him seven other spretes worse then him self: and when they are
entered in, (...)
they dwell there: And the end of that man is worse then the beginning. Even
so shall it go with this evil generation.

While he yet talked unto the people, behold, his mother and his brethren
stood without desyringe to speak with him. Then said one unto him: (...)
Behold, thy mother and thy brethren stand without, and would speak with the.
Nevertheless he answered and said unto him that told him: Who is my mother?
and who are my brethren? And he stretched forth his hand over his disciples,
and said: Behold my mother and my brethren. For who soever does ye will of my
father which is in heaven, Ioha^. 15.
the same is my brother, sister and mother.

The XIII. Chapter.
THe same day went Jesus out of ye Marc. 4. ^ Luc. 8. a
and much people resorted unto him: so yt he went in to a ship and satt him
down, and all the people stood upon the shore. And he spoke many things unto
the^ in symilitudes, saying: Behold, The sower went forth to sow: and as he
sowed, some fell by the way side: Then came the fowls, and ate it up. Some
fell upon stony ground, and anon it spronge up, because it had no depth of
earth: But when the Son arose, it caught heat: and for so much as it had no
rote, it withred away. Some fell among the thorns, and the thorns grew up,
and choked it. Some fell upon good ground, and gave fruit: some an hundredth
fold, some sixty fold, some thirty fold. Who so has ears to hear, let
hi^ hear.

And the disciples came unto him, and said: Marc. 4. ^ Luc. 8. b
He answered and said unto the^: Unto you it is given to know the mystery of
the kingdom of heaven, 2. Cor. 3. Mat. 25. c Marc. 4. ^ Luc. 8. b and 19. c
but unto them it is not given. For whosoever has, unto him shall be given, and he
shall have abundaunce. But who so has not, from him shall be taken away, eue^
that he has. Therefore speak I unto the^ by parables, for with seeing eyes
they se not, and with hearing ears they hear not, for they understand it
not. And in them is fulfilled ye prophecy of Esaias, which says: Esa. 6. b
Marc. 4. Luc. 8. b Ioha^. 12. c Act. 28. d Romans 11.
Ye shall hear in deed, and shall not understand: and with saying eyes shall ye
se, and not perceive. For ye heart of this people is waxed gross, and their
ears are thick of heari^ge, and their eyes have they closed, lest they should
once se with ye eyes, and hear with the ears, and understood with the heart, and
turn, that I might heal them.

But blessed are your eyes, for they se: and your ears, for they hear.
Verily I say unto Luc. 10. c 1. Pet. 1. b
Many prophets and righteous men have desired to se ye things that ye se, and
have not seen the^: and to hear the things that ye hear, and have not herd
the^. Hear ye therefore the parable of the sower. Marc. 4. b Luc. 8. b
When one hears ye word of the kingdom, and understands it not, the evil
man comes, and plucketh it away that is sown in his heart: and this is he yt
is sown by the way side. But he yt is sown in the stonye ground, is this:
wha^ one hears the word, and anon with joy receaueth it: nevertheless he
has no rote i^ him, but endures for a season: wha^ trouble and persecucion
aryseth because of the word, immediately he his offended. As for him that is
sown among ye thorns, this is he: Wha^ one hears the word, and the
carefulnes of this world, and the disceatfulnes of riches choke the word, and
so he becomes unfruitful. But he yt is sown in the good ground, is this:
when one hears the word, and understands it, and brings forth fruit: and
some gives an hundredth fold, some sixty fold, and some thirty fold.

^arc. 4. c
yt sowed good sede in his field. But while me^ slepte, there came an enemy,
and sowed tares among ye wheat, and went his way. Now wha^ the blade was
spro^ge up and brought forth fruit, the^ ye tares appeared also. Then came the
servants to ye householder, and said unto him: Sir, sowdest not thou good
sede in ye field? From whence the^ has it tares? He said unto the^: that has
the enemy done. The^ said ye servants: will thou then yt we go and wede
the^ out? He said: No, lest while ye wede out ye tares, ye pluck up the
wheat also with the^. Let the^ both grow together till the harvest, and in time
of harvest I will say unto the reapers: Gather ye tares first, and bind the^
in sheeues to be bre^t: but gather the wheat in to my barn.

Another parable put he forth unto the^, and said: The kingdom of heaven is
like unto a grane of mustarde sede, which a man took, Marc. 4. c Luc. 33. b
and sowed it in his field. Which is the leest among all seeds. But when it is
grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and is a tree: so that the birds
under the heaven come and dwell in the branches of it.

Luc. 13. b
which a woman took, and myxte it among three peckes of meele, till all was
leuended.

All soch things spoke Jesus unto ye people by parables, Marc. 4. d
and without parables spoke he nothing unto the^: yt the thing might be
fulfilled, which was spoken by ye prophet, saying: I will open my mouth in
parables, and will speak out the secrets from the beginning of the world.
Psalm. 77. a


Then sent Jesus the people away, and came home. And his disciples came unto
hi^, and said: Declare unto us ye parable of ye tares of ye field. Jesus
answered, and said unto them: He that sows the good sede, is the son of
man: the field is the world: ye good sede are the children of the kingdom:
The tares are the children of wickedness: ye enemy that sows the^, is the
deuell: ye harvest is the end of the world: ye reapers are ye angels. For
like as ye tares are weded out, Apo. 14 ^
and brent in the fire, eue^ so shall it go in ye end of this world. The son
of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom
all things yt offend, and the^ yt do iniquyte, and shall cast the^ in to a
furnace of fire, there shall be waylinge and gnaszhinge of teth. Dan. ^^. a Sap.
3. b 2. Cor. (...)
The^ shall the righteous shine as the Son, in the kingdom of their father.
Who so has ears to hear, let him hear.

Again, the kingdom of heaven is like

Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant, yt sought good
pearls: and wha^ he had found a precious pearl, he went and sold all that
he had, and bought it. Phil. ^. ^


Again, ye kingdom of heaven is like unto a nett cast in to ye see, wherewith
are taken all manner of fyshes: and wha^ it is full, me^ draw it out unto ye
shore, and sytt and gather ye good i^ to the vessels, but cast the bad away.
So shall it be also in ye end of ye world. Mat. (...)
The angels shall go out, and sever the bad from the righteous, and shall cast
the^ in to a furnace of fire, there shall be waylinge and gnaszhinge of teth.
Mat. ^^


And Jesus said unto them: Have ye understood (...) Luc. 4. ^
Ye LORD. Then said he unto the^: Therefore every scribe taught unto ye
kingdom of heaven, is like an houszholder, which brings out of his treasure
things new and old.

And it came to pass wha^ Jesus had ended these parables, he departed thence,
and came into his own country, and taught the^ in their synagoges: in so much,
that they were astonnyed and said: Whence comes soch wyszdome and power unto
him? (...)
Is not this the carpe^ters son? Is not his mother called Mary? and his
brethren James and Ioses, and Simon and Jude? And are not all his sisters here
with us? Whence has he the^ all these things? And they were offended at him.
But Jesus said unto the^: Marc. (...) Luc. (...) Ioha^. (...)
A prophet is nowhere less set by, the^ at home and among his own. And he
did not many miracles there, because of their unbelieve.

The XIIII. Chapter.
AT that time Herod ye Tetrarcha herd Marc. (...) Luc. (...)
and said unto his servants: This is Iho^ ye baptist. He is risen again
from the deed, therefore are his deeds so mighty. (...)
For Herod had taken Iho^ bound hi^, and put him in preson for Herodias sake
his brothers Philips wife. For Ihon said unto him: ^
It is not laufull for yt to have her. And feign would he have put him to
death, but he feared the people, because they held him for a Prophet. (...)
21. b


Genesis 40. c
But when Herod held his birth day, the daughter of Herodias daunsed
before-the^, Marc. 6. c
and that pleased Herod well, wherefore he promised her with an ooth, yt he
would give her, whatsoever she would axe. And she (being instruct of her
mother before) said: give me Ihon baptistes head in a platter. And the king
was sorry. Nevertheless for ye ooth sake, and the^ yt sat with him at ye table,
he commanded it to be given her, and sent, and beheeded Ihon in the preson.
And his heed

When Jesus hetde yt, he departed thence by ship in to a desert place alone.
Marc. 6. d (...). 9. b ^oha^. 6. a
And wha^ the people herd thereof, they followed him on foot out of ye cities.
And Jesus went forth, and saw much people, and had pytie upon them, and
healed their sick. But at even his disciples came unto him, and said: This is
a deserte place, and ye night falls omlet ye people depart from the, that
they may go in to the towns, and bye them vytayles. But Jesus said unto
them: They need not go away, give ye the^ to eat. The^ said they unto him:
We have here but five

And straight way Jesus made his disciples to enter in to a ship, Marc. 6. c
(...) 6. b
and to go over before hi^, till he had sent ye people away. And when he had
sent the people away, he went up in to a mountain alone, to make his prayer.
(...) 6. b
And at even he was there him self alone. And ye ship was already in ye
myddest of the sea, and was tossed with wawes, for the wind was contrary. But in
ye fourth watch of ye night Jesus came unto the^, walkinge upon the sea. And
when his disciples saw him goinge upon the sea, they were afraid, saying: It
is some sprete, and cried out for fear. But straight way Jesus spoke unto
them, and said: Be of good cheer, it is I, be not afraid.

Peter answered him, and said: LORD, if it LORD, help me. And i^mediatly
Jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught him, and said unto him: O thou of
little faith, wherefore doutest thou? And they went in to the ship, Marc. 6. ^
and the wind ceased. Then they that were in ye ship, came and fell down
before him, and said: Of a truth thou art ye son of God. And they shipped
over, and came in to the lord of Genazereth. And wha^ ye me^ of yt place had
knowledge of hi^, they sent out in to all that country round about, and
brought unto him all that were sick, and besought him, that they might but
touch the hemme of his vesture only: and as many as touched it, were made
whole.

The XV. Chapter.
THen came unto him the scribes and Marc. 7
Why do thy disciples transgress ye tradicions of the elders? for they wash
not their ho^des when they eat bred. He answered and said unto the^: Why do
ye transgress the commandment of God, because of your own traditions? For
God commanded, saye^ge: Honor father and mother: and he yt curses father
and mother, shall dye the death. Exo. 20. ^ Deu. 5. b and 27. ^
But ye say: Every man shall say to father or mother: The thing yt I should
help ye withal, is given unto God. Pro. 28. ^
By this is it come to pass, that no man honors his father or his mother
any more. And thus have ye made the commandment of God of none effect, for
your own traditions. Ye ypocrites, full well has Esaye prophesied of you,
and said: This people draws nigh unto me with their mouth, and honors me with
their lips, Esa. 29. c Ezec. 33. ^
howbeit, their heart is far fro me. But in vain do they serve me, while they
teach soch doctrynes as are nothing but the commandments of men.

And he called ye people to hi^, and said unto

Then came his disciples, and said unto him: know thou yt the Pharisees were
offended, when they herd this saying? He answered, and said: All plants
which my heavenly father has not planted, Act. ^. ^
shall be pluckte up by ye rotes. Let the^ go, they are ye blind leaders of ye
blind. ^^a. 42. c ^uc. 6. d
Wha^ one blind leads another, they fall both i^ ye diche.

^arc. 7. b
Then answered Peter and said unto him: Declare unto us this parable. And Jesus
said unto the^: Are ye yet the^ without understanding? Perceive ye not, yt
what soever goes in at ye mouth, desce^deth down in to ye belly, and is cast
out in to the draught? But the thing that proceadeth out of the mouth, comes
from ye heart, and that defyleth ye man. For out of ye heart come evil thoughts
murthur, breaking of wedlock, whordome theft, false witness, blasphemy. The
fear ye things that defyle a man. But to eat with vnwaszhen hondes, defyleth
not a man.

Marc. 7. c
And behold, a woman of Canaan went out of ye same coasts, and cried after
him, saye^ge: O LORD, thou son of David, have mercy upon me. My daughter is
sore vexed with a deuell. And he answered her never a word. The^ came his
disciples unto him, and besought him, saye^ge: Se^de her away, for she cries
after us. But he answered, and said: I am not sent, ^uc. 19. a
but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Notwithstondinge she came and
fell down before him, and said: LORD, help me. He answered and said: It is
not good, to take the childrens bred, and to cast it unto dogs. It is truth
LORD (said she) Nevertheless the whelps eat of the crommes, that fall from
their lords table. Then answered Jesus and said unto her: O woman, great is
ye faith be it unto the, eue^ as thou desyrest. And her daughter was made hole
at ye same hour.

And Jesus departed thence, and came nigh unto the sea of Galile, and went up
in to a mountain, and sat down there, And there came unto him much people,
having with them, lame, blind, do^me, crepell, and other many, and cast them
down at Jesus fete. And he healed the^, ^sa 35. a
in so much that the people wo^dred, to sethe do^me speak, the crepell whole,
the halt to go, and the blind to se. And they praised the God of Israel.

Marc. 8. a
I have compassion upon the people, for they have co^tynued with me now three
days, and have nothing to eat, and I will not let the^ depart fasting, lest
they perish in ye way. And his disciples said unto him: Whence should we get
so much bred in the wyldernes, that we might satiszfie so much people? And
Jesus said unto the^: How many loaves have ye? They said: seven, and a few
little fyshes. And he commanded ye people to sit down upon the ground, and
took ye seven loaves, and the fyshes, and gave thanks and brake the^, and gave
the^ to his disciples, and ye disciples gave the^ unto the people. And they all
ate, and were suff^sed. And they took up of the broken meat yt was left, seven
baszkettes full. And they yt ate, were four thousand me^, beside women and
children. And when he had sent away the people, he went in to a ship, and
came in to the parties of Magdala.

The XVI. Chapter.
THen came the Pharisees and Saduces Marc. ^ ^ Ioha^ ^ ^
requyringe him to show the^ a toke^ from heaven. But he answered, and said:
At eue^ ye say: Luc. ^^. ^
I^ will be fair wedder. for ye szkye is reed. And in ye morning, ye say: It
will be foul wedder to day, for the szkye is reed, and gloometh. O ye
ypocrytes, ye can discern the fashion of ye szkye: can ye not the^ discern
the tokens of these times also? This evil and aduouterous generacio^ seeks a
toke^, Man. ^^ ^
and there shall no toke^ be given the^, but the toke^ of ye prophet Jonas. So
he left the^, and departed. (...)


And wha^ his disciples were come to the other side of the water, Marc ^^
they had forgotten to take bred with them. Jesus said unto the^: Take heed and
bewarre of the leue^ of ye Pharisees and of the Saduces. (...)
The^ thought they in the^ selves, saye^ge: We have taken no bred with us. When
Jesus perceived yt, he said to the^: O ye of little faith, why are ye combred
(in yor minds (because ye have taken no bred with you? Do ye not yet perceive?
Remember ye not those five loaves, Mat. (...)
when there were five thousand me^, and how many baszkettes took ye up? Mat.
(...)
Nether ye seven loaves when there were four thousand men, and how many
baskettes

Then came Jesus in to the coasts of the cite Cesarea Philippi, and axed his
disciples and said: Who^ do me^ say, (...)
yt ye son of man is? They said: Some say, yt thou art Iho^ the baptist,
Some yt thou art Elias, Some yt thou art Jeremy, or one of ye prophets. He
said to the^: But who^ say ye yt I am? The^ (...)
And Jesus answered, and said unto hi^: Blessed art thou Symo^ ye son of
Jonas, for flesh and blood has not opened yt unto the, (...)
but my father yt is in heaven. And I say to ye: Thou art Peter, and ^
upon this rock will I build my congregation: and ye gates of hell shall not
prevail against it. (...) a (...) 18. b M^^. 18. b Ioha^. 20. c
And the keys of heaven will I give unto the: Whatsoever thou shall bind upon
earth, shall be bound also in heaven: and whatsoever thou shall lowse upon
earth, shall be lowsed also in heaven. Then charged he his disciples, that they
should tell no man that he was Jesus Christ.

From that time forth began Jesus to show unto his disciples, Marc. 8. d ^uc.
9. c
how that he must LORD, favor thy self, let not this happen unto the.
Nevertheless he turned him about, (...) 19. d
and said unto Peter: Avoid fro me Satan, thou hindrest me, for thou
sauourest not ye things that be of God, but of men.

Man. ^0. c ^arc. ^. c (...). 9. c (...) 14. d ^^ha^. 12. c
Then said Jesus unto his disciples: If any man will follow me, let him forsake
him self, and take up his cross, and follow me. For who so will save his life,
shall lose it: but who so loses his life for my sake, shall find it. What
helps it a man though he wanne the whole world, and yet suffered harm in his
soul? Or what can a man give, to redeem his soul withal? For it will come to
pass, that the son of man shall come in the glory of his father with his
angels, and then shall he reward every one acordinge to his deeds. (...)
Verily I say unto you: there stand here some, ^arc. 8. e (...) 9. c
which shall not taist of death, till they se ye son of man come in his
kingdom.

The XVII. Chapter.
^arc. 9. a (...) 9. d
and Ihon his brother, and brought them up in to an hye mountain out of the
way, and was transfigured before the^: and his face shone as ye Son, and his
clothes were as white as the light. And behold, there appeared unto the^ Moses
and Elias talkinge with him. Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus: LORD,
here is good being for us. If thou will, let us make here three tabernacles:
one for the, one for Moses, and one for Elias. While he yet spoke, (...) 42. a
(...) 3. b
behold, a bright cloud ouershadowed them: and lo, there came a voice out of
the cloud, ^^rc. 1. a (...) 1. d (...) 13. c
saienge: This is my dear son, in whom I delight, hear him. When ye
disciples herd that, they fell upon their faces, and were sore afraid. But
Jesus came and touched them, and said: Arise, and be not afraid. And when
they looked up, they saw no man, but Jesus only.

And wha^ they came down from ye mountain, Marc. 9.
Tell no man of this vision, till the son of man be risen again from ye
deed. And his disciples axed him, and said: Why say the scrybes then, that
Elias must first come? Jesus answered and said unto them: Mal. 3. d
Elias shall come first in deed, and bring all things to r^^ht again. But I
say unto you: Elias is come all ready, and they knew him not, but have done
unto him what they would. Eue^ so shall also the son of man suffer of them.
Then the disciples perceived, that he spoke unto them of Ihon the baptist.

And when they were come to the people, Marc. 9. Luc. 9. d
there came unto him a certain man, and kneled unto him, and said: LORD,
have mercy upon my son, for he is lunatike, and sore vexed. He falls often
times in to ye fire,

Then came the disciples unto Jesus secretly, and said: Marc. 9. ^
Why could not we cast him out? Jesus said unto them: Because of your
unbelieve. For I say verily unto you? Mat. 21. c Luc. 17. a
If ye have faith as a grane of mustarde sede, ye may say unto this
mountain: Remove hence to yonder place, and he shall remove, nether shall any
thing be impossible unto you. How beit this kind goes not out, but by prayer
and fasting.

While they occupied in Galile, Jesus said Mat. 22. c
Then are ye children fre. Nevertheless lest we offend them, go thy way to the sea, and cast thine angle, and take the fysh that first comes up, and when
thou have opened his mouth, thou shall find a piece of twenty pens, take that,
and give it them form and the.

The XVIII. Chapter.
Marc. 9. d ^uc. 9. c
and said: Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven? And Jesus called a
child unto him, and set him in the myddest among them, and said: Verily I
say unto you: Except ye turn and become as children, ye shall not enter in to
the kingdom of heaven. ^. Pet. ^. a
Whosoever therefore humbles him self as this child, ye same is the greatest
in ye kingdom of heaven. And who so receaueth soch a child in my name,
receaueth me. But who so offends one of these little ones which believe in me,
Marc. 9. c Luc. 17. a
it were better for him, that a mylstone were hanged about his neck, and he
drowned in the depth of the sea.

Woe unto the world because of slau^ders. Ye there must slanders come: ^.
Cor. 11. b
but woe unto that man, by whom slander comes. But if thy hand or thy foot
offend the, Mat. 5. d Marc. 9. c
cut him of, and cast him from the. It is better for yt to enter in unto life
lame or crepell, the^ yt thou should have two ho^des or two fete, and be cast
in to everlasting fire. And if thine eye offend the, Deu. 13. a
pluck it out, and cast it from the. Better it is for the to enter in unto
life with one eye, the^ to have two eyes, and to be cast in to hell fire.

Luc. 15. a
does not he leave the nyentie and nyene in the mountains, and goes, and
seeks that one which is gone astraye? And if it happen that he find it,
verily I say unto you: he reioyseth more over it, then over the nyentie and
nyene which went not astraye. Even so is it not the will before your father
in heaven, that one of these little ones should perish.

If thy brother trespace against the, go and tell him his fault between the and
him alone. Luc. 17. a Eccli. 17. b Deuteronomy. 19. d
If he hear the, thou have wo^ne thy brother. But if he hear the not, then
take yet with the one or two, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, Number.
25. d Deuteronomy. 17. b and 19. c ^. Cor. 13. a
every matter may be stablyshed. If he hear not them, tell it unto the
congregation. If he hea^e not the congregation, hold him as an Heithen and
Publican. Verily I say unto you: what soever ye shall bind upon earth, Mat.
16. c
shall be bound also in heaven: and what soever ye lowse upon earth, shall be
lowsed also in heaven. Again, Luc. ^4 b
there am I in the myddest among them.

Then came Peter unto him, and said, LORD, how often shall I forgive my brother,
Mat. (...) Marc. (...) Luc. 1^. a
yt trespaceth against me? Seven times? Jesus said unto hi^: I say not unto
ye seven times, but seue^tie times seven times. Therefore is ye kingdom of
heaven lickened unto a king which would reken with his servants. And when he
began to reke^, one was brought unto him, which ought him ten thousand
pound. Now wha^ he had nothing to pay his lord commanded him to be sold,
and his wife and his children, and all yt he had, and payment to be made. Then
the servant fell down, and besought him, saying: Sir, have patience with me,
and I will pay the all. Then had the lord pytie on that servant, and
discharged him, and forgave him the det^.

And the same servant went out, and found Iaco. 4. ^
O thou wicked servant, I forgave the all this dett, because thou praydest me:
should not thou then have had compassion also upon thy fellow, even as I had
pytie upon the? And his lord was wroth, and delivered him unto the iaylers,
till he paid all that he ought. Mat. ^. ^ Marc. ^ ^
So shall my heavenly father do also unto you, if ye every one of you from your
hertes, forgive not his brother his trespaces.

The XIX. Chapter.
ANd it came to pass, wha^ Jesus had (...)
he gat him from Galile, and came i^ to ye coasts of Iewry beyond Iordane,
and much people followed him, and he healed them there.

Then came unto him the Pharisees and tempted him, and said unto him: Is it
laufull for a man to put away his wife for any manner of cause? He answered and
said unto the^: Have ye not red, how yt he which made (man) at the beginning,
made the^ man and woman, and said: Genesis 2. d
For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and cleue unto his wife,
and they two shall be one flesh. Now are they not twain then, but one flesh.
Let not man therefore put a sunder, yt which God has coupled together.

Then said they: Why did Moses then command to give a testimonyall of
deuorsement, (...) 24. a (...) a (...) c
and to put her away? He said unto the^: Moses (because of ye hardness of yo
hertes) suffered you to put away your wives: (...) 3. d ^^c. 10. a (...) 16. d
But I say unto you: Whosoever puts away his wife (except it be for
fornicacion) and marieth another, breaks wedlock. And who so marieth her yt
is deuorced, commytteth aduoutrye.

Then said his disciples unto him: If ye matter be so between man and wife,
the^ is it not good to mary. But he said unto them: All me^ can not
co^prehende yt saying, save they to who^ it is given. (...)
For there be some gelded, which are so borne from their mothers womb: and
there be some gelded, which are gelded of men: and there be some gelded, which
have gelded the^ selves for the kingdom of heavens sake. He that can
co^prehende it, let him comprehend it.

^^rc. 10. b (...) b
Then were brought unto him yo^ge children, yt he should put his hondes upon
the^, and pray. And ye disciples rebuked them. But Jesus said: Suffer ye
children, and forbid the^ not to come unto me, for unto soch belongs the
kingdom of heaven. And wha^ he had laid his ho^des upon the^, he departed
thence.

(...) 10. b (...) 11. c
Good master, what good shall I do, yt I may have the ever lasting life? He
said unto him: Why call thou me good? there is none good, (...)
but God only. Nevertheless if thou will enter into life, keep ye (...) 20. d
(...) 4. a (...) 5. a
commandments. The^ said, he unto him: Which? Jesus said: Thou shall not
kill: thou shall not break wedlock: thou shall not steal: thou shall bear
no false wytnes: (...) 13. b
Honor father and mother: and thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. (...)
Then said the young man unto him: All these have I kept fro my youth up:
what lack I yet? Jesus said unto him: If thou will be perfect, go thy way
and sell that thou have, (...)
and give it unto the poor, and thou shall have a treasure in heaven, (...)
and come and follow me. When ye young man herd yt word, he went away sorry,
for he had great possessions.

Jesus said unto his disciples: Verily I say unto you: Marc. 10. c Luc. 1^. c
it shall be hard for a rich man to enter in to the kingdom of heaven. And
Zach. 8. a


Then answered Peter and said unto him: Marc. 10. c Luc. 18. c Mat. 4. c
Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed the: What shall we have therefore?
Jesus said unto the^: Verily I say unto you: that when the son of man shall
sytt in the seat of his majesty, Luc. 21. b
ye which have followed me in the new birth, shall sit also upon twolue seats,
and judge ye twolue trybes of Israel. Sap. 5. a
And who so ever forsakes houses or brethren, or sisters, or father, or
mother, or wife, Deu. 33. b
or children, or lands, for my names sake, the same shall receive an hundredth
fold, and inheret everlasting life. But many that be the first, shall be the
last: Mat. 20. b Luc. 13. c
and the last shall be the first.

The XX. Chapter.
THe kingdom of heaven is like unto said: These last have wrought but one
hour, and thou have made the^ equal unto us, which have borne the burden and
heat of the day. He answered and said unto one of them: friend, I do ye no
wrong: did not thou agree with me for a penny? Take that thine is, and go
thy way. I will give unto this last also, like as unto the. Or have I not
power, Romans 11. c
to do as me lists with mine own? Is thine eye evil, because I am good? So
the last shall be the first, and the first the last. Mat. 19. d Marc. 10. c Luc.
13. c Mat. 22. b
For many are called, but few are chosen.

And Jesus went up to Jerusalem, and took the twolue disciples aside in the
way, Mar. 10. d Luc. 18. d
and said unto them: Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the son of man
shall be delivered unto the hye prestes and scribes: and they shall condemn him
to death, and shall deliver him unto ye Heithen, to be mocked to be scourged,
and to be crucified. And the third day he shall rise again.

Mar. 10. d
and desired a certain thing of hi^. And he said unto her: What will thou?
She said unto him: Let these two sons of mine sit in thy kingdom: the one
upon thy right hand, and the other upon thy left hand. But Jesus answered,
and said: Ye wot not what ye axe. May ye drink the cup, that I shall
drink? and to be baptized with the baptyme, that I shall be baptized withal?
They said unto him: Ye that we may. And he said unto them: My cup truly
shall ye drink, and with the baptyme yt I shall be baptized withal, shall ye be
baptized: Nevertheless to sit upon my right hand and on my left, is not mine to
give, but unto the^ for who^ it is prepared of my father. Mat. 25. c


Marc. 9. d and 10. e Luc. 9. c and ^2. b
But Jesus called them unto him, and said: Ye know that ye princes of the
world have domynacion of the people, and the greatest Some read * The
greatest deal with violence
exercise power among the^. It shall not be so among you. But who so ever will
be great among you, let him be your mynister: and who soever will be chief,
let him be your servant: Even as the son of man came, not to be served, but
to do service, and to give his life to a rede^pcion for many.

And when they departed from Jericho, much people followed him: Marc. 10. e Luc.
18. d
and behold, two blyndemen sat by the way side: And when they herd that
Jesus passed by, they cried and said. O LORD, thou son David, have mercy
upon us. But ye people rebuked the^, that they should hold their peace.
Nevertheless they cried the more, and said: O LORD, thou son of David, have
mercy upon us. And Jesus stood still, and called them, and said: What will ye,
yt I shall do unto you? They said unto him: LORD, that our eyes may be
opened. And Jesus had compassion upon them, and touched their eyes: and
immediately their eyes received sight. And they followed him.

The XXI. Chapter.
NOw when they drew nigh unto Jerusalem, Marc. ^^. ^ Luc. 19. c
LORD has need of the^, And straight way he will let them go. But all this
was done, that the thing might be fulfilled, which was spoken by the prophet,
saying: Tell the daughter of Sion: Zac^. (...) Esa. (...)
behold, thy king comes unto ye meke, syttinge upon an Ass and a foale of
ye Ass used to the yocke. The disciples went, and did as Jesus commanded
them, and brought the Ass and the foale, and laid their clothes upon them,
and set him thereon. But many of the people spread their garments in the way:
Ioha^. (...)
other cut down branches from the trees, and strawed them in the way. As for
the people that went before and that came after, they cried and said:
Hosianna unto the son of David, Psalm. (...)
Blessed be he that comes in the name of the LORD, Hosianna in the height.

And when he was come into Jerusalem, Marc. (...) Luc. (...) Ioha^. (...)
Ioha^. (...)
Who is this? And the people said: This is Jesus ye prophet of Nazareth out of
Galile. And Jesus went in to the temple of God, and cast out all them that
bought and sold in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the money
chaungers, and the seats of them that sold doves, and said unto them: It is
written: My house shall be called ye house of prayer, (...)
but ye have made it a den of murthurers. The blind also and ye lame came
unto him in the temple, and he healed them.

But when the hye prestes and the scrybes saw the wonders that he did, and the
children crienge in the temple and sayenge^ Hosianna unto the son of David,
they disdayned, and said unto him: Hear thou what these say? Jesus said
unto them: (...)
Ye. Have ye never red: Out of the mouth of very babes and sucklinges thou
have ordained praise? And he left them there, and went out of the cite unto
Bethania, (...)
and there abode over night.

(...) 11. c
But in the morning as he returned in to the cite, he hu^gred. And in the way
he saw a fygge tree, and came unto it, and found nothing thereon, (...)
but leaves only, and said unto it: Never fruit grow on the from hence
forth. And immediately the fygge tree wythred away. And when his disciples saw
that, they marueyled, and said. How (...) 17. c (...) 1^ a
If ye have faith and doubt not, ye shall not only do this with the fygge tree,
but if ye shall say unto this mountain: Avoyde, and cast thy self in to the sea, it shall be done. (...). 11. c (...) 14. b (...) c (...). 20. a (...) d
And what soever ye axe in prayer, if ye believe, ye shall receive it.

And when he was come in to the temple, the chief prestes and the elders of the
people came unto him (as he was teachinge) and said: (...) b (...) a (...) d
By what auctorite do thou these things? and who gave the this auctorite?
Jesus answered and said unto them: I will axe a word of you also: which if ye
tell me, I in like wise will tell you, by what auctorite I do these things. The
baptime of Iho^, whence was it? from heaven, or of men? Then thought they
among them selves, and said: If we say it was from heaven, then shall he say
unto us: Why did ye not then believe him? But if we say it was of men, the^
fear we the people: (...) 14. a
For every man held Ihon for a prophet. And they answered Jesus, and said: We
can not tell. Then said he unto them: Nether tell I you, by what auctorite I
do these things. But what think ye? A certain man had two sons, and came
to the first, and said: Go thy way my son, and work to day in my
vynyarde. He answered and said: I will not, but afterward he repented, and
went. He came also unto the (...)
For Ihon came unto you, and taught you ye right way and ye believed him not:
but the publicans and harlottes believed hi^. As for you, though ye saw it, yet
were ye not moved with repentance, that ye might afterward have ^^leued him.

Hear another parable. There was a certain houszholder which planted a
vynyarde, and hedged it round about, Genesis 9. c Esa 5. a Iere. 12. b Marc. 12.
b Luc. 20. a
and dygged a wine press in it, and built a tower, and let it out unto
huszbandmen, and went in to a strange country. Now wha^ the time of the fruit
drew near, he sent his servants to the huszbandmen, to receive the fruits of
it. Then the huszbandmen caught his servants: one they bett, another they
killed, the third they stoned. Again, he sent other servants, moo then the
first, and they did unto them in like manner. At the last he sent his own son
unto them, and said: they will sto^de in awe of my son. But when the
huszbandme^ saw the son, they said among themselves: This is the Heir,
come, Genesis ^7. ^
let us kyl him, and take his inheritance unto our selves. And they caught
him, and thrust him out of the vynyarde, and slew him. Now when

Jesus said unto the^: Did ye never read in the scriptures: Psalm. 117. ^ Act.
4. a 1. Pet. 2. a
The same stone which the buylders refused, is become the head stone in the
corner? This was the LORDS doing, and it is marvelous i^ our eyes Therefore I
say unto you: The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and shall be given unto
the Heithe^, which shall bring forth ye fruits of it. And who so falls upon
this stone, Zach. 12. ^
shall be broken in pieces: and look upon whom it falls, it shall grynde him to
poulder. Dan. 2. ^
And when the hye prestes and Pharisees herd his parables, Marc 11. ^ Luc. 19.
a and 20. b
they perceived, that he spoke of them. And they went about to take him, but
they feared ye people, because they held hi^ for a prophet. Ioha^. 7. d


The XXII. Chapter.
ANd Jesus answered, and spoke unto the^ again by parables, and said: The
kingdom of heaven is like unto a king, which married his son. Luc. 14. b
Apo. 19. b
And sent forth his servants, to call the gestes unto the marriage, and they
would not come. Again, he sent forth other servants, and said: Tell the
gestes: Behold, I have prepared my dynner, mine oxen and my fed catell are
killed, and all things are ready, come to the marriage. But they made light of
it, and went their ways: one to his huszbandrye, another to his marchaundise.
As f^^ the remnau^t, they took his servants, and entreated the^ shamefully,
and slew the^. When the king herd that, he was wroth, and sent forth his
warryers, and destroyed those murderers, and set fire upon their cite. Then
said he unto his servants: The marriage in deed is prepared, but the gestes
were not worthy. Go your way out therefore into ye hye ways, and as many as
ye find, bid them to the marriage. And the servants went out in to the hye
ways, and gathered together as many as they could find, both good and bad,
and the tables were all full. Then the king went in, to se the gestes, Mat.
1^. f and 25. c
Take and bind him hand and foot, and cast him into ye utter darcknes: there
shall be waylinge and gnaszhinge of teth. Mat. 20. b
For many be called, but few are chose^.

Then went the Pharisees, and took council, Marc. 12. a Luc. 20. c ^oha^. 7. d
how they might tangle him in his words, and sent unto him their disciples
with Herodes officers, and said: Master, we know that thou art true, and
teach the way of God truly, and carest for no man: for thou regardest not
the outward appearaunce of me^. Tell us therefore, how think thou? Is it
laufull to give tribute unto the Emperor, or not? Now wha^ Jesus perceived
their wickedness, he said: O ye ypocrites, why te^pte ye me? Show me ye
tribute money. And they took hi^ a penny. And he Mat. 17. d Romans 13. b
that which is the Emperors: and give unto God, that which is Gods. When they
herd that, they marueyled, and left him, and went their way.

The same day there came unto him the Saduces (which hold that there is no
resurreccion) and axed him, Mar. 12. b Luc. 20. d Act. 23. a
and said: Master, Moses said: If a man dye, having no children, Deuteronomy. 25. a
his brother shall mary his wife, and raise up sede unto his brother. Now were
there with us seven brethren. The first married a wife, and dyed: and for somoch
as he had no sede, he left his wife unto his brother. Like wise the second,
and third unto the seventh. Last of all the woman dyed also. Now in the
resurreccion, whose wife shall she be of the seven? For they all had her. Jesus
answered, and said unto them: Ye err, and understood not the scriptures, ner
the power of God. In the resurreccion they shall nether mary, ner be married, but
are as the angels of God in heaven.

As touching the resurrection of the deed, Exodus (...) Heb. (...)
and the God of Jacob? Yet is not God a God of the deed, but of the living.
And when the people herd that, they were astonnyed at his doctrine.

When the Pharisees herd, Marc. (...) Luc. (...)
that he had stopped the mouth of the Saduces, they gathered them selves
together. And one of them (a Scrybe) tempted him, and said: Master, which is
the chefest commandment in the law? Jesus said unto him: Thou shall love
the LORD thy God with all thy heart, Deu. ^^ and ^^
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind: this is the pryncipall and
greatest commandment. As for the second, it is like unto it: Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thyself. (...)
In these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.

Now while the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus axed them, and said:
(...)
What think ye of Christ? Whose son is he? They said unto him: David's. He
said unto them: How then does David in sprete, call him LORD, saying: Psalm.
(...)
The LORD said unto my LORD: Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine
enemies thy footstool. If David now call him LORD, how is he then his son?
And no man could answer him one word, nether durst any man axe him any mo
questions, from that day forth.

The XXIII. Chapter.
THen spoke Jesus unto ye people and (...)
but after their works shall ye not do, for they say and do not. (...)
For they bind heavy and intolerable burdens, and lay them upon men's
shulders: But they them selves will not heave at them with one of their fyngers.
All their works do they to be seen of men. They set abroad their ^
Philateries, and make large borders upon their garments, and love to sit
uppermost at the table, and to have the chief seats in the synagoges, and love
to be saluted in the market, and to be called of me^ Rabbi.

But ye shall not suffer your selves to be called Rabbi, for one is your
master, even Christ, and all ye are brethren. And call no man father upon
earth, for one is your father, which is in heaven. And ye shall not suffer
your selves to be called masters, for one is your master, namely, Christ. He
that is (...) 14. b (...) b
shall be brought low: and he that humbles himself, shall be exalted.

Woe unto you Scrybes and Pharisees, ye ypocrytes, (...)
that shut up the kingdom of heaven before men: Ye come not in your selves,
nether suffer ye them to enter, that would be in.

Woe unto you Scrybes and Pharisees, ye ypocrytes, that devour wyddowes houses,
and that under the culoure of prayenge long prayers, therefore shall ye receive
ye greater damnacion.

Woe unto you Scrybes and Pharisees, ye ypocrytes, which compass see and lord
to make one (...)
Proselyte: and when he is become one, ye make of him a child of hell, two
fold more then ye your selves are.

Woe unto you blyndegydes, which say: Who so ever swears by the temple, that
is nothing: but who so ever swears by the gold of the temple, he is guilty.
Ye fools (...)
swears by the seat of God, and by him that sytteth thereon.

Woe unto you scrybes and Pharisees, ye ypocrytes, (...)
which tithe Mynt, Anyse and Commyn, and leave the waightier matters of the
law behind: namely, judgment, mercy, and faith. These ought to have been
done, and not to leave the other behind. O ye blind gydes, which strain out
a gnat, but swalowe up a Camel.

Woe unto you scrybes and Pharisees, ye Ypocrytes, which make clean the utter
side of the cup and platter, but within are ye full of robbery and (...)
excess. Thou blind Pharise, cleanse first the insyde of the cup and
platter, that the out side may be clean also.

Woe unto you scrybes and Pharisees, ye Ypocrites, which be like unto painted
Sepulcres,

Woe unto you scrybes and Pharisees, ye Ypocrites, which build the tombs of the
prophets, and garnysh the sepulcres of the righteous, and say: If we had been
in our fathers time, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood
of the prophets. Therefore ye be witnesses unto your selves, that ye are the
children of them, 1. Tess. ^. c
which slew the prophets. Go to fulfill ye also the measure of your fathers.
O ye serpents, O ye generation of vypers, how will ye escape the damnacion of
Hell?

Therefore behold, I send unto you prophets Mat. 10. b Luc. 11. c Ioha^. 16.
a Act. 5. e and 7. g
and some of them shall ye kill and crucifye, and some of them shall ye scourge
in your synagoges, and persecute them from cite to cite: that upon you may
come all the righteous blood which has been shed upon ye earth, from the
blood of righteous Abel, Genesis 4. b
unto ye blood of Zachary ye son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the
temple and the altar. Verily I say unto you: 2. Pa. 24. d
All these things shall light upon this generation. O Jerusalem Jerusalem, Luc.
13. d
thou that slayest the prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto the: How
often would I have gathered thy children together, even as the hen gathers
her chekens under her wings, 4. Esdr* 1. c
and ye would not? Behold, Psalm. 68. d
your habitacion shall be left unto you desolate. For I say unto you: Ye shall
not se me hence forth, till ye say: Blessed be he, Psalm. 117. c
that comes in the name of the LORD.

The XXIIII. Chapter.
ANd Jesus went out and departed Marc. 13. a Luc. 21. a
and his disciples came unto him, to show him the buyldinge of the temple. But
Jesus said unto them: Se ye not all these things? Verily I say unto you:
Luc. 19. d
there shall not be left here one stone upon another, yt shall not be cast down.
And as he sat upon the mount Oliuete, his disciples came unto him secretly, and
said: Tell us, when shall these things come to pass? and which shall be the
token of thy coming, and of the end of the world? Jesus answered and said
unto them: Take heed, that no man disceaue you. For there shall many come in my
name, Col. 2. c
and say: I am Christ, and shall disceaue many.

Ye shall hear of wars, and of ye noise of wars: take heed, and be not ye
troubled. All these things must first come to pass, but the end is not yet.
For one people shall rise up against another, and one real me against another:
4. Esd 13. c
and there shall be pestilence, honger, and earthquakes here and there. All these
are the beginning of sorrows.

Mat. 10. b Marc. 13. b Luc. 21. b Ioha^. 16. a
Then shall they put you to trouble, and shall kill you, and ye shall be hated of
all people for my names sake. The^ shall many be offended, and shall betraye one
another, and shall hate one the other. And many false prophets shall arise, and
shall disceaue many: and because iniquyte shall have the upper hand, 4. Es. 14. b
the love of many shall abate. But who so endures unto ye end, ye same shall be
saved. And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a
wytnes unto all people, Mat. 10. c
Marc. 13. b
and then shall the end come.

Marc. 13. b Luc. 21. c Dan. 9. c
let him marck it well) the^ let the^ which be in Iewry, fly unto ye
mountains: and let him which is on the house top, not come down to fet any
thing out of his house: and let him which is in ye field, not turn back to
fetch his clothes. But woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give
suck in those days. But pray ye, that your flight be not in ye winter, Dan.
12. a
ner on the Sabbath. For then shall there be great trouble, soch as was not
from the beginning of the world unto this time, ner shall be. Ye and except
those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved: but for ye
chosens sake those days shall be shortened.

Marc. 13. c Luc. 17. c
Then if any man shall say unto you: lo, here is Christ, or there, believe it
not. For there shall arise false Christ's and false prophets, ^. Tess. 2. b
Deuteronomy. 13. a
and shall do great tokens and wonders: In so much, that (if it were possible)
the very chosen should be brought in to error. Behold, Job. 3^ ^
there will the Aegles be gathered together.

Immediately after the trouble of the same time, Marc. (...) Luc. (...) Joel.
(...)
shall the Son and Moon lose their light, and the stars shall fall from
heaven, and the powers of heaven shall move: and then shall appear the token of
the son of man in heaven: and then shall all the kynreds of the earth mourn,
and they shall se the son of man come in the clouds of heaven with great
power and glory. Act. (...)
And he shall send his angels with ye great voice of a trompe, (...)
and they shall gather together his chosen from the four wyndes, from one end
of the heaven to the other.

Learn a symilitude of ye fygge tree. (...)
When his branch is yet tender, and his leaves spronge, ye know that Summer
is nigh. So likewise ye, when ye se all things, be ye sure, that it is nigh even
at the doors Verily I say unto you: This generation shall not pass, till all
these be fulfilled. Heaven and earth shall perish, but my words shall not
perish. (...)
Nevertheless of that day and hour knows no man, no not the angels of
heaven, but my father only. Even as it was in the time of Noe, so shall the
coming of (...)
For as they were in the days before ye floude (they ate, they drunk, they
married, and were married, even unto the day yt Noe entered in to the ship, and
they regarded it not, till the floude came and took them all away) So shall
also the coming of the son of man be. The^ shall two be in the field: (...)
the one shall be received, and the other shall be refused: Two shall be gryndinge
at the Myll, the one shall be received, and the other shall be refused:) Two in the
bed, the one shall be received, and the other refused.)

Watch therefore, (...)
for ye know not what hour your LORD will come. But be sure of this, that if
the good man of the house knew what hour the thief would come, (...)
he would surely watch, and not suffer his house to be broken up. Therefore be
ye ready also, for in the hour that ye think not, shall the son of man come.
(...)
Who is now a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord has made ruler over
his houszholde, that he may give them meat in due season? (...)
Blessed is yt servant, whom his lord (when he comes) shall find so doing.
Verily. I say unto you: he shall set him over all his goods. But and if the
evil servant shall say in his heart: Tush, it will be long or my lord come,
and begin to smite his fellows, ye and to eat and drink with the dronken:
The same servants lord shall come in a day, wha^ he looks not for him, and
in an hour that he is not ware of, and shall hew him in pieces and give him his
reward with ypocrytes: there shall be waylinge and gnaszhinge of teth.

The XXV. Chapter.
LORD LORD, (...) 7. b
opo^ unto us. But he answered, and said: Verily I say unto you: I know you
not. Luc. 6. c Man. 24. d Marc. 13. d Luc. 12. d ^^od. 2^. d
Watch ye therefore, for ye know nether the day ner yet the hour, when ye
son of man shall come.

Like wise as a certain man ready to take (...). 13. d ^uc. 19. a
and delivered his goods unto the^. And unto one he gave five talentes, to
another two, and to another one: unto every man after his abilyte, and straight
way departed. Then he that had received the five talentes, went and occupied
with the same, and wanne other five talentes. Likewise he yt received two
talentes, wa^ne other two also. But he that received ye one went and dygged a
pyt in the earth, and hyd his lords money. After a long season the lord of
those servants came, and rekened with them. Then came he that had received
five talentes, and brought other five talentes, and said: Sir, thou delyuerdst
unto me five talentes: Behold, with them have I won five tale^tes mo. Then
said his lord unto hi^: (...) 24. d
well thou good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful over little, I
will set the over much: enter thou in to the joy of thy lord. The^ came he
also that had received two talentes, and said: Sir, thou delyuerdst unto me
two talentes: Behold, I have won two other tale^tes with the^. His lord
said unto him: Well thou good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful
over little, I will set the over much: enter thou in to the joy of thy lord.

Then he that had received the one tale^t, Man. 13. Marc. 4. Luc. 8. and 19.
to him shall be given, and he shall have abundaunce. But who so has not, from
him shall be taken away even that he has. And cast the unprofitable servant in
to utter darcknes: Mat. 13.
there shall be waylinge and gnaszhinge of teth.

But when the son of man shall come in his glory, and all holy angels with
him, 2. Tess. ^
then shall he sit upon the seat of his glory. And all people shall be gathered
before him: and he shall separate them one from another as a shepherde deuydeth
the sheep from ye goats. Ezec. 34* ^
And he shall set ye sheep on his right hand, and the goats on the left. Then
shall the king say unto them that shall be on his right hand: Come hither ye
blessed of my father, inheret ye ye kingdom, which is prepared for you from
the beginning of the world. For I was hongrie, Mat. 20. ^
and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was
harbourlesse, Esa. 58. b Ezec. 18.
and ye lodged me: I was naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye vysited
me: I was in preson, Eccli. 7. d 2. Tim. 1.
and ye came unto me.

Then shall the righteous answer him, and LORD, when saw we the ho^grie, and
fed the? Or thirsty, and gave the drink? When saw we the herbourlesse, and
lodged the? Or naked, and clothed ye? Or when saw we ye sick or in preson,
and came unto the? And the king shall answer and say unto them: Verily I say
unto you: Look what ye have done unto one of the least of these my brethren,
the same have ye done unto me.

Then shall he say also unto them that shall be on the left hand: (...) 6. b
(...) 7. b (...) 13. c (...) 30. f (...) 7. b (...) 19. d (...) 20. c
Depart fro me ye cursed in to the everlasting fire, which is prepared for
the deuell and his angels. For I was ho^grie, and ye gave me no meat: I was
thirstye, and ye gave me no drink: I was herbourlesse, and ye lodged me not: I
was naked, and ye clothed me not: I was sick and in preson, and ye vysited me
not.

Then shall they also answer hi^, and say: LORD, when saw we the ho^grie, or
thyrstie, or herbourlesse, or naked, or sick, or in preson, and have not
mynistred unto the? The^ shall he answer them, and say: Verily I say unto
you: (...) 2. b (...) 30. c (...) 14. p (...) 17. a ^^ha^. 5. c
Look what ye have not done unto one of the leest of these, the same have ye
not done unto me. And these shall go in to everlasting pain, but the righteous
in to everlasting life.

The XXVI. Chapter.
(...). 14. a (...) 22. a ^^ha^ 18. a
and the son of man shall be delivered to be crucified.

Then assembled together the hye prestes and the scrybes, ^^ha^. 11. e
and the elders of the people in to the palace of the hye pressed which was
called Caiphas, and held a council, how they might take Jesus by disceate,
and kill him. But they said: Not on the holy day, lest there be an vproure in
the people.

Mar. 14. a ^uc. 7. d ^oha^. 12. a
Now when Jesus was at Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, there came unto
hi^ a woman, which had Some ^eade: A glass ^ith pre^ious wa^er
a box with precious ointment, and poured it upon his head, as he sat at the
table. When his disciples saw that, they diszdayned, and said: Where to
serves this waist? This oyntme^t might have been well sold, and given to the
poor. When Jesus perceived that, he said unto them: Why trouble ye the woman?
She has wrought a good work upon me for ye have allwaye the poor with you,
but me shall ye not have always. Deuteronomy. 15. b
Where as she has poured this oyntme^t upon my body, she did it to bury me.
Verily I say unto you: where so ever this gospel shall be preached through out
all the world, there shall this also that she has done, be told for a
memorial of her.

Mar. 14. b Luc. 2^. a Ioha^. 13. ^
and I shall deliver him unto you? And they offered hi^ thirty silver pens. And
from that time forth, he sought oportunyte to betraye him?

The first day of sweet bred came the disciples to Jesus, and said unto him:
Marc. 14. ^ Luc. (...)
Where will thou that we prepare for the, to eat the Easter lamb? He said:
Go in to the cite to soch a man, and say unto him: The Master sends the
word: My time is a^ hand, I will keep mine Easter by the with my disciples.
And the disciples did as Jesus had appointed them, and made ready the Easter
lamb.

And at even he sat down at the table with the twolue. And as they ate, he
said: Marc. 14. ^ Luc. (...) Ioha^. (...)
Verily I say unto you: One of you shall betraye me. And they were exceadinge
soroufull, and began every one of them to say unto him: Sir, is it I? He
answered and said: He that deppeth his hand with me in the dyszhe, the same
shall betraye me. The son of man goes forth, as it is written of him: but woe
unto that man by who^ the son of man shall be betrayed: It had been better for
that man, if he had never been borne. The^ Judas that betrayed him, answered
and said: Master, is it I? He said unto: him Thou have said.

And as they ate, Jesus took the bred, gave Marc. (...) Luc. (...) 1. Cor. (...)
and gave it to the disciples, and said: Take, eat, this is my body. And he
took the cup, and thanked, and gave it the^, and said: Drink ye all thereof,
this is my blood of the new testament, that shall be shed for many for the
remission of sins. I say unto you: I will not drink hence forth of this
fruit of the vine tree, until that day that I shall drink it new with you in
my fathers kingdom.

And when they had said grace, Man. (...) Luc. (...) Ioha^. (...)
they went forth unto mount Oliuete. Then said Jesus unto them. (...) Zach.
(...) Man. (...) Ioha^. (...)
This night shall ye all be offended in me. For it is written: I will smite the
shepherde, and the sheep of the flock shall be scatered abroad. But after that I
rise again, Act. ^^
I will go before you in to Galile. Peter answered and said unto him: Man.
(...) Luc. (...) Ioha^. (...)
Though all men should be offended in ye, yet will I never be offended. Jesus
said unto hi^: Verily I say unto ye: This same night before ye cock crow,
shall thou deny me thryse. Peter said unto him: And though I should dye with
the, yet will I not deny the. Likewise also said all the disciples.

Then came Jesus with them into a field (...). 14. d
Sit ye here, while I go yonder and pray. And he took with him Peter, and the
two sons of Zebede, and began to wexe soroufull and to be in an agonye.
Then said Jesus unto them: My soul is heavy even unto the death. ^^ha^. 1^. c
Tarry ye here, and watch with me. And he went forth a little, Luc. ^2. c
and fell flat upon his face, and prayed saying: O my father, if it be
possible, let this cup pass fro me: nevertheless not as I will but as thou will. And he came to his disciples, and found the^ a sleep, and said unto
Peter: What? could ye not watch with me one hour? Watch and pray, that ye
fall not in to temptacion. (...)
The sprete is wyllinge, but the flesh is weak.

Again, he went forth the second time and prayed, (...) 14. c
saying: O my father, if this cup can not pass away fro me (except I
drink of it) thy will be fulfilled. And he came, and found them a sleep
again, and their eyes were heavy. And he left them, and went forth again, and
prayed the third time, saying the same words. Then came he to his disciples,
and said unto them: Sleep on now, and take your rest. Behold, the hour is
come, yt the son of man shall be delivered in to the hondes of sinners: Arise,
let us be going. Behold, he is at ho^de, that betrayeth me.

While he yet spoke, lo, Judas one of the (...) ^4. b (...) 22. d ^^^a^. ^8. a
sent from the hye prestes and elders of the people. And he that betrayed him,
had given them a toke^, saying: Whom so ever I kiss, that same is he, lay
ho^des upon him. And forth withal he came to Jesus, and said: Hayle master,
and kyssed him. And Jesus said unto him: Friend, wherefore art thou come? Then
came they, and laid hondes upon Jesus, and took him. And behold, one of them
that were with Jesus, stretched out his hand, and drue his sword, and stroke
a servant of the hye prestes, and smote of his ear: Then said Jesus unto
him: Put up ye sword in to his place. (...) 9. a (...) b (...) 1^. b
For all that take the sword, shall perish with the sword. Or think thou
that I can not pray my father now, to send me more then twolue legions of
angels? But how the^ should the scriptures be fulfilled? (...) 14. d
For thus must it be.

(...) 14. f (...) 22. d
Ye are come out as it were to a murthurer with swerdes and staves for to take
me. I sat daily teachinge in the temple among you, and ye took me not. But
all this is done, Esa. 35. d Psalm. 21.6^
that the scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled. Mat. 26. ^
The^ all the disciples left him, and fled. But they that took Jesus, led him
to Caiphas the hye pressed, Marc. 14. Ioha^. 18 ^
where the scrybes and the elders were gathered together. As for Peter, he
followed him a far of unto the hye prestes palace, and went in, and sat with
the servants, that he might se the end.

But the hye prestes and the elders, Marc. 14. ^ Act. 6. b
and the whole council sought false witness against Jesus, that they might
put him to death, and found none. And though many false witnesses stepte
forth, yet found they none. At the last there stepte forth two false
witnesses, and spoke: He said: I can break down the temple of God, and
build it again in three days. Ioha^. 2. c


And the hye pressed stood up, Mar. 14. ^
and said unto him: Answerest thou nothing, unto it, that these testify
against the? Nevertheless Jesus held his tongue. And the hye pressed answered, and
said unto him: Luc. 22. ^
I charge the by ye living God, that thou tell us, if thou be Christ the son
of God. Jesus spoke: Thou have said it. Nevertheless I say unto you: Ioha^.
6. g Act. 1. b
From this time forth it shall come to pass, that ye shall se the son of man
syttinge upon the right hand of the power (of God) and coming in the clouds
of the heaven.

Then the hye pressed rent his clothes, and Mar. 14. g Luc. 22. e
what need we any mo witnesses? Lo, now have ye herd his blasphemy: What
think ye? They answered, and said: He is gyltie of death. Leui. 24. ^
Then Esa. 50. b ^oha^. 18. c
spytted they in his face, and smote him with fistes. Some smote him upon the
face, and said: Prophecy unto us thou Christ, who is it, that smote the?

As for Peter, Mar. 14. g Luc. 22. ^ Ioha^. 18. b
he sat without in the palace. And there came unto him a damsel, and said:
And thou wast with Jesus of Galile also. Nevertheless he denied before the^ all,
and said: I can not tell what thou say. But when he went out at the door,
another damsel saw him. and said unto them that were there: This was also
with Jesus of Nazareth. And he denied again, and swear also: I know not the
man. And after a little while, they that stood there, stepte forth, and said
unto Peter: Of a truth thou art one of them also, for thy speech be wrayeth
the. Then began he to curse and to swear: I know not the man. And
immediately the cock crew. Then thought Peter upon the words of Jesus, which
said unto him: Mat. 26. c
before the cock crow, thou shall deny me thryse. And he went out, and wept
bytterly.

The XXVII. Chapter.
Mal 2. a Marc. 15. a Luc. 23. a ^oha^. 19. d
that they might put him to death, and bound him, and led him forth, and
delivered him unto Pontius Pilate the debyte. ^ct. 3. b


When Judas which betrayed him, saw this that he was condemned unto death, it
repented him, and brought again the thirty silver pens to the hye prestes and
the elders, and said: I have done evil, in that I have betrayed innocent
blood. They said: What have we to do with yt? Se thou thereto. And he cast the
silver pens in the temple, and gat him away, and went and hanged him self. ^.
Re. 17. d Act. 1. c


So the hye prestes took the silver pens, and said: It is not laufull to put
them in to the Gods chest, for it is bloudmoney. Nevertheless they held a
council, and bought with the^ a potters field, for to burye strangers in.
Wherefore the same field is called the bloudfelde unto this day. Then was that
fulfilled, which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet saying: ^ere. 32. b Zach.
11. c
And they took thirty silver pens, the price of him that was sold, whom they
bought of the children of Israel: and these they gave for a potters field, as
the LORD commanded me.

Marc. 15. a Luc. 23. a Ioha^. ^8. d
and said: Art thou the king of the Jews? And Jesus said unto him: Thou
say it. And wha^ he was accused of the hye prestes and elders, he answered
nothing. Then said Pylate unto him: Hear thou not, how sore they accuse
the? And Esa. 53. b
he answered him not one word: in so much that the debyte marueled exceadingly.

At that feast, the debyte was wo^te to deliver a presoner fre unto the people,
Marc. 15. a Luc. 23. b Ioha^. 18. e
whom they would. And at the same time he had a notable presoner called
Barrabas. And when they were gathered together, Pylate said unto them: Whether
will ye, that I give lowse unto you? Barrabas, or Jesus which is called Christ?
For he knew well that they had delivered him of envy. And wha^ he sat upon
the judgment seat, his wife sent unto him, saying: Have thou nothing to do
with that righteous man, for I have suffered many things this day in a dream
because of him.

But the hye prestes and the elders persuaded Mar. (...)
that they should axe Barrabas, and destroy Jesus. Then answered the debyte,
and said unto the^: Luc. (...)
Whether of these two will ye yt I give lowse unto you? They said: Barrabas:
Pylate say^^ unto them: (...)
What shall I do then with Jesus, which is called Christ? They said all: let
him be crucified. The debyte said: What evil has he done the^? Nevertheless
they cried yet more and said, let him be crucified. So when Pilate saw, that
he could not help, but that there was a greater vproure, he took water, and
waszhed his hands before the people, and said: I am unguilty of ye blood of
this righteous man. Se ye thereto. Then answered all the people, and said: His
blood come upon us, and upon our children. (...)
Then gave he Barrabas lowse unto the^, but caused Jesus be scourged, and
delivered him to be crucified*

Then the debites soudyers took Jesus, in (...)
and gathered the whole multitude over him, and stryped him out of his clothes,
and put a purple robe upon him, and plated a crown of thorn, and set it upon
his head, and a read in his hand, and kneled before him, and mocked him, and
said: hayle king of the Jews. And spytted upon him, and took ye read, and
smote him upon the head. And wha^ they had mocked hi^, they took the robe of
him again, and put his own clothes upon him, and led him forth, yt they might
crucify hi^. (...)
And as they were goinge out, they found a man of Cyren called Simon: him they
compelled to bear his cross. And when they came unto the place called
Golgatha (that is to say by interpretacio^ a place of deed men's sculles) they
gave him to drink, veneger myxte with gall. (...)
And when he had tasted thereof, he would not drink.

So when they had crucified him, (...)
they parted his garments, and cast lottes therefore: that the thing might be
fulfilled, which was spoken by the prophet: (...)
They have parted my garments among the^, and cast lottes upon my vesture.
And there they sat, and watched hi^. And above over his head, they put up the
cause of his death in wrytinge: namely: This is the king of the Jews.

Then were there two murthurers crucified Esa. ^. ^
the one of the right hand, and the other on the left. They that went by,
reuyled him, and wagged their heads and said: Thou that breakest down the
temple of God, and buyldest it in three days, help thy self. If thou be the
son of God, come down from the cross. The hye prestes also in like manner
with the scrybes and elders, laughed him to scorn, and said: he has helped
other, and can not help him self: (...)
If he be the king of Israel, let him come down now from the cross, and we
will believe him (...)
He trusted in God, let him deliver him now, if he will have him. For he has
said: I am the son of God. The murderers also that were crucified with him,
cast the same in his tethe.

And from ye sixte hour there was darcknes over the whole earth unto the
nyenth hour. (...)
And about the nyenth hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice, and said: Eli,
Eli, Lamma asabthani? that is, My God, my God, (...)
why have thou forsaken me? But some of the^ that stood there, when they herd
yt said: He calls Elias. And immediately one of them ran, (...) ^5. d (...)
19. c
and took a spo^ge, and filled it with veneger, and put it upon a read, and
gave him to drink. But ye other said: hold, let se whether Elias will come,
and deliver him. Jesus cried again with a loud voice, and gave up the ghost.



(...) 15. d ^uc. 23. c
But the captain and they that were with him, and kept Jesus, when they saw
the earthquake and the things that were done, they were sore afraid, and
said: Verily this was Gods son. And there were many women there lokynge to
afar of, ^arc. 13. ^
which had followed Jesus from Galile, and had mynistred unto him: among whom
was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Ioses, and the mother of
the children of Zebede.

Marc. 15. c Luc. 23. c ^oha^. 19. c
He went unto Pylate, and axed the body of Jesus. Then commanded Pylate that
the body should be given him. And Joseph took the body, and wrapped it in a
clean lynnen cloth, and laid it in his own new sepulcre, which he had hewn
out in a rock, and rolled a great stone to the door of the sepulcre, and
went his way. And there was Mary Magdalene and ye other Mary, syttinge over
against the sepulcre. Marc. 15. ^


The next day that follows the day of preparynge, the hye prestes and
Pharisees came together unto Pylate, and said: Sir, we have called to
remembrance, that this disceauer said while he was yet alive: Mat. 16.17. c.
d Marc. 9. Luc. 18. d
After three days I will rise again. Command therefore that the sepulcre be
kept unto the third day, lest peradventure his disciples come, and steal
him away, and say unto the people: He is risen from the deed, and so shall the
last error be worse the^ the first. Pylate said unto them: There have ye
watchme^, go your way, and keep it as ye can. They went and kept the
sepulcre with watchmen, and sealed the stone.

The XXVIII. Chapter.
Upon the evening of the Sabbath Marc. 16 Luc. 24. Ioha^. 20
which dawneth ye morrow of the first day of ye Sabbathes, came Mary Magdalene
and ye other Mary, to se ye sepulcre. And behold, there was made a great
earthquake: for the angel of the LORD descended from heaven, and came and
rolled back ye stone from the door, and sat upon it. And his countenance was
as ye lightenynge, and his clothinge white as snow. But ye watch me^ were
troubled for fear of him, and became as though they were deed.

The angel answered, Marc. 1^ Luc. 24
and said unto ye women: Be not ye afraid. I know that ye seek Jesus that
was crucified. He is not here. He is risen, as he said. Come, and se ye place,
where the LORD was laid, and go your way soon, and tell his disciples,
that he is risen from the deed. And behold, he will go before you in to Galile,
there shall ye se him. Lo, I have told you.

And they departed from the grave in all Mar. 16* Luc. 24* 1. Cor. 1^
and ran to bri^ge his disciples word. And as they were goinge to tell his
disciples, behold, Jesus met them, and said: God speed you. And they went
unto him, and held his fete, and fell down before him. The^ said Jesus unto
them: Be not afraid: go your way and tell my brethren, that they go in to
Galile, there shall they se me. Act. 1. b


And when they were gone, behold, certain of the watchmen came in to the
cite, and told the hye prestes every thing that had happened. And they came
together with the elders, and held a council, and gave ye sonders money
enough, and said: Say ye: his disciples came by night, and stole him away,
while we were a sleep. And if this

The eleven disciples went unto Galile in to a mountain, where Jesus had
appointed them. And when they saw him, they fell down before him: but some of
them douted. And Jesus came unto them, talked with them, Mat. 11. e ^oha^. 17.
a ^hil. 2. a Mar. 16. b
and said: Unto me is given all power in heaven and in earth. Go ye your way
therefore, and teach all nations, and baptyse them in the name of the father,
and of the son, and of the holy ghost: and teach them to keep all things,
what soever I have commanded you. ^oha^. 14. b
And lo, I am with you every day unto the end of the world.

The end of the gospel of S. Matthew.
The gospel of S. Mark.
What S. Mark conteyneth.
Chap. I. The office of Ihon the baptist, The baptyme of Christ, his fasting,
his preachinge, and the calling of Peter, Andrew, James and Ihon. Christ
heals the man with the unclean sprete, helps Peter's mother in law, and
cleanses the leper. Chap. II. He heals the man of the palsye, calls Leui
the customer, eats with open sinners, and excuses his disciples. Chap. III.
He helps the man with the dried hand, choseth his apostles, and casts out
the unclean sprete, which the Pharisees ascrybe unto the deuell. The brother,
sister and mother of Christ. Chap. IIII. The parable of the sower. Christ
stilleth the tempest of the sea, which obeys him. Chap. V. He delyuereth the
possessed from the unclean sprete, the woman from the bloudye issue, and
rayseth the captains daughter. Chap. VI. Christ preaches at home, and is not
regarded. He sends out his disciples. Ihon baptist is taken and headed.
Christ fedeth five thousand men with five loaves and two fiszhes. He walks
upon the sea. Chap. VII. The Pharisees are not content, that the disciples eat
with vnwaszhen hands: but Christ rebukes the^ selves for breakinge the
commandments of God, heals the woman of Canaans daughter, and makes the
domme to speak. Chap. VIII. He fedeth four thousand me^ with vij loaves,
reproves the Pharisees that are so desirous of tokens, warns his disciples to
bewarre of their leven, makes a blind man to see, axeth his disciples what
men hold of him, reproves Peter, tells his disciples of his passion, and
exorteth them to follow him* Chap. IX. The transfiguracion of Christ, which
heals the child that was possessed of a domme sprete, teaches his disciples
to be lowly, and to avoid occasions of evil. Chap. X. Christ gives his
answer concerning marriage, and that it is hard for the rich to come in to
heaven: reproves the disdain of his disciples, lerneth the^ to be meke, and
restores blind Barthimeus to his sight. Chap. XI. Christ rydeth in to
Jerusalem, dryueth the merchants out of the temple, curses the fyge tree, and
confounds the Pharisees. Chap. XII. He rebukes the sin and unthankfulness
of the Jews with a goodly symilitude, takes the^ in their own disceatfull
questions, exorteth to bewarre of their doctrine and living, and commends
the good will of the poor wyddowe. Chap. XIII. He warns his disciples to
bewarre of false teachers and disceauers, comforteh them against the trouble
for to come, tellinge them of the horrible destruction of Jerusalem, of his
coming, and end of the world. Chap. XIIII. The Magdalene anoynteth Christ.
They eat the easter lamb, and the supper of the LORD. Christ is taken, and
brought in to Caiphas house. Peter denies him. Chap. XV. The crucifienge of
Christ, and how he was buried. Chap. XVI. The resurreccion of Christ, which
appears unto Mary Magdalene and to his disciples, whom he sends forth in to
the world to preach the gospel, and asce^deth up in to heaven himself.
The gospel of S. Mark.


The first Chapter.
(...) a (...) b (...) 7. c
Behold, I send my messau^ger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way
before the. The voice of a crier is in the wyldernes: (...)
Prepare the way of the LORD, make his paths straight.

Ihon was in the wyldernes, and baptized, (...) 3. d
and preached the baptyme of amendment, for the remyssion of sins. And there
went out unto him the whole land of Iewry, and they of Jerusalem, and were
all baptized of him in Jordan, and knowleged their sins.

Ihon was clothed with Camels here, and with a lethron gerdell about his
loins, (...). 3. a
and ate locustes and wild honey, and preached, and said: There comes one
after me, (...) 3. b (...) 3. c (...). c
which is stronger then I: before whom I am not worthy to stoop down, and to
lowse up ye lachet of his shue. I baptyse you with water, but he shall baptyse
you with the holy ghost.

(...) 3. b (...) 3. c ^^^a^ 1. d
And it happened at the same time, that Jesus came out of Galile from Nazareth,
and was baptized of Ihon in Jordan. And as soon as he was come out of the
water, he saw that the heavens opened, and the ghost as a dove coming down
upon him. And there came a voice from heaven: Thou art my dear son, (...)
in whom I delight.

(...) 4. a (...) 4. a
and was tempted of Satan, and was with the wild beestes. And the angels
mynistred unto him.

But after that Ihon was taken, Jesus came in to Galile, Mat. 4. b Luc. 4. b
and preached the gospel of the kingdom of God, and said: the time is
fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand: Amend your selves, and believe
the gospel.

So as he walked by the sea of Galile, Mat. 4. c Luc. 5. a
he saw Simon and Andrew his brother, castinge their nets in the sea, for
they were fyszhers. And Jesus said unto the^: Follow me, and I will make you
fyszhers of me^. Iere. 16. c Eze. 47. b
And immediately they left their nets, and followed him.

And when he was gone a little further from thence, he saw James the son of
Zebede, and Ihon his brother, as they were in the ship mendynge their nets.
And anon he called them. And they left their father Zebede in the ship with
the hired servants, and followed him.

And they went in to Capernaum, Luc. 4. d Ioha^ 2 b
and immediately upon the Sabbathes, he entered in to the synagoge, and taught.
And they were astonnyed at his doctrine: Mat. 7. c
for he taught them as one having power, and not as the Scrybes.

And in their synagoge there was a man Luc. 4. d
which cried and said: Oh what have we to do with the, thou Jesus of Nazareth.
Art thou come to destroy us? I know that thou art even yt holy one of God.
And Jesus reproved him, and said: hold thy tongue, and depart out of him. And
the foul sprete tare him, and cried with a loud voice, and departed out of
him. And they were all astonnyed, in so much that they axed one another among
the^ selves, and said: What is this? What new learning is this? For he
commands the foul spretes with power, and they are obedient unto him. And
immediately the fame of him was noysed round about in the coasts and borders
of Galile.

And forth with they went out of the synagoge, Mat. 8. b Luc. 4. d
and came in to the house of Symo^ and Andrew, with James and Ihon. And Symons
mother in law lay, and had the fevers, and anon they told him of her. And
he came to her, and set her up, and took her by ye hand, and the fever left
her immediately. And she mynistred unto them.

At even when the Son was gone down, Mat. 8. b Luc. 4. e
they brought unto him all that were sick and possessed, and the whole cite was
gathered together at the door, and he healed many that were diseased with
diverse sicknesses, and cast out many deuels, and suffered not the deuels to
speak, because they knew him.



Mat. 8. a Luc. 5. b
And there came unto him a leper, which besought him, and kneled before him, and
said unto him: If thou will, thou can make me clean. And it pitied Jesus,
and he stretched forth his hand, and touched him, and said: I will, be thou
clean. And wha^ he had so spoken, immediately the leprosy departed from him,
Marc. 7. d and 9. a
and he was cleansed. And Jesus forbad him strately, and forth with sent him
away, and said unto him: Take heed, that thou say nothing to any man, but
go thy way, and show thy self unto the pressed, and offer for thy clensynge what
Moses commanded, Leui. 14. a
for a witness unto them. But he when he was departed, began to speak much
of it, and made the deed known: in so much that Jesus could no more go into
the cite openly, but was without in deserte places, and they came unto him from
all quarters.

The II. Chapter.
Mat. 9. a Luc. 5. c Ioha^. 5 a
and it was noysed that he was in ye house. And immediately there was gathered a
great multitude, in so much that they had no rowme, no not without before the
door. And he spoke the word unto the^. And there came unto him certain, which
brought one sick of the palsye borne of four. And when they could not come
nigh him for ye people, they uncovered ye rofe of ye house where he was. And
when they had made a hole, they let down the bed (by coardes) wherein the sick
of ye palsy lay. But when Jesus saw their faith, he said unto the sick of
the palsye: My son, thy sins are forgeuen the.

Nevertheless there were certain scrybes which sat there, and thought in their
hertes: How speaks this man soch blasphemy? Who can forgive sins, Esa. 43. d
but only God? And immediately Jesus knew in his sprete, that they thought so
in the^ selves, and said unto them: Why think ye soch things in your
hertes? Whether is easier to say to the sick of the palsye: Thy sins are
forgiven the, or to say: arise, take up thy bed and walk. But that ye may
know, that ye son of man has power to forgive sins upon earth, he said
unto the sick of ye palsye: I say unto the, arise, take up thy bed, and go
home. And immediately he arose, took his bed, and went forth before them all:
Act. ^
in so much that they were all astonnied, and praised God, and said: We never
saw soch.

And he went forth again unto the sea, (...)
and he taught them. And as Jesus passed by, he saw Leui the son of Alpheus
syttinge at the receate of custom, and said unto him: Follow me. And he
arose, and followed him. And it came to pass as he sat at the table in his
house, there sat many publicans and sinners at the table with Jesus and his
disciples: For there were many yt followed him. And when the scrybes and
Pharisees saw that he ate with publicans and sinners, they said unto his
disciples: Why does he eat and drink with ye publicans and sinners? When
Jesus herd that, he said unto the^: The whole need not ye Phisician, but they
that are sick. I am not come to call the righteous, but the sinners to
repentance. (...)


And the disciples of Ihon and of ye Pharisees faste^. And there came certain,
(...)
which said unto him: Why fast the disciples of Ihon, and of ye Pharisees, and
thy disciples fast not? And Jesus said unto them: How can the weddinge
children fast, while the brydegrome is with them? So long as ye brydegrome is
with them, they cannot fast. But the time will come, that the brydegrome shall be
taken from them, and then shall they fast.

No man sows a piece of new cloth unto

And it chaunsed that upon ye Sabbath he went through the corn feldes, (...)
and his disciples began to make a way through, and to pluck the ears of ye
corn. And the Pharisees said unto him: Behold, what thy disciples do, which
is not laufull upon the Sabbath. And he said unto the^: Have ye never red what
David did, wha^ he had need, and was anhongred, both he and they that were with
him: how he went in to the house of God in the time of Abiathar the hye pressed,
and ate the shewbreds (which was laufull for no man to eat, (...). 21. b
but for the prestes) and he gave them unto him, and to them that were with
him? And he said unto them: The Sabbath was made for man's sake, and not man
for the Sabbathes sake. Therefore is the son of man LORD even over the
Sabbath.

The III. Chapter.
HE went again also in to the synagoge, (...)
And they marked him, whether he would heal him on the Sabbath, that they
might accuse him. And he said unto ye man with the wythred hand: Step forth
here. And he said unto the^: Is it laufull to do good on the Sabbath? Or is it
laufull to do evil? to save life, or to kill? But they held their tongue. And
he looked round about upon them with wrath, and was sorry for the hard hertes
of the^, and said unto the man: Stretch out thine hand. And he stretched it
out. And his hand was made whole like as ye other. (...) 15. b


And the Pharisees went out, and straight way they held a council with
Herodes officers against him, (...) 12. b (...) 10. d
how they might destroy him. But Jesus departed away with his disciples unto
the sea. And there followed him much people out of Galile, (...)
and from Iewry, and from Jerusalem, and out of Idumea, and from beyond
Jordan, and they that dwelt about Tire and Sydon, a great multitude which had
herd of his noble acts, and came unto him.

(...). 4. c
they fell down before him, and cried, and said: Thou art the son of God.
And he charged them strately, that they should not make him known.

(...) 10. a (...) 6. b (...) ^. a (...) b
And he went up in to a mountain, and called unto him whom he would, and they
came unto him. And he ordained ye twolue, that they should be with him, and
that he might send them out to preach, and that they might have power to heal
sicknesses, and to cast out deuyls. And unto Simon he gave the name Peter, and
James the son of Zebede, and Ihon the brother of James, and gave the^ the
name Bonarges, that is to say, the children of thonder: and Andrew, and
Philippe, and Bartylmew, and Matthew, and Thomas, and James ye son of Alpheus,
and Taddeus, and Simon of Cana, and Judas Iscarioth which betrayed him.

And they came to house. Then assembled the people together again, in so much
that they had no leisure to eat. And when they that were about him herd of
it, they went out to hold him. For they said: Some read: *He will go out of
his wit.
he takes to much upon him. But the scrybes that were come down from
Jerusalem, said: He has Beelzebub, and through the chief deuell casts he out
deuyls. And he called them together, Mat. 9. d and 12. c Luc. 11. b
and spoke unto them in symilitudes:

How can one Satan drive out another?

Verily I say unto you: Mat. 12. c Luc. 12. a 1. Ioh. 5. c
All sins shall be forgeuen the children of men, and the blasphemy also
wherewith they blaspheme. But who so blasphemeth the holy ghost, has never
forgeuenes, but is guilty of the everlasting judgment. For they said: he has
an unclean sprete.

And there came his mother and his brethren, and stood without, and sent unto
him, Mat. 12. c Luc. 8. c
and called him. And the people sat about him, and said unto him: Behold,
thy mother and thy brethren axe after the without. And he answered, and said:
Who is my mother and my brethren? And he looked round about him upon his
disciples, which sat round in compass about him, and said: Behold, my
mother and my brethren. For who so ever does the will of God the same is my
brother, and my sister and my mother.

The IIII. Chapter.
ANd he began again to teach by ye Mat. 1^. a Luc. 8. b
And there gathered much people unto him, so that he went in to a ship, and
sat upon the water. And all the people stood upon the land by the sea side.
And he preached long unto the^ by parables, and said unto the^ in his
doctrine: Harken to, behold, there went out a sower to sow: and it happened
while he was sowinge, that some fell by the way side. Then came the fowls
under the heaven, and ate it up. Some fell upon stonye ground, where it had
not much earth: and anon it came up, because it had not deep earth. Now wha^
the Son arose, it caught heat: and in so much as it had no rote, it wythred
away. And some fell among the thorns, and the thorns grew up, and choked it,
and it gave no fruit. And some fell upon a good ground, which gave fruit, that
came up and grew. And some bare thirty fold, and some sixty fold, and some
an hundredth fold, And he said unto them: Who so has ears to hear, let him
hear.

And when he was alone, they that were about him with the twolue, Mat. 1^. b
Luc. 8. b
axed him concerning this parable. And he said unto the^: Unto you it is
given, to know the mystery of the kingdom of God: but unto them that are
without, all things happen by parables, Esa. 6. b Ioha^. 12. c Act. 28. d Romans
11. b
that with seeing eyes they may se, and not discern: and that with hearing
ears they may hear, and not understood, lest at any time they turn, and
their sins be forgeuen them. And he said unto them: Understand ye not this
parable? How will ye then understand all other parables?

Mat. 13 c
and as soon as they have herd it, immediately comes Satan, and takes
away the word that was sown in their hertes. And likewise are they that are
sown on the stonye ground: which when they have herd the word, receive it
with joy, and have no rote in them: but endure for a time. When trouble and
persecucion aryseth for ye words sake, immediately they are offended. And these
are they that are sown among the thorns: which hear the word, and ye
carefulnes of this world, and the disceatfulnes of riches, and many other
lusts enter in, and choke the word, and so is it made unfruitful. And these
are they yt are sown upon a good ground: Which hear ye word, and receive
it, and bring forth fruit: some thirty fold, and some sixty fold, and some
an hundredth fold.

Mat. 5. b Luc. 8. b and 11. c
And he said unto the^: Is a candle lighted to be put under a buszhell, or
under a table? Is it not lighted, to be set upon a candelsticke? For there is
nothing hyd, that shall not be openly showed: and there is nothing secret, yt
shall not be known. Mat. 10. ^ Luc. ^ and 12. ^
Who so has ears to hear, let him hear. And he said unto them: Take heed
what ye hear. With what measure ye mete, with the same Mat. 7 ^ Luc. ^. ^
shall more be given. For who so has, unto him shall be given: and who so has
not, Man. ^ and ^ Luc. ^ and ^
from him shall be taken away, even that he has.

And he said: The kingdom of God is after this manner, as when a man casts
sede upon the land, and slepeth, and stondeth up night and day, Mat. ^
and the sede spryngeth up, and grows, he not knowinge of it. (For the earth
brings forth fruit of her self: first the grass, afterward the ear, then
the full wheat in the ear) But when she has brought forth the fruit, he
puts to the syckell, because the harvest is come.

And he said: Where unto will welicken the kingdom of God? Or by what
symilitude will we compare it? Mat* ^ Luc* ^
It is like a grain of mustarde sede, which wha^ it is sowe^ upon the land,
is the leest among all seeds of the earth. And wha^ it is sown, it grows
up, and is greater then all herbs, and gets great branches, so yt the
fowls under the heaven may dwell under ye shadow thereof.

And by many soch parables he spoke the word unto the^, there after as they
might (...)
and without parables spoke he nothing unto them: but unto his disciples he
expounded all things pryuately. And the same day at even he said unto them:
Mat. ^ Luc* ^
let us pass over. And they let the people go, and took him as he was in the
ship, and there were mo ships with him. And there arose a great storm of
wind, and daszhed the wawes in to the ship, so that the ship was full. And
he was behind in the ship and slepte upon a pelowe. And they awoke him and
said unto him: Master, Carest thou not, that we perish? And he arose, and
rebuked ye wind, and said unto the sea: Peace, and be still, And the wind
was laid, and there followed a great calm. And he said unto them: Why are ye
so fearful? How is it, that ye have no faith? And they feared exceadingly, and
said one to another: What is he this? For wind and see are obedient unto him.

The V. Chapter.
ANd they came over unto the other side of the sea in to the country of the
(...)
And when he went out of the ship, there met him a man possessed of an
unclean sprete, which had his dwellinge in the graves. And no man could bind
him, no not with cheynes: for he was often bound with fetters and cheynes, and
pluckte the cheynes in sunder, and brake the fetters in pieces, and no man could
tame him. And he was allwaye both day and night upon the mountains and in the
graves crienge, and beatinge him self with stones. But when he saw Jesus
afar of, he ran, and fell down before him, and cried loud, and said:
(...)
What have I to do with the O Jesus thou son of ye Highest God? I charge the by
God, that thou torment me not. Nevertheless he said unto him: Go out of the man
thou foul sprete. And he axed him: What is thy name? And he answered and
said: My name is Legion, for there be many of us. And he prayed him instantly,
that he would not send them away out of that country.

(...)
and all the deuyls prayed him, and said: Let us depart in to the swyne. And
anon Jesus gave them leave. Then the foul spretes went out, and intred in to
the swyne. And the heerd of swyne, ran heedlinges in to ye see with a storm.
They were about a two thousand swyne, and were drowned in the sea.

And the swyne herdes fled, and told it in the cite, and in the country. And
they went out for to se what had happened, and came to Jesus, and saw him
which was possessed and had had ye legion, that he sat, and was clothed, and in
his right mind, and they were afraid. And they that had seen it, told them
what had happened to the possessed, and of the swyne.

And they began to pray him, that he would depart out of their coasts. And
when he came in to the ship, the possessed prayed him, that he might be with
him.

Nevertheless Jesus would not suffer hi^, but said unto hi^: Go i^ to ye house
and to thine own, and tell the^ how great benefits the LORD has done for
ye, and how he has had mercy upon the. And he went his way, and began to
publish in the ten cities how great benefits Jesus had done for him. And
every man marueyled.

And when Jesus passed over again (...)
and was by the sea side. And behold, there came one of the rulers of the
synagoge, whose name was Iairus. And when he saw him, he fell down at his
fete, and besought him greatly, and said: My daughter is at the point (of
death) let it be thy pleasure to come and lay thine hand upon her, that she
may be whole and live. And he went with him, and much people followed him, and
thronged him.

And there was a woman, which had had the blood issue twolue years, Mat. 9. c
Luc. 8. c
and had suffered much of many phisicians, and spent all that she had, and was
not helped, but rather in worse case. When she herd of Jesus, she came behind
among the people, and touched his garment. For she said: If I may but touch
his clothes, I shall be whole.

And immediately ye fountain of her blood was dried up, and she felt in her
body, yt she was healed of the plage.

And forth with Jesus felt in himself the

As for the woman, she feared and trembled (for she knew, what was done in her)
and came and fell down before him, and told him the whole truth. And he
said unto her: Daughter, Luc. 7. c
thy faith has made the whole: go thy way in peace, and be whole of thy plage.

While he yet spoke, Mat. 9. c Luc. 8. f
there came certain from the ruler of the synagoges house, and said: Thy
daughter is deed, why troublest thou the master any more? But Jesus herd right
soon the word that was spoken, and said unto the ruler of the synagoge: Be
not thou afraid, believe only.

And he suffered no man to follow him, but Peter and James and Ihon his brother.
And he came in to the ruler of the synagoges house, and saw the busynes, and
them that wept and wayled greatly: and he went in, and said unto them: Why
make ye this a do, and weep? The maid is not deed, but slepeth. Ioha^. 11. b


And they laughed him to scorn 4. Re. 4. d
And he drove them all out, and took the father and mother of the maid, and
them that were with him, and went in where the maiden lay. And he took the
mayde^ by the hand, and said unto her: Thabith a Cumi (which is by
interpretaeion) Mayde^, I say unto the: Arise. Ioha^. 5. c Act. 9. f
And immediately the maiden arose, and walked. She was twolue year old, and
they were astonnyed out of measure. And he charged them strately, that no man
should know of it, and said unto them, that they should give her to eat.

The VI. Chapter.
Mat. 13. a Luc. 4. b
and his disciples followed him. And wha^ ye Sabbath came, he began to teach
in their synagoge. And many that herd it, marueled at his learning, and said:
From whence has he these things? And what wyszdome is this, yt is given him:
and soch acts as are done by his hands? Is not this the Carpenter the son
of Mary, and the brother of James and Ioses, and of Jude and Simon? Are not his
sisters here with us also? And they were offended at him. But Jesus said unto
the^: A prophet is nowhere less set by, Mat. 13. g Luc. 4. c Ioha^. 4. c
the^ in his own country, and at home among his own. And he could not show
one miracle there, but laid his hands upon a few sick, and healed them. And
he marueyled at their unbelieve.

And he went about in the towns on every side, and taught them. And called
the twolue, and began to send them two and two, and gave them power over the
unclean spretes. And commanded the^, that they should take nothing with them
toward their journey, save only a rod: no scrippe, no bred, no money in the
gerdell, but should be shod with sandales, and that they should not put on two
cotes. And he said unto them: Where so ever ye shall enter in to an house,
there abide, till ye go thence. And Mat. 10. b Luc. 9. a
depart out from thence, and shake of the dust from your fete, for a witness
unto them. I say unto you verily: It shall be easyer for Sodom and Gomorra in
the day of judgment, Mat. 11. d Luc. 10. a
then for that cite.

Mat. 10. a
And they went forth, and preached, that men should amend them selves, and
they cast out many deuyls: and many that were sick anointed they with oil,
and healed the^.

And it came to king Herod's ears (for his name was now known) and he said:
Mat. 14. a Luc. 9. a
Ihon the baptist is risen again from the deed, and therefore are his deeds so
mighty. But some said: It is Elias. Some said: It is a prophet, or one of ye
prophets. But when Herod herd it, he said: It is Ihon whom I beheeded, he
is risen again from the deed. This Herod had sent forth, and taken Ihon, and
put him in preson, because of Herodias his brother Philippes wife, for he had
married her. Nevertheless Ihon said unto Herod (...)
It is not laufull for the to have ye brothers wife. But Herodias laid wait
for him, and would have slain him, and could not. Notwithsto^dinge Herod
feared Iho^, for he knew that he was a just and holy man: and he kept him, and
herkened unto him in many things, and herd him gladly.

And there came a convenient day, that (...)
captains and chief estates of Galile. Then the daughter of Herodias came in,
and daunsed, and pleased Herod, and them that sat at the table. Then said the
king unto ye damsel: Axe of me what thou will, I will give it the. And he swear
unto her: What soever thou shall axe of me, I will give it the, even unto ye one
half of my kingdom. She went forth, and said unto her mother: what shall I
axe? She said: Ihon baptistes head. And immediately she went in to the king
with haist, and said: I will that thou give me straight way in a platter the
heed of Ihon the baptist. Then the king was sorry: Yet for the oothes sake and
the^ that sat at the table, he would not say her nay.

And immediately he sent the hangman,

And the Apostles came together unto Jesus, and told hi^ all, (...)
and what they had done and taught. And he said unto them: Let us go out of
the way in to the wyldernes, and rest a little. For there were many co^mers and
goers, and they had not time enough to eat. And there he passed by ship out
of ye way in to a deserte place. And the people saw the^ departing away,
and many knew of it, and ran thither together of foot out of all cities, and
came before the^, and came unto him. And Jesus went out, (...)
and saw much people, and had compassion upon them: for they were (...)
as the sheep, that have no shepherde, and he began a long sermon.

Now when the day was far past, his disciples came unto him, and said: This
is a deserte place, (...) 14. b
let them depart, that they may go in to the vyllagies and towns round
about, and bye themselves bred, for they have nothing to eat. But Jesus
answered and said unto them: give ye them to eat.

(...). 8. a
How many loaves have ye? Go and se. And when they had searched, they said:
Five, and two fiszhes. And he commanded them all to sit down by table fulles
upon the grene grass. And they sat down here arowe and there arowe by
hundreds and by fifties. And he took the five loaves and two fiszhes, and looked
up unto heaven, and gave thanks, and brake the loaves, and gave to the
disciples, to set before them. And the two fiszhes parted he among them all.
And they all ate, and were satisfied. And they took up twolue baskettes full of
ye broken pieces and of the fiszhes. And they that ate, were about five
thousand men. And anon he caused his disciples to go in to the ship, (...)
^4. c (...). 6. b
and to pass over before him unto Bethsaida, while he sent away the people.
And at even was the ship in the myddest of the sea, and he alone upon the
land. And he saw that they were in parell with rowing, for the wind was
against them.

(...). 14. d
be not afraid. And he went unto them in to the ship, and the wind
ceased. And they were astonnyed, and marueled exceadingly: for they had
forgotten the (...). 6. e
loaves, and their heart was blinded.

And when they were passed over, they came in to land of Genezareth, and drue
up in to the haven. And when thy were come out of the ship, immediately they
knew him, and ran through out all the region about, and began on every
side to bring unto him in beds soch as were sick, where they herd that he
was. And whither so ever he entered in to towns, cities or vyllagies, there
laid they the sick in the market place, and prayed him, that they might but
touch the hemme of his garment. And as many as touched him, were made whole.

The VII. Chapter.
ANd there came unto him the Pharisees, Mat 15. a
that were come from Jerusalem. And wha^ they saw certain of his disciples
eat bred with common (that is, with unwashed) hands, they complained. For the
Pharisees and all the Jews eat not, except they wash their hands often times:
observing so the tradicions of the elders. And when they come from the market,
they eat not, except they waszhe. And many other things there be, which they
have taken upon them to observe, as the washinge of cups and cruses, and
brazen vessels and tables.

Then the Pharisees and scrybes axed him: Why walk not thy disciples after the
tradicions of the elders, but eat bred with vnwaszhen hands? But he answered
and said unto them: Full well has Esaias prophesied of you Ypocrytes, as it is
written: Esa. 29. c
This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far fro me. But
in vain do they serve me, while they teach soch doctrynes as are nothing but
the commandments of me^. Ye leave the commandment of God and keep the
tradicions of men, as the washing of cruses and cups, and many soch things
do ye.

And he said unto the^: How goodly have Exo. 20. b Deuteronomy. 5. a
For Moses said: Honor father and mother. Exo. 21. b
Who so curses father and mother, shall dye the death. But ye say: A man shall
say to father or mother: Corban, that is, The thing yt I should help the
withal, is given unto God. And thus ye suffer him no more to do ought for his
father or his mother, and make Gods word of none effect, through your own
tradicions that ye have set up. And many soch things do ye.

And he called unto him all the people, Mat. 15. b
and said unto them: Harken unto me ye all, and understand me. There is
nothing without a man, that can defyle him, when it enters in to him. But
that goes out of him, that is it that makes the man unclean. If any man have
ears to hear, let him hear. And when he came from the people in to ye house,
his disciples axed him of this symilitude. And he said unto them: Are ye so
then without understanding? Perceive ye not yet, yt every thing which is
without, and goes into the man, can not defyle him? For it enters not in to
his heart, but in to ye belly, and goes out in to the draught, that purges all
meats.



Mat. 15. c
And he arose, and went from thence in to the borders of Tire and Sydon, and
entered into an house, and would let no man know of it, and yet could he not be
hyd: For a certain woman (whose daughter had a foul sprete) herd of him, and
came and fell down at his fete (and it was in Heithe^ woman of Syrophenices)
and she besought him, that he would drive out the deuell from her daughter. But
Jesus said unto her: Let the children be fed first: It is not mete to take the
childre^s bred, and to cast it unto dogs. She answered and said unto him:
Ye LORD, nevertheless the whelps also eat under ye table, of ye childre^s
cro^mes. And he

Mat. 9. d Luc. 11. b
And when he went out again from the coasts of Tire and Sydon, he came unto
the sea of Galile, thorw the mids of ye coasts of the te^ cities. And they
brought unto him one that was deaf, and had impediment in his speech. And they
prayed him, that he would lay his hand upon him.

And he took him a side from the people, and put his fyngers in his ears, and
did spyt, and touched his tongue, and looked up unto heaven, sighed, and said
unto him: Ephatha, that is, be opened. And immediately his ears were opened,
and the bond of his tongue was lowsed, and he spoke right. And he charged them,
Marc. 1. d and 9. a
that they should tell noman.

But the more he forbad them, the more they published it, and marueyled out of
measure, and said: Genesis 1. d Eccli. 39. c
He has done all things well. The deaf has he made to hear, and the domme
to speak.

The VIII. Chapter.
AT the same time when there was Tob. (...) Esa. (...)
For some of them were come from far. And his disciples answered him: Where
should we get bred here in the wyldernes, to satisfy them? And he axed the^:
Marc. ^
How many loaves have ye? They said: Seven. And he commanded the people to
sit down upon the ground. And he took the seven loaves, and gave thanks, and
brake them, and gave the^ unto his disciples to set them before the people. And
they set the^ before the people. And they had a few small fyshes, and when he
had given thanks, he bad set the same before the people. They ate, and were
satisfied, and took up seven baszkettes full of ye broken meat that was left.
And they yt ate, were upon a four thousand. And he sent the^ away.

And forth with he went in to a ship (...)
and came in to the coasts of Dalmanutha. And the Pharisees went out, and
began to dispute with him, and tempted him, and desired a token of him from
heaven. And he sighed in his sprete, and said: (...)
Why does this generation seek a token? Verily I say unto you: There shall no
toke^ be given unto this generation. And he left them, and went again into
the ship, and passed over.

And they forgot to take bred with them, (...)
and had no more with them in the ship but one loaf. And he commanded them,
and said: Take heed, and bewarre of the leven of the Pharisees, and of the
leven of Herod. And their minds wauered here and there, and said among them
selves: This is it, that we have no bred. And Jesus understood that, and said
unto them: Why trouble ye your selves, that ye have no bred? Are ye yet
without understanding? Have ye yet a blinded heart in you? Have ye eyes, and se
not? and have ye ears, and hear not? and remember (...)
that I brake five loaves among five thousand, how many baszkettes full of
broken meat took ye then up? They said: twolue. And ^
when I brake the seven among the four thousand, how many baskettes full of
broken meat took ye then up? They said: Seven. And he said unto the^: Why
are ye then without understanding?

And he came to Bethsaida, and they brought one blind unto him, and prayed him
to touch him. And he took the blind by the hand, and led him out of the
town, and spat in his eyes, and laid his hands upon him, and axed him
whether he saw ought. And he looked up, and said: I se men going as if I saw
trees. After this he laid his hands upon his eyes again, and made him to se.
And he was brought to right again, and saw all clearly. And he sent him home,
and said: Go not in to ye town, and tell it also unto noman therein.

(...). 16. b (...) 9. c
And in ye way he axed his disciples and said unto them: What do men say,
that I am? They answered: They say, thou art Ihon the baptist: Some say thou
art Elias, some that thou art one of the prophets. And he said unto them: But
whom say ye that I am? Then answered Peter and said unto him: (...) 26. g
Thou art very Christ. And he charged them strately, that they should tell no
man of him. And he began to teach them: (...) 16. c (...). 20. b
The son of man must suffer many things, and be cast out of the elders and
hye prestes and scrybes, and be put to death, and after three days rise again.
And that word spoke he fre openly. And Peter took him unto him, and began to
rebuke him. But he turned him about, and looked upon his disciples, and
reproved Peter, and said: Go after me thou Satan, for thou sauourest not the
things that be of God, but of men.

(...). 16. d (...). 9. c
and said unto them: Who so ever will follow me, let him deny himself, and
take up his cross, and follow me. For who so ever will save his life, (...).
17. d (...). 12. c
shall lose it: and who so ever loses his life for my sake and ye gospels, ye
same shall save it. What helps it a man though he wa^ne the whole world, and
yet took harm in his soul? Or, what can a man give, to redeem his soul
withal? Who so ever is ashamed of me and of my words among this aduouterous
and sinful generation, (...) 10. d (...) 9. c (...) ^4. b
of him shall the son of man also be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of
his father with the holy angels. (...). 16. d (...) 9. c
And he said unto them: Verily I say unto you: There sto^de here some, which
shall not taist of death, till they se the kingdom of God come with power.

The IX. Chapter.
ANd after six days Jesus took unto Mat. 17. a Luc. 9. d
and brought them up in to an hye mountain out of the way alone, and was
tta^sfigured before them, and his clothes were bright and very white as ye
snow, so white as no fuller can make upon earth. And there appeared unto the^
Elias with Moses, and they talked with Jesus. And Peter answered, and said
unto Jesus: Rabbi, here is good being for us. Let us make three tabernacles:
one for the, one for Moses, and one for Elias. For he knew not what he said,
and they were very fearful. And there was a cloud, which ouershadowed the^.
And out of the cloud there came a voice, Mat. 3. b Marc. 1. a Luc. 3. c
and said: This is my dear son, Deu 18
hear him. And immediately they looked about them, and saw noman more then
Jesus only with them.

But when they went down from the mountain, Jesus charged them, Mat. 17. ^
that they should tell no man what they had seen, till the son of man were
risen again from the deed.

And they kept that saying by them, Mala. 3. ^
Elias must first come? He answered and said unto them: Elias shall come first
in deed, and bring all things to right again. The son of man also shall
suffer many things, and be despised, Esa. 53. Psalm. 21. a
as it is written. But I say unto you: Elias is come, and they have done unto
him what they would, acordinge as it is written of him?

And he came to his disciples, and saw much people about them, Mat. 17. ^
Luc. 9. d
and the scrybes disputynge with them. And as soon as the people saw, they
were astonnyed, and ran unto him, and saluted him. And he axed the scrybes:
What dispute ye with them? And one of the people answered, and said: Master, I
have brought unto the my son, which has a domme sprete: and when so ever he
takes him, he teareth him, and he fometh, and gnaszheth with the teth, and
pyneth away, and I have spoken to thy disciples that they should cast him out,
and they could not.

He answered him, and said: O thou unfaithful earth, and weltred and fomed.
And he axed his father: How long is it, sens this happened unto him? He said:
Of a child, and often times has he cast him in to the fire and water, to
destroy him: but if thou can do any thing, have mercy upon us, and help
us. Jesus said unto him: If thou could believe: All things are possible
unto him that believes. And immediately the father of the child cried with
tears, and said: LORD I believe: O help thou mine unbelieve.

Now when Jesus saw that the people ran to, he rebuked the foul sprete, and
said unto him: Thou domme and deaf sprete, I charge the, depart out of him,
and enter no more in to him from hence forth. And he cried, and rent him sore,
and departed. And he was as though he had been deed, in so much that many
said: he is deed. But Jesus took him by the hand, and set him up. And he
arose. And when he came home, his disciples axed him secretly: Mat. 17. c
Why could not we cast him out? And he said: This kind ca^ go out by no
means, but by prayer and fasting.

Mat. 17. d Marc. 8. d and 10. d ^uc. 18. d and 9. c
and he would not that any man should know of it. But he taught his disciples,
and said unto them: The son of man shall be delivered in to the hands of men,
and they shall put him to death: and when he is put to death, he shall rise
again the third day. But they understood not that word, and were afraid to
axe him.

And he came to Capernaum. And when he was at home, Mat. 18. a
he axed them? What disputed ye among your selves by ye way? But they held
their tu^ges: For they had disputed by the way among them selves, Marc. 10. e
who should be ye greatest. And he sat down, and called the twolue, and said
unto them: If any man will be the first, Mat. 20. d
the same shall be the last of all, and the servant of all. And he took a
child, and set him in the myddest of them, and took him in his arms, and
said unto them: Luc. 9. e and 10. b ^oha^. 13. c
Who so ever receaueth soch a child in my name, receaueth me: and who so ever
receaueth me, receaueth not me, but him that has sent me.

Ihon answered him, and said: Master, we saw one drive out deuels in thy
name, but he follows not us, and we forbad him because he follows us not. But
Jesus said: Forbid him not: for 1. Co. 12. a
there is no man that does a miracle in my name, and can soon speak evil of
me. For who so ever is not against us, the same is for us. And whosoever Mat. ^^
verily I say unto you: he shall not lose his reward. Mat. ^^ Luc. ^
And who so offends one of these little ones that believe in me, it were better
for him, that a mylstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast in to the sea. Mat. 5. ^ and ^^
If thy hand offend the, cut him of. Better it is for the to enter in to life
lame, the^ having two hondes to go in to hell in to the everlasting fire,
where their worm dies not, and their fire goes not out.

If thy foot offend the, cut him of. Better it is for the to enter into life
crepell, the^ having two fete to be cast into hell in the fire everlasting,
where their worm dies not, and their fire goes not out. If thine eye offend
the, cast him from the. Better it is for the to enter in to ye kingdom of God
with one eye, then having two eyes to be cast in to the fire of hell: Esa. ^
Eze^ ^
where their worm dies not, and their fire goes not out. For every man must
be salted with fire, and ^
every offering shall be seasoned with salt. Man. ^ (...) ^
The salt is good: but if ye salt be unsavory, wherewith all shall it be salted?
Have salt in you, and peace among yo selves one with another.

The X. Chapter.
ANd he rose up, and came from thence (...)
Moses suffered to write a testimonial of deuorceme^t, and to put her away.
Jesus answered, and said unto them: Because of ye hardness of yo heart did
Moses write you this commandment. But from the first creacion God made the^
man and woman. (...)
For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and cleue unto his
wife, and they two shall be one flesh. Now are they not twain the^, but one
flesh. Let not man therefore put asunder that, which God has coupled together.

And at home his disciples axed him again of ye same. And he said unto the^:
Whosoever ever puts away his wife, (...)
and marieth another, breaks wedlock to her ward. And if a woman forsake
her huszbande, and be married to another, she commits aduoutrie.

(...). 19. b (...). 1^. b
But the disciples reproved those that brought the^. Nevertheless when Jesus
saw it, he was displeased, and said unto them: Suffer the children to come
unto me, and forbid them not, for of soch is the kingdom of God. Verily I say
unto you: Who so ever receaueth not the kingdom of God as a child, he shall
not enter therein. And he took them up in his arms, and laid his hands upon
them, and blessed them.

And when he was gone forth upon the way, there came one runninge, and kneled
unto him, (...). 19. c (...) 1^. c
and axed him: Good Master, what shall I do, that I may inheret everlasting
life? But Jesus said unto him: Why call thou me good? (...)
There is no man good, but God only, Thou know the commandments: (...)
^0. b
Thou shall not break wedlock: thou shall not kill: thou shall not steal:
thou shall bear no false witness: thou shall begyle no man: Honor thy
father and mother. But he answered, and said unto him: Master, all these have
I kept fro my youth up. And Jesus beheld him, and loved him, and said unto
him: Thou want one thing: Go thy way, and (...). 2. c (...) 4. d
sell all that thou have, and give it unto ye poor: so shall thou have a
treasure in heaven, and come and follow me, and take the cross upon ye. And he
was disconforted at the saying, and went away sorry, for he had great
possessions.

(...) 19. c (...) 1^. c
O how hardly shall the rich come into ye kingdom of God? And the disciples
were astonnyed at his words. But Jesus answered again, and said unto them:
Dear children, how hard is it for them that trust in riches, to come in to
the kingdom of God? It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a nedle,
then for a rich man to enter in to ye kingdom of God. Yet were they astonnyed
ye more, and said among the^ selves: Who can the^ be saved? But Jesus beheld
them, and said: With men it is impossible, but not with God: for with God all
things are possible. (...)


Then said Peter unto him: Behold, we have forsaken all, (...). 19. d (...).
1^. c
and followed the. Jesus answered and said: Verily I say unto you: There is no
man that forsakes house, or brethren, or sisters, or father or mother, or
wife, or children, or lands for my sake and the gospels, that shall not receive
an hundredth fold now in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and
mothers and children, and lands with persecucions, and in the world to come
everlasting life. But many that are the first, shall be the last: and the last
the first. Luc. 1^. c


They were in the way goinge up to Jerusalem, Mat. 20. b Luc. 18. d
And they were astonnyed, and followed him, and were afraid. And Jesus took the
twolue again, and told them what should happen unto him. Behold, we go up to
Jerusalem, and the son of man shall be delivered unto the hye prestes and
scrybes, and they shall condemn him to death, and deliver him unto the Heythe^.
And they shall mock hi^, and scourge him, and spyt upon him, and put him to
death, and on the third day shall he rise again.

Then went unto him James and Ihon ye sons of Zebede, and said: Master,
Mat. 10. c
We desire, that whatsoever we axe of the, thou will do it for us. He said
unto the^: What desire ye that I shall do to you? They said unto him: Grant
us, that we may sit one at thy right hand, and one at thy left hand in thy
glory. But Jesus said unto the^: Ye wot not what ye axe. May ye drink the
cup, yt I shall drink? and be baptized with the baptyme that I shall be
baptized withal? They said unto him: Ye yt we may. Jesus said unto them:
The cup that I drink, shall ye drink in deed: and be baptized with the
baptyme that I shall be baptized withal. Nevertheless to sit at my right hand
and at my left, is not mine to give you, but unto them for whom it is prepared.

And wha^ the ten herd that, they disdayned at James and Ihon. But Jesus
called Mat. 20. ^ Marc. 9. ^ Luc. 9. c and 22. b
and ye mighty exercise auctorite among them. So shall it not be among you:
but who so ever will be great among you, shall be your mynister: and who so
will be chefest among you, shall be servant of all. For the son of man also
came not to be served, but to do service, and Ioh. 10. ^
to give his life to a redemption for many.

And they came unto Jericho. Mat. 20. d Luc. 18. d
And when he went out of Jericho, and his disciples, and much people, there
sat one blind Barthimeus the son of Thimeus by ye way, and begged. And wha^
he herd that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry and say: Jesus thou
son of David have mercy upon me. And many reproved him, that he should hold
his tunge. But he cried much more: Thou son of David have mercy upon me. And
Jesus stood still, and bad call him. And they called the blind, and said unto
him: Be of good conforte, arise, he calls the. And he cast away his garment
from him, stood up, and came to Jesus. And Jesus answered, and said unto him:
What will thou that I do unto the? The blind said unto him: Master, that I
might se. Jesus said unto him: Go yt way, thy faith has helped ye. And
immediately he had his sight and followed him in the way.

The XI. Chapter.
Mat. 21. a Luc. 19. c
he sent two of his disciples, and said unto them: Go in to the town that
lies before you, and as soon as ye come in, ye shall find a foale bound,
where upon no man has sytte^: lowse it, and bring it hither. And if any man
say unto you: wherefore do ye that? Then say ye: The LORD has need thereof,
and forth with he shall send it hither. They went their way and found the
foale tied by ye door without at the partynge of the way, and lowsed it. And
certain of those yt stood there, axed them: What do ye, that ye lowse the
foale? But they said unto the^, like as Jesus had commanded them. And so they
let them alone. And they brought the foale unto Jesus, and laid their clothes
thereon, and he sat thereon. But many spread their garments in the way: ^oha^.
12. c
some cut down branches from the trees, and strowed the^ in the way. And
they that went before, and that followed after, cried, and said: Hosyanna,
blessed be he, Psalm. 117. c
that comes in the name of the LORD: blessed be the kingdom of our father
David, which comes in the name of the LORD. Hosyanna in the height.

LORD entered in to Jerusalem, and went in to the temple, and looked upon all.
And at even he went out unto Bethany with the twolue: and on the morrow wha^
they departed from Bethanye, he hu^gred, and saw a fygge tree afar of, Mat.
21. b
which had leaves. Then came he nigh, (to se) if he could find any thing
thereon. Luc. 13. a
And when he came to it, he found nothing but leaves (for the time of fygges
was not yet) And Jesus answered, and said unto it: Never man eat fruit of the
for evermore. And his disciples herd it.

And they came to Jerusalem. And Jesus went in to the temple, and began to
drive out the sellers and buyers in the temple, Marc. ^^ Luc. ^^ John. ^^
and overthrew the tables of the money chaungers, and the stoles of the dove
sellers, and suffered not any man to carry a vessel through the temple. And he
taught and said unto them: Is it not written: Esa. ^^ Iere. 3. ^ 5. Re. ^^
My house shall be called a house of prayer for all people? But ye have made it a
den of murthurers.

And the scrybes and hye prestes herd of Mat. ^^ Ioha^. ^^
And they sought how they might destroy him, but they were afraid of him, for
all the people marueled at his doctrine. And at even he went out of the cite.
And on the morrow they passed by, Mat. ^^
and saw the fygge tree, that it was wythred unto the rote. And Peter thought
thereon, and said unto him: Master, behold, the fygge tree yt thou cursedest,
is wythred away. Jesus answered, and said unto them: Mat. ^^ Luc. ^
Have faith in God. Verily I say unto you: Who so ever says unto this
mountain: Avoyde, and cast thy self in to the sea, and ^
douteth not in his heart, but believes that the things shall come to pass
which he says, then look what he says, it shall come to pass. Therefore I
say unto you: Ioha^. ^^ 15. a ^^
What so ever ye desire in your prayer, believe that ye shall receive it, and ye
shall have it. Mat. ^^ 1^. c. ^ Luc. ^^
And when ye stand and pray, forgive if ye have ought against any man, that
your father also in heaven, may forgive you your trespaces.

And they came again unto Jerusalem Mat. ^^ Luc. ^^
there came unto him the hye prestes and scrybes and the elders, and said unto
him: By what auctorite do thou these things? and who gave the this auctorite
to do soch?

But Jesus answered and said unto the^: I will axe you a word also, answer
me, and I will tell you, by what auctorite I do these. The baptyme of Ihon, was
it from heaven, or of men? Answer me.

And they thought in them selves: if we say, it was from heaven, then shall he
say: Why did ye not then believe him? But if we say: It was of men, then fear
we the people, for they all held that Ihon was a true prophet. And they
answered, and said unto him: We can not tell. And Jesus answered, and said
unto them: Nether tell I you, by what auctorite I do these things.

The XII. Chapter.
ANd he began to speak unto them a vynyarde, (...) 2^. d (...) 20. a
and made a hedge about it, and dygged a win press, and builded a tower,
and let it out unto huszbande men, and went in to a strange country. And when
the time was come, he sent a servant to the huszbande men, that he might
receive of the huszbandmen, of the fruit of the vynyarde. But they took him,
and bet him, and sent him away emptye. Again, he sent unto them another
servant, whom they stoned, and brake his head, and sent him away shamefully
dealt withal. Again he sent another, whom they slew, and many other: some
they b^tt, and some they put to death.

Then had he yet one son only, whom he loved, him he sent also unto them at
the last, and said: they will stand in awe of my son. But the same
huszbandmen said among themselves: This is the heir, Come, let us kill him,
so shall the inheritance be ours. And they took him, and slew him, and cast
him out of the vynyarde. What shall now the lord of the vynyarde do? He shall
come and destroy the huszbande men, and give the vynyarde unto other. Have ye
not red this scripture: (...) 117. c
The same stone which the buylders refused, is become the headstone in the
corner? This was the LORDS doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes. And they
went about to take him (but they feared the people) for they perceived, (...)
22. b (...) 20. b
that he had spoken this parable against the^. And they left him, and went
their way.

(...) 20. c
And they came, and said unto hi^: Master, we know that thou art true and
carest for no man. For thou regardest not the outward appearaunce of men, but
teach ye way of God truly. Is it laufull to give tribute unto the
Emperor, or not? Ought we to give it, or ought we not to give it? But he
perceived their ypocrisye, and said unto them: Why tempte ye me? Bring me a
penny, that I may se it. And they brought it him. Then said he: Whose image
and superscripcion is this? They said unto him: The Emperors. Then answered
Jesus and said unto the^: (...) 17. d (...) 13. b
Give therefore unto the Emperor that which is the Emperors, and unto God
that which is Gods. And they marueled at him.

Then came unto him the Saduces (which hold that there is no resurreccion)
these axed him, ^at. 12 c ^uc. 20. d (...) 2^ a
and said: Master, Moses wrote unto us. If any man's brother dye, Deuteronomy. 25. a
and leave a wife, and leave no children, his brother shall take his wife, and
raise up sede unto his brother. Now were there seven brethren: the first took a
wife, and dyed, and left no sede: and the second took her, and dyed, and left
no sede also: the third in like manner.

And they all seven took her, and left no sede. At the last after them all, the
wife dyed also. Now in the resurreccion when they shall rise again, whose wife
shall she be of them? For seven had her to wife.

Then answered Jesus, and said unto them: Do not ye err? because ye know not
the scryptures ner ye power of God? When they shall rise again from the deed,
they shall nether mary ner be married, but they are as the angels in heaven. As
touching the deed, that they shall rise again, have ye not red in the book of
Moses, how God spoke unto him in the bush, and said: Exodus 3. a Act. 7. d
I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? Yet is
not God a God of the deed, but of the living. Therefore ye err greatly.

And there came unto him one of the scrybes, Mat. 22. d
that had herkened unto the^ how they disputed together, and saw that he had
answered them well, and axed him: Which is the chefest commandment of all?
Jesus answered him: The chefest commandment of all commandments is this:
Deuteronomy. 6. ^ and 30. b
Hear O Israel, the LORD our God is one God, and thou shall love the LORD
thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind, and with all
thy strength. This is the chefest commandment, and the second is like unto
it: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Leui. 19. To. 13. b
There is none other greater commandment then these.

And the scrybe said unto him: Master, Verily thou have said right: for there
is but one God, and there is none other without him, and to love him with all
the heart, with all the mind, with all the soul, and with all the strength,
and to love a man's neighbor as himself, is more then brent sacrifices and all
offerynges. But wha^ Jesus saw that he answered discretly, he said unto him:
Thou art not far from the kingdom of God. And after this durst no man axe
him any mo questions.

And Jesus answered, and said, when he Mat. 22. d Luc. 20. c
yt Christ is the son of David? But David himself says through the holy
ghost: The LORD said unto my LORD: Psalm. 109. a
Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies ye fotestole. There
David calls him his LORD. How is he the^ his son? And many people herd
him gladly.

And he taught the^, and said unto the^: Bewarre of the scrybes, Mat. 23. a
Luc. 20. c
that love to go in long garments, and love to be saluted in the market, and
sit gladly above in the synagoges and at the table: they devour wyddowes
houses, and under a color they make long prayers. These shall receive the
more damnacion.

Luc. 21. a
And Jesus sat over against the 4. Reg. 12. b
Gods chest, and beheld how the people put money into the Gods chest. And many
that were rich: put in much. And there came a poor wyddowe, and put in two
mytes, which make a farthinge. And he called unto him his disciples, and said
unto them: Verily I say unto you: this poor wyddowe has put more in ye
Godschest, then all they that have put in: For they all have put i^ of their
superfluyte, but she of her pouerte has put in all that she had, even her
whole living.

The XIII. Chapter.
Mat. 24. a Luc. 21. a
Master, se, what stones and what a buyldinge is this? And Jesus answered and
said unto him: Seist thou all this great buyldinge? There shall not one stone
be left upon another, yt shall not be broken down.

And when he sat upon mount Oliuete over against the temple, Peter and James,
and Ihon, and Andrew axed him pryuatly: Tell us, When shall all these come to
pass? And what shall be the toke^, wha^ all these shall be fulfilled? Jesus
answered them, and began to say: Take heed, that no man disceaue you, for
there shall many come under my name, and say: I am Christ, and shall disceaue
many. But when ye shall hear of the noise of wars, be not ye afraid: for so
must it be, but ye end is not yet. One people shall rise against another, Isa.
19. a
and one realm against another, and there shall be earth quakes here and there,
and derth shall there be and troubles. These are the beginning of sorrows.

Some ^eade: cou^cell-^ouses.
councels, Mat. 10. b
and synagoges, and ye shall be beaten, and shall be brought before princes and
kings for my namessake, for a witness unto the^. And ye gospel must first be
preached among all people.

Nowwhan they shall led you and deliver you up, Mat. ^^ Luc. ^^ and ^^
take ye no thought before what ye shall say: and ymagyn ye nothing before
hand, but what so ever shall be given you at the same hour, that speak: for
it is not ye that speak, but the holy ghost. One brother shall deliver another
unto death, and the father the son, and the children shall rise against their
fathers and mothers, and shall help them to death, and ye shall be hated of all
men for my names sake. But who so endures to the end, shall be saved.

When ye shall se the abhominacio^ of desolacion (whereof it is spoken by Ma^^ ^^
Luc. ^^ D^^ ^^
Daniel the prophet) stand where it ought not (who so reads it, let him
marck it well) then let the^ which be in Iewry, fly unto the mountains: and
let him that is on the house top not desce^de into the house, ner come
therein, to fetch any thing out of the house. And let him that is in the field,
not turn back to fetch his clothes.

But woe unto them that are with child, LORD had not shortened those days,
there should no man be saved. But for the electes sake whom he has chosen, he
has shortened those days.

Now if any man shall say unto you at yt time: Lo, here is Christ: lo, he is
there, (...) Luc. ^^
believe it not. For there shall arise false Christ's, and false prophets, which
shall do tokens and wonders, to disceaue even the very chosen, if it were
possible. But take ye head, Behold, I have told you all before.

But at the same time after this trouble, Ma^^ ^^ Luc. ^^ Io^^. ^^
the Son and Moan shall lose their light, and the stars shall fall from
heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall move: ^
and then shall they se the son of man coming in the clouds with great
power and glory. And the^ shall he send his angels, and shall gather together
his chosen from the four wyndes, from one end of the earth to the other.

Learn a symilitude of the fyge tree: Wha^ (...)
and has brought forth leaves, ye know that the Summer is nigh. So likewise
wha^ ye se all these things come to pass, be ye sure, that it is nigh even at
the doors. Verily I say unto you: this generacio^ shall not pass, till all
these be fulfilled. Heaven and earth shall perish, but my words shall not
perish. But of that day and hour knows no man, (...)
nether the angels in heaven, no not the son him self, but the father only.

Take heed, watch, and pray, for ye know not when the time is. (...) 24. b
(...) ^^ a (...) 22. d (...) ^9. a
Like as a man that went in to a strange country, and left his house, and
gave his servants auctorite, unto every one his work, and commanded ye
porter, that he should watch. Watch ye therefore, for ye know not wha^ the
master of ye house comes, whether he comes in the evening, or at mydnight,
or about the cock crowynge, or in the morning, that he come not suddenly, and
find you slepynge. Look what I say unto you, that say I unto all. Watch.

The XIIII. Chapter.
(...) ^^. a (...) ^^. a (...) ^^. c
And ye hye prestes and scrybes sought how they might take him with disceate,
and put him to death. But they said: Not in the feast day, lest there be an
vproure in the people.

(...) 26. a (...) ^. d (...) 12. a
And when he was at Bethanye in the house of Simon the leper, and sat at the
table, there came a woman, which had a box of pure and costly Nardus ointment.
And she brake ye box, and poured it upon his head. Then were there some, yt
disdayned and said: Where to serves this waist? This ointment might have been
sold for more then three hundredth pens, and been given to ye poor. And they
grudged against her.

But Jesus said: let her be in rest. Why trouble ye her? She has done a good
work upon me. Ye have allwaye the poor with you, and wha^ so ever ye will, ye
may do the^ good: but me have ye not allwaie. She has done what she could,
she is come before, to anoynte my body for my burial. Verily I say unto you:
Where so ever this gospel shall be preached in all the world, there shall this
also that she has now done, be told for a remembrance of her.

(...). 2^. b (...) 22. a (...) 13. a
to betraye him unto them. When they herd yt, they were glad, and promised
that they would give him money. And he sought, how he might conveniently
betraye him.

And upon ye first day of sweet bred, wha^ the Easter Iambe was offered, (...)
12 c (...) 25. b (...) 2^. a
his disciples said unto him? Where will thou yt we go and prepare, yt thou
may eat ye Easter la^be? And he sent two of his disciples, and said unto
them: Go your way into the cite, and there shall mete you a man bearinge a
pitcher with water, follow him, and where so ever he goes in, there say ye to
the good man of the house: The Master sends the word: Where is the gest
house, wherein I may eat the Easter la^be, with my disciples? And he shall show
you a great parlour, which is paued and prepared, there make ready for us.
And ye disciples went forth, and came in to ye cite, and found it as he had
said unto the^. And they prepared ye Easter lamb.

At even he came with the twolue. And as Mat. 26. b Luc. 22. b Ioha^. 13. c
Verily I say unto you: One of you yt eats with me, shall betraye me. And they
were sorry, and said unto hi^ one after another: Is it I? and another (said:)
is it I? He answered and said unto the^: One of the twolue, even ye same yt
dyppeth with me in ye platter. The son of man truly goes forth, as it is
written of hi^. But woe unto that man, by whom the son of man is betrayed. It
were better for the same man, that he had never been borne.

And as they ate, Jesus took the bred, Mat. 26. c Luc. 22. b 1. Cor. 11. c
gave thanks, and brake it, and gave it the^, and said: Take, eat, this is
my body. And he took the cup, thanked, and gave it the^, and they all drank
thereof. And he said unto them: This is my blood of the new Testament, which
shall be shed for many. Verily I say unto you, that from hence forth I will not
drink of the fruit of the vine, till ye day yt I drink it new in ye kingdom
of God. And wha^ they had said grace, they went forth unto mount Oliuete.

And Jesus said unto them: This night Mat. 26. c
for it is written: Zac. 13. b
I will smite the sheperde, and the sheep shall be scatred abroad. Nevertheless
after yt I am risen again, I will go before you in to Galile. But Peter said
unto him: Act. 1. a
And though all men should be offended, yet would not I be offended. And Jesus
said unto him: Verily I say unto ye: Todaye in this same night, before ye
cock crow two times, shall thou deny me thryse. But he said yet more: Ye
though I should dye with ye, yet will I not deny ye. So said they all i^ like
manner.

And they came in to ye field called Gethsemane, and he said unto his
disciples: Sit ye here, till I go yonder, and pray. And he took with him Peter
and James, and Ihon, and began to wax fearful, and to be in an agonye, and
said unto the^: My soul is heavy eue^ unto ye death: tarry ye here and watch.
And he went forth a little, fell upon the ground and prayed, that, (if it were
possible) ye hour might pass from him, and said: Abba, my father, all
things are possible unto the, take this cup away fro me: Nevertheless not
what I will, but what thou will.

And he came unto them, and found the^

Mat. 26. d Luc. 22. d Ioha^. 18. a
And immediately while he yet spoke, came Judas one of the twolue, and with him a
great multitude, with swerdes and staves from the hye prestes and scrybes and
elders. And the traytoure had given them a toke^, and said: Whom so ever I
kiss, that same is he, lay hands upon him, and led him away warely. And
wha^ he was come, he went straight way unto him, and said unto him: O
master, master, and kyssed him. Then laid they their hands upon him, and took
him. But one of the^ that stood by, drew out his sword, and smote the hye
prestes servant, and cut of his ear.

Mat. 26. f Luc. 22. d
I was daily with you in the temple, and taught, and ye took me not. Esa. 53.
b Marc. 15. c
But this is done, hat the scripture may be fulfilled. And all the disciples
forsook him, and fled. And there followed him a young man, which was clothed in
lynnen upon the bare skin, and the young me^ took hold of him. But he let
the lynnen go, and fled naked from them.

Mat 26. f Luc. 22. d Ioh. 18. b
And they led Jesus unto the hye pressed, where all ye hye prestes, and elders and
scrybes were come together. As for Peter, he followed him afar of into the hye
prestes palace. And he was there, and sat with the servants, and warmed him.

Mat. 26. f
But the hye prestes and the whole council sought witness against Jesus, yt
they might bring him to death, and they found none. Many gave false witness
against him, but their witnesses agreed not together. And some stood up, and
gave false wytnes against him, and said: We herd him say: I will break down
this temple that is made with ho^des, Ioha^. ^^
and in three days build another not made with hands. But their witness agreed
not together.

And the hye pressed stood up among them, (...)
Answerest thou nothing unto it, that these testify against the? But he held
his tunge, and answered nothing. (...)
The^ the hye pressed axed him again, and said unto him: Art thou Christ the
son of the blessed? Jesus said: I am. And ye shall se the son of man sit at
the right hand of power, (...)
and come in the clouds of heaven. Then the hye pressed rent his clothes, and
said: What need we any mo witnesses? Ye have herd the blasphemy. What think
ye? They all condemned him, that he was guilty of death. Then began there
some to spyt upon him, and to cover his face, and to smite him with fistes, and
to say unto him Prophecy unto us. (...)
And the servants smote him on the face.

And Peter was beneth in ye palace. The^ came one of the wenches of the hye
pressed: (...)
And wha^ she saw Peter warming him, she looked upon hi^, and said: And thou
wast with Jesus of Nazareth also. But he denied, and said: I know him not,
nether can I tell what thou say. And he went out in to the fore court, and
the cock crew. And a damsel saw him, and began again to say unto them
that stood by: This is one of them. And he denied it again. And after a little
while they yt stood by, said again unto him: Of a truth thou art one of them
for thou art a Galilean, and thy speech sounds even alike. But he began to
curse and swear: I know not the man, that ye speabe of. And the cock crew
again. Then thought Peter upon the word, that Jesus said unto him: (...)
Before ye cock crow two times, thou shall deny me thryse. And he began to
weep.

The XV. Chapter.
ANd soon in the morning the hye Psa^ ^^ Man ^^ Lu^ (...) Ma^^ ^^
and bound Jesus, and led him away, and delivered him unto Pylate. And Pylate
axed him: Art thou the king of the Jews? He answered, and said unto him:
Thou say it. And the hye prestes accused him sore. But Pylate axed him
again, and said: Answerest thou nothing? Behold, how sore they lay to ye
charge. Nevertheless Jesus answered no more, in so much yt Pylate marueyled.

At that feast of Easter he was wont to deliver unto them a presoner, (...)
17. b
whom so ever they would desire. There was i^ preson with the sedicious, one
called Barrabas, which in the vproure had committed murthur. And the people
went up, and prayed him, that he would do, as he was wont. Pylate answered
them: will ye that I give lowse unto you the king of the Jews? For he knew,
that ye hye prestes had delivered him of envye. But the hye prestes moved ye
people, (...)
that he should rather give Barrabas lowse unto them.

(...) ^7. c (...) b
What will ye the^ that I do unto him, whom ye accuse to be king of the Jews?
They cried again: Crucify hi^. Pylate said unto the^: What evil has he
done? But they cried yet much more: Crucify him. So Pylate thought to satisfy
the people, and gave Barrabas lowse unto them, and delivered the^ Jesus, to be
scourgd and crucified.

(...) ^7. d (...) ^9. a
And the soudyers led him in to the common hall, and called the whole multitude
together, and clothed him with purple, and plated a crown of thorn, and
crowned him withal, and began to salute him: Hayle king of the Jews. And
smote him upon the head with a read, and spytted upon him, and fell upon the
kne, and worshipped him. And wha^ they had mocked him, (...) 19. b
they took ye purple of him, and put his clothes upon him, and led him out,
that they might crucifye him.

(...) d (...) c
and was the father of Alexander and Ruffus) to bear his cross. And they
brought him to the place Golgatha, which is by interpretacion: a place of deed
men's skulles. And they gave him wine myxted with myrre, to drink, and he took it
not. And when they had crucified him, they parted his garments, (...) b (...)
27. d (...) c
and cast lottes therefore, what every one should take. And it was about ye
third hour, and they crucified him. And the title of his cause was written
over above him (namely:) The king of the Jews. And they crucified him with two
murthurers, one at ye right hand, and one at the left. Then was the scripture
fulfilled, (...) 14. f
which says: He was counted among the evil doers.

(...) 27. c (...) 23. d
And they that went by, reuyled him, and wagged their heads, and said: Fie
upon the, how goodly breakest thou down ye temple, and buyldest it again in
three days? Help ye self now, and come down from the cross. The hye prestes
also in like manner laughed him to scorn among the^ selves, with the scrybes,
and said: He has helped other, himself can he not help. If he be Christ and
ye kyge of Israel, let him come down now from the cross, yt we may se it,
and believe. And they yt were crucified with hi^, checked hi^ also.

And wha^ it was about the sixte hour, there was a darcknesse over the whole
lord, Mat. 27. c Luc. 23. d
And about ye nyenth hour Jesus cried loud, and said: Eli, Eli, lamma
asabthani? which is interpreted: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And
some that stood by, Psalm. 21. a
when they herd yt, they said: Behold, he calls Elias. Then ra^ne there
one, and filled a spo^ge with vyneger, and stickte it upon a read, Mat. 27. c
Ioh. 19. c
and gave hi^ to drink, and said: Hold still, let se, whether Elias will
come, and take him down. But Jesus cried loud, and gave up the ghost. And the
vale of the temple rent in two pieces, from above till beneth.

The captain that stood thereby over against him, Mat 27. f Luc. 23. c
wha^ he saw yt he gave up the ghost with soch a cry, he said: Verily this
man was Gods son.

And there were women there also, which Ioha^* 19. c
among who^ was Mary Magdalene, and Mary of James ye little, and the mother of
Ioses, and Salome, which had followed him wha^ he was in Galile, and mynistred
unto hi^: and many other yt went up with hi^ to Jerusalem. And at even (for so
much as it was the day of preparinge, Mat. 27. g Luc. 23. c Ioha^ 19. d
which is the fore Sabbath) there came one Joseph of Arimathia, a worshipful
Senatoure (which looked also for the kingdom of God) and went in boldly unto
Pilate, and axed ye body of Jesus. But Pylate marueyled yt he was deed
already, and called ye captain, and axed hi^, whether he had long been deed.
And wha^ he had gotten knowledge of the captain, he gave Joseph ye body. And he
bought a lynne^ cloth, and took him down, and wrapped hi^ in ye lynne^ clothe,
and laid him in a sepulcre, which was hewe^ out of a rock, and rolled a stone
before ye door of ye sepulcre. But Mary Magdalene and Mary Ioses beheld, Mat.
27. g
where he was laid.

The XVI. Chapter.
ANd when the Sabbath was past, Mat. 28. a Luc 24. a Ioha^. 20. a
and Salome, bought spyces, yt they might come, and anoynte hi^. And they came
to the sepulcre upon a day of ye Sabbathes very early, wha^ ye Son arose,
and said one to another: Who shall roll us ye stone from ye door of the
sepulcre? And when they looked, they saw, that the stone was rolled away: for
it was a very great one. And they went in to the sepulcre, and on the right
hand they saw a young man syttinge, which had a long white garment upon him,
and they were abaszhed. But he said unto the^: Be not ye afraid, ye seek
Jesus of Nazareth which was crucified: he is risen, he is not here. Behold, ye
place, where they laid him. But go ye your way, and tell his disciples and
Peter, that he will go before you into Galile, Act. 1. a
there shall ye se him Mar. 14. d
as he said unto you. And they went forth in all the haist, and fled from the
sepulcre: for there was a trembling and fear come upon them, nether said
they any thing to any man, for they were afraid.

Mat. 28. a Luc. 24. a ^. Cor. 15. a
he appeared first unto Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had cast out seven
deuels. And she went and told the^ that were with him, as they mourned and
wept. And when they herd that he lived, and had appeared unto her, they
believed it not. After ward as two of the^ were walking, he showed himself
under another figure, Luc. 24. b
when they were going upon the field. And they went, and told the other:
these they believed not also.

At the last, as the eleven sat at the table, he showed himself unto them, Luc.
24. c
and rebuked their unbelieve, and ye hardness of their heart, because they
believed not the^ which had seen him risen. And he said unto them: Go ye your
way in to all the world, Mat. 28. c Ioha^. 20. c
and preach the gospel unto all creatures. Who so believes and is baptized,
shall be saved: but who so believes not, shall be damned.

Act. 5. b. ^. 2.16. c. 19. a
these are they: In my name shall they cast out deuyls: Act. 2. a Luc. 10. b
Act. 28. a
Speak with new tunges: Drive away serpe^tes: And if they drink any deedly
thing, it shall not hurt them: Act. 14. b and 28. a Luc. 24. d Act. 1. b and
7. g
They shall lay their hands upon the sick, and they shall recover.

And the LORD, after that he had spoken unto them, was taken up into heaven,
and sytteth at the right hand of God. And they went out, and preached every
where. And the LORD wrought with them, and confirmed the word with tokens
following.

The end of the gospel of S. Mark.
The gospel of S. Luke.
What S. Luke conteyneth.
Chap. I. The co^cepcion and birth of Ihon the baptist. The concepcion of
Christ. The tha^kfull songs of Mary, and Zachary* Chap. II. The birth and
circumcision of Christ. How he was received in to the temple, how Symeon and
Anna prophecy of him, and how he was found in the temple among the doctors.
Chap. III. The preachinge, baptyme, and presonment of Ihon. The baptyme of
Christ, and a rehearsal of the generation of the fathers. Chap. IIII. Jesus is
led into the wilderness, and fasteth all the time of his temptacion,
overcomes the deuell, goes in to Galilee, preaches at Nazareth and
Caphernau^: the Jews despise him, the deuels knowledge him: he comes into
Peter's house, heals his mother in law, and does great miracles. Chap. V.
Christ preaches in the ship: The disciples forsake all, and follow him. He
cleanses the leper, heals the man of the palsye, calls Matthew the customer,
and eats with open sinners. Chap. VI. He excuses the disciples, that pluck
the ears of corn, he heals the man with the wythred hand, choseth his
twolue Apostles, makes a sweet sermon, and teaches to do good for evil.
Chap. VII. He heals the captains servant rayseth up the wyddowes son from
death to life, enfourmeth the disciples whom Ihon baptist sent unto him,
commends Ihon, and reproves the Jews for their unthankfulness. He eats
with the pharisee. The woman waszheth his fete with her tears, and he
forgeueth her her sins. Chap. VIII. Christ with his apostles goes from town
to town and preaches, shows the parable of the sede, tells who is his
mother and his brother, stilleth the raginge of the sea delyuereth the
possessed, and dryueth the deuels in to the heerde of swyne, helps the sick
woman and Iairus daughter. Chap. IX. He sends out the twolue Apostles to
preach, Herod hears tell of hi^, He fedeth five thousand men with five
loaves and two fishes, the disciples confess him to be the son of God, he
transfigureth himself upon the mount, delyuereth the possessed, and teaches
his disciples to be lowly. They desire ve^geaunce, but he reproves them. Chap.
X. He sends the seuentye before him for to preach, and gives the^ a charge
how to behave them selves, prayseth his heavenly father, answers the scrybe
that tempted him* and (by the example of the Samaritane) shows who is a ma^s
neghbour. Martha receaueth the LORD into her house, Mary Magdalene is fervent
in hearing his word. Chap. XI. He teaches his disciples to pray, dryueth
out a deuel, and rebukes the blasphemous pharisees. They require signs and
tokens. He eats with the pharisee, and reproves the ypocrisy of the
pharisees, scrybes and ypocrites. Chap. XII. The leven of the pharisees. Christ
conforteth his disciples against persecucion warns them to bewarre of
cuvetousnesse, by the symilitude of a certain rich man: he will not have them
to hang upon earthly things, but to watch and to be ready against his
coming. Chap. XIII. Of the Galileans whom Pilate slew and of those that dyed
in Syloe. The symilitude of the fyge tree. Christ heals the sick woman. The
parable of the mustarde sede and leven. Few enter in to the kingdom. Christ
reproves Herod and Jerusalem. Chap. XIIII. Jesus eats with the pharisee,
heals the dropsye upon the Sabbath, teaches to be lowly, tells of the
great supper, and warns them that will follow him, to lay their accomptes
before, what it will cost the^. The salt of the earth. Chap. XV. The loving
mercy of God openly set forth in the parable of the hundredth sheep, and of the
son that was lost. Chap. XVI. The parable of the wicked Mammon Not one title
of Gods word shall perish. Of the rich man, and of poor Lazarus. Chap. XVII.
Christ teaches his disciples to avoyde occasions of evil, one to forgive
another, steadfastly to trust in God, and no man to presume in his own works.
He heals the ten lepers, speaks of the latter days, and of the end of the
world. Chap. XVIII. He teaches to be fervent in prayer continually. Of the
pharisee and the publican. The kingdom of God belongs unto children. Christ
answers the ruler, and promises reward unto all soch as suffer loss for
his sake and follow him. The blind man is restored to his sight. Chap. XIX. Of
Zacheus, and the ten servants to who^ the ten tale^tes were delivered. Christ
rydeth to Jerusalem, and wepeth over it. Chap. XX. They axe Christ one
questyon, and he axeth them another. The parable of the vynyarde. Of tribute te
be given unto the Emperor, and how Christ stops the mouths of the
Saduce^s. Chap. XXI. Christ commends the poor wyddow, tells of the
destruction of Jerusalem, of false teachers, of the tokens and troubles for to
come, of the end of the world, and of his own coming. Chap. XXII. Christ
is betrayed, they eat the easter lamb. The institucion of the sacrament. They
strive who shall be greatest, he reproves them: He prays three times upon the
mount. They take him and bring him to the hye prestes house: Peter denies him
thryse, and they bring him before the council. Chap. XXIII. Jesus is brought
before Pilate and Herod. The weme^ make lame^tacion for him. He prays for
his enemies, forgeueth the sinner upon his right hand, dies on the cross,
and is buried. Chap. XXIIII. The women come to the grave, Christ apeareth unto
the two disciples that go toward Emaus, stondeth in the myddest of all his
disciples, opens their understanding in the scriptures, gives them a
charge, and ascends up into heaven.
The gospel of S. Luke.


The prologe of S. Luke.
FOR so much as many have taken in hand, to set forth ye words of the acts
that are come to pass among us, like as they delivered the^ unto us, which
from the beginning saw them their selves, and were mynisters of the word, I
thought it good (after that I had diligently searched out all from the
beginning) to write the same orderly unto the (good Theophilus) that thou
might know the certe^te of ye words, whereof thou art infourmed.

The first Chapter.
IN the time of Herod 1. Pa. 25. b
course of Abia: and his wife of the daughters of Aaron, and her name
Elizabeth. They were both righteous before God, and walked in all the
commandments and statutes of the LORD vnreproueably. And they had no
child, for Elizabeth was baren, and they were both well stricken in age.

And it came to pass as he executed the prestes office before God when his
course came (acordinge to the custom of the presthode) it fell to his lot to
burn incense. And Exo. 30. b Heb. 9. a
he went into the temple of the LORD, and the whole multitude of the people
was without in prayer, while the incense was aburnynge. And the angel of the
LORD appeared unto him, and stood on the right side of the altar of ince^se.
And when Zachary saw him, he was abaszhed, and there came a fear upon him.

But the angel said unto him: Fear not Zachary, for thy prayer is herd. And
ye wife Elizabeth shall bear the a son, whose name thou shall call Ihon, and
thou shall have joy and gladness: and many shall rejoice at his birth, for he
shall be great before the LORD. Wine and strong drink shall he not drink.
And he shall be filled with the holy ghost, even in his mothers womb. And many of
the children of Israel shall he turn unto the LORD their God. And he shall go
before him in the sprete and power of Mala. 3 d Matt. 11. b
Elias, to turn the hertes of ye fathers unto the children, and the
unfaithful unto the wyszdome of the righteous, to make the people ready for
the LORD.

Genesis 17. c and 18. b Iud^c. 13. b
For I am old, and my wife well stricken in age. The angel answered, and
said unto him: I am Gabriell that stand before God, and am sent to speak
unto the, and to show the these glad tydinges. And behold, thou shall be
domme, and not able to speak, until the day that this come to pass, because
thou have 4. Re. 7. a
not believed my words, which shall be fulfilled in their season.

And the people waited for Zachary, and marueyled, that he tarried so long in
the temple. And wha^ he went out, he could not speak unto them. And they
perceived, that he had seen a vision in the temple. And he beckened unto them,
and remained speachlesse.

And it fortuned wha^ the time of his office was out, he went home in to his
house. And after those days Elizabeth his wife conceived, and hyd her self
five months, and said: Thus has ye LORD done unto me in ye days, wherein
he has looked upon me, to take away from my rebuke among men.

Matt. 1. c
And in the sixte month was the angel Gabriel sent from God in to a cite of
Galile, called Nazareth, unto a virgin that was spoused unto a man, whose name
was Joseph, of the house of David, and the virgins name was Mary. And the
angel came in unto her, and said: Hayle thou full of grace, the LORD is with
the: blessed art thou among women.

Esa. 7. c Mat. 4. c
Fear not Mary, for thou have found grace with God. Behold, thou shall
conceive in thy womb, and bear a son Luc. ^^
and shall call his name Jesus: he shall be great, and shall be called ye son of
the Highest. And the LORD God shall give him ye seat of David his father, Esa. ^^
and he shall be king over ye house of Jacob for ever (...)
and there shall be no end of his kingdom. Then said Mary unto the angel: How
shall this be, saying I know not a man? The angel answered, and said unto
her: The holy ghost shall come upon the, and the power of the Highest shall over
shadow the. Therefore that Holy also which shall be borne (of the) shall be called
the son of God. And behold, thy cosen Elizabeth she also has conceived a
son in her old age, and this is the sixte month of her, which is reported
to be barem: (...)
for with God is nothing impossible. And Mary said: Behold, here am I the hand
(...) of the LORD: be it unto me, as thou have said. And the angel departed
from her.

And Mary arose in those days, and went (...)
ye cite of Iewry, and came in to ye house of Zachary, and saluted Elizabeth.
And it fortuned as Elizabeth herd the salutacion of Mary, the babe sprange in
her womb. And Elizabeth was filled with the holy ghost, and cried loud, and
said: Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of ye womb. And
how happens this to me, that ye mother of my LORD comes unto me? Behold,
when I herd the voice of thy salutacion, the babe sprange in my womb with joy,
And blessed art thou that have believed, for ye things shall be performed, which
were told ye from ye LORD. And Mary said:

My soul magnifieth the LORD. (...)
And my sprete reioyseth i^ God my Savior.

For he has looked upon the low degree of his hand maid. Behold, from hence
forth shall all generacions call me blessed.

For he that is Mighty, has done great things unto me, and holy is his name.

And his mercy endures through out all generacions, upon them that fear him.

He shows strength with his arm, and scatreth them that are proud in the
ymaginacion of their heart.

He puts down the mighty from the seat, and exalts them of low degree.
(...)


He fylleth the hongrie with good things, and lets the rich go emptye.

He reme^breth mercy, and helps up his servant Israel.

Even as he promised unto our fathers, (...)
Abraham and to his sede forever.

And Mary abode with her about three months, and then returned home again.

And Elizabethes time was come, that LORD had showed great mercy upon her,
and they reioysed with her. And it fortuned upon the eight day, (...) 19. b
(...) a
they came to circumcyse ye child, and called him Zachary after his father:
And his mother answered, and said: No, but he shall be called Ihon. And they
said unto her: There is none in ye kynne, yt is so called. And they made
signs unto his father, how he would have him called. And he axed for wrytinge
tables, wrote and said: His name is Ihon. And they marueyled all. And
immediately was his mouth and his tongue opened, and he spoke, and praised God.
And there came a fear upon all their neghbours. And all this act was noysed
abroad through out all the hill country of Iewry: And all they yt herd thereof,
took it to heart, and said: What manner of man will this child be? For the hand
of the LORD was with him.



Blessed be ye LORD God of Israel, for he has vysited and redeemed his people.

And has set up an (...)
horn of salvation in the house of his servant David.

Even as he promised before time, by the mouth of his holy prophets.

That he would deliver us from our enemies, and from ye hand of all soch as
hate us.

And yt he would show mercy unto our fathers, and think upon his holy (...)
22. c
covenant.

Even the ooth yt he swear unto our father Abraham, for to give us.

(...)
That we delivered out of ye hand of o enemies, might serve him without fear
all the days of our life, in soch holiness and righteousness as is accept
before him.

And thou child shall be called a prophet of the Highest: for thou shall go
before ye LORD, to prepare his ways.

And to give knowledge of salvation unto his people, for the remyssion of their
sins.

Through the tender mercy of our God, whereby the day spring from an hye has
vysited us.

That he might give light unto them yt sit in darcknesse and shadow of death,
and to gyde our fete into the way of peace.

And the child grew, and waxed strong in sprete, and was in the wyldernes,
till the time that he should show him self unto the people of Israel.

The II. Chapter.
IT fortuned at the same time, that 1. Reg. 15.16. a. 20. b
which is called Bethleem, (because he was of ye house and lynage of David)
that he might be ^axed with Mary his spoused wife, which was with child.

And it fortuned while they were there, ye time was come, that she should be
delivered. Mat. 1. c
And she brought forth her first begotten son, and wrapped him inswadlinge
clothes, and laid him in a maunger: for they had else no rowme in the ynne.

And there were in ye same region shepherdes LORD stood by the^, and ye
brightness of the LORD shone round about them, and they were sore afraid.
And the angel said unto them: Be not afraid. Behold, I bring you tydi^ges
of great joy, which shall happen unto all people: for unto you this day is
borne ye Savior, eue^ Christ ye LORD, in the cite of David. And take this
for a token: Ye shall find the babe swadled, and laid in a maunger. And
straight way there was by the angel a multitude of heavenly hoostes, which
praised God, and said: Glory be unto God an hye, and peace upon earth, and
unto men a good will.

And it fortuned wha^ the angels were gone from the^ in to heaven, the
shepherdes said LORD has showed unto us. And they came with haist, and found
both Mary and Joseph, and the babe laid in ye maunger. And when they had seen
it, they published abroad the saying, yt was told the^ of this child. And
all they that herd it, wondered at the words, which the shepherdes had told
them. But Mary kept all these sayenges, and pondred them in her heart. And the
shepherdes returned, praysinge and laudinge God, for all that they had herd
and seen, even as it was told them.

And when eight days were ended, Genesis 17. b
that the child should be circumcysed, his name was called Jesus, Luc. 1. c
which was named of ye angel, before he was conceived in his mothers womb.

Leuit. 12. b ^. Reg. 1. d
were come, they brought him to Jerusalem, that they might present him unto the
LORD (As it is written in the law of the LORD: Exo. 13. a Number. 8. c
Every ma^childe that first opens the Matrix, shall be called holy unto ye
LORD) and that they might give the offering, as it is written in the law of
the LORD (namely) a pair of turtle doves, or two young pigeons.

And behold, there was a man (at Jerusalem) whose name was Symeon, and the
same man was just, and feared God, and lo^ged for the consolacion of Israel,
and the holy ghost was in him. And an answer was given him of the holy ghost,
that he should not se death, before he had seen ye LORDS Christ. And he came
by inspiracion into the temple.

And when the elders brought the child Leui. 12. b
law, then took he him up in his arms, and praised God, and said:

LORD, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, acordinge to thy
promise.

For mine eyes have seen thy Savior, who^ thou have prepared before all
people.

Esa 49. b Act. 13. e
A light for the lightenynge of the Heythe^, and for the praise of ye people of
Israel.

And his father and mother marueyled at the things that were spoken of him.
And Symeon blessed them, and said unto Mary his mother: Behold, this (child)
shall be set to a fall, and to an vprysinge again of many in Israel, and for a
token, which shall be spoken against. And the sword shall pearse thy soul, that
the thoughts of many hertes may be opened.

LORD, and spoke of him unto all that looked for the redemption at Jerusalem.

And when they had performed all acordinge to the law of the LORD, thy
returned i^to Galile, to their own cite Nazareth. And the child grew, and
wexed strong in sprete, full of wyszdome, and the grace of God was with him.

And his elders went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of Easter. And when
he was twolue year old, they went up to Jerusalem, (...)
after the custom of the feast. And when they had fulfilled the days, and
were gone home again, (...)
the child Jesus abode still at Jerusalem. And his elders knew it not, but
thought he had been in the company, and they came a days journey, and sought
hi^ among their kynszfolkes and acqua^taunce. And wha^ they found him not,
they went again to Jerusalem, and sought him.

And it fortuned after three days, yt they found him in the temple, syttinge
among (...)
And when they saw him, they were astonnyed. And his mother said unto him: My
son, why have thou done this unto us? Behold, thy father and I have sought
the sorowynge. And he said unto them: John ^^
What is it, that ye have sought me? Wist ye not, yt I must go about my
fathers busynes? And they (...)
understood not the saying yt he spoke unto them. And he went down with
the^, and came to Nazareth, and was obedient unto them. And his mother kept
all these words in her heart. And Jesus increased in wyszdome, age and favor
with God and men.

The III. Chapter.
IN the fiftenth year of the reign of Tiberius the Emperor, wha^ Pontius
(...)
and his brother Philippe one of the four princes in Iturea, and in the
coasts of Traconites, and Lysanias one of the four princes of Abilene, when
Hannas and Caiphas were hye prestes, the^ came ye word of God unto Ihon the
son of Zachary in the wyldernes. And he came into all ye coasts about
Jordan, and preached the baptyme of repentance for the remyssion of sins.
(...)
As it is written in ye book of ye sayenges of Esaye the prophet, which says:
The voice of a crier in the wyldernes: (...)
prepare the way of the LORD, and make his paths straight. Every valley
shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be brought low. And what so is
crooked, shall be made straight: and what rough is, shall be made smooth, and all
flesh shall se the Savior of God.

Then said he unto the people, yt went (...)
Ye generation of vipers, who has certified you, that ye shall escape ye wrath
to come? Take heed, bring forth due fruits of repe^tau^ce, and begin not to
say: We have Abraham to or father. For I say unto you: God is able of these
stones to raise up children unto Abraham. The axe is put unto the tree already:
so that every tree which brings not forth good fruit, (...). ^. a (...) 7. b
shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire. And the people axed him, and
said: ^ct. 2. d
What shall we do then? He answered, and said unto the^: He that has two
coats, let him part with him yt, has none: and he that has meat, let him do
likewise.

The publicans came also, to be baptized and said unto him: Master, what shall
we do? He said unto them: Require no more, then is appointed you. Then ye
soudyours axed him likewise, and said: What shall we do then? And he said unto
the^: Do no man violence ner wrong, and be content with your wages.

But when the people were in a doubt, and thought all in their hertes, whether
he were Christ, Ihon answered, and said unto the^ all: I baptyse you with
water, but after me there comes one stronger the^ I, whose shue lachet I am
not worthy to lowse: (...) ^. b (...) 1. a (...) 1. c ^^c. 36
he shall baptyse you with the holy ghost and with fire. Whose fan is in his
hand, and he shall pourge his floor, and shall gather ye wheat in to his
barn, (...) 3. b
and shall burn the chafe with unquenchable fire. And many other things more
exorted he, and preached unto the people.

(...) 14. a
But Herod the Tetrarcha (wha^ he was rebuked of him because of Herodias his
brothers wife, and for all the euels that Herod did) besides all this he laid
Iho^ in preson.

(...) 3. b (...) 1. a (...) 1. d
And it fortuned when all the people received baptyme, and when Jesus also was
baptized and prayed, that heaven opened, and the holy ghost came down in a
bodily shappe like a done upon him. And out of heaven there came a voice, which
said: Thou art my dear son, in who^ I delight.

And Jesus was about thirty years when he began. ^at. 13. d (...) 6. a
And he was taken for (...) 4. ^ (...) 1. c
which was the son of Mathat.

Which was the son of Leui*

Which was the son of Melchi.

Which was the son of Ianna.

Which was the son of Joseph.

Which was the son of Mathathias.

Which was the son of Amos.

Which was the son of Nahum.

Which was the son of Eszli.

Which was the son of Nange.

Which was the son of Maath.

Which was the son of Mathathias.

Which was the son of Simei.

Which was the son of Joseph.

Which was the son of Judah.

Which was the son of Iohanna.

Which was the son of Resia.

Which was the son of Zorobabel.

Which was the son of Salathiel.

Which was the son of Neri.

Which was the son of Melchi.

Which was the son of Abdi.

Which was the son of Cosam.

Which was the son of Elmadam.

Which was the son of Her.

Which was the son of Ieso.

Which was the son of Eliezer.

Which was the son of Iorem.

Which was the son of Mattha.

Which was the son of Leui.

Which was the son of Simeon.

Which was the son of Judah.

Which was the son of Joseph.

Which was the son of Ionam.

Which was the son of Eliachim

Which was the son of Melca.

Which was the son of Menam.

Which was the son of Mathathan.

Which was the son of Nathan.

Which was the son of David.

Which was the son of Iesse.

Which was the son of Obed.

Which was the son of Boos.

Which was the son of Salmon.

Which was the son of Naasson.

Which was the son of Aminadab.

Which was the son of Aram.

Which was the son of Esrom.

Which was the son of Phares.

Which was the son of Judah.

Which was the son of Jacob.

Which was the son of Isaac.

Which was the son of Abraham.

Which was the son of Thara.

Which was the son of Nahor.

Which was the son of Serug.

Which was the son of Regu.

Which was the son of Peleg.

Which was the son of Eber.

Which was the son of Salah.

Which was the son of Caynan.

Which was the son of Arphachsad.

Which was the son of Sem.

Which was the son of Noe.

Which was the son of Lamech.

Which was the son of Mathusalah.

Which was the son of Henoch.

Which was the son of Iared.

Which was the son of Mahaleel.

Which was the son of Renan.

Which was the son of Enos.

Which was the son of Seth.

Which was the son of Adam.

Which was the son of God.

The fourth Chapter.
Mat. 4. a Marc. 1. b
and was led of ye sprete into wyldernes, and forty days long was he tempted
of ye deuell. Exo. 34 d ^. Re. 19. b
And in those days ate he nothing. And when they were ended, he hongred
afterward. And the deuell said unto him: If thou be ye son of God,
command this stone, yt it be bred. And Jesus answered and said unto hi^: It
is written: Deuteronomy. 8 b
Man shall not live by bred only, but by every word of God. And ye deuell took
him up into an hye mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of ye whole
world in ye twinckelinge of an eye, and said unto him: All this power will I
give unto the, and the glory thereof, for it is given over unto me, and I give
it, to whom I will. If thou now wilt worship me, they shall all be thine. Jesus
answered him, and said: Avoid fro me thou Satan. It is written: Thou shall
worship the LORD thy God, ^eut. 6. c
and him only shall thou serve.

^sal. 90. b
and with their hands they shall hold the up, that thou dashe not thy foot
against a stone. And Jesus answered, and said unto him: ^eut. 6. c
It is said: Thou shall not tempte the LORD thy God. And when ye deuell had
ended all the temptacions, he departed from him for a season.

^at. 4. b ^arc. 1. c
And Jesus came again in the power of the sprete into Galile. And the fame of
him was noysed through out all ye region round about. And he taught in their
synagoges, and was commended of every man.

^at. 13. g ^arc. 6. a
And he came unto Nazareth where he was noursed, and as his custom was, he
went in to the synagoge upon ye Sabbath, and stood up for to read. Then was
there delivered him the Esd. 8. b
book of ye prophet Esaias. And when he had turned over the book, he found the
place where it is written: The sprete of the LORD is with me, because he has
anointed me: (...). 61. a
to preach the Gospel unto ye poor has he sent me: to heal the broken
hearted: to preach delyuerau^ce to the captyue, and sight to the blind: and
freely to set at liberty them that are bruised: and to preach the acceptable
year of the LORD.

And when he had closed the book, he gave (...)
And they all gave him witness, and wo^dred at the gracious words, which
proceaded out of his mouth, and they said: Is not this Joseph's son? Ioha^. ^^


And he said unto them: Doutles ye will say unto me this proverb: Phisician,
heal thyself. For how great things have we herd done at Capernau^? Do the
same here also in thine own country. But he said: Ma^^ ^^ Ma^^ ^^ Ioha^. ^^
Verily I say unto you: There is no prophet accepted in his own country.
Nevertheless of a truth I say unto you: ^
There were many wedowes in Israel in ye time of Elias, wha^ the heaven was
shut three years and six months, and when there was a great derth in all
the land: and to none of the^ was Elias sent, but only unto Sarepta of the
Sydonyans to a wedowe. (...)
And many lepers were there in Israel in the time of Eliseus ye prophet, and
none of the^ was cleansed, save only Naaman of Syria.

And as many as were in the synagoge, Ma^^ ^^ Ma^^ ^^ Ioha^. ^^
and came to Capernaum a cite of Galile, and taught the^ upon the Sabbathes.
And they wondered at his doctrine, Ma^^ ^^ Luc. ^^
for his preachinge was with power.

And in the Synagoge there was a man possessed with a foul deuell, and he
cried loud, and said: Let me alone, what have we to do with the thou Jesus of
Nazareth? Ma^^ ^^
Art thou come to destroy us? I know ye who thou art, even the Holy of God.
And Jesus rebuked him and said: hold thy tu^ge, and depart out of him. And
the deuell threw hi^ in the myddest among them, and departed from him, and did
him no harm. And there came a fear over the^ all, and they spoke among
themselves, and said: What manner of thing is this? He commands the foul
spretes with auctorite and power, and they depart out. And ye fame of him was
noysed through out all the places of ye country round about.

And he rose up out of the synagoge, Ma^^ ^^ Ma^^ ^^
and came into Symons house. And Symo^s mother in law was taken with a great
fever, and they prayde him for her. And he went unto her, and commanded the
fever. And it left her, and i^mediatly she rose up, and mynistred unto the^.

And when the Son was gone down ^at. ^. b (...) ^. c
And he laid his hands upon every one of the^, and made the^ whole. ^^rc. 3. b
The deuels also departed out of many, crie^ge and saying: Thou art Christ the
son of God. And he rebuked the^, and suffered them not to speak: for they
knew that he was Christ. But wha^ it was day, he went out into a deserte
place. And the people sought hi^, and came unto him, and kept him, yt he
should not depart from the^. But he said unto the^: I must preach the Gospel
of ye kingdom of God to other cities also: for there to am I sent. And he
preached in the synagoges of Galile.

The V. Chapter.
(...) 4. c (...) 1. b
and he stood by the lake of Genazereth, and saw two ships sto^de by ye lake
side, but ye fishers were gone out of the^, and had waszhed their nets. Then
went he into one of the ships, which was Symons, and prayed him, yt he would
thrust out a little from the land. And he sat him down, and taught the people
out of ye ship.

And when he had left of talking, he said unto Simon: Launch out in to the
deep and let slyppe yo nets, to make a draught. And Simon answered and said
unto him: Master, we have labored all ye night, and taken nothing. But upon
thy word, I will lowse forth the nett. And wha^ they had so done, they took a
great multitude of fiszhes, and their net brake. And they made signs to their
fellows which were in ye other ship, yt they should come, and help the^. And
they came, and filled both the ships full, so yt they LORD, go from, for I
am a sinful man: For he was astonnyed and all that were with him, at this
draught of fishes which they took, and so were James and Ihon also the sons
of Zebede, which were Symons companyons. And Jesus said unto Symo^: Fear not,
for from hence forth thou shall take men. And they brought the ships to
land, (...) 4. c
and left all, and followed him.

(...) a (...) 4. d
And it fortuned as he was in a cite, behold, there was a man full of leprosy.
Wha^ he saw Jesus, he fell upon his face, and besought him, and said: LORD,
if thou will, thou can make me clean. And he stretched out his hand, and
touched him, and said: I will, be thou clean. And immediately the leprosy
departed from him. And he charged him, yt he should tell no man, but go thy
way (said he) and show thy self unto ye pressed, and offer for ye clensynge,
Leui. 14
as Moses commanded, for a witness unto the^. But ye fame of hi^ went out
farther abroad, and there came much people together, to hear him, and to be
healed by hi^ from their sicknesses. And he departed into the wyldernesses, and
gave himself to prayer.

And it fortuned upon a day, yt he taught, and there sat ye Pharisees and
scrybes, which Mat. 9. a Marc. 2. a
and Iewry, and from Jerusalem, and the power of the LORD went from him, and
healed every man. And behold, certain men brought upon a bed, a man yt had ye
palsye, and they sought how they might bring him in, and lay him before him.
And when they could not find by what way they might bring him in (for ye
people) they clymmed up to ye top of the house, and let him down through the
tylinge with the bed, among the^ before Jesus. And when he saw their faith, he
said unto hi^: Man, yi sins are forgiven ye. And the scrybes and pharyses
began to think, and said: What is he this, yt speaks blasphemy. Esa. 45.
d and 44. ^
Who ca^ forgive sins, but only God?

Nevertheless wha^ Jesus perceived their thoughts, he answered, and said unto
the^: What think ye in yor hertes? Mat. 9. a Marc. 2. a Ioha^. 5. a
Whether is easier to say: Thy sins are forgiven ye, Or to say: Arise, and
walk? But that ye may know, that the son of man has power to forgive
sins upon earth, he said unto ye sick of the palsy: I say unto ye: Arise,
take up ye bed, and go home. And immediately he rose up before the^, and took up
the bed yt he had lain upon, and went home, and praised God. And they were all
astonnyed, and gave God ye praise, and were filled with fear, and said: We have
seen marvelous things to day.

And afterward he went out, and saw a publican named Leui, syttinge at ye
receate Mat. 9. a Marc. 2. b Luc. 15. a
And he left all, rose up, and followed him. And Leui made hi^ a great feast i^
his house. And many publicans and other sat with hi^ at ye table. And the scrybes
and Pharyses murmured against his disciples, and said: Wherefore do ye eat and
drink with publica^s and sinners? Luc. 7. e and 15. a
And Jesus answered, and said unto the^: The whole need not ye phisician, but
they yt are sick. I am not come to call ye righteous, but sinners to
repentance. 1. Tim. 1. c


But they said unto him: Wherefore fast ye disciples of Iho^ so of, and pray
so much, and the disciples of the Pharisees likewise, but ye disciples eat and
drink? And he said unto them: Can ye make the wedding children fast, so
long as the brydegrome is with the^? But the time will come that the brydegrome
shall be taken from the^, then shall they fast.

And he said unto them a symilitude: No man puts a piece of new cloth in to
an old garment: for else he renteth the new, and the piece of the new agrees
not with the old. And no man puts new wine in to old vessels, for else ye
new wine barsteth the vessels, and runs out it self, and the vessels
perish. But new wine must be put in to new vessels, and so are they both
preserved. And there is no man that drynketh the old, and would straight way
have

Mat. 12. a ^arc. 2. c
The VI. Chapter.
ANd it fortuned upon an after pryncipall Sabbath, that he went through the
corn field, and his disciples plucked the ears of corn, and ate, and rubbed
the^ with their hands. But certain of the Pharisees said unto them: Wherefore
do ye that, which is not laufull to do upon the Sabbath? And Jesus answered,
and said unto the^: Have ye not red what David did, wha^ he was hongrie, and
they that were with him, how he went in to the house of God, and took the Reg.
21. c Exo 25. c
shewbred, and ate, and gave also unto them that were with him, which was
laufull for no man to eat, but for the prestes only? And he said unto them:
The son of man is LORD even over the Sabbath. Mat 12. b Marc. 3. a


It came to pass upon another Sabbath, that he went in to the synagoge, and
taught and there was a man, whose right hand was wythred. But ye scrybes and
Pharisees marked him, whether he would heal upon the Sabbath, that they might
find an occasion against him. Nevertheless he perceived their thoughts, and
said unto the man with the wythred hand: Arise, and step forth here. And he
arose, and stepped forth. Then said Jesus unto the^: I will axe you a question:
What is it laufull to do upon the Sabbath? good, or evil? to save life, or to
destroy it? And he beheld the^ all round about, and said unto the man:
Stretch out thine hand. And he did so. Then was his hand restored him to
right, even as whole as the other. But they were filled full of madness, and
commoned together, what Mat. 14. Marc. ^^


And it fortuned at the same time, that he went out in to a mountain to
pray, and continued all night in prayer to God. Mat. ^^ Marc. ^^ and ^^ Luc.
^^ Act. ^^
And wha^ it was day, he called his disciples, and chose twolue of them, whom
he called also apostles. Simon, whom he named Peter, and Andrew his brother,
James and Ihon, Phylippe and Bartylmew, Matthew and Thomas, James the son of
Alpheus, Simon called Zelotes, Judas the son of James, and Judas Iscarioth,
which was the traytoure.

And he went down with them, Mat. ^^ Marc. ^^
and stood upon a plain in the field, and the company of his disciples, and a
great multitude of people, from all Iewry, and Jerusalem, and from Tire and
Sydon by the sea coast, which were come to hear him, and to be healed of their
diseases, and they that were vexed with foul spretes, were healed. And all the
people sought to touch him, for there Ma^^ ^^


And he lift up his eyes upon his disciples, and said: Blessed are ye poor,
for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that honger here, for ye
shall be satisfied. Blessed are ye yt weep here, for ye shall laugh. Blessed are
ye, when men hate you, and put you out of their co^panyes, and reuyle you, and
cast out your name as an evil thing, for the son of man's sake. Rejoice ye
then, and be glad: for behold, your reward is great in heaven. (...)
Even thus did their fathers unto the prophets also.

But woe unto you rich, for ye have your co^solacion already. Woe unto you
that are full, for ye shall honger. Woe unto you that laugh here, for ye shall
weep and wayle. Woe unto you when every man prayseth you, Even so did their
fathers unto the false prophets also.

But I say unto you that hear: Love your enemies: do good unto them that
hate you: bless them that curse you: pray for them that wrongfully trouble
you. And who so smyteth the on the one cheke, offer him ye other also. And who
so takes away thy cloak, forbid him not yt cote also. Who so ever axeth of
the, give him: and who so takes away thine, axe it not again. ^
And as ye would that men should do unto (...)


And if ye love them that love you, what thank have ye therefore? For sinners
also love their lovers. And if ye do good for your good doers, what thank
have ye therefore? For sinners also do even the same. And if ye lend unto them,
of who^ ye hope to receive what thank have ye there fore? For sinners also
lend unto sinners, that they may receive as much again. But rather love ye
yor enemies, do good, and lend, lokynge for nothing thereof again: so shall
yor reward be great, and ye shall be the children of the Highest, for he is
kind, even to the unthankful and to the evil.

(...) 7. a (...) 12. c
Be ye therefore merciful, as your father also is merciful. Judge not, and ye
shall not be judged. Conde^pne not, and ye shall not be condemned. Forgive, and
ye shall be forgeuen. (...)
Give, and to you shall be given. A good measure, pressed down, shaken together,
and ru^nynge over, shall me^ give into your bosom. For with what measure ye
meet, with the same shall it be measured to you again. (...) 7. a (...) 4 c


And he said a symilitude unto the^: Can the blind show the way to ye
blind? (...) 15. b
Do they not both the^ fall in to the dyche? The disciple is not above his
master. But whosoever is perfect, (...). 10. c (...). 13. b
ye same shall be as his master. But why seist thou a moote i^ thy brothers eye,
and considrest not the beam, that is in thine own eye? Or how can thou say
unto thy brother: hold still brother, I will pluck ye moate out of thine eye,
(...) 7. a
and thou thy self seist not ye beam in thine own eye? Thou ypocryte, First
cast the beam out of thine own eye, and the^ shall thou se clearly to pull
the moote out of thy brothers eye.

(...) 7. b (...) ^2. d
and no evil tree yt brings forth good fruit. Every tree is known by his
fruit. For me^ gather not fygges of thorns, ner grapes of buszhes. A good man
out of ye good treasure of his heart, brings forth yt which is good: and an
evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth that which is
evil. For of the abundaunce of the heart, the mouth speaks.

But why call ye me LORD LORD, and do not that I say unto you? (...) 1. a
(...) 7. b (...) 23. a (...) 7. c (...) 1. c
Who so ever comes unto me, and hears my words and does the^, I will show
you to whom he is like. He is like unto a man which builded an house, and
dug deep, and laid ye foundation upon a rock. When the waters came, the
floudes bett upon that house, and could not move it: for it was grounded upon
ye rock. But he that hears and does not, is like unto a man that builded his
house upon the earth without foundation, and the streams bett upon it, and it
fell immediately, and great was the fall of that house.

The VII. Chapter.
When he had ended his talking unto Mat. 8. a Ioha^. 4. f
he went in to Capernaum: and a captains servant lay deed sick, whom he
loved. Wha^ he herd of Jesus, he sent the elders of the Jews unto him, and
prayed him, that he would come, and make his servant whole. But wha^ they came
to Jesus, they besought him instantly, and said: He is worthy yt thou should
show this for him, for he loves our people, and has builded us ye synagoge.
And Jesus went with them.

Now when they were not far from ye house, ye captain sent fre^des unto hi^,
saie^ge unto him: Oh LORD, trouble not thy self, I am not worthy, yt thou
should enter under my rofe, and therefore I thought not my self worthy to come
to ye: but speak ye word, and my servant shall be whole. For I my self also am
a man, subject to the higher auctorite, and have soudyers under me. And I say
unto one: Go, and he goes. And to another: Come, and he comes. And to my
servant: Do this, and he does it. When Jesus herd yt, he marueyled at hi^,
and turned him about, and said unto ye people yt followed hi^: I say unto
you: So great faith have I not found, no not in Israel. And wha^ they that
were sent, came home again, they found the servant that was sick, whole.

And it fortuned afterward, that he went LORD saw her, he had compassion on
her, and said unto her: Weep not. And he came nigh, and touched the Coffyn. And
they that bare him, stood still. And he said: Young man, I say unto the:
Arise. And 3. Re. 17. ^ 4. Re. 4^ ^ Act. 9. f and 20. b
the deed sat up, and began to speak. And he delivered him unto his mother.
And there came a fear on them all, and they praised God, and said: Ioha^. 4.
and 6. b
A great prophet is risen among us, and God has vysited his people. And this
fame of him was noysed in all Iewry, and in all ye regions that lay round
about.

And the disciples of Iho^ showed him of all these things. And Ihon called
unto him two of his disciples, and sent the^ unto Jesus saying: Art thou he
that shall come, or shall we look for another? When the men came to him, they
said: Ihon ye baptist has sent us unto the, saying: Art thou he that shall
come, or shall we look for another?

^sa. 35. a
The blind se, the halt go, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the deed
arise, Esa 61. a
the Gospel is preached unto ye poor, and blessed is he, that is not offended
at me.

Mat. 11. a
When the messaungers of Iho^ were departed, Jesus began to speak unto ye
people concerning Iho^: What are ye gone out for to se in ye wilderness?
Would ye se a read, that is shaken with the wind? Or what are ye gone out for to
se? Would ye se a man clothed in soft raiment? Behold, they that are
gorgiously arrayed, and live delycately, are in kings courts. Or what are ye
gone out for to se? Would ye se a prophet? Ye I say unto you: one that is
more the^ a prophet. This is he, of whom it is written: Behold, I send my
messaunger before ye face, ^al. 3. a ^arc. 1. a
which shall prepare thy way before the. For I say unto you: Among the^ yt
are borne of weme^, there is no greater prophet the^ Ihon the baptist. Notwith
stondynge he that is less in the kingdom of God, is greater then he.

And all the people that herd him, and ye publicans, justified God, and were
baptized with the baptyme of Ihon. But the Pharisees and scrybes despised ye
council of God against the^ selves, and were not baptized of hi^.

LORD said: Where unto shall I licken the men of this generation? ^at. 11. c
And whom are they like? They are like unto children which sit in the market,
and cry one to another, and say: We have pyped unto you, and ye have not
daunsed: we have mourned unto you, and ye have not wept. For Ihon ye baptist
came, and ^at. 3. a
ate no bred, and dra^ke no wine, and ye say: he has ye deuell. The son of
man is come, eats and drynketh, and ye say: This man is a glutton and a wine
bebber, a friend of publicans and sinners. And wyszdome is justified of all her
children.

^at. 26. a ^ar. 14. a
And one of the Pharisees desired him, yt he would eat with him. And he went in
to the Pharisees house, and sat him down at ye table. ^^ha^. 1^. a
And behold, there was in the cite a woman, which was a sinner. When she knew
that Jesus sat at the table in the Pharisees house, she brought a box with
ointment, and stood behind at his fete, and wept, and began to water his
fete with tears, and to dry the^ with the hayres of her head, and kyssed his
fete, and anointed the^ with oyntme^t.

But when the Pharise which had called (...)
and said: If this man were a prophet, he would know who, and what manner of
woman this is that touches him, for she is a sinner. And Jesus answered, and
said unto him: Simo^, I have somewhat to say unto the. He said: Master say
on. A certain lender had two detters, the one ought five hundredth pens, the
other fifty: but when they had no thing to pay, he forgave the^ both. Tell
me which of them will love him most? Simon answered, and said: He, (I suppose)
to who^ he forgave most. Then said he unto him: Thou have judged right.

And he turned him to the woman, and said unto Symo^: Seist thou this woman? I
am come in to thine house, thou have given me no water unto my fete, but she
has watered my fete with tears, and dried the^ with the hayres of her head:
Thou have given me no kiss, but she (sens the time she came in) has not
ceased to kiss my fete: Thou have not anointed my head with oil, but she has
anointed my head with ointment. Therefore I say unto the: Many sins are
forgeuen her, for she has loved much. But unto whom less is forgeuen, the
same loves the less.

And he said unto her: Thy sins are forgeuen the. Then they that sat at the
table with him, began to say within them selves: What is he this, that
forgeueth sins also? But he said unto the woman: Thy faith has saved the,
Go thy way in peace.

The VIII. Chapter.
ANd it fortuned afterward, that he (...)
who^ he had healed from evil spretes and infirmities: Namely, Mary (...)
which is called Magdalene, out of whom went seven deuels, and Ioanna ye wife
of Chusa Herodes steward, and Susanna, and many other, that mynistred unto
them of their substance.

Now wha^ much people were gathered together, (...)
and haisted unto him out of the cities, He spoke by asymilitude: There went
out a sower to sow his sede, and while he was sowynge, some fell by the way
side, and was trodde^ under foot, and the fowls of the air ate it up. And
some fell on stone, and when it was spronge up, it wythred away; because it
had no moystnesse. And some fell among thorns, and the thorns sprange up
with it, and choked it. And some fell upon a good ground, and sprange up, and
bare fruit an hundredth fold. Wha^ he said this he cried: Who so has ears to
hear, let him hear.

(...) ^3. b (...). 4. a
And he said: Unto you it is given, to know the mysteryes of the kingdom of
God, but unto the other in parables, yt though they se it, they should not se
it, and though they hear it, they should not understand. (...)


This is the parable: The sede is the word of God: As for those that are by ye
way side, they are they that hear it, afterward comes the deuell, and
takes away the word out of their hertes, that they should not believe, and be
saved. But they on ye stone, are soch as when they hear it, receive the word
with joy, and these have no rote: they believe for a while, and in the time of
temptacion they fall away. As for it that fell among the thorns, are soch as
hear it, and go forth among the cares, riches and volupteousnesses of this
life, and are choked and bring forth no fruit. But that on the good ground,
are they that hear the word, and keep it in a pure good heart, and bring
forth fruit in patience.

No man lights a ca^dell, and covers it with a vessel, (...)
or puts it v^der a table, but sets it upon a candelsticke, that soch as
go in may se light. (...)
For there is nothing hyd, that shall not be openly showed: and there is
nothing secret, that shall not be known, and come to light. Take heed
therefore how ye hear. (...). 13. b (...) 5. c (...) 4. c (...) ^. c
For who so has, unto him shall be given: but who so has not, from him shall be
taken away, eue^ the same that he thinks to have.

(...)
and would se the. But he answered, and said unto the^: My mother and my
brethren are these, which hear the word of God, and do it.

(...)
And it fortuned upon a certain day, yt he went in to a ship, and his
disciples with him, and he said unto the^: Let us pass over to the other side
of ye lake. And they thurst of from the lord. And as they sailed, he slepte.
And there came a storm of wind upon ye lake, and the wawes fell upon the^,
and they stood in great ioperdy. Then went they unto him, and waked him up,
and said: Master master, we perish. Then he arose, and rebuked the wind, and
the tempest of water, and they ceased, and it waxed calm. But he said unto
the^: Where is your faith? Nevertheless they were afraid, and wo^dred, and
said one to another: What is he this? For he commands the wyndes and the
water, and they are obedient unto him. Mat. 8 d Marc. 5. ^
And they sailed forth in to the country of the Gadarenites, which is over
against Galile.

And when he went out to land, there

And Jesus axed him, and said: What is thy name? He said: Legion. For there
were many deuels entered in to him. And they besought him, that he would not
command the^ to go in to the deep. Mat. 8. d Marc. 5. b
But there was there a great heerd of swyne fedynge upon the mountain, and
they besought him, that he would give them leave, to enter in to ye same. And he
gave the^ leave. Then departed ye deuels out of the man, and entered in to the
swyne. And the heerd ruszhed headlynges with a storm in to the lake, and were
drowned. But wha^ ye herdmen saw what had chaunsed, they fled, and told it in
the cite and in the vyllagies.

Then went they out, for to se what was Marc. 5. b
And he gat him in to ye ship, and turned ag^yne. And the man out of who^ the
deuels were departed, besought him, yt he might be with him. But Jesus sent him
away, and said: Go home again, and show how great things God has done
for the. And he went his way, and preached through out all ye cite, how great
things Jesus had done for hi^.

Mat. 9. c Marc. 5. c
And it fortuned wha^ Jesus came again, the people received him, for they
waited for him. And behold, there came a man named Iairus (and he was a ruler
of the synagoge) and fell at Jesus fete, Mat. 9. c Marc. 5. c
and besought him, that he would come in to his house. For he had but one
daughter (upon a twolue year of age) and she lay at ye point of death. And as
he went, the people thronged him.

And Jesus said: Who has touched me? But when they all denied, Peter said,
and they that were with him: Master, the people thronge the and thrust the, and
thou say: Who has touched me? Jesus said: Some body has touched me, for
Ifele, that there is virtue gone out fro me. But when the woman saw that she
was not hyd, she came tre^blynge, Mat 9. c Marc. 5. d
and fell down before him, and told him before all the people, for what cause
she had touched him, and how she was healed immediately. And he said unto her:
Daughter, be of good comfort, thy faith has made the whole, go thy way in
peace.

While he yet spoke, there came one from ye ruler of ye synagoges house, and
said unto him: Thy daughter is deed, disease not the master. When Jesus herd
that, he answered him, Ioha^. 11. b
and said: Fear not, believe only, and she shall be made whole. But when he
came in to the house, he suffered no man to go in, save Peter, and James and
Iho^, and the father and mother of the maiden. They wept all, and sorowed for
her. But he said: Weep not, for she is not deed, but * slepeth. And they
laughed hi^ to scorn, knowing well that she was deed. But he thrust them all
out, and took her by the hand, and cried, and said: Mayde^ arise. And her
sprete Mat. 10. a Marc. 3. b and 6. a Luc. 6. b
And her elders were astonnyed. But he charged them, that they should tell no
man, what was done.

Mar. 6. a Luc. 10. a
The IX. Chapter.
ANd he called the twolue together, and gave them power and auctorite over all
deuels, and that they might heal diseases. And he sent the^ out to preach the
kingdom of God, and to heal ye sick, and said unto them: (...)
Ye shall take nothing with you by the way, nether staff, ner scryppe, ner
bred, ner money: ner have two coats. And into what house so ever ye enter,
there abide, till ye go thence. (...)
And who so ever receive you not, depart out of the same cite, and shake of
the dust from your fete, for a witness over them. And they departed, and
went through the towns, preachinge ye Gospel, and healynge every where.

Herod the Tetrarcha herd of all that was done by him. And he took care, for
so much as it was said of some: Iho^ is risen again from the deed: of some,
Elias has ^
One of the old prophets is risen again. And Herod said: Iho^ have I
beheaded, who is this then, of who^ I hear soch things? And he desired to se
him.

And the Apostles came again, and told him how great things they had done.
And he took them to him, and went aside into a solytary place by the cite
called Bethsaida. When the people knew of it, they followed him. And he received
them, and spoke unto them of the kingdom of God, and healed soch as hade need
thereof. But the day began to go down. Then came the twolue to him, and
said unto him: let the people depart from the, that they may go in to the
towns round about, and in to ye vyllagies, where they may find lodging
and meat, for we are here in ye wilderness. But he said unto them: Give ye
them to eat. They said: We have no more but five loaves and two fyszhes.
Except we should go and bye meat for so much people (for there were upon a
five thousand men) But he said unto his disciples: Cause them to sit down by
fifties in a company. And they did so, and made them all to sit down. Then
took (...)
and gave them to the disciples, to set the^ before the people. And they ate,
and were all satisfied. And there were taken up of that remained to them,
twolue baskettes full of broken meat.

And it fortuned when he was alone, and at his prayer, and his disciples with
him, he axed them, and said: Whom say the people that I am? They answered,
and said: They say, thou art Ihon the baptist: (...)
Some, that thou art Elias: Some, that one of the old prophets is risen
again. (...)
But he said unto them: Whom say ye that I am? Then answered Peter and said:
Thou art the Christ of God. And he charged them strately, (...). 6. g
and commanded them, that they should tell this unto no man, and said: (...).
16. c (...) 20. b (...). ^. d (...) 10. d (...). 18. d
For the son of man must suffer many things, and be cast out of the Elders
and of ye hye prestes, and scrybes, and be put to death, and rise again the
third day.

(...)
Then said he unto them all: If any man will follow me, let hi^ deny himself,
and take up his cross daily, and follow me. (...). 17. d
For who so ever will save his life, shall lose it. But who so loses his life
for my sake, shall save it. For what advantage has a man, though he wanne the
whole world, and loses himself, or runs in damage of himself? (...) 10. d
(...). 8. c (...) 12. a
Who so is ashamed of me and of my sayenges, of him shall the son of man also
be ashamed, when he comes in his glory, and in the glory of his father, and
of the holy angels. I say unto you of the treuth: (...). 16. d (...) 8. c
there be some of them that stand here, which shall not taist of death, till
they se the kingdom of God.

(...) 17. a (...). 9. a
he took unto him Peter, Ihon and James, and went up in to amou^t for to
pray. (...). 1. d
And as he prayed, the shappe of his countenance was changed of another
fashion, and his garment was white, and shyned: and behold, two men talked
with him, Which were Moses and Elias, that appeared gloriously, and spoke of
his departing, which he should fulfill at Jerusalem. As for Peter and them
that were with him, they were full of sleep. But when they awoke, they saw his
glory, and the two men stondynge with him.

(...) 17. a (...). 9. a
And it chaunsed, when they departed from him, Peter said unto Jesus: Master,
here is good being for us. Let us make three tabernacles: one for the, one for
Moses, and one for Elias, and wist not what he said. But while he thus spoke,
there came a cloud, and ouershadowed them. And they were afraid, when the
cloud covered them. And out of the cloud there came a voice, which said:
This is my dear son, (...)
hear him. And while this voice came to pass, they found Jesus alone. And
they kept it close, and told no man in those days any of the things which
they had seen.

(...)
And it chaunsed on the next day after, when they came down from the mount.
much people met him, and behold, a man among the people cried out, and said:
Master, I beseke the, look upon my son, for he is my only son: behold,
the sprete takes him, and suddenly he cries, and he teareth him, that he
fometh, and with pain departs he from him, when he has rent him. And I
besought thy disciples to cast him out, and they could not. Then answered
Jesus, and said: Oh thou unfaithful and crooked generation, how long shall I
be with you, and suffer you? Bring hither thy son. And when he came to him,
the deuell rent him and tare him. But Jesus rebuked the foul sprete, and
healed the child, and delivered him unto his father again. Marc. 1. c Luc. 4.
d
And they were all amassed at the mighty power of God.

And while they wondered every one at all things which he did, he said unto
his Mat. 16. c and 20. b Marc. 8. d and 9. d Luc. 2. g and 18. d
For the son of man must be delivered in to the hands of men. But they wist
not what that word meaned, and it was hyd from them, that they understood it
not. And they were afraid to axe him of that word. Mat. 18. ^ Marc. 9. d Luc.
22. b
There came a thought also among them, which of them should be the greatest.
But wha^ Jesus saw the thoughts of their heart, he took a child, and set him
hard by him, and said unto them? Mat. 10 e Marc. 9. c Luc. 10. b Ioha^. 13. c
Whosoever receaueth this child in my name, receaueth me: and who so ever
receaueth me, receaueth him that sent me. Mat. 20. ^ Marc. 9. ^ and 10. e Luc.
22. b
But who so is leest among you all, ye same shall be great.

Then answered Iho^, and said: Master, we saw one drive out deuels in thy
name, and we forbad him, for he followed the not with us. And Jesus said unto
him: For bid him not, for he that is not against us, is for us.

And it fortuned when the time was fulfilled that he should be received up from
hence, he turned his face to go straight to Jerusalem, and before him he sent
messaungers, which went their way, and came in to a town of the Samaritans,
to prepare lodginge for him. And they would not receive him, because he had
turned his face to go to Jerusalem. But when his disciples James and Ihon saw
that, they said: LORD, will thou, that we command, that fire fall down
from heaven, and consume them, 4. Re. 1. c
as Elias did? Nevertheless Jesus turned him about, and rebuked them, and
said: Know ye not, what manner of sprete ye are of? The son of man is not
come to destroy men's souls, but to save them. And they went in to another
town.

Mat. 8. c
And it fortuned as they went by the way, one said unto him: I will follow the,
whyther so ever thou go. And Jesus said unto him: The foxes have holes, and
the birds under the heaven have nestes: but the son of man has not whereon
to lay his head.

Mat. 8. c
And he said unto another: Follow me. He said: Sir, give me leave first to go,
and burye my father. But Jesus said unto him: Leu. 21. b
Let the deed burye their deed. But go thou thy way, and preach the kingdom
of God.

And another said: Sir, I will follow the, 3. Re. 19.
but give me leave first, to go bid them farwele, which are at home in my house.
Jesus said unto him: Who so puts his hand to the plowe, and looks back,
is not mete for the kingdom of God. 3. Pet. 2 d


The X. Chapter.
LORD appointed out other seventy, and sent them two and two before him in to
every cite and place, whither he himself would come, and said unto them: The
harvest is great, but the laborers are few. Mat. 9. d
Pray therefore the LORD of the harvest, to send forth laborers in to his
harvest. Go your way: behold, Mat. 10. a ^arc 6. a ^uc. 9. a
I send you forth as the la^bes among ye wolves. Bear nether wallet, ner
scryppe, ner shues, and ^. Re. 4. d
salute no man by the way. In to what so ever house ye enter, first say:
Peace be in this house. And if the child of peace be there, your peace shall
rest upon him. If no, then shall your peace turn to you again. But tarry ye
still in the same house, eatinge and drynkinge soch as they have. For the
labourer is worthy of his reward.

Go not from house to house. And in to what so ever cite ye enter, and they
receive you, eat soch things as are set before you. And heal the sick that
are there, and say unto them: The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. Mat.
10. b Marc. 6. b ^uc. 9. a ^ct. 13. c and 1^. a
But in to what so ever cite ye come, and they receive you not, go your way
out in to the streets of the same, and say: Even the very dust which cleaves
upon us of your cite, wype we of upon you. But of this ye shall be sure, that
the kingdom of God was come nigh unto you. I say unto you: It shall be easyer
for Sodom in that day, then for that cite.

Mat. 11. b
for if the miracles which have been done among you had been done at Tire and
Sidon, they had done pennaunce long agoo, syttinge in sack cloth and in
ashes. Nevertheless it shall be easyer for Tire and Sidon at the judgment, then
for you. And thou Capernaum which art exalted unto the heaven, shall be thrust
down unto hell. He that hears you, hears me: (...)
and he that despyseth you, despyseth me: but who so despyseth me, despyseth
him yt sent me.

The seue^tye came again with joy, and said: LORD, the deuels also are
subdued unto us in thy name. But he said unto them: I saw Satan fall down
from heaven as a lightenynge. Behold, Esa^ (...) Ap^. ^
(...) Act ^
I have given you power to tread upon serpe^tes and scorpions, and over all
power of the enemy, and nothing shall hurt you. Nevertheless, rejoice not ye
in this, that the spretes are subdued unto you: but rejoice, ^
that your names are written in heaven.

At the same hour reioysed Jesus in sprete, (...)
I praise the (O father and LORD of heaven and earth) that thou have hyd these
things from the wise and prudent, and have opened them unto babes. Even so
father, for so it pleased the. (...)
All things are given over unto me of my father: ^
and no man knows who the son is, but only the father: nether who the
father is, save only the son, and he to who^ the son will open it.

And he turned him unto his disciples, and said in especial: Blessed are the
eyes, which se that ye se. For I say unto you: Many prophets and kings, (...)
would have seen the things that ye se, and have not seen them: and to have
herd the things that ye hear, and have not herd them.

And behold, there stood up a scrybe and tempted him, and said: Master, what
must I do, to inheret everlasting life? He said unto him: What is written in
the law? How read thou? He answered and said: (...)
Thou shall love thy LORD God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all
thy strength, and with all thy mind, and (...)
thy neighbor as thy self. He said unto him: Thou have answered right: this
do, and thou shall live. But he would have justified himself, and said unto
Jesus: Who is then my neighbor?

Then answered Jesus, and said: A certain which stryped him out of his
clothes, and wounded him, and went their way, and left him half deed. And by
chance there came down a pressed the same way: and when he saw him, he passed
by. And likewise a Leuite, wha^ he came nigh unto the same place and saw him,
he passed by. But a Samaritane was going his journey, and came that way, and
when he saw him, he had compassion upon him, went unto him, bound up his
wounds, and poured oil and wine therein, and lift him up upon his beast, and
brought him in to the ynne, and made prouysion for him. Upon the next day when
he departed, he took out two pens, and gave them to the oost, and said unto
him: Take cure of him, and what so ever thou spendest more, I will pay it the,
when I come again. Which of these three now think thou, was neighbor unto
him, that fell among the murderers? He said: He that showed mercy upon him
Then said Jesus unto him: Go thy way then, and do thou likewise.

It fortuned as they went, that he entered in to a town, where there was a
woman named Martha, which received him in to her house. And she had a sister,
called Mary, (...) 33. a
which sat her down at Jesus fete, and herkened unto his word. But Martha
made her self much to do, for to serve him. And she srepte unto him, and said:
LORD, carest thou not, that my sister lets me serve alone? Bid her
therefore, that she help me. But Jesus answered, and said unto her: Martha
Martha, thou take thought, and combrest thy self about many things: (...)
25. a
there is but one thing needful. Mary has chosen a good part, which shall
not be taken away from her.

The XI. Chapter.
LORD, teach us to pray, as Ihon also taught his disciples. He said unto
the^: When ye pray, say: O our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy
name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be fulfilled upon earth, as it is in heaven.
Give us this day our daily bred. And forgive us our sins, for we also
forgive all them that are detters unto us. And led us not in to temptacion,
but deliver us from evil.

And he said unto them: Which of you is it that has a friend, and should go
to him at mydinght, and say unto him: friend, lend me three loaves, for a
friend of mine is come to me out of the way, and I have nothing to set before
him: and he within should answer and say: Disquyete me not, the door is shutt
already, and my children are with me in the chamber, I can not rise, and give
the. I say unto you: and though he would not arise and give him, because he is
his friend, Yet because of his unshame fast begginge he would arise, and give
him as many as he neded.

And I say unto you also: Axe, and it Pro. 8. b Mat. 7. a Ioha^. 14. ^ 15. a.
16. c
knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For who so ever axeth, receaueth: and
he that seeks, fyndeth: and to him that knocks, shall it be opened. If the
son axe bred of any of you that is a father, will he give him a stone
therefore? Or if he axe a fyszhe, will he for the fish offer him a serpent? Or if
he axe an egg, will he profer him a scorpion? If ye then which are evil, can
give your children good gifts, how much more shall the father of heaven give
the holy sprete unto them that axe him?

And he drove out a deuell that was domme: Mat. 9. ^ and 12 ^
and it came to pass when the deuell was departed out, the domme spoke, and
the people wondered. But some of them said: He dryueth out the deuels, through
Beelzebub the chief of the deuels. Marc. ^
The other tempted him, and desired a token of him from heaven. But he knew
their thoughts, and said unto them: Every kingdom divided within it self,
shall be desolate, and one house shall fall upon another. If Satan then be at
variaunce within himself, how shall his kingdom endure? Because ye say, that I
drive out deuels through Beelzebub.

And if I drive out deuels through Beelzebul, by whom the^ do your children
drive them out? Therefore shall they be your judges. But if I cast out the
deuels by the finger of God, then is the kingdom of God come unto you.

When a strong harnessed man keeps Mat. 12.
Col. 2
but when a stronger then he comes upon him, and overcomes him, he takes
from him all his wapens, wherein he trusted, and deuydeth the spoil. He that is
not with me, is against me: and he that gathers not with me, scatereth abroad.

Mat. 12. c
When the unclean sprete is gone out of a man, he walks through dry places,
seeking rest, and fyndeth none. Then says he: I will turn again in to my
house, from whence I went out. And when he comes, he fyndeth it swepte, and
garnished. Then goes he, and takes unto him seven other spretes, worse the^
himself. And when they are entered in, they dwell there. And the end of that
man is worse then the beginning.

And it fortuned when he spoke soch, a certain woman among the people lift up
her voice, and said unto him: Blessed is ye womb that bare the, and the
pappes that thou have sucked. But he said: Ye blessed are they that hear the
word of God, and keep it.

When the people were gathered thick together, he began to say: This is an
evil generation, ^arc. 8. b
they desire a toke^, and there shall no token be given them, but the toke^ of
the prophet Jonas. ^onae 3. a (...) 3. b
For like as Jonas was a toke^ unto the Niniuytes, so shall the son of man be
unto this generation* The queen of the south shall arise at the judgment with
the men of this generation, Re. 10. a Par. 9. a ^at. 12. d
and shall condemn them: for she came from the end of the world, to hear
the wyszdome of Solomon. And behold, here is one more then Solomon. The men of
Niniue shall arise at the judgment with this generation, and shall condemn
them: for they did pennaunce after the preachinge of Jonas: and behold, here
is one more the^ Jonas.

^at. 5. b ^arc. 4. b (...). 8. b
No man lights a candell, and puts it in a preuy place, nether under a
buszhell, but upon a candilsticke, that they which come in, may se ye light.
Mat. 6. c
The eye is the light of the body. If thine eye then be syngle, all thy body
shall be full of light: but if thine eye be wicked, then shall all thy body be
full of darcknesse. Take heed therefore, that the light which is in the, be not
darcknesse. If thy body now be light, so that it have no part of darkness,
then shall it be all full of light, and shall light the even as a clear
lightenynge.

LORD said unto him: Now do ye Pharisees make clean the out side of the cup
and platter, (...)
but your inward parts are full of robbery and wickedness. Ye fools, is a
thing made clean within, because the outsyde is cleansed? Nevertheless give
alms of that ye have, and behold, all is clean unto you.

But woe unto you Pharisees, ye that tithe mynt and rewe, and all manner herbs,
(...)
and pass over judgment and ye love of God. These ought to have been done, and
not to leave the other undone.

Woe unto you Pharisees, Mat. ^ Man. ^ Luc. ^
for ye love to sit uppermost in the synagoges, and to be saluted in the market.

Woe unto you scrybes and Pharyses, ye ypocrites, for ye are like covered
sepulcres, where over men walk, and are not awarre of them.

Then answered one of the scrybes, and said unto him: Master, with these
words thou put us to rebuke also. But he said: And woe unto you also ye
scrybes, for ye lade men with intolerable burdens, and ye your selves touch
them not with one of yo fyngers. (...)


Woe unto you, for ye build the sepulcres (...)
but your fathers put them to death. Doutles ye bear witness, and consent
unto the deeds of yo fathers: for they slew them, and ye build their
sepulcres.

Therefore said the wyszdome of God: (...)
I will send prophets and Apostles unto the^: and some of them shall they put
to death and persecute, that the blood of all the prophets which has been
shed sens the foundation of the world was laid, may be required of this
generation: (...)
from the blood of Abell, unto ye blood of ^
Zachary, which perished between the altar and ye temple. Ye I say unto you:
it shall be required of this generation.

Woe unto you scrybes, (...)
for ye have received ye keye of knowledge. Ye are not come in your selves, and
have forbidden them that would have been in.

When he spoke thus unto them, the scrybes and Pharyses began to preasse sore
upon him, and to stop his mouth with many questions, and laid wait for him,
and sought to hunte out some thing out of his mouth, that they might accuse
him.

The XII. Chapter.
^at. 16. a ^arc. 8. a ^ap. 1. b ^at. 10. d ^arc. 4. b (...). ^. b
But there is nothing hyd, that shall not be discovered: nether secret, that
shall not be known. Therefore what soever ye have spoken in darkness, that same
shall be herd in light: and that ye have spoken in to the ear in the cha^bers,
shall be preached upon the house tops.

But I say unto you my friends: Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and
after that have no more that they can do. (...). 10. d (...) ^0. c
But I will show you, whom ye shall fear. Fear him, which after he has
killed, has power also to cast in to hell: Ye I say unto you: Fear him. Are
not five sparowes bought for two farthinges? Yet is not one of them forgotten
before God. The very hayres of your head also are nombred every one. Fear
not therefore, for ye are better then many sparowes.

(...). 10 d ^^rc. ^. e (...). 9 c (...) ^. a
I say unto you: Who so ever knowlegeth me before men, him shall the son of
man also knowledge before the angels of God: But he that denies me before men,
shall be denied before the angels of God. And who so ever speaks a word
against the son of man, (...). 11. c (...). 3. c
it shall be forgeuen him: But who so blasphemeth the holy ghost, it shall not be
forgeuen him.

(...). 10. c (...). 13. b (...). 21. b
and to the rulers and officers, take ye no thought, how or what ye shall
answer, or what ye shall speak: for the holy ghost shall teach you in the same
hour, what ye ought to say.

But one of the people said unto him: Master, bid my brother deuyde the
enheritaunce with me. Nevertheless he said unto him: Man, who has set me to be
a judge or heretage parter over you? And he said unto them: Take heed, and
bewarre of covetousness, for no man lives thereof, that he has abundaunce of
goods. And he told them a symilitude, and said: There was a rich man, whose
field had brought forth fruits plenteously, and he thought in himself, and
said: What shall I do? I have nothing where into gather my fruits. And he
said: This will I do, I will break down my barnes, and build greater, and
therein will I gather all mine increace, and my goods, and will say unto my
soul: Soul, thou have much goods laid up in stoare for many years, (...)
^1. c
take now thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. But God said unto him: Thou
fool, Iere. 17. ^
this night shall they require thy soul from the, Psalm. 38. ^
and whose shall it be that thou have prepared? Thus goes it with him yt
gathers treasure for himself, and is not rich in God.

But he said unto his disciples? Therefore Psalm. 54. Mat. 6. ^ 1. Pet. 5. a
Take ye no thought for your life, what ye shall eat: nether for your body,
what ye shall put on. The life is more then meat, and the body more then
rayme^t. Consydre the ravens, they nether sow ner reap, they have also nether
stoarehouse ner barn, and yet God fedeth them. But how much better are ye then
the fowls?

Which of you (though he took thought therefore) could put one cubyte unto his
stature? Mat. 6. ^
Saying then ye be not able to do that which is least, why take ye thought for
the other? Considre the lilies upon the field, how they grow: they labor
not, they spynne not. But I say unto you: that even Salomen in all his royalte
was not clothed like one of these. Wherefore if God so cloth the grass, yt is
to day in ye field, and tomorow shall be cast into the furnace, how much more
shall he clothe you, o ye of little faith? Axe not ye therefore what ye shall eat,
or what ye shall drink, and clymme not up an hye: The Heithen in the world
seek after all soch things. But seek ye the kingdom of God, and all these
shall be mynistred unto you.

Fear not thou little flock, for it is your Deuteronomy 1. c and 20. a
Sell that ye have, and give alms. Make you bags, which wax not old:
even a treasure that never fails in heaven, where no thief comes, Mat. 6. c
and 19. c
and no moth corruppeth: for where your treasure is, there will your heart be
also.

Let your loins be gerded about, Ephe. 6. ^ 1. Pet. 1. c
and your lights burning, and be ye like unto men that wait for their
lord, against he return from the marriage, that when he comes and knocks,
they may straight way open unto him. Blessed are those servants, whom the
LORD (when he comes) shall find waking. Verily I say unto you: Luc. 22. b
He shall gyrde up him self, and make them sit down at the table, and shall go
by them, and mynister unto them. And if he come in the second watch, and in
the third watch, and find them so, blessed are those servants. But be sure
of this, Mat. 24. d Marc. 13. d
that if the good man of the house knew, what hour the thief would come, he
would surely watch, and not suffer his house to be broken up. Therefore be ye
ready also, for at an hour when ye think not, shall the son of man come.
^at. 25. a


But Peter said unto him: LORD, tellest LORD said: How great a thing is a
faithful and wise steward, whom his lord sets over his houszholde, to
give the^ their duty in due season? Blessed is that servant, whom his lord
(when he comes) shall find so doing. ^po. 16. c
Verily I say unto you: he shall set him over all his goods. Mat. ^4. d
But if the same servant shall say in his heart: Tush, it will be long or my
lord come, and shall begin to smite ye servants and maidens, ye and to
eat and drink, and to be dronke^: the same servants lord shall come in a
day when he looks not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and
shall hew him in pieces, and give him his reward with the unbelievers.

^aco. 4. b
The servant that knew his lords will and prepared not himself, nether did
acordinge to his will, shall be be^ten with many strypes: But he that knew it
not, and yet did things worthy of strypes, shall be beaten with few strypes.
For look unto whom much is given, of him shall much be sought: and look to whom
much is committed, of him shall much be required.

I am come to kyndle fire upon earth, and Mat. 10. c Mich. 7. a
I tell you nay, but rather debate. For from hence forth there shall be at
varyau^ce in one house: three against two, and two against three. The father shall
be divided against ye son, and the son against the father: the mother
against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother: the mother in law
against her daughter in law, and ye daughter in law against her mother in
law.

And he said unto the people: When ye se a cloud rise out of ye west, Mat.
1^. a
straight way ye say: there comes a shower, and so it is: and when ye se
the southwynde blow, ye say: It will be hot, and it comes so to pass. O ye
ypocrytes, ye can discern the fashion of the sky and of the earth: Why can ye
not discern this time also? Ye and why judge ye not of your selves, what is
right?

While thou go with thine adversary unto the Prince, give diligence by the
way, that thou may be quyte of him, lest he bring the before the judge,
and the judge deliver the to the iaylar, and the iaylar cast the in to preson.
I tell the, thou shall not come out thence, till thou pay the vttemost myte.

The XIII. Chapter.
THere were present at the same season Act. 1^
Galileans, whose blood Pilate had me^gled with their own sacrifice. And
Jesus answered, and said unto them: Suppose ye, that these Galilea^s were
greater sinners then all the other Galileans, because they suffered soch
punishment? I tell you nay, but except ye amend your selves, ye shall all
perish likewise. Or think ye that ye eightene (upon whom the tower in Siloe
fell and slew them) were guilty above all men that dwell at Jerusalem? I tell
you nay: but except ye amend your selves, ye shall all perish likewise.

And he told them this symilitude: A certain man had a fygge tree, which was
planted in his vynyarde, and he came and sought fruit thereon, and found none.
Then said he unto the wine gardener: Behold, This three year long have I
come every year, and sought fruit upon this fygge tree, and find none: cut it
down, why hyndreth it the ground? But he answered, and said: Sir, let it
alone yet this year, till I dygge round about it and donge it, if it will
bring forth fruit: If no* then cut it down afterward.

And he taught in a synagoge upon the Sabbath: and behold, there was a woman,
which had a sprete of infirmyte eightene years, and was crooked, and could not
well look up. When Jesus saw her, he called her to him, and said unto her:
Woman, be delivered from thy disease. And he laid his hands upon her, and
immediately she was made straight, and praised God. Then answered the ruler of
the synagoge, and took indignacion

Then the LORD answered him, and said: Thou ypocryte, does not every one of
you lowse his ox or ass from the crybbe upon Sabbath, and lead him to the
water: But should not this (which is Abraham's daughter) whom Satan has bound
now eightene years, be lowsed from this bond upon the Sabbath? And when he
thus said, all his adversaries were ashamed. And all the people reioysed over
all the excellent deeds, that were done by him.

(...). 13. d (...). 4. a
And he said: What is the kingdom of God like? Or where unto shall I compare it?
It is like a grain of mustarde sede, which a man took, and cast in his garden:
and it grew, and waxed a great tree, and the fowls of the air dwelt among
the branches of it.

(...). 13. c
And again he said: Where unto shall I licken the kingdom of God? It is like
unto leven, which a woman took, and myxte it among three peckes of meele,
(...). 1^. a
till it was all leuended. And he went through cities and towns, and taught,
and took his journey toward Jerusalem.

LORD, are there few (think thou) that shall be saved? But he said unto
them: (...). 7. b
Strive ye to enter in at the strayte gate, for many (I say unto you) shall
seek to come in, and shall not be able. From that time forth, when the good man
of the house is risen up, and has shut the door, then shall ye begin to
stand without, and to knock at ye door, and say: LORD LORD, (...). ^5. a
open unto us. And he shall answer, and say unto you: I know you not whence
ye are.

Then shall ye begin to say: We have eaten and dronken before the, and thou
have taught us upon ye streets. And he shall say: I tell you, I know you not
whence ye are. Depart fro me all ye workers of iniquyte. (...). 6. b (...). 7.
b (...) 25. d
There shall be weeping and gnaszhinge of teth, when ye shall se Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob and all the prophets in ye kingdom of God, and your selves
thrust out, And wha^ they shall come from the east and from the west, (...)
from the north and from the south, which shall sit at ye table in the kingdom
of God. (...). 19. d (...) 20. b (...) 20. c
And behold, there are last, which shall be first: and there are first, which
shall be last.



(...)
O Jerusalem Jerusalem, thou that kyllest the prophets, and stonest the^ that
are sent unto ye, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as
the hen gathers her nest under her wings, and ye would not? Behold, yo
habitacion shall be left unto you desolate. For I say unto you: ye shall not se
me, till ye time come that ye shall say: blessed be he, Luc. 19. d Psalm. 117. ^
yt comes in ye name of the LORD.

The XIIII. Chapter.
ANd it fortuned that he came in to the Luc. 6. a and 13. b Mat. 12. b Marc. 3.
a
Is it laufull to heal on the Sabbath? But they held their tongue. And he took
him, and healed him, and let him go, and answered, and said unto the^: Which
of you shall have an ox or an ass fallen in to a pytte, Exo. 23. a Deuteronomy. 22. ^
and will not straight way pull him out on the Sabbath day? And they could not
answer him again to that.

And he told a symilitude unto ye gestes, wha^ he marked how they chose the
highest seats, and said unto the^: When thou art bydde^ of any man to a
wedding, sit not down in the highest rowme, lest a more honorable man the^ thou
be bydde^ of him, and he that bade both the and him, come and say unto ye:
give this man rowme, and thou the^ begin with shame to take ye lowest rowme.
But rather wha^ thou art bydde^, go and sit in ye lowest rowme, that wha^ he
that bade the, comes, he may say unto the: Friend, sit up hyer: Pro. 25. a
For who so ever exalts himself, shall be brought low: Mat. 23. b. Luc. 18. b
and he yt humbles himself, shall be exalted.

He said also unto him that had bydden him: Wha^ thou make a dinner or a
supper, call not thy friends, ner thy brethren, ner thy kynsfolkes, ner ye
rich neghbours, lest they call the again, and recompense be made ye. But wha^
thou make a feast, Tob. 4. ^
call the poor, the crepell, the lame, the blind, then art thou blessed, for
they can not recompense ye. But it shall be recompensed the in the resurreccion
of the righteous.

When one of them that sat by at the table herd this, he said unto him:
Blessed is he, that eats bred in ye kingdom of God. But he said unto him;
Mat. 22. ^ Apo. 19. b
A certain man made a great supper, and called many there to. And in ye hour
of the supper he sent his seruau^te, to say unto the^ yt were bydde^: Come,
bought a ferme, and I must needs go forth and se it, I pray ye have me
excused. And ye second said: I have bought five yoke of oxen, and now I go to
prove them, I pray the have me excused, And the third said: I have married a
wife, therefore can I not come. And the servant came, and brought his lord
word again thereof.

Then was the good man of the house displeased, and said unto his servant: Go
out quyckly in to the streets and quarters of ye cite, and bring in hither the
poor and crepell, and lame and blind. And the servant said: lord, it is
done as thou have commanded, and there is yet more rowme. And the lord said
unto the servant: Go out into the hye ways, and to the hedges, and compel
them to come in, that my house may be filled. But I say unto you: that none
of these men which were bydden, shall taist of my supper.

^eut. 13. b ^at. 10. c and 16. d
If any man come unto me, and hate not his father, mother, wife, children,
brethren, sisters, ye and his own life also, he can not be my disciple. And
whosoever bears not his cross, and follows me, can not be my disciple.

Which of you is it, yt will build a tower, and sytteth not down first and
counts ye cost, whether he have sufficient to perform, it? lest after he
has laid the foundacio^, and is not able to perform it, all they that se
it, begin to laugh him to scorn, and to say: This man began to build,
and is not able to perfurme it. Or what king will go to make battayl against
another king, and sytteth not down first, and casts in his mind, whether
he be able with ten thousand, to mete him that comes against him with
twentye thousand? Or else, while the other is yet a great way of he sends
embassage, and desires peace. So likewise every one of you that forsakes not
all that he has, can not be my disciple.

Mat. 5. b Marc. 9. c
Salt is a good thing: but if the salt be unsavory, what shall they season
withal? It is nether good upon the land, ner in the donge hill, but shall be
cast away. He that has ears to hear, let him hear.

The XV. Chapter.
Mat. 9. a Marc. 2. b Luc. 5. d Luc. 5. d and 7. c
This man receaueth sinners, and eats with them. But he told the^ this
symilitude, and said: What man is he among you, that has an hundredth sheep,
and if he loose one of the^, that leaves not the nine and nyentye in the
wilderness, Mat. (...)
and goes after that which is lost till he find it? And when he has found
it, he lays it upon his shulders with joy: and when he comes home, he
calls his fre^des and neghbours, and says unto the^: Rejoice with me, for I
have found my sheep, yt was lost. I say unto you: Eue^ so shall there be joy
in heaven over one sinner that does pennaunce, more then over nine and nyentye
righteous, which Luc. (...)
need not repen^taunce.

Or what woman is it that has ten grotes,

And he said: A certain man had two sons, and the younger of them said unto
the father: Father, give me the portion of ye goods, that belongs unto me.
And he divided the good unto them. And not long thereafter, gathered the younger
son all together, and took his journey in to a far country, and there
waisted he his goods with ryotous living. Now when he had spent all that he
had, there was a great derth through out all the same lord. And he began to
lack, and went his way, and claue to a cytesin of that same country, which
sent him in to his field, to keep swyne. And he would feign have filled his
belly with the coddes, that the swyne ate. And noman gave him them.

Then came he to him self, and said: How (...)
his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell about his neck,
and kyssed him. Then said the son unto him: Father, I have sinned against
heaven, and before the, I am no more worthy to be called thy son. But the
father said unto his servants: Bring forth the best garment, and put it
upon him, and give him a ring upon his hand, and shues on his fete, and
bring hither a fed calfe, and kill it, let us eat and be merry: for this my
son was deed, and is alive again: he was lost, and is found. And they
began to be merry.



The XVI. Chapter.


And he called unto hi^ all his lords detters, and said unto the first: How
much owe thou unto my lord? He said: an hundredth tonnes of oil. And he
said: Take ye byll, sit down quyckly, and write fifti^. Then said he unto
another: How much owe thou? He said: an hundredth quarters of wheat. And he
said unto him: Take thy byll, and write four score. And the lord commended
the unrighteous steward, because he had done wisely. For the children of this
world are in their kind wyser, the^ the children of light. And I say unto
you: Make you friends with the unrighteous Mammon, yt when ye shall have need,
they may receive you in to everlasting Tabernacles.

He that is faithful in the least, is faithful

No servant can serve two masters: Mat. 6. c
for either he shall hate the one, and love ye other: or else he shall lean to
the one, and despise the other. Ye can not serve God and Mammon.

All these things herd the Pharisees, which were covetous, and they mocked
hi^. And he said unto them: Ye are they that justify yor selves before men,
but God knows your hertes. For yt which is hye among men, is an
abhominacion before God.

The law and ye prophets prophesied Mat. 11. b
and from that time forth is ye kingdom of God preached through ye Gospel, and
every man p^easseth in to it by violence. But easier is it, for heaven and
earth to perish, then one tittle of ye law to fall. Who so ever puts away
his wife, and marieth another, breaks matrimonye: Mat. 5. d and 19. b Marc.
10. a
and he that marieth her which is deuorced from her huszbande, breaks
wedlock also.

There was a certain rich man, which clothed him self with purple and costly
lynnen, and fared deliciously every day. And there was a poor man named
Lazarus which lay at his gate full of sores, and desired to be filled with the
crommes, that fell from the rich man's table. Yet came the dogs, and licked
his sores. But it fortuned, that the poor man dyed, and was carried of the
angels in to Abraham's bosom. The rich man dyed also, and was buried.

Now when he was in the hell, he lift up wise Lazarus received evil. But now
is he comforted, and thou art tormented. And beside all this, there is a great
space set between us and you: so yt they which would go down from hence unto
you, can not: nether may they pass over from thence unto us.

Then said he: I pray the then father, that thou will send him unto my
fathers house, for I have yet five brethren, that he may warn them, lest they
also come in to this place of torment. Abraham said unto him: They have Moses
and the prophets, let them hear them. But he said: Nay father Abraham, but
if one went unto them from the deed, they would do pennaunce. Nevertheless he
said unto him: If they hear not Moses and the prophets, then shall they not
believe also, though one rose again from the deed.

The XVII. Chapter.
Mat. 18. a Marc. 9. e
but woe unto him by whom they come: It were better for him, that amylstone were
hanged about his neck, and he cast in to the sea, then that he should offend
one of these little ones. Take heed to your selves. If thy brother trespace
against the, rebuke him: Mat. 18. b
and if he amend, forgive him. And though he sin against the seuentymes in a
day, and come seven times in a day to ye again, and say: It repents me,
forgive him.

And the Apostles said unto ye LORD: Increace our faith. The LORD said: If
ye have faith as a grain of mustarde sede, Mat. 17. c and 21. c
and say unto this Molbery tree: Pluck thy self up by the rotes, and pla^te
thy self in the sea, it shall be obedient unto you. Which of you is it, that has
a servant (which ploweth, or fedeth the catell) wha^ he comes home from ye
field, that he will say unto him: Go

And it fortuned, when he took his journey toward Jerusalem, he went through
the myddest of Samaria and Galile. And as he came in to a town, there met him
ten leporous men, which stood afar of, and lift up their voice, and said:
Jesus master, have mercy upon us. And when he saw them, he said unto the^:
Leuit (...)
Go, and show your selves unto ye prestes. And it came to pass, as they
went, they were cleansed. And one of them wha^ he saw that he was cleansed, he
turned back again, and praised God with loud voice, and fell down on his
face at his fete, and gave him thanks. And the same was a Samaritane. Jesus
answered and said: Are there not ten cleansed? But where are those nine? There
were else none found, that turned again, and gave God the praise, save only
this stranger. And he said unto him: Arise, go thy way, thy faith has made
ye whole.

But when he was demanded of ye Pharisees:

And he said to the disciples: The time shall come, wha^ ye shall desire to se
one day of the son of man, and shall not se it. And they shall say unto you:
Se here, Se there. (...)
Go not ye, nether follow, for as the lightenynge shyneth above from the
heaven, and lights over all that is under the heaven, so shall the son of
man be in his day. But first must he suffer many things, (...)
and be refused of this generation.

And as it came to pass in the time of Noe, (...)
so shall it come to pass also in ye days of the son of man. They ate, they
drank, they married, and were married, even unto ye day that Noe went in to
the Arc, and ye floude came, and destroyed them all.

Likewise also as it came to pass in the (...)
it rayned fire and brymstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. After this
manner also shall it go, in the day when the son of man shall appear.

In that day, who so is upon the rofe, and his stuff in ye house, (...)
let him not come down to fetch it: Likewise he that is in the field, let him
not turn back, for it that is behind him. ^
Remember Lottes wife. Who so ever goes about to save his life, shall lose it:
and who so ever shall lose it, shall save it.

I say unto you: In yt night shall two lie upon one bed, the one shall be
received, the other shall be for saken. Two shall be gryndinge together, (...)* 14.
d
the one shall be received, the other shall be forsaken. And they answered, and
said unto him: Where LORD? He said unto the^: Where so ever ye deed carcass
is there will ye Aegles be gathered together.

The XVIII. Chapter.
(...) 5. c
yt men ought always to pray, and not to leave of, and said: There was a
judge in a cite, which feared not God, and stood in awe of no man. And in the
same cite there was a wedowe, which came unto him, and said: deliver me fro
mine adversary. And he would not a great while. But afterward he thought
within himself: Though I fear not God, and stand in awe of no man, yet seeing
this weddowe is so importune upon me, I will deliver her, lest she come at the
last, and rail upon me.

Then said the LORD: Hear what ye unrighteous judge says. But shall not
God also deliver his chosen, that cry unto hi^ day and night, though he
differ the^? I say unto you: He shall deliver them, and that shortly.
Nevertheless, when the son of man comes, suppose ye, that he shall find
faith upon earth?

(...)
I thank the God, that I am not as other men, robbers, unrighteous, aduouters,
or as this publican. I fast twyse in the weke, I give the tithes of all that I
have. And the publican stood afar of, and would not lift up his eyes to
heaven, but smote upon his breast, and said: God be thou merciful unto me
sinner. I tell you: This man went down in to his house justified more the^
the other. (...) 23. b (...) 4. b
For who so ever exalts himself, shall be brought low: and he that humbles
himself, shall be exalted.

(...)
They brought young children also unto him, that he should touch them. But when
the disciples saw that, they rebuked them. Nevertheless Jesus called them unto
him, and said: Suffer children to come unto me, and forbid the^ not, for of
soch is ye kingdom of God. Verily I say unto you: Whosoever receaueth not ye
kingdom of God as a child, shall not enter therein.

Mat. 19. ^ Mar. 10. b
that I may enheret everlasting life? But Jesus said unto him: Why call
thou me good? There is no man good, but God only. Thou know the
commandments: Thou shall not break wedlock: Thou shall not kill: Exo. ^0. c
Thou shall not steal: Thou shall not bear false witness: Honor thy father
and ye mother. But he said: All these have I kept fro my youth up. Wha^ Jesus
herd that, he said unto him: Yet lackest thou one thing, sell all that thou
have, and give it unto ye poor, and thou shall have a treasure in heaven, and
come and follow me. When he herd that, he was sorry, for he was very rich.

When Jesus saw that he was sorry, he said: Mat. 19. c Marc. 10. c
How hardly shall the rich come in to the kingdom of God? It is easyer for a
Camel to go through the eye of a nedle, the^ for a rich man to enter in to the
kingdom of God. Then said they yt herd that: Who can then be saved? But he
said: look what is impossible with me^, is possible with God.

Then said Peter: Behold, Luc. 1. c
we have forsaken all, and followed the. He said unto the^: Mat. 19. d Mar. 10.
c
Verily I say unto you: There is no man yt forsakes house, or elders, or
brethren, or wife, or children for the kingdom of Gods sake, which shall not
receive much more in this time, and everlasting life in the world to come.

He took unto him the twolue, and said Mat. 20. b Marc. 10* d
and it shall all be fulfilled, that is written by the prophets of the son of
man. For he shall be delivered unto ye Heythen, and shall be mocked, and
despytefully entreated, Luc. 23. a
and spitted upon: and when they have scourged him, they shall put him to death,
and upon the third day shall he arise again. Luc. 2. g
And they understood nothing of these things. And this saying was hyd from
them, and they perceived not the things that were spoken.

And it came to pass, Mat. 20. d Marc. 10. c
when he came nigh unto Jericho, there sat one blind by the way, and begged.
And when he herd the people pass by, he axed what it was. Then said they
unto him, that Jesus of Nazareth passed by. And he cried, and said: Jesus thou
son of David, have mercy upon me. But the people that went before, rebuked
him, that he should hold his tunge. Nevertheless he cried much more: Thou son
of David have mercy upon me. Jesus stood still, and commanded hi^ to be brought
unto hi^. And when he was come near, he axed him and said: What will thou,
that I do unto the? He said: LORD, that I may receive my sight. And Jesus
said unto him: Receive thy sight, thy faith has saved the. And immediately he
saw, and followed him, and praised God. And all the people that saw it, gave
God the praise.

The XIX. Chapter.
Act. 16. c
with joy. When they saw that, they murmured all, and said, yt he was gone
in, to a sinner.

But Zacheus stood forth, and said unto the LORD: Behold LORD, the half of
my goods give I to the poor: and if I have defrauded any man, I restore him
four fold. Jesus said unto him: This day is health happened unto this
house, for so much as he also is Abraham's son. Mat. 15. c
For the son of man is come, to seek and to save that which was lost.

Now while they herkened, he told a symilitude also, because he was nigh unto
Jerusalem, and because they thought, that the kingdom of God should appear
immediately. And he said: A certayn^ noble man went in to a far country,
Mat. 25. a Marc. 13. d
to receive hi^ a kingdom, and then to come again. This man called ten of his
servants, and delivered them ten pound, and said unto them: Occupye, till I
come again. But his citesyns hated him, and sent a message after him, and
said: We will not have this man to reign over us.

(...)
Of thine own mouth judge I the thou evil servant. Knew thou thou that I
am an hard man, taking up that I laid not down, and reapynge that I did not
sow? Wherefore then have thou not delivered my money to the exchange bank?
And at my coming might I have required mine own with vauntage?

And he said unto them that stood by: (...)
unto him shall be given: but from him that has not, shall be taken away even
that he has. As for those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign
over them, bring them hither, and slaye them before me. And when he had thus
said, he went on forward, and took his journey up to Jerusalem.

And it fortuned when he came nigh to Bethphage and Bethany unto mount Oliuete,
he sent two of his disciples, and said: (...)
Go in to the town that lies over against you, and as soon as ye are come in,
ye shall find a foale tied, whereon yet never man satt, lowse it, and bring it
hither. And if any man axe you wherefore ye lowse it, say thus unto him. The
LORD has need thereof.

And they that were sent, went their way and found even as he had said. But
wha^ they lowsed ye foale, the owners thereof said unto the^: Why lowse ye the
foale? They said: The LORD has need thereof. And they brought it unto Jesus,
and cast their clothes upon the foale, and set Jesus thereon. Now as he went,
(...)
they spread their garments in the way.

And when he went down fro mount Oliuete, (...)
that comes a king in the name of the LORD. ^
Peace be in heaven, and praise in the height. And some of the Pharisees among
the people said unto him: Master, rebuke thy disciples. And he answered and
said unto them: I tell you, (...)
if these hold their peace, yet shall the stones cry.

And when he was come near, he beheld the cite, and (...) 11. d
wept upon it, and said: If thou knew what were for ye peace, thou
should remember it even in this present day of thine. But now is it hyd from
thine eyes. For the time shall come upon the, (...)
that thine enemies shall cast up a ba^ke about the, and about thy children
with the, and besege ye, and keep the in on every side, and make the eauen with
the ground, and shall not leave in the one stone upon another, because thou
have not known ye time, wherein thou have been visited.

And he went in to the temple, and began to drive out them that bought and
sold therein, (...)
and said unto them: It is written: (...)
My house is an house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of murthurers. And
he taught daily in the temple. But the hye prestes and the scrybes and the
chefest of ye people went about to destroy him, (...)
and found not, what to do unto him. For all the people stacke by him, and
gave him audience.

The XX. Chapter.
(...) ^1. c (...). 11. d
and preached the Gospel, the hye prestes and scrybes came to him with the
Elders, and spoke unto him, and said: Tell us, by what auctorite do thou
these things? Or who gave the this auctorite? But he answered, and said unto
the^: I will axe you a word also, tell it me: The baptyme of Iho^ was it from
heaven, or of men? But they thought in them selves, and said: If we say, from
heaven, then shall he say: Why did ye not the^ believe him? But if we say, of
men, then shall all the people stone us, for they be persuaded, that Ihon is a
prophet. And they answered, that they could not tell, whence it was. And Jesus
said unto them: Nether tell I you, by what auctorite I do these things.

And he began to tell the people this symilitude: (...)
A certain man planted a vynyarde, and let it out unto huszba^dmen, and went
himself in to a strange country for a great season. And when his time was
come, he sent a servant to the huszba^dmen, that they might give him of the
fruit of the vynyarde. But the huszbandmen bet him, and sent him away emptye.
And again he sent yet another servant: but they bet him also, and entreated
him shamefully, and sent him away Ioha^. 3. c Romans 8. Phil. 2. a
dear son, peradventure they will stand in awe of him, when they se him.

But when the huszbande men saw the son, they thought in the^ selves, and
said: This is the heir, come, Genesis 37.
let us kill him, yt the inheritance may be ours. And they thrust him out of
ye vynyarde, and slew him. What shall now the lord of the vynyarde do unto
them? He shall come, and destroy those huszbandmen, and let out his vynyarde
unto other. When they herd that, they said: God forbid.

But he beheld the^, and said: What is this then that is written: Psalm. 117.
Esa. 28 c
The same stone which the buylders refused, is become the head corner stone?
Who so ever falls upon this stone, shall be broken in sunder: but upon who^ so
ever he falls, he shall grynde him to poulder. Mat. 21 c Marc. 12. Luc. 19. c
And the hye prestes and scrybes went about to lay hands upon him the same
hour, and they feared the people: for they perceived, that he had spoken this
symilitude against them.

And they watched hi^, and sent forth spies, Mat. 2^ Marc. 12.
that they might take him in his words, to deliver him unto the power and
auctorite of ye debite. And they axed him, and said: Master, we know that
thou say and teach right, and regardest the outward appearau^ce of no
man, but teach the way of God truly. Is it laufull, that we give tribute
unto the Emperor, or not? But he perceived their craftynes, and said unto
them: Why te^pte ye me? Show me the penny. Whose image and superscripcion has
it? They answered, and said: The Emperors. Then said he unto them: Give the^
unto the Emperor, that which is the Emperors: and unto God, that which is
Gods. And they could not reprove his word before the people, and marueyled at
his answer, and held their peace.

Then came unto him certain of the Saduces Mat. 22. c Marc. 12. ^
Moses wrote unto us, if any man's brother dye having a wife, and dies without
children, Deuteronomy. 25. a
then shall his brother take his wife, and raise up sede unto his brother. Now
were there seven brethren: the first took a wife, and dyed childlesse: and the
second took the wife, and deyed without children also: and the third took
her, likewise all the seven, and left no children behind the^, and dyed. At
the last after them all, the woman dyed also. Now in the resurreccion, whose
wife shall she be of them For seven had her to wife. And Jesus answered and
said unto them: The children of this world mary, and are married, but they yt
shall be worthy to enjoy that world and the resurreccion from the deed, shall
nether mary ner be married, for they can dye no more. For they are like unto the
angels, and are the Ioha^. 3. a
children of God, in so much as they are children of the resurreccion.

LORD, ^xod. 3. a
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. But God is not a
God of the deed but of the living, for they live all unto him. Then answered
certain of the scrybes, and said: Master, thou haist said well. And from
that time forth they durst axe him no mo questions.

Mat. ^2. d Marc 12. d
But he said unto them: How say they that Christ is David's son? And David
himself says in the book of the Psalms: The LORD said unto my LORD: Psalm.
109. a
Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool. David
calls him LORD, how is he then his son?

Mat. 23. a Marc. 12. d ^uc. 11. d
Now while all the people gave audience, he said unto his disciples: Bewarre of
the scrybes, which will go in long garments, and love to be saluted upon the
market, and desire to sit highest in the synagoges, and at the table. They
devour wedowes houses and that under a culoure of long prayenge: These shall
receive the greater da^nacion.

The XXI. Chapter.
Marc. 12. d
He saw also a poor wedowe, which put in two mytes, and he said: Verily I
say unto you: 1. Cor. 8. b
This poor wedowe has put in more the^ they all: For these all have of their
excess put in unto the offering of God, but she of her pouerte has put in
all her living that she had.

Mat. 24. a Marc. 13. a
And wha^ some spoke of the temple, that it was garnished with goodly stones and
Jewels, he said: 3. Re. 9. b Iere. 7. b Luc. 19. d
The time shall come, where in of all this that ye se, there shall not be left one
stone upon another, which shall not be broken down. They axed him, and said:
Master, wha^ shall these be? and what shall be the token, when these shall come to
pass?

He said: Take heed, that ye be not disceaued: 1. Ioh. 4. a
For many shall come in my name, and say, I am he, and the time is come hard
by. Follow them not.

Esa. ^9 a
and one realm against another, and shall be great earthquakes here and there,
pestilence, and derth, and fearful things. And great tokens shall there be
from heaven. But before all these, Mat. (...) and (...) Marc. (...) Luc. (...)
Ioha^. (...) and (...).
they shall lay hands upon you, and persecute you, and deliver you up in to
their synagoges and presons, and bring you before kings and princes for my
names sake. But this shall happen unto you for a witness. Be at a point
therefore in your hertes, that ye take no thought, how ye shall answer: for I
will give you mouth and wyszdome, Exo^ (...) Esa. (...) Act (...)
^gaynst the which all your adversaries shall not be able to speak ner to
resist. But ye shall be delivered up even of your elders, brethren, Mich. (...)
kynszfolkes and friends, and some of you shall they put unto death, and ye shall
be hated of every man for my names sake, and yet shall not one hair of your
head perish. Hold fast your souls with patience.

But when ye shall se Jerusalem beseged (...)
that the desolacion of it is nigh. Then let them which be in Iewry, fly unto
the mountains* and let soch as be in the myddest thereof, depart out: and let
soch as be in the countrees, not come therein. For these are the days of
vengeance, that every thing which is written, may be fulfilled. But woe unto
them that are with child, and to them that give suck in those days: for
there shall be great trouble upon earth, and wrath over this people, and they
shall fall through the edge of the sword, and be led captyue among all nations.
(...)
And Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Heithen* until the time of the
Heithen be fulfilled.

And there shall be tokens in the Son and Moan, and stars, (...)
and upon earth the people shall be in soch perplexite, that they shall not tell
which way to turn them selves. And the sea and the waters shall roar, and men
shall pyne away for fear, and for lokynge after the things which shall come
upon earth. For even the very powers of heaven shall move.

And then shall they se the son of man coming in the cloud with power and
great glory. (...)
But when these things begin to come to pass, the^ look up, and lift up
your heads, for your redemption draws nigh.

And he told them a symilitude: Behold the fygge tree, (...). ^4. c (...). 1^.
d
and all tree trees, wha^ they now shute forth their buddes, ye se by them, and
perceive, that Summer is now at hand. So likewise ye, when ye se all these
things come to pass, be sure that the kingdom of God is nigh. Verily I say
unto you: This generacio^ shall not pass, till all be fulfilled. Heaven and
earth shall pass, but my words shall not pass.

(...)
But take heed unto your selves, that yo hertes be not ouerlade^ with excess
of eatinge and with dronkennes, and with taking of thought for living, and so
this day come upon you unawares. For as a snare shall it come on all them that
dwell upon earth. Watch therefore co^tynually, (...). 14. d (...). 1^ d (...).
5. b
and pray, that ye may be worthy to escape all this that shall come, and to
sto^de before ye son of man.

And on the day time he taught in the temple, but in the night season he went
out and abode all night upon mount Oliuete. And all the people gat them up
early unto him in the temple, for to hear him.

The XXII. Chapter.
(...) 2^. a (...). 14. a (...). 7. c ^ and f (...). 11. a (...) 8. c
Satan was entered in to Judas, named Iscarioth (which was of ye nombre of ye
twolue) and he went his way, and talked with the hye prestes and with ye
officers, how he would betraye him unto them. And they were glad, and promised
to give him money. And he consented, and sought oportunite, yt he might betraye
hi^ without any rumoure.

(...) 25. b (...) 14. b
Then came ye day of sweet bred, wherein the Easter lamb must be offered. And
he sent Peter and Ihon, and said: Go your way, prepare us the Easter lamb,
that we may eat. But they said unto him: Where will thou, that we prepare
it? He said unto them: Behold, wha^ ye come in to ye cite, there shall mete
you a man, bearinge a pitcher of water, follow him in to the house yt he
enters in, and say unto the good man of the house: The master sends ye
word: Where is ye gesthouse, wherein I may eat the Easter la^be with my
disciples? And he shall show you a great parlour paued. They went their way,
and found as he had said unto them, and made ready the Easter lamb.

Mat. 26. Mar. 14. 1. Cor. 11.
And he took the cup, gave thanks, and said: Take this and deuyde it among
you. For I lay unto you: I will not drink of the fruit of ye vine, until the
kingdom of God come.

And he took the bred, gave thanks, and brake it, and gave it them, and said:
This is my body, Ioha^. 6. f
which shall be given for you. This do in the remembrance of me. Likewise also
the cup, after they had supped, and said: This cup is the new Testament in
my blood, which shall be shed for you.

But lo, Mat. 26. Mar. 14.
the hand of him that betrayeth me, is with me on the table. And the son of
man truly goes forth, as it is appointed. But woe unto that man, by whom he is
betrayed. And they began to axe among them selves, which of them it should
be, that should do that.

There rose a strife also among the^, Mat. 20. Marc. 9. and 10. c Luc. 9. c
which of them should be taken for the greatest. But he said unto them: The
kings of ye world have domynion over ye people, and they that bear rule over
the^, are called gracious lords. 1. Pet. 5. a
But ye shall not be so: But the greatest among you, shall be as the youngest: and
the chefest, as a servant. For which is the greatest? he that sytteth at the
table, or he that serves? Is not he that sytteth at the table? Luc. 12. ^
But I am among you as a mynister. As for you, ye are they, that have bydde^
with me in my temptacions. And I will appoynte the kingdom unto you, even as my
father has appointed me, that ye may eat and drink at my table in my
kingdom, Mat. 19. d Apoc. 3. d
and sit upon seats, and judge the twolue trybes of Israel.

But the LORD said: Simon Simon, LORD, Mat. 26. Marc. 14. Ioha^. 13. ^
I am ready to go with the in to preson, and in to death. Nevertheless he said:
Peter, I say unto the: The cock shall not crow this day, till thou have
thryse denied, yt thou knew me.

And he said unto them: Mat. 10. a Marc. 6. ^ Luc. 9. a
When I sent you without wallet, without scryppe, and without shues, lacked ye
any thing? They said: No. Then said he unto them: But now, he that has a
wallet, let him take it up, likewise also the scryppe. But he that has not,
let him sell his coat, and bye a sword. For I say unto you: It must yet be
fulfilled on me, that is written: Esa. 53. c
He was counted among the evil doers. For look what is written of me, it has
an end. But they said: LORD, Behold, here are two swerdes. He said unto
the^: It is enough.

Mat. 26. c Ioha^. 18. a
And he went out (as he was wont) unto mount Oliuete. But his disciples
followed him unto the same place. And when he came thither, he said unto the^:
Mat. 6. b
Pray, that ye fall not in to te^ptacion. And he gat him from them about a
stones cast, and kneled down, prayed, and said: Father, if thou will, take
away this cup fro me: Nevertheless, not my will, but thine be fulfilled.
And there appeared unto him an angel from heaven, ^oha^. 6. d
and conforted him. And it came so, that he wrestled with death, and prayed the
longer. And his sweat was like drops of ^loude, runnynge down to the
ground. And he rose up from prayer, and came to his disciples, and found them
slepinge for heaviness, and said unto them: What, sleep ye? rise up and pray,
that ye fall not in to tentacion.

Mat. 26. e Marc 14. e ^oha^. 18. a
and one of the twolue called Judas went before them, and he came nigh unto
Jesus, to kiss him. But Jesus said unto him: Judas, betrayest thou the son
of man with a kiss? When they that were about him, saw what would follow,
they said unto him: LORD, shall we smite with the sword? And one of the^
stroke a servant of ye hye prestes, and smote of his ear. But Jesus answered,
and said: Suffer the^ thus far forth. And he touched his ear, and healed
him.

But Jesus said unto the prestes and rulers of the temple, Mat. 26. f Marc.
14. f
and to the Elders that were come unto him: Ye are come forth as it were to a
murthurer with swerdes, and with staves. I was daily with you in the temple,
and ye laid no hands upon me. But this is your hour, and the power of
darkness. Nevertheless they took him, and led him, Ioha^. 18. b
and brought him in to the hye prestes house. As for Peter, he followed hi^ a
far of.

Then kyndled they a fire in the myddest of the palace, and sat them down
together. And Peter sat him down among them. Then a damsel saw him syttinge
by the light, and beheld him well, and said unto him: This same was also with
him. But he denied him, and said: Woman, I know him not. And after a little
while, another saw him, and said: Thou art one of them also. But Peter said:
Man, I am not.

And about the space of an hour after, LORD turned him about and looked upon
Peter. And Peter remembered the words of ye LORD, how he said unto him: Luc.
(...) Mat. (...) Mar. (...)
Before the cock crow, thou shall deny me thryse. And Peter went out, and
wept bytterly.

The men that held Jesus, mocked him, Mat. (...).
and stroke him, blyndfolded him, and smote him on the face, and axed him, and
said: Prophecy, who is it that smote the? And many other blasphemies said
they unto hi^.

And when it was day, there gathered together the Elders of the people, Mat.
(...) Mat. (...)
the hye prestes and scrybes, and led him up before, their council, and said:
Art thou Christ? Tell us. But he said unto them: If I tell you, ye will not
believe: But if I axe you, ye will not answers me, nether will ye let me go. Col.
(...) Heb. (...) and (...)
From this time forth shall the son of man sytt at the right hand of the
power of God. Then said they all: Art thou then ye son of God? He said unto
them: Ye say it, for I am. They said: What need we any farther witness?
Man. (...)
We our selves have herd it of his own mouth.

The XXIII. Chapter.
ANd the whole multitude of the^ arose, (...)
and began to accuse him, and said: We have found this fellow peruertinge
the people, and forbyddinge to give trybute unto the Emperor, and says,
that he is Christ a king. But Pilate axed him, and said: (...)
Art thou the king of the Jews? He answered him, and said: Thou say it.
Pilate said unto ye hye prestes and to the people: I find no cause in this
man. But they were the more fearce, and said: He has moved the people, in
that he has taught here and there in all the land of Iewry, and has (...)
begone at Galile unto this place.

When Pilate herd mention of Galile, he axed whether he were of Galile. And
when he perceived that he was under (...)
He rodes iurisdiccion (...)
he sent him to Herod, which was also at Jerusalem in those days. When Herod
saw Jesus, he was exceadinge glad, for he had long been desirous to se him:
because (...)
he had herd much of him, and hoped to se a miracle of hi^. And he axed him
many things. Nevertheless he answered him nothing. The hye prestes and scrybes
stood, and accused him sore. But Herod with his men of war despised him, and
mocked him, put a white garment upon him, and sent him again unto Pilate. Upon
ye same day were Pilate and Herod made friends together, for before they had
been at variaunce.

(...). 27. b (...). ^5. a (...) ^8. c
Ye have brought this man unto me, as one that peruerteth the people, and
behold, I have examyned him before you, and find in the man none of the
causes, whereof ye accuse him: Nor yet Herod: for I sent you to him, and
behold, there is brought upon hi^ nothing, that is worthy of death. (...).
^9. a
Therefore will I chasten him, and let him lowse: For he must have let one lowse
unto them after the custom of the feast.

(...). 27. c (...). 1^. b
Then cried the whole multitude, and said: Away with him, and deliver unto us
Barrabas, which for insurreccion made in the cite, and because of a murthur,
was cast in to preson. Then called Pilate unto them again, and would have let
Jesus lowse. But they cried, and said: Crucifye him, Crucifye him. Yet said
he unto them, the third time: What evil the^ has he done? I find no cause
of death in hi^, therefore will I chasten him, and let him go. But they lay
still upon him with great cry, and required yt he might be crucified. And the
voice of the^ and of the hye preastes prevailed.

(...). ^7. c (...) 3. b
and let lowse unto the^, him, that for insurreccio^ and murthur was cast in to
preson, whom they desired, but gave Jesus over unto their will. And as they led
him away, (...). ^^. d (...) 19. b
they took one Simon of Cyren (which came from the field) and laid ye cross
upon him, to bear it after Jesus.

(...). 12. c
And there followed him a great multitude of people and of women, which bewailed
and lamented him. But Jesus turned him about unto the^, and said: Ye
daughters of Jerusalem, weep not over me: but weep over your selves, and over
your children. For behold, the time will come, wherein it shall be said:
Blessed are the baren, and the wombes that have not borne, and the pappes that
have not given suck. (...)
Then shall they begin to say unto the mountains: Fall upon us. And to the
hills: Cover us. For if this be done to a grene tree, what shall be done then to
the dry?

(...)
And two other (which were myszdoers) were led out also, to be put to death with
him. And wha^ they came to ye place, which is called Caluery, they crucified
him even there, and the two myszdoers with him, the one on the right hand,
the other on ye left. But Jesus said: Father, forgive them, Act. 7. ^
for they wot not what they do. Psalm. 2 Mat. 27 Marc. 1 Ioha^. 19
And they parted his garments, and cast lottes therefore. And the people stood
and beheld.

And the rulers mocked him with them, Mat. 27 ^ Ioha^. 19 ^
This is the king of the Jews.

And one of the myszdoers that hanged there, blasphemed him, and said: If thou
be Christ, then help thy self and us. Then answered the other, rebuked him,
and said: And thou fear not God also, which art yet in like da^nacion. And
truly we are therein be right, for we receive acordinge to our deeds. As for
this man, he has done nothing amysse. And he said unto Jesus: LORD,
remember me, when thou come in to thy kingdom. And Jesus said unto him:
Verily I say unto the: To day shall thou be with me in Paradyse. And it was
about the sixte hour, Mat. 25 Marc. 1^
and there was darkness over ye whole land until the nyenth hour. And the
Son was darkened, and the veil of the temple rent in two even through the
mids.

And Jesus cried loud, and said: Father, Psalm. 30 Act. 7. g
in to thy hands I commend my sprete. And when he had so said, he gave up
the ghost. Mat. 27 ^ Marc. 15 ^
But when the Captain saw what had happened, he praised God, and said:
Verily this was a just man. And all the people that stood by and beheld, when
they saw what was done, smote upon their breasts, and turned back again. But
all his acquantaunce, and the women that had followed him out of Galile, stood
afar of, and beheld all these things.

And behold, a man named Joseph, Mat. 27. ^ Marc. 15. ^ Ioha^. 19. ^
a Senator, which was a good just man, the same had not consented unto their
council, and deed, which was of Arimathia a cite of the Jews, which same also
waited for the kingdom of God: he went unto Pilate, and axed the body of
Jesus. And the took him down, wrapped him in a lynnen cloth, and laid him in
a hewn sepulcre, wherein never man was laid. And it was the day of
preparinge, and the Sabbath drue on.

(...)
The women that were come with him out of Galile, followed him, and beheld the
Sepulcre, and how his body was laid. But they returned, and made ready the
spyces and anontme^tes. And upon the Sabbath they rested, acordinge to the law.

The XXIIII. Chapter.
Mat. 28. a ^arc. 16. a ^^ha^. 20. a
they came unto the Sepulcre, and brought ye spyces which they had prepared,
and certain women with the^. Nevertheless they found the stone rolled away
from the sepulcre, and went in, and found not the body of ye LORD Jesus.
^^ha^. ^0. b
And it happened as they were amassed thereat, behold, there stood by them two
men in shyninge garments. And they were afraid, and cast down their faces to
the earth. Then said they unto the^: What seek ye? the living among the
deed? He is not here. He is risen up. Remember, how yt he told you wha^ he was
yet in Galile, and said: (...). 9. c
The son of man must be delivered in to the hands of sinners, and be
crucified, and the third day rise again.

And they remembered his words, and went from the sepulcre, ^at. 28. b ^arc
16. b ^^ha^. 20. b
and told all this unto the eleven, and to all the other. It was Mary
Magdalene, and Iohanna, and Mary James, and the other with them, that told
this unto the Apostles. And their words seemed unto them, as though they had
been but fables, and they believed them not. But Peter arose, and ran to the
sepulcre, and stouped in, and saw the lynnen clothes laid by them selves, and
departed. And he wondered within himself at that which had happened

^at. 1^. b
to a town (which was three score furlo^ges from Jerusalem) whose name was
called Emaus. And they talked together of all these things yt had happened.
And it chanced as they were thus talkinge and reasonynge together, Mat. 1^. c
Jesus himself drue nigh, and went with them. But their eyes were holden, that
they should not know hi^. And he said unto them: What manner of co^municacions
are these that ye have one to another as ye walk, and are sad? Then answered
the one, whose name was Cleophas, and said unto him: Art thou only a
stranger at Jerusalem, not knowinge what is come to pass there in these
days? And he said unto the^: What? They said unto him: That of Jesus of
Nazareth, Mat. ^1. c
which was a prophet, mighty in deed and word, before God and all ye people,
how our hye prestes and rulers delivered him to the condemnacion of death, and
crucified him. But we hoped that he should have delivered Israel. And besides
all this, todaye is the third day that this was done. Luc. 24. ^ Ioha^. (...)
Ye and certain women also of our company which were early at the Sepulcre,
and found not his body, came and told, that they had seen a vision of angels,
which said he was alive. And certain of them that were with us, went unto
the sepulcre, and found it even so as ye weme^ said, but hi^ found they not.

And he said unto the^: O ye fools and slow of heart to believe all that the
prophets Esa. (...)
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter in to his glory?
And he began at Moses and at all the prophets, and expounded unto them all
the scriptures, that were spoken of him. And they drue nigh unto the town,
which they went unto, and he made as though he would have gone farther. Genesis
(...) Luc. (...)
And they compelled him, and said: Abide with us, for it draws toward
night, and the day is far passed. And he went in to tarry with the^. And it
came to pass when he sat at the table with the^, he took the bred, gave
thanks, brake it, and gave it them. Then were their eyes opened, and they
knew him. And he vanyshed out of their sight. And they said, between the^
selves: Did not our heart burn with in us, when he talked with us by the way,
while he opened the scriptures unto us? And they rose up the same hour, turned
again to Jerusalem, and found ye eleue^ gathered together, and them that were
with them, which said: The LORD is risen of a truth, and has appeared unto
Simon. And they told the^ what had happened by ye way, and how they knew him
in breaking of the bred.

But while they were talking thereof, (...)
Jesus himself stood in the mids among the^, and said: Peace be with you.
But they were abashed and afraid, supposinge that they had seen a sprete. And
he said unto the^: Why are ye abashed? and wherefore rise there yo hertes?
Behold my hands and my fete, it is even I my self. Handle me, and se, for a
sprete has not flesh and bones, as ye se me have. And when he had thus spoken,
he showed the^ his ho^des and his fete. But while they yet believed not for joy
and wondered, (...)
he said unto them: Have ye any thing here to eat? And they set before him a
piece of a broyled fish, and an honey comb. And he took it, and ate it before
the^.

And he said unto them: (...). 1^. c
These are the words, which I spoke unto you, while I was yet with you. For it
must all be fulfilled that was written of me in the law of Moses, in the
prophets, and in the Psalms. The^ opened he their understanding, that they
might understand the scriptures, and said unto them: (...)
Thus is it written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and the third day
to rise again from the deed, and to let repentance and remyssion, of sins
be preached in his name among all nations, (...). 4. a
and to begin at Jerusalem. As for all these things, ye are witnesses of
the^. And behold, I will send upon you the (...) a (...) 1 a ^^^a^ 14. c (...)
a
promise of my father: but ye shall tarry in the cite of Jerusalem, till ye be
endewed with power from above.

(...). c (...) b
But he led them out unto Bethany, and lift up his hands, and blessed them. And
it came to pass wha^ he blessed them, he departed from them, and was carried up
in to heaven. And they worshipped him, and turned again to Jerusalem with
great joy: and were contynually in ye temple, geuynge praise and thanks unto
God. Amen.

The end of the gospel of S. Luke.
The gospel of S. Ihon.
What S. Ihons gospel conteyneth.
Chap. I. The everlasting birth of the son of God, and how he became man.
The testimony of Ihon and of his baptyme. The calling of Andrew, Peter, Philip
and Nathanael. Chap. II. Christ turns the water unto wine at the marriage in
Cana, and dryueth the merchants out of the temple. Chap. III. The sweet
talkinge of Christ with Nicodemus. The doctrine and baptyme of Iho^, and what
witness he bears of Christ. Chap. IIII. The loving communicacion of Christ
with the woman of Samaria by the wells side. How he comes into Galile, and
heals the rulers son. Chap. V. He heals the man that was sick eight and
thirty year. The Jews accuse him as a breaker of the Sabbath: he answers
for himself, and reproves them Chap. VI. Jesus fedeth five thousand me^ with
five barlye Loaves, departs away, that they should not make him king, goes
upon the sea, and reproves the fleshly hearers of his word. The carnal are
offended at hi^, and forsake him. Chap. VII. Jesus comes to Jerusalem at the
feast, teaches the Jews and reproves the^: The pharisees and the hye prestes
hearing that the people begin to favor Christ and to believe in him, send
out officers to take hi^. There are diverse opinions of him among the people.
The pharisees rebuke the officers because they have not taken him, and chyde
with Nicodemus for taking his part. Chap. VIII. A woman is taken in
aduoutrie: Christ delyuereth her. The fredome of soch as follow Christ, whom
they accuse to have the deuel within him, and go about to stone him. Chap. IX.
Christ makes the man to se that was borne blind, where through he gets
himself more displeasure among the Jews and Pharisees. Chap. X. Christ is the
true shepherde, and the door of the sheep. Some say: Christ has the deuell,
and is madd, some say: he speaks not the words of one that has the deuell.
Because he tells the truth, the Jews take up stones to cast at him, call
his preachinge blasphemy, and go about to take him. Chap. XI. Christ rayseth
Lazarus from death. The hye prestes and the pharyses gather a council, and
cast their heads together against him, therefore he gets him out of the
way. Chap. XII. Mary anoynteth Christ's fete, Judas murmureth, Christ excuses
her, rydeth in to Jerusalem, and is louyngly received of the thankful, but
utterly despised of the ungodly. Chap. XIII. Christ washes the disciples fete,
tells them of Judas the traitor, and commands the^ earnestly to love one
another. Chap. XIIII. He armeth his disciples with consolacion against trouble
for to come, takes from the^ the heaviness that they had because of his
departinge, and promises them the holy ghost, the spirit of comfort. Chap.
XV. The true vine, the huszbandman and the branches. A doctrine of love, and a
sweet comfort against persecucion. Chap. XVI. Co^solacion against trouble.
Prayers are herd through Christ. Chap. XVII. The most heartily and louinge
prayer of Christ unto his father, for all soch as receive the truth, and be
his own. Chap. XVIII. Christ is betrayed. The words of his mouth smite the
officers to the ground. Peter smyteth of Malchus ear. Jesus is brought before
Anna, Caiphas, and Pilate. Chap. XIX. Christ is crucified. He commends his
mother unto Ihon, sheddeth his blood, and is buried. Chap. XX. The
resurreccion of Christ, which appears to Mary Magdalene and to all his
disciples, to their great comfort. Chap. XXI. He appears to his disciples
again by the sea of Tyberias, and commands peter earnestly to feed his
sheep.
The gospel of S. Ihon.


The first Chapter.
Genesis 1. a ^ro. 8. b
All things were made by the same, and without the same was made nothing that
was made. In him was the Ioha^. 14. b Ioha^. 8. b ^^a. 12. c
life, and the life was the Ioha^. 14. b Ioha^. 8. b ^^a. 12. c
light of men: and the light shyneth in the darkness, and the darkness
comprehended it not.

There was sent from God a man, whose name was Ihon. The same came for a
witness, to bear witness of ye light, that through him they all might believe.
^oha^. 5. d
He was not that light, but that he might bear witness of ye light. That was
the true light, which lights all men, that come in to this world. He was in
the world, and the world was made by him, and ye world knew him not. He
came in to his own, and his own received him not. But as many as received
him, ^^se. 1. b ^om. 8. b ^^al. 4. a
to them gave he power to be the children of God: even soch as believe in his
name. Which are not borne of blood, ner of the will of the flesh, ner of the
will of man, but of God.

^aruc. 2. e Mat. 17. a ^. Pet. 1. c ^. Ioha^. 1. a
and we saw his glory, a glory as of the only begotten son of the father,
full of grace and truth.

Ihon bare witness of him, cried, and said: Mat. ^. b Marc. 1. a
It was this, of whom I spoke: After me shall he come, that was before me, For
he was or ever I: and Col. ^. b
of his fullness have all we received grace for grace. For the law was given
by Moses, grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. Deuteronomy. (...) 1. Ioha^. (...)
No man has seen God at any time. The only begotten son which is in the
bosom of the father, he has declared the same unto us.

And this is the record of Ihon, when the Jews sent prestes and Levites from
Jerusalem, to axe him: Who art thou? And Ioha^. (...)
he confessed and denied not. And he confessed, and said: I am not Christ. And
they axed him: What the^? Art thou Elias? He said: I am not. Art thou the
Deuteronomy. (...)
Prophet? And he answered: No. Then said they unto him: What art thou the^, yt
we may give answer unto the^ that sent us? What say thou of ye self? He
said: Mat. (...) Marc. (...) Luc. (...)
I am ye voice of a crier in the wilderness. Make straight ye way of the
LORD. Esa (...)
As ye prophet Esaias said:

And they that were sent, were of ye Pharisees. Man (...) Marc. (...) Luc. (...)
Act. (...)
I baptyse with water, but there is one come in among you, whom ye know not.
It is he that comes after me, which was before me: whose shue lachet I am not
worthy to vnlowse. This was done at Bethabara beyond Iordane, Ioha^ (...) and
(...)
where Ihon did baptyse.

The next day after, Ihon saw Jesus coming unto him, and said: Behold
the Esa. (...) 1. Co^ (...)
la^be of God, which takes away the sin of the world. This is he, of whom
I said unto you: After me comes a man, which was before me. For he was or
ever I, and I knew him not: but that he should be declared in Israel, therefore
am I come to baptyse with water.

And Ihon bare record, and said: I saw (...)
and I knew him not. But he that sent me to baptyse with water, ye same said
unto me: Upon whom thou shall se the sprete descend and tarry still on him, the
same is he, that baptyseth with the holy ghost. And I saw it, and bare
record, that this is the son of God.

The next day after, Ihon stood again, and two of his disciples. And wha^ he
saw Jesus walking, he said: Behold the (...)
la^be of God. And two of his disciples herd him speak, and followed Jesus.
And Jesus turned him about, and saw them folowinge, and said unto the^: What
seek ye? They said unto him: Rabbi, (which is to say by interpretacion,
Master.) Where art thou at lodginge? He said unto them: Come and se it. They
came and saw it, and abode with him the same day. It was about the tenth
hour.

One of the two, which herd Ihon speak, and followed Jesus, was Andrew the
brother of Simon Peter: the same found first his brother Simon, and said unto
him: We have found Messiah (which is by interpretacion, ye Anointed) and
brought him to Jesus. When Jesus beheld him, he said: Thou art Simon the
son of Jonas, (...)
thou shall be called Cephas, which is by interpretacion, a stone.

The next day after, would Jesus go again (...)
Follow me. Philippe was of Bethsaida the cite of Andrew and Peter. Philippe
found Nathanael, and said unto him: We have found him, of who^ (...)
Moses in the law, and ye (...)
prophets have written, even Jesus the son of Joseph of Nazareth. And
Nathanaell said unto him: (...)
What good can come out of Nazareth? Philippe said unto him: Come, and se.

Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and said of him: Behold, a right
Israelite, in whom is no gyle. Nathanael said unto him: From whence know
thou me? Jesus answered, and said unto him: Before yt Philippe called the,
when thou wast under the fygge tree, I saw the. Nathanaell answered, and said
unto hi^: Rabbi, thou art ye son of God, thou art ye king of Israel. Jesus
answered, and said unto him: Because I said unto the, that I saw the under
the fygge tree, thou beleuest: thou shall se yet greater things the^ these. And
he said unto him: Verily verily I say unto you: From this time forth shall ye
se the heaven open, (...) c (...) d
and the angels of God goinge up and down over the son of man.

The II. Chapter.
(...)
Woman, what have I to do with the? Mine hour is not yet (...) His mother said
unto ye mynisters: Whatsoever he says unto you, do it. There were set there
six water pottes of stone, after ye manner of the purifienge of ye Jews, every
one co^teyninge two or three measures.

Jesus said unto the^: Fill the water pottes with water. And they filled the^
up to ye brymme. And he said unto the^: Draw out now, and bring unto the
Master of the feast. And they bare it. Wha^ the master of ye feast had taisted
ye wine which had been water, and knew not whence it came (but the mynisters
that drue ye water, knew it) the Master of the feast called the brydegrome,
and said unto him: Every man at the first gives the good wine: and when they
are dronken, the^ that which is worse. But thou have kept back the good wine
until now.

This is the first token that Jesus did at Cana in Galile, and showed his
glory, and Mat. 4. b Marc. 1. b Luc. 4 d
his mother, his brethren, and his disciples, and tarried not long there.

And the Jews Easter was at hand. Mat. 21. b Marc. 11. b Luc. 19. d
And Jesus went up to Jerusalem, and found syttinge in the temple, those that
sold oxen, sheep, and doves, and chaungers of money. And he made a scourge of
small cords, and drove them all out of the temple with the sheep and oxen, and
poured out the chaungers money, and ouerthrewe the tables, and said unto them
that sold the doves: Have these things hence, and make not my fathers house
an house of marchaundyse. His disciples remembered it, that is written: Psalm.
68. b
The zele of thine house has even eaten me.

Then answered the Jews, and said unto Mat. 16. a Ioha^. 6. d
that thou may do these things? Jesus answered and said unto the^: Mat.
26. f
Break down this temple, and in three days will I set it up again. Then said
the Jews: 1. Esd. 5.6
Six and fourtye year was this temple abuyldinge, and will thou set it up in
three days? But he spoke of ye temple of his body. Now wha^ he was risen again
from the deed, his disciples remembered that he thus said, and they believed the
scripture, and the words which Jesus spoke.

Wha^ he was at Jerusalem at Easter in ye feast, many believed on his name, when
they saw ye tokens yt he did. But Jesus committed not himself unto the^, for
he knew the^ all, and neded not yt any man should testifye of man, Iere. 17. b
Apo. 2. d
for he knew well what was in man*

The III. Chapter.
THere was a man of the Pharisees, named Ioha^. 7. e and 19. d
The same came unto Jesus by night, and said unto hi^: Master, we know yt
thou art come a teacher from God: for Ioha^. 9. b
no man can do these tokens yt thou do, except God be with him. Jesus
answered, and said unto him: Verily verily I say unto the: Except a man be
borne a new, he can not se the kingdom of God. Nicodemus said unto him: How
can a man be borne, when he is old? Can he enter into his mothers womb, and
be borne again? Jesus answered: Verily verily I say unto the: ^oha^. 4. b and
7. d Tit. 3. a
Except a man be borne of water and of the sprete, he can not come in to ye
kingdom of God.

Rom 8. a
That which is borne of flesh, is flesh: and that which is borne of the sprete,
is sprete. Marvel not, that I said unto ye: Ye must be borne of new. The
wind blows where he will, and thou hear his sound: Eccls. 11. a
but thou can not tell whence he comes, and whither he goes. So is every
one, that is borne of the sprete.

Nicodemus answered, and said unto him: How may these be? Jesus answered, and
said unto hi^: Art thou a Master in Israel, and know not these? Verily I
say unto ye: We speak that we know, and testify that we have seen, and ye
receive not our witness. If ye believe not when I tell you of earthly things,
how should ye believe, wha^ I speak unto you of heavenly things?

Ephe. 4. a
And noman ascends up in to heaven, but he that is come down from heaven,
(namely) the son of man which is in heaven. And like as Moses lift up the
serpent in the wyldernes, Number. 21. b Ioha^. 8. c and 12. d
even so must the son of man be lift up, that who so ever believes in him,
should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Romans 5. a ^. Ioha^. 4. b
that who so ever believes in hi^, should not perish, but have everlasting
life. Luc. 19. a
For God sent not his son in to ye world to condemn the world, but that
the world might be saved by him. He that believes on him, shall not be
condemned. But he that believes not, is condemned already: because he believes
not on the name of the only son of God. But this is ye co^dempnacion, Ioha^.
1. a and 12. f
that the light is come in to the world, and men loved the darkness more the^
ye light: for their works were evil. Whosoever does evil, hates the light,
and comes not to the light, that his deeds should not be reproved. But he
that does the truth, comes to the light, that his works may be known: for
they are done in God.

Ioha^. 4. a
and baptized Mat. 3. a Marc. 1. a Luc. 3. a Mat. 4. b
Ihon baptized also in Enon beside Salem: for there was much water there. And
they came thither, and were baptized: for Ihon was not yet put in preson.

Then arose there a question among the disciples of Ihon with the Jews about
the purifienge, and they came unto Ihon, and said unto him: Master, he yt was
with the beyond Jordan, of whom thou barest witness, behold, * he baptyseth,
and every man comes unto him. Ihon answered and said: A man can receive
nothing, except it be given him from heaven. Ye your selves are my
witnesses, how Ioha^ (...)
that I said, I am not Christ, but am sent before him. He that has the bryde,
is the brydegrome: but the friend of the brydegrome stondeth, and herkeneth
unto him, and reioyseth greatly ou^r the voice of the brydegrome, this same
joy of mine is now fulfilled. He must increace, but I must decreace.

He that comes from an hye, is above (...)
that God is true. For he who^ God has sent, speaks ye words of God: Esa
(...)
for God gives not the sprete (unto him) by measure. The father loves the
son, Mat (...) Luc (...)
and has given him all things in to his hand. Ioha^ (...) 1. Ioha^ (...)
He that believes on the son, has everlasting life: he that believes not
the son, shall not se the life, but ye wrath of God abides upon him.

The IIII. Chapter.
NOw when Jesus had knowledge, yt it was come to the ears of the Pharisees, that
Jesus made and baptized mo disciples the^ Ihon (howbeit Jesus himself baptized
not, but his disciples) (...)
he left the land of Iewry, and departed again in to Galile. But he must
needs go through Samaria. Then came he in to a cite of Samaria, called Sichar,
nigh unto ye piece of lord, (...)
yt Jacob gave unto Joseph his son. And there was Jacobs well. Now when Jesus
was weerye of his journey, he satt hi^ down so upon the well. And it was
about the sixte hour. Then came there a woman of Samaria to draw water.
Jesus said unto her: Give me drink. (For his disciples were gone their way
in to ye cite, to bye meat.) So the woman of Samaria said unto him: How is it
that thou axest drink of me, seeing thou art a Jew, and I a woman of Samaria?
For the Jews meddle not with the (...)
Samaritans.

Jesus answered, and said unto her: If that says unto the, give me drink,
thou would axe of him, and he would give the, the water of life. (...). b
(...) 7. d
The woman said unto him: Sir, thou have nothing to draw withal, and the
well is deep, from whence have thou then that water of life? Art thou greater
then our father Jacob, which gave us this well? And he himself drank thereof,
and his children, and his catell. Jesus answered, and said unto her: Who so
ever drynketh of this water, shall thyrst again: But whosoever shall drink of
the water that I shall give him, shall never be more a thyrst: (...) a (...) a
but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water, which
spryngeth up in to everlasting life.

The woman said unto him: (...)
Sir, give me that same water, that I thyrst not, nether need to come hither to
draw. Jesus said unto her: Go, call they huszbande, and come hither. The
woman answered, and said unto him: I have no huszbande.

(...). 9. a (...). 7. c
ye say, that at Jerusalem is the place, where men ought to worship. Jesus
said unto her: Woman, believe me, the time comes, that ye shall nether upon
this mountain ner at Jerusalem worship the father. Ye wot not what ye
worship, but we know what we worship, for (...) ^1. c
Salvation comes of the Jews. But the time comes, and is now already,
that the true worshippers shall worship the father in (...) 1. a
sprete and in the truth: For the father will have soch so to worship him.
(...). 3. c
God is a sprete, and they that worship him, must worship in sprete and in
the truth.

Mat. 9. d Luc. 10. a
for it is white already unto the harvest.

And he that reapeth, receaueth reward, and gathers fruit to everlasting
life, that both he that sows and he that reapeth,

Many Samaritans of the same cite believed on him, for the saying of the woman,
which testified: He has told me all that ever I did. Now when the Samaritans
came to him, they besought him, that he would tarry with them. And he abode
there two days, and many mo believed because of his word, and said unto the
woman: We believe now hence forth, not because of thy saying, Ioha^. 17. b
we have herd him oureselues, and know, that this of a truth is Christ the
Savior of the world.

After two days he departed thence, and went in to Galile. Mat. 13. g Mar. 6.
a Luc. 4. c
For Jesus himself testified, that a prophet is nothing set by at home. Now
wha^ he came in to Galile, the Galilea^s received him, which had seen all that
he did at Jerusalem in the feast: for they also were come thither in the feast.
And Jesus came again unto Cana in Galile, Ioha^. 2. a
where he turned the water unto wine.

And there was a certain ruler, whose his servants met him, and told him,
and said: Thy child lives. Then inquired he of them the hour, wherein he
began to amend. And they said unto him: Yesterdaye about the seventh hour
the fever left him. Then the father perceived, that it was about the same
hour, wherein Jesus said unto him: Thy son lives. Act. 18. a
And he believed with his whole house. This is now the second token that Jesus
did, when he came from Iewry in to Galile.

The V. Chapter.


Jesus said unto him: Arise, take up thy bed, and go thy way. And immediately
the man was made whole, and took up his bed and went his way. Mat. 9. a Marc.
2. a ^uc. 5. c Mat. 12. a Marc. 2. c and 3. a ^uc. 6. a ^^b. 14. a ^oha^. 7. b
and 9. b
But upon the same day it was the Sabbath. Then said the Jews unto him that
was made whole: To day is ye Sabbath, it is not laufull for the to carry the
bed. He answered them: He that made me whole, said unto me: Take up thy bed,
and go ye way. Then axed they him: What man is that, which said unto the:
Take up thy bed, and go ye way? But he that was healed, wist not who he was:
for Jesus ^oha^. 6. b
had gotten him self away, because there was much people.

^oha^. 8. a
sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto the. The man departed, and told
the Jews, that it was Jesus, which had made hi^ whole. Therefore did ye Jews
persecute Jesus, and sought to slaye him, because he had done this upon ye
Sabbath.

But Jesus answered them: ^. Cor. 12 a
My father works hither to, and I work also. Therefore sought the Jews the
more to slaye hi^: because he brake not only ye Sabbath, but said also, that
God was his father, and made him self equal with God. The^ answered Jesus, and
said unto them: Verily verily I say unto you: Ioha^ (...)
The son can do nothing of himself, but that he seyth the father do. For
what soever he does, that does ye son also. The father loves the son,
and shows him all that he does, and will show him yet greater works, so
that ye shall marueyle. For as the father rayseth up the deed, and makes them
live, eue^ so the son also makes living whom he will. For the father
judges no man, but (...)
has given all judgment unto the son, that they all might honor the son,
even as they honor ye father. Who so honors not the son, the same
honors not the father, which has sent him.

Verily verily I say unto you: Who so Ioha^ (...)
and believes him that sent me, has everlasting life, and Luc. (...)
comes not in to damnacion, but is passed through from death unto life.

Verily verily I say unto you: (...) Ioha^ (...)
The hour comes, and is now already, yt the deed shall hear ye voice of ye
son of God: and they that hear it, shall live. For Ioha^ (...) and (...)
as the father has life in him self, so likewise has he given unto the son,
to have life in him self: and has given hi^ power also to execute judgment
because he is the son of man. Maruayle not ye at this: (...)
for ye hour comes, in ye which all that are in ye graves, shall hear his
voice, and shall go forth, they that have done good, unto the resurreccion of
life: but they that have done evil, unto the resurreccion of damnacion.

I can do nothing of myself. As I hear, so I judge: and my judgment is just.
For I seek not mine own will, but the will of the father which has sent me.
(...)
If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true. There is another that
bears witness of me, and I am sure, that the witness which he bears of
me, is true.

(...)
Ye sent unto Ihon, and he bare wytnes (...)
For the works which the father has given me to fynish, the same works which
I do, bear witness of me, that the father has sent me. And ye father him
self which has sent me, bears witness of me. (...)
Ye have nether herd his voice at any time, ner seen his shappe: and his word
have ye not abydinge in you, for ye believe not him, whom he has sent.

(...)
Search the scripture, for ye think ye have everlasting life therein: (...).
1^. c
and the same is it that testifyeth of me, and ye will not come unto me, (...)
that ye might have life. I receive not praise of men. But I know you, that ye
have not the love of God in you. I am come in my fathers name, and ye receive
me not. (...) c (...) a
If another shall come in his own name, him will ye receive. How can ye believe
which receive praise one of another, and seek not the praise, that is of God
only?

Ye shall not think that I will accuse you before ye father: there is one yt
accuses you, even Moses, in who^ ye trust. If ye believed Moses, ye should
believe me also: For he has written of me. (...)
But if ye believe not his wrytinges, how shall ye believe my words?

The VI. Chapter.
(...) ^4. b (...). 6. d (...) 9 b
And much people followed him, because they saw the tokens that he did upon
the^ which were diseased. But Jesus went up in to a mountain, and there he
sat with his disciples. And Easter ye feast of the Jews was nigh. Then Jesus
lift up his eyes, and saw yt there came much people unto him, and he said
unto Philippe: Whence shall we bye bred, yt these may eat? But this he said
to prove him, for he himself knew, what he would do.

Philippe answered him: Two hundredth penny worth of bred is not enough among
the^, yt every one may take a little. The^ said unto hi^ one of his disciples,
Andrew ye brother of Symo^ Peter: There is a lad here, yt has five barlye
loaves, and two fishes, but what is that among so many? (...)
Jesus said: Make the people sit down. There was much grass in the place.
Then they sat the^ down, about a five thousand men. Jesus took the loaves,
thanked, and gave them to the disciples: the disciples (gave) to them that were
set down. Likewise also of the fishes as much as they would.

Luc. 7. b Ioh. 4. c
This is of a truth the Prophet, yt should come in to the world. When Jesus
now perceived that they would come, and take him up, to make him king, Ioha^.
5. a
he gat him away again in to a mountain himself alone.

At even went his disciples down to ye see, and entered in to the ship, Mat.
14. c Marc. 6. ^
and came to the other side of ye see unto Capernau^. And it was darcke
already. And Jesus was not come to the^. And ye see arose through a great
wind. Now when they had rowed upon a five and twenty or thirty furlonges,
they saw Jesus goinge upon the sea, and came nigh to the ship. And they were
afraid. But he said unto them: It is I, be not afraid. Then would they have
received him in to ye ship. And immediately ye ship was at the land whither
they went.

The next day after, the people which LORD had given thanks. Now when the
people saw that Jesus was not there, nether his disciples, they took ship
also, and came to Capernaum, and sought Jesus.

And when they found him on the other side of the sea, they said unto him:
Master, when came thou hither? Jesus answered the^, and said: Verily verily
I say unto you: Ye seek me not because ye saw ye tokens, but because ye ate
of the loaves, and were filled. Labor not for the meat which perishes but
yt endures unto everlasting life, which the son of man shall give you: For
him has God the father sealed.

The^ said they unto him: What shall we Mat. 16. a Marc. 8. b Ioha^. 2. c
What token do thou the^, that we may se and believe ye? What workest thou?
Our fathers ate Ma^na in the wilderness, as it is written: Exo. 16. a Psalm.
77. c
He gave the^ bred from heaven to eat. Then said Jesus unto the^: Verily
verily I say unto you: Moses gave you not bred from heaven, but my father
gives you the true bred from heaven: For this is that bred of God, which
comes from heaven, and gives life unto the world.

The^ said they unto him: Ioh. 4. b
Sir, give us allwaye soch bred. But Jesus said unto the^: I am yt bred of
life. He that comes unto me, shall not hunger: and he that believes on me,
shall never thyrst. But I have said unto you, yt ye have seen me, and yet ye
believe not. All that my father gives me, comes unto me: and who so comes
unto me, him will not I cast out: for I am come down from heaven, not to do
mine own will, but the will of him that has sent me. L^c. 22. c


Ioha^. 10 c and 18. a
that of all that he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it
up again at the last day. This is the will of him which has sent me, that,
who soever seyth the son and believes on him, Ioha^. 5. c
have everlasting life, and I shall raise him up at the last day.

The^ murmured the Jews therouer, that he said: I am yt bred which is come
down from heaven, and they said: Is not this Jesus, Joseph's son, whose
father and mother we know? How says he then, I am come down from heaven?
Jesus answered, and said unto them: Murmur not among your selves. Mar. 16. c
^oh 6. g ^. Tess. 3. a
No man can come unto me, except the father which has sent me, draw him. And
I shall raise him up at the last day. It is written in the prophets: They shall
all be taught of God. Who so ever now hears it of the father, and lerneth it,
comes unto me. Esa. 54. c ere. 31 f Mat. 11. c Luc. 10. c Deuteronomy. 5. c
Not that any man has seen the father, save he which is of the father, the
same has seen the father.

^oh. 3. e ^. Ioh. 5. b
He that believes on me, has everlasting life. I am that bred of life. Your
fathers ate Manna in the wyldernes, and are deed. This is that bred which
comes from heaven, that who so eats thereof, should not dye. I am that
living bred, which came down from heaven: Who so eats of this bred, shall
live for ever. And the bred that I will give, is my flesh Luc. 22. b
which I will give for ye life of the world.

Then strove the Jews among them selves, and said: How ca^ this follow give
us his flesh to eat? Jesus said unto the^: Verily verily I say unto you:
Except ye eat ye flesh of ye son of man and drink his blood, ye have no
life in you. Who so eats my flesh, and drynketh my blood, has everlasting
life: and I shall raise him up at the last day. For my flesh is ye very meat,
and my blood is ye very drink. Who so eats my flesh, and drynketh my
blood, 1. Ioh. 4. ^
abides in me, and I in him. As the living father has sent me, and I live
for the fathers sake: Even so he that eats me, shall live for my sake. This is
ye bred which is come from heaven: Not as your fathers ate Manna, and are
deed. He that eats of this bred, shall live for ever.

These things said he in the synagoge, Ioh. ^
No man can come unto me, except it be given him of my father.

From that time forth, many of his disciples went back, and walked no more
with him. Then said Jesus unto the twolue: Will ye also go away? Then
answered Simon Peter: LORD, Whither shall we go? Thou have the words of
everlasting life: and we have believed and known, that thou art Christ the
son of the living God. Jesus answered them. Have I not chosen you twolue,
and one of you is a deuell? But he spoke of Judas Simon Iscarioth: the same
betrayed him afterward, and was one of the twolue.

The VII. Chapter.
AFter that went Jesus about in Galile, (...)
But the Jews feast of Tabernacles was at hand. Then said his brethren unto
him: Get the hence, and go into Iewry, that thy disciples also may se thy
works, that thou do. He that seeks to be openly known, does nothing in
secret. If thou do soch things, the^ show yi self before the world: For his
own brethren also believed not in him.

Then said Jesus unto them: My time is not yet come, but your time is allwaye
ready. Ioh. ^^
The world can not hate you, ^
but me it hates: because I testifye of it, that the works of it are evil.
Go ye up unto this feast, I will not go up yet unto this feast, for my time is
not yet fulfilled. When he said this unto them, he abode still in Galile. But
as soon as his brethren were gone up, then went he up also unto the feast,
not openly, but as it were secretly. Then sought him ye Jews at ye feast, and
said: (...)
Where is he? And there was a great murmur of him among the people. Some
said: He is good. But other said: No, he does but disceaue the people.
Howbeit no man spoke freely of him, (...)
for fear of the Jews.

(...)
Has not Moses given you the law. and none of you keeps the law? Why go ye
about to kill me? The people answered, and said: Thou have the deuell, who
goes about to kill the? Jesus answered and said: (...)
One work have I done, and ye all maruayle. Moses gave you the circumcision,
(not because it comes of Moses, but of ye (...)* 7. b
fathers:) Yet do ye circumcyse a man upon the Sabbath. If a man receive
circumcision upon the Sabbath, that the law of Moses should not be broken,
diszdayne ye then at me, because I have made a man every whyt whole on the
Sabbath? Judge not after the utter appearau^ce, (...)
but judge righteous judgment.

(...)
we know, whence this is. But wha^ Christ comes, no man shall know whence he
is.

Then cried Jesus in the temple as he taught, and said: Ye ye know me, and
whence I am ye know, (...)
and of my self am I not come, but he yt sent me, is true, whom ye know not.
But I know him, for I am of him, and he has sent me. Then sought they to take
him, but no mamlayed hands upon him, for his hour was not yet come. (...)
But many of the people believed on him, and said: When Christ comes, shall
he do mo tokens, then this does?

And it came to the Pharisees ears, that ye people murmured soch things of
him. 1. Re. 19 d Mat. 22. b Marc. 12. b Luc. 20. c Ioh. 16. b
Then said Jesus unto them: I am yet a little while with you and then go I unto
him that has sent me. Ye shall seek me, and not find me: Iere. 29. c Ioh 8. b
and 13. d
and where I am, thither can ye not come. Then said the Jews among them
selves: Whyther will he go, that we shall not find him? Will he go among the
Greeks that are scatred abroad, and teach the Greeks? What manner of saying is
this, that he says: ye shall seek me, and not find me: and where I am,
thither can not ye come?

But in the last day which was ye most solemn day of the feast, Jesus stood
up, cried, and said: Who so thyrsteth, Esa. 55. a Esa 12 a Joel. 2. f Ioh. 3.
a and 4. b
let him come unto me, and drink. He that believes on me, as the scripture
says, out of his body shall flow ryuers of the water of life. (But this spoke
he of the Act. 2. a
sprete, which they that believe on him, should receive. For the holy ghost was
not yet there, because Jesus was not yet glorified.) Many of the people now
when they herd this saying, said: This is a very prophet. Other said: Mat.
21. b
Mat. 16. ^ Ioh. 1. e
He is Christ. But some said: Shall Christ come out of Galile? Says not the
scripture, Psalm. 131. b
that Christ shall come of the sede of David, and out of the town of Mich. 5. a
Mat. ^. a
Bethleem, where David was? Thus was there discencion among the people for his
sake. Some of them would have taken him, but no man laid hands on him.

The servants came to the hye prestes Ioh. 12. f 1. Cor. 1. d
Does any of the rulers or pharisees believe on him? But the common people which
know not the law, are cursed. Ioh 3. a
Nicodemus said unto them, he that came to him by night, which was one of
them: Exo. 23. a Leui. 19. ^
Does our law judge any man, before it hear him, and know what he has
done? They answered and said unto him? Art thou a Galilean also? Ioh. 1. ^
Search and look, out of Galile aryseth no prophet. And so every man went
home.

The VIII. Chapter.
Mat. 21. b Marc. 11. b
and all the people came unto him. And he sat down, and taught them. And ye
scrybes and Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in aduoutrye, and set her
there openly, and said unto him: Master, this woman was taken in aduontrye,
eue^ as the deed was adoynge. Leui. 20. b
Moses in the law commanded us to stone soch. What say thou? This they
said, to tempte him, that they might have whereof to accuse him. But Jesus
stouped down, and wrote with his finger upon the ground. Now while they
continued axynge him he lift him self up, and said unto them: He that is
among you without sin, let him cast the first stone at her. And he stouped
down again, and wrote upon the ground. But when they herd that, they went
out, one after another: the eldest first, and left Jesus alone, and the woman
stondinge before him. Jesus lift himself up, and when be saw noman but the
woman, he said unto her: Woman, where are thine accusers? Has noman
condemned the? She said: LORD, no man. Jesus said: Nether do I co^dempne
the, Go thy way, and sin no more. Ioha^. 5. b


Ioh. 1. a ^. a. 1^. ^
I am the light of the world. He that follows me, shall not walk in
darkness, but shall have the light of life. Then said the Pharisees unto him:
Thou bear record of thy self, thy record is not true.

Jesus answered, and said unto them: Though I bear record of my self, yet my
record is true: for I know whence I came, and whither I go: but ye can not
tell whence I come, and whither I go. Ye judge after the flesh, I judge no man:
but if I judge, my judgment is true: for I am not alone, but I and the father
that has sent me. It is written also in your law, Deuteronomy. 17. a and 19. c
that the testimony of two men is true. I am one that bear witness of my
self: And the father that sent me, Mat. 17. a
bears wytnes of me also. Then said they unto him: Where is thy father?
Jesus answered: Ye nether know me ner yet my father. Mat. 11. e Luc. 10. c
^oh. 7. c
If ye knew me, ye should know my father also. These words spoke Jesus upon
the Gods chest, as he taught in the temple. And noman took him, Ioh. 7. c
for his hour was not yet come.

Ioh. 7. d and. 13. d
Then said Jesus again unto them: I go my way, and ye shall seek me, and shall
dye in your sins: whither I go, thither can not ye come. Then said ye
Jews: Will he kill him self then, that he says: whither I go, thither can not
ye come? And he said unto them: Ye are from beneth, I am from above: Ye are of
this world, I am not of this world. Therefore have I said unto you, that ye
shall dye in your sins. (...) Ioh. (...)
For if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins.

Then said they unto him: Who art thou then? And Jesus said unto the^: Eue^
Ioh. (...)
that speak I before the world, Howbeit they understood not, that he spoke of
the father.

Then said Jesus unto them: When ye have lift up an hye the son of man, then
shall ye know that I am he, and that I do nothing of my self: Ioh* (...)
but as my father has taught me, even so I speak. And he that sent me, is
with me. The father leaves me not alone, for I do alwaie that pleases him.
When he thus spoke, Ioh* (...)
many believed on him. Then said Jesus unto the Jews, that believed on him: If
ye continue in my word, then are ye my very disciples, and ye shall know the
truth, and the truth shall make you (...)
fre.

Then answered they him: We are Abraham's sede, we were never bond to any man,
how say thou then: Ye shall be fre? Jesus answered them, and said: Verily
verily I say unto you: (...)
Who so ever does sin, is the servant of sin: As for the servant, he
abides not in the house for ever, but the son abides ever. If the son
therefore make you fre, then are ye fre in deed. I know that ye are Abraham's
sede, but ye seek to kill me. For my word takes not among you. I speak that
I have seen of my father, and ye do that ye have seen of your father.

They answered, and said unto him: (...)
which I have herd of God, this did not Abraham. Ye do the deeds of your
father. Then said they unto him: We are not borne of fornicacion, we have one
father, even God. Jesus said unto them: If God were your father, then would
ye love me. For I am proceaded forth, and come from God. For I am not come of
my self, but he has sent me. Why know ye not the^ my speech? Eue^ because ye
can not abide the hearing of my word.

Ye are of the father the deuell, and after the lusts of your father will ye
do. (...)
The same was a murthurer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth: for
the truth is not in him. When he speaks a lie, then speaks he of his own:
for he is a liar, and a father of the same. But because I say the truth, ye
believe me not.

Which of you can rebuke me of one sin? If I say the truth, why do ye not
believe me? (...)
He that is of God, hears Gods word. Therefore hear ye not, because ye are
not of God.

(...)
and have the deuell? Jesus answered: I have no deuell, but I honor my
father, and ye have dishonored me. I seek not mine own praise, but there is
one that seeks it, and judges. Verily verily I say unto you: (...)
If any man keep my word, he shall never se death.

Then said the Jews unto him: Now know me, that (...)
thou have the deuell. Abraham is deed and the prophets, and thou say: If
any man keep my word, he shall never taist of death. Art thou greater then our
father Abraham? which is deed, and the prophets are deed? Who^ make thou thy
self? Jesus answered: (...)
If I praise my self, then is my praise nothing. But it is my father that
prayseth me, which ye say is your God, and ye know hi^ not: but I know him.
And if I should say, I know him not* I should be a liar, like unto you. But I
know him, and keep his word.

Abraham your father was glad, that he should se my day, (...)
And he saw it, and reioysed. (...)
Then said the Jews unto him: Thou art not yet fifty year old, and have
thou seen Abraham? Jesus said unto the^: Verily verily I say unto you: Or
ever Abraham was, (...) 3. c
I am. Then took they up stones, to cast at him. But Jesus hyd himself, and
went out of the temple.

The IX. Chapter.
(...)
but that ye works of God should be showed on him. I must work the works of
him that has sent me, while it is day. The night comes, when no man can
work. As long as I am in the world, I am the Ioha^. 1. a 8. b. 12. e
light of the world.

When he had thus said, he spat on the ground, and made claye of the spetle,
and rubbed the claye on the eyes of the blind, and said unto him: Go thy way
to the pole of Esa. 8. b
Syloha (which is interpretated, sent) and wash the. Then went he his way and
waszhed him, and came seeing. The neghbours and they that had seen him before,
that he was a beggar, said: Is not this he that sat, and begged? Some said:
It is he. Other said: he is like him. But he himself said: I am even he. Then
said they unto him: How are thine eyes opened? He answered, and said: The man
that is called Jesus, made claye, and anointed mine eyes, and said: Go thy
way to the pole of Siloha, and wash the. I went my way, and washed me, and
received my sight. Then said they unto him: Where is he? He said: I can not
tell.

Then brought they unto the pharisees, Mat. 1^. a Marc. 1. c Luc. 6. a Ioha^. 5.
a and 7. b
It was the Sabbath, when Jesus made the claye, and opened his eyes. Then
again the Pharisees also axed him, how he had received his sight. He said unto
the^: He put claye upon mine eyes, and I waszhed me, and now I se.

Then said some of the pharisees: This man is not of God, seeing he keeps not
ye Sabbath. Ioha^. 7. d 10. b. 12. b
But the other said: How can a sinful man do soch tokens? And there was a
strife among the^. They said again unto ye blind: What say thou of him,
that he has opened thine eyes? He said: he is a prophet.

The Jews believed not hi^, that he was blind, and had received his sight,
till they called the elders of him, that had received his sight, and they axed
them, and said: Is this your son, whom ye say, was borne blind? How does
he now se then? His elders answered them, and said: We know* that this is
our son, and that he was borne blind. But how he now seyeth, we can not
tell: or who has opened his eyes, can we not tell. He is old enough himself,
(...) him, let him speak for him self.

This said his elders, because they feared the (...) Therefore said his
elders: He is old enough, are him.

Then called they the man again yt was blind, and said unto him: Iosue. 7. c
Act. 1^. d
Give God ye praise, we know that this man is a sinner. He answered, and
said: Whether he be a sinner or no, I can not tell: one thing am I sure off,
that I was blind, and now I se. The^ said they unto him again: What did he
unto the? How opened he thine eyes: He answered them: I told you right now.
Herd ye it not? What, will ye hear it again? Will ye also be his disciples?
Then rayted they him, and said: Thou art his disciple. We are sure that God
spoke with Moses: As for this fellow, we know not whence he is.



Jesus herd, yt they had thrust him out, and wha^ he had found him, he said
unto him: Beleuest thou on the son of God? He answered, and said: LORD, who
is it, yt I might believe on him? Jesus said unto him: Thou have seen him, and
he it is, that talks with the. He said: LORD, I believe. And he worshipped
him.

And Jesus said: I am come to judgment in to this world, that they which se
not, might se: and that they which se, might be made blind. And some of the
Pharisees yt were with him, herd this, and said unto him: Are we then blind
also? Jesus said unto the^: ^oha^. 15. c
If ye were blind, ye should have no sin. But now that ye say, we se,
therefore your son remains.

The X. Chapter.
Verily verily I say unto you: He yt enters not in at the door in to the
shepefolde, but clymmeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a
murthurer. But he that goes in at the door, is the shepherde of the sheep: to
him ye porter opens, and the sheep hear his voice, and he * calls his own
sheep by name, and ledeth them out. And when he (...) forth his ^wne sheep, he
(...), and the (...) is voice. As for a stranger, they follow him not, but
fly from him: for they know not the voice of strangers. This proverb spoke
Jesus unto them, but they understood and not what it was, that he said unto
them.

Then said Jesus unto them again: Verily verily I say unto you: Ioh. ^
I am the door of the sheep. All they that are come before me, are thieves and
murthures. But ye sheep harkened not unto them. I am the door. If any man enter
in by me, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. A thief
comes not, but for to steal, kill, and destroy. I am come, yt they might
have life, and have it more abundauntly.

I am a good shepherde. A good shepherde gives his life for the sheep. But an
(...)
nether the sheep are his own, seyth ye wolf coming, and leaves ye sheep,
and flies. And the wolf catches and scatereth ye sheep. But the hired
servant flies, because he is an hired servant, and cares not for the
sheep. I am a good sheperde, (...)
and know mine, and am known of mine. Eue^ as my father knows me, and I
know ye father. And (...)
I give my life for my sheep. And I have yet other sheep, which are not of this
fold, and those same must I bring also, and they shall hear my voice, and
there shall be one flock and one shepherde.

Therefore does my father love me, because I leave my life, that I may take it
again. Noma^ takes it fro me, but I leave it of myself. I have power to leave
it, and have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my
father. Then was there discension among the Jews for these sayenges. Many of
the^ said: (...)
He has the deuell, and is madd, why hear ye him? Other said: ^
These are not words of one that is possessed. Can the deuell also open ye
eyes of the blind?

It was the dedicacion of the temple at Jerusalem, (...)
and Jesus walked in ^
Salomo^s porche. The^ came ye Jews round about hi^, and said unto hi^: How
long do thou make us doubt? If thou be Christ, tell us planely. Jesus
answered the^: I told you, and ye believe not. The works yt I do in my fathers
name, they bear witness of me. But ye believe not, because ye are not of my
sheep as I said unto you. My sheep hear my voice, and I know the^, and they
follow me. And I give the^ everlasting life, and they shall never perish, and
noma^ shall pluck the^ out of my hand. My father which gave the^ me, is
greater the^ all: and noman is able to pluck them out of my fathers hand.
(...). a (...)* c
I and the father are one. Then the Jews took up stones again, to stone him.
Jesus answered the^: Many good works have I showed you fro my father, for
which of the^ stone ye me?

(...)
but for the blasphemy: and because yt thou being a man, make thy self God.
Jesus answered the^: Is it not written in your law: (...)
I have said, Ye are Gods? If he call them Gods, unto whom the word of
God came (and the scripture can not be broken) say ye the^ unto hi^, who^ ye
father has sanctified and sent in to ye world: thou blasphemest God, because
I said: I am ye son of God? (...) ^6. g (...). 14. b (...). c (...) a (...).
c
If I do not ye works of my father, believe me not: but if I do the^, the^ (if
ye believe not me) yet believe ye works, yt ye may know and believe, yt the
father is in me, and I in ye father.

(...) 3. a (...). b
They went about again to take him, but he escaped out of their hands, and
went away again beyo^de Iordane, in to ye place (...)
where Iho^ had baptized before, and there he abode. And many came to hi^, and
said: Iho^ did no tokens, but all yt Ihon spoke of this man, is true. And many
believed on him there.

The XI. Chapter.
(...). 7. c
It was yt Mary which anointed ye LORD with ointment, and dried his fete with her
here, whose brother Lazarus lay sick.) The^ sent his sisters unto hi^, and
said: LORD, behold, he who^ thou love lies sick. Wha^ Jesus herd that,
he said: This sickness is not unto death, but for the praise of God, (...)*
9. a
yt the son of God may be praised there through. Jesus loved Martha and her
sister, and Lazarus. Now wha^ he herd that he was sick, he abode two days in
ye place where he was.

After ward said he unto his disciples: Let us go again i^ to Iewry. His
disciples said unto him: Master, (...)* 7. c (...) 10. c
lately would the Jews have stoned the, and will thou go thither again* Jesus
answered: Are there not twolue hours in ye day? He yt walks in the day,
stombleth not, for he seyeth ye light of this world. But he that walks in
the night, sto^bleth: for there is no light in him.

o friend (...)
slepeth, but I go to wake him out of sleep. The^ said his disciples: LORD,
if he sleep, he shall do well enough (Howbeyt Jesus spoke of his death but they
thought yt he had spoken of ye bodily sleep.) The^ said Jesus unto the^
planely: Lazarus is deed, and I am glad for yo sakes, yt I was not there, that
ye may believe. Nevertheless let us go unto hi^. The^ said Thomas (which is
called Didimus) unto ye disciples: Let us go also, yt we may dye with hi^.
Ioha^. 20. c


The^ came Jesus, and found yt he had lain in ye grave four days already.
Bethanye was nigh unto Jerusalem, about fiftene furlo^ges. And many of the
Jews were come to Martha and Mary, to comfort the^ over their brother. Now
wha^ Martha herd yt Jesus came, she went to mete him. But Mary satt still at
home.

The^ said Martha unto Jesus: LORD, if thou had been here, my brother had
Ioh. 11. ^
But nevertheless I know also, what soever thou axest of God, that God will give
it the. Jesus said unto her: Thy brother shall rise again. Martha said unto
hi^: I know, yt he shall rise again in the resurreccion at ye last day. Jesus
said unto her: I am the resurreccion and the life Romans 1. b Ioh. 3. b and 6. f
He yt believes on me, shall live, though he were deed already: and whosoever
lives and believes on me, shall never dye. Beleuest thou this? She said unto
him: Ye LORD, I believe, that thou art Christ the son of God, which should
come in to the world. And wha^ she had said this, she went her way, and
called Mary her sister secretly, and said: The master is come, and calls
for the. She when she herd that, rose up quyckly, and came unto him: For Jesus
was not yet come in to ye town, but was yet in the place, where Martha met
him. The Jews that were with her in the house and comforted her, when they saw
Mary, that she rose up haistely, and went out, they followed her, and said:
She goes to the grave, to weep there.

Now wha^ Mary came where Jesus was and saw him, she fell down at his fete,
and said LORD, if thou had been here, my brother had not been deed. Ioh.
11. c
Wha^ Jesus saw her weep, and the Jews wepinge also yt came with her, he groned
in the sprete, and was sorry with in himself, and said: Where have ye laid him?
They said: LORD come, and se it. And * Jesus wept. Then said ye Jews:
Behold how he loved him. But some of the^ said* Could not he * which opened
the eyes of ye blind, have made also, that this man should not have dyed? But
Jesus groned again i^ himself, and came to the grave. It was a cave, and a
stone laid on it. Jesus said: Take away ye stone. Martha the sister of him ^
was deed, said (...) already, for (...) Jesus said unto her: Said I not
unto the, that if thou dyddest believe, thou should se the glory of God?

Iuh. 12. d
because of ye people that stand by, I said it, that they may believe, that
thou have sent me.

When he had said this, he cried loud: Lazarus come forth. And ye deed came
forth bound hand and foot with grave clothes, and his face bound with a napkyn.
Jesus said unto the^: Lowse him, and let him go. Many now of ye Jews which
mere come unto Mary, and saw what Jesus did, believed on him. But some of the^
went their way unto the pharisees, and told the^ what Jesus had done.

Then the hye prestes, and the pharisees gathered a counce^l, and said: Psalm.
2. a Act. 4. b
What do we? This man does many tokens. If we let him go thus, all me^ will
believe in him: ^an. 9. c
the^ shall the Romans come, and take away our land and people. But one of
them, named Caiphas, which was hye pressed that same year, said unto them: Ye
know nothing nether considre ye any thing at all. (...). 18. b
It is better for us that one man dye for the people, then that all the people
should perish.



The Jews Easter was nigh at hand. And there went up many to Jerusalem out of
that country before ye Easter, to purifye them selves. Then stood they up, and
axed after Jesus, and spoke among them selves in the temple:* What think ye,
that he comes not to ye feast? The hye prestes and pha^ises had given a
commandment, that if any man knew where he were, he should h^we it, that
they might take him.

The XII. Chapter.
Six days before Easter came Jesus unto Bethanye, where Lazarus was, which
was deed, whom Jesus (...) from the deed. There they made him a supper, and
Martha served. But Lazarus was one of them, that sat at the table with him.
Luc. ^
Then took Mary a pound of ointment of pure and costly Nardus, and anointed
Jesus fete, and dried his fete with her here. The house was full of the sanoure
of the oynment. Then said one of his disciples, Judas Iscarioth Symons son,
which afterward betrayed him: Why was not this ointment sold for three
hundredth pens, and given to the poor? (This said he not that he cared for the
poor, but because he was a thief, and Ioh. (...)
had the bag, and bare that which was given.) Then said Jesus: Let her
alone, this has she kept against the day of my buryenge. For the poor have
ye allwaye with you, but me have ye not allwaye.

Then much people of the Jews had (...)
whom he had raised from the deed. But ye hye prestes were aduysed to put
Lazarus to death also: because yt for his sake many of the Jews went away
and believed on Jesus.

Upon the next day much people which were come unto the feast, (...)
when they herd that Jesus came toward Jerusalem, they took branches of
palm trees, and went out to mete him, and cried: Hosianna, Psalm (...)
Blessed be he, that in the name of the LORD comes king of Israel. Jesus
gat a young Ass, and rode thereon, As it is written: Esa (...) Zac^ (...)
Fear not thou daughter of Sion, behold, thy king comes rydinge upon an
Asses foale. Nevertheless his disciples understood not these things at the
first, but when Jesus was glorified, then remembered they that soch things were
written of him, and that they had done soch things unto him.

The people that was with him when he called Lazarus out of ye grave and raised
him from the deed, commended the act. Therefore the people met him, because
they herd, that he had done soch a miracle. But the pharisees said among them
selves: Ye se, that we prevail nothing, behold, all ye world runs after
him.

There were certain Greeks (among the^ (...) Act. (...)
^
which was of Bethsaida out of Galile, and prayed him, and said: Sir, we would
feign se Jesus. Philippe came, and told Andrew. And again, Philippe and
Andrew told Jesus. Jesus answered the^, and said: The hour is come, (...)
that the son of man must be glorified.

Verily verily I say unto you: Except the wheatcorne fall in to the ground,
(...)
and dye, it bydeth alone: But if it dye, it beyngeth forth much fruit. He that
loves his life, (...)
shall lose it: and he that hates his life in this world, shall keep it unto
life everlasting. He that will serve me, let him follow me. And where I am,
there shall my servant be also: and he that serves me, him shall my father
honor.

(...). d (...) ^4. d (...) 22. c
Now is my soul heavy, and what shall I say? Father, help me out of this hour.
But therefore am I come in to this hour. Father, glorifye thy name.

(...)
This voice came not because of me, but for your sakes.

Now goes the judgment over the world. Now shall the prince of this world be
thrust out. And I when I am life up from the earth, will draw all unto me. (But
this he said, to signifye, what death he should dye.) Then answered him the
people: We have herd in the (...)
law, that Christ endures for ever: and how say thou then, that the son
of man must be lift up? Who is this son of man?

(...)
walk while ye have the light, that the darkness fall not upon you. He that
walks in the darkness, woteth not whither he goes. Believe ye on the light,
while ye have it, that ye may be the children of light.

These things spoke Jesus, and departed away, and hyd himself from them. And
though he had done soch tokens before the^, yet believed they not on him, that
the saying of Esaias the prophet might be fulfilled, which he spoke: (...)
LORD, who believes our preachinge? Or to whom is the arm of the LORD
opened? Therefore could they not believe, (...)
for Esaias said again: He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart,
that they should not se with the eyes, ner understand with the heart, and
should be converted, and he should heal them. This said Esaias, when he saw
his glory, and spoke of him.

(...) 7. c
but because of the Pharisees they would not be aknowne of it, lest they should
be excommunicate, Ioh. 9. c
Ioha^. 5. d
For they loved more the praise with men, then with God.

Jesus cried and said: He that believes on me, believes not on me, but on him
that sent me. And he that seyth me, seyth him yt sent me. I am come a light in
to the world, Ioha^. 3. ^ 8. b. 9. a
that whosoever believes on me, should not bide in darkness. And he that
hears my words and believes not, I judge him not, for I am not come to judge
the world, Ioh. 3. c
but to save the world. He that refuses me, and receaueth not my words, has
one already that judges him. Deuteronomy. 18. ^
The word that I have spoken, that shall judge him at the last day, For I
have not spoken of myself: Ioh. 16. b
but the father that sent me, has given me a commandment, what I should do
and say. And I know that his commandment is life everlasting. Therefore
look what I speak, that speak I eue^ so, as the father has said unto me.

The XIII. Chapter.
BEfore the feast of Easter when Jesus Mat. 26. b Mar. 14. b Luc. 22. a
when the deuell had already put into ye heart of Judas Iscarioth Symons son,
to betraye him, Jesus knowinge that the father had given all things in to his
hands, Mat. 11. e Luc. 10. c
and that he was come from God, and went unto God, he rose from supper, and
laid aside his upper garments, and took a towell, and gyrde it about him.
Afterward poured he water in to a basen, and began to wash the disciples
fete, and dried them with the towell, yt he was gyrded withal.

Then came he unto Simon Peter, and ye same said unto him: LORD, shall thou
wash my fete? Jesus answered and said unto him: What I do, thou know not
now, but thou shall know it herafter. The^ said Peter unto him: Thou shall
never wash my fete. Jesus answered him: If I wash ye not, thou shall have no
part with me. Simon Peter said unto him: LORD, not the fete only, but the
hands also and the head.

Jesus said unto him: He that is waszhe^, Ioh 6 g.
but not all. For he knew his betrayer, therefore said he: ye are not all
clean.

Now when he had waszhen their fete, and taken his clothes, he sat him down
again, and said unto the^: Wot ye what I have done unto you? Ye call me
master and LORD, and ye say right therein, for so I am. If I then your LORD
and master have waszhen your fete, ye ought also to wash one another fete.
Ephe. 5. a 1. Pet. 2. c
I have given you an ensample, that ye should do as I have done unto you.
Verily verily I say unto you: Mat. 10. c Luc. 6. d Ioh. 15. b
the servant is not greater then his lord, nether is the Apostell greater
then he that sent him. If ye know these things, blessed are ye if ye do them.
Mat. 3. b
I speak not of you all, I know whom I have chosen, but that the scripture
might be fulfilled: Psalm. 40. b
He yt eats my bred, has lift up his hele against me. Ioha. 14. c and 16. a
I tell it you now, before it come, that when it is come to pass, ye may
believe, that I am he.

Mat. 10. e Mat. 9. d Luc. 10. b
receaueth me: and he that receaueth me, receaueth him that sent me. When Jesus
had thus said, he was heavy in sprete, and testified, and said: Mat. 26. b
Marc. 14. c Luc. 22. a
Verily verily I say unto you: One 1. Io 2. c Act. 20. d
among you shall betraye me. Then the disciples looked one upon another, and
were in doubt, of whom he spoke. But there was one among his disciples, that
leaned at the table on Jesus bosom, Ioha^. ^0. a
who^ Jesus loved: to him beckened Simon Peter, that he should axe, who it was,
of whom he spoke. For the same leaued upon Jesus breast, and said unto him:
LORD, who is it? Jesus answered: It is he, unto whom I dip the soppe and
give it. And he dypte in the soppe, and gave it unto Judas Iscarioth Symons
son. And after ye soppe the deuell entered in to him.

Then said Jesus unto him: That thou boest, do quyckly. But ye same wist no
man at the table, for what intent he said it unto him. Some thought (for so
much as Judas had the bag) that Jesus had said unto him: Ioha^. 12. a
Bye that is necessary for us against the feast: Or that he should give some
thing unto the poor. When he had received the soppe, he went out immediately,
and it was night.

^oha^. 12. c and 17. a
and God is glorified in him. If God be glorified in him, the^ shall god
glorify him also in himself, and straight way shall he glorifye him. Dear
children, I am yet a little while with you. Ye shall seek me, Ioh. 7. d and 8. b
and (as I said unto ye Jews) whither I go, thither can ye not come. And now
I say unto you, Ioha^ (...)
A new commandment give I you, that ye love together as I have loved you, yt
even so ye love one another. By this shall every man know that ye are my
disciples, if ye have love one to another. (...)
Simon Peter said unto him: LORD, whither go thou? Jesus answered him:
Whither I go, thou can not follow me now, (...)
but thou, halt follow me herafter. Peter said unto him: LORD, why cannot I
follow the ^ow? I will give my life for yt sake. Jesus answered him: Will thou
give thy life for my sake? Verily verily I say unto ye. (...)
The cock shall not crow, till thou have denied me thryse.

The XIIII. Chapter.
ANd he said unto his disciples: Let

Thomas said unto him: LORD, we know not whither thou go, and how can we
know the way? Jesus said unto him: I am the way, and the truth, and the
life. Noman comes to the father but by me. (...)
If ye knew me, ye knew my father also. And from hence forth ye know hi^,
and have seen him. Philippe said unto him: LORD, show us the father, and it
suffices us. Jesus said unto him: Thus long am I with you, and have thou not
known me? Philippe, he that seyth me, seyth the father. And how say thou
then: Show us the father? Beleuest thou not that I am in the father, (...)
and that ye father is in me? (...)
The words that I speak unto you, those speak not I of my self: but the
father that dwells in me, he does the works. Believe me, that I am in the
father, and that ye father is in me: Or else, believe me at the leest for the
works sake.

Verily verily I say unto you: He that believes (...)
And what soever ye axe ye father in my name, that will I do, that the father
may be praised in the son. If ye axe any thing in my name, I will do it.

If ye love me, keep my commandments. And I will pray the father, and he
shall give you another comforter, that he may bide with you for ever: even ye
sprete of truth, whom ye world can not receive, for it seyth him not, nether
does it know him: but ye know him, for he abides with you, and shall be in you
(...)
I will not leave you co^fortles, I come unto you. It is yet a little while, the^
shall the world se me no more, (...) b (...) b
but ye shall se me: for I live, and ye shall live also. In yt day shall ye
know, that I am in the father and ye in me, and I in you. He that has my
commandments, (...)
and keeps them, the same is he that loves me: and he that loneth me, shall be
loved of my father: and I will love him, and will show mine own self unto him.
(...)
Judas said unto hi^: (not that: Iscarioth) LORD, What is the cause the^,
that thou will show thy self unto us, and not unto the world?



This have I spoken unto you, while I was with you. (...)
But that comforter even ye holy ghost, who^ my father shall send in my name,
he shall teach you all things, and bring all to your remembrance, what
soever I have told you.

Peace I leave unto you, my peace I give you: I give not unto you, as the
world gives. Let not yo heart be troubled, nether let it be afraid. Ye have
herd, that I said unto you: I go, and come again unto you. If ye loved me,
ye would rejoice, because I said, I go to the father: for ye father is greater
the^ I. (...)
And now have I told you, before it come, that when it is come to pass, ye
may believe: Here after will not I talk much with you. (...)
For the prince of this world comes, and has nothing in me. But that the
world may know that I love ye father. And as the father has commanded me,
so do I. Arise, let us go hence.

The XV. Chapter.
(...) 4. c
vine, and my father is an huszbande man. Every branch that brings not forth
fruit in me, shall he cut of: and every one that brings forth fruit, shall he
pourge, yt it may bring forth more fruit. Now are ye clean, because of the
word, that I have spoken unto you. Bide ye in me, and I in you. Like as ye
branch can not bring forth fruit of it self except it bide in the vine, Even
so nether ye also, except ye abide in me.

I am the vine, ye are the branches. He that abides in me, and I in him, the
same brings forth much fruit: for without me can ye do nothing. He that
abides not in me, is cast out as a vine branch, and it wythereth, and men
gather it up, and cast it in to the fire, and it burns. Mat. 21. e Marc. 11.
c Ioh 14. b and. 16. c
If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall axe what ye will, and it
shall be done unto you. Herin is my father praised, that ye bring forth much
fruit, and become my disciples. Like as my father has loved me, eue^ so have I
loved you. Co^tynue ye i^ my love. Ioh. 14. d
If ye keep my commandments, ye shall co^tynue in my love: like as I have
kept my fathers commandments, and co^tynue in his love.

These things have I spoken unto you, Ioh. 13. d 1. Ioh. 3. c
This is my commandment, that ye love together, as I have loved you. No man
has greater love, then to set his life for his friend. Mat. 12. e
Ye are my friends, if ye do that I command you. Hence forth call I you not
servants, for a servant knows not what his lord does. But I have said
that ye are friends: For all that I have herd of my father, have I showed unto
you. Ephe. 1. a
Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye go,
and Col. 1. a
bring forth fruit, and that your fruit contynne, that what soever ye axe the
father in my name, he should give it you.

This I command you, that ye love one another. If the world hate you, then
know, that it has hated me before you. If ye were of the world, the world
would love his own. Howbeit because ye are not of the world, but I have
chosen you from the world, therefore the world hates you. Remember my word,
that I said unto you: The servant i^ not greater then his lord. Mat. 10. c
Luc. 6. d Ioh. 13. b
If they have persecuted me, they shall persecute you also: If they have kept
my word, they shall keep yours also.

But all this shall they do unto you for which is written in their law: They
have hated me without a cause. Psalm. 34. c and 68. a


But wha^ the comforter comes, who^ I shall send you from the father eue^ the
sprete of truth which proceadeth of the father, Ioh. 14. c and 16. a Act. 2. a
he shall testify of me Act. ^. a and ^. d
and ye shall bear witness also: for ye have been with me from the beginning.

The XVI. Chapter.
Act. 9. a Ioha^. 15. c 1. Cor. 2. a
And soch things shall they do unto you, because they have nether known ye
father ner yet me. But these things have I said unto you, Ioh. 13. b and 14. c
that when the time comes ye may think thereon, that I told you. But these
things have I not said unto you from the beginning: For I was with you.

But now I go unto him that sent me, and none of you axeth me: Whither go
thou? but because I have said these things unto you, your heart is full of
sorrow. Nevertheless I tell you the truth, It is better for you yt I go away:
For if I go not away that comforter comes not unto you: but if I depart,
Ioh 14. c and 15. c
I will send hi^ unto you. And when he comes, he shall rebuke the world of
sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment. Of sin, because they believe not
on me. O frighteousnes, because I go to the father, and ye shall se me no more.
Of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged already. Ioh. 12. d


Ioh. 14 c Ioha^. 12. f
For he shall not speak of himself, but what soever he shall hear, that shall he
speak: and he shall show you, what is for to come. He shall glorifye me: for
he shall receive of mine, and shall show unto you. Mat. 11. e Luc. 10. c Ioh. 3.
e
All that the father has, is mine. Therefore have I said: he shall receive of
mine, and show unto you.

After a little while, and ye shall not se me: and again after a little while,
and ye shall se me: for I go to the father. The^ said some of his disciples
among themselves: What is this that he says unto us, After a little while,
and ye shall not se me: and again after a little while, and ye shall se me: for I
go to the father? Then said they: What is this, that he says: After a little
while? We can not tell what he says. Then perceived Jesus that they would axe
him, and he said unto them: Ye inquire of this among your selves, that I
said: After a little while, and ye shall not se me: and again after a little
while, and ye shall se me.

Verily verily I say unto you: Ye shall weep (...)
Verily verily I say unto you: If ye axe ye father ought in my name, he shall
give it you. Hither to have ye axed nothing in my name. Axe, and ye shall
receive, yt your joy may be perfect. These things have I spoken unto you
by (...)
proverbs. Nevertheless the time comes, that I shall speak no more by
proverbs, but I shall show you planely of my father.

In that day shall ye axe in my name. (...)
I went out from the father, and came into the world: Again, I leave ye
world, and go to the father.

His disciples said unto him: Behold, now talkest thou planely, and speak
no proverb. Now are we sure yt thou know all things, and nedest not that
any man should axe the. Therefore believe we, that thou came out from God:
Jesus answered them: Now ye do believe: Behold, (...)
the hour draws nigh, and is come already, that ye shall be scatred, every man
in to his own, and shall leave me alone: and yet am I not alone, (...)
for the father is with me.

These things have I spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. (...)
In ye world have ye trouble, but be of good comfort, I have overcome the
world.

The XVII. Chapter.
THese things spoke Jesus, and lift up his eyes toward heaven, and said:
Father, the hour is come, (...)
that thou glorifye thy son, that thy son also may glorifye the. Like as
thou have given him power over all flesh, (...)
that he should give everlasting life to as many as thou have given him. (...)
But this is the life everlasting, that they know the (that thou only art
the true God) and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ.

I have glorified ye upon earth, and (...)
fynished ye work, yt thou gave me to do. And now glorifye me thou father by
thine own self with ye glory which I had or ever the world was. I have
declared thy name unto ye men, whom thou gave me from the world. They were
thine, and thou gave them unto me, and they have kept thy word.

(...)
and they have received them, and known of a truth, that I am come forth from
the, and have believed, that thou have sent me. I pray for them, and pray not
for the (...)
world, but for them whom thou have given me, for they are thine. And all that
is mine, is thine: and what thine is, that is mine. And I am glorified in them.
And now am I no more in the world, and they are in ye world, and I come to
the. Holy father, keep in thy name, those whom thou (...)
have given me, that they may be one, like as we are. While I was with the^ in
the world, I kept them in thy name. Those yt thou gave me, have I kept,
and none of them is lost, but that lost child, that the (...). a (...) 40. b
(...) a
scripture might be fulfilled. But now come I unto the, and this I speak in
the world, that they may have my joy perfect in them. I have given them thy
word, (...) b (...). c
and the world hates the^: for they are not of the world, even as I also am
not of the world. I pray not that thou should take them out of the world,
(...)
but that thou keep the^ from evil. They are not of the world, as I also am
not of the world.



Nevertheless I pray not for them only, but also for those, which through their
word shall believe on me, that they all may be one, like as thou father art in
me, and I in ye, that they also may be (...)
one in us: that the world may believe, that thou have sent me. And the glory
which thou gave me, have I given them: that they may be one, like as we are
one. I in the^, and thou in me, that they may be perfect in one, and that the
world may know, that thou have sent me and have loved them, as thou have
loved me.

Father, I will, Ioh. 12. e and 14. a
that they whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, yt they may se my
glory, which thou have given me: for thou have loved me, or ever ye world was
made. Righteous father, Mat. 11 e Ioh. 15. c and. 16. a
the world has not known yt, but I have known ye: and these have known,
that thou have sent me. And I have declared thy name unto them, and will declare
it, yt the love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in the^, and I in them.

The XVIII. Chapter.
When Jesus had thus spoken, he went Mat. 26. a Mar. 14. ^ Luc. 22. ^
where there was a garden, in to the which Jesus entered and his disciples. But
Judas yt betrayed hi^, knew the place also. For Jesus resorted thither often
times with his disciples. Mat. 26. ^ Mar. 14. ^ Luc. 22. d
Now when Judas had taken unto him the company, and mynisters of the hye
prestes and Pharisees, he came thither with creshettes, with lanternes, and with
weapens. Jesus now knowinge all yt should come upon him, went forth, and said
unto the^: Whom seek ye? They answered him: Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus said unto
them: I am he. Judas also which betrayed him, stood with the^. Now when Jesus
said unto the^: I am he, they went bacwardes, and fell to the ground. Then
axed he the^ again: Whom seek ye? They said: Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus
answered: I have told you, that I am he. If ye seek me, then let these go
their way. That the word might be fulfilled, which he said: Ioh. 17. b
Of them who^ thou gave me, have I not lost one. Then had Simon Peter a
sword, and drew it out, and smote the hye prestes servant, and cut of his
right ear. And ye servants name was Malchus.

Then said Jesus unto Peter: Put up Ioh. 11. e
It was Caiphas, which gave counsel unto ye Jews that it were good, that one
man should dye for the people.

As for Simon Peter, he and another disciple followed Jesus. The same disciple
was known unto the hye pressed, and went in with Jesus in to the hye prestes
palace. But Peter stood without at the door. Then yt other disciple which was
known unto the hye pressed, went out, and spoke to the damsel yt kept the
door, and brought in Peter. Then the damsel that kept the door, said unto
Peter: Art not thou also one of this man's disciples? He said: I am not.

The servants and officers stood, and had Ioh. 7. b
I have spoken openly before the world, I have ever taught in the synagoge and
in the temple, whither all the Jews resorted, and in secret have I spoken
nothing. Why axest thou me? Axe the^ yt have herd, what I have spoken unto
the^: behold, they can tell what I have said. But when he had thus spoken,
Iere. 30. a Mat. 26. g Act. 33. a
one of the officers that stood by, smote Jesus on the face, and said:
Answerest thou the hye pressed so? Jesus answered him: If I have evil spoken,
the^ bear witness of evil: but if I have well spoken, why smytest thou me?
And Annas sent him bound unto Caiphas ye hye pressed.

Mat. 26. g Mar. 14. g Luc. 22. d
Symo^ Peter stood and warmed him self. The^ said they unto him: Art not thou
one of his disciples? He denied, and said: I am not. A servant of the hye
prestes, a kynszma^ of his, whose ear Peter had smytten of, said unto him:
Did not I se the in the garden with him?

Ioh. 13. d
Mat. 27 a Marc 15. a Luc. 2^. a
Then led they Jesus from Caiphas in to the common hall. And it was early in the
morning. And they them selves went not in to the common hall, lest they should
be defiled, but yt they might eat ye Pascall lamb. Then went Pilate out unto
the^, and said: What accusacion bring ye against this man? They answered, and
said unto him: If he were not an evil doer, we had not delivered him unto
the. Then said Pilate unto the^: Take ye him, and judge him after yo law.
Then said ye Jews unto him: It is not laufull for us to put any man to death.
That ye word of Jesus might be fulfilled, Ioh. 12. d
which he spoke, when he signified, what death he should dye.

Mat. 27. b Marc. 15. a Luc. 23. a
Then entered Pilate in to the common hall again, and called Jesus, and said
unto him: Art thou the king of the Jews? Jesus answered: Say thou that of
thy self, or have other told it the of me?

Ioh. ^
But now is my kingdom not from hence. The^ said Pilate unto hi^: Art thou a
king the^? Jesus answered: Thou say it, for I am a king. For this cause
was I borne, and came in to the world, that I should testifye the truth. Who
so ever is of the truth, hears my voice. Pilate said unto hi^: What is the
truth? Man* (...) Man. (...) Luc. (...)
And when he had said that he went out again to the Jews, and said unto
them: I find no gyltinesse in him: Man. (...) Man. (...) Luc. (...)
But ye have a custom, that I should give one unto you lowse at Easter. Will ye
now yt I lowse unto you the king of ye Jews? The^ cried they again
altogether, and said: Not him, but Barrabas. Yet was Barrabas a murthurer.

The XIX. Chapter.
THen Pilate took Jesus, and scourged (...) Luc. (...)
And the soudyers platted a crown of thorns, and set it upon his head, and
put a purple garment upon him, and said: Hayle king of the Jews. And they
smote him on the face. Then went Pilate forth again, and said unto the^:
Behold, I bring him forth unto you, yt ye may know, yt I find no fault in
hi^. So Jesus went out, and ware a crown of thorn and a purple robe. And he
said unto them: Behold, the man. When the hye prestes and the mynisters saw
him, they cried, and said: Crucifye, crucifye. Pilate said unto the^: Take ye
him, and crucifye him, for I find no giltynesse in him. The Jews answered
him: We have a law, (...)
and after our law he ought to dye, ^
because he made him self the son of God. When Pilate herd that word, he
was the more afraid, and went again in to the common hall, and said unto
Jesus: Whence art thou? But Jesus gave him no answer. The^ said Pilate unto
him: Speak thou not unto me? Know thou not, yt I have power to crucifye
ye, and have power to lowse ye? Jesus answered: Thou should have no power
upon me, if it were not (...)
given the from above. Therefore he that delivered me unto ye, has the more
sin. From that time forth Pilate sought means to lowse him. But the Jews
cried, and said: If thou let him go, thou art not the Emperors friend. For
whosoever makes himself king, (...)
is against the Emperor.

When Pilate herd yt word, (...)
he brought Jesus forth, and sat hi^ down upon ye iugdme^t seat, in the place
which is called the Pauement, but in the Hebrew, Gabbatha. It was the day of
preparinge of the Easter about the sixte hour. And he said unto the Jews:
Behold yo king. But they cried: Away with him, away with him, crucify him.
Pilate said unto the^: Shall I crucifye yo king? The hye prestes answered: We
have no king but ye Empero. The^ delivered he him unto them, to be crucified.

They took Jesus, and led him away. And he bare his cross, (...)
and went out to the place called ye place of deed men skulles, which in
Hebrew is named Golgatha, where they crucified him, and two other with him, on
either side one, but Jesus in the mids (...) ^7. d (...). ^5. c (...). 23. d
Pilate wrote a superscripcion, and set upon the cross. And there was written:
Jesus of Nazareth, king of the Jews. This superscripcion red many of the
Jews. For ye place where Jesus was crucified, was nigh unto the cite. And it
was written in Hebrew, Greek and Latin. Then said the hye prestes of the Jews
unto Pilate: Write not king of the Jews, but yt he said, I am king of the
Jews. Pilate answered: What I have written, that have I written.

(...). d (...). ^5. c
took his garments, and made four parts, to every soudyer one patte, and the
cote also. As for the cote, it was unsown from above, wrought through and
through. Then said they one to another: Let us not deuyde it, but cast lottes
for it, who shall have it, that the scripture might be fulfilled, which says:
(...) ^1. b
They have parted my garments among them, and on my cote have they cast
lottes. This did the soudyers in deed.

There stood by the cross of Jesus, his mother, and his mothers sister Mary,
the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene. Now when Jesus saw his mother, and
the disciple stondynge by, who^ he loved, he said unto his mother: Woman,
behold, that is thy son. Then said he to the disciple: behold, that is thy
mother. And from that hour the disciple took her unto him.

After that when Jesus knew that all was performed, (...) ^8. c
that the scripture might be fulfilled, he said: I am a thyrst. There stood a
vessel full of vyneger. They filled a sponge with vyneger and wonde it about
with ysope, (...)
and held it to his mouth. Now when Jesus had received the vyneger, he said:
It is fynished, and bowed his head, and gave up the ghost.

Zach. 1^.
And immediately there went out blood and water.

And he that saw it, bare record, and his record is true. And he knows
that he says true, that ye might believe also. For this is done, yt the
scripture might be fulfilled: Exodus 12.
Ye shall not break a bone of him. And again, another scripture says: Zach.
12
They shall se him, whom they have pearsed.

After that, Joseph of Arimathia, which was a disciple of Jesus (but secretly
for fear of the Jews) besought Pilate, Marc. 15. Mat. 27. Luc. 23. c
yt he might take down the body of Jesus. And Pilate gave him license. There
came also Ioh. ^. a
Nicodemus, (which before came unto Jesus by night) and brought of Myrre and
Aloes mingled together, about an hundredth pound weight.

The^ took they the body of Jesus, and wonde it with lynnen clothes, and with
the spyces, as the manner of the Jews is to burye. And by ye place where Jesus
was crucified, there was a garden, and in the garden a new sepulcher, where in
was never man laid: there laid they Jesus, because of the preparinge day of
ye Jews, for the sepulcre was nigh at hand.

The XX. Chapter.
Upon one day of the Sabbath, came Ioh. 13. c 19. c. 21. a
whom Jesus loved, and said unto them: They have taken away the LORD out of
the sepulcre, and we can not tell where they have laid him. The^ went Peter
forth and the other disciple, and came to the sepulcre. They ra^ne both
together, and that other disciple outra^ne Peter, and came first to the
sepulcre, and looked in, and saw the lynnen clothes laid. But he went not in.
The^ came Simon Peter after him, and went in to the sepulcre, and saw the
lynne^ clothes lie, and the napkyn that was bound about Jesus head, not
laid with the lynnen clothes, but wrapped together in a place by it self. The^
went i^ also yt other disciple, which came first to ye sepulcre, and he saw
and believed: for as yet they knew not ye scriptures, Psalm. 15. b Act. 2. c ^3.
d. 17. a
yt it behooved hi^ to rise again from ye deed. The^ went ye disciples again
together.

As for Mary, she stood before ye sepulcre LORD, and I wot not where they
have laid hi^. And when she had said yt, she turned her self back, and saw
Jesus stondinge, and knew not yt it was Jesus. Jesus said unto her: Woman,
why wepest thou? Whom sekest thou? She thought yt it had been ye gardener, and
said unto him: Sir, if thou have borne him hence: then tell me where thou have
laid him? and I will fetch hi^. Jesus said unto her: Mary. Then turned she her
about, and said unto him: Rabboni, yt is to say: Master. Jesus said unto
her: Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended unto my father. But go thou ye
way unto my Psalm. 21. c
brethren and say unto the^: I asce^de up unto my father and yo father: ^oha^.
16. d
to my God, and yo God. Mary Magdalene came, and told ye disciples: I have
seen the LORD, Luc. 42. a
and soch things has he spoken unto me.

Luc. 24. c
and the doors were shut for fear of ye Jews, came Jesus, and stood i^ yr
mids, and said unto the^: Peace be with you. And wha^ he had so said, he
showed the^ his hands and his side. Ioh. 16. c
The^ were ye disciples glad, yt they saw ye LORD. The^ said Jesus unto the^
again: Peace be with you. Esa. 61. a Mar. 16. b Luc. 4. a Ioh. 17. c
Like as my father sent me, eue^ so se^de I you. And when he had said yt, he
brethed upon the^, and said unto the^: Receive the holy ghost. Whose sins
soever ye remytte, they are remytted unto the^: and whose sins so ever ye
retain, they are retained.

But Thomas one of the twolue Ioh. 11. b
which is called Didimus, was not with the^ wha^ Jesus came. The^ said the other
disciples unto him: We have seen the LORD. But he said unto the^: Except I
se in his hands the prynte of the nales, and put my hand in to his side, I
will not believe.

LORD, and my God. Jesus said unto him: Thomas, because thou have seen me,
thou have believed. Blessed are they, that se not, and yet believe.

Many other tokens did Jesus before his disciples, which are not written in
this book, But these are written, yt ye should believe, yt Jesus is Christ the
son of God, and that ye through believe might have life in his name.

The XXI. Chapter.
AFter that showed Jesus himself again Ioh* ^
Nathanael of Cana a cite of Galile, and the sons of Zebede, and two other of
his disciples. Simon Peter said unto the^: I go a fyshinge. They said unto
hi^: We also will go with the. They went out, and entered into a ship straight
way. And yt same night took they nothing. But wha^ it was now morrow, Jesus
stood on the shore, but his disciples knew not yt it was Jesus. Jesus said
unto the^: Children, have ye any thing to eat? They answered hi^: No. He
said unto the^: (...)
Cast out the nett on ye right side of the ship, and ye shall find. The^ they
cast out, and could no more draw it for ye multitude of fishes. The^ said ye
disciple (...)
who^ Jesus loved, unto Peter: It is the LORD.

When Simon Peter herd that is was LORD, he gyrde his mantell about him (for
he was naked) and sprange in to ye see. But other disciples came by ship (for
they were not far from land, but as it were two hundredth cubytes) and they
drew the net with the fiszhes. Now when they were come to land, they saw
coals laid, and fysh thereon, and bred. Jesus said unto the^: Bring hither of
the fyshes, (...)
that ye have taken now. Simon Peter stepped forth, and drew the nett to the
land, full of great fyszhes, and hundredth and three and fyftie. And for all
there were so many, yet was not the net broken.

Jesus said unto them: Come, and dyne. LORD. Then came Jesus, and took ye
bred, and gave it the^: and the fyszhe likewise. This is now the third time
that Jesus appeared unto his disciples, after that he was risen again from the
deed.

Now wha^ they had dyned, Jesus said unto Simon Peter: Symo^ Ioha^na, love
thou me more then these do? He said unto him: Ye LORD, thou know yt I
love the. He said unto him: Feed my la^bes. He said unto him again the
second time: Symo^ Ioha^na, love thou me? He said unto him: Ye LORD, thou
know, yt I love ye. He said unto him: Feed my sheep. He said unto him ye
third time: Simon Ioha^na, love thou me? Peter was sorry, because he said
unto him, love thou me? And he said unto him: (...). ^5. d
LORD, thou know all things, thou know, that I love ye. Jesus said
unto him: Feed my sheep.

Verily verily I say unto the: When (...)
But wha^ thou art old, thou shall stretch forth thy hands, (...)
and another shall gyrde the, and led the whither thou would not. But this he
said, to signifye with what death he should glorifye God.

When he had spoken this, he said unto him: Follow me. Peter turned him
about, and saw the disciple folowinge, whom Jesus loved,( (...)
which also leaned upon his breast at the supper, and said: LORD, who is it
that betrayeth the)? Wha^ Peter saw him, he said unto Jesus: LORD, but what
shall he do? Jesus said unto him: If I will that he tarry till I come, what is
that to the? Follow thou me. Then went there out a saying among the
brethren: This disciple dies not. And Jesus said not unto him: He dies not,
but: If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to the? This is the same
disciple, which testifyeth of these things, and wrote these things, and we
know that his testimony is true.

There are many other things also that Jesus did, which, if they should be
written every one, I suppose the world should not contain the books, that
were to be written.

The end of the Gospel of S. Ihon.
The Acts of the Apostles, written by S. Luke the Evangelist.
What the Acts conteyne.
Chap. I. The ascension of Christ. Mathias is chosen in the stead of Judas.
Chap. II. The coming of the holy ghost. The sermon of Peter before the
congregation at Jerusalem, and the increase of the faithful. Chap. III. The
halt is restored to his fete. Peter preaches Christ unto the people. Chap.
IIII. The Apostles are taken and brought before the council. They are
forbidden to preach, but they turn them unto prayer, and are more obedient
unto God then unto men. Chap. V. The dyssemblynge of Ananias and Saphira is
punyshed. Miracles are done by the Apostles, which are taken, but the angel of
God brings them out of preson. They are brought before the council, The
sentence of Gamaliel. The apostles are bett, they rejoice in trouble. Chap VI.
Ministers (or deacons) are ordened in the congregation to do service in
necessary things of the body, that the Apostles may wait only upon the
word of God. Steven is accused. Chap. VII. Steven makes answer to his
accusacion, rebukes the hardnecked Iues, and is stoned unto death. Chap. VIII.
Saul persecuteth the Christian, The Apostles are scatred abroad. Philip comes
in to Samaria. Simon magus is baptized, he dyssembleth. Philip baptiseth the
chamberlayne. Chap. IX. Paul is converted, and confounds the Iues* Peter
rayseth Tabitha. Chap. X. The vision that Peter saw. How he was sent to
Cornelius. The Heithen also receive the sprete, and are baptized. Chap. XI.
Peter shows the cause wherefore he went to the Heithen. Barnabas and Paul
preach unto the Heithen. Agabus prophecieth derth for to come. Chap. XII.
Herod persecuteth the christian, kylleth James, and puts Peter in preson,
who^ the LORD delyuereth by an angel. The shameful death of Herod. Chap.
XIII. Paul and Barnabas are called to preach among the Heithen* Of Sergius
Paulus and Elymas the sorcerar. Paul preaches at Antioche. Chap. XIIII. Paul
and Barnabas preach at I^^nium: some believe, some stere up sedicion. A^ Listra
they would do sacrifice to Barnabas and Paul, which refuse it, and exorte the
people to worshipe the true God Paul is stoned, after that comes he to Derba,
lystra, I conium and to Antioche. Chap. XV. Variaunce about circumcision, The
Apostles pacify the matter at Jerusalem. Paul and Barnabas preach at Antioche.
Chap. XVI. Timothy is circumcised, Paul preaches at Philippos, and there is he
put in preson. Chap. XVII. Paul comes to Thessalonica, where the Iues set the
cite on a roore Paul escapes, and comes to Athens, where he preaches the
true and unknown God. Chap. XVIII. Paul preaches at Corinthum, contynuinge
there a year and a half, goes again in to Syria, comes to Ephesus, Cesarea
and Antioche. Of Apollos, Aquila and Priscilla. Chap. XIX. Of the xij. men whom
Paul baptized at Ephesus, and what miracles were done by him. Demetrius moves
sedicion in the cite. Chap. XX. Paul goes in to Macedonia and in to
Grekelonde. At Troas he rayseth up a deed body. At Ephesus he calls the
elders of the congregation together, commits the kepinge of Gods flock unto
them, warns the^ for false teachers, makes his prayer with them, and
departs to ship. Chap. XXI. Paul's iourneye by ship. Of Philippe the
Evangelist, and Agabus the Prophet, which warns Paul not to go to Jerusalem.
He remains steadfast in his purpose, and is taken in the temple. Chap. XXII.
Paul answers the Jews, is scourged, and laid in preson again. Chap XXIII.
Paul comes before the council. Debate arises among the people, the
captain delyuereth him, God conforteth him. Chap. XXIIII. Paul is accused
before felix, he answers for himself. Chap. XXV The Jews accuse Paul before
Festus, he appealeth unto the Emperor, and is sent unto Rome. Chap. XXVI.
King Agrippa hears Paul, which tells him his calling from the beginning.
Chap. XXVII. Paul's shippinge toward Rome, Julius the captain entreats Paul
courteously, at the last they suffer shipwrake. Chap. XXVIII. The vyper hurts
not Paul's hand, he heals Publius father, and preaches Christ at Rome.
The Acts of the Apostles.


The first Chapter.
THE first treatise (dear Theophilus) have Io^ ^
and appeared unto them fourtye days long, and spoke unto them of the
kingdom of God.

And when he had gathered them together, he commanded them that they should
not depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the promise of the father, whereof
(said he) ye have herd of me: (...)
^
For Ihon baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with ye holy ghost, and
that within this few days.

Now when they were come together, they axed him, and said: LORD, shall thou
at this time set up the kingdom of Israel again? But he said unto them: It
belongs not unto you to know the times or seasons, (...)
which the father has kept in his own power, but ye shall receive the power
of ye holy ghost, which shall come upon you, and ye shall be my witnesses at
Jerusalem, Luc. (...). Act. (...) Act. (...)
and in all Iewrye and Samaria, and unto the end of the earth.

And when he had spoken these things, (...)
And while they looked after him, as he went in to heaven, behold, there stood
by them two men in white garments, which also said: ye men of Galile, Why
stand ye gasynge up in to heaven? This Jesus which is taken up from you in to
heaven (...) 7. b (...) 24. c (...) 13. c (...)* 17. c (...) 21. d
shall come even so as ye have seen him go in to heaven.

Then turned they again from ye mount that is called Oliuete, which is nigh to
Jerusalem, and has a Sabbath days journey. And when they came in, they went
up in to a parler, (...). 10. a (...). b (...)* 5. b (...) 9* a
where abode Peter and James, Ihon and Andrew, Philippe and Thomas, Bartilmew
and Matthew, James the son of Alpheus, and Simon Zelotes, and Judas the son
of James. These all continued with one acorde in prayer and supplicacion, with
the women and Mary the mother of Jesus and with his brethren.

(...) 10. a
for he was nombred with us, and had opteyned the felashippe of this
mynistracion. This same truly possessed the (...) ^7. a
field for the reward of unrighteousness, and hanged himself, and brast a
sunder in the mids, and all his bowels guszhed out. And it is known unto all
the^ that dwell at Jerusalem, in so much that the same field is called in their
mother tongue Acheldema, that is to say, the blood field.

(...) ^3. d (...) 103. a
His biszhoprike another take. Wherefore among these men which have been
gathered together with us (all the time that the LORD Jesus went out and in
among us, beginning from the baptyme of Ihon, until ye day that he was
taken up from us) must one be a witness with us of his resurreccion.

(...)
And they appointed two (Joseph called Barsabas, whose syrname was Iustus, and
Mathias.) making their prayer and saying: (...) 19. c
Thou LORD, which know the hertes of all men, show whether of these two
thou have chosen, that the one may take the rowme of this mynistracion and
Apostelshippe, from the which Judas by transgression fell, that he might go
away in to his own place. And they gave forth the lottes over them, and the
lot fell upon Mathias. And he was counted with the eleven Apostles.

The II. Chapter.
ANd when the Deuteronomy. 16. ^ Leui. 24. ^
Whit sunday was Mat. 16. c
And they began to preach with other tunges, even as the sprete gave them
vtteraunce.

There were dwellinge at Jerusalem Jews, men that feared God, out of every
nation that is under heaven. Now when this voice came to pass, the multitude
came together, and were asto^nyed: For every one herd, that they spoke with
his own tunge. They wondered all and marueyled, and said among themselves:
Behold, are not all these which speak, of Galile? How hear we the^ every one
his own tunge, wherein we were borne? Parthians and Medes, and Elamites, and we
that dwell in Mesopotamia, and in Iewry and Capadocia, Pontus, and Asia,
Phrigia and Pamphilia, Egipte, and in the parts of Lybia by Cyren, and
strangers of Rome, Jews and Mat. 23.
Proselytes, Cretes and Arabians: we hear them speak with our own tunges
the great works of God.

They were all amassed, and wondered, and

Ye men of Iewry, and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known unto you,
and let my words enter in at your ears. For these are not dronken, as ye
suppose, for it is yet but the third hour of ye day: but this is it, that
was spoken before by the prophet Joel: And it shall come to pass in the last
days, says God, Joel ^. f
I will pour out of my sprete upon all flesh, and your sons and your
daughters shall prophecye, and your young men shall se visions Act. 10. and 16. b
and your old men shall dream dreams, Luc. 2. f Act. 21. b
and on my servants and on my handmaydens will I pour out of my sprete in
those days, and they shall prophecye.

And I will show wonders in heaven above, and tokens on the earth beneth, Mat.
27. f Luc. 23. d
blood and fire, and the vapoure of smoke. The Son shall be turned in to
darkness, and the Moon in to blood, before that great and notable day of
the LORD come. And it shall come to pass, ^o. 10. b
Who so ever shall call upon the name of the LORD, shall be saved.

yo selves know also, Mat. 27. c
him (after that he was delivered by the determinate council and foreknowlege
of God) have ye taken by the hands of unrighteous persons, and crucified
him, and slain him, ^ct. 10. e
who^ God has raised up, and lowsed the sorrows of death, for so much as it
was impossible that he should be holden of it. ^sal. 15. b
For David speaks of him: Before hand have I set the LORD always before
me, for he is on my right ho^de, that I should not be moved. Therefore did my
heart rejoice, and my tunge was glad: For my flesh also shall rest in hope. For
thou shall not leave my soul in hell, nether shall thou suffer ye Holy to se
corrupcion. Thou have showed me the ways of life, thou shall make me full of
joy with thy countenance.

Ye men and brethren, let me freely speak unto you of the Patryarke David: For
he is deed and buried, Reg. 2. b
and his sepulcre is with us unto this day. Wherefore now saying yt he was a
prophet, and knew that God had ^al. 131. b
he saw it before, and spoke of the resurreccion of Christ: for his soul was
not left in hell, nether has his flesh seen corrupcion. This Jesus has God
raised up, ^ct. 1 a (...). 15. c
whereof we all are witnesses.

Seeing now that he by the right hand of God ^hilip. 2. a
is exalted, and has received of ye father ye promise of the holy ghost, he
has shed forth this, that ye se and hear. For David is not ascended in to
heaven, but he said: ^^al. 109. a
The LORD said unto my LORD: Sit thou on my right hand, until I make
thine enemies yt footstool. So therefore let all the house of Israel know for
a suertye, yt God has made this same Jesus (whom ye have crucified) LORD and
Christ.

^ach. 1^. c
When they herd this, their heart pricked them, and they said unto Peter and to
the other Apostles: Ye men and brethren, (...). 3. b ^ct. 9. a (...) 16. d
What shall we do? Peter said onto them: Amend your selves, and let every one
of you be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remyssion of sins,
and ye shall receive the gift of the holy ghost. For this ^el. ^. f
promise was made unto you and your children, and to all that are far of,
who^ so ever the LORD our God shall call. And with many other words bare he
witness, and exorted them, and said: Save your selves from this untoward
generation. They that gladly received his preachinge, were baptized, and the
same day there were added unto them about three thousand souls.

They continued in the Apostles doctrine, and in the felashippe, and in
breaking of bred, and in prayer. And fear came upon every soul, and many
wonders and tokens were done by ye Apostles. But all they that believed, were
together, Act. ^
and had all things commen. They sold their goods and possessions, and
parted them out among all, acordinge as every man had need. And they continued
daily with one acorde in the temple, and Esa ^
brake bred in every house: they took their meat with joy and synglenesse of
heart, praysinge God, and had favor with all ye people. And the LORD added to
the congregation daily soch as should be saved.

The III. Chapter.
PEter and Ihon went up together Act. ^
In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth rise up and walk. And he took him by
the right hand and lift him up. Immediately his legs and ancle bones were
made strong, and he sprange, stood and walked, and entered with them in to the
temple, walking, and leapinge and praysinge God.

And all the people saw him walk and (...)
porche, which is called Salomo^s, and wondered.

When Peter saw that, he answered unto the people: Ye men of Israel, why
maruayle ye at this, or why look ye so at us, as though we by our own power
or deseruynge, had made this man to walk? The God of Abraham and of Isaac, and
of Jacob, ye God of our fathers has glorified his child Jesus, (...)
whom ye delivered and denied in the presence of Pilate, when he had judged him
to be lowsed. But ye denied the holy and just, and desired the murthurer to be

Now dear brethren, I know that ye have done it (...)
through ignorance, as did also your rulers. But God, which by the mouth of
all his prophets had showed before, yt his Christ should suffer, has so
fulfilled it. Do penance now therefore and turn you, that your sins may be
done away, when the time of refreshinge shall come before the presence of the
LORD, and when he shall send him, which now before is preached unto you, even
Jesus Christ: which must receive heaven until the time that all things, which
God has spoken by the mouth of his holy prophets sense ye world began, be
restored again.

LORD your God raise up unto you, (...). c (...). c
even from among your brethren, like unto me: him shall ye hear, in all that
he shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass, what soul soever shall not
hear the same prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people. And all the
prophets from Samuel and thence forth as many as have spoken, have likewise
told of these days.

Ye are the children of the prophets and of the covenant, which God made unto
or fathers, when he said unto Abraham: Through ye sede shall all ye nations of
ye earth be blessed. (...) 12. a (...) 22. c (...). 10. a
First unto you has God raised up his child Jesus, and sent hi^ unto you, to
bless you: yt every one should turn from his wickedness.

The IIII. Chapter.
But as they spoke to ye people, there

And it chanced on ye morrow, that their rulers and Elders and scrybes (as
Annas ye hye pressed and Caiphas, and Ihon and Alexander, and as many as were of
the hye prestes kynred) gathered them selves together at Jerusalem, and set
them before them, and axed them: By what auctorite, Or in what name have ye
done this? Mat. ^1. c


Peter full of the holy ghost, said unto them: Ye rulers of the people, and ye
Elders of Israel, If we this day be examyned concerning this good deed upon
the sick man, by what means he is made whole, be it known then unto you and
to all the people of Israel, Act. 3. a
that in ye name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, who^ God has
raised up from the deed, sto^deth this man here before you whole. Psalm. 117. c
Mat. 21. e 1. Pet. 2. a
This is the stone refused of you buylders, which is become the head corner
stone, nether is there salvation in any other: Mat. 1. c Phil. 2. a
Ner yet also is there given unto me^ any other name, wherein we must be saved.

They saw the boldness of Peter and Ihon Ioh. 11. c
What shall we do to these me^? for a manifest token is done by them, and is
openly known unto the^ that dwell at Jerusalem, and we can not deny it. But
that it break out no farther among the people, let us threate^ them
earnestly, that hence forth they speak of this name unto noman.

And they called them, and commanded the^, that in any wise they should not
speak ner teach in the name of Jesus. But Peter and Ihon answered, and said
unto the^: Judge ye your selves, whether it be right before God, that we
should be more obedient unto you, then unto God. We can not chose, but speak
that we have seen and herd. But they threatened them, and let them go, and
found nothing how to punyshe them because of ye people: for they all praised
God because of that, Act. ^*
which was done. For the man, upon whom this token of health was done, was
above fourtye year old.

And when they were let go they came to their folowes, and told them what ye
hye prestes and Elders said unto them. Wha^ they herd that, they lift up
their voice with one acorde unto God, and said: LORD, thou that art the God
which made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all that therein is thou that by
the mouth of David thy servant have said: Why do the Heythe^ rage? and ye
people ymagin vain things? The kings of the earth stand up, Psalm. 2. a
and the princes have gathered them selves together against ye LORD, and
against his. Christ. Of a truth against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou have
anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate with the Heythen and people of Israel,
have gathered themselves together, to do what soever thy hand and thy council
determined before to be done. And now LORD, behold their threatenynges, and
grant unto thy servants with all steadfast boldness to speak thy word:
and stretch out thine hand, that healinge and tokens and wonders may be done
by the name of thy holy child Jesus.

LORD Jesus, and great grace was with them all. Nether was there any among
them that lacked. For as many as were possessers of lands or houses, sold
the^ and brought ye money of the goods that were sold, and laid it at the
Apostles fete. And distribucion was made unto every man, acordinge as he had
need.

Ioses which was also called of ye Apostles, Barnabas (that is to say, the
son of consolacion) a Leuite, of the country of Cypers, had land, and sold
it, and brought the money, and laid it at the Apostles fete.

The V. Chapter.


And it fortuned as it were about ye space LORD? Behold, the fete of the^
which have buried thy huszbande, are at the door, and shall carye the out. And
immediately she fell down at his fete, and gave up the ghost. Then came in the
young men, and found her deed, and carried her out, and buried her by her
huszba^de. And there came a great fear over the whole congregation, and over
all the^ that herd it.

Many tokens and wonders were done among the people by the hands of the
Apostles (and they were all together with one acorde in (...)
Salomons porche: but of other there durst no man join him self unto the^,
nevertheless the people held much of them. The multitude of the men and women
that believed in the LORD, grew more and more) In so much that they brought
out the sick in to the streets, and laid them upon beds and barowes, that
at the leest way the shadow of Peter (when he came by) might ouershadowe some
of the^. There came many also out of ye cities round about unto Jerusalem,
and brought the sick and the^ that were vexed with unclean spretes, and they
were healed every one.

But the hye pressed rose up, and all they yt (...)
which is the sect of the Saduces, and were full of indignacion, and laid
hands on the Apostles, and put them in the common preson. But the angel of ye
LORD by night opened the preson doors, (...)
and brought the^ out, and said: Go your way and step up, and speak in
the temple to the people all the words of this life. When they herd that,
they entered in to the temple early in the morning: and taught.

But the hye pressed came, and they yt were with him, and called the council
together, and all ye Elders of the children of Israel, and sent to the preson
to fet them. The mynisters came and found them not in the preson, ^ame again,
and told, and said: The preson found we shut with all diligence, and the
kepers stondinge without before the doors: but wha^ we had opened, we found
noman therein. When the hye pressed, and the rulers of the temple and the other
hye prestes herd these words, they douted of them, whereunto this would grow.

(...)
for they feared the people, lest they should have been stoned. And when they
had brought them, they set the^ before the council. And the hye pressed axed
them, and said: Did not we (...)
command you strately, that ye should not teach in this name. And behold,
ye have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine, (...)
and ye inte^de to bring this man's blood upon us.

But Peter and the Apostles answered, and said: We ought more to obey God
then men. The God of our fathers has raised up Jesus, who^ ye slew, and
hanged on tree. Him has the right hand of God exalted, to be a prince and
Savior, to give repentance and forgiveness of sins unto Israel. And we
are his records of these words, and the holy ghost, who^ God has given unto
the^ that obey him. Wha^ they herd that, it went through the hertes of them,
and they thought to slaye them.

(...)
named Gamaliel, a scribe, had in great reputacion before all ye people, and
bad put the Apostles aside a little, and said unto them: Ye men of Israel, take heed to your selves, what ye do as touching these men. Before these days
rose up one Theudas, boostinge himself. (And there cleued unto him a no^bre of
me^, about a four hundredth) which was slain, and all they yt enclyned unto
him, were scatred abroad, and brought to naught. (...)
After this stood up Judas of Galile in ye days of trybute, and drew away
much people after him, and he also perished, and all they that enclyned unto
him, are scatred abroad. And now I say unto you: refrain yo selves from these
men, and let the^ go. (...)
If this council or work be of me^, it will come to naught: but if it be of
God, ye are not able to destroy it, lest ye be found to be the men, that will
strive against God. Then they agreed unto him, and called the Apostles, and bet
them, and commanded them, that they should speak nothing in the name of
Jesus, and let them go.

But they departed from the presence of the council, reioysinge, Mat. 5. ^
that they were worthy to suffer rebuke for his names sake. And daily in the
temple and in every house they ceased not, to teach and to preach the
Gospel of Jesus Christ.

The VI. Chapter.
IN those days when the nombre of 1. Tim. 3. b
that are of honest report, and full of the holy ghost and wyszdome, whom we
may appoynte to this needful busynes. But we will give our selves unto
prayer, and to the mynistracion of the word of God. And the saying pleased
the whole multitude. And they chose Steven, a man full of faith and of the holy
ghost, and Philippe, and Procorus, and Nicanor, and Thimon, and Parmenas, and
Nicolas the Proselite of Antioche. Nu. 27. d Act. 1. d 1. Ti. 4. b 2. Tim. 1. b
These they set before ye Apostles, and they prayed, and laid their hands upon
them. And the word of God increased, and the nombre of the disciples
multiplied greatly at Jerusalem. And there were many prestes also obedient unto
the faith.

Steven full of faith and power, did wonders and great tokens among the
people. Then arose there certain of the synagoge, which is called (the
synagoge) of ye Libertynes, and of the Cyrenites, and of the Alexa^drines, and
of the^ yt were of Celicia and Asia, and disputed with Steue^, Luc. 21. b
and they could not resist the wyszdome and the sprete, out of the which he
spoke. Then sent they in certain men, that said: Mat. 26. f
We have herd him speak blasphemous words against Moses, and against God.
And they moved the people, and the Elders and the scrybes, and came upon him,
and caught him, and brought him before the council, and set false witnesses
there, which said: This man ceasseth not to speak blasphemous words against
this holy place and the law. For we herd him say: Jesus of Nazareth shall
destroy this place, and change the ordinances which Moses gave us. And all
they that sat in the council, looked upon him and saw his face as the face of
an angel.

The VII. Chapter.
o father Abraham, while he was yet in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Haran,
and said unto him: Get yt out of thy country, and from thy kynred, and come in
to a land which I will show ye. The^ went he out of the land of the Caldees,
Genesis 11. d
and dwelt in Haran. Genesis 12. a
And from thence, when his father was deed, he brought him over in to this
land (where ye dwell now) and gave him no enheritau^ce therein, no not ye
breadth of a foot: and promised him, that he would give it him to possess, Genesis
13. d
and to his sede after him, when as yet he had no child.

Genesis 15. c
But thus said God unto him: Thy sede shall be a stranger in a strange land,
and they shall make bond men of them, and entreat the^ evil four hundredth
years: and ye people whom they shall serve, will Iiudge, said God. And after
that shall they go forth, and serve me in this place. And he gave him the
covenant of circumcision. Genesis 17. b
And he begat Isaac, Genesis 21. a Genesis 25. c
and circumcised him the eight day. And Isaac begat Jacob Genesis 29. f
and Jacob begat the twolue Patriarchs.

Genesis 37. e Sap. 10. c
and sold hi^ in to Egipte. And God was with him, and delivered him out of all
his troubles, and gave him favor and wyszdome i^ the sight of Pharao king of
Egipte Genesis 41. f
which made him prince over Egipte and over all his house.

But there came a derth over all the land of Egipte and Canaan, Genesis 41. g and
42. a
and a great trouble, and our fathers found no sustenaunce. But Jacob herd
that there was corn in Egipte, and sent our fathers out the first time. Genesis
45. a
And at the second time was Joseph known of his brethren, and Joseph's kynred
was made known unto Pharao. But Joseph sent out, and caused his father and all
his kynred to be brought, eue^ three score and fyftene souls. Genesis 46. a G^n.
49. ^
And Jacob went down in to Egipte, and dyed, both he and our fathers Ge. 50.
b Iosue. 24 f
and were brought over unto Siche^, and laid in the sepulcre, that Abraham
boughte for money of the children of Hemor at Sichem. Genesis 23. d


Exodus 1. a Psalm. 104. a
till there rose another king, which knew not of Joseph. The same dealte
suttely with our kynred, and entreated our fathers evil and made them to cast
out the young children, that they should not remain alive.

At the same time was Moses borne, (...)
and was a proper child before God, and was norished three months in his
fathers house. But when he was cast out, Pharaos daughter took him up, and
norished him up for her own son. And Moses was learned in all manner wyszdome
of the Egipcians, and was mighty in deeds and words.

But when he was fourtye year old, it came in to his mind to vyset his
brethren the children of Israel. And when he saw one of them suffer wrong, he
helped him, and delivered him, that had the harm done unto him, and slew the
Egipcian. But he thought that his brethren should have understand, how that
God by his hand should save the^, howbeit they understood it not.

And on the next day he showed himself (...)
Who made the a ruler and judge over us? Will thou slaye me also, as thou
slewest the Egipcian yesterdaye? But Moses fled at that saying, and was a
stranger in the land of Madian, where he begat two sons.

And after fourtye years, (...)
the angel of ye LORD appeared unto him upon mount Sina, in a flamme of fire
in a buszhe. Wha^ Moses saw it, he wondered at the sight. But as he drue nigh
to behold, ye voice of ye LORD came unto him: I am the God of thy fathers,
the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. How beit Moses
tre^bled, and durst not behold. But ye LORD said unto hi^: (...)
Put of thy shues from thy fete, for ye place where thou stondest, is an holy
ground. I have well seen the trouble of my people in Egipte, and have herd
their gronynge, and am come down to deliver them. And now come, I will send
the in to Egipte.

This Moses, whom they refused, and said: Who made ye a ruler and judge over
us? (...)
him had God sent to be a ruler and delyuerer by the hand of the angel, that
appeared unto him in the buszhe. The same brought them out, and did wonders
and tokens in Egipte, and in the reed see, and in ye wilderness fourtye
years. This is that Moses, which said unto the children of Israel: (...). 18.
c ^ct. 3. d
A prophet shall the LORD your God raise up unto you even from among your
brethren, like unto me. Him shall ye hear. This is he, (...). 19. a (...) 3. c
that was in the congregation in the wilderness with the angel, which talked
with him, upon mount Sina, and with our fathers. This man received the word
of life to give unto us, unto whom our fathers would not be obedient, but
thrust him from the^, and in their hertes turned back again in to Egipte, and
said unto Aaron: Make us gods to go before us, (...)
for we can not tell what is become of this Moses, yt brought us out of the
land of Egipte. And they made a calfe at the same time, and offered sacrifice
unto the image, and reioysed in the works of their own hands.

But God turned himself, and (...) 1. d
gave them up, so that they worshipped the hooste of heaven, as it is written
in the book of the prophets: (...) 3. d (...) ^. c
O ye house of Israel, gave ye me sacrifices and catel those fortye years in
the wilderness? And ye took unto you ye tabernacle of Moloch, and the star
of your god Remphan, images which ye your selves made to worship the^. And
I will cast you out beyond Babylon.

(...) 25. d (...). ^. a
when he spoke unto Moses, that he should make it (acordinge to the patron, yt
he had seen.) which our fathers also received, and brought it with Iosue into
the land that the Heythe^ had in possession, (...)
whom God drove out before the face of our fathers, until the time of David,
which found favor with God, and desired that he might find a tabernacle for
the God of Jacob.

But Solomon buylte hi^ an house. (...) 6. a (...) 17. d
Howbeit ye Highest of all dwells not in temples that are made with hands: As
he says by the prophet: (...)
Heaven is my seat, and the earth is my footstool. What house then wilye
build unto me? says the LORD: Or which is the place of my rest? Has not my
hand made all these things?

(...)
Ye styffnecked and of vncircumcysed hertes and ears, ye allwaye resist the
holy ghost: Eue^ as yo fathers did, so do ye also. Which of the prophets have
not yo fathers persecuted? (...). b (...) 15. b
and have not kept it.

When they herd this, it went through ye hertes of the^, and they gnaszhed
upon him with their tethe. But he being full of the holy ghost, looked up
toward heaven, Mat. 16.
and saw the glory of God, and Jesus sto^dinge on the right hand of God,
and said: Behold, I se the heavens open, and the son of man stondinge on ye
right hand of God. But they cried out with a loud voice, and Psalm. 57.
stopped their ears, and ra^ne violently upon him all at once, and thrust him
out of the cite, and stoned him. Act. 22.
And ye witnesses laid down their clothes at the fete of a young man, which
was called Saul. And they stoned Steven, which cried, and said: LORD Jesus,
receive my sprete. And he kneled down, and cried with a loud voice: LORD,
Luc. 2^.
lay not this sin to their charge. And wha^ he had thus spoken, he fell a
sleep.

The VIII. Chapter.
SAul had pleasure in his death. At ye Act. 9. ^ 22. a. 26 1. Cor. ^ Gal. 1. b
But Saul made havoc of the congregation, entered in to every house, and drue
out men and women, and delivered the^ to preson. They now yt were scatered
abroad went about and preached the word. The^ came Philippe in to a cite of
Samaria, and preached Christ unto them. And the people gave head with one
acorde unto ye things that Philip spoke, hearing him, and seeing the tokens
that he did. For the unclean spretes cried loud, and departed out of many yt
were possessed. And many that were sick of the palsy and lame, were healed.
And there was great joy in the same cite.

But before there was in ye same cite a certain man, called Simon, which used
witch craft, and bewitched ye people of Samaria, saying, that he was a man
which could do great things. And they all regarded him from the leest unto
ye greatest, and said: This is the power of God which is great. But they
regarded him, because that of long time he had bewitched them with his
sorcery. Howbeit when they believed Philips

When the Apostles which were at Jerusalem, herd, that Samaria had received ye
word of God, they sent unto the^ Peter and Ihon. Which, wha^ they were come,
prayed for the^, yt they might receive the holy ghost. For as yet he was come
upon none of them but they were baptized only in the name of Christ Jesus. ^ct.
13. a and 19. a Tim. 4. b and 5. c Tim. 1. b
Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the holy ghost.

But when Simon saw, that by the layenge on of the Apostles hands yt holy
ghost was given, he offered the^ money, and said: Give me also this power,
that, on whomsoever I put the ho^des, he may receive the holy ghost. Howbeit
Peter said unto him: Perish thou with thy money, Mat. 10. a
because thou think that ye gift of God may be optayned with money. Thou
shall have nether part ner felashipe in this word, for ye heart is not right
before God. Repent therefore of this ye wickedness, and pray unto God, if
happly the thought of thy heart may be forgiven ye. For I se, yt thou art full
of bitter gall, and wrapped in with unrighteousness.

(...). 21. b
Pray ye unto the LORD for me, yt none of these things whereof ye have
spoken, come upon me. And they, wha^ they had testified and spoken the word of
the LORD, turned again to Jerusalem, and preached the Gospel in many towns
of the Samaritanes.

But the angel of the LORD spoke unto Philippe, and said: Arise, and go
toward the South, unto the way that goes down from Jerusalem unto Gaza,
which is deserte. And he rose, and went on. And behold, a man of the Morians
lord (a chamberlayne and of auctorite with Candace ye queen of the land of
the Morians) which had the rule of all her treasuries, ye same came to
Jerusalem to worshipe. And returned home again, and satt upon his charet, and
red the prophet Esaias.

The sprete said unto Philippe: Go near, and join thy self to yonder
charet. The^ ran Philippe unto him, and herd him read the prophet Esaias, and
said: Vndersto^dest thou what thou read? He said: How can I, except some
man enfourme me?

Esa. 53. b
He was led as a sheep to be slain, and as a lamb voycelesse before his
sherer, so opened he not his mouth. In his humbleness is his judgment exalted.
Who shall declare his generation? for his life is taken away from the earth.
Then answered the chamberlayne unto Philippe, and said: I pray the, of whom
speaks the prophet this? of himself, or of some other man?

Philippe opened his mouth, and began at this scripture, and preached him the
Gospel of Jesus. And as they went on their way, they came to a water. And
the chamberlayne said: Behold, here is water, what hyndereth me to be
baptized? Philippe said: If thou believe from thy whole heart, thou may. He
answered, and said: I believe, that Jesus Christ is the son of God. And he
commanded to hold still the charet, and they went down in to the water,
both Philippe and the chamberlayne. And he baptized him. But when they were
come up out of the water, the sprete of the LORD took Philippe away. And the
Chamberlayne saw him no more. But he went on his way reioysinge. As for
Philippe, he was found at Aszdod, and walked about, and preached the Gospel
unto all the cities, till he came to Cesarea.

The IX. Chapter.
SAul was yet breathinge out threatenings LORD. Act. (...) 1. Cor^ (...)
And went unto ye hye priest, and desired of him letters to Damascon unto the
synagoges, that if he found any of this way (whether they were men or women)
he might bring the^ bound unto Jerusalem. And as he was goinge on his
journey, it fortuned, that he came nigh unto Damasco^, and suddenly there shyned
round about hi^ a light from heaven, and he fell to the earth, and herd a
voice, which said unto him: Saul Saul (...)
why persecutest thou me? He said: LORD, who art thou? The LORD said: I am
Jesus, who^ thou persecutest. It shall be hard for ye to kycke against the
prycke. And he both tremblinge and astonnyed, said: LORD (...)
what will thou that I shall do? The LORD said unto him: Arise, and go into
the cite, there shall it be told the what thou shall do.

As for ye me^ that iourneyed with him, they stood and were amassed: for they
herd a voice, but saw noman. Saul rose from the earth, and when he had opened
his eyes, he saw noman. Nevertheless they took him by the hand, and brought
him to Damasco^: and he was three days without sight, and nether ate ner
drank. At Damascon there LORD in a vision: Ananias And he said: behold,
here am I LORD. The LORD said unto him: Arise, and go into the street which
is called straight, and are in the house of Judah after one called Saul of (...)
Tharsis: for behold, he prays, and has seen in a vision a man named
Ananias coming unto him, and layenge the hand upon him, that he might
receive his sight.

Ananias answered: LORD, I have herd by many of this man, how much evil he
has done to thy saints at Jerusalem. And here has he auctorite of the hye
prestes, to bind all those yt call upon thy name. The LORD said unto him: Go
thy way, (...)
for this man is a chosen vessel unto me, that he may bear my name before
the Heythen, and before kings, and before the children of Israel. I will show
him, how great things he must suffer for my names sake.

(...) 22. b
and laid the hands upon him, and said: Brother Saul, the LORD which
appeared unto ye in the way as thou came, has sent me, that thou might
receive thy sight, and be filled with the holy ghost. And immediately there fell
from his eyes as it had been scales, and he received his sight, and rose, and
was baptized, and took meat, and was conforted.

Then was Saul a certain days with the disciples that were at Damascon. And
straight way he preached Christ in the synagoges, how that he was ye son of
God. But all they that herd him, were amassed, and said: Is not this he, which
at Jerusalem spoiled all those that called on his name? and came hither to the
intent that he should bring them bound unto the hye prestes? But Saul
increased in strength, and confounded ye Jews which dwelt at Damascon, and
affirmed yt this was very Christ.

(...). 11. d
that they might kill him. (...). 2. c. (...). 19. c
Then the disciples took him by night, and put him through the wall, and let
him down in a baslrett.

(...) 2. b
But when Saul came to Jerusalem, he assayed to join himself to ye disciples.
And they were all afraid of him, and believed not, yt he was a disciple.
Nevertheless Barnabas took him, and brought him to the Apostles, and told them
how he had seen the LORD in the way, and how he spoke to him, and how he had
done boldly at Damascon in the name of Jesus. And he was with them, and went
out and in at Jerusalem, and quyte himself boldly in ye name of ye LORD Jesus.
He spoke also, and disputed with ye Greeks. But they went about to slaye him.
When the brethren knew yt, Act. 22. b
they brought him to Cesarea, and sent him forth to Tharsis. So the
congregacions had rest through out all Iewry, and Galile, and Samaria, and were
edified, and walked in the fear of the LORD, and were filled with the
comfort of the holy ghost.

It chanced that as Peter walked through LORD.

At Ioppa there was a certain woman that was a disciple, named Tabitha, which
by interpretacion is called Dorcas: ye same was full of good works and alms
deeds, which she did. But it chanced at the same time, that she was sick, and
dyed. Then waszhed they her, and laid her in a chamber. But for so much as
Lydda was nigh unto Ioppa, and the disciples herd that Peter was there, they
sent two men unto him, and desired him, yt he would take it for no grefe to
come unto them.

Peter rose, and came with the^. And wha^ Some read: *She (...) up
she sat her down again. But he gave her the hand, and lift her up, and
called the saints and the wedowes, and showed her there alive. And it was
known through out all Ioppa, and many believed on ye LORD. And it fortuned, yt
he tarried a long season at Ioppa by one Simo^, which was a tanner.

The X. Chapter.
THere was a man at Cesarea, named vision openly (about the nyenth hour of
the day) an angel of God entringe in to him, and saying unto him: Cornelius.
He looked upon him, and was afraid, and said: LORD, what is it? He said unto
him: Eccli. 35. b
Thy prayers and thine allmesses are come up in to remembrance before God. And
now send men unto Ioppa, and call for Simo^, whose syrname is Peter, which is
at lodginge with one Simon a tanner, whose house lies by ye see side: he shall
tell ye, what thou ought to do. And wha^ the angel which spoke to
Cornelius, was departed, he called two of his household servants, and a
devout soudyer, of the^ that waited upon him: and told them all, and sent
the^ to Ioppa.

On the next day after when these were goinge on their journey, and came nigh
unto the cite, Peter 4. Re. 4. d Mat 6. a Luc. 6. b
went up in to a chamber to pray about the sixte hour. And when he was
ho^grie, he would have eaten. But while they made ready for him, he fell into a
trance, LORD, Leuit. 11. a Deuteronomy. 14. a
for I never ate any commen or unclean thing. And the voice spoke unto him
again ye second time: Mat 15. b To 14. b ^ Tim 4. a Tit. 1. c
What God has cleansed, yt make not thou unclean. This was done thryse. And ye
vessel was received up again into heaven.

But while Peter was combred in himself, what manner of vision this should be
which he had seen, behold, the men yt were sent from Cornelius, enquered after
Simo^s house, and stood before the door, and called, and axed whether Simon
(whose syrname was Peter) were lodged there. While Peter was musinge of the
vision, the sprete said unto him: behold, the men seek the. Arise therefore,
and get the down, and go with the^, and doubt not, for I have sent them.

Genesis 19. a and. 24. d ^. Pet. 4. b
Then called he them in, and lodged them.

The next day after went Peter forth with them, and certain brethren of
Ioppa bare him company. And ye day folowinge came they to Cesarea. Cornelius
waited for the^, and had called together his kynszfolkes and special friends.
And as it chanced yt Peter came in, Cornelius met him, and fell down at his
fete, and worshipped him. But Peter took him up, and said: Act. ^^. Apo. ^^
and ^^
Stand up, I am a man also. And as he talked with him, he went in, and found
many that were come together, and he said unto them: Ye know, Deu. ^^
that it is not laufull for a man being a Jew to join him self or to come
to a stranger. But God has showed me, yt I should call no man common or
unclean. Therefore have I not douted to come, as soon as I was sent for. I axe
you therefore, for what intent have ye sent for me?

Cornelius said: It is now four days

Peter opened his mouth, and said: (...)
Now perceive I of a truth, that God has no respect of persons, ^
but in all people he yt fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted
unto him. Ye know of ye preachinge that God sent unto the children of Israel,
preachinge through Jesus Christ (which is LORD over all) which preachinge was
published through out all Iewry, (...)
and began in Galile after ye baptyme that Ihon preached, how God (...)
anointed the same Jesus of Nazareth with the holy ghost and with power, which
went about, and did good, and healed all those that were oppressed of the
deuell, for God was with him. And we are witnesses of all that he did in the
land of the Jews, and at Jerusalem. Whom they slew, and hanged on tree.

Him God raised up on the third day, (...)
after he was risen up from the deed. And he commanded us to preach unto the
people, (...)
and to testifye, that it is he which is ordained of God a judge of the living
and of the deed. (...) 4^. d (...) 53. c (...) 30. d (...) 4. d
Of him bear all the prophets witness, that through his name all they yt
believe in him, shall receive remyssion of sins. While Peter was yet speaking
these words, the holy ghost fell upon all the^ that herkened unto the word.
And the faithful of the circumcision which came with Peter, were astonnyed,
because that the gift of ye holy ghost was shed out also upon the Heythen. For
they herd that they spoke with tunges, and magnified God. The^ answered Peter:
(...) 3. d
May any man forbydde water, that these should not be baptized, which have
received the holy ghost as well as we? And he commanded them to be baptized in
the name of the LORD. The^ prayed they him, that he would tarry there certain
days.

The XI. Chapter.
(...) 7. a
Thou wentest into men that are vncircumcysed, and have eaten with them. But
Peter began, and expounded the thing in order unto the^ and said: I was in
ye cite of Ioppa praye^ge, (...) 10. b
and in a trance I saw a vision, a vessel cominynge down, as it had been a
great lynnen clothe with four corners, and let down from heaven, and came
unto me. In to the which I looked, and considered, and saw four foted beestes
of the earth, and wild beestes, and worms, and fowls of the air. And I
herd a voice, which said unto me: Rise Peter, slaye, and eat. But I said:
Oh no, LORD, for there never entered any commen or unclean thing in to my
mouth. Nevertheless the voice answered me again from heaven: What God has
cleansed, that call not thou unclean. This was done three times, and all was
taken up again into heaven.

And behold, immediately stood there three men before the door of the house that
I was in, sent from Cesarea unto me. But the sprete said unto me, that I
should go with the^ and doubt nothing. ^ct. 10. c
These six brethren also came with me, and we entered in to the ma^s house.

Act. 2. a
like as upon us at ye beginning. Then thought I upon the word of the LORD,
how he said: Act. 1. a
Ihon baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with ye holy ghost. For as
much then as God has given them like gifts, as unto us, which believe on the
LORD Jesus Christ, who was I, that I should be able to withsto^de God? When
they herd this, they held their peace, and praised God, and said: Then has
God also to the Heithen granted repentance unto life.

They that were scatred abroad through ye trouble yt rose about Steven, Act 8. a
walked on euerysyde until Phenices, and Cipers, and Antioche, and spoke the
word unto noman but only unto ye Jews. Nevertheless some of the^ were men of
Cipers and Cyren, which came to Antioche, and spoke also unto the Greeks, and
preached the Gospel of the LORD Jesus. And ye hand of the LORD was with
the^. And a great nombre believed, and turned unto the LORD.

This tydinges of them came to ye ears Act. 13. d
and exorted them all, that with purpose of heart they would continue in the
LORD. For he was a good man, full of the holy ghost and faith. And there was a
great multitude of people added unto the LORD. But Barnabas departed unto
Tharsus, to seek Saul And wha^ he had found hi^, he brought hi^ to Anthioche.
It chanced, that a whole year they were there co^uersaunte together in the
co^gregacio^, and taught much people, so that the disciples at Antioche were
first called Christen.

In those days came there prophets from Jerusalem unto Antioche. And one of
them (whose name was Act. 21. b
Agabus) stood up, and declared by the sprete a great derth, that should come
over the whole compass of the earth: which came to pass under the Emperor
Claudius. But the disciples concluded (every one acordinge to his abylite) to
send 1. Cor. 16. 2. Cor. 8. and 9. a
an handreachinge unto ye brethren that were in Iewry: which thing they also
did, and sent it by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.

The XII. Chapter.
Mat. 4. c
James the brother of Ihon, him he slew with the sword. And when he saw that
it pleased the Jews, he proceaded farther to take Peter also. But it was
Easter. Now when he had taken him, he put him in preson, and delivered him unto
four quaternions of soudyers, to keep him: and thought after Easter to bring
him forth to the people. And Peter was kept in the preson Act. 4. c
But prayer was made without ceassinge of the congregation, unto God for him.
And when Herod would have brought him out unto the people, in the same night
slepte Peter between two soudiers, bound with two cheynes. And the kepers
before the door kept the preson.

LORD was there present, and a light shyned in the habitacion, and he smote
Peter on the side, and waked him up, and said: Arise up quyckly. And the
cheynes fell of from his hondes. And the angel said unto him: Gyrde the, and
put on thy shues. And he did so. And he said unto him: Cast thy mantle about
the, and follow me. And he went out, and followed him, and wist not, that it
was truth that was done by ye angel, but thought he had seen a vision.
Nevertheless they went through the first and second watch, and came to the iron
gate, that ledeth unto the cite, which opened to the^ by his own acorde. And
they went out, and passed through one street, and immediately the angel
departed from him.

LORD has sent his angel, and delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and
from all the waytinge for of the people of the Jews. And as he considered the
thing, he came to the house of Mary the mother of one Ihon, (which after his
syrname was called Mark) where many were gathered together, Act. 1. b
and prayed. As Peter knocked at the entry door, there came forth a damsel to
harken, named Rhoda. And when she knew Peter's voice, she opened not the entrye
for gladness, but ra^ne in, and told, that Peter stood before ye entrye. But
they said unto her: Thou art mad. Nevertheless she abode by it, that is was so.
They said: it is his angel. But Peter continued knockinge. When they opened
the door, they saw him, and were astonnyed. Act. 13. b
But he beckened unto them with the hand, to hold their peace, and told
them, how the LORD had brought him out of the preson. And he said: Show
this unto James, and to the brethren. And he departed, and went in to another
place.

When it was day, there was not a little LORD smote him, because he gave not
God the honor: And he was eaten up of worms, (...)
and gave up the ghost. But the word of God grew, and multiplied. As for
Barnabas and Saul, they came again to Jerusalem, and delivered Act (...)
the handreachinge, and took with them Ihon, whose syrname was Mark.

The XIII. Chapter.
THere were at Antioche in the congregation, LORD, and fasted, the holy ghost
said: Separate me out Barnabas and Saul for the work, Act (...)
where unto I have called them. Then fasted they and prayed, and laid the
hands on them, and let them go. And they being sent of the holy ghost, came
unto Seleucia, from thence they sailed unto Cypers. And when they were come in
to the cite Salamin, they showed the word of God in the synagoges of ye Jews.
And they had (...)
Ihon to their mynister.

And when they had gone through out the isle unto the cite of Paphos, they found
a certain Sorcerer and false prophet, a Jew (whose name was Bariesu) which
was with Sergius Paulus the ruler of the country, a man of understanding. The
same called Barnabas and Saul unto him, and desired to hear ye word of God.
Then the (...)
Sorcerer Elimas (for so was his name by interpretacion) withstode the^, and
sought to turn away the ruler from the faith. But Saul which is also called
Paul, being full of the holy ghost, looked upon him, and said: O thou child
of the deuell, full of all suttyl^ie and all disceatfulnesse, and enemy of all
righteousness, thou ceassest not to peruerte the straight ways of ye LORD. And
now behold, the hand of the LORD comes upon the, and thou shall be blind,
and not se the Son for a season, And immediately there fell on him a mist and
darkness, and he went about, and sought them that should led him by the
hand. When the ruler saw what was done, he believed, and wo^dred at the
doctrine of the LORD.

(...)
But Ihon departed from them, and went again to Jerusalem. Nevertheless they
wandered through from Perga, and came to Antioche in the land of Pisidia, and
went in to the synagoge upon the Sabbath day, and sat down. But after the
lecture of the law and of the prophets, the rulers of the synagoge sent unto
them, saying: Good brethren, if ye have any sermon to exorte the people, say
on. Then stood Paul up, and (...)
beckened with the hand (that they should hold their peace) and said:

Yemen of Israel, and ye that fear God, herke^ to: The God of this people
chose our fathers, and exalted the people, when they were strangers in the
lord of Egipte, and with a mighty arm brought he them out of it. (...)
And by the space of fortye years suffered he their manners in the wilderness,
and destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan, (...). 13. b
and parted their land among them by lot. (...). 1. a
After that gave he them judges by the space of four hundredth and fiftye
years, unto the prophet Samuel. And after that they desired a king, (...)
and God gave unto them Saul the son of Cis, (...)
a man of the trybe of Ben Iamin, fortye years long. (...)
And when he had put him down, he set up David to be their king, of whom he
reported, saying: (...)
I have found David the son of Iesse, a man after my heart, he shall fulfill
all my will.

(...). 131. a (...) 7. c
acordinge to the promise) brought forth unto the people of Israel, ye
Savior Jesus: when Ihon had first preached before his coming the baptyme of
repentance unto Israel. But when Ihon had fulfilled his course, he said: I am
not he, that ye take me for. But behold, there comes one after me, whose
shues of his fete I am not worthy to lowse. Ye men and brethren, ye children of
the generation of Abraham, and they that fear God among you, Mat. 10. a
unto you is ye word of this salvation sent. For the inhabiters of Jerusalem,
and their rulers, for somoch as they knew him not, ner yet the voices of the
prophets (which are red every Sabbath) have fulfilled them in condemnynge him.
1. Cor 2* a
Luc. 23. a
And though they found no cause of death in him, yet desired they Pilate to
kill him. And when they had fulfilled all that was written of him, they took
him down from the tree, and laid him in a sepulcre. Luc. 23. ^
But on ye third day God raised him up from the deed, and he appeared many
days unto the^, that went up with him from Galile unto Jerusalem, which Act.
1. a
are his witnesses unto the people.

And we also declare unto you ye promise, Esa. 55. ^
will I faithfully keep unto you. Therefore says he also in another place: Thou
shall not suffer thy Holy tose corrupcion. For David, Psalm. 15. b
when he in his time had served the will of God, 3. Reg. 2. b
he fell a sleep, and was laid by his fathers, and saw corrupcion. But he
who^ God raised up again, saw no corrupcion.

Be it known unto you therefore ye men and brethren, yt through this man is
preached unto you ye forgiveness of sins, Luc. 24. d
and from all ye things, whereby ye might not be justified in the law of
Moses. But whosoever believes on this man, is justified. Bewarre therefore, that
it come not upon you, which is spoken in the prophets: Behold ye despysers,
and wonder at it, and perish, Abac. 1. a
for I do a work in your time, which ye shall not believe, if any man tell it
you.

When the Jews were gone out of the synagoge, the Heythen besoughte them, yt
they would speak ye word unto them between the Sabbath days. And wha^ the
congregation of the synagoge was broken up, many Jews and Proselites yt served
God, followed Paul and Barnabas, which spoke to them, and Act. 11. c
exorted them, that they should continue in the grace of God.

Mat. 10. a and. 15. c
It behooved first the word of God to be spoken unto you: but now that ye
thrust it from you, and count your selves unworthy of everlasting life, lo,
Mat. ^1. c
we turn to the Gentyles. For so has the LORD commanded us: Esa. 49. b Mat.
5. b Luc. 3. c
I have set the to be a light unto ye Gentyles, yt thou be ye Salvation unto
the end of the earth. When the Gentyles herd that, they were glad, and
praised the word of the LORD, and believed, eue^ as many as were ordained to
everlasting life. And the word of ye LORD was spread abroad through out all
the region. Howbeit the Jews moved the devout and honorable women, 1. Tim. ^.
b
and the chefemen of the city, and raised up a persecucion against Paul and
Barnabas and expelled them out of their coasts. But they Mat. 10 b Mar. 6. b
Luc. 9. a
shoke of the dust of their fete against them, and came to Iconium. And the
disciples were filled with joy and with the holy ghost.

The XIIII. Chapter.
LORD, which gave testimony unto the word of his grace, and caused tokens and
wonders to be done by their hands. Marc. 16. c
Howbeyt the multitude of the cite was divided, some held with the Jews, and
some with the Apostles.

But when there rose up an insurreccion of the Heythe^ and of ye Jews, and of
their rulers, to put them to shame, and to stone the^, they perceived it, and
Mat. 10. c
fled unto lystra and Derba cities of ye country of Licaoni^^ and unto ye
region that lies round about, and there they preached the Gospel.



When ye Apostles Barnabas and Paul Act (...)
We are mortal me^ also like unto you, and preach unto you ye Gospel, that ye
should turn from these vain things unto ye living God, which made heaven
and earth, and the sea, (...)
and all that therein is, which in times past suffered all ye Heythen to walk
after their own ways. Nevertheless he has not left hi^ self without
witness, in yt he has showed his benefits, and given us rain from heaven,
and fruitful seasons, fyllynge our hertes with fode and gladness. And when
they said this, they scarce refrayned the people, that they did not sacrifice
unto them.

But there came thither certain Jews from Antioche and Iconiu^, and persuaded
the people, and (...)
stoned Paul, and drue him out of the cite, supposinge he had been deed.
Howbeyt as ye disciples stood round about him, he rose up, and came in to the
cite. And on the next day he departed with Barnabas unto Derba, and preached
the Gospel (...)
And wha^ they had ordained them Elders by eleccion through all the
congregacions, they prayed and fasted, and commended them unto the LORD, on
whom they believed.

And they went through Pisidia, and came to Pamphilia, and spoke the word at
Perga, and went down to Attalia, and from thence departed they by ship unto
Antioche: from whence they were delivered to the grace of God unto ye work,
which they had fulfilled. When they came there, they gathered the congregation
together, and showed them, how great things God had done with the^, and how
he had opened the door of faith unto the Heithen. And there they abode a long
time with the disciples.

The XV. Chapter.
(...)
Except ye be circumcysed after the manner of Moses, ye can not be saved. Now
wha^ there rose a disce^sion, and Paul and Barnabas had set them selves hard
against them, (...)
they ordained, that Paul and Barnabas and certain other of them should go up
to Jerusalem unto the Apostles and Elders, about this question. And they were
brought on their way by ye congregation, and went through Phenices and
Samaria, and declared the (...)
conversation of the Heythen, and brought great joy unto all the brethren.
When they came to Jerusalem, they were received of ye congregation, and of the
Apostles, and of the Elders, and they told how great things God had done
with the^. Then rose there up certain of the sect of ye Pharisees (which
believed) and said: They must be circumcysed and commanded, to keep the law
of Moses. But the Apostles and Elders came together, to reason upon this matter.

(...)
and gave the^ the holy ghost, like as unto us, and put no dyfference betwixt
us and them, and purified their hertes through faith. Now therefore why tempte ye
God, with layenge upon ye disciples necks the yocke, (...)
which nether o fathers ner we were able to bear? But we believe to be saved
through the grace of the LORD Jesus Christ, (...)
like as they also. The^ all ye multitude held their peace, and gave audience
unto Paul and Barnabas, which told how great tokens and wonders God had done
by the^ among the Heythen. Afterward when they held their peace, James
answered, and said: Ye men and brethren, herke^ unto me, Simo^ has told, how
God at the first vysited to receive a people unto (...)
After this will I return and will build again ye tabernacle of David, that is
fallen down, and that which is fallen in decay thereof, will I build again,
and will set it up, that the residue of men may seek after the LORD: and also
the Heythen / upon whom my name is named, says the LORD, which does all
these things. Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of ye
world. Wherefore my sentence is, that they which from among the Heythen are
turned unto God, be not disquyeted, but to write unto them, that they absteyne
them selves from fylthynesse of Exo. 20. a Ephe. 5. a Genesis 9. a
Idols, from Exo. 20. a Ephe. 5. a Genesis 9. a
whordome, and from Exo. 20. a Ephe. 5. a Genesis 9. a
strangled, and blood. For Moses has of old time in every cite them that
preach him: and he is red in the synagoges every Sabbath day.

And the Apostles and Elders with the whole congregation thought it good, to
chose out men of them, and to send them unto Antioche with Paul and Barnabas,
namely Ioh. 14. b
Judas, whose syrname was Barsabas, and Sylas (which were chief men among the
brethren) and gave the^ letters in their hands after this manner:

We the Apostles and Elders and brethren, wysh health unto the brethren of the
Heythe^ Gal. ^. ^
saying: ye must be circumcysed, and keep ye law (to whom we gave no soch
commandment) it seemed good unto us, being gathered together with one
accord, to chose out men, and to send them unto you, with our beloved
Barnabas and Paul, men that have Act. 13. e and. 14. ^
ioperded their lives for ye name of our LORD Jesus Christ. Therefore have we
sent Judas and Sylas, which shall also tell you the same with words. For it
pleased the holy ghost and us, to lay no charge upon you, more then these
necessary points: That ye absteyne from the 1. Cor. 8. a and. 10. c
offeringes of Idols, and from blood, and from strangled, and from whordome.
From the which if ye absteyne your selves, ye shall do well. Fare ye well.

When these were sent forth, they came unto Antioche, and gathered the
multitude together, and delivered the epistle. When they had red it, they were
glad of that co^solacion. As for Judas and Sylas (which were prophets also)
they exorted ye brethren with much preachinge, and stre^gthed them. And when
they had tarried there for a season, they were let go of the brethren in peace
LORD, with other many.

Nevertheless after certain days Paul said unto Barnabas: let us go again,
and vyset our brethren through all the cities (wherein we have showed the word
of the LORD) how they do. But Barnabas gave council, that they should take
with the^ Ihon, whose syrname was Mark. Howbeit Paul thought it mete, not to
take him with them, Act. 1^. b
which departed from them in Pamphilia, and went not with them unto the work.
And so sharp was the strife between them, that they departed asunder ye one
from the other, and Barnabas took Mark unto him, and sailed unto Cypers. But
Paul chose Sylas, and departed, being committed of the brethren unto the grace
of God. He went through Syria and Celicia, stablishynge the congregacions.

The XVI. Chapter.
Gal. 2. a.
circumcysed him because of the Jews that were in those quarters. For they
knew all, that his father was a Greek. But as they went through the cities,
they delivered them the sentence to keep, Act. ^5. d
which was concluded of the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem. The^ were the
congregacions stablyshed in the faith, and increased in nombre daily.

But as they went through Phrygia and the land of Galacia, they were Romans 1. b
forbidden of the holy ghost, to preach the word in Asia. Howbeit as they
came in to Mysia, they proved to take their journey in to Bithinia, and the
sprete suffered them not.

Act. 18. a and 23. b
vision unto Paul by night, that there was a man of Macedonia which stood and
prayed him, and said: Come down to Macedonia, and help us. When he had seen
ye vision, we sought immediately to go, unto Macedonia, being certified, that
ye LORD had called us thither, to preach the Gospel unto them. The^ departed
we from Troada, and came the straight course unto Samothracia, on the next
day to Neapolis, and from thence to Philippis, which is the chief cite of the
land of Macedonia, and a fre cite. In this cite abode we certain days.

On the day of the Sabbathes went we out of the cite beside the water, where
men were wont to pray, and we sat down, and spoke unto the women that
resorted thither. And a devout woman (named Lydia) a seller of purple, out of
the cite of Thiatira, herkened to, whose heart the LORD opened that she gave
head unto the things that Paul spoke. When she was baptized and her household,
she besoughte us, and said: If ye think that I believe on the LORD, then come
in to my house, and a bide there. And she (...)
constrained us.

It fortuned when we went to prayer, yt (...)
And he departed out at the same hour.

But wha^ her master and mastresse saw that the hope of their vauntage was
gone, (...)
they took Paul and Sylas, drue them in to the market place before ye rulers,
and brought the^ unto the officers, and said: These men trouble our cite,
and are Jews, and preach an ordinance, which is not laufull for us to
receive, ner to observe, seeing we are Romans. And the people ra^ne on them,
and (...)
And when they had beaten them sore, they cast the^ in preson, and commanded
the iayler, to keep them diligently. Which when he had received soch
commandment, he cast the^ in to the ynner preson, and put their fete in the
stocks.

But at mydnight prayed Paul and Sylas, and praised God. And the presoners
herd them. Suddenly was there a great earth quake, so that the foundacions of
the preson were shaken. And immediately were all the doors open, and all their
bonds lowsed Wha^ the keeper of the preson waked out of sleep, and saw the
preson doors open, he drue out his sword, and would have killed him self: for
he thought ye presoners had been fled. But Paul cried loud, and said: Do thy
self no harm, for we are all here.

He called for a light, and sprange in, and trembled, and fell at the fete of
Paul and Sylas, and brought them out, and said: Syrs, what must I do, to be
saved? They said: (...)
Believe on the LORD Jesus, and so shall thou and thy household be saved. And
they preached the word of the LORD unto him, and to all that were in his
house.

And he took them to him in the same hour (...)
reioysed with all his household, that he was become a beleuer on God.

And when it was day, the officers of the cite sent mynisters, and said: Let
those men go. And the keeper of the preson told this saying unto Paul: The
officers have sent hither, that ye should be lowse. Now therefore get you hence,
and go in peace. But Paul said unto them: They have beaten us openly
vncondempned (where as we are yet Romans) and have cast us in preson, and
should they now thrust us out preuely? Not so, but let them come them selves,
and bring us out. The mynisters told these words unto the officers. And they
feared, when they herd that they were Romans, and came and besoughte them,
and prayed the^ to depart out of the cite. Then went they out of the preson,
and entered in to the house of Lydia. And when they had seen the brethren and
comforted them, they departed.

The XVII. Chapter.
(...) 4. d (...). c (...). d
that Christ must needs have suffered, and rise again from the deed: and this
Jesus, whom I preach unto you (said he) is ye same Christ. And some of the^
believed, and were joined unto Paul and Sylas, a great multitude also of the
devout Greeks, and of the chief women not a few.

But the styffnecked Jews had indignacion, and took unto them certain evil
men which were vagabundes, and gathered a company, and set the cite in a rore,
and preassed unto the house of Jason, and sought to bring them out unto the
common people. But when they found them not, they drue Jason, and certain
brethren unto the rulers of the cite, and cried: These that trouble all the
world, are come hither also, Ioh. 18. ^ and. 19. a
that there is another king, one Jesus. They troubled the people, and the
rulers of the cite, that herd this. And when they had received a sufficient
answer of Jason and of the other, they let them go.

But the brethren immediately sent away Paul and Sylas by night unto Berea.
When they came there, they went in to the synagoge of the Jews (for they were
the Eldest among the^ at Thessalonica) which received the word marvelous
wyllingly, and Ioh. 5. d
searched the scriptures daily, whether it were even so. Then believed many of
them, and worshipful women off the Greeks, and men not a few. 1. Tess. 2. c
But when the Jews off Thessalonica had knowledge, that the word off God was
preached off Paul at Berea, they came, and moved the people there also. Howbeit
the brethren sent Paul away then immediately, to go unto the sea. As for Sylas
and Timotheus, they abode there still.

They that conveyed Paul, brought him Some read: * deuyls.
gods (That was, because he had preached unto the^ the Gospel of Jesus, and
of the resurreccion.) And they took him, and brought him before the council
house, and said: May we not know, what new doctrine this is that thou
teach? For thou bryngest strange tidinges to our ears? We would know
therefore, what this means. As for all they of Athens, and strangers and
gestes, they gave the^ selves to nothing else, but either to tell, or to hear
some news.

Psalm. 145. a Act. 14. c
for so much as he is LORD of heaven and earth, Esa. 66. a Act. 7. f
dwells not in temples made of hands, nether is he worshipped with men's
hands, as though he had need of any man, seeing he himself gives life and
breath unto all men every where: Genesis 2. b
and has made of one blood all the generation of men to dwell upon all the
face of ye earth: and has assygned borders appointed before, how long and
far they should dwell, that they should seek the LORD, if they might feel
and find him.

And truly he is not far from every one Romans 2. a
And truly God has ouersene the time of ignorance: Lu. 24. d
But now he commands all men every where to repent, because he has
appointed a day, in the which he will judge the compass of the world, with
righteousness, by that one man in who^ he has appointed it: and offered faith
unto all men, after that he had raised him up from the deed.

When they herd of the resurreccion of the deed, some mocked. But some said:
We will hear the again of this matter. So Paul departed from among them.
Howbeit certain men claue unto him, and believed: among whom was Dionisius,
one of the council: and a woman named Damaris, and other with them.

The XVIII. Chapter.
To. 16. a 3. Tim. 4. c
Aquila, borne in Po^tus, which was lately come out of Italy: and his wife
Priscilla (because the Empero Claudius had commanded all Jews to depart from
Rome) and he drue unto the^. And because he was of the same craft, he abode
with the^, and wroughte. Their craft was to make tents. And he preached in
the synagoge every Sabbath day, and exhorted the Jews and the Greeks.

When Sylas and Timotheus were come fro Macedonia, Paul was constrained by the
sprete to testifye unto ye Jews, that Jesus was very Christ. But wha^ they
said contrary and blasphemed, (...)
he shoke his raiment, and said unto them: Your blood be upon your own
head. From hence forth I go blameless unto the Gentyles. And he departed
thence, and came in to the house of a man named Iustus, which feared God, and
his house was next unto the synagoge. Howbeit Crispus the chief ruler of the
synagoge, believed on ye LORD with all his household. And many of the
Corinthians that gave audience, believed, and were baptized.

The LORD spoke unto Paul by a vision in ye night: Be not afraid, but
speak, and hold not thy peace, for I am with the: and noman shall invade the
that shall hurt the, for I have much people in this cite. He continued there a
year and six months, and taught them the word of God.

But when Gallio was ruler of the country

Paul after yt he had tarried a good while, took his leave of the brethren, and
sailed in to Syria, Priscilla and Aquila bearinge him company. And he shore his
head at Cenchrea (for he had a (...)
vow) and came down to Ephesus, and left them there. But he himself went
in to the synagoge, and reasoned with the Jews. And they desired him, that he
would tarry with them a longer season. And he consented not, but bad them
farwele, and said: I must needs in any wise keep this feast that comes, at
Jerusalem: but (...)
if God will, I will return again unto you.

And he departed from Ephesus, and came to Cesarea, and went up, and saluted
ye congregation, and took his journey down to Antioche, and tarried there a
certain time, and departed, and walked through all ye country of Galatia and
Phrigia by order, and strengthed all the disciples.

There came unto Ephesus a certain Jew, named (...). b (...). b
Apollo (borne at Alexandria) an eloquent man, and mighty in the scriptures:
the same was infourmed in the way of the LORD, and spoke fervently in the
sprete, and taught diligently the things of the LORD, and knew but the
baptyme off Ihon only. The same began to speak boldly in the synagoge. When
Aquila and Priscilla herd him, they took him unto the^, and expounded the way
of God, unto him more perfectly. But when he would go in to Achaia, the
brethren wrote, and exorted the disciples to receive him. And when he was come
thither, he helped them much which believed through grace. For he overcame the
Jews mightily, and showed openly by ye scripture, that Jesus was Christ.

The XIX. Chapter.
(...) 3. b (...) a (...)* c (...)* c
and spoke unto ye people, that they should believe on him, which should come
after him, that is, on Jesus, that the same is Christ. When they herd that,
they were baptized in the name of the LORD Jesus. And when Paul laid the
hands on the^, the holy ghost came upon them, and they spoke with tunges, and
prophesied. And all the men were about twolue.

He went in to ye synagoge, and preached boldly three months long,
teachinge, and geuynge them exortacions of the kingdom of God. But when
diverse waxed herd herted, and believed not, and spoke evil of the way of the
LORD before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated the disciples,
and disputed daily in the scole of one called Tyrannus. And this was done two
years long, so that all they which dwelt in Asia, herd the word of the
LORD Jesus, both Jews and Greeks. And God wroughte no small miracles by the
hands of Paul, so that from his body there were brought napkyns or partlettes
unto the sick, and the diseases departed from them, and the evil spretes
went out of them.

But certain of the vagabounde Jews LORD Jesus, over those that had evil
spretes, and said: We charge you by Jesus whom Paul preaches. They were seven
sons of one Sceua a Jew the hye pressed, which did so. The evil sprete
answered, and said: Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye? And the
man in who^ the evil sprete was, ran upon them, and overcame them, and cast
them under him, so that they fled out of the same house naked and wounded. This
was known unto all the Jews and Greeks which dwelt at Ephesus, and there fell
a fear upon them all. And ye name of the LORD Jesus was magnified. Mat. 3. a
Many of the^ also that believed, came and confessed, and showed their works.
But many of them that had used curious crafts, brought the books together,
and burnte them openly: and they counted the price of them, and found it of
money fiftye thousand pens. So mightily grew ye word of the LORD, and
prevailed.

When this was done, Paul purposed in Psalm. 113. ^
They be not gods that are made with hondes. Howbeit it shall not only bring
our occupacion to this point to be set at naught, but also the temple of
great Diana shall from hence forth be despised, and her majesty also shall be
destroyed, who^ nevertheless all Asia and the world worshippeth.

When they herd this, they were full of wrath, cried out, and said: Great is
Diana of the Ephesians. And all ye cite was on a roore, and they ruszhed in
with one assent in to the open place, and took Gaius and Aristarchus of
Macedonia, Paul's companyons. When Paul would have gone in among the people,
the disciples suffered him not. Certain also of ye chief of Asia which were
Paul's good friends, sent unto him, and desired him, that he should not preasse
in to the open place. Some cried one thing, some another. And the congregation
was out of quyete, and the more part knew not wherefore they were come
together. Some of the people drue forth Alexander, when ye Jews thrust him
forward. Alexander beckened with the hand, and would have given the people an
answer. But when they knew that he was a Jew, there arose a shoute of all,
and cried the space of two hours: Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

When the town clarke had stylled the

But yff Demetrius and they that are craftesmen with him, have ought to say
unto any man, the law is open, and there are rulers, let them accuse one
another. But if ye will go about any other thing, it may be determined in a
laufull congregation. For we stand in ioperdy to be accused of this days
vproure: and yet is there no man giltye, of whom we might give a reckoning of
this vproure. And when he had said this, he let the congregation depart.

The XX. Chapter.
1. Tim. 1. a
to go in to Macedonia. And when he had gone through those parts, and exhorted
them with many words, he came in to Grekelonde, and there abode three months.
But when the Jews laid wait for him, as he was about to sail in to Syria,
he purposed to turn again through Macedonia. There accompanied him in to Asia,
Sopater of Berrea: and of Thessalonica, Aristarchus and Secundus: and Gaius of
Derba, and Timotheus: but of Asia, Tychicus and Act. (...). Tim. (...)
Trophimus. These went before, and tarried for us at Troada: but we sailed
after the Easter days from Philippos, unto ye fyfth day, and came to them
unto Troada, and tarried there seven days.

Upon one of the Sabbathes, when the

But we went before in to the ship, and sailed toward Asson, wyllinge there
to receive Paul. For so had he appointed, and would himself go on foot. When
he was come to us unto Asson, we took him in, and came to Mitylenes, and sailed
from thence, and came on the next day over against Chios, and on the day
folowinge we aryued at Samos, and tarried at Tragilion, and on the next day
came we to Mileton: for Paul had determed to sail over by Ephesus, that he
need not to spend the time in Asia: for he haisted to be at Jerusalem upon the
Whitsondaye, if it were possible for him.

But from Mileton he sent unto Ephesus, Act* (...)
that I came in to Asia, after what manner I have been with you at all time, and
served ye LORD with all humbleness of mind, and with many tears and
tentacions, which happened unto me by ye layenges of wait of the Jews, how yt
I have kept back nothing yt was profitable, but that I have showed you, and
taught you openly, and privately from house to house. And have testified both
unto the Jews and to the Greeks * the repentance toward God, and faith
toward our LORD Jesus.

And now behold, I go bound in ye sprete unto Jerusalem, not knowinge what
shall happen there unto me, but yt the holy ghost (...)
witnesses in every cite, and says, that bonds and troubles abide me there.
But (...)
I regard none of them, nether count I my life bearer then my self, that I
may fulfill my course with joy, and the office yt I have received of the
LORD Jesus, to testifye the Gospel of the grace of God.

(...)
that after my departinge there shall enter in among you grievous wolves, which
shall not spare the flock. Ye eue^ (...)
from among your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse doctrine, to
draw disciples after them. Therefore awake, and remember, that by the space of
three years I ceased not to warn every one off you both night and day with
tears.

(...)
I have not desired silver, gold or raiment off any off you. For ye your
selves know, that (...) d (...) b (...)
these hands have mynistred unto my necessities, and them that were with me. I
have showed you all things, how that so labouringe ye ought to receive the
weak, and to remember the word of the LORD, how that he said: It is more
blessed to give, then to receive.

And when he had said this, he kneled down, and prayed with them all. But
there was much weeping among them all, and they fell about Paul's neck, and
kyssed him, and were sorry, most of all because of the word which he had said,
that they should se his face no more. And they accompanied him unto the ship.

The XXI. Chapter.
NOw when it fortuned that we had

On the next day we yt were with Paul, Act. 6. a and. ^. a
Philippe the Evangelist (which was one of the seven) and abode with him. The
same had four daughters, which were virgins, Joel. 2. f
and prophesied. And as we tarried there mo days, there came down from Iewry a
prophet, named Act. 11. c
Agabus. Wha^ he was come unto us, he took Paul's gerdell, and bound his hands
and fete, and said: Thus says ye holy ghost: Act. 10. c
The man whose gerdell this is, shall the Jews bind thus at Jerusalem, and
shall deliver him in to the hands of the Heythe^. When we herhe this, both we
and they that were of the same place, besoughte him, that he would not go up to
Jerusalem. Then answered Paul and said: What do ye, weeping, and breaking my
heart? For I am redye not only to be bound, but also to dye at Jerusalem for
ye name of the LORD Jesus. But wha^ he would not be persuaded, we ceased, and
said: Mat. ^. b
The will of the LORD be fulfilled. And after those days we were ready, and
went up to Jerusalem: There came with us also certain of the disciples off
Cesarea, and brought with them one of Cypers, named Mnason, an old disciple,
with whom we should lodge. Now wha^ we came to Jerusalem, the brethren received
us gladly. But on the next day Paul went in with us unto James, and all the
Elders came together. And when he had saluted them, he told by order, what God
had done among the Heythen by his mynistracion.

LORD, and said unto him: Brother, thou seyst how many thousand Jews there
are which believe, and are all Zealous over ye law. But they are enfourmed
against the, that thou teach all the Jews which are among the Heythe^, to
forsake Moses, and say that they ought not to circumcyse their children,
ner to walk after the same custom. What is it therefore? The multitude must
needs come together, for they shall hear that thou art come. Do this therefore
that we say unto the: We have four men, which have a Number. 6. b Act. 13. b
vow on them, take them unto ye, and purifye thyselfe with them, and do the
cost on them, that they may shave their heads: and they shall know, that it
is nothing, whereof they are enfourmed against the, but that thou also walk
and kepest the law. For as touching them that believe among the Heythen, Act.
15. d
we have written, and concluded, that they should observe no soch, but only to
keep them selves from the offeringes of Idols, from blood, from stra^gled,
Act. 24. b
and from whordome. Then Paul took the men unto him, and was purified with them
on the next day, and entered in to the temple, declaringe that he fulfilled
the days of purificacion, till there was an offeringe offered for every one of
them.

Act. 20. a 2. Tim. 4. c
Trophimus the Ephesian with him in the cite, him they thought yt Paul had
brought in to the temple. And all the cite was moved, and the people ran
together. And they took Paul, and drue him out off the temple, and forth with
the doors were shut to.

But when they went about to kill him, tydinges came to the chief captain of
the company, that all Jerusalem was moved. Which immediately took soudyers and
captains unto him, and ran in among them. When they saw the captain and
the soudyers, they left smytinge of Paul.

When the captain came nigh, he took him, Act. (...)
to be bound with two cheynes, and axed what he was, and what he had done. One
cried this, another that among the people. But when he could not know the
certente because of the rumoure, he commanded him to be carried in to the
castle. And wha^ he came to the steps, it fortuned that he was borne of ye
soudyers because of the violence of the people. For the multitude off the
people followed after, and cried: Luc. (...)
Away with him. When Paul was now to be carried in to the castle, he said
unto ye captain: May I speak unto the? He said: Can thou Greek? Art not
thou the Egipcian, which before these days maydest an vproure, and leddest out
in to the wilderness four thousand preuy murthurers? Paull said: I am a man
which am a Jew off Act. ^ and ^
Tharsis, a citesyn of a famous cite in Celicia: I beseke the, suffer me to
speak unto the people. When he had given him license, Paul stood on the
steps, and beckened with the hand unto the people. Now when there was made a
great syle^ce, he spoke unto them in Hebrew, and said:

The XXII. Chapter.
YE men, brethren, and fathers, hear Act* (...)
Gamaliel, enfourmed diligently in the law of the fathers, and was fervent
minded to God ward, as ye all are also this day, Act* (...) and 1. Co^ (...)
Gal. (...)
and I persecuted this way unto the death. I bound them and delivered them
unto preson, both men and women, as ye hye pressed also does bear me witness,
and all ye Elders: of whom I received letters unto the brethren, and went
toward Damascon, that I might bring them which were there, bound to
Jerusalem, to be punyshed.

But it fortuned as I made my journey, and came nigh unto Damascon, about
noone, suddenly there shone a great light about me from heaven, and I fell to
the earth, and herd a voice which said unto me: Saull Saull, why persecutest
thou me? I answered: Who art thou LORD? And he said unto me: I am Jesus of
Nazareth whom thou persecutest. As for them that were with me, they saw ye
light and were afraid, but they herd not the voice of him that spoke with
me. I said: LORD, what shall I do? The LORD said unto me: Arise, and go in
to Damascon, there shall it be told yt of all that is appointed the to do. But
when I saw nothing for the bryghtnesse of the light, I was led by the hand
of them that were with me, and came to Damascon.

(...) 9. b
which had a good report of all the Jews that dwelt there, the same came, and
stepte unto me, and said: Brother Saul, look up. And I looked up upon him the
same hour. He said: The God of our fathers has ordained the before, that
thou should know his will, and se the thing yt is rightful, and hear the
voice out of his mouth: for thou shall be his witness unto all men, of tho
things which thou have seen and herd. And now why tariest thou? Arise, and be
baptized, and wasze away thy sins, and (...)
call upon the name of the LORD.

But it fortuned, that when I was come again to Jerusalem, and prayed in the
temple, I was in a trance, and saw him. Then said he unto me: Make haist,
(...) ^0. b (...) 9. d
and get the soon out of Jerusalem, for they will not receive the witness that
thou bear of me. And I said: LORD, they the^ selves know that I put in
preson and bett in every synagoge them that believed on the. (...)
And wha^ the blood of Steue^ thy witness was shed, I stood by also, and
consented unto his death, and kept the clothes of them that slew him. And he
said unto me: Go thy way, for (...) 13. a (...) 1. c (...). 3. a
I will send the far among the Heythen.



The XXIII. Chapter.
PAul beheld the council, and said: Act. 24.
I have lived with all good conscience before God unto this day: Iere. 20. ^
Ioh. 18. a
But the hye pressed Ananias commanded them that stood about him, to smite hi^
on the mouth. Then said Paul unto him: God shall smite the thou painted wall.
Deuteronomy. 17
Syttest thou and iudgest me after the law, and commaundest me to be smytten
contrary to ye law? And they that stood about hi^, said: Reuylest thou Gods
hye pressed? And Paul said: Brethren, I wist not that he was the hye pressed. For
it is written: Exo. 22.
The ruler of thy people shall thou not curse.

But when Paul knew that the one part was Saduces, and the other part
Pharisees, he cried out in ye council: Ye men and brethren, I am a Pharise, and
the son of a Pharise, Phil. ^. a Act. 4. a 26. a. 28.
Of hope and resurreccion of the deed am I judged. And when he had so said,
there arose a dissencion between ye Pharisees and the Saduces, and the multitude
was divided: Mat. ^2. ^ Marc. 12 Luc. 20. ^
for the Saduces say that there is no resurreccion, nether angel, ner sprete:
but the Pharisees grant both. And there was made a great cry. And ye Scrybes
of the Pharyses sect, stood up, and strove,

But when the discension was great, ye upper captain feared, that Paul should
have been pluckte a sonder of them, and commanded the soudyers to go down,
and to take him from them, and to bring him in to the castle. But in the
night folowinge, the LORD stood by him, and said: Be of good cheer Paul,
for as thou have testified of me at Jerusalem Ephe. 3. a 2. Tim. 1. ^
so must thou testifye at Rome also.

Now when it was day, certain of the Jews gathered them selves together, and
made a vow nether to eat ner drink, till they had killed Paul. They were mo
then fortye, which had made this conspyracion. These came to the hye prestes
and Elders, and said: We have bound our selves with a vow, that we will eat
nothing, till we have slain Paul. Now therefore give ye knowledge to the upper
captain and to the council, that he may bring him forth unto you tomorow,
as though ye would hear him yet better: As for us, we are ready to kill him,
or ever he come nigh you.



Then the upper captain let the young man depart, and charged him to tell
noman, that he had showed him this. And he called unto him two vndercaptaynes,
and said: Make redye two hundredth soudyers, that they may go to Cesarea, and
three score and ten horsemen, and two hundredth spear men at the third hour of
the night, and deliver the^ beasts, that they may set Paul thereon, and
bring him safe unto Felix the debyte, and he wrote a letter on this manner:

(...) 21. d
The Jews had taken this man, and would have slain him, then came I with
soudyers, and rescued him, and perceived that he is a Romayne. And when I would
have known the cause, wherefore they accused hi^, I brought him in to their
council: then perceived I, that he was accused about questions of their law.
But there was no accusacion worthy of death or of bonds. And when it was
showed me, that certain Jews laid wait for him, I sent him straight way
unto the, and commanded the accusers also, that look what they had against
him, they should tell the same before the. Fare well.

The soudyers (as it was commanded them) took Paul, and brought him to
Antipatras. But on the next day, they left ye horse men to go with him, and
turned again to the castle. When these came to Cesarea, they delivered the
letter unto the Debyte, and presented Paul before him also. When the Debyte had
red the letter, he axed off what country he was. And wha^ he understood that he
was of Celicia, he said: Deuteronomy. (...)
I will hear the, when thine accusers are come also. And he commanded him to
be kept in Herodes judgment house.

The XXIIII. Chapter.
After five days the hye pressed Ananias

We have found this man a pestilent fellow, and a sterer up of sedicion among
all the Jews through out all the world, and a manteyner of the sect of the
Nazaretes, Act. (...)
and has taken in hand also to suspende the temple, whom we took, and would
have judged him acordinge to our law. But Lysias the hye captain came upon
us, and with great violence delivered him out of our hands, and commanded
his accusers to come unto the: of whom (if thou will inquire) thou may have
knowledge of all these things, whereof we accuse him. The Jews likewise
affirmed and said, that it was even so.

But Paul (when the debyte had beckened Seeing I know that thou have been
judge now many years among this people, I will not be afraid to answer for
my self, because that thou may know, that there are yet no more but twolue
days sense I came up to Jerusalem for to worship, and that they nether
found me in the temple disputinge with any man, or making any vproure among
the people, ner in ye synagoges, ner in the cite: nether can they prove the
things, whereof they accuse me. But this I (...)
confess unto the, that after this way which they call heresye, so worship
I the God of my fathers, that I believe all that is written in the law and in
the prophets, and have hope towarded God, that the same resurreccion of the
deed (which they them selves look for also) shall be, both of the just and
unjust. Therefore study I to have allwaye a clear conscience toward God and
toward men. (...)


But after many years I came and brought allmesse unto my people, and
offeringes: (...)
whereupon they found me purifyed in the temple without any manner of rumoure or
unquietness. Howbeit there were certain Jews out of Asia, which should be
here present before the, and accuse me, if they had ought against me: or else
let^ these same here say, if they have found any unrighteousness in me, while
I stand here before ye council: except it be for this one word, that I
cried stondinge among them: (...)
Of the resurreccion off the deed am I judged of you this day.

(...)
But he commanded the vndercaptayne to keep Paul, and to let him have rest,
and that he should forbydde none of his acquauntau^ce to mynister unto him, or
to come unto him.

But after certain days came Felix with his wife Drusilla, which was a Iewesse,
and called for Paul, and herd him of the faith in Christ. Howbeit when Paul
spoke off righteousness, and off chastity and off the judgment to come, Felix
trembled, and answered: Go thy way for this time. When I have a conuenyent
time, I will send for the. He hoped also, that money should have been given him
of Paul, therefore called he often for him, and commened with him. But after two
years came Portius Festus in to felix rowme. Yet Felix wyllinge to show the
Jews a pleasure, left Paul bound.

The XXV. Chapter.
NOw when Festus was come in to

When he had tarried among them more then ten days, he went down to Cesarea.
And on the next day he sat down on the judgment seat, and commanded Paul
to be brought. When he was come, ye Jews which were come down from
Jerusalem, stood round about him, and brought up many and grievous quarrels
against Paul, which they could not prove, while he answered for himself: I
have nether offended

But Festus wyllinge to show the Jews a pleasure, answered Paul, and said:
Will thou go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged off these things before me?
But Paul said: I stand at the Emperors judgment seat, where I ought to be
judged: to the Jews have I done no harm, as thou also know very well. If I
have hurt any man, or committed any thing worthy off death, I refuse not to
dye. But if there are no soch things as they accuse me off, then may no man
deliver me unto them. I appeal unto the Emperor. Then spoke Festus with the
Council, and answered: Thou have appealed unto the Emperor, to the Emperor
shall thou go.

After certain days came king Agrippa and Bernice to Cesarea to welcome
Festus. And when they had tarried there many days, Festus rehearsed Paul's cause
unto the king, and said: There is a man left Deuteronomy. 17. ^
It is not the manner off the Romans to deliver any man that he should
perish, before that he which is accused, have his accusers present, and
receive liberty to answer for him self to the accusacion. Wha^ they were
come hither together, I made no delay, but sat the next day in judgment, and
commanded the man to be brought forth. Of whom, when the accusers stood up,
they brought no accusacion of soch things as I supposed: But had certain
questions against him of their own supersticions, and of one Jesus deed, whom
Paul affirmed to be alive. Howbeit because I understood not the question, I
axed hi^, whether he would go to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these
matters. But wha^ Paul had appealed, that he might be kept unto the knowledge
of the Emperor, I commanded him to be kept, till I might send him to the
Emperor.



The XXVI Chapter.


My living truly from youth up (how it was led from the beginning among this
people at Jerusalem) know all the Jews which knew me before at the first, if
they would testifye, for after the most strayte sect of our Iewysh law, I
lived a Pharise. Act (...) Phil. (...)
And now stand I, and am judged because of the hope of the (...) and (...)
Deuteronomy* (...) Psalm. (...)
promise, that was made of God unto our fathers, unto the which (promise) our
twolue trybes hope to come, serving God insta^tly day and night. For the
which hopes sake (O king Agrippa) I

I also verily thought by my self, that I ought to do many contrary things
clean against the name off Jesus off Nazareth, Act. (...) and (...)
which I did at Jerusalem, when I shut up many saints in preson, whereupon I
received auctorite of ye hye prestes. And wha^ they should be put to death, I
brought the sentence. And through all the synagoges I punyshed them often, and
compelled the^ to blaspheme, and was exceadinge mad upon them, and persecuted
them even unto strange cities. About which things as I went toward
Damascon with auctorite and license of the hye prestes, even at myddaye (O
king) I saw in the way, that a light from heaven (clearer then the
brightness of the Son) shyned round about me, and them that iourneyed with
me.

But when we were all fallen down to LORD, who art thou? He said: I am
Jesus, whom thou persecutest. But rise up, and stand upon thy fete, for
therefore have I appeared unto the, that I might ordeyne the to be a mynister
and witness of it that thou have seen, and that I will yet cause to appear
unto the. And I will deliver the from the people, and from the Heythen, among
who^ I will now send the, to open their eyes, that they may turn from the
darkness unto the Esa* (...)
light, and from the power of ye deuell unto God, that they may receive
forgiveness of sins, and the enheritaunce with them that are sanctified by
faith in me.

Wherefore (O king Agrippa) I was not (...)
do pennaunce, and turn unto God, and to do the right works of pennaunce.
For this cause the Jews took me in the temple, and went about to kill me.
But through the help of God lent unto me, I stand unto this day, and testifye
both unto small and great, and say no other thing, the^ that ye prophets
have said (that it should come to pass) and Moses, that Christ should suffer,
and be the first of the resurreccion from the deed, and show light unto the
people, and to the Heythen.

When he thus answered for himself, Festus said with a loud voice: Paul,
thou art besides thy self, much learning makes ye madd. But Paul said: I am
not madd

The XXVII. Chapter.
(...)
Aristarchus out of Macedonia off Thessalonica, and on the next day we came
unto Sidon. And Julius entreated Paul courteously, and gave him liberty to go to
his friends, and to refresh himself. And from thence launched we, and sailed
hard by Cypers (because the wyndes were against us) and sailed over the sea of
Celicia and Pamphilia, and came to Myra in Lycia.

And there the vndercaptayne found a ship of Alexandria, ready to sail in
to Italy, and put us therein. And when we had sailed slowly, and in many days
were scarcely come over against Gnydon (for the wind with stood us) we sailed
by Candy nigh unto the cite off Salmo, and came scarcely beyond it. Then came
we to a place, which is called Goodhauen, nigh where unto was the cite Lasea.
Now when much time was spent, and saylinge was now ioperdous, because that they
also had fasted ouerlonge, Paul exhorted them, and said unto them: Syrs, I se
that this saylinge will be with hurt and much damage, not only of the ladynge
and of the ship, but also of our lives.

Nevertheless ye vndercaptayne believed

But not long after, there rose against their purpose a flawe of wind, which
is called the Northeast. And when the ship was caught, and could not resist
ye wind, we let her go, and drove with the wedder. But we came to an I Will named
Claudia, where we could scarce get a boat. Which they took up, and used help,
and bound it under hard to the ship, fearinge lest they should have fallen
in to the Syrtes are perlous places i^ the sea.
Syrtes, and let down the vessel, and so were carried. And when we had bydden
a great tempest, on the next day they made an outcastinge. And on the third
day with our own hands we cast out the tacklynge of the ship. But wha^
nether Son ner stars appeared in many days, and no small tempest lay upon
us, all the hope of our life was taken away.

And after long abstinence, Paul stood

For this night stood by me the angel off God (whose I am, and who^ I serve)
and said: Fear not Paul, thou must be brought before the Emperor. And lo,
God has given unto the all the^ that sail with the. Wherefore syrs be of good
cheer: for I believe God, yt it shall come so to pass, as it was told me.
Howbeit we must be cast in to a certain ylonde.

But when the fourtenth night came, as we were carried in Adria about mydnight,
ye shipmen demed that there appeared some country unto them, and they cast out
the lead, and found it twe^tye feddoms: and wha^ they were gone a little
farther, they cast out the lead again, and found fyftene feddoms.

Then fearinge lest they should fall on some Mat. 10. d Luc. 12. a
for there shall not one here fall from the head of any of you. And when he had
thus spoken, he took bred, and Mar. 6. c and 8. a Ioh. 6. a ^ Tim 4. a
gave thanks to God before them all, and brake it, and began to eat. Then
were they all of good cheer, and took meat also. We were all together in the
ship two hundredth three score and sixtene souls. And when they had eaten
enough, they lightened the ship, and cast out the wheat in to the sea.



The soudyers council was to kill ye presoners, lest any of them when he had
swymmed out, should fly away. But the vndercaptayne wyllinge to save Paul,
keped them from their purpose, and commanded that they which could swymme,
should cast them selves first in to the sea, and escape unto land: and the
other, some on bordes, some on broken pe^es of the ship. And so it came to
pass, that all the souls came safe unto land.

The XXVIII Chapter.
ANd wha^ we were escaped, we knew Luc* (...)
and felt no harm. Howbeit they waited, wha^ he should have swollen, or fallen
down deed suddenly. But when they had looked a great while, and saw yt there
happened no harm unto him, they changed their minds, and said that he was a
God.

In the same quarters the chief man of the I Will whose name was Publius had a
lordshipe: the same received us, and lodged us three days courteously. It
fortuned wha^ Publius father lay sick of the fevers and of a bloody flux,
Paul went in unto him, and prayed, and laid the hands on him, and healed him.

When this was done, other also which

After the months we sailed in a ship of Alexandria, which had wyntred in
the I Will, and had a badge of Castor and Pollux. And when we came to Syracusa, we
tarried there three days. And when we had sailed about, we came to Rhegium: and
after one day when the south wind blewe, we came to Putiolus, where we found
brethren and were desired of them to tarry there seven days, and so came we to
Rome. And from thence when the brethren herd of us, they came forth to mete us
to Apiforum and to the Three tauerns. When Paul saw them, he thanked God, and
waxed bold. But wha^ we came to Rome, the vndercaptayne delivered the
presoners to ye chief captain. As for Paul, he had leave to bide alone with one
soudyer that kept him.

(...)* b (...)* b
I have committed nothing against o people, ner against ye laws of ye
fathers, yet was I bound, delivered out of Jerusalem in to ye Romans hands:
which wha^ they had examyned me, would have let me go, for so much as there was
no cause of death i^ me. But wha^ ye Jews spoke ye contrary, I was constrained
to appeal unto ye Empero: not as though I had ought to accuse my people of.
For this cause have I called you, eue^ to se you, and to speak with you: because
yt (...)
for ye hope of Israel, I am bound with this cheyne. They said unto hi^: We
have nether received letter out of Iewry concerning the, nether came there any
of the brethren, yt showed or spoke any harm of ye. But we will hear of ye,
what thou think: for we have herd of this sect, that every where (...)
it is spoken against. And wha^ they had appointed hi^ adaye, there came many
unto hi^ in to his lodginge: unto who^ he expounded ye kingdom of God and
preached unto the^ of Jesus, out of ye law and out of the prophets, eue^ from
morning until the eue^. And some believed ye thing yt he said, but some
believed not.

But wha^ they agreed not among the^ selves, o fathers, (...)
and said: Go unto this people, and say: With ears ye shall hear, and not
understood: and with eyes shall ye se, and not perceive. For ye heart of this
people is waxed gross, and they hear hardly with their ears: and their eyes
have they closed, yt they should not once se with their eyes, and hear with their
ears, and understood i^ their hertes, and be converted, yt I might heal
the^. Be it known therefore unto you, yt this salvation of God is sent unto ye
Heythe^, and they shall hear it. And wha^ he said yt, ye Jews departed, and
had a great disputacion among themselves. But Paul abode two whole years in
his own hired dwellinge, and received all the^ yt came in unto hi^, preachinge
ye kingdom of God, and teachinge those things which concern the LORD Jesus
with all boldness, vnforbydden.

The end of the Acts of the Apostles, written by S. Luke, which was present
at ye doings of them.
The Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul to the Romans.
The Sum of this Epistle.
Chap. I. Paul declares his love toward the Romans, shows what the
gospel is with the fruit thereof, and rebukes the beestlynesse of the flesh.
Chap. II. He rebukes the Jews, which as touching sin are like the Heythe^,
ye worse then they. Chap. III. He shows what preferment the Jews have, and
that both the Jews and Gentiles are under sin, and are justified only by the
grace of God in Christ. Chap. IIII. He declares by the example of Abraham,
that faith justifies, and not the law, ner the works thereof. Chap. V. The
power of faith, hope and love* and how death reigned from Ada^ unto Christ* by
who^ only we have forgiveness of sins. Chap. VI. For so much as we be
delivered through christ from sin, we must fashion our selves to live as the
servants of God, and not after our own lusts. The unlike reward of
righteousness and sin. Chap. VII. Christ has delivered us from the law and
death Paul shows what the flesh and outward man is, and calls it the law
of the members. Chap. VIII. The law of the sprete gives life. The sprete of
God makes us Gods children and heirs with Christ. The abundaunt love of God
can not be separated. Chap. IX. Paul complayneth upon the hard hertes of the
Jews, that would not receive Christ, and how the Heythe^ are chosen in their
stead. Chap. X. The unfaithfulness of the Jews. Two manner of righteousnesses.
Chap. XI. All the Jews are not cast away, therefore Paul warns the Gentiles
that be called, not to be hye minded, ner to despise the Jews, for the
iudgme^tes of God are deep and secret. Chap. XII. The sweet conversation,
love, and works of soch as believe in Christ. Chap. XIII. The obedience of men
unto their rulers. Love fulfilleth the law. It is now no time to follow the
works of darkness. Chap. XIIII. The weak ought not to be despised No man
should offend another conscience. Again, for outward things should no man
condemn another. Chap. XV. The infirmite and fraylnesse of the weak ought to
be borne with all love and kyndnesse, after the ensample of Christ. Chap. XVI.
A chapter of salutacions He warns them to bewarre of men's doctrine, and
commends unto them certain godly men, that were lovers and brethren in the
truth.
The Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul to the Romans.


The first. Chapter.
Act. 13. a
put aparte to preach the Gospel of God (which Deuteronomy. 18. c Act. 26. d
he promised before by his prophets in ye holy scriptures) off his son, which
was begotten Mat. 1. a ^. Tim. 2. a
of ye sede of David after the flesh: and mightily declared to be the son of
God after the sprete which sanctifies, sense the time that he rose again from
the deed, namely, Jesus Christ our LORD, by whom we have Act. 9. c
received grace and Apostelshippe among all Heythen, to set up the obedience
of faith under his name, of whom ye are a part also, which are called of Jesus
Christ.

To all you that be at Rome, beloved of God, and saints by calling 1. Cor. 1.
a Gal. 1. a
Grace be with you and peace from God our father, and the LORD Jesus Christ.

First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your faith is
spoken of through out all the world. For God is my witness ( Ioh. 4. c 2. Tim.
1. a
whom I serve in my sprete in the Gospel of his son) that without ceassynge
I make mention of you Phil. 1. a Col. 1. a
besekinge always in my prayers, that I might once have a prosperous journey
( Iere. 10. d
by the will off God) to come unto you. For I long to se you, that I might
bestow upon you some spiritual gift to strength you (that is) that I might
be conforted with you, through yo faith and mine, which we have together.

Act. 16. a
let hither to) that I might do some good among you, like as among other
Gentyles. I am detter both to the Greeks, and to the vngrekes, to the wise and
to the unwise. Wherefore (as much as i^ me is) I am ready to preach the Gospel
unto you at Rome also.

For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: for it is the (...)
power of God, which saves all that believe thereon, the Jew first and also the
Greek: for in it ye righteousness that is of value before God, is opened, which
comes out of faith i^ to faith. As it is written: The just shall live by his
faith. (...)
For ye wrath of God is declared from heaven upon all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of me^, which witholde the truth of God in unrighteousness:
because that it, which may be known of God, is manifest with the^. For God
has showed it unto the^, that the invisible things of God (that is, his
everlasting power (...)
while they are considered by the works from the creacion of the world: so
that they are without excuse, in as much as they knew, that there is a God,
and have not praised him as God ner thanked him, but became vain in their
ymaginacions, and (...)
their foolish heart was blinded. When they counted them selves wise, they
became fools: and (...)
turned ye glory of the incorruptible God in to ye symilitude of ye image of a
corruptible man, and of birds, and of four foted, (...)
and of crepinge beestes (...)
Wherefore God likewise gave them up unto their hertes lusts in to uncleanness,
to defyle their own bodies in them selves, which turned the truth of God unto
a lie, and worshipped and served the creature more then the maker, which is
blessed for ever. Amen.

Therefore God gave the^ up unto shameful (...)
For their women changed the natural use in to the unnatural: likewise ye
me^ also left the natural use of the woman, and brent in their lusts one on
another, and man with man wrought fylthines, and received in them selves the
reward of their error, as it was acordinge. (...)
And as they regarded not to know God, even so (...)
God gave the^ up in to a lewd mind, to do those things which were not
comely, being full of all unrighteousness, whordome, wickedness, covetousness,
maliciousnes, full of envy, murthur, strife, disceate, evil co^dicioned
whisperers, backbyters, despysers of God, doers of wrong, proud, boosters,
bryngers up of evil things, disobedient to their Elders, without
understanding, covenant breakers, vnlouynge, stubborn, unmerciful: which
men, though they know the righteousness of God (that they which do soch, are
worthy of death) yet not only do the same, but also have pleasure in those
that do the^.

The II. Chapter.
(...)
look wherein thou iudgest another, thou condemnest thy self, in so much as
thou that iudgest, do even the same. For we are sure that the judgment of
God is (acordinge to the truth) over them that do soch. But think thou this
O thou man, that iudgest them which do soch things, and do even the very
same thy self, that thou shall escape yt judgment of God? Or despysest thou
the riches of his goodness, patience, and long sufferinge? (...)
Know thou not, that ye loving kyndnesse of God leads the to repentance?

But thou after thine hard and impenitent heart, heapest unto thy self a
treasure of wrath, against the day of wrath and of the opening of the
righteous judgment of God, (...)
which shall reward every man acordinge to his deeds: namely, praise and
honor, and vncorrupcion, unto them that with patience in doing good, seek
everlasting life: But unto them that are contencious (...)
and not obedient unto the truth, but obey unrighteousness, shall come
indignacion and wrath, trouble and anguysh upon all the souls of me^ that do
evil, of the Jew first and also of the Greek: But unto all the^ that do good
(shall come) praise and honor, and peace, unto the Jew first, and also to the
Greek.

(...)
For there is no respect of persons before God: Who so ever have sinned
without law, shall perish also without law: and whosoever have sinned in the
law, shall be judged by the law. (...)
For before God; they are not righteous, which hear ye law: but they that do
the law, shall be justified. For if the Gentyles which have not the law, do of
nature the things contained in the law, then they having not the law, are a
law unto them selves, in that they show, that the work of ye law is written
in their hertes: while their conscience bears witness unto the^, and also
the thoughts which accuse or excuse them among them selves, in the day when
God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, acordinge to my Gospel.

But take heed, (...)
thou art called a Jew, and trustest in the law, and make thy boost of God,
and know his will: and for so much as thou art enfourmed out of ye law,
thou prouest what is best to do, and presumest to be a leader of the blind: a
light of them yt are in darcknes: an enformer of ye unwise: a teacher of ye
simple: which have the ensample of knowledge and of the truth in the law.

Now teach thou other, and teach not thy self. Thou preachest that a man

The circumcision verily avayleth, Esa. 52. a Eze. 36.
if thou keep the law: but if thou break the law, then is thy circumcision
become uncircumcision. Therefore if the uncircumcision keep the right things
contained in the law, shall not his uncircumcision be counted for circumcision?
And so it that of nature is uncircumcision, and fulfilleth the law shall judge
the, which under the letter and circumcision tra^sgressest the law. For he is
not a Jew which is a Jew outwa^de: nether is that circumcision which is done
outwardly in ye flesh: But he is a Jew, Ioh. 8. d Romans 9.
which is hydd within. And Col. ^. b
the circumcision of ye heart is the circumcision, which is done in the sprete
and not in the letter: Whose praise is not of men, but of God.

The III. Chapter.
WHat furtheraunce then have the Romans 9.
Unto them was committed what God spoke. But where as some of them did not
believe thereon, what then? should their unbelieve make the promise of God of none
effect? God forbid. Let it rather be thus, that God is true, Psalm. 115 Psalm.
50. a
and all me^ liars. Ioh. 3. c
As it is written: That thou may be justified in thy sayenges, and should
overcome, wha^ thou art judged.

But if it be so, that our unrighteousness prayseth ye righteousness of God,
what shall we say? Is God then unrighteous, that he is angry therefore? (I
speak thus after the manner off men) God forbid. How might God the^ judge ye
world? For if the truth of God be through my lie the more excellent unto his
praise, why should I the^ be judged yet as a sinner? and not rather to do thus
(as we are evil spoken of, and as some report, that we should say) Let us do
evil, yt good may come thereof. Whose da^nacio^ is inste.

Psalm. 13. a and. 52. a
As it is written: There is none righteous, no not one. There is none yt
understands, there is none that seeks after God. They are all gone out of
the way, they are altogether become unprofitable: there is none that does
good, no not one. Psalm. 5. b
Their throat is an open sepulcre, with their tunges they have disceaued, Psalm.
139. a
the poison off Aspes is under their lips. Their mouth is full of cursynge
and bytternesse. Pro. 1. a ^sa. 59. a
Their fete are swifte to shed blood. Destruction and wrechidnes are in their
ways, and ye way of peace have they not known. Psalm. 35. a
There is no fear of God before their eyes.

But we know, yt, what soever the law says, it says it unto them which
are under the law, yt every mouth may be stopped, and yt all the world may
be detter unto God, Gal. 2. c
because yt by ye deeds of the law no flesh may be justified in his sight.
Heb. 7. c
For by the law comes but the knowledge of sin. But now without addinge to
of ye law is the righteousness which avayleth before God, declared, having
witness of ye law and the prophets: but I speak of ye righteousness before
God, which comes by the faith on Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them
that believe.

Exo. 25. c Heb. 5. a
Mercyseate through faith in his blood, to show the righteousness which
avayleth before him, in that he forgeueth the sins, which were done before
under the sufferaunce of God, which he suffered, that at this time he might
show ye righteousness which avayleth before him: yt he only might be
righteous, and the righteous maker of him which is of the faith on Jesus.

Where is now then thy reioysinge? It is excluded. By what law? By the law of
works? Nay, but by the law of faith. We hold therefore that a man is
justified Some ^eade: By ^aith only.
by faith, without the works of the law. Or is God the God of the Jews
only? Is he not also the God of the Heythen? Yes verily the God of the Heythen
also, for so much as he is the God only that justifies the circumcision which
is of faith, and the uncircumcision through faith. Destroys we then the law
through faith? God forbid. But we mantayne the law.

The fourth Chapter.
WHat shall we say the^, that Abraham o father as pertayninge to ye flesh Genesis
(...) Gal. ^. a Jacob* (...)
Abraham believed God, and yt was counted unto him for righteousness. Unto hi^ yt
goes about with works, is the reward not rekened of favor, but of duty:
Howbeit unto him, yt goes not about with works, but believes on him yt
justifies the ungodly, is his faith counted for righteousness. Even as David
says also, that blessedness is only that man's, unto who^ God counts
righteousness without addinge to of works, where he says: Blessed are they,
whose vnrighteousnesses are forgeuen, Psalm (...)
and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man, unto whom the LORD imputes
no sin.

Now this blessedness, goes it over the Genesis (...)
not in the circumcision, but in the uncircumcision. As for the toke^ of
circumcision Genesis (...)
he received it for a seal off the righteousness off faith, which he had yet in
ye uncircumcision, yt he should be a father of all the^ yt believe, being in ye
vncircu^cisio^, yt it might be counted unto the^ also for righteousness: and
that he might be a father of circumcision, not only of the^ that are of ye
circumcision, but of them also that walk in the fotesteppes of the faith,
which was in the uncircumcision of our father Abraham.

For the promise (that he should be ye heir Gal. (...)
For if they which are of the law be heirs, the^ is faith vain, and the
promise of none effect, for so much as the law causes but wrath. For where
the law is not, there is also no transgression. Therefore was the promise made
through faith, that it might come off favor, whereby the promise might be
made sure unto all the sede: not only unto him which is off the law, but also
unto him that is of the faith of Abraham (...) 5^. a (...)* 13 b (...) 19. a
(...) ^. c ^al. ^ a Ge. 17. a
which is the father of us all. As it is written: (...) 5^. a (...)* 13 b (...)
19. a (...) ^. c ^al. ^ a Ge. 17. a
I have made the a father of many Heythe^ before God, whom thou have believed:
which quyckeneth the deed, and calls it which is not, that it may be.

And he believed upon hope, where nothing (...) 1^. a
Even so shall thy sede be. And he was not faynte in faith, nether co^sidred his
own body, which was deed already, while he was almost an hundredth year old,
nether the deed womb of Sara. For he douted not in the promise of God through
unbelieve, but was strong in faith, and gave God the praise: and was sure, that
look what God promyseth, he is able to make it good. And therefore was it
rekened unto him for righteousness. (...). 15. a
But this is not written only for his sake, yt it was counted unto him, but
also for our sakes: unto who^ it shall be counted, if we believe on him, that
raised up our LORD Jesus from the deed. Which (...). 2. a
was given for our sins, and raised up for our righteousness sake.

The V. Chapter.
LORD Jesus Christ, by who^ also we have an intraunce in faith unto this
grace, wherein we stand, and (...) 3. a
rejoice in the hope of ye glory for to come, which God shall give. Not only
yt, but we rejoice also i^ troubles, for so much as we know, yt (...) 1. a
trouble brings patience, patience brings experience, experience brings
hope: As for hope, is lets us not come to confusion, because the love of God
is shed abroad in our hertes, by the holy ghost which is given unto us. For
when we were yet weak acordinge to the time, Christ dyed for us ungodly. Now
dies there scace any man for the righteous sake: (...) 3 a (...) 1. b (...) 3.
b
Peradventure for a good man durst one dye. (...) 3. c (...). 3. c (...) 4. b
(...) 9. c.d
Therefore does God set forth his love toward us, in yt Christ dyed for us,
when we were yet sinners: Much more then shall we be saved from wrath by him
seeing we are now made righteous through his blood.

LORD Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement.

Wherefore Genesis 3. a
as by one man sinned entered in to the world, and death by ye means off
sin: even so went death also over all men, in so much as they all have
sinned. For sin was in ye world unto the law: but where no law is, there
is not sin regarded. Nevertheless death reigned from Adam unto Moses, even
over them also that sinned not with like transgression as did Adam, which is ye
image of him yt was to come.

But it is not with the gift as with the sin: for if through the sin of one
many be deed, yet much more plenteously came the grace and gift of God upon
many Ioh. 1. b
by the favor that belonged unto one man Jesus Christ.

And the gift is not only over one sin, as death came through one sin of
one that

But the law in the mean time entered, Gal. 3. ^
that sin should increace. Luc. 7. ^
Nevertheless where abundaunce of sin was, there was yet more plenteousnes of
grace: that, like as sin had reigned unto death, eue^ so might grace reign
also through righteousness to everlasting life by the means of Jesus Christ.

The VI. Chapter.
WHat shall we say then? Shall we Gal. 3. d Col. 2. b 1. Pet. 3. ^
Know ye not, that all we which are baptized in to Jesus Christ, are baptized
in to his death? Therefore are we buried with him by baptyme in to death, that,
like as Christ was raised up from the deed by the glory of the father, Ephe. 4.
Col. 3. a Heb. 9. c
even so we also should walk in a new life. For if we be grafted with him unto
like death, then shall we be like the resurreccion also: For so much as we
know, that our old man is crucified with him, that the sinful body might
cease, that hence forth we should serve sin no more. Pet. 4. a
For he that is deed, is made righteous from sin.

Tim. 2. b
and are sure, Apoc. 1. d
that Christ raised from the deed, dies no more: Death shall have no more power
over him. For as touching that he dyed, he dyed concerning sin once: but as
touching that he lives, he lives unto God. Likewise ye also, count your
selves to be even deed concerning sin, and to live unto God through Jesus
Christ our LORD. Let not sin reign therefore in your mortal body, that
ye should obey unto the lusts of it. Nether give ye over your members unto
sin to be wapens of unrighteousness, but give over your selves unto God, as
they that off deed are become living, and your members unto God to be wape^s
off righteousness. For sin shall not have power over you, in so much as ye are
not under the law, but under grace.

How then? Shall we sin, because we are not under ye law, but under grace?
God forbid. ^oh 8. c Pet. 2. d
Know ye not, that look unto who^ ye give over your selves as servants to
obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether it be of sin unto
death, or of obedience unto righteousness? But God be thanked, that though ye
have been the servants of sin, ye are now yet obedient of heart to the
ensample off the doctrine, whereunto ye are committed. For now that ye are made
fre from sin, ye are become the servants of righteousness.

Genesis 2. c ^om 5. b
For death is the reward of sin, but the gift of God is everlasting life.

The VII. Chapter.
1. Cor. (...)
For the woman yt is in subieccion to the man, is bound unto the law while
the man lives: but if the man dye, then is she lowsed from the law that
concerns the man. Not. (...)
If she be now with another man, while the manlyneth, she shall be called a
wedlock breaker. But if the man be deed, then is she fre from the law, so
that she is no wedlock breaker, if she be with another man.

Even so my brethren, ye also are deed unto the law by the body of Christ,
that ye should be with another (namely with him which is raised up from the deed)
that we should bring forth fruit unto God. For when we were in the flesh, the
sinful lusts (which were stered up by the law) were mighty in our members
to bring forth fruit unto death. But now are we lowsed from the law, and deed
unto it, that held us captyue, so that we should serve in a new conversation
of the sprete, and not in the old conversation of the letter.

What shall we say then? Is the law Exo. (...) Deuteronomy. (...)
Thou shall not lust. But then took sin occasion at the commandment, and
stered up in me all manner of lust. For without the law sin was deed. As for
me, I lived some time without law. Howbeit when the commandment came, sin
renyued, but I was deed. And the very same commandment that was given me unto
life, was found to be unto me on occasion of death. For sin took occasion at
the commandment, and disceaued me, and slew me by the same commandment.
Esa. (...)
The law in deed is holy, and the commandment holy, just and good. Is that
then which is good, become death unto me? God forbid. But sin, that it might
appear how yt it is sin, has wroughte me death through good: that sin
might be out of measure sinful by the commandment. For we know, that the
law is spiritual, but I am carnal, (...)
sold under sin: because I know not what I do. For I do not yt I will, but
what I hate, yt do I. If I do now that which I will not, the^ grant I, that
the law is good.

So then it is not I that do it, but sin (...)
flesh) there dwells no good thing. To will is present with me, but to
perform yt which is good, I find not. For ye good that I will, do I not: but
the evil which I will not, that do I. If I do now that I will not, then is it
not I that do it, but sin that dwells in me.

Thus find I now by the law, yt when I will do good, evil is present with me.
For I delight in the law of God after the inward man: but I se another law in
my members, which stryueth against ye law of my mind, and takes me presoner
in ye law of sin, which is in my members. O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? I thank God through Jesus Christ our
LORD. So then with the mind I serve ye law of God, but with the flesh the law
of sin.

The VIII. Chapter.
THen is there now no damnacion unto the^ that are in Christ Jesus, which walk
not after the flesh, but after ye sprete. For ye law of ye sprete (yt brings
life i^ Christ Jesus) has made me (...)
fre from the law of sin and death. (...)
For what impossible was unto ye law (in as much as it was weak because of
the flesh) yt performed God, and sent his son in ye similitude of sinful
flesh, and by Cor. 3. c
sin damned sin in ye flesh: that the righteousness required of the law,
might be fulfilled in us, which walk not after the flesh, but after the
sprete. For they that are fleshly, are fleshly minded: but they that are
goostly, are goostly minded. To be fleshly minded, is death: but to be goostly
minded, is life and peace. For to be fleshly minded is enemyte against. God,
(...)
sith it is not subdued unto ye law of God, for it can not also. As for the^
that are fleshlye, they can not please God. Howbeit ye are not fleshly, but
goostly, if so be that the sprete of God dwell in you. But who so has not the
sprete of Christ, the same is not his. Nevertheless if Christ be in you, then is
the body deed because of sin. But the sprete is life for righteousness sake.

(...). 4. a ^ Tim. 1. a
are Gods children: for ye have not received the sprete of bondage to fear any
more, but ye have received ye sprete of adopcion, whereby we cry: Abba, dear
father. 2. Cor. 1. and 5. a Ephesians. 1. b
The same sprete certifieth our sprete, that we are the children of God. If we
be children, then are we heirs also, namely the heirs of God, and heirs
annexed with Christ, if so be that we suffer together, that we may be also
glorified together.

For I suppose, that the affliccions off 2. Cor. 4
which shall be showed upon us. 2. Co. ^
For the fervent lo^ginge of ye creature looks for the appearinge of the
children of God, because the creature is subdued unto vanyte against her will,
but for his will that has subdued her upon hope. For the creature also shall be
fre from the bondage of corrupcion, unto the glorious liberty of the children
of God. For we know, that every creature groneth, and Ioh. 16.
trauayleth with us in pain unto the same time.

Not they only, but we our selves also, which have the first fruits of the
sprete, groan within in our selves for the childshippe, and look for ye
delyueraunce of our body. For we are s^ued i^ deed, howbeit i^ hope: but ye
hope that is seen, is no hope: for how can a man hope for that which he seyeth?
But if we hope for that which we se not, the^ do we through patience abide for
it.

Likewise the sprete also helps our Esa. 26*
nevertheless ye sprete it self makes intercession mightily for us with
vnoutspeakable gronynges. Howbeit he yt searches the heart, knows what the
mind of the sprete is: for he makes intercession for the saints acordinge to
the pleasure of God. But sure we are, that all things serve for the best unto
them that love of God, which are called of purpose. For those whom he knew
before, has he ordained also before, yt they should be like fashioned unto ye
shappe of his son, yt he might be the first begotten among many brethren.
As for those whom he has ordained before, them has he called also: and whom
he has called, the^ has he also made righteous: and whom he has made
righteous, them has he glorified also.

What shall we say then unto these things? Yff God be on our side, Nu. 14. ^
Esa. 50. b
who can be against us. Ge. 22 Esa. 53. c
Which spared not his own son, but has given him for us all: how shall he
not with him give us all things also? Who will lay enythinge to ye charge of
Gods chosen? Here is God that makes righteous, who will then condemn? Here is
Christ that is deed, ye rather which is raised up again, which is also on ye
right hand of God, and makes intercession for us.

Who will separate us from the love of God? Trouble? or anguysh? or
persecucio^? or honger? or nakedness? or parell? or sword? ^al. 43. c
As it is written: For thy sake are we killed all the day long, we are
counted as sheep appointed to be slain. Nevertheless in all these things we
overcome far, for his sake that loved us. For sure I am, that nether death
ner life, nether angel, ner rule, nether power, nether things present, nether
things to come, nether heyth, ner loweth, nether any other creature shall be
able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our LORD.

The IX. Chapter.
(...). 31. g
I have wyszhed my self to be cursed from Christ for my brethren, that are my
kynsmen after the flesh, which are off Israel: (...). 19. a (...). 7. a
unto whom pertayneth the childshippe, and the glory, and the couenauntes and
law, and the service of God, and the promyses: whose are also the fathers, off
whom (after the flesh) comes Christ, ^om. 1. c
which is God over all, blessed for ever, Ame^^ But I speak not these things,
as though the word of God were of none effect: for they are not all
Israelites, ^om. 2. c
which are of Israel: ^al. 4. c
nether are they all children, because they are the sede of Abraham: ^en. 21. b
but in Isaac shall the sede be called unto the, that is, They which are
children after the flesh, are not the children of God, but the children of the
promise are counted for the sede. For this is a word of the promise, where he
says: About this time will I come, ^en. 18. b
and Sara shall have a son.

^en. 25. c
and had done nether good ner bad (that the purpose of God might sto^de
acordinge to the eleccion, not by the deseruynge of works, but by the grace of
the caller) it was said thus unto her: The greater shall serve the less. As it
is written: ^^al. 1. a
Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.

What shall we say then? Is God then unrighteous? God forbid. For he says
unto Moses: I show mercy, to whom I show mercy: and have compassion, Exo.
(...)
on who^ I have compassion. So lies it not then in any man's will or runnynge,
but in the mercy of God. For the scripture says unto Pharao: Exo. (...)
For this cause have I stered the up, even to show my power on the, that my
name might be declared in all lo^des. Thus has he mercy on whom he will: and
whom he will, he hardens.

Thou will say then unto me: Why blames Iere. (...) Eccli. (...). Tim. (...)
out of one lompe of claye to make one vessel unto honor, and another unto
dishonor? Therefore when God would show wrath, and to make his power known,
he brought forth with great patience the vessels off wrath, which are
ordained to damnacion: that he might declare the riches off his glory on ye
vessels of mercy, which he has prepared unto glory, whom he has called
(namely us) not only of the Jews, but also of the Gentyles. As he says also
by Osee: Osee* (...) and* ^* c 1. (...)
I will call that my people, which is not my people: and my beloved, which is
not ye beloved. And it shall come to pass in ye place, where it was said unto
them: Ye are not my people, there shall they be called the children of the
living God. But Esaias cries over Israel: Esa. (...) Zach. (...)
Though the nombre of the children of Israel be as the sonde of the sea, yet
shall there but a remnaunt be saved. For there is the word, that fynisheth and
shorteneth in righteousness: for a short word shall God make upon earth. And as
Esaias LORD of Sabbath had left us feed, Esa. ^ b
we should have been as Sodoma, and like unto Gomorra.

What shall we say then? This will we say: The Heythen which followed not
righteousness, have overtaken righteousness: but I speak of the righteousness
that comes of faith. Again, Israel followed the law of righteousness, and
attained not unto the law of righteousness. Why so? Even because they sought
it not out of faith, but as it were out of the deseruynge of works. For they
have stombled at the stomblinge stone. As it is written: Behold, Esa. (...)
I lay in Sion a stone to sto^ble at, and a rock to be offended at: and who
so ever believes on him, Esa. (...)
shall not be confounded.

The X. Chapter.
(...)
For Christ is the end of the law, unto righteousness for every one yt
believes. ^para
Moses writes of ye righteousness which comes of the law, that the man which
does ye same, shall live therein. But ye righteousness which comes of faith,
speaks on this wise: (...)
Say not in thine heart: Who will go up in to heaven? (that is nothing else then
to fetch Christ down) Or who will go down in to ye deep? (that is nothing else
the^ to fetch up Christ from the deed.) But what says the scripture? The
word is nigh the, even in thy mouth and in thine heart. This is ye word of
faith yt we preach.

LORD, and beleuest in thine heart, that God has raised him up from the deed,
thou shall be saved. For if a man believe from the heart, he shall be made
righteous: and if a man knowledge with the mouth, he shall be saved. For the
scripture says: (...)
Who so ever believes on him, shall not be confounded.

Here is no difference, nether of the Jew ner of the Gentyle. For one is LORD
of all, which is rich unto all yt call upon him. * For who so ever shall call
upon the name of the LORD, shall be saved. But how shall they call upon him, on
who^ they believe not? How shall they believe on him, of who^ they have not herd?
How shall they hear without a (...)
As it is written: How beutyfull are the fete of the^ yt preach peace, yt
bring good tidinges? But they are not all obedient unto the Gospel. For Esaye
says: LORD, who believes our preachinge? So the^ faith comes (...)
by hearing, but hearing comes by the word of God.

But I say: Have they not herd? No doubt their sound went out in to all
lands, (...)
and their words in to the ends of the world. But I say: Has not Israel
known? First, (...)
Moses says: I will provoke you to envy, by them that are not my people: and
by a foolish nation will I anger you. (...)
Esaye after him is bold, and says: I am found of them, that sought me not:
and have appeared unto them, that axed not after me. But unto Israel he says:
Esa ^. 6^.
All the day long have I stretched forth my hands unto a people yt believes
not, but speaks against me.

The XI. Chapter.
I Say then: Has God thrust out his Iere 31. ^
for I also am an Israelite, of the sede of Abraham out of the trybe of Ben
Iamin. God has not thrust out his people, whom he knew before. Or wot ye not
what the scripture says of Elias, how he makes intercession unto God against
Israel, and says: 3. Re. 19. ^
LORD, they have slain thy prophets, and dydged down thine altares, and I
am left over only, and they seek my life? But what says the answer of God
unto him? 3. Re. 19. ^
I have reserved unto me seven thousand men, which have not bowed their knee
before Baal. Eue^ so goes it now at this time also with this remnaunt after ye
eleccion of grace. Deuteronomy. 9. a
If it be done of grace, the^ is it not of deseruynge: else were grace no grace.
But if it be of deseruynge, then is grace nothing: else were deseruynge no
deseruynge.

What the^? Israel has not optayned yt Esa. 6. b
eyes that they should not se, and ears that they should not hear, eue^ unto
this day. And David says: Let their table be made a snare to take the^ with
all, and an occasion to fall, Psalm. 6^. d
and a reward unto the^. Let their eyes be blinded that they se not, and ever
bow down their backs.

I say then: Have they therefore stombled, yt they should clean fall to
naught? God forbid: but through their fall is salvation happened unto ye
Heythen, that he might provoke them to be zealous after them. For if their fall
be the riches of the world, and the mynishinge of the^ the riches of the
Heythen: how much more should it be so, if their fullness were there? I speak
unto you Heythen: for in as much as Romans 1. a 1. Tim. 2. ^ 2. Tim. 1. b
I am ye Apostle of the Heythen, I will praise mine office, if I might provoke
them unto zele, which are my flesh, and save some of them. For if the loss of
them by the reco^cylinge of the world, what were that else, then as if life
were taken of the deed? If the beginning be holy, then is all ye dowe holy:
Esa. 65. b
and if the rote be holy, then are the branches holy also.

But though some of ye branches now be partaker of the rote and sap of the
Iere. 11. c
olyue tree, boost not thy self against the branches. If thou boost thy self
against them, then bear not thou the rote, but the rote bears the. Thou will say then: the branches are broken of, that I might be grafted in. Thou
say well. They are broken of because off their unbelieve, but thou stondest
through believe Eccl. 7. c
Be not thou hye minded, but fear, seeing God has not spared the natural
branches, lest he also spare not the.

Behold therefore the kyndnesse and rigorousnes off God: on them which fell,
rigorousnes: but toward the, kyndnes, if thou continue in the kyndnesse. Else
shall thou be hewe^ of: ^. Cor. 3. c
and they, if they bide not still in unbelieve, shall be grafted in again. For
God is of power to grafte the^ in again. For if thou be cut out of the
natural wild olyue tree, and grafted (contrary to nature) in the good olyue
tree, how much more shall they that are natural, be grafted in their own olyue
tree again?

Luc. 21. c
so long till the fullness of the Heythen be come in, and so all Israel shall be
saved. As it is written: There shall come out of Sion he that does deliver,
Psalm. 13. a Esa. 59. c
and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob. And this is my covenant with
them, wha^ I shall take away their sins. As concerning the Gospel, I hold
them as enemies for your sakes: but as touching the eleccion, I love them for
the fathers sakes.

For verily the gifts and calling of God are soch, that it can not repent
him of them. For likewise as ye also in time passed have not believed, but now
have optayned mercy through their unbelieve: Even so now have they not believed on
the mercy which his happened unto you, that they also may obtain mercy. For
God has closed up all under unbelieve, that he might have mercy on all.

O the depenesse of the riches, both of the wyszdome and knowledge of God? How
incomprehensible are his judgments, Sap. 17. a
and his ways unsearchable? Sap. 9. b Esa. 40. b ^. Cor 2. b Esa. 44. e
For who has known the mind of the LORD? Or who has been his council
geuer^ Or who has given him ought before hand, that he might be recompensed
again? For of him, and through him, and in him are all things. To him be
praise for ever, Amen.

The XII. Chapter.
I Beseke you brethren by the mercyfulnesse of God, that ye give over your
bodies for a * sacrifice, yt is quycke holy, and acceptable unto God, which is
yo reasonable serving off God. And fashion not your selves like unto this
world, but be changed through the renewynge off yo mind, yt ye may prove,
what thing that good, yt acceptable, and perfect will of God is. For I say
through the grace yt is given me, unto every man among you: Ecc^^. (...)
that no man esteem off him self more, then it becomes him to esteem: but
that he discretly judge of himself, acordinge as God has dealte unto every
man the measure of faith. 1. Cor. (...) Ephesians. (...)
For like as we have many members in one body, but all the members have not one
manner of operacion: Even so we being many are one body in Christ. But among
our selves every one is the membre of another, and have diverse gifts,
acordinge to the grace that is given unto us 1. Co. (...)
If any man have the gift of prophecienge, let it be acordinge to the faith.

1. Pet* (...)
Let him that has an office, wait upon Ecc^^* (...)
^
If any man show mercy, let him do it with cheerfulness. Let love be without
dissimulacion. Hate that which is evil: Cleue unto that which is good. Be
kind one to another with brotherly love. In geuynge honor go one before
another. Ecc^ (...)
Be not slothful in the business that ye have in hand. Be fervent in the
sprete. Apply your selves unto the time. Rejoice in hope, be pacient in
trouble. Continue in prayer. Distribute unto the necessities of the saints.
Heb* (...)
Be glad to harbarow. Bless the^ that persecute you. Bless, and curse not. Be
merry with them that are merry and weep with them that weep.

Be of one mind among your selves. Pro. (...) 1. (...)
Recompe^se unto no man evil for evil. Provide honesty before hand toward
every man. If it be possible (as much as in you is) have peace with all men.

Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but give rowme unto the wrath off
God. For it is written: Vengeance is mine, (...)
and I will reward, says ye LORD. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him:
If he thyrst, (...)
give him drink. For in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire upon his
head. Be not overcome with evil, but overcome thou evil with good.

The XIII. Chapter.
(...)
For there is no power but of God. The powers that be, are ordained of God: so
that who so ever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God. And they
that resist, shall receive to them selves da^nacion. For rulers are not to be
feared for good works, but for evil. If thou will be without fear off the
power, do well then, and thou shall have praise of the same: for he is the
minister off God for thy wealth. But yff thou do evil, then fear, for he
bears not the sword for naught. For he is the mynister of God, a taker of
vengeance, to punyshe him that does evil. Wherefore ye must needs obey, not
only for punyshme^t, but also because of conscience. For this cause must ye
give trybute also. For they are Gods mynisters, which ma^teyne ye same defense.

(...)
to whom tribute belongs: custom, to whom custom is due: fear, to whom
fear belongs: honor, to whom honor pertayneth. Owe nothing to any man,
but to love one another. (...)
For he that loves another, has fulfilled the law. For where it is said: (
(...) ^0. c (...)* 5. c
Thou shall not break wedlock: thou shall not kill: thou shall not steal:
thou shall not bear false witness: thou shall not lust) and if there be any
other commandment, it is comprehended in this word: (...)
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Love does his neighbor no evil.
Therefore is love ye fulfillynge of the law.

And for so much as we know this, namely the time (...) 5. a
that the hour is now for us to rise from sleep (For now is our salvation
nearer, then when we believed: the night is past, but the day is come nigh.)
Let us therefore cast away ye works of darkness, (...)
and put on the armoure of light. Let us walk honestly as in the day, (...)
not in excess off eatinge and in drunkenness, not in chamburynge and
wantonness, not in strife and enuyenge: but put ye on the LORD Jesus Christ,
(...)
and make not prouysion for ye flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it.

The XIIII. Chapter.
Iaco. 4. b
Who art thou, that iudgest another man's servant? He stondeth or falls unto
his LORD: Ye he may well sto^de, for God is able to make hi^ sto^de. Some
man puts difference between day and day, but another man counts all
days alyke. Col. 2. c
Let every man be sure of his meaning. He that puts difference in the day,
does it unto the LORD: and he that puts no difference in the day, does it
unto ye LORD also. He yt eats, eats unto the LORD, for he gives God
thanks: and he that eats not, eats not unto ye LORD, and gives God
thanks. For none of us lives to him self, and none dies to him self. If we
live, we live unto the LORD: If we dye, we dye unto the LORD. Therefore,
whether we live or dye, we are the LORDS.

For thereto dyed Christ, and rose again, Act. 2. d Phil. ^. a
LORD both of deed and quycke. But why iudgest thou ye brother? Or thou other,
why despysest thou ye brother? We shall all be brought before ye judgment seat
of Christ. Gal. 6. a
For it is written: As truly as I live, (says the LORD) all knees shall bow
unto me, Esa. 45. c Phil. 2. a
and all tu^ges shall knowledge unto God. Thus shall every one of us give acomptes
for himself unto God. Let us not therefore judge one another any more. But
judge this rather, yt noma^ put a stomblinge block or an occasion to fall in
his brothers way. 1. Cor. 8. ^
I know, and am full certified in ye LORD Jesus, yt there is nothing common
of it self: but unto him yt judges it to be common, to him is it common. But
if ye brother be grieved over ye meat, the^ walk thou not now after charity.
Destroy not with thy meat, him, for whom Christ dyed,

Se therefore that your treasure be not Tit. 1. c
but it is evil for yt man, which eats with hurt of his conscience 1. Cor. 8.
b
It is much better yt thou eat no flesh, and drink no wine, nor any thing,
whereby thy brother stombleth, or falls, or is made weak. Have thou faith,
have it with ye self before God happy is he, that condemns not him self in
yt thing which he aloweth. But he that makes conscience of it and yet eats,
is dampened: because he does it not of faith. For Tit 1. c
what so ever is not of faith, that same is sin.

The XV. Chapter.
Gal. 6. a
ought to bear ye fraylnesse of them which are weak, and not to stand in
our own consaytes. Let every one of us order himself so, that he please his
neighbor unto his wealth, and edifienge: For Christ pleased not himself, but
as it is written: The rebukes of them which rebuked the, are fallen upon me.
Psalm. 68 b
To. 4. d
What so ever things are written before time, are written for our learning,
that we through patience and comfort off the scriptures, might have hope. The
God of patience and consolacion grant you to be like minded one toward
another, acordinge unto Jesus Christ, that ye being of one mind, may with one
mouth praise God the father of our LORD Jesus Christ.

Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ has received you to the praise off
God. But I say that Christ Jesus was a mynister of the circumcision for the
truth of God, to confirm the promyses made unto the fathers, and that the
Heythen might praise God because of mercy, as it is written: 2 Re. 22. g Psalm.
17. c
For this cause will I praise the among the Ge^tyles, and sing unto thy name.
And again he says: Deu. 32. f
Rejoice ye Heythen with his people. And again: Psa. 116. a
Praise the LORD all ye Gentiles, and laud him all ye nations. And again
Esaias says: There shall be the rote of Iesse, and he that shall rise to

I my self am full certified of you (my brethren) that ye your selves are
full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, so that ye are able to exhort one
another. Nevertheless (brethren) I have somewhat more boldly written unto you, as
one that puts you in remembrance, for the grace that is given me of God*
that I should be a mynister of Jesus Christ among the Heythen, to declare the
gospel of God, that the Heythen might be an acceptable offering unto God,
sanctified by the holy ghost. Therefore may I boost myself through Jesus Christ,
that I meddle with things perteyninge unto God. For I durst not speak ought,
except Esa. (...)
shall understand. This is also the cause, wherefore I have been often times let
to come unto you. But now sith I have no more place in these countrees, having
yet a desire many years sense to come unto you, when I shall take my journey in
to Spain, I will come to you: for I trust that I shall pass yt way and se you,
and to be brought on my way thitherwarde by you: but so, that I first refresh
my self a little with you.

But now go I to Jerusalem, to mynister Act (...) 1. Co. (...) 2 Cor (...) and
(...)
for the poor saints at Jerusalem. They have done it wyllingly, and their
detters are they. 1. (...) Gal* (...)
For if ye Heythen be made partakers off their spiritual things, their duty
is to mynister unto the^ in bodily things. Now when I have performed this,
and have brought the^ this fruit sealed, I will take my journey by you in to
Spain. But I am sure when I come unto you, that I shall come with ye full
blessing of the Gospel of Christ.

I beseke you brethren through our LORD Jesus Christ, and through the love of
the sprete, yt ye help me in my busynes with your prayers unto God for me,
that I may be delivered from the unbelievers in Iewrye and that this my service
which I do to Jerusalem, may be accepted of the saints, yt I may come unto
you with joy by ye will of God, and refreshe my self with you. The God of
peace be with you all. Amen.

The XVI. Chapter.
I Commend unto you Phebe our sister, LORD, as it be comes the saints,
and that ye help her in what soever business she has neade off you. For she
has succored many, and mine own self also.

Great Prisca and (...) a (...). 4. c
Aquila my helpers in Christ Jesus, which for my life have laid down their
own necks: unto whom not I only give thanks, but all the congregacions of
the Heythen. Great the congregation also in their house. Salute Epenetos my
beloved, which is ye first fruit among the^ of Achaia i^ Christ. Great Mary,
which has bestowed much labor on us. Salute Andronicus and Iunia my cosens,
and fellow presoners, which are awncient Apostles, and were before me in
Christ. Great Amplias my beloved in ye LORD. Salute Urban o helper in Christ,
and Stachis my beloved. Salute Apelles LORD Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa,
which have labored in ye LORD. Salute my beloved Persi^^, which has labored
much and ye LORD. Salute Ruffus ye chosen in ye LORD: and his mother and
mine. Great Asyncritus, Phlego^, Herman, Patrobas, Hermen, and ye brethren with
the^. Salute Philologus and Iulia, Nerius and his sister, and Olympa, and all
the saints. with the^ Salute one another with an holy kiss. The co^gregacions of
Christ salute you.

(...)
I beseke you brethren, mark them which cause deuysion and give occasions of
evil, contrary to ye doctrine which ye have learned, and avoyde them. For they
yt are soch, serve not the LORD Jesus Christ, (...)
but their own belly: and through sweet preachinges and flateringe words, they
disceaue ye hertes of ye innocents. For your obedience is published among
all men, therefore am I glad of you.

(...)
and simple in evil. The God of peace tread Satan under yo fete shortly. The
grace of o LORD Jesus Christ be with you (...)
Timotheus my helper, and (...)
Lucius, and (...)
Jason, and (...)
Sopater my kynsme^ salute you. I Tertius which have written this epistle in ye
LORD, salute you (...)
Gaius mine ooste and ye oost of ye whole congregation saluteth you. Erastus ye
cha^berlaine of ye cite saluteth you and Quartus a brother saluteth you. The
grace of o LORD Jesus Christ be with you all Ame^,

To him yt is of power to stablyshe you, acordinge to my Gospel and preachinge
of Jesus Christ, whereby is uttered ye mystery which has been kept secret,
sense ye world began, but now is opened, and showed by the scriptures of ye
prophets, at the commandment of the everlasting God, to set up ye obedience
of the faith among all Heythen: (...)
to the same God, which alone is wise, be praise through Jesus Christ for ever,
Amen.

To the Romans.

Sent from Corinthum, by Phebe, which was a mynister of the congregation at
Cenchrea.

The first Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul, to the Corinthians.
The sum of this Epistle.
Chap. I. He commends the Corinthians* exhorts the^ to be of one mind, and
rebukes the diuysion that was among them. Wordly wisdom is foolishnes before
God, ye there is no wisdom but in the despised cross of Christ. Chap. II. It
is not eloquence and glorious painted words of wordly wisdom, that can edify
and convert souls unto Christ: but the plain words of the scripture, for,
they make mention of him and his cross. Chap. III. Paul rebukes the sec^es
and authors thereof. Christ is the fou^dacio^ of his church No man ought to
rejoice in men, but in God. Chap. IIII. The preachers are but ministers.
Judgment belongs only unto God. Chap. V. After what manner Paul curses the
man, that had committed fornicacion with his mother in law. Chap. VI. He
rebukes the^ for goinge to law together before the Heithen, and reproves
uncleanness. Chap. VII. Of marriage, virginite and wyddowheade. Chap. VIII. He
rebukes the^ that use their lyberte to the slander of other, and shows how
men ought to behave the^ toward soch as be weak. Chap. IX. Love forbeareth
the thing that she may do by the law. He exorteth them to run on forth in
the course that they have begone. Chap. X. He fears them with the ensamples
of the old Testament, and exorteth them to a godly conversation. Chap. XI. He
rebukes the^ for the abuse and misordre that they had about the Sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ, and brings them again to the first
institucion. Chap. XII. The diversity of the gifts of the holy ghost, given to
the comfort and edifienge of one another, as the members of a man's body serve
one another. Chap. XIII. The nature and conditions of love. Chap. XIIII. Paul
shows that the gift of prophecy, interpretinge, or preachinge, excels the
gift of tunges, and how they ought both to be used. Chap. XV. The resurreccion
of the deed. Chap. XVI. He puts the^ in remembrance of the gadderynge for
the poor christian at Jerusalem, and concludes his epistle with the
salutacions of certain loving brethren.
The first Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul, to the Corinthians.


The first Chapter.
Act. 18. b
Sosthenes, unto the congregation off God which is at Corinthum, to them that
are Ioh. 17. c Heb. 9. c
sanctified in Christ Jesus, saints by calling, with all them that call upon
the name of our LORD Jesus Christ, in every place both off theirs and ours.
^. Cor. 1. a
Grace be with you and peace from God our father, and from the LORD Jesus
Christ.

I thank my God always on your behalf, for the favor of God which is
given you in Jesus Christ, that in all points ye are made rich by him, in
every word, and in all manner of knowledge (eue^ as ye preachinge of Christ is
confirmed in you) so that ye want nothing in any gift, and wait but for the
appearinge of our LORD Jesus Christ: which shall strength you also unto ye
end, that ye may be blameless in the day of our LORD Jesus Christ. Number.
23. c 1. Co 10. b 1 Tess. 5. c
For God is faithful, by who^ ye are called unto the fellishippe of his son
Jesus Christ our LORD.

LORD Jesus Christ, that ye all speak one thing, and let there be no
discension among you, but that ye be perfect in one meaning. For it is
showed me (my brethren) of you, by them which are of ye household of Cloes,
that there is strife among you. I speak of that, which every one of you
says: I hold of Paul. Another, I hold of Act. 18. c
Apollo* The third, I hold of Cephas. The fourth, I hold off Christ. Is
Christ then divided in parts? Was Paul crucified for you? Or were ye baptized
in ye name of Paul? I thank God that I have baptized none of you, but *
Crispus and Gaius: lest any should say, yt I in mine own name had baptized. I
baptized also ye household of Stephana. Farthermore know I not, whether I
baptized any other. For Christ sent me not to baptyse, but to preach the
Gospel, not with wyszdome of words, lest ye cross of Christ should have been
made of none effect.

For the word of ye cross is foolishness (...)
but unto us which are saved, it is the power of God. For it is written: (...)
I will destroy the wyszdome of the wise, and will cast away the understanding
of ye prudent. (...)
Where are the wise? Where are ye scrybes? where are ye disputers of this
world? Has not God made the wyszdome of this world foolishness? For in so
much as the world by the wyszdome thereof knew not God in his wyszdome, it
pleased God through foolish preachinge to save them yt believe. For (...)
the Jews require tokens, and the Greeks axe after wyszdome. But we preach
Christ the crucified: to the Jews an occasion off fallinge, and unto the
Greeks foolishnes. But unto them that are called (both Jews and Greeks) we
preach Christ the power of God and (...)
the wyszdome off God.

For the foolishnes of God is wyser then (...)
not many wyseme^ after the flesh, not many mighty, not many of hye degree are
called: but that foolish is before the world, has God chosen, that he might
co^founde the wise: And that weak is before ye world, has God chosen, yt he
might confound the mighty. And the vile and despised before the world has
God chosen, ye and that which is nothing, that he might destroy that which
is ought, that no flesh should rejoice in his presence. Of the same are ye
also in Christ Jesus, which of God is made unto us wyszdome and (...)
righteousness, and (...)
sanctifienge and rede^pcion, that, acordinge as it is written: (...)
He that reioyseth, should rejoice in the LORD.

The II. Chapter.
ANd I brethren, wha^ I came unto you among you that I knew any thing, save
only Jesus Christ, even the sam that ewas crucified. And I was among you in
weakness, and in fear, and in much tremblinge: (...)
and my word and my preachinge was not with entysinge words of man's wyszdome,
but in shewinge of the sprete and of power: that your faith should not stand
in the wyszdome of men, but in the power of God.

That we speak of, is wyszdome among the^ yt are perfect: not ye wyszdome of
this world, nether of the rulers of this world which go to naught: but we
speak of the wyszdome of God, which is in secret and lies hyd: which God
ordained before the world unto our glory: (...)
which none of ye rulers of this world knew. For if they had known it, they
had not crucified the LORD of glory, but as it is written: (...)
The eye has not seen, and the ear has not herd, nether has it entered in
to the heart of man that God has prepared for them that love him.

But God has opened it unto us by his sprete. (...)
For the sprete searches out all things, ye even the depenesses of the God
head. For what man knows what is in man, save the sprete of man which is in
him? Even so no man knows what is in God, save ye sprete of God. As for us,
we have not received the sprete of this world, but the sprete which comes of
God, so that we ca^ know what is given us of God: which we also speak, not
with conning words of ma^s wyszdome, but with the co^nynge words of the holy
ghost, and judge spiritual matters spiritually. Howbeit the natural man
perceaueth nothing of ye sprete of God. It is foolishnes unto him, and he can
not perceive it: for it must be spiritually discerned. (...)
But he that is spiritual, discusseth all things, and he is judged of noman.
(...)
For who has known ye mind of the LORD? Or who shall enfourme him? But we
have the mind of Christ.

The III. Chapter.
(...)
I gave you milk to drink, and not meat, for ye might not then away
withal, nether may ye yet even now, in so much as ye are yet fleshlye. For
(...)
seeing there is enuyenge, strife, and discencion among you* are ye not
fleshly, and walk after ye manner of men? For when one says: I hold of Paul:
another, (...)
I hold of Apollo, are ye not the^ fleshlye? What is Paul? What is* Apollo?
Eue^ mynisters are they, by whom ye are come to the believe, and the same,
acordinge as the LORD has given unto every man. I have planted, Apollo has
watered, Ioh. 6 g Act. 2. c
but God has given the increace. So then nether is he that planteth, any
thing, nether he that watreth, but God which gives the increace. As for him
that planteth, and he that watreth, ye one is as the other: but yet shall every
one receive his reward acordinge to his labor. For we are Gods laborers, ye
are Gods huszbandry, ye are Gods buyldinge.

Acordinge to the grace of God which is Mat. 16. c
For other fou^dacion can noman lay, then that which is laid, the which is
Jesus Christ. But if enyman build upon this foundation, gold, silver,
precious stones, timber, hay, stobble, every ma^s work shall be showed. Esa.
28. c
For the day of the LORD shall declare it, which shall be showed with fire: and
the 1. Pet. 1. b and 4. b
fire shall try every ma^s work what it is. If any man's work that he has
build thereon, abide, he shall receive a reward: If any man's work burn, he
shall suffer loss: but he shall be saved himself, nevertheless as through fire.

1. Cor. 6. ^ 2. Cor. 6. ^ Heb. 3. a
Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the sprete of God dwells
in you? If any man defyle the temple of God, him shall God destroy. For the
temple of God is holy, which ye are. Let no man disceaue himself. If any man
think himself wise among you, let him become a fool in this world, that he
may be wise. For Romans 1. c
the wyszdome off this world is foolishnes with God. For it is written: Job.
5. b
He compaseth the wise in their craftynesse. And again: Psalm. 93. b
The LORD knows the thoughts of the wise, that they are vain. Therefore let
no man rejoice in men. For all is youres, whether it be Paul or Apollo, whether
it be Cephas or* the world, whether it be life or death, whether it be
present or for to come. All is youres, but ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

The IIII. Chapter.
LEt every man this wise esteem us, 2. Cor. 6. a
and stewardes of the Deu. 29. d
secrets of God. Now is there no more required of the stewardes, then, that
they be found Iere. 23 e Luc. 1^.
faithful. It is but a small thing unto me, that I should be judged of you,
or of man's day, nether judge I mine own self. I know naught by my self,
Ioh. 9. a
yet am I not thereby justified. It is the LORD that judges me. Therefore judge
ye nothing before ye time, until the LORD come, which shall bring it to
light that is hyd in darkness, and open the councels of ye hertes, and the^
shall every one have praise of God.

^aco. 1. a
What have thou that thou have not received? If thou have received it, why
make thou the^ thy boost, as though thou had not received it? Now ye are
full, now ye are made rich, ye reign without us, and would God ye did reign,
that we might reign with you.

Me thinks that God has set forth us Apostles for the lowest off all, Psalm.
43. c Romans 8. e
even as those that are appointed unto death. For we are agasynge stock unto
ye world and to the angels, and unto men. We are fools for Christ's sake, but
ye are wise in Christ: We weak, but ye strong: Ye honorable, but we despised.
Even unto this day we ho^ger and thyrst, and are naked, and are boffetted with
fystes, and have no certain dwellinge place, Act. 18. a
and labor and work with our own hands. We are reuyled, To. 12. b
and yet we bless: we are persecuted, and suffer it: We are evil spoken of,
and we pray: We are become as it were the very outswepinges of ye world, ye
the of scowringe of all men unto this time.

Gal. 4. b Iaco. 1. b
begotten you in Christ Jesus through ye Gospel? Wherefore I exhort you, 1. Co.
10. a Phil. 3. c
be ye my folowers. For this cause have I sent unto you Timotheus (which is my
dear son, and faithful in the LORD) that he may put you in remembrance
of my ways, which are in Christ, eue^ as I teach every where in all
congregacions. Some are puffed up, as though I would come no more at you. But I
will come to you shortly ( Pro. 20. d Iere. 10. d
if the LORD will) and will know, not the words of the^ that are puffed up, but
ye power. For the kingdom of God is not i^ words, but in power. What will ye?
Shall I come unto you with the rodd, or with love and the sprete of meekness?

The V. Chapter.
THere goes a commen report, that (...)
that one should have his fathers wife. And ye are puffed up, and have not rather
sorowed, that he which has done this deed, might be put from among you. For
I verily as absent in body, but present in sprete, have determined already as
though I were present (concerning him that has done this deed) in ye name of
our LORD Jesus Christ, wha^ ye are gathered together with my sprete, and with
the power of our LORD Jesus Christ, Mat. (...) 1. Tim. (...)
to deliver him unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the sprete
may be saved in the day of the LORD Jesus.

Your reioysinge is not good. Gal. 5. ^
Know ye not that a little leven sowereth the whole lompe of dowe? Pourge out
therefore the old Esa. (...) Ioh. (...)
Easter lamb, which is Christ, that is offered for us. Wherefore let us (...)
keep Easter, not in ye old leven, ner in the leven of maliciousnes, and
wickedness, but in the sweet bred of pureness and of the truth.

I wrote unto you in the Epistle, that ye should have nothing to do with
whoremo^gers, and that meant I not at all of the whoremongers of this world,
either of the covetous, or of extorcioners, or of the^ that worship images,
for then must ye needs have gone out of the world. (...)
But now have I written unto you, yt ye should have nothing to do with them:
(Namely,) if there be any man that is called a brother, and is an whoremonger,
or covetous, or a worshipper of images, either a raylar, or a dronkarde, or an
extorcioner, (...)
with soch shall ye not eat. For what have I to do to judge them that are
without? Do ye not judge the^ that are within? As for them that are without,
God shall judge them. (...)
Put away from you him that is evil.

The VI. Chapter.
HOw dare one off you having busynes (...)
Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world? If the world then
shall be judged off you, are ye not good enough to judge small matters? Know ye
not that we shall judge the angels? how much more things that pertayne to the
te^porall life? Therefore if ye have judgments of temporal matters, take them
that are despised in the congregation, and set them to be judges. This I say
to your shame. Is there utterly no wise man among you? What not one at all,
that can judge between brother and brother? but one brother goes to law with
another, and that before the unbelievers?

(...)
Why rather suffer ye not wrong? Why suffer ye not your selves rather to be
defrauded? but ye your selves do wrong and defraude, and that even the
brethren. Know ye not that ye unrighteous shall not inheret the kingdom of
God? Be not disceaued. Nether whoremongers, (...)
ner worshippers off images, ner breakers off wedlock, ner weaklinges, nether
abusers of them selves with mankind, ner thieves, nether the covetous, ner
dro^kardes, ner cursed speakers, ner extorcioners shall inheret the kingdom of
God. And soch have some of you been, but ye are waszhed, ye are sanctified, ye
are made righteous by the name of the LORD Jesus, and by the sprete of our
God.

(...)
all things are not profitable. I may do all things, but I will be brought
under no ma^s power. Meats are ordained for ye belly, and the belly for meats.
But God shall destroy both it and them. The body belongs not unto whordome,
but unto the LORD, and the LORD unto the body (...)
God has raised up the LORD, and shall raise us up also by his power. Know ye
not that your bodies are the me^bres of Christ? Shall I now take the members of
Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid. Or do ye not know,
that he which cleueth unto an harlot, is one body? For they shall be two ( (...)
says he) in one fleszhe. But he that cleueth unto the LORD, is one sprete.

Fle whordome. All sins yt a man does, are without the body. But he that
commytteth whordome, synneth against his own body. (...)
Or know ye not that your body is the temple of the holy ghost? Whom ye have
of God, and are not your own? (...)
For ye are dearly boughte. Praise ye God therefore in yo body and in yo sprete,
which are Gods.

VII. Chapter.
AS concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me, I answer: It is good for
a man not to touch a woman. Nevertheless to avoyde whordome, let every man have
his own wife, and let every woman have her own huszbande. Let the man give
unto the wife due benevolence: likewise also the wife unto ye man. The wife
has not power over her own body, but the huszbande: and likewise the man has
not power over his own body, but the wife. Tob 6. d and 8. a Joel 2. c
Withdraw not yo selves one from another, except it be with the consent of
both for a time, that ye may give your selves unto fasting and prayer, and
the^ come together again, lest Satan tempte you for yo incontyne^cye. But
this I say of favor, and not of commandment. Howbeit I would rather yt all
me^ were as I am. Nevertheless every one has his proper gift of God: one thus,
another so. To them verily yt are unmarried and to wedowes I say: It is good
for the^ that they abide also as I do. 1. Tim. 5. b
But if they cannot absteyne, let them mary. For it is better to mary, then to
burn.

But unto them that are married, command LORD, Mat. 5. d
that the wife separate not her self from the huszbande: but if she separate
her self, yt she remain unmarried, or be reconcyled to her huszbande: and let
not the huszbande put away his wife from him.

As for the other, unto the^ say I, not ye LORD: If any brother have an
unbelieving wife, and she is content to dwell with him, let him not put her
away. And if a woman have an unbelieving huszbande, and he is content to dwell
with her, let her not put him away. For the unbelieving huszbande is
sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the
huszbande: or else were your children unclean, but now are they holy. But if
the unbelieving depart, let him depart. A brother or a sister is not bound
in soch cases, but God has called us in peace. 1. Pet. ^. a
For what know thou O woman, whether thou shall save ye man? Or what know
thou O man, whether thou shall save the woman? But even as God has distributed
unto every one Ephe. 4. ^
and as the LORD has called every man, so let him walk: and so orden I in
all congregacions.

If any man be called being circumcysed wherein he is called. 1. Tim. 6. a
Art thou called a servant, care not for it: nevertheless if thou may be
fre, use it rather. For he that is called in the LORD being a seruau^te, is a
freman of the LORD. Likewise he that is called being fre, is a servant of
Christ. 1. Cor. 6. c 1. Pet. 1. c
Ye are dearly boughte, be not ye the servants of men. Brethren let every one
wherein he is called, therein abide with God.

As concerning virgins, I have no commandment of the LORD, nevertheless I
say my goodmeanynge, as I have optayned mercy of the LORD to be faithful. I
suppose it is good for ye present necessite: for it is good for a man so to be.
Art thou bound unto a wife, seek not to be lowsed: Art thou lowsed from a
wife, seek not a wife. But if thou take a wife, thou synnest not. And if a
virgin mary, she synneth not. Nevertheless soch shall have trouble in the
fleszhe. But I favor you.

Psalm. 89. a 2. Pet. 3. b
the time is short. Farthermore this is the meaning, yt they which have
wives, be as though they had none: and they that weep, be as though they wept
not: and they that rejoice, be as though they reioysed not: and they that bye,
be as though they possessed not: and they that use this world, be as though
they used it not. For the faszhion off this world passes away. Mat. 6. a Luc
^2. c
But I would that ye should be without care. 1. Tim. 5. a
He that is syngle, cares for the things of the LORD, how he may please the
LORD. But he that is married, cares for the things of the world, how he may
please his wife, and is divided. A woman and a virgin that is syngle, cares
for the things of the LORD, that she may be holy both in body and also in
sprete. But she that is married, cares for ye things of the world, how she
may please her huszbande.

This I say for your profit, not that I LORD without hynderaunce. But if any
man think that it is uncomely for his virgin if she pass the time of marriage,
and if need so require, let him do what he list, he synneth not, let the^ be
coupled in marriage. Nevertheless he that purposes surely in his heart, having
no need, but has power of his own will, and determeth so in his heart to keep
his virgin, does well. Finally, he that joins his virgin in marriage, does
well: but he that joins not his virgin in marriage, does better. Romans ^
The wife is bound to the law, as long as her huszbande lives. But if her
huszbande sleep, she is at liberty to mary unto whom she will, only that it be
done in the LORD. But she is happier if she so abide after my judgment. I
think verily that I also have the sprete of God.

The VIII. Chapter.
AS touching things Act ^
offered unto Idols ^
we are sure yt we all have knowledge. Knowledge puffs a man up, but love
edifyeth. Nevertheless if any man think yt he knows any thing, he knows
not yet how he ought to know. But if any man love God, the same is known of
him.

So are we sure now concerning the meats offered unto Idols, (...)
that an Idol is nothing in the world, and that there is none other God but
one. And though there be that are called gods, whether in heaven or in earth
(as there be gods many and lords many) yet have we but one God, even the
father, (...)
of who^ are all things, and we in him* and one LORD Jesus Christ, by who^
are all things, and we by him.

But every man has not knowledge: for some make yet (...)
conscience over the Idol, and (...)
if meat offend my brother, I will never eat flesh, lest I offend my brother.

The IX. Chapter.
AM I not an Apostle? Am I not fre? Act. ^
Have I not seen Jesus Christ our LORD? Are not ye my work in the LORD? If
I be not an Apostle unto other, yet am I your Apostle: for the seal of mine
Apostelshippe are ye in the LORD. Mine answer unto them that axe me, is this:
Have we not power to eat and drink? Have we not power also to lead about a
sister to wife, as well as other Apostles, and as the brethren of the LORD,
and (...)
Cephas? Or have only I and Barnabas not power this to do? Who goes a warfare
at any time upon his own wages? Who planteth a vynyarde, and eats not of the
fruit thereof? Who fedeth a flock, and eats not of the milk of the flock?

Say I these things after the manner of (...). ^5. a (...). 5. c
it is written in the law off Moses: Thou shall not mosell the mouth of the
ox that treads out the corn. Does God take thought for the oxen? Or says
he it not altogether for our sakes? For no doubt it is written for our
sakes. For he that eareth, should ear upon hope: and he yt throszheth, should
troszhe upon hope, yt he might be partaker of his hope. (...)
If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we reap
yo bodily things? But if other be partakers of this power on you, wherefore are
not we rather? (...)
Nevertheless we have not used this power, but suff^e all things, lest we
should hinder the Gospel off Christ. Know ye not that they which labor in
the temple, have their living of ye temple: and they that wait at the altar,
enjoy the altar? (...)
Even thus also has ye LORD ordained, that they which preach the Gospel,
should live of ye Gospel. (...)
But I have used none of these things.

(...)
Unto the Jews I am become as a Jew, to win ye Jews. To them that are
under the law, I am become as though I were under the law, to win them
which are under the law.

(...) ^0. d
I am become of all faszhions unto every man, to save some at ye leest. But
this I do for the Gospels sake, that I might be partaker thereof.

Know ye not, that they which run in a course, run all, yet but one
receaueth the reward? Run ye so, that ye may obtain. Every one that
proves mastrye, absteyneth from all things, and they do it, that they may
obtain a corruptible crown, but we to obtain an 1. Pet. 5. a
incorruptible crown. I therefore so run, not as at an uncertain thing: So
fight I, not as one yt beats ye air: but I tame my body, and bring it in
to subieccion, lest when I preach unto other: I my self be a cast away.

The X. Chapter.
BRethren, I would not that ye should Exo. 1^. d
that our fathers were all under the cloud, Exo. 14. ^
and all passed through the sea, and were all baptized under Moses in the cloud
and in the sea, Exo. 16. ^
and did all eat of one spiritual meat, and Exo. 17. b Nu. 20. a Mat. 16. ^
did all drink of one spiritual drink: but they drunk of the spiritual
Exo. 17. b Nu. 20. a Mat. 16. ^
rock that followed the^, which rock was Christ. Nevertheless in many of them
had God no delight, Number. 14
for they were smytten down in the wilderness.

These are ensamples unto us, yt we should not lust after evil things, as
they lusted. Nether be ye worshippers off images, as were some of them.
Acordinge as it is written: Exo 3^. b
The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. Nether let us
commytte whordome, Number* 25. Psalm. 105.
as some of them committed whordome, and fell in one day three and twenty
thousand. Nether let us tempte Christ, Number. 21.
as some of them tempted him, and were destroyed of serpe^tes. Nether murmur
ye, Number. 11. ^
as some of them murmured, and were destroyed through the destroyer.

All these things happened unto the^ for 1. Cor. 1. a 1. These. 2. ^
God is faithful, 2. Pe. 2. ^
which shall not suffer you to be tempted above your strength, but shall in the
mids of ye temptacion make a way to come out, that ye may bear it.
Wherefore my dearly beloved, fle from worshippinge of Idols. I speak unto them
which have discrecio^, judge ye what I say. The cup of tha^kesgeuynge
wherewith we give thanks, is it not the partakinge of the blood of Christ? The
bred that we break, is it not ye partakinge of ye body of Christ? For we many,
are one bred and one body, in as much as we all are partakers of one bred.

1. Cor. 8. a
Shall I say that the Idol is any thing? Or that it which is offered unto the
Idol is any thing? Nay. But this I say, that look what the Heythen offer,
that offer they unto deuels, and not unto God. Now would I not that ye should
be in the fellishippe of deuels. Ye can not drink of the cup of the LORD
and of the cup of the deuels. Ye can not be partakers of the LORDS table,
and of the table of deuels. Or will we provoke the LORD? 1. Cor. 6. c Eccli.
37. d
I may do all things, but all things are not profitable. I may do all
things, but all things edifye not. Let noman seek his own profit, but let
every man seek another wealth.

What soever is sold in the fleshmarket, that eat, and axe no question for
conscience sake. Psalm. 23. b
For the earth is the LORDS, and all yt therein is. If any of the^ yt believe
not, bid you to a feast, and if ye be disposed to go, what soever is set before
you, that eat, axinge no question for conscience sake.

LORDS and all that therein is.) Nevertheless I speak of 1. Cor. 8. b
conscience, not thine, but of ye other. For why should my liberty be judged of
another ma^s conscience: 1. Tim. 4. b
For if I take my part with thankesgeuynge, why am I evil spoken of, for yt
thing wherefore I give thanks?

Col. 3. b
Therefore whether ye eat or drink, or what so ever ye do, do all to ye praise
of God. Be not ye an occasion of fallinge, nether to the Jews, ner to the
Gentyles, ner to the congregation of God, 1. Cor. 9. d
eue^ as I also please all men in all things, not sekinge mine own profit,
but the profit of many, that they might be saved. 1. Cor. 4. c
Follow ye me, as I do Christ.

The XI. Chapter.
Ephe. 5. c
As for ye man, he is the head of ye woman, but God is Christ's head. Every
man that prays or prophecieth, and has any thing on his head, shameth his
head. But every woman that prays or prophecieth with uncovered head,
dishonesteth her head. For it is even a like much as if she were shaven. If
the woman be not covered, let her here also be cut of. But if it be uncomely
for a woman to have her here cut of or to be shaven, then let her cover her
head. Nevertheless the man ought not to cover his head, Ephe. ^
for so much as he is the image and glory of God: but the woman is the glory of
the man. Genesis ^
For the man is not of the woman, but the woman of the man. Nether was the man
created for the woman's sake, but the woman for the man's sake.

Therefore ought the woman to have a LORD. For as the woman is of the man, even
so comes the man also by the woman, but all of God. Judge ye by yo selves,
whether it be comely, yt a woman pray before God bare headed? Or does not
nature teach you, yt it is a shame for a man if he weere long here, and a
praise to ye woman, if she weere long here? For her here is given here to
cover her withal. But if there be any man among you that has lust to strive,
let him know, that we have no soch custom, nether the congregacions of God.
But this must I warn you of: I commend it not, that ye come together not
after a better manner but after a worse. First, when ye come together in the
congregation, I hear, that there are discensions among you, and I partly
believe it. (...)
For there must be sects among you, that they which are perfect among you,
might be known.

Now when ye come together, the LORDS LORD. (...)
For the LORD Jesus the same night in the which he was betrayed, took the
bred, and gave thanks, and brake it, and said: Take ye, and eat ye, this is
my body, which is broken for you. This do in the remembrance of me. After the
same manner also he took ye cup when supper was done, and said: This cup is
the new Testament in my blood, this do (as often as ye drink it) in the
remembrance of me. For as often as ye shall eat of this bred, and drink of this
cup, ye shall show the LORDS death, until he come.

LORD unworthily, shall be giltye of the body and blood of the LORD. (...)
But let a man examen himself, and so let him eat of this bred, and drink of
this cup. For he that eats and drynketh unworthily, eats and drynketh his
own damnacion, because he makes no difference of the LORDS body. Therefore
are there so many weak and sick among you, and many sleep. (...)
For if we judged our selves, we should not be judged. But when we are judged,
we are chastened of ye LORD, that we should not be d^ned with the (...)
world. Wherefore my brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for
another. But if any man honger, let him eat at home, that ye come not together
unto co^dempnacion. As for other things, I will set them in order when I come.

The XII. Chapter.
(...)
that no man speaking through the sprete of God, defyeth Jesus. And no man can
say that Jesus is the LORD, but by the holy ghost.

(...) 1^. a
There are diverse gifts, yet but one sprete: and there are diverse offices,
yet but one LORD: and there are diverse operacions (...)
yet is there but one God, which works all in all. The gifts of the sprete
are given unto every man to profit the congregation. To one is given through the
sprete the vtteraunce of wiszdome: to another is given the vtteraunce of
knowledge acordinge to the same sprete: to another, faith in the same sprete: to
another, the gifts of healinge in the same sprete: to another, power to do
miracles: to another, prophecienge: to another, (...)
judgment to discern spretes: to another, diverse tunges: to another, the
interpretacion of tunges. These all does ye same only sprete work, and
distributeth unto every man, acordinge as he will.

(...)
nevertheless all the members of the body though they be many, are yet but one
body: even so Christ also. For we are all baptized in one sprete to be one
body, whether we be Jews or Gentyles, whether we be bond or fre, and have all
Esa. 55. a Ioh. 7. d
dronke^ of one sprete. For the body also is not one membre, but many. If the
foot say: I am not ye hand, therefore am I not a membre of the body, is he
therefore not a membre of ye body? And if the ear say: I am not the eye,
therefore am I not a membre of the body, is he therefore not a membre of the
body? If all the body were an eye, where were then the hearing? If all were
hearing, where then the smellinge? But now has God set the members, every one
severally in the body, as it has pleased him. Nevertheless if all the me^bres
were one membre, where were then the body? But now are the members many, yet is
the body but one.

The eye can not say unto the hand: I

And God has ordained in the congregation, first the Mat. 10. a Luc. 9. a Ephe
4. a
Apostles, secondly prophets, thirdly Act. 13. a
teachers, then doers of miracles, after that the gifts of healinge, helpers,
gouerners, diverse tunges. Are they all Apostles? Are they all prophets? Are
they all teachers? Are they all doers of miracles? Have they all the gifts of
healinge? Speak they all with tunges? Can they all interpret? But covet ye
the best gifts. And yet show I you a more excellent way.

The XIII. Chapter.
THough I spoke with the tunges of men and angels, and yet had not love, I were
even as sowndinge brass, or as a tynklinge Cymball. * And though I could
prophecy, and understood all secrets, and all knowledge, and had all faith* so
* that I could move mountains out of their places, and yet had not love, I
were nothing. And though I bestowed all my goods to feed ye poor, and though
I gave my body even that I burned, and yet have not love, it profits me
nothing.

Love is pacient and courteous, love envyeth not, love does not frowardly, is
not puffed up, deals not dishonestly, Phil. 2. b
seeks not her own, is not provoked unto anger, thinks not evil, reioyseth
not over iniquyt^, but reioyseth in the truth, bears all things, believes
all things, hops all things, suffers all things.



The XIIII. Chapter.




But when thou geuest thanks with ye (...)
Brethren be not children in understanding, howbeit as concerning
maliciousnes be children, but in understanding be parfecte. In the law it is
written: (...)
With other tunges and with other lips will I speak unto this people, and yet
shall they not so hear me, says the LORD (...)
Therefore are tunges for a token, not to the^ that believe, but to them that
believe not. Contrary wise, prophecienge, not to them that believe not, but to
them which believe.

If the whole congregation now came together Let all be done to edifyenge. If
any man speak with tunges, let him do it him self being the second, or at
the most him self being ye third, and one after another, and let one
interpret it. But if there be not an interpreter, then let him keep silence in
the congregation, howbeit let him speak to himself and to God. As for the
prophets, let two or three speak (...) 4. a
and let the other judge. But if any reuelacion be made unto another that
sytteth, then let the first hold his peace.

(...) d (...) a (...) b
but off peace, like as in all congregacions off the saints. (...) d (...) a
(...) b
Let your wives keep silence in the congregation, for it shall not be permytted
unto the^ to speak, but to be under obedience, (...)
as ye law says also. But if they will learn any thing, let them axe their
huszba^des at home. For it becomes not weme^ to speak in the congregation.
Or spronge the word of God from among you? Or is it come unto you only? If
any man think himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him know what I
write unto you, for they are the commandments of the LORD. But if any man
be ignorant, let him be ignorant. Wherefore brethren, covet to prophecye, and
forbid not to speak with tunges. Let all things be done honestly and in order.

The XV. Chapter.
(...) 3. b
For I am ye leest of the Apostles, which am not worthy to be called an
Apostle, (...)
because I persecuted the congregation of God. But by the grace of God I am
that I am. And his grace in me has not been vain, but I have labored

But if Christ be preached, that he is risen from the deed, how say then some
among you, that there is no resurreccion of the deed? If there be no
resurrection of the deed, then is Christ not risen. If Christ be not risen,
then is our preachinge in vain, and your faith is also in vain: ye and we
are found false witnesses of God, because we have testified against God, that
he has raised up Christ, whom he has not raised up, if the deed rise not
again. For if the deed rise not again, the^ is Christ also not risen again.
But if Christ be not risen again, then is your faith in vain, and ye are yet
in your sins: they also that are fallen a sleep in Christ, are perished. If
in this life only we hope on Christ, then are we of all men the most miserable.

But now is Christ risen from the deed, Col. 1. b
ye first fruits of them that sleep. For by one man comes death, and by one
man the resurreccion of the deed. For as they all dye in Adam, so shall they all
be made alive in Christ, but every one in his order. The first is Christ, then
they that belo^ge unto Christ, when he comes. Then the end, wha^ he shall
deliver up the kingdom unto God the father, when he shall put down all rule,
and all superiorite, and power. Psalm. 109. ^ Heb. 2. b
For he must raygne, till he have put all his enemies under his fete. The last
enemy that shall be destroyed, is death, for he has put all things under his
fete. But wha^ he says, that all things are put under him, it is manifest
that he is excepted, which put all things under him. When all things shall be
subdued unto him, then shall the son himself also be subject unto him, which
put all things under him, that God may be all in all.

Or else what do they which are baptized o LORD, I dye daily. That I have
fought with beestes at Ephesus after ye manner of men, what helps it me, if
the deed rise not again? Esa. 22. b Sap. 2. a
Let us eat and drink, for tomorow we shall dye. Be not ye disceaued. Evil
speakinges corruppe good manners. Awake right up, and sin not: for some have
not ye knowledge of God. This I say to your shame.

But some man might say: How shall the deed arise? And with what manner off
body shall they come? Thou fool, Ioh. 12. c
yt which thou sowest is not quyckened, except it dye. And what sowest thou?
thou sowest not ye body that shall be, but a bare corn, namely of wheat, or of
some other. But God gives it a body as he will, and unto every one of ye seeds
his own body.



If there be a natural body, there is a spiritual body also. As it is
written: Genesis 2. b
The first man Adam was made in to a natural life, and the last Ada^ in to a
spiritual life. Howbeit the spiritual body is not the first, but ye natural,
and then the spiritual. The first man is of the earth, earthy: ye second man
is from heaven, heavenly. As the earthy is, soch are they also that are earthy:
and as ye heavenly is, soch are they also yt are heavenly. And as we have borne
the image of the earthy, so shall we bear the image of the heavenly also. This
I say brethren, that flesh and blood can not inheret ye kingdom of God:
nether shall corrupcion inheret vncorrupcion.

Tess 4 c Phil. 3. c
We shall not all sleep, but we shall all Tess 4 c Phil. 3. c
be changed, and that suddenly and in the twinklynge of an eye, at the time of
the last trompe. For the trompe shall blow, and the deed shall rise
incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For this corruptible must put on
vncorrupcion, and this mortal must put on immortalite. But when this
corruptible shall put on vncorrupcion, and this mortal shall put on immortalite,
the^ shall the word be fulfilled that is written: Death is swalowed up in
victory. (...). 13. c Heb. 3. b
Death, where is thy stynge? Hell, where is ye victory? The stynge of death is
sin: The strength of sin is the law. But thanks be unto God (...)
, which has given us the victory through our LORD Jesus Christ. Therefore my
dear brethren, be ye steadfast, immovable, and allwaye rich in the work of
the LORD, for as much as ye know, that your labor is not in vain in the
LORD.

The XVI. Chapter.
Concerning the (...)
gadderynge that (...)
But I will come unto you, when I go through Macedonia: for through Macedonia will
I take my journey. With you peradventure will I abide, or else winter, that ye
may bring me on my way, whither so ever I go.

I will not se you now in my passage, for LORD shall suffer me. (...)
But I will tarry at Ephesus until whitsontyde. For a great and fruitful door
is opened unto me, and there are many adversaries. If Timotheus come, se that
he be without fear with you, for he works ye work of the, LORD as I do.
Let no man therefore despise him, but conuaye him forth in peace, that he may
come unto me, for I look for him with the brethren.

As for brother Apollo, be ye sure, that I greatly desired him to come unto you
with the brethren. And his mind was not at all to come at this time, but he
will come wha^ he has oportunyte. Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quyte you
like men, and be strong: let all your things be done in love.

But brethren (ye know the house off (...)


The congregacions of Asia salute you. Aquila and Priscilla salute you much in
the LORD, and so does the congregation that is in their house. All the
brethren salute you. (...)
Salute ye one another with an holy kiss. The salutacion of me Paul with mine
own hand. If any man love not the LORD Jesus Christ, the same be Anathema
Maharan Matha. The grace of the LORD Jesus Christ be with you. My love be with
you all in Christ Jesus. Amen.

The first Epistle to the Corinthians sent out of Asia, by Stephana and
Fortunatus, and Achaicus, and Timotheus.

The second Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul, to the Corinthians.
The sum of this Epistle.
Chap. I. The consolacion of God in trouble The love of Paul toward the
Corinthians, and his excuse that he came not unto them. Chap. II. He shows
the cause of his absence and exorteth the^ to forgive the man that was fallen,
and to receive him again with love. Chap. III. He prayseth the preachinge of
the Gospel above the preachinge of the law. Chap. IIII. A true preacher is
diligent, he corruppeth not the word of God, he preaches not himself, but
se^eth the honor of Christ, ye though it be with the parell of his life.
Chap. V. The reward for suffringe trouble. Chap. VI. An exortacion to receive
the word of God with thank fullness and amendme^t of life. The diligence of
Paul in the gospel, and how he warns them to eschew the company of the
Heythen. Chap. VII. He exorteth the^ to receive the promises of God than fully
The Corinthia^s are commended for their obedience and love toward Paul. Chap.
VIII.IX. He puts them in remembrance to help the poor saints at
Jerusalem, acordinge as the Macedonians did. Chap. X. He touches the false
apostles, and defends his auctorite and calling. Chap. XI. Paul (under
sufferau^ce) commends himself, and defends his auctorite against the false
prophets. Chap. XII. Paul is taken up in to the third heaven, and hears
words not to be spoken off. Chap. XIII. He promises to come unto them, and
exhorts them so to order them selves that he may find them parfecte, and of
one mind.
The second Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul, to the Corinthians.


The first Chapter.
PAul an Apostle of Jesus

Gal. 1. a Ephe. 1. a 1. Pet. 1. a
Grace be with you, and peace from God our father, and from the LORD Jesus
Christ.

Blessed be God the father of our LORD Jesus Christ, the father of mercy and
ye God of all comfort, which comfort us in all our trouble: in so much yt
we are able to comfort them that are in any manner of trouble, with the same
comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God. For as the affliccio^s
of Christ are plenteous in us, even so is o co^solacion plenteous by Christ.
But whether we have trouble or comfort, it is done for your wealth. If it be
trouble, it is done for your comfort and health, which health shows her
power, in that ye suffer the same affliccions which we suffer. If it be
comfort, it is done also for your comfort and health. Therefore is our hope
fast for you, in as much as we know, that, like as ye are partakers of the
affliccio^s, so shall ye be partakers also of the consolacion.

Brethren we would not have you ignorant Act. 19. c
which happened unto us in Asia, for we were grieved out off measure passing
strength, so that we even dispared of life, and had concluded in our selves yt
we must needs dye. But this was done, because we should not put our trust in
our selves, but in God, which rayseth up the deed to life again: which
delivered us from so great a death, and yet delyuereth daily, On whom we
trust, that he will deliver us here after also, by the help of your prayer for
us ^. Cor. 4. c
that on our behalf many thanks may be given by many persons, for the
gift that is given us.

For our reioysinge is this, even the testimony of our conscience, that in
synglenes and godly pureness, not in fleshlye wyszdome, but in the grace of
God, we have had our conversation in the world, but most of all with you. For
we write nothing else unto you, then that ye read and also know. Ye and I
trust that ye shall find us unto the end, even as ye have found us partly.

Phil. 2. b 1. Tess 2. c
reioysinge in ye day of the LORD Jesus. And in this confidence was I minded
the other time to come unto you (that ye might have yet another pleasure more)
and to pass by you into Macedonia, 1. Co. 16. a
and to come again out of Macedonia unto you and to be led forth to Iewrye
ward of you.

When I thus wise was minded, did I use lightness? Or are my thoughts
fleshly? Not so Mat. 5. d Iaco. 5. c
but with me ye is ye, and nay is nay. O faitfull God, that our word unto
you has not been ye and nay. For Gods son Jesus Christ, which was preached
among you by us (namely, by me and Siluanus and Timotheus) was not ye and
nay, but in him it was ye. For all the promyses of God are ye in him, and
are Ame^ in him, to the praise of God by us. But it is God which stablysheth us
with you in Christ, and has anointed us, Ephe. 4. c
and sealed us, and given the ernest of the sprete in our hertes.

The II. Chapter.
Romans 9. a
that to favor you withal I came not again unto Corinthum. Not that we are
1. Pet. ^. a
lords over your faith, but we are helpers of your joy, for ye stand in
faith. But I determined this with my self, that I would not come again to you
in heaviness. For if I make you sorry, who is it that shall make me glad, but the
same which is made sorry by me? And the same have I written unto you, lest wha^
I come, I should take heaviness of them, of whom I ought to rejoice: for somoch
as I have this confidence in you all, that my joy is the joy of you all. For
in great trouble and anguysh of heart wrote I unto you with many tears: not yt
ye should be sorry, but that ye might perceive the love, which I have most
specially unto you.

But if any man have caused sorrow, the (...)
the same man is so rebuked of many, so that from hence forth ye ought the
more to forgive him and to comfort him, lest he be swalowed up in over much
heaviness. Wherefore I exhort you, that ye show love upon him. For therefore
did I write unto you also, that I might know the proof of you, whether ye
were obedient in all things. But look unto who^ ye forgive any thing, I
forgive hi^ also. For I also, if I forgive ought unto any man, that forgive I
for your sakes in the rowme of Christ, lest we should be prevented of Satan.
For his thoughts are not unknown unto us.

But wha^ I came to (...)
Troada to preach LORD) I had no rest in my sprete, because I found not Titus
my brother: but I took my leave of them, and went away into Macedonia. Yet
thanks be unto God, which allwaye gives us the victory in Christ, (...)
and opens ye sauoure of his knowledge by us in every place. For we are unto
God the good sauoure of Christ, both among the^ yt are saved, and among the^m
yt perish. (...)
To these, ye sauoure of death unto death: but unto ye other, the sauoure of
life unto life. And who is mete thereto? For we are not as many are, which
choppe and change with the word of God, but eue^ out of pureness, and out of
God, in ye sight of God, so speak we in Christ.

The III. Chapter^
Begin we then again to praise o selves? Or need we (as some other) of
pistles of comme^dacion unto you or letters of comme^dacion from you? Ye are
our epistle written in our hertes: which is understand and red of all me^,
in that ye are known, how that ye are ye epistle of Christ, mynistred by us,
and written, not with ynke, but with the sprete of the living God: (...)
not in tables of stone, (...)
but in fleshy tables of the heart. Soch trust have we through Christ to God
ward, not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of
our selves, (...)
but our ableness comes of God, which has made us able, to be (...)
mynisters of the new Testament: not of the letter, but of the sprete. For the
letter kylleth, but the sprete gives life.

But if the mynistracion yt kylleth through the letter, and was figured in
stones, was glorious, (...). 34. d
so that the children of Israel might not behold the face of Moses, for ye
clearness of his countenance, (which glory nevertheless is done away) how
shall not ye mynistracion of ye sprete be much more glorious? For if the office
that preaches damnacion be glorious, much more does the office that preaches
righteousness exceade in glory. For ye other part that was glorified is
nothing glorified in respect of this exceadinge glory. For if that which is
done away, be glorious, much more shall yt which remains, be glorious.

(...) ^4. d
which put a veil before his face, so that ye children of Israel might not se
the (...)
end of it, that is done away. But their minds are blinded. (...)
For unto this day remains the same coueringe vntake^ away in the old
Testament, when they read it, which in Christ is put away. But even unto this
day when moses is red, the veil hangs before their hertes: (...) 11. c
Nevertheless wha^ they turn to the LORD, the veil shall be taken away. (...)
For the LORD is a sprete: and where the sprete of the LORD is, there is
liberty. But now the glory of ye LORD apeareth in us all with open face, and
we are changed into the same image, from one clearnes to another, eue^ as of
the sprete of the LORD.

The IIII. Chapter.


If our Gospel be yet hyd, it is hyd in them that are lost: among whom the
God of this world (...)
has blinded ye minds of them which believe not, that ye light of the Gospel
of the glory of Christ ( (...)
which is the image of God) should not shine unto them. For we preach not or
selves, but Jesus Christ to be the LORD, and our selves your servants for
Jesus sake.

(...)
that commanded the light to shine out of darcknesse, (...)
has given a clear shine in our hertes, yt by us ye light of ye knowledge of
the glory of God might come forth, in the face of Jesus Christ.

But this treasure have we in (...)
earthen vessels, that ye power which excels might be of God, and not of us.
We are troubled on every side, yet are we not without shift. We are in
poverty, but not utterly without somewhat. We are persecuted, but we are not
forsaken. We are oppressed, nevertheless we perish not. Gal. 6. b
We always be are about in our body the dyenge of the LORD Jesus yt the
life also of the LORD Jesus might appear in our body. Romans 8. ^
For we which live, are always delivered unto death for Jesus sake, that the
life also of Jesus might appear in our mortal flesh.

Therefore is death now mighty in us, Psalm. 115. ^
I believed, and therefore have I spoken.) we also believe, and therefore we
speak, for we know that he, which raised up ye LORD Jesus, shall raise us up
also by ye means of Jesus, and shall set us with you. For all things do I for
your sakes, ^. Cor. 1. ^
that the ple^teous grace by the tha^kesgeuynge of many, may redounde to the
praise of God. Therefore are we not weery, but though or outward man be
corrupt, yet the inward is renewed day by day. Psalm. 29. a To. 8. c
For our trouble, which is but temporal and light, works an exceadinge and
an eternal weighte of glory unto us, which look not on the things that are
seen, but on them which are not seen. For ye things which are seen, are
temporal: but the things that are not seen, are eternal.

The V. Chapter.
WE know surely, yt if our 2. Cor. 4. b
earthy Romans 8. c
And in the same sighe we also after our ma^sion, which is from heaven: and
long to be clothed therewith, so yet, Apoc. 16. c
if that we be found clothed, and not naked. For as long as we are in this
tabernacle, we sighe and are grieved, for we had rather not be unclothed, but to
be clothed upon, that mortalite might be swalowed up of life. But he that has
ordained us for this, is God, Romans 8. b ^. Cor. 1. c
which has given us the earnest of the sprete. Therefore are we allwaye of good
cheer, and know, that as long as we dwell here in the body, we are not at
home with the LORD: for we walk in faith, and se him not. Nevertheless we are
of good comfort, and had lever to be absent from the body, and to be at home
with the LORD.

Wherefore, whether we be at home or from home, we endeavor our selves to
please him. ^at. 25. c (...) 14. b
For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, yt every one may
receive in his body, acordinge to yt he has done, whether it be good or bad.
Seeing then that we know, how that the LORD is to be feared, we fare fair
with men, but we are known well enough unto God: I trust also, that we are
known in your consciences. We praise not our selves again unto you, but
give you an occasion to rejoice of us, yt ye may have to rejoice against them,
which rejoice after the outward appearaunce, and not after the heart. For if we
do to much, we do it unto God: if we keep measure, we do it for your sakes.
For the love of Christ constrayneth us, in as much as we thus judge, that if
one be deed for all, then are all deed. 1. Tess. 5. b
And therefore dyed he for all, that they which live, should not hence forth
live unto them selves, but unto him, which dyed for them and rose again.

Apoc. 21. a
behold, all are become new. Nevertheless all things are off God, which has
reconcyled us unto himself by Jesus Christ, and has given us the office to
preach the atonement. Col 2. b
For God was in Christ, and Romans 3. c Col. 1. b 1. Ioh. 4. b
reconcyled the world unto himself, and counted not there sins unto them,
and among us has he set up the word of ye attoneme^t. Now the^ are we
messaungers in the rowme of Christ, even as though God exhorted by us. We
beseke you now therefore in Christ's stead, that ye be at one with God: Esa.
53. b Rom 8. a Heb. 9. c
for he has made him which knew no sin, to be Esa. 53. b Rom 8. a Heb. 9. c
sin for us, yt we by his means should be that righteousness, which before
God is allowed.

The VI. Chapter.
Esa 49. b
I have herd the in the time accepted, and in the day of salvation have I
succored the. Behold, now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation.
Let us give no man occasion of evil, that our office be not evil spoken of:
but in all things let us behave our selves as the 1. Co. 4. a 1. Cor. 3. a
mynisters of God: in much patience, in troubles, in necessities, in
anguysshes, in strypes, in presonmentes, in vproures, in labors, in
watchinges, in fastings, in pureness, in knowledge, in long sufferynge, in
kyndnesse, in the holy ghost, in love unfeigned, in the word of the truth, in
the power of God, by the armoure of righteousness on the right hand and on the
left, by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report: as
disceauers, and yet true: Esa. (...)
as dyenge, and behold, we live: as chastened, and not killed: as sorowynge,
and yet allwaye merry: as poor, and yet make many rich: as having nothing,
and yet possessynge all things.

O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is made large. Ye are
in no straytnesse on our behalf: but where as ye are in straytnesse, that do
ye of your own hertely meaning. I speak to you, as to children, that have
like reward with us. Set your selves therefore at large.

Bear not a strange yock with the unbelievers. (...)
(...)
How agrees Christ with Belial* Or what part has the beleuer with the
infydele? How acordeth ye temple of God with images? Ye are the temple of the
living God, as says God: I will dwell in them, and walk in them, (...)
and will be their God, and they shall be my people. Wherefore come out from among
them, and separate your selves (...)
(says the LORD) and touch no unclean thing, so will I receive you, and be
your father, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says ye Almighty LORD.

The VII. Chapter.
Seeing now that we have soch promyses (...)
For when we were come into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest, but we were
troubled on every side: outward was fightinge, inward was fear. Nevertheless
God that comfort the abiecte, (...)
comforted us by the coming of Titus.

Not only by his coming, but also by yo fervent mind for me, so yt I now
rejoice ye more. For where as I made you sorry by the letter, it repents me
not, though I did repe^te. For I se, that the same epistle made you sorry
(though it were but for a ceason). But now I rejoice, not that ye were sorry,
but that ye were sorry to repentance. For ye sorowed godly, so that in nothing
ye were hurt by us. For godly sorrow causes repentance unto salvation, not
to be repented of: (...). ^0. c
but worldly sorrow causes death. Behold, where as ye have had godly sorrow,
what diligence has it wrought in you? Ye a sufficient answer, displeasure,
fear, desire, a fervent mind, punishment. For in all points ye have showed
your selves, that ye are clear in that matter.



The VIII. Chapter.
(...) c (...) 1^. d (...). 16. a (...). 9. a
ha^dreachinge that is done for the saints: And not as we looked for, but gave
over them selves first to the LODRE, and afterward unto us by ye will of God,
so that we could not but desire Titus, that like as he had begone before he
would even so accomplish the same beniuolence among you. Now as ye are rich
in all points, in faith and in word, and in knowledge, and in all diligence,
and in your love toward us, even so se that ye be plenteous also in this
benyuole^ce. This I say not as commau^dynge, but seeing, other are so
diligent, I prove your love also, whether it be perfect or no. For ye know
the liberalite of our LORD Jesus Christ, which though he be rich, yet for
your sakes he became poor, yt ye through his pouerte might be made rich.

And my council herin I give, for this Pet. 4. b Pro. 3. b
of that which ye have. Luc. 2^
For if there be a wyllinge mind, it is accepted acordinge to that a man has,
not acordinge to that he has not. This is not done to the intent, that other
should have ease, and ye co^braunce, but that it be a like. Let your
abundaunce sucker their lack in this time off derth, that their abundaunce
also herafter may supplee your lack, that there may be equalite. As it is
written: He yt gathered much, Exo. 10.
had not the more: and he that gathered little, wanted nothing. Thanks be unto
God, which put in the heart of Titus, the same diligence toward you. For he
accepted the request in deed, ye he was rather so well willing, that of his
own acorde, he came unto you.

We have sent with him that brother, LORD, and to stere up your prompte
mind, and to bewarre, lest any man report evil of us because of this
plenteousnes, which is mynistred by us: Romans 12
and therefore make we provision for honest things, not only before the LORD,
but also before men.

We have sent with them also a brother of ours, whom we have often proved
dilligent in many things, but now much more diligent. And this have we done in
great hope toward you, whether it be for Titus sake (which is my fellow and
helper among you) or for our brethren (which are Apostles of the
co^gregacions, and the praise of Christ.) Show now the proof off your love
and off our boastinge of you, unto these, and openly in the sight of the
cogregacions.

^^m. 15 d ^^o. 16. a ^^or. 8. a
handreachinge unto ye saints, it is no need for me to write unto you: for I
know your redynesse of mind, whereof I boast my self among them of
Macedonia, and say: Achaia was ready a year agoo. And your feruentnesse has
provoked many. Nevertheless yet have we sent these brethren, left our
reioysinge over you should be in vain in this behalf, that ye might be
ready, as I have reported of you: left when they of Macedonia come with me, and
find you unprepared, we (I will not say ye) should be ashamed in this
presumpcion of boostinge.

(...). 11. c ^^al. 6. a
he which sows little, shall reap little also: and he yt sows plenteously,
shall likewise reap plenteously, every one acordynge as he has purposed in his
heart, not grudgingly, or of compulsion. ^od. 25. a (...) 35. a ^cli. 35. a
For God loves a cheerful geuer. God is able to make you rich in all grace,
yt ye in all things having sufficient to the vttemost, may be rich to all
manner of good works. As it is written: ^sal. 111. b
He has sparsed abroad and given to ye poor, his righteousness remains for
ever.

He that gives sede unto the sower, shall yo righteousness, that in all things
ye may be made rich unto all singleness, which causes through us,
thankesgeuynge unto God. For the ha^dreachinge of this colleccion not only
suppleeth the need off the saints, but also is abu^daunt herin, that for this
laudable mynistracion many might give thanks unto God, and praise God for yo
obedient professynge of the Gospel of Christ, and for yor synglenesse in
distributynge unto the^, and to all men, and in their prayer for you, which
long after you, for the abundaunt grace of God in you. Thanks be unto God for
his vnoutspeakeable gift.

The X. Chapter.
(...)
wapens of our war are not fleshly, but mighty before God to cast down
strong holds, wherewith we overthrow ymaginacions, and every hye thing yt
exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bring in to captiuyte all
understanding to the obedience of Christ, and are ready to take vengeance on
all disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled. Look ye on things after
ye utter appearau^ce?

If any man trust of himself yt he is Christ's, (...)
which ye LORD has given us to edifye and not to destroy, it should not be
to my shame. This I say, lest I should seem, as though I went about to make
you afraid with letters. For the pist^les (say they) are sore and strong,
but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech rude. Let him yt is soche,
think on this wise, that as we are in word by letters wh^ we are absente,
soch are we also in deed when we are present. For we darre not reken or compare
our selves, unto some that praise them selves: Nevertheless while they measure
them selves by them selves, and hold only of them selves, they understand
nothing.

Howbeit we will not boast o selves above

The XI. Chapter.
LEt him that reioyseth, rejoice in the LORD: for he yt (...)
prayseth him self, is not allowed, but he who^ ye LORD prayseth. Would God ye
could suffer me a little in my foloshnes, yet do ye forbear me. For I am
gelous over you with godly gelousy. For I have married you unto one man, to bring
a chaste virgin unto Christ. But I fear, left (...)
as ye serpent begyled Eve with his sutteltie, eue^ so yor wits should be
corrupt from the synglenesse that is in Christ. For if he that comes unto
you, preach another Jesus, whom we have not preached, or if ye receive another
sprete, yt ye have not received, or another Gospel which ye have not accepted,
ye might right well have been content. For I suppose that I am no less the^
the hye Apostles are. And though I be rude in speaking, yet am I not rude in
knowledge. Howbeit among you I am known to the vttemost. Or did I sin therein
because I submytted my self, that ye might be exalted?

(...). 9. b
freely, and robbed other co^gregacions, and took wages of the^, to preach unto
you. (...). 20. c
And when I was present with you, and had need, I was grievous to no man: (...)
4. c
for yt which was lacking unto me, the brethren which came fro Macedonia,
suppleed. And in all things I kept myself so, yt I should not be grievous to
you, and so will I keep my self. As surely as the truth of Christ is in me,
this reioysinge shall not be taken fro me in the regions of Achaia. Wherefore?
because I should not love you? God knows. Nevertheless what I do and will do,
that do I to cut away occasion, from the^ which seek occasion, that they
might boast the^ selves to be like unto us. For soch false Apostles and
disceatfull workers fashion them selves like unto the Apostles of Christ. And
that is no marvel: for Satan himself is changed into ye fashion of an
angel of light. Therefore is it no great thing, though his my misters fashion
them selves as though they were the preachers of righteousness, (...) a
whose end shall be acordinge to their deeds.

LORD, but as it were in folishnes, while we are now come to boastinge: Seeing
that many boaste them selves after ye flesh, I will boast my self also. For ye
suffer foles gladly, in so much as ye your selves are wise. For ye suffer even
if a man bring you in to bondage, if a man put you to dishonesty, if a man
take ought from you, if a man exalte himself over you, if a man smite you on
the face. I speak concerning rebuke, as though we were weak.

Wherein so ever now any man darre be bold (I speak folishly) therein darre I
be bold also. They are Hebrews, so am I. They are Israelites, even so am I.
They are the sede of Abraham, so am I. They are the mynisters of Christ (I
speak as a fool) I am more: in labors more abu^daunt, in strypes above
measure, in presonmentes more plenteously, in death often. Deuteronomy. 25
Of the Jews received I five times fortye strypes, one less. Act. 16. ^
Thryse was I beaten with rods. Act. 14. ^
I was once stoned, Act. 27. ^
I suffered thryse shypwracke: night and day have I been in the deep of 1.
Cor. 8. ^
Who is weak, and I be not weak? Who is offended, and I burn not? If I must
needs make my boast, I will boast my self of mine infirmyte. God ye father of
our LORD Jesus Christ, which is blessed for ever, knows that I lie not.
Act. 9. d
At Damascon the gouernoure of ye people under king Aretas, kept ye cite of
the Damascenes, and would have taken me. and at a wyndowe was I let down in a
basket through the wall, and so escaped his hands.

The XII. Chapter.
IT profits me nothing (no doubt) LORD. I know a man in Christ above
fourtene years a goo (whether he was in ye body, I can not tell: or whether he
was out of the body, I can not tell, God knows.) the same was taken up in to
the third heaven: and I know the same man (whether he was in ye body or out
of the body, I can not tell, God knows) how that he was taken up in to
Paradise, and herd words not to be spoken, which no man can utter. Here of
will I boast, but of my self will I make no boast, except it be of mine
infirmyties. And though I would boast myself, I did not foolishly, for I would
say the truth. But I refrain my self, lest any man should think of me
above yt he seyth in me, or hears of me. Job. 1. b
And lest I should exalte my self out of measure because of the hye
reuelacions, there is a warning given unto my flesh, even ye messaunger of
Satan, to buffet me, that I should not exalte my self out off measure: for ye
which I besoughte the LORD thryse, that it might depart fro me. And he said
unto me: My grace is sufficient for the. For my strength is made perfect
through weakness. Very glad therefore will I rejoice in my weaknesses, that the
strength of Christ may dwell in me.

Cor. 9. a
in so much as I am in nothing inferior to ye hye Apostles. Though I be
nothing, yet are ye tokens of an Apostles wrought among you, with all
patience, with signs, and with wonders and with mighty deeds. For what is it,
wherein ye are inferiors to the other congregacions? except it be yt I have
not been grievous unto you. Forgive me this wrong. Behold, I am ready the
third time to come unto you, and will not be chargeable unto you. Act. 20. c
For I seek not youres, but you. For ye children ought not to gather treasure
for the elders, but the elders for the children. I will very gladly bestow, and
will be bestowed for your souls: though ye more I love you, the less am I
loue^ again.



The XIII. Chapter.
Deuteronomy. 19. c Mat. 18. b
In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every matter be stabliszhed. I have
told you before, and tell you before as present ye second time, and write it
now being absent, unto the^ which in time passed have sinned, and to all
other: and if I come again, I will not spare, seeing that ye seek experience of
him, (...)
which speaks in me, even Christ, which among you is not weak, but is
mighty among you. And though he was crucified in weakness, yet lives he in
the power of God. And though we are weak in him, yet live we with him in the
power of God among you.

1. Cor. (...)
Prove your selves, whether ye are in the (...)
which the LORD has given me to edifye, and not to destroy.

Finally brethren, rejoice, be parfecte, comfort LORD Jesus Christ, and the
love of God, and the fellishippe of ye holy ghost be with you all. Amen.

The second Epistle to the Corinthians. Sent from Phillippos in Macedonia, by
Titus and Lucas.

The Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul to the Galathians.
The sum of this Epistle.
Chap. I. Paul rebukes them, because they were fallen away from the gospel,
shows his own conversion, magnifieth his office and apostelshippe, and
declares himself to be equal with the hye apostles. Chap. II. He withstondeth
Peter in the face, and proves, that the law and circumcision are not
necessary to salvation. Chap. III. He rebukes the vnsted fastness of the
Galathians, shewinge the vnparfectnesse of the law, and declares
nevertheless that it was not given for naught. Chap. IIII. Paul shows that
through Christ we be delivered from the law, and rebukes the unthankfulness
of the Galathians. Chap. V. He labors to draw them away from circumcision,
shows them the barrayll betwixt the sprete and the flesh, and the f^^tes of
them both. Chap. VI. He erorteth them to brotherly love, and one to bear with
another* In the end ^he warns them to bewarre of circumcision
The Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul to the Galathians.


The first Chapter.
PAul an Apostle (not of

(...)
Grace be with you, and peace from God the father, and our LORD Jesus Christ,
which gave him self for our sins, that he might deliver us from this
present euel world, acordinge to the will of God our father, to whom be
praise for ever and ever. Amen.

I marvel yt ye are so soon turned (from him that called you in the grace of
Christ) unto another Gospel: which is nothing else, but that there besome,
which (...)
trouble you, and intend to peruerte the Gospel of Christ.



But I certifye you brethren, yt the Gospel which is preached of me, is not of
men. For I nether received it ner learned it of man, but by the reuelacion of
Jesus Christ. For ye have herd of my conversation before time in the
Ieweshippe, (...)
how that beyo^de measure I persecuted the congregation of God, and spoiled it,
and prevailed in the Ieweshippe above many of my companyons in my nation, and
was a much more fervent manteyner of the tradicions of the fathers.

But when it pleased God which separated LORDS brother.

The things that I write unto you, behold, 2. Cor. 11. d
God knows, I lie not. After that went I into the coasts of Syria and
Celicia: but of face I was unknown to ye Christen congregacions in Iewrye.
Nevertheless they had herd only, that: He that persecuted us in time passed,
preaches now ye faith which some time he destroyed: and they praised God in me.

The II. Chapter^
Then after fourtene years, Act. 15. a
I went Act. 16. a 1. Cor. 9. c
But Titus which was also with me, was not compelled to be circu^cysed, though
he was a Greek: and that because of certain incommers being false brethren,
which came in among other, to spy out our liberty, which we have in Christ
Jesus, that they might bring us in to bondage: To whom we gave no rowme, no
not for the space of an hour, as concerning to be brought in to subieccion:
yt the truth of the Gospel might comtynue with you.

As for the^ that seemed to be great, what they were in time passed, it makes
no matter to me. Act. 10. d Romans 2 b Ephe. 6. a
For God looks not on the outward appearaunce of men. Nevertheless they which
seemed great, taught me nothing: but contrary wise, when they saw that the
Gospel over the uncircumcision was committed unto me, as ye Gospel over ye
circumcision over the circumcision, the same was mighty with me also among
the Heythen) they perceived the grace that was given unto me.

James and Cephas and Ihon, which seemed to be pilers, gave me and Barnabas ye
right hands, and agreed with us, that we should preach among the Heythe^,
and they among the Jews: only that we should remember the poor, Act. 11. e
2. Co 9. a
which thing also I was diligent to do.

But wha^ Peter was come to Antioche, I withstode him in ye face: for he was
worthy to be blamed. For before there came certain from James, he ate with the
Heythe^. But wha^ they were come, he withdrue and separated himself, fearinge
the^ which were of the circumcision. And the other Jews dyssembled with him
likewise, in so much yt Barnabas was brought in to their symulacion also. But
when I saw that they walked not right after ye truth of the Gospel, I said
unto Peter openly before all: If thou being a Jew, lyuest after the manner of
the Gentyles, and not as do the Jews, why causest thou the Gentyles then to
live as do the Jews?

Phil. 3 a
Though we be Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentyles, yet (in so much
as we know, Romans 3. b
that a man is not made righteous by the deeds off the law, but by the faith
on Jesus Christ) we have believed also on Jesus Christ, yt we might be made
righteous by the faith of Christ, and not by the deeds of the law, because
that by the deeds of the law no flesh shall be justified.

If we then which seek to be made righteous by christ, should be yet found
sinners or selves, is not Christ then the mynister of sin? God forbid. For if
I build again yt which I have destroyed, then make I my self a trespacer.
But I through the law am deed unto the law, that I might live unto God. I am
crucified with Christ, yet do I live: nevertheless now not I, but Christ
lives in me. For ye life which I now live in ye fleszhe, I live in the faith
of ye son of God phe. 5. a
which loved me, and gave himself for me. I cast not away the grace of God.
For if righteousness come by the law, then dyed Christ in vain.

The III. Chapter.
(...)
Even as Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousness.
Thus ye know, that they which are of faith, are Abraham's children.

The scripture saw before hand, that God (...)
In the shall all the Heythen be blessed. So then they which be of faith, are
blessed with faithful Abraham. For as many as go about with the works of the
law, are under ye curse: For it is written: (...)
Cursed be every man, which co^tynueth not in all things that are written in
the book of the law, to do them. That no man is justified by the law in the
sight of God, it is euyde^t: (...)
For yt just shall live by his faith. The law is not of faith, (...)
but the man that does ye same, shall live therein. But Christ has delivered us
from ye curse of the law, when he became a curse for us. (For it is written:
(...)
Cursed is every man that hangs on tree) yt the blessing of Abraham might
come on the Gentyles in Christ Jesus, and yt we might so receive ye promised
sprete, through faith.

Brethren, I will speak after the manner (...)
when it is confirmed. To Abraham and his sede were the promyses made. He
says not: In the seeds, as in many, but in thy sede, as in one, which is
Christ. This Testament (I say) which before was confirmed to Christ ward, is
not disanulled (that the promise should be made of none affecte) by the law
(...)
which was given beyond four hundredth. and thirty years thereafter. (...)
For if the enheritaunce be gotten by the law, then is it not given by promise.
But God gave it freely unto Abraham by promise.

Wherefore the^ serves the law? (...)
It was added because of trangression, till the sede came, to the which the
promise was made. (...)
And it was given of angels, by the hand of the (...)
mediatoure. A mediator is not a mediator of one only, but God is one.

Is the law then against the promyses been given a law which could have
given life, the^ no doubt righteousness should come of the law. (...)
But ye scripture has shut up all under sin, that ye promise should come by
the faith on Jesus Christ, given unto the^ that believe. Before faith came, we
were kept and shut up under the law, unto the faith which should afterward
be declared. Thus ye law was or scolemaster unto Christ, that we might be made
righteous by faith. But now that faith is come, we are no more under the
scolemaster. (...)
For ye all are the children of God by the faith in Christ Jesus. (...)
For as many of you as are baptized, have put on Christ. Here is nether Jew
ner Greek: here is nether bo^de ner fre: here is nether man ner woman, for ye
are all (...)
one in Christ Jesus. If ye be Christ's, the^ are ye Abraha^s sede and heirs
acordynge to the promise.

The IIII. Chapter.
(...)
and put under the law, to redeem them which were under the law, that we
might receive ye childshippe. (...)
For so much the^ as ye are children, God has sent the sprete of his son in
to our hertes, which cries: Abba, dear father. Wherefore now, thou art not a
servant, but a son. If thou be a son, then art thou the heir of God
through Christ. Notwithstondinge when ye knew not God, ye did service unto
them, which by nature are no Gods. But now seeing ye know God (ye rather
are known off God) how is i^ (...)
that ye turn you back again unto the weak and beggarly tradicions, where
unto ye desire again a fresh to be in bondage?



They are gelous over you amysse. Ye they would make you to fall back, that
ye might be fervent to the^ ward. It is good to be fervent, so yt it be
allwaye in a good thing, and not only when I am present with you. My little
children (of whom I travail in birth again, until Christ be fashioned in
you) I would I were with you now, and could change my voice, for I sto^dei^
doubt of you.

Tell me ye that wylbe under the law, have Genesis 16. d
the one by a bond maid, Genesis 71. a
the other by a fre woman. As for him that was of the bo^de maid, he was borne
after ye flesh: but he which was of the fre woman, was borne by promise. These
words betoken somewhat. For these women are the two Testamentes: The one from
the mount Sina, that gendreth unto bondage, which is Agar. For Agar is called
in Arabia ye mount Sina, and reaches unto Jerusalem which now is, and is in
bondage with her children.

Apoc. 21 a
But Jerusalem that is above, is the fre woman, which is the mother of us all.
For it is written: Esa. 54. a
Rejoice thou baren, that bear no children: break forth and cry thou yt
trauaylest not, for the desolate has many mo children, then she which has an
huszbande. As for us (brethren) we are the children of Isaac acordinge to the
promise.

Genesis 27. g
But like as at that time, he that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him yt
was borne after the sprete, even so is it now also. But what says the
scripture? Genesis 21. b
Put away the bond maiden and her son: for the son of ye bondmayde shall
not be heir with ye son of the fre woman. So now brethren, we are not
children of the bond maid, but of the fre woman.

The V. Chapter.
Stand fast therefore in the liberty (...)
For in Christ (...) circumcision any thing worth ner uncircumcision, but
faith which 1. Co. 13. a
by love is might^e in operacion. Ye ran well, who was a let unto you, that
ye should not obey the truth? Soch council is not of him that has called
you. 1. Cor. 5. a
A little leven sowreth the whole lompe of dowe.

LORD, that ye wylbe none otherwise minded. But he that troubles you, shall
bear his judgment, what so ever he be. Brethren if I yet preach circumcision,
why do I suffer persecucion? then had the slander off the cross ceased.
Would God they were roted out from among you, which trouble you. But brethren,
ye are called unto liberty, only let not your liberty be an occasion unto
the flesh, but by love serve one another. For all the law is fulfilled in one
word, namely in this: Leuit 19. e To. 13. b
love thy neighbor as thy self. But if ye byte and devour one another, take heed, that ye be not consumed one of another.

1. Pet. 2. b
lusts off the flesh. For the flesh lusts against the sprete, and the
sprete against the flesh. These are contrary one to the other, so that ye can
not do that which ye would: But and if ye be led of the sprete, then are ye not
under the law. 1. Tim. 5. c
The deeds of ye flesh are manifest, which are these: Aduoutrye, whordome,
uncleanness, wanta^nes, Idolatrye, witchcraft, hatred, variaunce, zele, wrath,
strife, sedicion, sects, envyenge, murthur, dronkennes, glotony, and soch
like: of the which I tell you before, as I have told you in time past, 1. Cor.
6. b
that they which commytte soch, shall not inheret the kingdom of God. Ephe. 5. b
But the fruit of the sprete, is love, joy, peace, long sufferinge,
ge^tlenes, goodness, faithfulness, meekness, te^peraunce, 1. Tim. 1. b ^. To
13. b 1. Pet. 2. b
Against soch is not ye law: 1. Tim. 1. b ^. To 13. b 1. Pet. 2. b
But they that are Christ's, have crucified their flesh, with the lusts and
desires.

The VI. Chapter.
(...)
Bear ye one another (...), and so shall ye fulfill the law of Christ. (...)
if any man think himself to be (...) (when in deed he is nothing) the (...)
h^mselfe. Let every man prove (...) own wo^^e, and the^ shall he have
reioysinge in his own self, and not in another. For (...)
every one shall bear his own burden.

(...)
But let him that is taught with the word, mynister in all good things, unto
him that teaches him. Be not disceaued, God will not be mocked. (...)
For what soever a man sows, that shall he reap. He that sows upon the
flesh, shall of the flesh reap destruction: But he that sows upon ye sprete,
shall of the sprete reap life everlasting. (...)
Let us not be weery of well doing: for wha^ the time is come, we shall reap
without ceassinge. While we have time therefore, let us do good unto all men
(...)
but specially unto the^ which are of ye household of faith.

Behold, with how many words I have written unto you with mine own hand.
They that will please in the flesh, constrayne you to be circumcysed, only lest
they should be persecuted with the cross of Christ. For eue^ they them selves
which are circumcysed, keep not the law, but would have you circu^cysed, that
they might rejoice in your flesh. But God forbid that I should rejoice, save
only in the cross of our LORD Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified
unto me, and I unto the world. (...)
For in Christ Jesus nether circumcision avayleth any thing, ner
uncircumcision, but a new creature. (...)
And as many as walk acordynge to this rule, peace and mercy be upon the^, and
upon Israel of God. From hence forth let no man put me to business, (...)
for I bear in my body the marks of the LORD Jesus. Brethren, the grace of
our LORD Jesus Christ be with your sprete Amen.

Unto the Galathians, sent from Rome.

The Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul to the Ephesians.
The sum of this Epistle.
Chap. I. The everlasting ordinance and eleccion of God in saving all men
through Christ Jesus his son. We are ordened unto good works. The dominion of
Christ. Chap. II. Paul shows them what manner of people they were before their
conversion, and what they are now in Christ. Chap. III. He shows the cause of
his presonment, desires them not to faynte because of his trouble, and prays
God to make the^ steadfast in his sprete. Chap. IIII. He exhorts them unto
mekenes, long sufferinge, unto love and peace, every one to serve and edify
another with the gift that God has given him, to bewarre of strange
doctrine, to lay aside the old conversation of gredy lusts, and to walk in
a new life. Chap. V. He exhorts them unto love, warns them to bewarre of
uncleanness, cuvetounesse, foolish talking and false doctrine: to be
circumspecte, to avoyde drunkenness, to rejoice and to be thankful toward
God, to submytt themselves one to another, He teaches how women should obey
their huszbo^des, and how louyngly men ought to entreat their wives. Chap. VI.
How children should behave themselves toward their fathers and mothers:
Likewise fathers toward their children: Servants toward their masters:
Again, masters toward their servants. An exhortacion to the spiritual
battayll, and what weapens christen men should fight withal.
The Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul to the Ephesians.


The first Chapter.


(...)
Grace be with you and peace from God our father, and from the LORD Jesus
Christ.

Blessed be God the father of our LORD Jesus Christ, which has blessed us with
all manner of spiritual blessing in heavenly things by Christ (...)
acordinge as he had chosen us by him, or ever the foundation of the world was
laid, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love, and
ordained us before, to receive us as children through Jesus Christ, acordinge to
the pleasure of his will, unto the praise of the glory of his grace, whereby he
has made us accepted in the Mat. 3. b and 1^. a
Beloved, in whom we have redemption through his blood (namely) the forgeuenes
of sins, acordynge to ye riches Gal. 4. a
wha^ the time was fullcome, that all things should be gathered together by
Christ, both the things which are in heaven, and also the things that are
upon earth, even by him, by whom also we are come to the inheritance Rom ^. d
we that were thereto predestinate before, acordinge to ye purpose of him, which
works all things after ye council of his own will, that we might be to
the praise of his glory, even we that before believed on Christ, on who^ also ye
believed, after that ye herd the word of truth, namely ye Gospel of your
salvation: wherein when ye believed, ye were 2. Cor. ^. e and 5. a
sealed with the holy sprete of promise, which is the ernest of our
inheritance to our redemption, that we might be his own to the praise off
his glory.

Wherefore I also, (in so much as I have LORD Jesus, and of your love unto all
ye saints) cease not to give thanks for you, and make mention of you in my
prayers, that ye God of our LORD Jesus Christ, the father of glory may give
unto you the sprete of wyszdome, and open unto you the knowledge of himself,
and lighten the eyes of your understanding, that ye may know what is the
hope of your calling, and what the riches of his glorious enheritaunce is
upon the saints, and what is the exceadinge greatness of his power toward
us, which believe acordinge to ye workynge of his mighty power, which he
wroughte in Christ, when he raised him up from the deed, Psalm. 109.
and set him on his right hand i^ heavenly things, above all rule, power,
and might, and dominacio^, and above all that may be named, not only in this
world, but also in ye world to come. Psalm 8. b
And has put all things under his fete, and has made him above all things
Ephe. 4 and 5. c Col. 1. c
the head of the congregation, which is his body, and the fullness of him that
fylleth all in all.

The II. Chapter.
ANd quyckened you also, when ye were and after the prince that rules in the
air namely, after ye sprete, which now works in the children of unbelieve,
Col. 3. a
among whom we also had our conversation in time past in the lusts of our
flesh, and did the will of the flesh and of the mind, and were naturally the
children of wrath, even as well as other.

But God which is rich in mercy through his great love wherewith he loved us
eue^ wha^ we were deed in sins, has quyckened us in Christ ( Esa. 25. b Act.
15. b
for by grace are ye saved) and has raised us up with him, and set us with him
in heavenly things through Christ Jesus, yt in times to come he might show
the exceadinge riches of his grace, in kyndnesse to us ward in Christ Jesus.
For by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves, For it is
ye gift of God, not Tit. 2. b
unto good works, to yt which God ordained us before, that we should walk in
them.

Wherefore remember, that ye (which before time were Gentyles after the flesh,
and were called uncircumcision, of the^ that are called Phil. 3. a Col. 2. b
circumcision after the flesh, which circumcision is made with the hand) that
ye at the same time were without Christ, and reputed aleauntes from the commonwealth of Israel, and were strangers from the Testamentes of promise, therefore
had ye no hope, and were without God in this world. But now ye that be in
Christ Jesus, and before time were far of, are now made nigh by the blood of
Christ.

o Esa. 9 b Col. 1. b
peace, which of both has made one, and has broken down the wall, that was a
stop between us, and has also through his flesh put away the cause off
hatred (namely the law of the commandments contained in the law written)
that of twain he might create one new man in him self, and make peace, and
to reconcyle both unto God in one body through the cross, and so he slew ye
hatred through his own self, and came Esa. 57. c
and preached peace in the Gospel, unto you which were afar of, and to the^
that were nigh. For through him we both have intraunce in ^ne sprete unto the
father.

Now therefore ye are no more gestes and strangers, but citesins with the
saints, and of the household of God, builded upon Cor. 3. b
ye foundation of ye Apostles and prophets Pet. 2. a
where Jesus Christ is ye head corner stone in whom every buyldinge coupled
together, grows to an holy temple in the LORD, in whom ye also are builded
together, to be an habitacion of God in the sprete.

The III. Chapter.
FOr this cause I Paul am (...)
a presoner of Jesus Christ for you Heythen, acordinge as ye have herd of ye
office of the grace of God which is given me to you ward. For by (...)
reuelacion was this mystery showed unto me, as I wrote about in few words:
whereby when ye read it, (...) may perceive mine understanding in ye mystery
of Christ, which (mystery) in times past was not opened unto the children of
me^ as it is now declared to his holy Apostles and prophets by the sprete:
namely, that the Heythen should be inheritours also, and of the same body, and
partakers of his promise in Christ by the Gospel, whereof I am made a mynister
acordynge to the gift of the grace of God, which is given me acordinge to the
workynge of his power.

Unto me (...)
the leest of all saints is this (...)
mystery, which from the beginning of the world has been hyd in God, which
made all things through Jesus Christ to the intent that now unto the rulers and
powers in heaven might be known by the congregation the manifold wyszdome
off God, acordinge to ye eternal purpose, which he has showed in Christ Jesus
our LORD by whom we have boldness and intraunce in all confidence through
faith on him. Wherefore I desire that ye faynte not because of my tribulacions,
yt I (...)
suffer for you, which is your praise.

For this cause I bow my knees unto the LORD Jesus Christ, which is the true
father, over all that is called father in heaven and in earth, that he grant
you (acordinge to ye riches of his glory) to be strengthed with power by his
sprete in ye inward man, that Christ may dwell in your hertes by faith, that
ye being roted and grounded in love, may be able to co^prehende with all
saints, what is the breadth, and the length, and the deepth, and the heyth: and
to know the love of Christ, which love yet passes all knowledge: that ye may
be filled with all manner of fullness of God.

Unto him that is able to do exceadinge abundauntly, above all that we axe or
understand (acordinge to ye power that works in us) be praise in the
congregation, which is in Christ Jesus, at all times for ever and ever, Amen.

The IIII. Chapter.
LORD, exhort you, that ye walk as it becomes yor calling wherein ye are
called, with all humblenes off mind and mekenes, and long sufferinge,
forbearinge one another in love, and be diligent to keep the unite of the
sprete through the bond of peace. One body and one sprete, eue^ as ye are
called in one hope of your calling. One LORD, one faith, one baptyme, one
God and father of us all, which is above all, and through all, and in you all.

(...)
Unto every one of us is given grace, acordinge to the measure off the gift off
Christ. Therefore says he: (...)
He is gone up an hye, and has led away captiuyte captyue, and has given
gifts unto men. That he went, up what is it, but that he first came down in
to ye lowest parts of ye earth? (...)
He that came down, is even the same which is gone up above all heavens, to
fulfill all. (...)
And ye same has set some to be Apostles, some to be prophets, some to be
Evangelists, some to be shepherdes and teachers, whereby the saints might be
coupled together through comen service to the edifienge of ye body of Christ,
till we all come unto one manner of faith and knowledge of the son of God, and
become a perfect man in to the measure of the perfect age of Christ (...)
that we be no more children, (...)
waueringe and carried about with every wind of doctrine through the wickedness
of men and craftynes, whereby they lay awayte for us to disceaue us.

(...)
which is the head, even Christ, in whom all the body is coupled together, and
one membre hangs by another through out all ye joints. (...)
Whereby one mynistreth unto another (acordinge to the operacion as every membre
has his measure) and makes, that ye body grows to the edifienge of it self
in love.

This I say therefore, and testifye in the LORD, that ye walk no more * as ye
other Heythen walk in the vanite of their mind, blinded in their
understanding, being strangers from the life which is in God through the
ignorance that is in them, because of the blyndnes of their heart: which being
past repentance, have given them selves over unto wantonness, to work all
manner of uncleanness even with gredynesse.

But ye have not so learned Christ, if so be that ye have herd of him, and are
taught Romans 6. a Col. 3. a
lay from you that old man which marreth himself through disceauable lusts:
but be ye renewed in the sprete of your mind, and put on that new man, which
is shapen after God, in true righteousness and holiness. Zach. ^. c 1. Pet. 2. a
Wherefore put away lyenge, and speak every man the truth unto his neighbor,
for as much as we are members one of another. Psalm. 4. a
Be angry, but sin not. Let not ye Son go down upon your wrath: nether
give place to the bacbyter. He that has stolen, let him steal no more: 2.
Tess. 3. a
but let him labor rather, and do some good with his hondes, that he may
have to give unto him that needs.

Let no filthy communicacion proceade out of your mouth, Mat. 12. d Ephe. 5. a
but that which is good to edifye withal, wha^ need is, that it be gracious to
hear. And grieve not the holy sprete of God, wherewith ye are 2. Cor. 1. c
sealed unto ye day of redemption. Let all bytternes, and fearsnes, and wrath,
and roaringe, and cursed speaking be far from you with all maliciousnes. But
be ye courteous one to another, merciful, Mat. 6. ^
and forgive one another, eue^ as God has forgeuen you in Christ.

The V. Chapter.
BE ye the Mat. 5. e Ioh. 13. b Gal. 1. a
folowers therefore of God Mat. 5. e Ioh. 13. b Gal. 1. a
gave him self for us an offering and sacrifice of a sweet sauoure unto God.
As for whordome and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be named among
you, as it becomes saints: Eccli^ 23. c
nether fylthines, ner folish talking, ner ieastynge (which are not comely) but
rather geuynge of thanks. 1. Cor. 6. b Col. 3. a
For be sure, that no whore monger, or unclean person, or covetous person
(which is a worshipper off images) has inheritance in the kingdom of Christ
and of God. Col. 2. a
(Let no man disceaue you with vain words) for because of these comes the
wrath of God upon the children of unbelieve. Be not ye therefore companions with
them. For sometime ye were darkness, 1. Tess. 5. ^
but now are ye light in the LORD.

Walk as the children of light. ( Gal. 5. c
(...) what is pleasinge unto the LORD, and have no fellishippe with ye
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather rebuke the^. For it is shame even to
name those things, which are done of them in secret. But all things are
manifest, when they are rebuked of the light. For what so ever is manifest,
that same is light. Therefore says he: Esa. 60. a Romans 13. b
Awake thou that slepest, and stand up from the deed, and Christ shall give the
light.

Col. 4. a
Take heed therefore how ye walk circumspectly, not as the unwise, but as ye
wise, and redeem the time, for it is a miserable time. Wherefore be not ye
unwise, but understand what the will of the LORD is, Eccli^. 31. c
and be not dronken with wine, wherein is excess: but be full of the sprete
Col. 3. b
and talk among your selves of Psalms, and ymnes, and spiritual songs,
synginge and making melody unto the LORD in your hertes 1. Tess. 5. c
geuynge thanks always for all things unto God the father, in the name of
our LORD Jesus Christ, submyttinge youreselues one to another in the fear of
God.

Col. 3. c 1. Pet. 3. a
as unto the LORD..1 Co. 11. a
For the huszbande is the wives head, eue^ as Christ also is the head of the
congregation, and he is the Savior of his body. Therefore as the congregation
is in subieccion to Christ, likewise let the wives be in subieccion to their
huszbandes in all things.

Ye huszbandes love your wives, even as Christ loved the congregation, Ephe.
5. a Gal. 2. c
and gave himself for it, to sanctifye it, Tit. 3. a 1. Pet 3. c
and cleansed it in the fountain of water by the word, to make it unto
himself a glorious congregation, having no spot ner wrynkle, ner any soch
thing, but that it should be holy and without blame.

So ought men also to love their wives, even as their own bodies. He that
loves his wife, loves himself. For no man ever yet hated his own fleszhe,
but norisheth and cheriszheth it, even as the LORD does also the congregation.
For we are members of his body, of his flesh and of his bones. Genesis 2. d Mat
19. a Marc. 10. a
For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and cleue unto his wife,
and they two shall be one flesh: This is a great secret: but I speak of
Christ and the congregation. Nevertheless do ye so, that every one of you love
his wife even as himself: but let the (...) huszbande.

The VI. Chapter.
YE (...)
children, obey your elders in the LORD, for that is right. Honor thy
father and thy mother ( (...)
That is the first commandment, that has any promise) that thou may
prospere, and lyuelonge upon earth. And ye fathers, provoke not your children
unto wrath, but bring the^ up in the nourtoure and informacion of the LORD.

(...)
Ye servants, obey your bodily masters, with fear and trembling, in
synglenes of your heart, even as unto Christ, not with service only in the eye
sight, as men pleasers: but as the servants off Christ, doing the will off
God from the heart with good will. Think that ye serve the LORD and not me^:
and be sure, that what good soever a man does, he shall receive it again of the
LORD, whether he be bond or fre.

And ye masters, (...)
do even the same unto the^, putting away threatenynges, and know that even
your master also is in heaven, (...)
nether is there any respect of persons with him.

Finally my brethren, be strong in the LORD, and in the power of his might:
armo of God, that ye may stand steadfast against the crafty assautes off the
deuell. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against rule, against
power namely, against the rulers of the world, of the darkness of this
world, against ye spretes of wickedness under the heaven. For this cause take
ye the armoure of God, yt ye may be able to resist in the evil day, and
stand perfect in all things.

(...)
Stand therefore, and your loins gyrde about with the truth, having on the
breast plate of righteousness, and shod upon yo fete with the gospel of peace,
that ye may be prepared: Above all things take hold of the shylde of faith,
wherewith ye may quench all the fyrie darts of the wicked. And take the
helmet of salvation, and the sword of the sprete, which is the word of God.

(...)
And pray always with all manner of (...)
that the word may be given me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to utter
the secrets of the Gospel, whereof I am a messaunger in bonds, that I may
speak therein freely, (...)
as it becomes me to speak.

But that ye may also know, what case I am in, and what I do, Tichicus my
dear brother and faithful mynister in the LORD, shall show you all: whom I
have sent unto you for the same cause, that ye might know what case I stand
in, and that he might comfort your hertes.

Peace be unto the brethren, and love with faith, from God the father, and from
the LORD Jesus Christ. Grace be with all them that love our LORD Jesus Christ
unfeignedly. Amen.

Sent from Rome unto the Ephesians, by Tichicus.

The Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul to the Philippians.
The sum of this epistle.
Chap. I. He exhorts them to increace in love, in knowledge and experience of
godly things: makes mention of his presonment at Rome, is glad to hear
Christ preached, is content either to dye or live, and prays them to lead a
godly conversation, to be of one mind, and to fear no persecucion. Chap. II.
He exhorts them to unite and brotherly love, and to bewarre of strife and
vain glory: And for a sure ensample he lays Christ before them. Chap. III.
He warns the^ to bewarre of false teachers, whom he calls dogs and
enemies of Christ, and reproves ma^s own righteousness. Chap. IIII. He
saluteth certain of them, exhorts them to be of honest conversation, and
thanketh them because of the prouysion, that they made for him being in
preson.


The first Chapter.
PAul and Timotheus the servants of Jesus Christ. Unto all the saints in Jesus
Christ, which are at Philippos, with the Biszhoppes and (...)
mynisters.

Grace be with you and peace from God our father, and from the LORD Jesus
Christ.

Col. 1. ^ 1. Tess. 1. a
I thank my God, as often as I remember you (which I always do in all my
prayers for you all, and pray with gladness) because of your fellishippe
which ye have in the Gospel from the first day unto now, and am surely
certified of this, yt he which has begone that good Ioh. ^. d
work in you, shall go forth with it untyll ye day of Jesus Christ: as it
becomes me to judge of you all, because I have you in my heart, as those that
are partakers with me of grace in my bonds, in defendinge and stablyshinge of
the Gospel.

For God is my 1. Tess. 2. ^
record, how I long after Ephe. 1. c Col. 1. a ^. Tess. 1. b
And for the same I pray, yt yo love may increace more and more in all manner
of knowledge and in all experience, yt ye may prove what is best, that ye may
be pure, and soch as hurt no man's conscience, unto the day of Christ: filled
with the fruits of righteousness, which come by Jesus Christ unto the glory and
praise of God.

I would ye understood brethren, that my busynes is happened unto the greater
furtheraunce of the Gospel, so that my bonds in Christ are manifest through
out all ye judgment hall, and in all other places: In so much that many
brethren in the LORD, are boldened through my bo^des, and darre more largely
speak the word without fear. Some (no doubt) preach Christ of envy and
strife, but some of good will. The one part preaches Christ off strife and not
purely, supposing to add more aduersite unto my bonds. The other part of
love, for they know that I lie here for the defense of the Gospel.

What then? So that Christ be preached all manner of ways (whether it be done
by 2. Cor. 1. ^
through your prayer and mynistrynge of the sprete of Jesus Christ, as I look
for and hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed: but yt with all confidence (as
always in times past, eue^ so now) Christ shall be magnified in my body whether
it be through life or through death. For Christ is to me life, and death is to me
au^^ge. But in as much as to live in ye (...) fruitful to me for the work,
(...) what I shall chose, for both these (...) hard upon me. (...)
I desire to (...) be with Christ, which thin^^ (...) (form) but to abide
(...) needful for you.

Ephe. 4. a Col. 1. a 1. Tess. 4. a
as it becomes the Gospel of Christ, that whether I come and se you, or else
be absent, I may yet hear of you that ye co^tynue in one sprete and one
soul, labourynge (as we do) to maintain the faith of the Gospel, and in
nothing fearinge your adversaries, which is to them a token off perdicion,
but unto you of salvation, and that of God. For unto you it is given, not only
that ye should believe on Christ, but also suffer for his sake, and to have even
the same fight, which ye have seen in me, and now hear of me.

The II. Chapter.


Let the same mind be in you, that was in Christ Jesus: which beyinge in the
shappe of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God, but made himself
of no reputacion, and took upon him the shappe of a servant, (...). 5. a
became like another man, and was found in his apparel as a man: he humbled
himself, and became obedient unto the death, even unto the death of the cross.

Mat. 28 e Heb. 2. b
Therefore has God also exalted him, and given him a name, which is above all
names, Esa. 45. c Dan. 7. c To. 14. b
that in the name of Jesus every kne should bow, both of things in heaven of
things upon earth, and of things under the earth, and that all tunges should
confess, that Jesus Christ is the LORD unto (...) praise of God the father.

Wherefore my dearly beloved, as ye have (...) obeyed (not only in my presence,
(...) so much more in my absence) even (...) your own salvation with (...).
(...)
For it is God which (...) the will and the deed, even of his own good will.
Do all things without murmurynges and disputinges, that ye may be fautles and
pure, and the children of God (...)
without rebuke, in the mids of ye crooked and perverse nation, (...)
among whom se that ye shine as lights in the world, holdinge fast the word
of life, unto my reioysinge in the day of Christ, that I have not run in
vain, nether labored in vain. (...)
Ye and though I be offered up upon the offering and sacrifice of your faith,
I am glad, and rejoice with you all: be ye glad also, and rejoice ye with me.

I trust in the LORD Jesus, to send Timotheus shortly unto you, that I also
may be of good comfort, when I know what case ye stand in. For I have no
man that is so like minded to me, which with so pure affeccio^ cares for you:
for all other seek their own, not that which is Jesus Christ's. LORD, that I
also my self shall come shortly.

Nevertheless I thought it necessary to send unto you the brother Ephraditus,
which is my companyon in labor and fellow soudyer, and your Apostell, and my
mynister at my need, for so much as he longed after you all, and was full of
heaviness, because ye had herd that he was sick. And no doubt he was sick, and
that nigh unto death: but God had mercy on him, and not on him only, but on me
also, lest I should have had sorrow upon sorrow.

I have sent him therefore the more haistely, that ye might se him, and rejoice
again, and that I also might have the less sorrow. Receive him therefore in
the LORD with all gladness, (...)
and make much of soche: for because of the work of Christ, he went so far,
that he came nigh unto death, and regarded not his life, to fulfill that service
which was lacking on your part toward me.

The III. Chapter.
MOROVER my brethren, rejoice LORD. Where as I write ever one thing unto you,
it greueth me not, and makes you the surer. Bewarre off dogs, bewarre of
evil workers, bewarre off discension: (...)
for we are the circumcision, even we that serve God in the sprete, and rejoice
in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh, though I have whereof I
might rejoice in ye flesh. If any other man think that he has whereof he
might rejoice in the flesh, much more I, which was circu^cysed on the eight
day, one of the people of Israel, of the trybe off Ben Iamin, an hebrew of the
Hebrews: as concerning the law (...)
a Pharise: as concerning feruentnes (...)
I persecuted the congregation: and as touching the righteousness which is in
the law, I was vnrebukable.

(...)
But the things that were vauntage unto me, have I counted loss for Christ's
sake. Ye I think all things but loss, for that excellent (...)
knowleges sake of Christ Jesus my LORD: for whom I have counted all thing
loss, and do judge them but donge, that I might win Christ, and be found
in him, not having mine own righteousness which comes of the law, but by
the (...)
that I may be conformable unto his death, yff by any means I might attain
to the resurreccion from the deed. Not that I have attained unto it all ready,
or that I am already perfect: but I follow, if I may comprehend that,
wherein I am comprehended off Christ Jesus. Brethren, I count not my self yet
that I have gotten it: but one thing I say: I forget that which is behind,
and stretch my self unto that which is before, and preace unto ye marck
appointed, to obtain the reward of the hye calling of God in Christ Jesus.

(...) 4. c (...) d
Brethren, be ye ye folowers of me, and look on the^ which walk eue^ so as ye
have us for an ensample. For many walk (off whom I have told you often, but
now I tell you weeping) eue^ enemies of the cross of Christ, whose end is
damnacion, (...)
whose God is the belly, and whose glory shall be to their shame, which are
earthly minded. (...)
But our conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for the Savior Jesus
Christ ye LORD, (...)
which shall change or vile body, yt it may be like fashioned unto his
glorious body, acordinge to ye workynge whereby he is able to subdue all things
unto himself.

The IIII. Chapter.
Wherefore my brethren dearly beloved LORD ye beloved. I pray Euodias, and
beseke Syntiches, that they be of one mind in the LORD. Ye and I beseke the
my faithful yoc^ fellow, help the women, which have labored with me in the
Gospel, with Clement and with my other helpers, Luc. 10. b Apo. 17. b
whose names are in the book of life. Rejoice in the LORD allwaye, and again
I say, Rejoice. Let your softnes be known unto all men. The LORD is even at
hand. Be not careful, but in all things let yor peticions in prayer and
supplicacion, with geuynge of thanks be known before God. And ye Ioh. 14. c
Romans 5. a
peace of God, which passes all vndersto^dinge, keep your hertes and minds in
Christ Jesus.

Furthermore brethren, whatsoever things LORD, that now at the last ye are
reuyued again to care for me, as ye cared for me before, but ye lacked
oportunyte. I speak not this because of necessite: for I have learned in what
soever estate I am, 1. Tim. 6. b
therewith to be conte^te I can be low, and I ca^ be hye. Every where and in
all things I am mete, both to be full, and to be hongrie: to have plentye, and
to suffer need. I can do all things through Christ, which stre^gtheth me.
Notwithstondinge ye have done well, that ye bare part with me in my
tribulacion.

But ye of Philippos know, that in the Romans 12. a Heb. 1^. c
a sacrifice accepted and pleasant unto God. My God fulfill all yor need,
acordinge to his riches in glory i^ Christ Jesus.

Unto God and our father be praise for ever and ever Amen.

Salute all ye saints in Christ Jesus. The brethren that are with me, salute
you. All the saints salute you, but specially they that are of the Emperors
house. The grace of our LORD Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen.

Written from Rome by Epaphroditus.

The Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul to the Colossians.
The sum of this Epistle.
Chap. I. He gives thanks unto God for their faith, love, and hope: prays
for their increase and shows how we are the kingdom of God, optayned by
Christ, which is the head of the congregation. Chap. II. What great care Paul
took for all congregacions. He exhorts them to be steadfast in Christ, to
bewarre of false teachers and worldly wyszdome, and descrybeth the false
prophets. Chap. III. He puts them in remembrance of the spiritual
resurrection, to lay aside all manner of corrupt living, to be fruitful in
all godliness and virtue, and shows all degrees their duty. Chap. IIII. He
exhorts them to be fervent in prayer, to walk wisely unto them that are not
yet come to the true knowledge of Christ, and so saluteth them.


The first Chapter.
PAul an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and brother Timotheus.

To ye saints which are at Colossa and brethren that believe in Christ.

Grace be with you and peace from God our father and from the LORD Jesus
Christ.

(...)
We give thanks unto God and the father of our LORD Jesus Christ, prayenge
always for you (sense we herd of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of your
love to all saints) for ye hopes sake which is laid up in stoare for you in
heaven: of the which ye have herd before by the word of truth in the
Gospel, which is come unto you, eue^ as it is in to all the world: and is
fruitful, as it is in you, sense ye day yt ye herd and knew the grace of
God in ye truth, as ye learned of Col. (...)
Epaphras our dear fellow servant, which is a faithful mynister of Christ
for you, which also declared unto us your love in the sprete.

(...)
For this cause we also, sense the day yt we herd of it, cease not to pray
for you, and desire that ye might be fulfilled with the knowledge of his will,
in all wyszdome and spiritual understanding, that ye might walk worthy off
the LORD, to please him in all things, (...)
and to be fruitful in all good works, and grow in the knowledge of God: and
to be strengthed with all power acordinge to the might of his glory, to all
patience and longsufferynge with ioyfulnes, and give thanks unto the father,
which has made us mete for the enheritaunce of saints in light.

Which has delivered us from the power (...)
in whom we have redemption through his blood, namely, the forgeuenes of
sins.) (...)
Which is the image of the inuisyble God, first begotten before all creatures.
(...)
For by him were all things created, that are in heaven and earth, things
vysible and things inuysible, whether they be majesty's or lordshippes, either
rules or powers: All things are created by him and in him, and he is before
all things, and in him all things have their being.

(...)
And he is the head of the body, namely, of the congregation: (...)
he is the beginning and first begotten from the deed, that in all things he
might have the preemynence. For it pleased the father, that in him should
dwell all (...)
fullness, and that by him all things should be (...)
reconciled unto himself, whether they be things upon earth or in heaven,
that through the blood on his cross he might make peace even through his own
self. And you (which were in times past strangers and enemies, because your
minds were set in evil works) has

(...)
Now joy I in my sufferynges, which I suffer for you, and fulfill that which
is behind of the passions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which is
the congregation, (...) 4. a
whereof I am made a mynister, acordinge to ye Godly office of preachinge, which
is given unto me among you, that I should richely preach the word of God,
namely, (...)
that mystery which has been hyd sense the world began, and sense the
beginning of times: but now is (...)* 11. c
opened unto his saints, to whom God would make known the glorious riches of
this mystery among ye Heythen: which (riches) is Christ in you, eue^ he that
is the hope of glory, who^ we preach, and warn all men, and teach all men in
all wyszdome, to make every man parfecte in Christ Jesus: Wherein I also labor,
and strive acordinge to the workynge of him which works mightily in me.

The II. Chapter.
(...)
which is in the knowledge of the mystery of God the father and of Christ, (...)
in whom are hyd a^l the treasures of wyszdome and knowledge.

(...). 3. a (...). 3. a
This I say, lest any man should begyle you with entysinge words. (...). 3. a
(...). 3. a
For though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I present with you in the sprete:
ioyenge, and beholdinge your order and the stedfastnes of your faith in
Christ. (...)
As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the LORD, even so walk in him, and
be roted and builded in him, and be steadfast in faith, as ye have learned: and
be plenteous in the same in geuynge thanks.

(...)
Bewarre lest any man spoil you through philosophy and disceatfull vanite after
the tradicions of men, and after the ordinances of the world, and not after
Christ. (...). 3. c
For in him dwells all the fulness of the Godheade bodily, and ye are complete
in him, which is the head of all rule and power: in whom also ye are
circumcysed with Romans 2. ^ Phil. 3. a
circumcision without hands, by putting of the sinful body of the flesh:
(namely) with the circumcysion of Christ, Romans 6. a
in that ye are buried with him through baptyme: in whom ye are also risen
again through faith, that is wrought by the operacion of God, which raised him
up from the deed.

Romans 5. a Ephe. ^. a Col. 1. b
And with him he quyckened you, when ye were deed in sins, and in the
uncircumcision of your flesh, and has forgeuen us all sins, and put out the
handwrytinge that was against us (contained in the law written) and that has
he taken out of the way, and fastened it to the cross: Genesis 3. c Luc. 11. c
Ioh. 12. d
And has spoiled rule and power, and has made a show of them openly, and
triumphed over them in his own person.

Let no man therefore trouble your consciences Heb. 8. a 8. b. 10. a
which are the shadow of the things that were for to come: but the body self
is in Christ. Let no man make you shote at a wrong mark, which after his own
choosing walks in humblenes and spiritualtye of angels, things which he
never saw, and is vain, and puffed up in his own fleshly mind: and holds
not himself to the head, whereof the whole body by joints and couples
receaueth norishment, and is knyt together, and so grows to the greatness that
comes of God.

Wherefore if ye be deed with Christ from the ordinances of the world, Gal. 4.
a
why are ye holden the^ with soch tradicions, as though ye lived after the
world? As when they say: Touch not this, taist not that, handle not that. All
these things do hurt unto men, because of the abuse of them, which abuse
comes only of the commandments and doctrynes of men: 1. Tim. 4. f
which things have a shine of wyszdome through chosen spirituality and
humblenes, and in that they spare not the body; and do the flesh no worshipe
unto his need.

The III. Chapter.
IF ye be risen now with Christ, seek

Ephe. 5. a
Mortifye therefore your me^bres which are upon earth, whordome, uncleanness,
unnatural lust, evil concupisce^ce, and covetousness, which is a worshippynge
of Idols: Gen 6.19 1. Cor. 10. a
for which things sakes the wrath of God comes upon the children of
unbelieve: Ephe. 3. a
in the which things ye walked some time, when ye lived in them.

Romans 6. a Ephe. 4. c
But now put all away from you: wrath, fearcenesse, maliciousnes, cursed
speaking, fylthie words out of your mouth. Lie not one to another. Romans 13. b
Put of ye old man with his works, and put on ye new, which is renewed in
knowledge after ye image of him that made him: Gal. 6. b
where there is no Greek, Jew, circumcision, uncircumcision, Barbarous,
Sithian, bo^de, fre: but Christ is all and in all.



Let ye word of Christ dwell in you plenteously in all wyszdome. Ephe. 5. b
Teach and exhort your own selves with psalms and ymnes, and spiritual
songs which have favor with them, synginge in your hertes to the LORD. 1.
Cor. 10. d
And what soever ye do in word or work, do all in the name of the LORD Jesus,
Ephe. 5. b
and give thanks unto God the father by him.

Ephe. 5. c 1. Pet. 3. a
Ye wives, submytte your selves unto your huszbandes, as it is comely in the
LORD.

Ye huszbandes, love your wives, and be not bitter unto them.

Ephe. 6. a
Ye children, obey your elders in all things, for that is well pleasynge
unto the LORD.

Ye fathers, rate not yor children, lest they be of a desperate mind.

^phe. 6. a ^it. 2. b ^. Pet. 2. c
Ye servants, be obedient unto your bodily masters in all things, not with
eye service as men pleasers, but in synglenes of ^ert, fearinge God. What so
ever ye do, do it ^^rtely, even as unto the LORD and not (...). And be sure,
that of the LORD (...) the reward of ye enheritaun^^ (...) LORD Christ. But
he that does (...), shall receive for the wrong that he has done, (...)
for there is no respect of persons (with God.)

(...)
Ye masters, do unto your servants that which is just and equal, and know,
yt ye also have a master in heaven.

The IIII. Chapter.
Continue in prayer, and watch in the (...)
and pray also together for us, that God open unto us the door of the word,
to speak the mystery of Christ (wherefore I am also in bo^des) that I may
utter ye same, as it becomes me to speak. (...)
Walk wisely toward them that are without, and redeem ye time. Let your
speech be allwaye favorable, seasoned with (...)
salt, that ye may know how to answer every man.

Tichicus the dear brother and faithful mynister and fellow servant in ye
LORD, shall tell you what case I am in. Whom I have sent unto you for the same
purpose, that he might know how ye do, and that he might comfort your
hertes, with one (...)
Onesimus a faithful and beloved brother, which is one of you: they shall show
you of all things, which are adoynge here (...)
Aristarchus my preson fellow saluteth you, and (...)
Marcus Barnabasses sisters son, touching whom ye received commandments:
If he come unto you, receive him, and Jesus, which is called Iustus, which are
of the circumcision. These only are my helpers in the kingdom of God, which
were to my consolacion.

(...)
Epaphras a servant of Christ, which (...)
Demas. Salute the brethren, which are at Laodicea, and salute Nymphas, and the
congregation which is in his house. And when the epistle is red of you, cause
it to be red also in the co^gregacio^ at Laodicea, and that ye likewise read
the epistle of Laodicea. And say to Archippus: Take heed to the office which
thou have received in the LORD, that thou fulfill it. My salutacion with the
hnade of me Paul. Remember my bo^des. (...)
Grace be with you, Amen.

Sent from Rome by Tichicus and Onesimus.

The first Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul to the Tessalonians.
The sum of this Epistle.
Chap. I. He thanketh God for them, that they are so steadfast in faith and good
works, and receive the gospel with soch earnest. Chap. II. He puts them in
mind of the godly conversation that he led among them when he preached the
gospel unto them, thanketh God that they receive his word so frutefully, and
excuses his absence. Chap. III. He shows how greatly he was reioysed, wha^
Timothy told him of their faith and love. Chap. IIII. He exhorts them to
steadfastness, to keep them selves from sin and uncleanly co^uersacion, to
love one another: rebukes ydilnesse, and speaks of the resurreccion. Chap.
V. He enfourmeth them of the day of dome and coming of the LORD, exhorts
them to watch, and to regard soch as preach Gods word among them.


The first Chapter.


Unto the congregation of the Tessalonyans, in God the father and in the LORD
Jesus Christ.

Grace be with you, and peace from God our father and from the LORD Jesus
Christ.

(...)
We give thanks unto God allwaye for you all, making me^sion of you in or
prayers without ceassynge, and call to remembrance your work in the faith,
and your labor in love, and your patience in hope, (...)
which is our LORD Jesus Christ before God our father: Because we know
(brethren, beloved of God) how that ye are elect: (...)
for our Gospel has not been with you in word only, but both in power and
in the holy ghost, and in much certayntie, as ye know after what manner we were
among you for your sakes.

And ye became the folowers of us and LORD: and received the word in much
affliccion with joy of the holy ghost: so that ye were an example to all that
believed in Macedonia and Achaia. For from you was the word of the LORD noysed
out, not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but i^ all quarters also is yor faith
i^ God spread abroad so that it needs not us to speak any thing at all. For
they them selves show of you, what manner of entering in we had unto you, and
how ye are turned unto God from images, for to serve the living and true God,
and to look for his son Act. 1. b
from heaven: whom he raised up from the deed, even Jesus, which has delivered
us from the Ioh. 8. c
wrath to come.

The II. Chapter.
FOr ye your selves (brethren) know Act. 16. c
were shamefully entreated at Philippos (as ye know) we were bold in our
God, Act. 17. a
to speak unto you ye Gospel of God with much stryuynge. For our exhortacion
was not to bring you to error ner yet to uncleanness, nether was it with gyle:
but as we are allowed of God, that the Gospel should be committed unto us to
preach, even so we speak, Gal. 1. b
not as though we would please me^, but God, which tries our hertes.

For we have not gone about with flateringe words (as ye know) ner waited
for our own profit ( Phil. 1. b
God is record) nether sought we praise of men, nether of you ner of any
other, when we might have been chargeable unto you as the Apostles off Christ,
but we were tender among you.

Like as a norsse cherishes her children,

Ye remember brethren our labor and travail. Act. 20. ^ 2. Tess. ^. a
For day and night wroughte we (because we would not be chargeable unto any
of you) and preached the Gospel of God among you. Ye are witnesses, and so is
God, how holyly and justly and unblameable we behaved our selves among you
tha^ believe: as ye know, how that as a (...) his children, even so exhort
(...) and besoughte every one (...) would walk worthily before God, (...) has
called you unto his kingdom and (...)

For this cause thank we God without ceassynge, because that wha^ ye received
of us the word of the preachinge of God, ye received it not as ye word of
men, but (eue^ as it is of a truth) the word of God, which works in you
that believe.

Heb. 10. d
the congregacions off God which in Iewry are in Christ Jesus, so that ye have
suffered even like things of your kynsmen, as they have suffered of the Jews.
Which as they put the LORD Jesus to death, and their own prophets, Mat. 23. d
even so have they persecuted us also, and please not God, and are contrary to
all men, Act. 17. a. b
forbyddinge us to speak unto the Heythen that they might be saved, to
fulfill their sins allwaye: for the wrath is come upon them already unto ye
vttemost.

But we (brethren) for as much as we have been kept from you for a season, as
concerning the bodily presence, but not in the heart, we have haisted the more
with great desire to se you personally. Therefore would we have come unto you,
(I Paul) two times, Dan. 10. b
but Satan withstode us. For who is our hope, or joy, or crown of Phil. 2. b
reioysinge? are not ye it in ye sight of our LORD Jesus Christ at his
coming? Yes ye are our praise and joy.

The III. Chapter.
Act. 17. c
Athens alone, and sent Timotheus our brother and mynister of God, and our
helper in ye gospel of Christ, to stablysh you and to comfort you in your
faith, that noman should be moved in these troubles: (for ye your selves
know, that we are even appointed there unto. And when we were with you, we
told you before, that we should suffer tribulacion, even as it is come to
pass, and as ye know.) For this cause seeing I could no longer forbear, I
sent, that I might have knowledge of your faith, lest happly the tempter had
tempted you, and lest our labor had been in vain.

But now that Timotheus is come from you unto us, and has showed us of your
^ORDE. For what thanks can we recompense to God again for you, because of
this joy that we have concerning you before our God? We pray exceadingly
day and night, that we might se you presently, and fulfill that which is
lacking in yor faith.

God himself or father and or LORD Jesus Christ gyde our journey unto you.
But the LORD increace you, and make you flow over in love one toward
another, and toward all men (even as we do toward you) that yor hertes may
be stable and unblameable in holiness before God our father, at the coming of
our LORD Jesus Christ with all his saints.

The IIII. Chapter.
FVrthermore we beseke you brethren LORD Jesus, that ye increace more and
more, even as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk and to please God.
For ye know what commandments we ga^ue you by our LORD Jesus Christ. For
this is the (...)
will of God, even your sanctifienge, that ye should absteyne from whordome, ^
yt every one of you should know how to keep his vessel in holiness and
honor, and not in the lust of concupiscence, (...)
as the Heythen which know not God. And that no man go to far, ner defraude
his brother in bargayninge. For the LORD is the auenger of all soch things,
as we have said and testified unto you before time. For God has not called us
to uncleanness, but unto holiness. (...)
He therefore that despyseth, despyseth not man, but God, (...)
which has given his holy sprete in to you.

But as touching brotherly love, ye need (...)
for ye your selves are taught of God to love one another: ye and that thing
ye do unto all the brethren, which are through out all Macedonia. But we beseke
you brethren that ye increace yet more and more, and that ye study to be
quyete, and to meddle with your own business, (...)
and to work with your own hands, as we commanded you, that ye may walk
honestly toward the^ that are without, and that nothing be lacking unto you.

We would not brethren that ye should be ignorant concerning them which are
fallen a sleep, that ye sorrow not as other do which have no hope. For if we
believe that Jesus dyed and rose again, even so the^ also which sleep by Jesus,
shall God bring with him. For this we say unto you in the word of the LORD,
(...)
that we which live and are remaining in the coming* of the LORD, shall not
come yer they which sleep. (...)
For the LORD himself shall come down from heaven with a shoute and voice of
ye Archangell and with the trompe of God, (...)
and the deed in Christ shall arise first: then shall we which live and remain,
be caught up with them also in the clouds, to mete the LORD in the air, and so
shall we ever be with the LORD. Wherefore comfort your selves one another with
these words.

The V. Chapter.
But of ye times and seasons (brethren) it is no need to write unto you. For ye
youreselues know perfectly, that (...)
the day of the LORD shall come even as a thief in the night. For when they
shall say* Tush, It is peace, there is no danger, (...)
then shall soden destruction come upon the^, even as the pain of a woman
trauaylinge with child, and they shall not escape. But ye brethren are not in
darkness, that that day should come on you as a thief. Ye are altogether
children of light, and children of the day. We are not of the night, nether
of darkness.

(...)
Therefore let us not sleep as do other, but let us watch, and be sober. For
they that sleep, sleep in the night: and they that be dronken, are dronken in
the night. But let us which are of the day, be sober, armed with the brestplate
of faith and love, and with ye helmet of hope to salvation.

LORD Jesus Christ* which dyed for us: that whether we wake or sleep, we should
live together with him. Wherefore comfort your selves together, and edifye one
another, even as ye do.

We beseke you brethren, (...)
that ye know them which labor among you, and have the ouersighte of you in
the LORD, and give you exhortacion, that ye have the^ the more in love for
their works sake, and be at peace with them. We desire you brethren, warn
them that are unruly, comfort the feeble minded, forbear the weak, be pacient
toward all men.* So that none recompense evil for evil unto any man: but
ever follow that which is good, both among your selves and to all men.

Rejoice always, pray contynually, (...)
in all things be thankful: for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus
toward you. (...)
Quench not ye sprete: despise not prophecie^ges: prove all things, and keep
yt which is good. Abstain from all suspicious things. The very God ^f peace
sanctifye you through out. And I ^raye God, that your whole sprete, soul and
^ody be kept blameles unto ye coming of ^ure LORD Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 1.
a and 10. b
Faithful is he which has called you, which will also do it. Brethren, pray
for us. Great all the brethren with an holy kiss. I charge you by ye LORD,
that this epistle be red unto all ye holy brethren. 2. Tess. ^. b
The grace of our LORD Jesus Christ be with you, Amen.

The first Epistle to the Tessalonians, sent from Athens.

The second Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul to the Tessalonians.
The sum of this epistle.
Chap. I. He thanketh God for their faith and love, and prays for the
increase of the same. Chap. II. He shows them that the day of the LORD shall
not come, till the departinge from the faith come first: and therefore he
exhorts them not to be disceaued, but to stand steadfast in the things that
h^ has taught them. Chap. III. He desires them to pray for him that the
gospel may prospere, and gives the^ warning to reprove the idle, and if
they will not labor with their hands, that they shall not eat.
The first Chapter.
PAVL and Siluanus

To the congregation of ye Tessalonia^s in God our father and in the LORD
Jesus Christ.

Grace be with you, and peace from God our father, and from the LORD Jesus
Christ.

We are bound to thank God always for you brethren, as it is mete: because
that your faith grows exceadingly, and the love of every one of you
increases toward another among your selves, so that we our selves make
our boast of you (in the congregacions of God) of your patience and faith in
all your persecucions and troubles that ye suffer, which is a token of the
righteous judgment of God, that ye are counted worthy of the kingdom of God,
for the which ye also suffer.

For it is a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulacion unto the^ yt
trouble you: but unto you which are troubled, rest with us, Mat 24. c and 25. c
2. Pet. 3. a
wha^ the LORD Jesus shall show himself from heaven, with the angels of his
power, and with flammynge Mat 24. c and 25. c 2. Pet. 3. a
fire, to give vengeance unto them that know not God, Romans 2. a
and to them that obey not the Gospel of our LORD Jesus Christ. Sap. 5.
Which shall be punyshed with everlasting damnacion, Esa. 2. b
from ye presence of the LORD, and from the glory of his power, when he shall
come to be glorified in his saints, and to be come marvelous in all them that
believe: because ye have believed our testimony unto you of the same day. *
Wherefore we pray always for you, that our God make you worthy of ye
calling, and fulfill all delectacion of goodness, and the work of faith in
power, that ye name of our LORD Jesus Christ may be praised in you, and ye
in him, acordinge to the grace of our God, and of the LORD Jesus Christ.

The II. Chapter.
LORD Jesus Christ, and in that we shall assemble unto him, that ye be not
suddenly moved from your mind, and be not troubled, nether by sprete, nether
by words, ner yet by letter, which should seem to be sent from us, as though
ye day of Christ were at hand. Let noman disceaue you by any means. For the
LORD comes not, except the Dan. 9. e 1. Tim. 4. a
departing come first, and that that Man of sin be opened, even the son of
perdicion, which is an adversary, and is exalted above all yt is called God or
Gods service, so that he sytteth as God in the 1. Cor. 3. b
temple of God, Dan. 11. e
and boasts himself to be God.

Remember ye not, that when I was yet with you, I told you these things? And
now ye know what witholdeth it, eue^ that it might be uttered at his time. (
1. Ioh. 2. c
For the mystery of the iniquyte works already, till he which now only
lets, be taken out Job 15. d Esa. 11. a Dan. 8. d
whom the LORD shall consume with ye sprete of his mouth, and shall destroy
with the appearaunce of his coming: even him, whose coming is after the
workynge of Satan Deuteronomy. 13. a
with all lyenge power, and signs and wonders, Mat. 24. b
and with all deceauablenes of unrighteousness among them that perish, because
they received not the love of ye truth, that they might have been saved* Zach.
5 a Romans 1* d
Therefore shall God send them strong de^^sion, that they should believe lies,
yt all they might be damned, which believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness.

But we are bound to give thanks allwaye unto God for you, brethren be loved
of the LORD, because that God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation
in the sanctifienge of the sprete and in beleuynge of the truth, whereunto he
has called you by our Gospel, to obtain the glory of our LORD Jesus
Christ.

Therefore brethren stand fast, and keep the ordinances which ye have learned,
whether it were by our preachinge or by epistle. But our LORD Jesus Christ
himself, and God our father, which has loved us and given us everlasting
consolacion, and a good hope through grace, comfort your hertes, and stablysh
you in all doctrine and good doing.

The III. Chapter.
FVrthermore brethren (...)
pray for us, (...)
For faith is not every ma^s. But the LORD is faithful, which shall stablyshe
you and keep you from evil. We have confidence in the LORD to you ward, that
ye both do and will do that which we command you. The LORD gyde your hertes
unto the love of God and patience of Christ.

(...)
But we require you brethren, in the name of our LORD Jesus Christ, that ye
withdraw your selves from every brother that walks inordinatly, and not
after the institucion which he received of us. For ye yor selves know, how ye
ought to follow us: for we behaved not our selves inordinatly among you,
nether took we bred of any man for naught (...)
but wrought with labor and travail night and day, lest we should be
chargeable to any of you. Not but that we had auctorite, but to give our
selves for an ensample unto you to follow us. And when we were with you, this we
warned you of, that if there were any which would not work, ye same should not
eat. For we hear say, that there are some which walk among you
inordinatly, and work not at all, but are busy bodies. (...)
But them that are soche, we command and exhort by our LORD Jesus Christ,
that they work with quyetnes, and eat their own bred.

Nevertheless brethren, (...)
be not ye weery of well doing. (...)
But if any man obey not our sayenges, send us word of him by a letter, and
have nothing to do with him, yt he may be ashamed. Yet count him not as an
enemy, but warn him as a brother. The very LORD of peace give you peace
always by all means. The LORD be with you all. The salutacion of me Paul
with mine own hand: This is the token in all epistles, So I write, The grace
of our LORD Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

Sent from Athens.

The first Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul to Timothy.
The sum of this epistle.
Chap. I. He exhorts Timothy to wait upon his office: namely, to se that
nothi^ge be taught but Gods word andc. He shows also wherefore the law is
good, and tells these sweet and glad tidinges, that Christ Jesus came in to
the world to save sinners, example of himself. Chap. II. He exhorts to
pray for all men. He will not have women to be over costly arrayed, ner to
teach in the congregation, but to be in silence, and obey their huszbandes.
Chap. III. What manner of man a byszhpppe or pressed ought to be, and what
conditions his wife and children should have. The properties also required in a
deacon or mynister, and in his wife. Chap. IIII. He prophecieth of the latter
days, and exhorts Timothy to the dilligent reading of the holy scripture.
Chap. V. He teaches him how he shall behave himself in rebukynge all degrees
An order concerning wyddowes. Chap. VI. The duty of servants toward their
masters. Against soch as are not satisfied with the word of God, Against
cuvetousnes, A good lesson for rich men.


The first Chapter.
PAul an Apostle of Jesus Christ acordinge to Act. 9. b
commandment of God our Savior, and of the LORD Jesus Christ, 1. Tess. 1.
a
which is our hope.

Unto Timothy my natural son in the faith.

Grace, mercy, and peace from God our father, and our LORD Jesus Christ.

As I besoughte ye to abide still at Ephesus ( Act. 19.20.
when I departed in to Macedonia) eue^ so do, that thou command some, that
they teach none other wise, 2. Tim 2. c Tit. 3. b
nether give head to fables and genealogies, which are endless, and bread
doutes more then godly edifyenge, which is by faith. Romans 13. b Gal. 6. a
For ye chief sum of the commandment is love of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience, and of faith unfeigned. From the which some have erred, and have
turned unto vain iangelynge, wyllinge to be doctors of the scripture, and
understand not what they speak, nether whereof they affirm.

Romans 7. b
But we know that the law is good, Gal. 5. c
that the law is not given unto the righteous, but to the unrighteous and
dishobedient, to the ungodly and to sinners, to the unholy and unclean, to
murthurers of fathers and murthurers of mothers, to manslayers, to
whoremongers, Romans 1. d
to the^ that defyle them selves with mankind, to menstealers, to liars, to
perjured, and so forth if there be any other thing yt is contrary to ye
wholesome doctrine, acordinge to ye Gospel of ye glory of the blessed God,
which (Gospel) is committed unto me.

And I thank Christ Jesus or LORD, which has made me strong, for he counted
me faithful, and put me in office, wha^ before I was a blasphemer, Act 9. a
Gal. 1. b
and a persecuter, and a tyrant: but I optayned mercy, because I did it
ignorauntly in unbelieve. Nevertheless the grace of or LORD was more abu^daunt
through ye faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.

Mat. 9. b Ioh. ^. c
that Christ Jesus came in to ye world to save sinners, of whom I am chief.
Notwithstondynge for this cause optayned I mercy, that Jesus Christ might
pryncipally show in me all long patience, to the ensample of them which
should believe in him unto eternal life. So then unto God king everlasting,
immortal and Col. 1. b
invisible, and wise only, be honor and praise for ever and ever Amen.

This commandment commytte I unto the (my son Timotheus) acordinge to ye
prophecies which in time past were prophesied of the, that thou in them
should fight a good fight, having faith and good conscience, which some
have put away from them, and as concerning faith have made shypwrake: of
whose nombre is 2. Tim 2. b 2. Tim 4. b
Hymeneos and 2. Tim 2. b 2. Tim 4. b
Alexander, 1. Cor. 5. a
whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they might be taught, no more to
blaspheme.

The II. Chapter.
Iere. 29 b Baruc. 1. c
for kings, and for all that are in auctorite, that we may live a quyete and
peaceable life in all godlynes and honesty. For that is good and accepted in
ye sight of God our Savior, which will have all men saved, and to come unto
the knowledge of ye truth. For there is one God, and Heb. 9. c
one mediator between God and men, (namely) the man Christ Jesus, which gave
him self a ransom for all men, that at his time it should be preached,
whereunto Rom 1. a 2. Tim. 1. b
I am ordained a preacher and an Apostle (I tell ye truth in Christ and lie
not) a teacher of the Heythe^ in faith and in the truth.

Ioh. 4. c
in all places, liftinge up pure hands without wrath or dowtynge. Tit. 2. a 1
Pet. 3. a
Likewise also the women, that they array them selves in comely apparel with
shamfastnes and discrete behaueor, not with broyded here, or gold, or perles,
or costly array: but with soch as it becomes weme^ that profess godlynes
through good works. 1. Co. 14. e
Let the woman learn in syle^ce with all subieccion. I suffer not a woman to
teach Genesis 3. c Ephe. 5. c
ner to have auctorite over the man, but for to be in silence. For Adam was
first formed, and the^ Eve: Adam also was not disceaued, but the woman was
disceaued, and has brought in the tra^sgression. Notwitstondynge through
bearing of children she shall be saved, if she continue in faith and in love and
in the sanctifyenge with discrecion.

The III. Chapter.
THis is a true saye^ge: If a man covet (...)
the huszba^de of one wife, sober, discrete, manerly, harberous, ^
apt to teach: Not given to much wine, no fighter, not given to filthy lucre:
but gentle, abhorrynge strife, abhorrynge covetousness: and one that rules his
own house honestly, having obedient children with all honestye. (But if a man
can not rule his own house, how shall he care for the congregation of God?) He
may not be a yo^ge scolar, left he be puffed up, and fall in to the judgment of
ye evil speaker. He must also have a good report of them which are without,
lest he fall in to the rebuke and snare of the evil speaker.

Likewise must the (...)
mynisters be honest,

Even so must their wives be honest, not evil speakers, but sober and
faithful in all things. Let the mynisters be, every one the huszba^de of one
wife, and soch as rule their children well, and their own housholdes. (...)
For they that mynister well, get them selves a good degree and great liberty
in the faith which is in Christ Jesus.

These things write I unto the, trustinge shortly to come unto the: but if I
tarry long, that then thou may yet have knowledge, how thou ought to
behave thy self in Gods house, which is the congregation of the living God,
the piler and ground of truth: and without nay, great is that mystery of
godlynes. (...)
God was showed in the flesh: was justified in the sprete: (...)
was seen of angels: was preached unto the Heythen: was believed on in the
world: (...)
was received up in glory.

The IIII. Chapter.
THe sprete speaks euydently, (...)
that ^
depart from the faith, and shall give head unto spretes of error, and
deuelish doctrynes, of them which speak false through ypocrysie, and have their
conscience marked with an whote iron, forbyddinge to mary, and co^maundynge to
abstain from the meats, which God has created to be received with geuynge
thanks of them which believe and know the truth. (...)
For every creature off God is good, and nothing to be refused, yt is received
with thankesgeuynge: for it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer. If
thou shall put the brethren in remembrance of these things, thou shall be a
good mynister of Jesus Christ, (...)
which have been norished up in the words of faith and of good doctrine, which
thou have followed hither to.

(...)
As for vngoostly and old wyuesh fables, cast them away, but exercise thy
self unto godlynes. For bodily exercise profyteth little, but godlynes is
profitable unto all things, as a thing which has promyses of the life that
is now, and of the life for to come. This is a sure saying, and of all parts
worthy to be received. For therefore we labor and suffer rebuke, because we
hope in the living God, which is the Savior of all men, but specially of
those that believe. Soch things command thou and teach. (...)
Let no man despise ye youth, (...)
but be thou unto them that believe, an ensample, in word, in co^uersacion, in
love, in ye sprete, in faith, in pureness.

Give attendaunce to reading, to exhortacion, to doctrine, until I come. Be
not necligent in the gift that is given the through prophecye, (...)
with laye^ge on of the hands of the Elders. These things exercise, and give
thy self unto them, that thine increace may be manifest unto every man. Take heed unto thy self, and to learning, co^tynue in these things. For if thou
so do, thou shall save thy self, and them that hearethe.

The V. Chapter.
(...)
But she that is a right wedowe, and desolate, puts her trust in God, and
co^tynueth in prayer and supplicacion night and day. But she that lives in
pleasures, is deed, even yet a line. And these things command, that they
may be without blame. (...)
But if there be any man that prouydeth not for his own, and specially for
them of his houszholde, the same has denied the faith, and 1. Pet. 2. d
is worse then an infydele.

Let no wedowe be chosen under three score 1. Pet. 4. b
harberous, if she have washed the saints fete, if she have mynistred unto
the^ which were in aduersite, if she were continually given to all manner of
good works. But ye younger wedowes refuse. For when they have begone to wax
wanton against Christ, then will they mary, having their damnacion, because
they have broken ye first faith. Besides this they are ydell, and learn to
run about from house to house. Tit. 2. a
Not only are they ydell, but also tryflinge and busy bodies, speaking
things which are not comely.

1. Cor. 7. a
I will therefore that the younger women mary, bear children, gyde the house, to
give ye adversary no occasion to speak evil. For some are turned back
already after Satan. If any man or woman that believes have wedowes, let them
make prouysion for the^, and let not the congregation be charged: that they
which are right wedowes, may have enough.

The Elders that rule well, are worthy of Deuteronomy. 25. a 1. Cor. 9. b
Thou shall not mosell the mouth of ye ox yt treads out ye corn. And: Mat
10. a
The labourer is worthy of his reward.

Deuteronomy. 19 c
Against an Elder receive none accusacion, but under two or three witnesses.
The^ that sin, rebuke in the presence of all, that other also may fear.

I testifye before God and the LORD Jesus Christ, and ye elect angels, that
thou observe these things without haistie judgment, and do nothing parcially.
Lay hondes suddenly on no man, nether be partaker of other men's sins. Keep ye
self pure. Eccli. 31. d
Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for ye stomachs sake, and
because thou art often times sick. Some men's sins are open, so that they may
be judged before hand: but some men's (sins) shall be manifest herafter.
Likewise also good works are manifest before hand: and they that are other
wise can not be hyd.

The VI. Chapter.
LEt as many servants as are under the yocke, count their m^sters worthy of
all honor, that the name of God and his doctrine be not evil spoken of. Se
that they which have beleuynge masters, despise them not because they are
brethren, but rather do service, for so much as they are beleuynge, and
beloved, and partakers of the benefit.

These things teach and exhort. If any man teach otherwise, and agrees not
unto the wholesome words of our LORD Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine of
godlynes, he is puffed up, and knows nothing, but waysteth his brain about
questions and stryuynges of words: Tit. 3. b
whereof spring envye, strife, raylinges, evil surmysinges, vain disputacio^s
of soch men as have corrupt minds, 2. Tess. 2. b
and are robbed of the truth, which think that godlynes is lucre: From Pro.
15. b Heb. 13. a
and holds him content with that he has. Job. 1. c
For we brought nothing in to the world, therefore is it a plain case yt we
can carry nothing out. Eccli. 29. d
When we have fode and raiment, let us therewith be content. Pro. 23. a Mat. 13 c
For they that wylbe rich, fall in to the te^ptacion and snare, and in to many
foliszhe and noisome lusts, which drown men in destruction and damnacion. For
Covetousness is the rote of all evil, which while some lusted after, they erred
from the faith, and tangled them selves with many sorrows.

2. Tim. 2. c
But thou man of God, fly soche things: follow righteousness, godlynes, faith,
love, patience, mekenes: fight a good fight of faith: lay hand on eternal
life, where unto thou art called, and have professed a good profession before
many witnesses.

I give the charge before God, 1. Reg. 2. b Act. 17. e
which quyckeneth all things, and before Jesus Christ, which under Pontius
Pilate witnessed a good witnessynge, that thou keep the commandment, without
spot, unreprovable, until the appearing of our LORD Jesus Christ, which
appearing (at his time) he shall show that is blessed, and mighty only, Apo.
17. c and 19. c
the king of all kings, and LORD of all lords: which only has
immortalite, and dwells in a light, that no man can attain: Ioh. 1. b 1.
Ioh. 4. b
whom no man has seen, nether can se. Unto whom be honor and empire
everlasting, Amen.

Mat. ^. e
gatherynge up treasure for them selves, a good foundation, against ye time to
come, that they may lay hand on eternal life.

O Timothy, keep that which is committed unto the, and avoyde vngoostly vain
words, and opposicions of science falsely so called, which while some
professed, they have erred as concerning the faith. Grace be with the, Amen.

Written from Laodicea, which is the chefest cite of Phrigia Pacaciana.

The second Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul to Timothy.
The sum of this epistle.
Chap. I. Paul exhorts Timothy to steadfastness and patience in persecucion,
and to continue in the doctrine that he had taught him. A commendacion of
Onesiphorus. Chap. II. Like as in the first chapter, so here he exhorts him
to be constant in trouble, to suffer manly, and to bide fast in the wholesome
doctrine of our LORD Jesus Christ. Chap. III. He prophecieth of the parelous
times, sets out ypocrites in their culours, tells us what they be within,
for all their fair faces outwardly. Persecucion for the gospel. Chap. IIII.
He exhorts Timothy to be ferue^^ in the word, and to suffer aduersite:
makes mension of his own death, and byddeth Timothy come unto him.
The first Chapter.
PAul an Apostle of Jesus

To my dear son Timotheus.

Grace, mercy, and peace from God the father and from Christ Jesus our LORD.

I thank God, (...)
whom I serve fro my fore elders in a pure conscience, that without ceassynge
I make mention of the in my prayers night and day: and long to se the (when I
remember thy tears) so that I am filled with joy, when I call to remembrance
the unfeigned faith that is in the, which dwelt first in thy graundemother Lois,
and in thy mother Eunica: And am assured, that it dwells in ye also. Wherefore
I warn the, that thou stere up ye gift of God which is in the by putting on
of my hands. (...)
For God has not given us the sprete of fear, but of power, and of love, and
of right understanding.

(...)
Be not thou aszhamed therefore of ye testimony of or LORD, nether of me, (...)
which am his presoner: but suffer thou aduersite also with the Gospel,
acordinge to the power of God (...)
which has saved us, and called us with an holy calling: not acordinge to
our deeds, but acordinge to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in
Christ Jesus before the time of the world, but is now declared openly by the
appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ. (...). 15. f (...). 1. c
Which has taken away ye power of death, and has brought life and
immortalite unto light, through the Gospel: (...). 1. a (...). a
whereunto I am appointed a preacher and an Apostell, and a teacher of the
Heythen: for the which cause I also suffer these things, nevertheless I am not
ashamed. For I know whom I have believed, and am sure that he is able to keep
that which I have committed unto his keeping against that day.

(...)
Hold the after ye ensample of the wholesome words, which thou heardest of me,
concerning faith and love in Christ Jesus. This hye charge keep thou through the
holy ghost, which dwells in us. This thou know, that all they which are in
Asia, be turned fro me, of which sort are Phigelus and Hermogenes. The LORD
give mercy unto the house of (...)
Onesiphorus: for he often refreszhed me, and was not aszhamed of my cheyne: but
when he was at Rome (...) 13. c
he sought me out very diligently, and found me. The LORD grant unto him,
that he may find mercy with the LORD in that day. And how much he mynistred
unto me at Ephesus, thou know very well.

The II. Chapter.
(...). 1. b
the same commytte thou unto faithful men, which are apt to teach other. Thou
therefore suffer affliccion as a good soudyer off Jesus Christ. No man that
warreth, tangleth himself with wordly busynesses, and that because he would
please him, which has chosen him to be a soudyer. And though a man strive for
a mastrye, yet is he not crowned, except he strive laufully. (...). 9. b
The huszbandman that labors, must first enjoy the fruits. Consydre what I
say. The LORD shall give the understanding in all things.

Remember that Jesus Christ, being Romans 1 ^
of the sede of David, rose again from the deed, acordynge to my Gospel,
wherein I suffer as an evil doer even unto bands: but the word of God is not
bound. Act. 20. c Ephe. 3. a Col. 1. c
Therefore suffer I all for the electes sakes, that they also might obtain the
salvation in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.

This is a true saying: Romans 6. Romans 8. Luc. 12. a
If we be deed with Romans 6. Romans 8. Luc. 12. a
If we be pacient, we shall also reign with him: Romans 6. Romans 8. Luc. 12. a
If we deny him, he also shall deny us: Nu. 23. Romans ^.
If we believe not, yet abides he faithful, he can not deny himself. Of these
things put thou them in remembrance, and testifye before the LORD, that they
strive not about words, which is to no profit, but to peruerte the hearers.

Study to show thy self unto God a laudable workman, that needs not to be
ashamed, deuydynge the word of truth justly. 1. Tim. 1 4. a. 6. a
As for vngoostly and vain talkynges, eschew them: for they help much to
ungodliness, and their word fretteth as does a canker: Of whose nombre is 1.
Tim. 1
Hymeneos and Philetus, which as concerning the truth have erred, saying,
that the resurreccion is past already, and have destroyed the faith of diverse
persons.

But ye sure ground of God stondeth fast, Ioh. 10. ^
The LORD knows them that are his, and let every man that calls upon the
name of Christ, depart from iniquyte. Notwithstondynge Romans ^
in a great house are not only vessels of gold and of silver, but also of
wod and of earth: some for honor, and some to dishonor. But if a man pourge
himself from soch fellows, he shall be a vessel sanctified unto honor, mete
for the LORD, and prepared unto all good works. 1. Tim. 6
Fle thou the lusts of youth* but follow righteousness, faith, love, peace*
with all them that call upon the LORD with pure heart. (...)
As for folish questions an^ soch as teach not, put them from the: for tho^
know that they do but ge^der strife. The servant of the LORD ought not to
strive, but to be gentle unto every man: apt to teach, one that can forbear
the evil, one yt can (...)
with meekness enfourme them yt (...) if God at any time will give (...) for to
know the truth (...) again from the snare of (...) are holden in preson of
him (...)

III. Chapter.
^. Tim. 4. a ^. Pet. 3. a ^ud. 1. c
BUT this shall thou know, that in the last days shall come parelous times. For
there shall be me^ which shall hold of the^ selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
cursed speakers, dishobedient to their elders, unthankful, vngoostly, unkind,
truce breakers, false accusers, ryatours, fearce, despysers of them which are
good, traitors, heady, hye minded, gredy upon voluptuousnes more then the
lovers of God, having a shine off godly living, but denyenge the power
thereof. And soch avoyde. ^it. 1. c
Of this sort are they which ru^ne from house to house, and bring in to
bondage weme^ lade^ with sin: which (women) are led with diverse lusts, ever
learning, and are never able to come unto the knowledge of the truth.

^xod. 7. b
But like as Iamnes and Ia^bres withstode Moses, even so do these also resist
the truth: me^ they are of corrupt minds, and lewd as concerning ye faith:
but they shall prevail no longer. For their folishnes shall be manifest unto all
men, as theirs was.

But thou have seen the experience of my doctrine, my faszhion of living, my
purpose, my faith, my longsufferynge, my love, my patience, my persecucions, my
affliccions, which happened unto me Act. 13. a ^^d 14. a Cor. 1. b
at Antioche, at Iconium, at Lystra, which persecucions I suffered patiently,
and from the^ all the LORD delivered me. Eccli. 2. a ^al. 33. c
Ye and all they that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecucion.
But the evil men and disceauers shall wax worse and worse, disceauynge and
being disceaued.

Tim. 1. c
But continue thou in the things that thou have learned, which also were
committed unto the, seeing thou know of who^ thou have learned them, And for
so much as thou have known holy scripture of a child, the same is able to
make ye wise unto salvation through the faith in Christ Jesus. Pet. 1. d
For all scripture given by inspiracion of God, is profitable to teach, to
improve, to amend, and to instruct in righteousness, that a man off God may
be perfect, and prepared unto all good works.

The IIII. Chapter.
I Testifye therefore before God and before the LORD Jesus Christ, which shall
come to judge the living and ^he deed, at ^is appearing in his kyngdo^^ (...)
each ^hou the word, be fervent, be it (...) out of season: Improve, rebuke,
(...) all long sufferynge and (...) will come, when they shall not suffer
wholesome doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they (whose ears ytche)
get them an heap of teachers, and shall turn their ears from the truth, and
shall be given unto fables. But watch thou in all things, suffer aduersite, do
the work of a preacher of the Gospel, fulfill thine office unto the vttemost.

(...)
For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departinge is at hand. I
have fought a good fight: I have fulfilled the course: I have kept the
faith. From hence (...)
crown of righteousness, which the LORD the righteous judge shall give me in yt
day: Howbeit not unto me only, but unto all them that love his coming. Make
speed to come unto me at once.

For (...)
Demas has left me, and loves this present world, and is departed unto
Tessalonica, Crescens in to Galacia, Titus unto Dalmacia, Only Lucas is with
me. Take (...)
Mark, and bring him with the: for he is profitable unto me to the
mynistracion. Tichicus have I sent to Ephesus. The cloak that I left at Troada
with Carpus bring with the when thou come: and the books, but specially the
parcheme^t: (...)
Alexander the coppersmyth did me much evil, the LORD reward him acordynge
to his deeds, of whom be thou ware also. For he withstode our words sore.

In my first answering no man assisted LORD stood by me, and stre^gthed me,
that by me the preachinge should be fulfilled to the vttemost, and that all the
Heythe^ should hear. And I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion. And the
LORD shall deliver me from all evil doing, and shall keep me unto his heavenly
kingdom. To whom be praise for ever and ever, Amen.

Salute Prisca and (...)
Aquila, and ye houszholde of Onesiphorus. ^
Erastus abode at Corinthum. But ^
Trophimus left I sick at Miletu^. Make speed to come before winter. Eubolus,
and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren salute the. The LORD
Jesus Christ be with thy sprete. Grace be with you, Amen.

The second epistle unto Timothy, written from Rome, wha^ Paul was presented
the second time before the Emperor Nero.

The Epistle of of the Apostle S. Paul unto Titus.
The sum of this epistle.
Chap. I. Paul exhorts Titus to ordene prestes or biszhoppes in every cite,
declares what manner of men they ought to be that are chosen to that office,
and charge Titus to rebuke soch as withstonde the gospel. Chap. II. He
tells him how he shall teach all degrees to behave them selves. Chap. III. Of
obedience to soch as be in auctorite. He warns Titus to bewarre of foolish
and unprofitable questions.


The first Chapter.
(...)
to preach the faith off Gods elect, and the knowledge of ye truth, which
ledeth unto god lines, upon the hope of eternal life: which God (...)
that can not lie has promised before the times of the world: but at his time
has opened his word through preachinge, which is committed unto me acordinge
to the commandment of God our Savior.

(...)
Unto Titus my natural son after ye comen faith.

Grace, mercy, and peace from God the father, and from the (...)
LORD Jesus Christ our Savior.

(...)
For a Bisshoppe must be blameless, as the (...)
steward of God: not wylfull, not angrye, (...)
not given unto much wine, no fyghter, not gredye of filthye lucre: but
harbarous, one that loves goodness, sober minded, righteous, holy, temperate,
and soch one as cleueth unto the true word of doctrine: that he may be able
to exhort with wholesome learning, and to improve them that say against it.

Act. 15. a
For there are many dishobedient, and 2. Tim. 3. a
which peruerte whole houses, teachinge things which they ought not, because
of filthye lucre. One of them selves even their own prophet, said: Epimenides
The Cretayns are always liars, evil beestes, and slow belies. This witness
is true. Wherefore rebuke them sharply, yt they may be sound in the faith, and
not to take heed unto Jews fables and commandments of men, which turn them
away from the truth. Mat. 12 a and. 23. c
Unto ye clean are all things clean: but To. 14. c
to the unclean and unbelievers, there is nothing clean, but both their mind
and conscience is defiled. They say that they know God, but with the deeds
they deny him: for so much as they are abominable and dishobedient, and
unmeet to all good works.

The II. Chapter.
But speak thou that which becomes Genesis ^. c
obedient unto their own huszbandes, that the word of God be not evil spoken
of. Exhort the young men likewise, that they be sober minded. Above all thing
show thy self 1. Tim. 4. b 1. Pet. 5. a
an ensample off good works, with incorrupt doctrine, with honestye, with the
wholesome word which can not be rebuked: 1. Pet. 2 b 3. b
that he which withsto^deth may be ashamed, having nothing in you that he
may disprayse.

(...)
Exhort the servants, to be obedient unto their masters, to please in all
things, not answeringe again, nether to be pykers, but to show all good
faithful^ (...) in all things they may do (...) to the doctrine off God our
(...) For the grace of God that brings (...) unto all men, has appeared, and
teaches us, that we should deny ungodliness, and 1. Ioh. 2. c
wordly lusts: and that we should live discretly, righteously, and godly in
this world, lokynge for that blessed hope and appearing of the glory of ye
great God and of our Savior Jesus Christ: Romans 8. a Gal. 3. b
which gave him self for us, to redeem us from all unrighteousness, and to
pourge us to be a peculiar people unto himself, to be fervently given Ephe. 2.
b
unto good works. These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all
earnest. 1. Tim. 4. b
Se that no man despise the.

The III. Chapter.
Romans 13. a 1. Pet. ^. b
that they submytte them selves unto Princes and to the hyer auctorite, to obey
the officers, to be ready unto all good works, that they speak evil of no
man, that they be no stryuers, but soft, showing all mekenes unto all men. For
we our selves also were in times past, unwise, dishobedient, in error,
serving lusts and diverse manners of voluptuousnes, living in maliciousnes
and envye, full of hate, hatynge one another.

But after that ye kyndnesse and love of God our Savior to man ward
appeared, not for ye deeds of righteousness which we wroughte, but after his
mercy he saved us by the Ioh. 3. a
fountain of the new birth, and renuynge of the holy ghost, which he shed on
us abundauntly, through Jesus Christ our Savior: yt we being made righteous
Act. 15. b Ephe. 2. a
by his grace, should be heirs of eternal life acordynge to hope. This is a
true saye^ge.

1. Tim. 1. a and 6. a 2. Tim. 2. c
As for folish questions, and genealogies, and braulynges and stryuynges about
ye law, avoid the^, for they are unprofitable and vain. Mat 18. b 2. Tess.
3. a To. 16. b
A man that is given unto heresye, after ye first and second monicion, avoid,
and know, that he that is soch, is perverted, and synneth even ^amned by his
own judgment.

When I shall send Artemas or Tichicus ^^to ye, make speed to come to me unto
Ni^^polis, for I have determined there to ^^ynter. Bring Zenas ye Scrybe and
Apol^^s on their journey diligently, that nothin^^ be lacking unto them. And
let ours (...) ^^cell in good works, as far (...), that they be not (...)

(...) with me, salute the. Great them that love us in the faith. Grace be with
you all, Amen.

Written from Nicopolis in Macedonia.

The Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul unto Philemon.
The sum of this Epistle.
He reioyseth to hear of the faith and love of Philemon, whom he desires to
forgive his servant Onesimus, and louyngly to receive him again.

PAul the presoner of Jesus Christ, and brother Timotheus.

Unto Philemon the beloved, and our helper, and to the beloved Appia, and to
Archippus or fellow soudyer, and to the congregation in thy house.

Grace be with you, and peace from God our father and from the LORD Jesus
Christ.

I thank my God, making mention all ways of the in my prayers (for so much
as I hear of thy love and faith which thou have on the LORD Jesus, and toward
all saints) that our comen faith may be fruitful in the, through knowledge of
all ye good that ye have in Christ Jesus. Great joy and consolacion have I in
thy love. For by the (brother) the saints are hertely refreshed.

Wherefore though I have great boldness in Christ to command the that which
becomes the, yet for loves sake I rather beseke ye, though I be as I am, eue^
Paul aged, and now a presoner also of Jesus Christ. I beseke the for my son
(...)
Onesimus (whom I have begotten in my bonds) which in time past was to the
unprofitable, but now profitable both to the and me. Whom I have sent again:
but receive thou him (that is) even mine own heart. For I would have kept him
still with me, that in thy stead he might have mynistred unto me in ye bonds
of ye Gospel: Nevertheless without thy mind would I do nothing, that ye good
which thou do, should not be of compulsion, but wyllingly.

Happly he therefore departed for a season, that thou should receive him for
ever: not now as a servant, but above a servant, even a brother beloved,
specially to me, but how much more unto ye, both in ye flesh and in the LORD?
If thou hold me for thy companyon, receive him then even as my self. But if
he have hurt the, or owes the ought, that lay to my charge. I Paul have
written it with mine own hand, I will recompense it: so that I do not say
unto ye, how that thou owe unto me even thine own self. Even so brother,
let me enjoy the in the LORD: refresh thou my heart in the LORD.

Trustinge in thine obedience, I have written unto the, for I know that thou will do more then I say. Morouer prepare me lodginge, for I hope that through
your prayers I shall be given unto you. There saluteth the, Epaphras my fellow
presoner in Christ Jesus, Marcus, Aristarchus, Demas, Lucas, my helpers. The
grace of our LORD Jesus Christ be with your sprete, Amen.

Sent from Rome by Onesimus a servant.

The first Epistle of the Apostle S. Peter.
The sum of this Epistle.
Chap. I. He shows that through the abundaunt mercy of God we are begotten
again to a lively hope: and how faith must be tr^ed: how the salvation in
Christ is no news, but a thing prophesied of old. He exhorts them to a
godly conversation, for so much as they are now borne a new by the word of
God. Chap. II. He exhorts men to lay aside all vice, shows that Christ is
the foundation where upon they be buylt, prays them to absteyne from fleshly
lusts, and to obey worldly rulers. How servants should behave them selves
toward their masters. He exhorts to suffer after the ensample of Christ.
Chap. III. How wives ought to order them selves toward their huszbandes and in
their apparel The duty of me^ toward their wives. He exorteth all men to
unite and love, and patiently to suffer trouble. Of true baptyme. Chap. IIII.
He exhorts men to cease from sin, to spend no more time in vice, to be
sober and apt to prayer, to love each other, to be pacient in trouble, and to
bewarre that no man suffer as an evil doer, but as a Christian man, and not to
be ashamed. Chap. V. A special exhortacion for all bisshoppes or prestes to
feed the flock of Christ, and what their duty is, and what reward they shall
have if they be dilligent. He exhorts young persons to submytt the^ selves
to the elder, every one to love another, to be sober, and to watch, that they
may resist the enemy.
The first Epistle of the Apostle S. Peter.
The first Chapter.
PETER an Apostle of Heb. 9. b and 10. c
sprenklynge of the blood of Jesus Christ.

Grace and peace be multiplied with you.

2. Cor. 1. a Ephe. 1. a
Blessed be God and the father of our LORD Jesus Christ, which acordinge to
his great mercy has begotten us again unto a lively hope 1. Co. 15. c
by the resurreccion of Jesus Christ from the deed, to an incorruptible and
undefiled inheritance, which never shall fade away, but is reserved in heaven
for you that are kept by the power of God through faith to salvation, which is
prepared all ready to be showed in the last time: in the which ye shall rejoice,
though now for a little season (yff need require) ye are in heaviness through
manyfolde temptacions: Ioh. ^0. ^
in whom now ye believe* though ye se him not. Even so shall ye rejoice also with
vnoutspeakable and glorious joy, receauynge the end^ of your faith, even the
salvation of your^ souls.

Of which salvation the prophets have inquired and searched, which prophesied
off the grace that should come upon you: searchinge when or at what time the
sprete off Christ that was in them, shuld^ signifye, which (sprete) testified
before the passions that should come unto Christ, an^ the glory that should
follow after. Vnt^ the which (prophets) it was declared, th^^ not unto them
selves, but unto us th^^ should mynister the things which are no^ showed unto
you, by them which through holy ghost sent down from heaven, ha^^ preached unto
you the things (...)
which (...) angels delight to behold.

Wherefore gyrde op the (...)
(...) your mind, be sober, and trust (...) on the grace that is brought unto
you, by the declarynge of Jesus Christ, as obedient children, not faszhionynge
your selves to yor old lusts of ignorance: but as he which has called you
is holy, eue^ so be ye holy also in all your conversation: for it it written:
Leuit 11. g and 19 a
Be ye holy, for I am holy.

And if so be that ye call on the father, which without respect of persons
judges Mat. 25. c
acordynge to every man's work, se yt ye pass ye time of your pilgremage in
fear: ^. Cor. 6. c and 7. c
and know, that ye were not redeemed with corruptible silver and gold, from
your vain conversation (which ye received by the traditions of the fathers)
Heb. 9. b 1 Ioh. 1. b Apo. 1. a
but with the precious blood of Christ, as of an innocent and undefiled lamb,
which was ordained before Esa. 9 b Luc. 2. b
for your sakes, which through him believe on God, that raised him up from the
deed, Phil. 2. a
and has given him the glory, that ye might have faith and hope in God: Even
ye which have purifyed your souls Act. 15. b
in obeyenge the truth through the sprete, for to love brotherly without
faynynge, and fervently one to love another with a pure heart, as they that are
borne a new, not of corruptible sede, but of incorruptible, eue^ by the living
word of God, which endures for ever. Esa. 40. a Eccli. 14. b ^aco. 1. b
For all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man is as the flower of
grass. The grass withers, and the fl^ure falls away but the word of the
LORD endures for ever. This is the word, that is preached among you.

The II. Chapter.
Ephe. 4. a Col. 3. a Heb. 12. a
as newborn babes desire that reasonable milk, which is without corrupcion,
that ye may grow therein, if so be that ye have Psalm. 33 a
taisted how friendly the LORD is. Unto whom ye are come, Ephe. 2. c
as to the living stone, which is disalowed of men, but chosen of God and
precious. And ye also as living stones are made a spiritual house, and an
holy presthode, to offer up Romans 12. a
spiritual sacrifices, acceptable unto God by Jesus Christ. Wherefore it is
contained in the scripture: Esa. 28. c Mat. 21. e Act. 4. a
Behold, I put in Sion an head corner stone, elect and precious, and he that
believes on him, shall (...) be confounded. Unto you therefore which (...) he is
precious: but unto them that (...) is ye same stone which the Psalm (...)
(...) made the head stone in the (...) one to stomble at, Esa. 8. c
and a rock to be offended at, namely in the^ which stomble at ye word, and
believe not that whereon they were set.

(...)
But ye are that chosen generation, that (...)
Even you which in time past were not a people, but now are the people of God:
which were not under mercy, but now have optayned mercy.

Dearly beloved, I beseke you as strangers and pilgrems, (...)
absteyne from the fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul, and led an
honest conversation among the Heythen, (...)
that they which bacbyte you as evil doers, may se your good works, and
praise God in the day of visitacion.

Submytte your selves unto all manner ordinance of men for the LORDS sake:
(...)
whether it be unto the king as unto ye chief head, or unto rulers, as unto
them that are sent of him, for the punishment of evil doers, but for the
praise of the^ that do well. For so is the will of God, that ye with well
doing should put to silence the ignorance of folishmen: as fre, and not as
having the liberty for a cloak of wickedness, but eue^ as the servants of
God. Honor all men. Love brotherly fellishippe. Fear God. (...)
Honor the king.

(...)
Ye servants, obey your masters with all fear: not only if they be good and
courteous, but also though they be froward. For that is grace, if a man for
conscience toward God endure grefe, and suffer wrong. For what praise is it,
if wha^ ye be buffeted for yor fautes, ye take it patiently? (...)
But if when ye do well, ye suffer wrong, and take it patiently, that is grace
with God. For hereunto are ye called, for so much as Christ also suffered for
us, leaving us an (...)
ensample, that ye should follow his fotesteppes, which did no sin, nether was
there gyle found in his mouth: (...)
which when he was reuyled, reuyled not again: wha^ he suffered, he threatened
not: but commyted the cause unto him, that judges righteously: (...)
which his own self bare our sins in his body upon the tree, that we should
be delivered from sin, and should live unto righteousness: by whose strypes ye
were healed. (...)
For ye were as sheep goinge astraye, but now are ye turned unto the shepherde
and Biszhoppe of your souls.

The III. Chapter.
(...)
let the wives be in subieccion to their huszbandes, that even they which
believe not the word, may without the word be won by ye co^uersacion of the
wives, when they behold yo pure conversation in fear. Whose apparel (...)
shall not be outward with broyded here, and hanginge on of gold, or in putting
on of gorgious array, but let ye inward man of ye heart be incorrupt with a meke
and a quyete sprete, which before God is much set by. For after this manner in
the old time, did ye holy weme^ which trusted in God, tyer themselves, and
were obedient unto their huszba^des: Even as Sara obeyed Abraham, (...)
and called him lord: whose daughters ye are, as long as ye do well, not
being afraid for any trouble.

Likewise ye men, dwell with them acordinge unto knowledge, geuynge (...)
hono unto the wife, as to the weaker vessel: and as unto the^ yt are heirs
with you of the grace of life, that your prayers be not let.

(...)
Recompense not evil for evil, nether rebuke for rebuke: but contrary wise,
bless: and know that ye are called thereto, even yt ye should be heirs of ye
(...)
blessing. For (...)
who so lists to live, and would feign se good days, Let him refrain his
tongue from evil, and his lips yt they speak no gyle. Let him eschew evil,
and do good: Let him seek peace and ensue it. For ye eyes of the LORD are over
the righteous, and his ears are open unto their prayers. But ye face of the
LORD beholds the^ yt do evil. And who is it that can harm you, if ye
follow that which is good? Not withsto^dinge (...)
blessed are ye, if ye suffer for righteousness sake (...)
Fear not ye their threatnynge, nether be troubled, but sanctifye the LORD
God in your hertes. (...)
Be ready always to give an answer to every man, that axeth you a reason of
the hope that is in you, and that with mekenes and fear, having a good
conscience, (...)
that they which bacbyte you as evil doers, may be ashamed, that they have
falsely accused your good co^uersacion in Christ.

(...)
For it is better (if the will of God be so) that ye suffer for well doing,
the^ for evil doing. For as much as Christ has once suffered for our sins,
ye just for the unjust, for to bring us to God: and was slain after the
flesh, but quyckened after the sprete.

In the which sprete he also went, and preached unto ye spretes that were in
preson, which in time past believed not, when God once a bode and suffered
pacie^tly in the time of Noe, while the Arc was a preparynge: Genesis 7. c
Wherein few (that is to say eight souls) were saved by water. Which
signifies Romans 6. a
baptyme yt now saves us: not ye puttinge away of the fylth of the flesh, but
in yt a good conscience co^senteth unto God by ye resurreccion of Jesus Christ,
which is on the right hand of God, and is gone in to heaven, angels, power
and might subdued unto him.

The IIII. Chapter.
FOr as much then as Christ has suffered Romans 9. a
For he which suffers in the flesh, ceasseth from sin, yt hence forth (as
much time as yet remains in ye flesh) he should not live after the lusts of
me^, but after the will of God. For it is enough, yt we have spent ye time past
of the life, after the will of ye Heythen, wha^ we walked in wantannesse,
lusts, dronke^nes, glotony, ryotous drinking, and i^ abominable Idolatrye.
And it seems to the^ a strange thing, yt ye run not also with them unto the
same excess of ryote, and speak evil of you. (Which shall give aco^ptes unto
hi^ yt is ready to judge ye quycke and ye deed.) For unto this purpose also was
ye Gospel preached unto the deed, yt they should be judged like other me^ i^
ye flesh, but should live unto God in ye sprete. The end of all things is at
hand.

Mat. 24. d
Be ye therefore sober and watch unto prayers: Pro. 10. b
For love covers the multitude of sins. Be ye herberous one to another
without grudginge, and mynister one to another, eueryone with the gift yt he
has received, as good stewardes of the manifold grace of God. Iere. 23. b
If any man speak, let hi^ speak it as ye words of God. To. 12. b
If any man have an office, let him execute it as out of the power yt God
mynistreth unto hi^, yt God may be praised in all things through Jesus Christ,
To who^ be hono and domynion for ever and ever Amen.

Derely beloved, marvel not at this Luc. (...) 1. Cor. ^. b 1 Pet. 1. b
heat (which is come among you to try you) as though some strange thing
happened unto you: but rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers (...)
If ye be reuyled for ye name of Christ, blessed are (...) ye sprete (which is
ye sprete of glory and (...) rests upon you. On their part (...) spoken of,
but on yo part he is (...)

(...)
But se that none of you (...), or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busy
body in other men's matters. If any man suffer as a Christen man, let him not be
ashamed, but let him praise God on this behalf. Iere. 25. d and 40. b Ezec. 8.
b
For ye time is come, that judgment must begin at the house of God. If it
first begin at us, what shall the end be of the^ which believe not the Gospel
of God? Pro. 11. d
And if ye righteous scacely be saved, where shall ye ungodly and sinner
appear? Wherefore let them that suffer acordynge to the will off God, commytte
their souls unto him with well doing, as to the faithful creator.

The V. Chapter.
Act. 5. c
and a witness off the affliccions in Christ, and partaker of the glory that
shall be opened. Act. 20. d
Feed Christ's flock which is among you, and take the ouerfighte of the^, not
as though ye were compelled thereto, but wyllingly: not for the desire of filth
ye lucre, but of a good mind: not as though ye were lords over the parishe^s,
Tit. 2. a
but that ye be an ensample to the flock: and when the chief shepherde shall
appear, ye shall receive the incorruptible crown of glory.

Likewise ye yo^ger submytte your selves unto the elder. Submytte your selves
every man one to another, and knyt yor selves together in lowlynes of mind.
Pro. 11. a Iaco. 4. a
For God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble. Submytte yo
selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalte you when
the time is come. Mat. 6. c Luc. 12. c
Cast all your care on him, for he cares for you.

Job. 1. b
for yor adversary ye deuell, walks about as a roaringe lion, seeking whom
he may devour, Iaco. 4. a
whom resist steadfast in the faith, and know, that your brethren in the
world have even the same affliccions.

But ye God of all grace, which has called you to his everlasting glory in
Christ Jesus, shall his own self make you perfect, which suffer Romans 8. c ^.
Pet. 1. a Heb. ^^. d
a little season: eue^ he shall settle, strength, and stablish you. To him be
praise and domynion for ever and ever, Amen.

By Siluanus your faithful brother (as I suppose) have I written unto you
breuely, exhortinge and testifyenge, how that this is the true grace of God
wherein ye sto^de. The companyons of your eleccion that are at (...), salute
you, and Marcus my son. (...) one another with the kiss of love. (...) with
you all which are in Christ (...).

The second Epistle of the Apostle S. Peter.
The sum of this epistle.
Chap. I. For so much as the power of God has given them all things
pertayninge unto life, he exhorts the^ to fly the corrupcion of worldly
lust, to make their calling ^ore with good works and fruits of faith. He
makes mention of his own death, declaringe the LORD Jesus to be the true
son of God, as he himself has seen upon the mount. Chap. II. He prophecieth
of false teachers, and shows their punishment. Chap. III. He exhorts men to
bewarre of soch as would make the^ believe, that the day^ of the LORD were
slack in coming: prays them to lead a godly life, and to look verily for
the coming of the LORD, whose ^^ge tarienge is salvation, and because he
would have no man lost, but would receive all (...) to repentance.
The first Chapter.
Simon Peter a servant and an Apostle of Jesus Christ.

Unto the^ which have optayned like faith with us in the righteousness that
comes of our God, and Sa^oure Jesus Christ.

(...)
Grace and peace be multiplied with you through the knowledge of God and of Jesus
Christ our LORD.

For so much as his godly power has given us all things (that pertayne unto
life and godlynes) through the knowledge of him that has called us by his own
glory and power, whereby the excellent and most great promyses are given unto
us: namely, that ye by the same should be (...)
partakers of the godly nature, if ye fly the corrupt lust of the world:
Give ye all your diligence therefore here unto, and in your faith mynister
virtue: in virtue, knowledge: in knowledge, temperancy: in temperancy, patience:
in patience, godlynes: in godlynes, brotherly love: in brotherly love, general
love. For if these things be plenteous in you, they will not let you be idle
nor unfruitful in ye knowledge of our LORD Jesus Christ. But he that lacks
these things, is blind, and gropeth for the way with the hand, and has
forgotten, that he was cleansed from his old sins.

Wherefore (brethren) give the more diligence, to make your calling and
eleccion sure: for if ye do soch things, ye shall not fall, and by this means
shall there be plenteously mynistred unto you an entering in unto ye
everlasting kingdom of our LORD and Savior Jesus Christ.

(...)
tabernacle, to stere you up by puttinge you in remembrance. For I am sure,
that I must shortly put of my tabernacle, even as our LORD Jesus Christ has
showed unto me. Yet will I do my diligence, that allwaye after my departing ye
may have wherewith to keep these things in remembrance.

For we followed not deceaueable fables, when we declared unto you the power and
coming of our LORD Jesus Christ: (...)
but with our eyes we saw his majesty, when he received of God the father
honor and praise, by a voice that came unto him from the excellent glory,
after this manner: (...)
This is my dear son, in whom I have delight. And this voice herd we
brought down from heaven, when we were with him on the holy mount.

We have also a sure word of prophecy, and ye do well that ye take heed
thereunto, as unto a light (...)
that shyneth in a dark place until the day dawne, and the day star arise
in your hertes. And this shall ye know first, that no prophecy in the
scripture is done of any private interpretacion. (...)
For the prophecy was never brought by the will of man, but the holy men of
God spoke, as they were moved of ye holy ghost.

The II. Chapter.
But there were false prophets also among the people, (...)
even as there shall be false teachers among you likewise, which preuely shall
bring in damnable sects, even denyenge the LORD that has boughte them, and
shall bring upon them selves swift damnacion: and (...)
many shall follow their damnable ways, by who^ the way of the truth shall be
evil spoken of: and through cuvetousnes shall they with feigned words make
marchaundise of you, upon who^ the judgment is not neclige^t in tarienge of
old, and their damnacion slepeth not.

(...)
For if God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them down with the
cheynes of darkness in to hell, and delivered the^ over to be kept unto
judgment: Genesis 7. a
Nether spared the old world, but saved Noe the preacher of righteousness
himself being ye eight, and brought the floude upon the world of the
ungodly: Genesis 19. c
And turned the cities of Sodom and Gomor into aszhes, ouerthrue them, damned
them, and made on them an ensample, unto those that after should live ungodly:
And delivered just Loath which was vexed with the ungodly conversation of ye
wicked. For in so much as he was righteous and dwelt among them, so that he
must needs se it and hear it, his righteous soul was grieved from to day to
day with their unlawful deeds. 1. Cor. 10. b
The LORD knows how to deliver the godly out of tentacion, and how to
reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment for to be punyshed: but specially
them that walk after the flesh in ye lust Iudae. 1. b
wha^ the angels yet which are greater both in power and might, bear not that
blasphemous judgment against them of the LORD. Iere. 12. a
But these are as ye brute beestes, which naturally are brought forth to be
taken and destroyed: Iudae. 1. b
speaking evil of yt they know not, and shall perish in their own
destruction, and so receive ye reward of unrighteousness.

They count it pleasure to live deliciously for a season: Spots are they and
fylthynes: living at pleasure and in disceaueable ways: feastynge with that
which is youres, having eyes full of aduoutrye, and ca^ not cease from sin,
entysinge unstable souls: having an heart exercysed with covetousness: they are
cursed children, and have forsaken the right way, and are gone astraye:
folowinge the way of Number. 22.23.24.
Balaam the son of Bosor, which loved the reward of unrighteousness: but was
rebuked of his iniquyte. The tame and domme beast spoke with ma^s voice, and
forbad the foolishnes of ye prophet.

These are wells without water, and Iudae. ^. c
clouds Ioh. 8. c Romans 6. b
For off whom so ever a man is overcome, unto the same is he in bondage. Luc. 9
f
For if they (after they have escaped from the fylthynes of the world, through
the knowledge of ye LORD and Savior Jesus Christ) are yet tangled again
therein and overcome, Mat. 12. c Heb. 6. a
then is the latter end worse unto them then the beginning. For it had been
better for them, not to have known the way of righteousness, then after they
have known it, Act. 5. a
to turn from the holy commandment, that was given unto them. It is happened
unto them acordynge unto the true proverb: Pro. 26 b Eccli. 34. d
ye dog is turned to his vomyte again and ye sow that was waszhed, unto her
walowynge in the mire.

The III. Chapter.
LORD and Savior.

This first understand, 1. Tim. 4* a 2. Tim. 3. a Iudae. 1 c
that in the last days there shall come mockers, which will walk after their
own lusts, and say: Eze. 12. d
Where is the promise of his coming? For sense the fathers fell on sleep,
every thing contynueth as it was from the beginning of ye creature. This they
know not (and that wylfully) how that the heavens were before time also, and
the earth out of the water, and was in the water by the word of God, Gen 7. d
yet was the world at that time destroyed by the same with the floude. But the
heavens which are yet, and ye earth, are kept in stoare by his word, to be
reserved 2. Tess. 1. b
unto fire against the day of judgment and damnacion of vngodlymen.

Psalm. 89 a Eze. 12. d 1. Pet. 4. a
how that one day is with the LORD as a thousand year: and a thousand
year as one day. The LORD is not slack to fulfill his promise (as some me^
count slacknesse) but is Romans 2. a
pacie^t to us ward, Eze. 18. d
and will not that any man should be lost, but that every man should amend
himself. Nevertheless Mat* 24. d ^ Tess. 5. a Apoc. 3. a
the day of the LORD shall come even as a these in the night: in the which
(day) the heavens shall perish with a great noise, and the Elements shall
melte with heat, and the earth and ye works that are therein, shall burn.

If all these things shall perish, what manner persons then ought ye to be in
holy co^uersacion and godlynes, lokynge for and hastynge unto the coming of
the LORD? In the which the heavens shall perish with fire, and the elements
shall melt with heat. Nevertheless (...)
we look for a new heaven and a new earth (acordynge to his promise) wherein
dwells righteousness.

Wherefore dearly beloved, seeing that ye LORD your salvation, Even as our
dearly beloved brother Paul (acordinge to the wyszdome given unto him) wrote
unto you: ye speakinge there of almost in all Epistles, wherein are many
things hard to be understand, which they that are unlearned and unstable,
peruerte, as they do the other scriptures also, to their own da^nacion.

Ye therefore beloved, seeing ye know it before hand, bewarre, lest ye also be
plucte away through the error of ye wicked, and fall from yor own sted
fastnes. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our LORD and Savior
Jesus Christ. To him be praise now and for ever, Amen.

The first Epistle of the Apostle and Evangelist S. Ihon.
The sum of this epistle.
Chap. I. True witness of the everlasting word of God. The blood of Christ
is the purgacion from sin. No man is without sin. Chap. II. Christ is our
advocate. Of true love, and how it is tried. Chap. III. The synguler love of
God to ward us: and how we again ought to love one another. Chap. IIII.
Difference of spretes, and how the sprete of God may be known from the sprete
of error. Of the love of God and of our neghbours. Chap. V. To love God, is
to keep his commandments. Faith overcomes the world. Everlasting life is
in the son of God* Of the sin unto death.


The first Chapter.
(...)
we have seen with or eyes, which we have looked upon, (...)
and or hands have handled of the word of life: and the life has appeared,
and we have seen, and bear wytnes, and show unto you ye life that is
everlasting, (...)
which was with the father, and has apeared unto us. That which we have seen
and herd, declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellishippe with us, and
that our fellishippe may be with the father and with his son Jesus Christ.
And this write we unto you, (...)
that your joy may be full.

And this is the tydinges which we have herd of him, and declare unto you,
that* God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. If we say that we have
fellishippe with him, and yet walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth.
But if we walk in light, even as he is in light, then have we fellishippe
together, (...)
and the blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all sin.

(...)
If we say that we have no sin, we disceaue our selves, and the truth is
not in us. (...)
But if we knowledge our sins, he is faith full and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If we say, we have not
sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.

The II. Chapter.
(...)
and he it is that optayneth grace for our sins: not for our sins only,
but also for the sins of all the world. And hereby are we sure that we know
him, if we keep his commandments. Ioh. 4. c
He that says: I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar,
and the truth is not in him, But who so keeps his word, in him is the love
of God perfect in deed. Ioh. 13. d
Hereby know we, that we are in him. He yt says he abides in him, ought to
walk even as he walked.

Brethren, I write no new commandment unto you, but that old commandment,
which ye have herd from the beginning. The old commandment is the word,
which ye have herd from the beginning. Again, Ioh. 13. d
a new commandment write I unto you, a thing that is true in him and also in
you: for the darkness is past, and the true light now shyneth.

He that says he is in light, and hates

Babes, I write unto you, Luc. 24. ^ Act. 4. a
that yor sins are forgeuen you for his names sake. I write unto you fathers,
how that ye have known him which is from ye beginning. I write unto you young
me^, how that ye have euercome the wicked. I write unto you little children, how
that ye have known the father. I have written unto you fathers, how that ye
have known him, which is from the beginning. I have written unto you young
men, how that ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have
over come that wicked.

Se that ye love not the world, nether ye 1. Cor. 7. d
the world passes away and the lust thereof. But he that fulfylleth the will
of God, abides for ever.

Little children, it is the last hour, and (as ye have herd that Mat. 24. a
Ioh. 5. d
Antechrist shall come) even now are there many become Antechristes already:
whereby we know, that it is ye last hour. They went out Ioh. 1^. c Act. 20. d
(...). 11. b
from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us, they would no
doubt have continued with us. But * that they may be known, (...) that they
are not all of us.

But ye have the (...). 11. b
anoyntinge of (...) holy, and ye know all things. I have (...) unto you, as
though ye knew not ye tr^eth but ye know it, and are sure, yt no lie comes

This have I written unto you co^cerninge the^ that disceaue you. Esa. 54. c
Ioh. 6. c 14. c. 16. b
And the anoyntinge which ye have received of him, dwells in you: and ye need
not yt any man teach you, but as the anoyntinge teaches you all things, even
so is it true, and is no lie. And as it has taught you, eue^ so abide ye
therein. And now babes, abide in hi^, yt wha^ he shall appear, we may be bold,
and not be made ashamed of him at his coming. If ye know yt he is righteous,
know also that he which does righteousness, is borne of him.

The III. Chapter.
Luc. 20. d
children of God, and yet has it not appeared what we shall be. To 8. c 1. Cor.
15 f Col. 3. a Phil. 3 c
But we know yt when he shall appear, we shall be like him: for we shall se him
as he is. And every man yt has this hope in him, pourgeth him self, even as
he is pure. Who so ever co^mytteth sin, co^mytteth unrighteousness also, and
sin is unrighteousness. Esa. 53. d ^. Tim. 1. c Tit. 2 b 8. Pet. 2. c
And ye know that he appeared to take away our sins: and in him is no
sin. Who so ever abides in him, synneth not: who soever synneth, has not
seen him nether known him.

Ioh. 8. d
for the deuell synneth sense ye beginning. For this purpose appeared the
son of God, to lowse the works of the deuell. * Who so ever is borne of God,
synneth not: for his * sede remains in him, and he ca^ not sin, because he
is borne of God. * By this are the children of God known and the children of
the deuell. Who so ever does not righteousness, is not of God, nether he (...)
loves not his brother.

(...) this is the tydinges which ye have (...) the beginning, that ye should
(...) one another, * not as Cain* which was of the wicked, and slew his
brother. And wherefore slew he him? even because his own works were evil,
and his brothers righteous. (...)
Maruayle not (my brethren) though the world hate you. We know yt we are
translated from death unto life, because we love the brethren. He that loves
not his brother, abides in death. (...)
Who soever hates his brother, is a mansleyer. And ye know that a mansleyer
has not eternal life abydinge in him.

Hereby have we perceived love, that he (...)
let us not love with word nether with tongue, but with ye deed, and with the
truth. Hereby know we, that we are of the verite, and can quyete our hertes
before him. But if our heart condemn us, God is greater the^ our heart, and
knows all things. Dearly beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we
a fre boldness to God ward. (...)
And what so ever we axe, we shall receive it: because we keep his
commandments, and do those things, which are pleasant in his sight.

And this is his commandment, that we believe on ye name of his son Jesus
Christ, and love one another, (...)
as he gave commandment. And he that keeps his commandments, dwells in
him, and he in him. And hereby know we that he abides in us, even by the
sprete which he has given us.

The IIII. Chapter.
DEarly believed, believe not ye every sprete, (...)
but prove the spretes, whether they be of God. For many false prophets are
gone out in to the world. Hereby shall ye know the sprete of God: Every sprete
which confesses, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God: And every
sprete which confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not off
God. And this is that sprete of Antechrist, off whom ye have herd, how that he
shall come, and even now already is he in the world. Little children, ye are
off God, and have over come them: for greater is he that is in you, then he
that is in the world. They are off the world, therefore speak they off the
world, and the world herkeneth unto them. We are of God, (...)
and he that knows God, herkeneth unto us: he that is not of God, hears us
not. Hereby know we the sprete of truth, and ye sprete of error.

(...)
By this appeared the love of God to us ward, because that God sent his only
begotten son in to this world, that we might live through him. Herein is
love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, (...)
and sent his son to make agreement for our sins.

Dearly beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. (...)
No man has seen God at any time. If we love one another, God dwells in us,
and his love is perfect in us. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in
us, because he has given us of his sprete. And we have seen, and testifye that
the father sent the son to be the Savior of the world. (...)
Who soever now confesses yt Jesus is the son of God in him dwells God,
and he in God: and we have known and believed the love that God has to us.



Let us love him, for he loved us first (...)
If any man say: I love God, and yet hates his brother, he is a liar. For he
that loves not his brother whom he seyth, how can he love God, whom he seyth
not? And this commandment have we of him, (...)
that he which loves God, should love his brother also.

The V. Chapter.
(...)
is borne of God. And who soever loves him that begat, loves him also which
was begotten of him. By this we know that we love Gods children, when we love
God, and keep his commandments. For this is the love of God, that we keep
his commandments, (...)
and his commandments are not grievous. For all that is borne of God, over
comes the world: and this is the victory that overcomes the world, eue^
our faith. Who is it yt overcomes the world, but he which believes that
Jesus is the son of God?

This is he that comes with water and blood, even Jesus Christ: not with
water only, but with water and blood. Mat. 3. b and 17. a Ioh. 1. d and 12. d
And it is the sprete that bears wytnes: for the sprete is the truth. (For
there are three which bear record in heaven: the father, the word, and the
holy ghost, and these three are one.) And there are three which bear record in
earth: the sprete, water and blood, and these three are one.

If we receive the witness of men, the Ioh ^. e Romans 8. b Gal. 4. a
He that believes on ye son of God, has the wytnes in him self. He that
believes not God, has made him a liar. And this is that record, even yt God
has given us everlasting life. Ioh. 1. a
And this life is in his son. He that has the son of God, has life: He
that has not the son of God, has not life.

These things have I written unto you, which believe on the name of the son
of God, that ye may know, how that ye have eternal life, and that ye may
believe on ye name of the son of God. And this is the fre boldness which we
have toward him, that if we axe any thing acordinge to his will, he hears
us. And if we know that he hears us what so ever we axe, then are we sure
that we have ye peticions, which we have desired of him.

If any man se his brother sin a sin Iere. 7. b Mat. 1^. c Ioh* 8* b
sin unto death, for the which say I not that a man should pray. All
unrighteousness is sin, and there is sin not unto death.

We know, that whosoever is borne off God, synneth not: but he that is
begotten of God, keeps himself, and yt wicked touches him not. We know that
we are of God, and the world is set altogether on wickedness. But we know,
that the son of God is come, Luc. ^4. ^
and has given us a mind, to know him which is true: and we are in him yt is
true, in his son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and ever lasting life.
Babes keep your selves from image

The second Epistle of S. Ihon.
The sum of this epistle.
He writes unto a certain lady, reioyseth that her children walk in the
truth, exhorts the^ unto love, warns them to bewarre of soch disceauers as
deny that Jesus Christ came in the flesh, prays them to continue in the
doctrine of Christ, and to have nothing to do with them that bring not this
learning.

THE Elder. To ye elect

Grace, mercy, and peace be with you from the LORD Jesus Christ ye son of
the father in the truth and in love.

I am greatly reioysed, that I have found among thy children, them that walk
in ye truth, as we have received a commandment of the father. And now lady I
beseke the (not as though I wrote a new commandment unto the, but the same
which we have had from the beginning) that we love one another. And this is
the love, that we walk after his commandments.

This is the commandment (as ye have ^. Ioh. 2. c and 4. a
For many disceauers are come in to the world, which confess not yt Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh: this is a disceauer and an Antechrist. Take heed
to your selves, that we lose not that which we have wrought, but that we may
receive a full reward. Who so ever transgresses, and abides not in the
doctrine of Christ, has not God: he that abides in ye doctrine of Christ,
has both the father and the son.

^. Tess. 3. b
If any man come unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not in to
the house, nether salute him: for he that saluteth him, is partaker of his
evil deeds. I had (...) any things to write unto you: neuerthe^^^^ I would
not write with papyre and ynke, (...) to come unto you, and to (...) mouth, that
our joy (...) ^hildren of thy elect sister

The third Epistle of S. Ihon.
The sum of this epistle.
He is glad of Gaius, that he walks in the truth: exhorts him to be
loving unto the poor christen in their persecucion, shows the unkind
dealing of Diotrephes, and the good report of Demetrius.

THE Elder. To the beloved Gaius, whom I love in the truth. My beloved, I
wysshe

My beloved, (...)
thou do faithfully what so ever thou do to the brethren and to
strangers, which have borne witness of thy love before the congregation: and
thou have done well that thou dyddest bring them forward on their journey,
worthily before God. For because of his names sake they went forth, and took
nothing of the Heythen. We therefore ought to receive soch, that we might be
helpers unto the truth.

I wrote to the congregation, but Diotriphes, which loves to have the
preemynence among them, received us not. Wherefore,

My beloved, follow not yt which is evil, but that which is good. He that
does well, is of God: but he that does evil, seyth not God. Demetrius has
good report of all men, and of the truth: ye and we our selves also bear
record, and ye know that our record is true. I had many things to write,
but I would not with ynke, and pen write unto the. But I trust shortly to se
the and so will we speak together mouth to mouth. Peace be with the. The lovers
salute the. Great the lovers by name.

The Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul to the Hebrews.
The sum of this epistle.
Chap. I. How God dealt louyngly with the^ of the old time in sendynge them
his prophets, but much more mercy has he showed us in that he sent us his
own son. Of the most excellent glory of Jesus Christ, which in all things
is like to his father. Chap. II. He exhorts us to be obedient unto the new
law which Christ has given us and not to be offended at the infirmite and
low degree of Christ: and why? it was necessary that for our sakes he should
take soch an humble state upon him, that he might be like unto his brethren.
Chap. III. He requires us to be obedient unto the word of Christ, which is
more worthy then Moses The punishment of soch as will needs harden their
hertes. Chap. IIII. The Sabbath or rest of the Christen. Punishment of
unbelievers. The nature of the word of God. Chap. V. Christ is our hye pressed,
the seat of grace, and more excellent then the hye prestes of the old law.
Chap. VI. He goes forth with the thing that he began in the latter end of
the fyfft chapter, and exhorts them not to faint, but to be steadfast and
pacient: for so much as God is sure in his promise. Chap. VII. He co^pareth
the presthode of Christ unto Melchisedech, but to be far more excellent.
Chap. VIII. The office of Christ is more worthy then the prestes office of the
old law, which was imperfect, and therefore abrogate. Chap. IX. The profit
and worthynesse of the old Testament, and how far the new excels it.
Chap. X. The old law had no power to cle^se away sin, but Christ did it
with offering up his body once for all An exhortacion to receive this
goodness of God tha^k fully with patience and steadfast faith Chap. XI. What
faith is, and a comme^dacion of the same. The steadfast believe of the fathers in
old time. Chap. XII. An exhortacion to be pacient and steadfast in trouble and
aduersite, upon hope of everlasting reward. A comme^dacion of the new
Testament above the old Chap. XIII. He exhorts us unto love, to hospitalite,
to think upon soch as be in aduersite, to manteyne wedlock, to avoyde
cuvetousnesse, to make much of the^ that preach Gods word, to bewarre of
strange learning, to be content to suffer rebuke with Christ, to be thankful
unto God, and obedient unto to our heads.


The first Chapter.
GOD in time past dyuersly Mat. 28. c
whom he has made heir of all things, by whom also he made the world. Sap.
7* d
Which (son) being the brightness of his glory, and the very image of his
substance, bearinge up all things with the word of his power, Ephe. 1. a
has in his own person pourged our sins, and is set on the right hand
of the majesty on hye: being eue^ as much more excellent the^ ye angels, as
he has optayned a more excellent Luc (...) Phil. 2. a
name then they.

For unto which of the angels said he at Psalm. 2. a 2. Reg. 7
Thou art my son, this day have I begotten the? And again: Psalm. 2. a 2.
Reg. 7
I will be his father, and he shall be my son: And again, wha^ he brings in
the first begotten son in to the world, he says: Psalm. 96. ^
And all the angels of God shall worship him. And of the angels he says:
Psalm. 103. ^
He makes his angels spretes, and his mynisters fla^mes of fire. But unto ye
son he says: Psalm. 44
God, ye seat endures for ever and ever: the cepter of ye kingdom is a right
cepter. Thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquyte: wherefore God (which
is thy God) has anointed the with the oil of gladness above ye fellows.
Psalm. 101
And thou LORD in ye beginning have laid the foundation of the earth, and ye
heavens are the works of thy hands, 2. Pet. ^
they shall perish, but thou shall endure: they all shall wax old as does a
garment, and as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed.
But thou art ye same, and the years shall not fail. Unto which of the angels
said he at any time: * Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies
thy footstool? Are they not all mynistry (...) spretes, sent to mynister for
(...), which shall be heirs of salvation (...)

The II. Chapter.
Marc. 1 b
after that it began to be preached by the LORD himself, ^arc. 16. c
was confirmed upon us, by them that herd it, God bearing witness thereto,
with tokens, wonders and diverse powers, and gifts of the holy ghost acordinge
to his own will.

^sal 8. b
What is man, that thou art myndefull of him? or the son of man, that thou
vysitest him? After thou had for a little season made him lower the^ ye
angels, thou crownedst him with honor and glory, and have set him above the
works of thy hands. Thou have put all things in subieccion under his fete. ^
Cor. 1^. c
In that he subdued all things unto him, he left nothing that is not put
under him. Nevertheless now se we not all things yet subdued unto him. But him,
which for a little season was made less then the angels, we se that it is
Jesus: which is ^hil. 2. a
crowned with honor and glory for the sufferynge of death, that he by the
grace of God, should taist of death for all men. For it became him, for whom
are all things, and by who^ are all things (after yt he had brought many
children unto glory) that he should make the LORD of their salvation perfect
through sufferynge, for so much as they all come of one, both he that
sanctifies, and they which are sanctified.

^^al. 21. c
I will declare thy name unto my brethren, and in the mids of the
congregation will I praise the. And again: ^^al. 17. a (...). 12. a Esa. 8. d
I will put my trust in him. And again: ^^al. 17. a (...). 12. a Esa. 8. d
behold, here am I and my children, which God has given me.

For as much then as the children have flesh and blood. (...) 2. a
he also himself likewise took part with them, (...). 13. ^ ^ Cor. 15. f ^
Tim. 1. b
yt he through death, might take away ye power of him, which had lordshippe
over death, that is to say, ye deuell: and that he might deliver the^ which
through fear of death were all their life time in (...) bondage. For he in no
place takes on him (...) ^ngels, but ye sede of Abraham tabeth he on him.
Wherefore in all things it became him to be made (...)
like unto his brethren, that he might be merciful and a faithful hye pressed
in things concerning God, to make agreement for the sins of ye people. (...)
For in that he himself suffered and was tempted, he is able to sucker them
that are tempted.

The III. Chapter.
Wherefore holy brethren, ye that are (...)
Moses in all his house. But this man is worthy of greater honor then moses,
in as much as he which prepares the house, has greater honor in it, then
the house it self. For every house is prepared of some man: (...)
but he that ordained all things, is God. And Moses verily was faithful in
all his house as a mynister, (...)
to bear witness of those things which were to be spoken afterward: But
Christ as a son has rule over his house, (...)
whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence and reioysinge of that
(...)
hope unto the end.

Wherefore, as ye holy ghost says: (...)
Todaye if ye shall hear his voice, harden not your hertes, (...)
as in the prouokynke in the day of temptacion in the wyldernes, where your
fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works fortye years long. Wherefore
I was grieved with that generation, and said: They err ever in their hertes. But

Take heed brethren, that there be not in any of you an evil heart of unbelieve,
to depart from the living God: but exhort your selves daily, while it is
called to day, lest any of you wax hard hearted through ye disceatfulnes of
sin. For we are become partakers of Christ, if we keep sure unto ye end the
beginning of the substance, so long as it is said: Todaye, if ye shall hear
his voice, harde^ not your hertes, as in the prouocacio^. For some when they
herd, provoked. Howbeit not all they yt came out of Egipte by Moses. But with
whom was he displeased fortye years long? Was he not displeased with them yt
sinned, whose carcases were overthrown in ye wilderness? (...)
To whom swear he, yt they should not enter in to his rest, but unto the^ yt
believed not? And we se yt they could not enter in because of unbelieve.

The IIII. Chapter.
(...)
And God rested on the seventh day from all his works. And in this place
again: (...) 4. b
They shall not come in to my rest.

Seeing it follows the^, that some must enter there in to: and they, to whom
it was first preached, entered not therein for vnbeleues sake, therefore
appoynteth he a day again after so long time, and says: Todaye (as it is
rehearsed by David) Todaye if ye shall hear his voice, then harden not your
hertes. For if Joshua had given them rest, the^ would he not afterward have
spoken, of another day. Therefore remains there yet a rest unto the people of
God. For he that is entered in to his rest, ceasseth from his works, (...)
as God does from his

Let us make haist therefore to enter in to (...)
enters through, even to the deuydinge of the soul and the sprete, and of ye
joints and the mary, and is a iudger of the thoughts and inte^tes of the
heart, nether is there any creature invisible in ye sight of him. But all
things are naked and bare unto ye eyes of hi^ of who^ we speak.

The V. Chapter.
(...)
without sin. Let us therefore go boldly unto the (...)
seat of grace that we may receive mercy, and find grace to help in the
time of need.

(...)
to offer gifts and sacrifices for sin: which can have compassion on the
ignorant, and on them that are out of the way, for so much as he himself
also is compased about with infirmyte. Therefore is he bound to offer for
sins, as well for him self as for ye people. And noma^ takes ye honor
unto himself, but he that is called of God, Exo. 28. a
as was Aaron.

Even so Christ glorified not himself to Psalm. 2. a
Thou art my son, this day have I begotten the. As he says also in another
place: Psalm. 109. a
Thou art a pressed for ever after ye order of Melchisedech. Luc. 23. c Ioh. 17. a
And in ye days of his flesh, he offered up prayers and supplicacions, with
strong cryenge and tears unto him yt was able to save him from death: and was
herd also, because he had God in honor. Phil. 2. a
And though he was Gods son, yet learned he obedience, by those things which
he suffered. And he being made perfect, became the cause of everlasting
salvation, unto all the^ yt obey him, and is called of God an hye pressed after
the order of Melchisedech. Whereof we have many things to say, which are hard
to be uttered, because ye are dull of hearing. 1. Cor. ^. a
For where as concerning the time ye ought to be teachers, yet have ye need
again, yt we teach you the first precepts of the word of God: and are become
soch as have need of milk, and not strong meat. For every one that is fed
yet with mylte, is vnexperte in the word of righteousness, for he is but a
babe. But strong meat belongs unto them yt are perfect, which through
custom have their wits exercysed to judge both good and evil.

The VI. Chapter.
Wherefore let us leave the doctrine Act. 18. c Iaco. 4. b
if God permytte. Heb. 10. ^
For it is not possible, that they which were once lighted, and have taisted of
the heavenly gift, and are become partakers of the holy ghost, and 2. Pet. 2. a
have taisted of ye good word of God, and of the power of the world to come,
if they fall away (and concerning them selves crucifye the son of God
afreszhe, and (...) mock off him) that they should be (...) again unto
repentance.

For the earth, that drynketh (...) which comes often upon (...) forth herbs
mete for (...) receaueth blessing of God: But yt ground which bears thorns
and thistles, is nothing worth, and nigh unto cursynge: whose end is to be
brent. Nevertheless (ye dearly beloved) we trust to se better of you, and yt
salvation is nyer, though we thus speak. Mat. 25. d
For God is not unrighteous, that he should forget your work and labor of
love, which ye showed in his name, when ye mynistred unto the saints, and yet
mynister. Ye and we desire, that every one of you show the same diligence, to
the stablyshinge of hope even unto the end, that ye faynte not, but follow
them which through faith and patience inheret the promyses. For when God made
promise to Abraham, because he had none greater to swear by, Genesis 22. c
he swear by himself, and said: Surely I will bless the and multiplye ye in
deed. And so he abode pacie^tly, and optayned the promise.

Exo. 22. b
and the ooth is the end of all strife to confirm the thing among them. But
God, wyllinge very abundauntly to show unto the heirs of promise the stablenes
of his council, added an ooth yt by two immutable things (in the which it is
impossible yt God should lie) we might have a strong consolacion: even we,
which are fled to hold fast the hope that is set before us, which (hope) we
have as a sure and steadfast anchor of our soul. Which (hope) also enters in,
in to those things that are within ye veil, whither the foreru^ner is for us
entered in, eue^ Jesus, which is made an hye pressed forever after ye order of
Melchisedech.

The VII. Chapter.
Genesis 14. a
king of Salem (which being pressed of the most hye God, met Abraham as he
returned again from the slaughter of the kings, and blessed him, unto whom
Abraham also gave tithes of all the goods) first is by interpretacion king of
righteousness: after that is he king of Salem also (that is to say, king of
peace) without father, without mother, without kynne, and has nether
beginning of days, ner end of life: but is likened unto the son of God,
and contynueth a pressed for ever.

But consider how great a man this was, to whom the Patriarch Abraham gave
ti^hes of the spoils. (...)
And verily the children (...), when they recea^^ the presthode, (...)
^^mmaundement acordynge to the (...) he tithes of the people, that (...) their
brethren, though they also came out of the loins of Abraham.

But he whose kynred is not counted among

If now therefore perfeccion came by the presthode of the Levites (for under the
same (presthode) the people received the law) what neded it then furthurmore,
that another pressed should rise after the order of Melchisedech, and not after
the order of Aaron?

(...)
For if the presthode be translated, the^ of necessite must the law be
translated also. For he of whom these things are spoken, is of another trybe,
of the which never man served at the altar.

For it is evident, (...)
that our LORD spronge of the trybe of Judah, to the which trybe Moses spoke
nothing concerning presthode, And it is yet a more evident thing, if after
the symilitude of Mechisedech there arise another pressed, which is not made
after ye law of the carnal commandment, but after the power of the endless
life (For he testifies: (...)
Thou art a pressed for ever after the order of Melchisedech) then the
commandment that went before, is disanulled, because of his weakness, and
unprofitableness. For the law made nothing perfect, but was an introduccion
of a better hope, by yt which hope we draw nigh unto God. And for this cause is
it a better hope, yt it was not promised without an ooth. Those prestes were
made without an ooth, but this pressed with an ooth, by him that said unto him:
The LORD swear, and will not repent: Thou art a pressed for ever after the order
of Melchisedech. Thus is Jesus become a stabliszher of so much a better
Testame^te.

And among them many were made prestes, (...)
to make intercession for us.

For it became us to have soch an hye pressed as is holy, innocent, undefiled,
separate from sinners, and made hyer then heaven: which needs not daily (
(...). 9. b
as yonder hye prestes) to offer up sacrifice first for his own sins, and
then for the peoples sins. For that did he once for all, when he offered up
him self. (...)
For the law makes men prestes which have infirmity: but the word of the
ooth, that came sense the law, makes the son pressed, which is perfect for
evermore.

The VIII. Chapter.
(...)
We have soch an hye pressed, that is set on ye right hand of the seat of
majesty in heaven: and is a mynister of holy things, and of the true
Tabernacle, which God pitched, and not man. For every hye pressed is ordened to
offer gifts and sacrifices: Wherefore it is of necessite, yt this man have
somewhat also to offer. For he were not a pressed, if he were upon earth, where
are prestes yt acordynge to the law offer gifts (which prestes serve unto the
ensample and shadow of heavenly things, even as the answer of God was given
unto Moses, when he was about to fynish the Tabernacle: (...)
Take heed (said he) that thou make all things acordinge to the patron
showed the in the mount.) But now has he optayned a more excellent office, in
as much as he is the mediator of a better Testament, which was made for better
promyses. For if that first (Testament) had been fautles, then should no place
have been sought for the second. For in rebukynge the^ he says: (...)
Behold, the days will come (says the LORD) that I will fynish upon the
house of Israel, and upon the house off Judah, a new Testament: not as the
Testament which I made with their fathers, in that day when I took them by the
hands, to lead them out of the land of Egipte: (...)
for they continued not in my Testament, and I regarded them not, says the
LORD.

LORD. I will give my laws in their mind, and in their hertes will I write
them: (...)
And I will be their God, and they shall be my people: and they shall not teach
every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying: know ye LORD,
for they shall know me from the leest to the most of them: for I will be
merciful over their vnrighteousnesses: And on their sins and on their
iniquyties will I not think any more. In that he says: A new, he weereth out
ye old. Now yt which is worn out and waxed old, is ready to vanish away

The IX. Chapter.
THat first Tabernacle verily had ordinances, and seruynges off God Exodus 25. a
For there was made a foretabernacle, wherein was ye candilsticke, and the
table, and the Leui. 24. b
show bred: and this is called ye Holy. But behind the second veil was the
Tabernacle which is called Holiest of all, which had the golden censor, and the
Exodus 25. b
Arc of the Testament ouerlayed round about with gold, wherein was the Exodus
16. f
golden pot with Manna, and Aarons rodd Number. 17. a
that flourished, and the tables of the Testament: Above therein were the
Cherubins off glory ouershadowynge the Mercyseate: Of which things it is not
now to speak perticularly.

When these things were thus ordained, the prestes went always in to the
first Tabernacle, and excuted ye service of God. Exo. 30 b Leui. 16 g Luc. 1. a
But in to the second went the hye pressed alone once in the year, not without
blood, which he offered for himself and for the ignorance of the people.
Wherewith the Ioh. 10. a and 14. a
way of holiness was not yet opened, while as yet the first Tabernacle was
stondynge. Which was a symilitude for the time then present, in the which were
offered gifts and sacrifices, and could not make perfect (as partaynynge to
the conscience) him, that did the Gods service only with meats and drynkes,
and diverse waszhinges, and iustifienges of the flesh, which were ordained unto
the time of reformacion.

But Christ being an hye pressed of good things to come, came by a greater and
a more perfect Esa. 33. c 2. Cor. 5. a
Tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this manner
building: nether by the blood of goats or calves: 1. Ioh. ^ 1. Pet. ^ Apo* ^
but by his own blood entered he once for all in to the holy place, and has
found eternal redemption. For yff the blood off oxen and off goats, (...)
and the aszhes off the cow when it is sprenkled, haloweth the unclean as
touching the purificacion of the flesh, How much more shall the blood of
Christ (which through the eternal sprete offered him self without spot unto
God) pourge our conscience from deed works, (...)
for to serve t^^geuynge God? And for this cause is, and ^^^e^diatour of the
new (...) through death which chaursed (...) redemption of those tra^sgressons
(that were under the first Testament) they which were called might receive the
promise of eternal inheritance. For where soever is a Testament, there must
also be the death of him that makes the testament.

Gal. 3. c
For a Testament takes auctorite when men are deed: for it is of no value, as
long as he that made it is alive. For the which cause that first Testament
also was not ordained without blood. For when all the commandments
(acordinge to the law) were red of Moses unto all the people, he took ye
blood of calves and of goats, with water and purple woll and ysope, and
sprenkled the book and all the people, saying: * This is the blood of the
Testament, which God has appointed unto you. And the Tabernakle and all the
vessels of the Gods service sprenkled he with blood likewise. And almost

For Christ is not entered in to the holy places yt are made with hands (which
are but symilitudes of true things) but in to the very heaven, for to apeare
now before the face of God for us: Not to offer himself off^ Leui. 16. g
as the hye pressed enters in to the holy place every year with strange
blood: for the^ must he often have suffered sense the world began. But now
in the end of the world has he appeared once, to put sin to flight, by the
offering up of himself. And as it is appointed unto me^ yt they shall once
dye, and then comes the judgment: Romans 5. a ^ Pet. 3. c
Eue^ so Christ was once offered, to take away the sins of many. And unto them
that look for him, shall he appear again without sin unto salvation.

The X. Chapter.
FOr the law * which has but the shadow off good things to come, and not
the things in their own fashion, can never by the sacrifices which they offer
year by year continually, make the comers there unto perfect: Else should
they have ceased to have been offered, because that the offerers once pourged,
shul^^ (...) had no more conscience of sins. (...) in those sacrifices there
is ma^e but a ^^^^^braunce of sins every yea^e.* For (...) yt the blood of
oxen and of goats should take away sins. Wherefore when he comes in to the
world, he says: (...)
Sacrifice and offering thou would not have, but a body have thou ordained
me. Burnt offerynges and synneofferynges have thou not allowed. Then said I:
Lo, I come. I the beginning of the book it is written of me, that I should do
ye will O God. Above wha^ he had said: Sacrifice and offering, and
burntsacrifices and syn offerynges thou would not have, nether have allowed
(which yet are offered after ye law). The^ said he: Lo, I come to do will thy
O God: there takes he away the first, to stablyszhe the latter: In the which
will we are sanctified by the offering up of the body of Jesus Christ once for
all.

And every pressed is ready daily mynistringe, and oftymes offers one manner of
offerynges, which can never take away sins. But this man when he had offered
for sins, one sacrifice which is of value for ever, sat him down on the
right hand of God, and from hence forth tarieth, (...)
till his foes be made his footstool. For with one offering has he made
perfect for ever, the^ that are sanctified. And the holy ghost also bears us
record of this, even when he said before: (...)
This is the Testament, that I will make unto them after those days, says ye
LORD: I will give my laws in their hertes, and (...) minds will I write them,
and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. And where remyssion of
these things is, there is no more offering for sin.

Seeing now brethren, that we have a (...)
fresure

(...)
For if we sin wylfully after that we have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains unto us no more sacrifice for sins, but a fearful
lokynge for judgment; and violente fire, which shall devour ye adversaries.
(...). 17. b (...) 19. c
He yt despyseth Moses law, dies without mercy under two or three witnesses:
Of how much sorer punishment (suppose ye) shall he be counted worthy, which
treads under foot the son of God, and (...). 32. c (...). 12. c (...) 32. c
Vengeance is mine, I will recompense, says the LORD. And again: (...). 32.
c (...). 12. c (...) 32. c
The LORD shall judge his people. It is a fearful thing to fall in to the
hands of the living God.

But call ye to remembrance ye days yt are past, i^ yt which after ye had
received light, ye endured a great fight off adversities: partly while all
me^ wo^dred and gased at you for the shame and tribulacion that was done unto
you: and partly while ye became co^panyons of them which so passed their time.
For ye have suffered with my bo^des, and took a worth ye spoylinge of your
goods, and that with gladness, knowing in your selves, how that ye have in
heaven a better and an enduringe substance. Cast not away therefore yor
confidence, which has so great a reward. (...)
For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye
might receive the promise. (...)
For yet over a little while, and then he that shall come, will come, and will not
tarry. (...)
But the just shall live by his faith: And if he withdraw himself away, my
soul shall have no pleasure in him. As for us, we are not of those which
withdraw them selves to damnacion: but of them that believe to the winning of
the soul.

The XI. Chapter.


(...) 4. a
By faith offered Abell unto God a more plenteous sacrifice: by the which he
optayned witness, that he was righteous: God testifyenge of his gifts, by the
which also he being deed, yet speaks.

(...) a (...) 4. b (...) 44. b (...). c
By faith was Enoch taken away, that he should not se death: and was not
found, because God had taken him away. For before he was taken away, he had
record that he pleased God. But without faith it is impossible to please God.
For he that comes

Genesis 6. d Eccli. 4^ b
By faith Noe honored God, after yt he was warned of things which were not
seen, and prepared the Arc, to ye sauinge of his household: through the which
Arc he condemned the world, and became heir of the righteousness, which
comes by faith.

By faith Abraham (wha^ he was called) obeyed, to go out in to the place, Genesis
12. a 13
which he should afterward receive to inheritance: and he went out, not
knowing whither he should go.

By faith was he a stranger in the lord of promise as in a strange country,
and dwelt in tabernacles: and so did Isaac and Jacob, heirs with him of the
same promise: for he looked for a cite which has a foundation, whose buylder and
maker is God.

By faith Sara also received strength to Genesis 21. a
and was delivered of a child when she was past age, because she judged him to
be faithful which had promised. And therefore spronge there of one (ye even
off one which was as good as deed concerning the body) so many in multitude
Genesis 15. a
as the stars off the sky, and as the sonde off the Sea shore, which is
innumerable.

All these dyed acordinge to faith and received not the promyses, but saw the^
afar off, and believed them, and saluted them: Genesis 47. ^
and confessed, that they were strangers and pilgrems upon earth. For they
that say soch things, declare, that they seek a natural country. And doutles
if they had been myndefull off that country from whence they came out, they had
leisure to have returned again. But now they desire a better, that is to say,
a heavenly. Exo. 3. c Mat. 2^. d
Wherefore God is not ashamed of the^, eue^ to be called their God: for he has
prepared a cite for them.

By faith Abraham offered up Isaac, wha^ Genesis 22. a Eccli. 44 ^
and gave over his only begotten son, in whom he had received the promyses,
of whom it was said: In Isaac shall thy sede be called: For he considered, yt
God was able to raise up again from the deed. Therefore received he him for an
ensample.

By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau, Genesis 27. ^
concerning things to come.

By faith Jacob, when he was a dyenge, Genesis 4^. c
blessed both the sons off Joseph, and bowed himself toward the top of
his cepter.

By faith Joseph when he dyed, Genesis 50. d
remembered ye departing of the children of Israel, and gave commandment
concerning his bones.

^xod. 2. a
By faith Moses wha^ he was borne, was hyd three months of his Elders, because
they saw that he was a proper child, nether feared they the kings
commandment.

^xod. 2. b
By faith Moses when he was greate^ refused to be called the son of Pharao^
daughter: and chose rather to suffer aduersite with the people of God, then to
enjoy ye pleasures of sin for a season: and esteemed the rebuke of Christ
greater riches, then the treasure of Egipte: for he had respect unto the
reward.

Exodus 12. f
for he endured, eue^ as though he had seen him which is invisible.

Exodus 12. b
By faith he held Easter, and the effusion of blood, lest he which slew the
firstborne, should touch them.

Exodus 14 e
By faith they passed through the reed See as by dry land: which wha^ the
Egipcians assayed to do, they were drowned.

By faith the walls of Jericho fell, wha^ they were compased about seven
days.

By faith the harlot Raab perished not with the unbelievers, wha^ she had
received the spies to lodginge peaceably.

And what shall I more say? yt time would be to short for me to tell of ^udi.
7.4.4.11. ^. Reg. 17. ^. Reg. 12.
Gedeon, of ^udi. 7.4.4.11. ^. Reg. 17. ^. Reg. 12.
Barac, and of ^udi. 7.4.4.11. ^. Reg. 17. ^. Reg. 12.
Samson, and of Iepthae, ^udi. 7.4.4.11. ^. Reg. 17. ^. Reg. 12.
and of David, and ^udi. 7.4.4.11. ^. Reg. 17. ^. Reg. 12.
Samuel, and of the prophets, which through faith subdued Dan. 3.
quenched the violence of fire, escaped ye edge of the sword, of weak were
made strong, became valeaunt in battle, turned to flighte the armies of the
aleauntes, ^. Re. 17. c ^. Re. 4. d
the women received their deed again from resurreccion. But other were racked,
and accepted no delyueraunce, that they might obtain the resurreccion that
better is.

Other taisted of mockinges and scourginges, of bonds also and presonment: 3.
Re. 21.
were stoned, were hewn a sunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword,
4. Re. 1. b Mat. 3. a
went about in sheep skynnes and goats skynnes, in need, in tribulacion, in
vexacion, which (men) the world was not worthy of: they wandered about in
wyldernesses, upon mountains, in dens and caves of the earth. And these all
through faith optayned good report, and received not ye promise: because God had
provided a better thing for us, that they without us should not be made
perfect.

The XII. Chapter.
Wherefore seeing we have so great a (...)
let us also lay away all yt presses down, and the sin that hangs on,
and let us run with patience unto the batayl that is set before us, lokynge
unto Jesus ye auctor and fyniszher of faith: (...)
which when the joy was laid before him, abode the cross, and despised the
shame, and is set down on ye right hand of ye trone of God. Consider him
therefore that endured soch speakinge against hi^ of sinners, lest ye be weery
and faynte in your minds: for ye have not yet resisted unto blood, stryuynge
against sin, and have forgotten the consolacion, which speaks unto you as
unto children: (...)
My son, despise not the chastenynge off the LORD, nether faynte when thou
art rebuked of him: (...)
for who^ the LORD loves, him he chasteneth, ye and he scourges every son
that he receaueth.

If ye endure chastenynge, God offers (...)
Life up therefore the hands which were let down, and the weak knees, and se
that ye have straight steps unto your fete, lest any haltinge turn you out
of the way, ye let it rather be healed.

Follow after peace with all men, and holiness, LORD, and look well, that no
man be destitute of the grace of God, lest there spring up any bitter rote,
and cause disquyetnes, and thereby many be defiled: that there be no
whoremonger, or unclean person, as Esau, (...)
which for one meat sake sold his birth right. For ye know, how that
afterward when he would have inhereted the blessing, he was put by: for (...)
he found no place of repentance, though he desired (ye blessing) with
tears. For ye are not come to ye mount that can be touched (...). 19. c
and burns with fire, nether yet to mist and darcknes, and tempest of wedder,
nether to the sound of the trompe, and ye voice of words: which they that
herd, wyszhed away, that the word should not be spoken to them, for they
were not able to abide that which was spoken. (...). 19. b
And if a be had touched the mountain, it must have been sto^ed, or thrust
through with a darte. And so terrible was the sight which appeared, that Moses
said: I fear and quake. But ye are come to the mount Sion, and to the cite of
the living God, to the celestial (...). 21. b
Jerusalem, and to the multitude (...). 4. b
Abel.

Se that ye despise not him that speaks unto you: for if they escaped not
which refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall we not escape, if we
turn away from him that speaks from heaven: whose voice shoke the earth at
that time. But now promyseth he, and says: (...). 2. b
Yet once more will I shake, not the earth only, but also heaven. No doubt that
same that he says yet once more, signifies the remouynge away of those
things which are shaken, as off things which are made: that ye things which
are not shaken, may remain. Wherefore, seeing we receive the immovable
kingdom, we have grace, (...). 2. a
whereby we may serve God, and please him, with reverence and godly fear.
(...) 4. d
For our God is a consumynge fire.

The XIII. Chapter.
(...) 18. a (...). 19. a (...). 1^. b (...). 4. b
Be not forgetful to lodge strangers: for thereby have diverse received angels
in to their houses unawares. Remember them that are in bonds, eue^ as though
ye were bound with them: and be myndefull off them which are in aduersite, as
ye which are also in the body. Let wedlock be had in price in all points,
and let ye chamber be undefiled. For whorekepers and aduouterers God will judge.
Let your conversation be without covetousness, (...). 29. d
and be content with that ye have already, for he has said: (...). 31. b
(...) 1. a (...) 55. a (...) 17. a
I will not fail the nether forsake the, so that we may boldly say: (...).
31. b (...) 1. a (...) 55. a (...) 17. a
The LORD is my helper, and I will not fear what man may do unto me. Remember
the^ which have the ouersighte of you, which have declared unto you the word
of God. The end of whose co^uersacion se that ye look upon, and follow their
faith.

Jesus Christ yesterdaye and Heb. 3. b
Todaye, Exo. 29. ^ Number 19 ^ Leuit. 4 ^
whose blood is brought in to the holy place by ye hye pressed to pourge sin,
are brent without the te^tes. Therefore Jesus also, to sanctifye ye people by
his own blood, Ioh. 19. b
suffered without ye gate. Let us go forth therefore out of the tents, and
suffer rebuke with him: Phil. 3. c
for here have we no contynuynge cite, but we seek one to come.

Psalm. 91. ^
Let us therefore by him offer always Phil. 4. ^
for with soch sacrifices God is pleased. Obey them that have the ouersighte off
you, and submytte your selves unto them: for they watch for your souls, even
as they that must give acco^ptes therefore, that they may do it with joy, and
not with grefe: for that is an unprofitable thing for you. Pray for us. We
have confidence, because we have a good conscience in all things, and desire
to live honestly. But I desire you ye more abundauntly, that ye so do, yt I
may be restored unto you the more quyckly.

The God of peace (that brought again LORD Jesus the Eze. 34. Ioh. 10 a 1.
Pet. 5. a
great shepherde of the sheep through the blood of the everlasting Testament)
make you perfect in all good works, to do his will, workynge in you that
which is pleasant in his sight through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise for
ever and ever Amen. I beseke you brethren, suffer the word of exhortacion, for
I have written unto you in few words. Know or brother Timotheus, whom we have
sent from us, with whom (if he come shortly) I will se you. Salute the^ that
have the ouersighte of you and all ye saints. The brethren of Italy salute
you. Grace be with you all, Amen.

Sent from Italy by Timotheus.

The Epistle of S. James.
The sum of this epistle.
Chap. I. He exhorts to rejoice in trouble, to be fervent in prayer with
steadfast believe, to look for all good things from above, to forsake all vice:
and thankfully to receive the word of God, not only hearing it and speaking
of it, but to do thereafter in deed. True religion or devotion what it is. Chap.
II. He forbyddeth to have any respect of persons, but to regard the poor
as well as the rich, to be loving and merciful, and not to boast of faith
where no deeds are: for it is but a deed faith, where good works follow not.
Chap III. What good and evil comes through the tongue. The duty of soch as be
learned. The difference betwixt the wyszdome of the gospel and the wyszdome of
the world. Chap. IIII. War and fightinge comes of volupteousnesse. The
frendishipe of the world is enemyte before God. An exhortacion to fly
slander and the vanite of this life. Chap. V. He threateneth the wicked rych
me^, exhorts unto patience, to bewarre of swearynge, one to knowledge his
fautes to another, one to pray for another, and one to labor to bring
another to the truth.
The first Chapter.
LORD Jesus Christ, sends gretinge to the xij. trybes which are ^ct. 8. a
scatered here and there. My brethren, count it exceadynge joy when ye fall in
to diverse temptacions, for as much as ye know, how yt the ^o. 5. a ^. Pet. 1.
b ^ach. 13. b
tryinge of your faith brings patience: and let patience have her parfect
work, yt ye may be parfecte and sound, lakinge nothing.

^ro. 2. a
If any of you lack wyszdome, let him axe of God, which gives to all men
indifferently, and casts no man in the teth: and it shall be given him. But
let him axe in faith and waver not. For he that douteth, is like the wawes of
ye See, tossed of the wind, and carried with violence. Nether let yt man think
that he shall receive any thing of ye LORD. A wauerynge minded man is unstable
in all his ways.



Happy is the man that endures in te^ptacion, for when he is tried, Job. (...)
he shall receive the crown of life, which the LORD has promised to them that
love him.

Let no man say when he is tempted, yt he is tempted of God. For God te^pteth
not unto evil, nether te^pteth he any man. But every man is tempted, drawn
away, and entysed of his own co^cupisce^ce. The^ when lust has conceived,
she brings forth sin, and sin when it is fynished, brings forth deeth.

Err not my dear brethren. Pro. (...) Ioh. (...)
Every good gift, and every parfait gift, is from above, and comes down from
ye father of light, with whom is no variablenes, nether is he changed unto
darcknes. Ioh. (...) 1. Co^ (...)
Of his own will begat he us with the word of life, that we should be the
first fruits of his creatures.

Pro* (...) Ecc^. (...)
Wherefore dear brethren, let every man beswifte to hear, slow to speak, and
slow to wrath. For the wrath of man works not that which is righteous before
God.

Wherefore lay aparte all fylthines, all (...)
And se that ye be doers of ye word and not hears only deceauinge your own
selves. (...)
For if any hear the word, and do it not, he is like unto a man that
beholds his bodily face in a glass. For as soon as he has looked on him
self, he goes his way, and forgets immediately what his faszhion was. (...)
But who so looks in ye perfect law of liberty, and continues therein (if he
be not a forgetful hearer, but a doar of the work) the same shall be happy in
his deed.

If any man among you seem devout, and refrain not his tongue: but deceive
his own heart, this man's devotion is in vain. Pure devotion and undefiled
before God the father, is this: to visit the friendless and widows in their
aduersite, and to keep him self unspotted of the (...)
world.

The II. Chapter.
BRethren, have not the faith of our LORD Jesus Christ ye LORD of glory in
(...)
respect of persons. If there come in to yor company a man with a golden ring
and in goodly aparell, and there come in also a poor man in vile rayme^t, and
ye have a respect to him yt wears the gaye clothinge and say unto hi^: Sit
thou here i^ a good place, and say unto ye poor, stand thou there or sit
here under my footstool: are ye not parciall in your selves, and have judged
after evil thoughts?

Harken my dear beloved brethren. ^at. 5. a
Has not God chosen the poor of this world, which are rich in faith, and
heirs of the kingdom which he promised to the^ that love him? But ye have
despised the poor. Are not the rych they which oppress you: and they which
draw you before judges? Do not they speak evil of that good name after which
ye be named.

^uit. 19. c
Thou shall love thine neghbour as thy self, ye do well. But if ye regard one
person more then another, ye commit sin, and are rebuked of the law as
tr^a^gressours. ^ec. 18. b
Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet fail in one point, he is gyltie
in all. For he that said: (...). ^0. c
Thou shall not commit adultery, said also: thou shall not kill. Though thou
do none adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art a transgresser of the law. So
speak ye, and so do as they that shall be judged by the law of liberty. (...).
18. d
For there shall be judgment merciles to him that shows no mercy, and mercy
reioiseth against judgment.

(...). 7. c
What a vayleth it my brethren, though a man say he has faith, when he has
no deeds? Can faith save him? (...) 3. c
If a brother or a sister be naked or destitute of daily fode, and one of you
say unto them: Depart in peace, God send you warmnes and fode: not
withsto^dinge ye give them not tho things which are nedfull to the body: what
helps it them? Even so faith, if it have no deeds, is deed in it self.

(...). d (...). 1. c
The devils also believe and tremble.

Will thou understood o thou vain man that faith with out deeds is deed: Was
not Abraham our father justified through works when he offered Isaac his son
upon the altar? Thou seist how yt faith wrought with his deeds, and through ye
deeds was the faith made perfect: and the scripture was fulfilled which faith:
(...). 1^. b (...). 4. b (...)* 1. a
Abraham believed God and it was reputed unto him for rightewesnes: and he was
called ye friend of God. Ye se then how that of deeds a man is justified, and
not of faith only (...)
Likewise also was not Raab the harlot justified through works, when she
received the messengers, and sent them out another way? For as the body, with
out the sprete is deed, even so faith with out deeds is deed.

The III. Chapter.
MY brethren, be not every man a Mat. 23. ^
master, Eccli. 14 19. c. 25. b
If a man sin not in word, the same is a parfecte man, and able to tame all
the body. Behold, we put bittes into the horses mouths yt they should obey
us, and we turn about all the body. Behold also ye ships, which though
they be so great, and are driven of fearce winds, yet are they turned about
with a very small helm, whither soever the violence of the gouerner will. Even
so the tongue is a little member, and bosteth great things.

Behold how great a thing a little fire

All the natures of beasts, and of birds, and of serpents, and things of
the sea, are meked and tamed of the nature of man. But the tongue can no man
tame. Yt is an unruly evil full of deedly poison. Therewith bless we God the
father, and therewith curse women which Genesis 1. ^
are made after the similitude of God. Out of one mouth proceadeth blessing
and cursynge. My brethren these things ought not so to be. Does a fountain
send forth at one place sweet water and bitter also? Can the fygge tree, my
Brethren, bear olive beries: either a vine bear fygges? So can no fountain
give both salt water and freszhe also. If any man be wise and endued with
learning among you, let him show

But if ye have bitter enuyenge and strife in yor hertes, rejoice not: nether
belyars against the truth. This wiszdome descends not from above: but is
erthy, and natural, and devilish. For where enuyenge and strife is, there is
unstableness and all manner of evil works. But the wiszdom that is from above,
is first pure, the^ peasable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy
and good fruits, without judging, and without simulacion: ye, and the fruit
of rightewesnes is sown in peace, of the^ that mayntene peace.

The IIII. Chapter.
FRom whence comes war and not here hence? even of yor volupteousnesses
that rain in your me^bres? Ye lust, and have not. Ye envy and have
indignacion, and can not obtain. Ye fight and war, and have not, because ye
axe not. Ye axe and receive not because ye axe amysse: eue^ to consume it upon
yor voluptuousnes. Ye aduouterars, and weme^ that break matrimony: know ye
not ^oh. 2. c (...). 1. b
how that the frenshippe of ye world is ennimite to godwarde? Whosoever will be
a friend of the world, is made ye enemy of god. Either do ye think yt the
scripture says in vain. The (...). 5. c
sprete yt dwells in you, lusts even contrary to envy: but gives more
grace.

Submit your selves to God, and ^et. 5. b
resist the deuell, and he will fly from you. Draw nigh to God and he will draw
nigh to you. Cleanse yor hondes ye sinners, and pourge your hertes Pet. 5. a
Cast down your selves before the LORD, and he shall lift you up. Backbyte
not one another, brethren. He that backbyteth his brother, and he yt judges
his brother, backbyteth the law, and judges the law. But and if thou judge
the law, thou art not an obseruer of the law: but a judge. There is one law
geuer, which is able to save and to distroye. To. 14. a
What art thou that iudgest another man?

^ze. 18. a Luc. 12. b
Go to now ye that say: to day and to morrow let us go into soche a city and
continue there a year, and bye and sell, and win: and yet ca^ not tell what
shall happen to morrow. For what thing is your life? It is even a vapoure that
apereth for a little time, and the^ vanysheth away: For that ye ought to say:
Act. 28. a Heb. 6. a
if the LORD will, and if we live, let us do this or that. But now ye rejoice
in your bostinges. All soche reioysynge is evil. Therefore Luc. 12. c
to him that knows how to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin.

The V. Chapter.
yo wretchedness that shall come upon you. 1. Tim. 6. b
Your riches is corrupt, your garments are motheaten. Your gold and yo
silver are cancred, and the rust of them shall be a witness unto you, and shall
eat your fleszhe, as it were fire. Ye have heaped treasure togedder in yo
last days: Leui. 19. c Deuteronomy. 24. c Tob. 4. c
Behold, the hyre of the laborers which have reped down your feldes (which
hyer is of you kept back by fraud) cries: and the cries of the^ which have
reped, are entered in to the ears of the LORD Sabbath. Ye have lived in
pleasure on the earth and in wantannes. Ye have noryszhed your hertes, Luc
(...)
as in adaye of slaughter. Ye have condemned and have killed the just, and he
has not resisted you.

Be pacient therefore brethren, unto the coming of the LORD. Behold, the
huszba^de LORD draws nigh. Grodge not one against another brethren, lest ye
be damned. Behold, the judge stondeth before the door. Take (my brethren) the
prophets for an ensample of sufferynge adversity, and of long patience,
which spoke in the name of the LORD. Behold we count them happy which
endure. Ye have heard (...)
of ye patience of Job, and have known what end the LORD made. For the LORD
is very pitiful and merciful.

But above all things my brethren, swear not, nether by heaven, nether by
earth, nether (...)
and yo nay nay: lest ye faule in to ypocricy. If any of you be evil vexed,
let hi^ pray. If any of you be merry, let him singe Psalms. If any be deseased
among you, let him call for the elders of the congregation, and let the^ pray
over him, and anoynte him with oil in the name of the LORD: and ye prayer of
faith shall save the sick, and the LORD shall raise him up: and if he have
committed sins, they shall be forgeuen him.

Knowledge your fautes one to another: and pray one for another, that ye may
be healed. The prayer of a righteous man avails much, if it be fervent. (...)
Helias was a man mortal even as we are, and he prayed in his prayer, that it
might not rain: and it rayned not on the earth by the space of three years and
six months. (...)
And he prayed again, and ye heaven gave rain, and ye earth brought forth her
fruit.

Brethren, if any of you err from the truth and another convert him, let ye
same know that he which converted the sinner from going astraye out off his
way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hyde the multitude of sins.

The end of the epistle of S. James.
The Epistle of S. Jude.
The sum of this epistle.
He rebukes soch as being blinded with their own lusts, resist the truth,
and that we may know them the better, he says they be soch as sin beastly
against nature, and despise rulers andc. He exhorts us to edify one another,
to pray in the holy ghost, to continue in love, to look for the coming of
the LORD, and one to help another out of the fire.



Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the commen salvation:
it was needful for me to write unto you, to exhort you, that ye should
continually labor in the faith which was once given unto the saints. (...)
For there are certain craftily crept in, of which it was written before time
unto soche judgment. They are ungodly, and turn the grace of our God unto
wanta^nes, and deny God the only LORD, and our LORD Jesus Christ.

My mind is therefore to put you in remembrance, for as much as ye once know
this, how that ye LORD (after that he had delivered the people out of Egypt)
destroyed them which afterward believed not. (...)
The angels also which kept not their first estate: but left their own
habitacion, he has reserved in everlasting chains under darcknes unto the
judgment of the great day: (...) 9. c
Sodom and Gomor, and the cities about them (which in like manner defiled them
selves with fornicacion and followed strange fleszhe) are set forth for an
ensample, and suffer the vengeance of eternal fire. Likewise these dremers
defyle the fleszhe despise rulers, and speak evil of them that are in
authority.

(...)* 3 a
Yet Michael the archangell when he strove against the deuell, and disputed
about the body of Moses, durst not give raylinge sentence, but said: the
LORD rebuke the. (...)
But these speak evil off those things which they know not: and what
things they know naturally, as beasts which are without reason, in tho
things they corrupt them selves. Woe be unto the^, Genesis 4. a Nu. 24. a Number. 16.
for they have followed the way of Cain, and are utterly given to the error
of Balaam for lukers sake, and peryszhe in the treason of Core.

These are spots which of your kindness 2. Pet. 2. d
carried about of wyndes, and trees without fruit at gadringe time, twyse deed
and plucked up by the rotes. They are the ragynge waves of the sea, fominge out
their own shame. They are wandrynge stars, to who^ is reserved the mist of
darcknes for ever.

Apoc. 1. a Esa. ^. c
Enoch the seventh from Adam prophesied before of such, saienge: Behold, the
LORD shall come with thousands of saints, to give judgment against all men,
and to rebuke all that are ungodly among the^, of all their ungodly deeds,
which they have ungodly committed, and of all their cruel speakynges, which
ungodly sinners have spoken against him.

These are murmurers, complaners, walking after their own lusts, whose
mouths speak proud things. They have me^ in great reverence because of
avauntage. But ye beloved, remember the words which were spoken before of the
Apostles of our LORD Jesus Christ, how that they told you yt their should be
begylers in the last time, 1. Tim. 4. a 2. Tim. 3. a 2. Pet. ^. a
which should walk after their own ungodly lusts. These are makers off
sects fleshly, having no sprete.

But ye derlye beloved, edifye your selves LORD Jesus Christ, unto eternal
life. And have compassion on some, separatinge the^: and other save with fear,
pullinge them out of the fire, and hate the fylthy vesture of the flesh.

Unto him that is able to keep you, that ye faule not, and to present you
fautlesse before ye presence of his glory with joy, yt is to say, to God our
saueoure which only is wise, be glory, majesty, dominion, and power, now and
for ever. Amen.

The Apocalips or reuelacion of S. Ihon.
The sum of the Reuelacion.
Chap. I. Happy are they that hear the word of God and keep it. He writes
to the seven congregacio^s in Asia, seyth seven candilstickes, and in the
myddest of them, one like unto the son of man. Chap. II. He exhorts four
congregacions to amend, and shows the reward of him that over comes.
Chap. III. He instructs and enfourmeth the angels of three co^gregacions,
declaringe also the reward of him that overcomes. Chap. IIII. He seyth the
heaven open, and the seat and one syttinge upon it, and xxiiij seats about
it with xxiiij. elders syttinge upon the^, and four beasts praysinge God day
and night. Chap. V. He seyth the la^be opening the book, and therefore the
four beasts, the xxiiij elders and the angels praise the lamb and do him
worshipe. Chap. VI. The lamb opens the vi. seals, and many things follow
the opening thereof. Chap. VII. He seyth the servants of God sealed in their
foreheades out of all nations and people: which though they suffer trouble, ye^
the lamb fedeth the^, ledeth them to the fountaynes of living water, and God
shall wype away all tears from their eyes. Chap. VIII. The seventh seal is
opened, there is silence in heaven: the four angels blow their trompettes,
and great plages follow upon the earth. Chap. IX. The fifth and sixte angel
blow their tompettes: the star falls from heaven: the locustes come out of
the smoke: The first woe is past: the four angels that were bound are lowsed,
and the third part of me^ is killed. Chap. X. The angel has the book open,
he swears there shall be no more time: he gives the book unto Ihon, which
eats it up. Chap. XI. The temple is measured, The second woe is past. Chap.
XII. The seventh angel blows his tro^pet: There apeareth in heaven a woman
clothed with the Son: Michael fights with the dragon, which persecuteth the
woman. Chap. XIII. A be ryseth out of the sea with seven heads and ten
horns. Another be comes out of the earth with two horns. Chap. XIIII.
The la^be stondeth upon the mount Sion, and the undefiled congregation with
him: The angel exhorts to the fear of God and tells of the fall of
Babylon. Chap. XV. He seyth seven angels, having seven vyalles full of wrath.
Chap. XVI. The angels pour out their vyalles. Chap. XVII. He descrybeth the
woman syttinge upon the beast with ten horns. Chap. XVIII. The lovers of the
world are sorry for the fall off Babylon, but they that be off God, have cause
to rejoice for her destruction. Chap. XIX. Praise and thanks are given unto
God for iudginge the whore, and for auenginge the blood of his servants. The
angel will not be worshipped. The fowls and birds are called to the slaughter.
Chap. XX. The dragon is b^u^de for a thousand years. The deed arise, and
receive judgment. Chap. XXI. In this chapter is descrybed the new and
spiritual Jerusalem. Chap. XXII. The river of the water of life, the
frutefulnesse and light of the cite of God. The LORD gives ever his
servants warning of things for to come: The angel will not be worshipped. To
the word of God may nothing be added ner mynished there from.


The first Chapter.
THE reuelacion of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, for to (...)
which bare record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus Christ,
and of all things that he saw. (...)
Happy is he yt reads, and they that hear the words of the prophesy and
keep thoo things which are written therein. For the time is at hand.

Ihon to the seven co^gregacions in Asia. Grace be with you and peace, from him
which is and which was, and which is to come, and from the seven spretes which
are present before his trone, and from Jesus Christ which is a faithful
witness, and first begotten of the deed: and LORD over ye kings of the earth.
Unto him that loved us and weszhed us from sins in his own (...)
blood, and made us kings and Prestes unto God his father, be glory, and
dominion for ever more. Amen. Behold, he comes with clouds, and all eyes
shall se him: (...)
and they also which peersed him. (...)
says ye LORD almighty, which is and which was and which is to come.

I Ihon your brother and co^panyon in tribulacion, and in the kingdom and
patience which is in Jesus Christ, was in the isle of Pathmos for the word of
God, and for ye witnessynge of Jesus Christ. I was in the sprete on a sunday,
and herd behind me, a great voice, as it had been of a trompe, saying: I am
Alpha and Omega, the first and ye last. That thou seist, write in a book, and
send it unto the co^gregacions which are in Asia, unto Ephesus and unto
Smyrna, and unto Pargamos, and unto Thiatira, and unto Sardis, and unto
Philadelphia, and unto Laodicia.

(...)
one like unto the son of man clothed with a lynnin garment down to the
ground, and gyrd about the breast with a golden gyrdle. His heed, and his
hears were white, as white woll, and as snow: (...)
and his eyes were as a flamme of fire: and his fete like unto brass, as though
they bre^t in a furnace: and his voice as the sound of many waters. And he had
in his right hand seven stars. (...)
And out of his mouth went a sharp two edged swearde. And his (...)
face shone even as the son in his strength.

And when I saw him, I fell at his fete, (...)
and have the kayes of hell and of death. Write therefore the things which thou
have seen, and the things which are, and ye things which shall be fulfilled
here after: and the mystery of the seven stars which thou saw in my right
hand, and the seven golden candelstickes. The seven stars are the angels of
the seven congregacions: And the seven candelstyckes which thou saw, are the
seven congregacions.

The II. Chapter.
Luc. 13. a
Or else I will come unto the shortly, and will remove thy ca^delstycke out of
his place, except thou repent. But this thou have because thou hate ye deeds
of the Act. 6. a
Nicolaitans, which deeds I also hate. Let him yt has ears, hear, what ye
sprete says unto the congregacions. To him that overcomes, will I Genesis 2. b
give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the mids of ye paradise of God.

And unto the angel of the congregation Esa. 41. a
is first, and the last, which was deed, and is alive: I know thy works and
tribulacion and pouerte, but thou art rich: And I know the blaspheny of them
which call them selves Jews and are not: but are the congregation of Satan.
Fear none of tho things which thou shall soffre. Behold, ye deuell shall cast
of you in to preson, to tempte you, and ye shall have tribulacion x. days. Be
faithful unto the deeth, and I will give ye a crown of life. Let him that has
ears, hear, what the sprete says to the congregacions: He that over comes,
shall not be hurt of the second deeth.

And to the angel of the congregation in Pergamos write: This says he which
Heb. 4. c
has the sharp swearde with two edges: I know thy works, and where thou
dwell, even where Satan's seat is, and thou kepest my name, and have not
denied my faith. And in my days Antipas was a faithful witness of mine, which
was slain among Number. 25. a and 31. c
Balaam, which taught in Balak, to put occasion of syn before the children of
Israel, that they should eat of meat dedicat unto ydoles, and to commyt
fornicacion. Even so have thou the^^ that maintain ye doctrine of the
Nicolaytans, which thing I hate. But be converted, or else I will come unto
the shortly, and will fight against the^ with the swearde of my mouth. Let him
yt has ears, hear, what the sprete says unto the co^gregacions: To him that
over comes, will I give to eat ma^na that is hyd, and will give him a white
stone, and in the stone a new^ name written, which no man knows, sauinge he
that receaueth it.

And unto the angel of the congregation of Theatira write: This says the
son of God, Apo 1. c 19. c
which has his eyes like unto a flame of fire, whose fete are like brass: I
know thy works and thy love, service, and faith and thy patience, and thy
deeds, which are mo at the last then at the first. Notwithstondinge I have a
feawe things against the, that thou suffer that woman 3. Re. 16. d 4. Re.
9. c
Iesabell (which called her self a prophetisse) to teach and to deceive my
servants, to make them committ fornicacion, and to eat meats offered up
unto ydoles. And I gave

Unto you I say, and unto other of the^ of Thiatyra, as many as have not this
learning and which have not known the depnes of Satan (as they say) I will
put upon you none other burden, but yt which ye have already. Hold fast till
I come, and whosoever overcomes and keeps my works unto ye end, Psalm. 2. b
Apoc. 19. c
to him will I give power over nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of
iron: and as the vessels of a potter, shall he break them to sheuers. Eue^ as I
received of my father, so will I give him yt morning star. Let him yt has
ears, hear, what the sprete says to the co^gregacions.

The III. Chapter.
Mat. 24. d 1. Tess. 5. a 2 Pet. 3. b
If thou shall not watch, I will come on the as a these, and thou shall not
know what hour I will come upon ye Thou have a few names in Sardis, which
have not defiled their garments: and they shall walk with me in white, for
they are worthy. He that overcomes, shall be clothed in white array, and I will
not put out his name out of the book of life, Luc. 12. a
and I will confess his name before my father, and before his angels. Let him
yt has ears, hear, what the sprete says unto the congregacions.

And write unto ye angel of the co^gregacio^ of Philadelphia: this says he yt
is holy and true, which has the keye of David: which (...)
openyth and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens. I know thy
works. Behold, I have set before the an open door, and no man can shut it,
for thou have a little strength and have not denied my name. Behold, I shall
give some of the congregation of Satan, which call them selves Jews and are
not, but dolye: Behold: I will make them, that they shall come and worship
before thy fete: and shall know that I have loved the.

Because thou have kept the words of my patience, therefore will I keep the from
the hour of temptacion, which will come upon all the world, to tempte them
that dwell upon the earth. Behold, I come shortly. Hold that which thou have,
that no man take away thy crown. Him that over comes, will I make a pyllar
in the temple of

And I will write upon him, the name of my God, and the name of ye cite of my
God, new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from my God, and I will
write upon him my new name. Let him that has ears, hear, what the sprete
says unto the congregacions.

And unto the angel of the congregation, which is in Laodicia write: This
says Amen the faithful and true witness, the beginning of ye creatures of
God. I know thy works, yt thou art nether cold nor hot: I would thou were
cold or hot. So then because thou art bitwene both, and nether cold ner
hot I will spew the out off my mouth: because thou say thou art rich and
incresyd with goods and have need of nothing, and know not how thou art
wretched and miserable, poor, blind, and nakyd. I counsel the to bye of me
gold tried in the

(...)
As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten. Be fervent therefore and repent.
Behold, I stand at the door and knock. If any man hear my voice and vpen
the door, I will come in unto him and will suppe with him, and he with me. To
him that ouerco^mth, will I grant (...)
to sytt with me on my seat, eue^ as I ouercam and have sytte^ with my father
on his seat. Let him that has ears, hear, what the sprete says unto the
co^gregacio^s.

The IIII. Chapter.
(...)
And about the seat were xxiiij. seats. And upon the seats xxiiij. elders
syttinge clothed in white raiment, and had on their heads crowns of gold.

And out of ye seat proceeded lightnynges, and thundrynges, and voices, and
there were seven la^pes of fire, burninge before the seat, which are the seven
spretes of God. And LORD God almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.

And when those beestes gave glory and honor and thanks to him that sat on
the seat, which lives for ever and ever: ye xxiiij. elders fell down before
him that sat on the trone, and worshipped him yt lives for ever, and cast
their crounes before ye trone, saying: thou art worthy LORD to receive glory,
and honor, and power, for thou have created all things, and for thy wills
sake they are, and were created.

The V. Chapter.
(...)
that sat in the trone, a book written with in and on the backside, sealed with
seven seals. And I saw a strong angel preachinge with a loud voice: Who is
worthy to open the book, and to loose the seals thereof? And no man in heaven
ner in earth, nether under ye earth, was able to open ye book, nether to look
thereon. And I wept much, because no man was found worthy to open and to read
the book, nether to look thereon.

And one of the elders said unto me: weep not: Esa 49 b Esa. ^1. b
Behold, the lion which is off the trybe of Judah, ye rote of David, has
obtained to open the book, and to lowse the seven seals thereof. And I beheld,
and lo, in the mids of the seat, and of ye four beasts, and in the mids
of ye elders, stood a lamb as though he had been killed, which had seven
horns and seven eyes, which are the seven spretes of God, sent in to all the
world. And he came and took the book out of the right ho^de of him that sat
upon the seat.

And when he had taken the book, the four beestes and the xxiiij. elders fell
down before Heb. 9. b 1. Pet. ^. c 1. Ioh. 1. b Apo. 1. a
wast killed, and have redeemed us by thy blood, out of all kynreddes, and
to^ges, and people, and nations, and have made us unto or God, kings and
prestes, and we shall raygne on ye earth.

Dan. 7. b
And I beheld, and I herd the voice of many angilles about the trone, and
about the beestes and ye elders, and I herd thousand thousands, saying with
a loud voice: Worthy is the lamb that was killed, to receive power, and
riches and wiszdome, and strength, and honor and glory, and blessing. And
all creatures, which are in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and
in the sea, and all yt are in the^, herd I saying: blessinge, honor, glory,
and power, be unto him, yt sytteth upon the seat, and unto the la^be for
evermore. And the four beestes said: Ame^. And ye xxiiij. elders fell upon
their faces, and worshipped him that lives for evermore.

The VI. Chapter.
ANd I saw when the la^be opened one Zach 1. b and 6. ^
there was a white horse, and he yt sat on him had a bow, and a crown was
given unto him, and he went forth conquerynge and for to overcome. And when he
opened the second seal, I herd the second beeste say: come and se. And
there went out another horse that was reed, and power was given to him that
sat there on, to take peace from the earth, and that they should kill one
another. And there was given unto him a great swearde.

And when he opened the third seal, I herd the third beeste say: come and
se. And I beheld, and lo, a black horse: and he that (...) sat on him, had
a pair of balances in his hand. And I herd a voice in the mids of the
four beasts say: a measure of whete for a penny, and three measures of barley
for a penny: and oil and wine se thou hurt not.



And when he opened the fyfte seal, I saw under the aultre, the souls of
them yt were killed for the word of God, and for ye testimony which they had,
and they cried with a loud voice saye^ge: How long tariest thou 4. Esd. 15. b
Dan. 12. b
LORD holy and true, to judge and to avenge our blood on them that dwell on
the earth? And long white garments were given unto every one of them. Esa.
26. c
And it was said unto them, that they should rest for a little season, until
the number of their fellows, and brethren, and of them that should be killed as
they were, were fulfilled.

Esa. 2. c
And the kings of ye earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the
chief captains, and the might men, and every free man, hyd them selves in
dens, Apo. 9. b
and in rocks of ye hills, and said to the hills, and rocks: fall on us,
and hyde us from the presence of him that sytteth on the seat, and from the
wrath of the lamb, for the great day of his wrath is come. And who can endure
it?

The VII. Chapter.
(...)
Hurt not the earth nether the sea, nether the trees, till we have sealed the
servants of our God in their forheddes.

And I herd the nombre of them which were sealed, and there were sealed an c.
and xliiij.M. of all the trybes of the children of Israel. Of ye trybe of Judah
were sealed xij.M. Of the trybe of Ruben were sealed xij.M. Of the trybe of Gad
were sealed xij.M. Of the trybe of Asser were sealed xij.M. Of the trybe of
Neptalym were sealed xij.M. Of ye trybe of Manasses were sealed xij.M. Of the
trybe of Symeon were sealed xij.M. Of the trybe of Leui were sealed xij.M. Of
the trybe of Isacar were sealed xij.M. Of the trybe of Zabulon were sealed
xij.M. Of the trybe of Joseph were sealed xij.M. Of the trybe of Benjamin were
sealed xij. thousand.

(...)
After this I beheld, and lo, a great multitude (which no man could nombre) of
all nations and people, and tongues, stood before the seat, and before the
lamb, clothed with long white garments, and palms in their hondes, and cried
with a land voice, saying: salvation be asscribed to him yt sytteth upon the
seat of our God, and unto the lamb. And all the angels stood in the compase
of the seat, and of the elders and of the four beasts, and fell before ye
seat on the faces, and worshipped God, saying, am^^ Blessing and glory,
wiszdome and thanks, and honor, and power and might, be unto our God for
evermore Amen.

And one of the elders answered, saying unto me: what are these which are
arrayed in long white garments, and whence, came they? And I said unto him:
LORD thou wotest. And he said unto me: these are they which came out of great
tribulacion, and made their garments large, and made the^ white in the blood
of the lamb: therefore are they in the presence of the seat of God and serve
him day and night in his temple, and he that sytteth in the seat, will dwell
among them. They shall honger (...)
no more nether thyrst, nether shall the son light on them, nether any heat:
For the la^be which is in the mids of the seat, shall feed them, and shall
lead them unto fountaynes of living water, (...)
and God shall wype away all tears from their eyes.

The VIII. Chapter.
ANd when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven about
the space of half an hour. And I shall reign for eurmore. And the four and
twentye Elders, which sat before God on their seatts, fell upon their faces,
and worshipped God saying: we give the thanks LORD God allmyghte: which art
and wast, and art to come, for thou have received thy great might, and have
raygned. And the Heythen were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the
deed that they should be judged, and that thou should give reward unto thy
servants the prophettes and saynctes, and to the^ that fear thy name, small
and great: and should destroy them which destroy the earth. And the temple
of God was opened in heaven, and there

And there appeared a great token in heaven. A woman clothed with the Son,
and the moon under her fete, and upon her deed a crown of twolue stars. And
she was with child, and cried trauaillinge in birth, and payned ready to be
delivered. And there appeared another token in heaven, and behold a great
reed dragon, having seven heads, and ten horns and seven crowns upon his
heads: and his tail drue the third part of the stars, and cast them to
the earth.

And the dragon stood before the woman, which was ready to be delivered: for to
devour (...) 12. d (...) ^1. f
And the woman fled in to wyldernes, where she had a place prepared off God,
that they should feed her there a M.ij.C. and lx. days.

And there was a great battle in heaven Michael and his angels fought with
the dragon, and the dragon fought and his angels, and prevailed not, nether was
their place found any more in heaven. And the great dragon that old serpent
(called the deuell and Sathanas) was cast out. Which disceaued all the world.
(...)
And he was cast in to the earth, and his angels were cast out with him also.

And I hard a loud voice, which said in heaven: Now is salvation, and
strength and the kingdom become our Gods, and ye power his Christ's: For he
is cast down, which accused them before God day and night. And they overcame
him by the blood of the lamb, and by the word of their testimony, and they
loved not their lives unto

And when the dragon saw, that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted the
woman, which brought forth the man child. And to the woman were given two
wings of a great egle Apoc. 12
that she might fly in to the wyldernes, in to her place, where she is
noryszhed for a time, two times, and halffe a time, from the presence of the
serpent. And the dragon cast out of his mouth water after the woman, as it had
been a river, Dan. 7. b
that he might cause her to be caught of ye flood. And the earth help the
woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swalowed up the river which the
dragon cast out of his mouth. And the dragon was wroth with the woman: and went
and made war with the remnaunt of her sede, which keep the commandments of
God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ. And I stood on the sea sonde.

The XIII. Chapter.
ANd I saw a be rise out of the sea, having seven heads, and x. horns,
and upon his horns x. crowns, and Apo. 17. ^
And the beast which I saw was like a catt of the mountain, and his fete were
as the fete of a bear, Dan. 7. ^
and his mouth as the mouth of a lion. And ye dragon gave him his power and
his seat, and great auctorite: and I saw one of his heads as it were
wounded to death, and his dedly wound was healed. And all the world wo^dred
at the beast, and they worshipped the dragon which gave power unto the beast,
and they worshipped the beast, saying: who is like unto the beast? who is able
to war with him?

And there was given unto him a mouth to speak great things and blasphemies,
and power was given unto him, to do xlij. months. And he opened his mouth
unto blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle and them
that dwell in heaven. Apoc. 11. b
And it was given unto him to make war with the saints, and to overcome
them. And power was given him over all kynred, tongue, and nation: Dan. 11. f
and all that dwell upon the earth worshipped him: whose names are not written in
the book of life of the lamb, which was killed from the beginnynge of the
world. If any man have an ear, let him hear. He that leads in to
captivity, shall go in to captivity: ^en. 9 a Mat 26. e
he that kills with a swearde, must be killed with ye swearde. Apo. 14 c
Hear is the patience, and the faith of the saynctes.

And I beheld another be coming up out of the earth, and he had two
horns like a lamb, and he spoke as did the dragon. And he did all that the
first be could do in his presence, and he caused the earth, and them which
dwell therein, to worship the

And he had power to give a sprete unto the image of the beast, and that the
image of the beast should speak, and should cause, that as many as would not
worship the image of the beast, should be killed. And he made all both small
and great, rich and poor, fre and bond, to receive a mark in their right
hondes, or in their forheades. And that noman might by or sell, save he yt had
ye mark, or the name of the beast, either the nombre of his name. Here is
wiszdome. Let him that has wit, count the nombre of the beast. For it is the
nombre of a man, and his nombre is six hundred, three score and six.

The XIIII. Chapter.
(...)
These were redeemed from men, being the first fruits unto God and to the
lamb, and in their mouths was found no gyle. For they are withoute^ spot
before the trone of God.

And I saw an angel fly in the mids (...)
that made heaven and earth, and the sea, and the fountaynes off water. And
there followed another angel, saying: She is fallen, she is fallen: eue^
Babylon that great cite, (...)
for she made all nations drink off the wine off her whordome.

And the third angel followed the^, saying

And the smoke of their torment ascends up evermore. And they have no res^
day ner night, which worship the beast and his image, and whosoever
receaueth the prynt of his name. (...)
Here is the patience of saints. Hear are they that keep the commandments
and the faith off Jesus.

And I herd a voice from heaven, saying unto me: write: Blessed are ye deed,
which LORD. Ye the sprete says, that they rest from their labors, for
their works follow them. And I looked and behold, a white cloud, and upon ye
cloud one sitting like unto the son of man, having on his heed a golden
crown, and in his ho^de a sharp sykle. And another angel came out of the
temple, cryenge with a loud voice to him that sat on the cloud: (...)
Thruste in thy sycle and reepe: for the time is come to reepe, for the corn
of the earth is ripe. And he that sat on ye cloud thrust in his sykle on the
earth, and the earth was reeped.

And another angel came out of the temple, which is in heaven, having also a
sharp sykle. And another angel came out from the aultre, which had power over
fire, and cried with a loud cry unto him that had the sharp syckle, and
said: Thruste in thy sharp syckle, and gather the clusters of ye earth, for
her grapes are ripe. And the angel thrust in his syckle on the earth, and cut
down the grapes of the vynyarde of the earth, and cast them in to the great
wynefat of ye wrath of God: and the wynefat was trodden without the cite, and
blood came out of the fat, even unto the horse brydles by the space of a
thousand and six hundredth furlonges.

The XV. Chapter.
LORD God almighty, just and true are thy ways, thou king of saints. (...)
10. a
Who shall not fear the O LORD and gloryfie thy name? For thou only are holy,
for all gentiles shall come and worship before the, for thy judgments are
made manifest.

And after that, I looked, and behold, the (...) 44. a
And the temple was full of smoke for the glory off God, and for his power, and
no man was able to enter in to the temple, till the seven plages of the seven
angels were fulfilled.

The XVI. Chapter.
LORD which art and wast, thou art righteous and holy, because thou have given
soche judgments, for they shed the blood of saints, and prophets, and
therefore have thou given them blood to drink: for they are worthy. And I
herd another angel out of the altar, say: even so LORD God almighty,

And the fourth angel poured out his vial on the Son, and power was given
unto him to vex men with heat of fire. And the men raged in great heat, and
spoke evil of the name of God, which had power over those plages, and they
repented not, to give him glory. And the fifte angel poured out his vyall upon
the seat of the beast, and his kingdom wexed derke, and they gnewe their
tongues for sorrow, and blasphemed the God of heaven for sorrow, and pain of
their sores, and repented not of their deeds.

And the sixte angel poured out his vyall Mat. 24. Luc. 12. ^ 1. Tess 5. 2.
Pet. 3. ^
Behold, I come as a thief. Happy is he that watches and keeps his
garments, lest he be found naked, and men se his filthynes. And he gaddered
them togedder in to a place, called in the hebrew tongue, Armagedon.

And the seventh angel poured out his was divided in to three parties. And the
cities of nations fell. And great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to
give unto her the cup of wine of the fearcenes of his wrath. And every isle
fled away, and the mountains were not found. And there fell a great hayle,
as it had been talentes, out of heaven upon the men, and the men blasphemed
God, because of the plage of the hayle, for it was great, and the plage of it
sore.

The XVII. Chapter.


And the angel said unto me: wherefore meruayllest thou? I will shewethe the
mystery of the woman, and of the beast that beerith her, which has seven
heads, and ten horns. The beast that thou see, was, and is not, and shall
ascend out of the bottomless pytt, and shall go in to perdicion, and they that
dwell on the earth shall wondre (whose names are not written in the book of life
from the beginning of the world) when they behold the beast that was, and is
not. And here is a mind, that has wiszdome.

The seven heads are seven mountanes, (...) the woman sytteth: they are also
(...). Five are fallen, and one is, (...) is not yet come. When he (...)
continue a space. And the (...) and is not, is eue^ the eight, and is of the
seven, and shall go in to destruction. (...)
And ye ten horns which thou saw, are ten kings, which have not yet
received the kingdom, but shall receive power as kings at one hour with ye
be. These have one mind, and shall give their power and strength unto ye
beeste. These shall fight with the lamb, and the la^be shall overcome them: For
he is (...)
LORD of all lords, and king of all kings: and they that are on his side,
are called, and chosen and faithful.

And he said unto me: The waters which (...)
are people, and folk, and nations, and tongues. And the ten horns, which thou
saw upon the beast, are they that shall hate the whore, and shall make her
desolate, and naked, and shall eat her fleszhe, and burn her with fire. For
God has put in their hertes, to fulfill his will, and to do with one consent,
for to give her kingdom unto the beast, until the words of God be fulfilled.
And the woman which thou saw, is that great cite, which reigns over the
kings of the earth.

The XVIII. Chapter.
ANd after that I saw another angel (...)
She is fallen, she is fallen, even great Babylon, and is become the
habitacion of deuels, and ye hold of all foul spretes, and a cage of all
unclean and hateful birds: for all nations have dronken of the wine of the
wrath of her whordome. And the kings of the earth have committed fornicacion
with her, and her merchants are wexed rich of the abundaunce of her
pleasures.

And I herd another voice from heaven (...)
come away from her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, lest ye
receive of her plages. For her sins are gone up to heaven, and the LORD has
remembered her wyckednes. Reward her even as she rewarded you, and give her
dubble acordinge to her works. And pour in dubble to her in the same cup,
which she filled unto you. And as much as she gloryfied her self and lived
wantanly, so much pour ye in for her of punyszhme^t, and sorrow, for she
says in her heart: (...)
I sit being a queen, and am no wyddowe, and shall se no sorrow. Therefore shall
her plages come at one day, death, and sorrow, and honger, and she shall be
bre^t with fire: for strong is the LORD God which shall judge her.



And the apples that thy soul lusted after,

And every ship gouerner, and all they that occupy ships, and shippmen
which work in the sea, stood a far of, and cried, when they saw the smoke
of her burning, and said: what cite is like unto this great cite? And they
cast dust on their heads, and cried weeping, and waylinge, and said: Alas,
Alas the great cite, where in were made rich all that had ships in the sea,
by the reason of her wares: for at one hour is she made desolate.

Iere. 16.25
and the voice of the brydegrome and of the bryde, shall be herd no more in the
for thy merchants were princes of the earth. And with thine inchau^tment were
deceived all nations: and in her was found the blood of the prophets, and of
the saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth.

The XIX. Chapter.
ANd after that, I herd the voice of LORD or God, for true and righteous are
his judgments, because he has judged the great whore (which did corrupt ye
earth with her fornicacion) and has avenged the blood of his servants of her
hond. And again they said: Alleluia. Apo. 9 c 14. c
And smoke rose up for evermore. And ye xxiiij: elders, and the four beestes
fell down, and worshipped God that sat on the seat, saying: Amen: Alleluia.
And a voice came out of the seat, saying: praise or LORD God all ye that are
his servants, (...) that fear him both small and great.

And I herd the voice of much people, (...) ye voice of many waters, and as ye
voice of strong thondrynges, saying: Alleluia, for God omnipotent reigns.
Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him: for the marriage of the
la^be is come, and his wife made her self ready. And to her was granted, that
she should be arrayed with pure and goodly sylke. (As for the sylke, it is the
rightewesnes of saints.) And he said unto me: Luc. 14. ^
Blessed are they which are called unto the Lambs supper. And he said unto
me: these are the true sayenges of God. And I fell at his fete, to worship
him. And he said unto me: Act. 10. c 14. c Apo. 2^ d
Se thou do it not. For I am thy fellow servant, and one of thy brethren, and
of them that have the testimony of Jesus. Worship God. For the testimony of
Jesus is ye sprete of prophesy. And I saw heaven open, and behold, a white
horss^ and he yt sat upon him, was called (...) and true, and in rightewesnes
did (...) make battle. His eyes (...)
were (...) fire, and on his head were (...) he had a name written, (...) but
him self. (...)
And he was (...) vesture dipped in blood, and his name is called, ye word of
God. And ye warriers which were in heaven, followed him upon white horses,
clothed with white and pure sylke and Apoc. 1. ^
out of his mouth want a sharppe sword, that with it he should smite the
Heithen: Psalm. ^. b
And he shall rule them with a rod of iron, and he trod the wynefatte of the
fearcenesse and wrath of allmightye God. And has on his vesture and on his
thyghe a name written: Dan. 12. a
King of all kings, and LORD of all lords. ^. Tim. ^. Apo. 17. c


(...) I saw an angel stand in the Son, (...). 39. d
the fleszhe of kings, and of hye captains, and the fleszhe of mighty men,
and the fleszhe of horses, and of the^ that sit on them, and the fleszhe of
all free men and bondmen, both of small and great. And I saw the beeste and
the kings of ye earth, and their warriers gaddred togedder, to make battle
against him that sat upon the horse, and against his sowdiers.

And the beeste was taken, and with him that false prophet that wrought
miracles before him, with which he disceaued then that received the beestes
mark, and them that worszhipped his image. Dan. 7. b Apo. 20 c Mat* 15. d
The (...) were cast in to a ponde of fire burning with brymstone: and the
remnaunte were slain with the swearde of him that sat upon the horse, Heb.
(...)
which swearde proceeded out of his mouth, and all the fowls were filled with
their fleszhe.

The XX. Chapter.
^ob. 4. b ^ Pet. 2. b
And he took the dragon that old serpent (which is the deuell and Satanas) and
he bound him a thousand years: and cast him in to the bottomless pyt, and he
bound him, and set a seal on him, that he should disceaue the people nomoare,
till the thousand years were fulfilled. And af^^r that must he be lowsed for a
littell (...)

(...) seats, and they sat upon (...) was given unto (...) the souls of them
that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus (...) for the word of God: which
had not wo^^shipped the beast, nether his image, nether had raken his mark
upon their forhea^des, or on their hondes: and they lived, and raygned with
Christ a thousand year: brethe other of the deed men lived not again, until
the thousand year were fyniszhed. This is that first resurreccion. Blessed and
holy is he that has part in the first resurreccion. On soch has the second
deeth no power, but they shall be the prestes of God and of Christ, and shall
raygne with him a thousand year.

And when the thousand years are expyred, (...)
Gog and Magog, to gadder them togedder to battle, whose nombre is as the
sonde off the sea: and they went up on the plain of the earth, and compased
the tents of the saints about, and the beloved cite. And fire came down from
God out of heaven, and devoured them: (...)
and the deuell that disceaued them, was cast into a lake of fire and
brymstone, where the beast and the false prophet were, and shall be tormented
day and night for evermore.

And I saw a great white seat, and him (...)
And I saw the deed, both great and small stand before God: And the books were
opened, and another book was opened, which is (the book) of life, and the deed
were judged of tho things which were written in the books according to their
deeds: and the sea gave up her deed, which were in her, and deeth and hell
delivered up the deed, which were in them: and they were judged every man
according to his deeds. And death and hell were cast in to the lake of fire.
This is that second deeth. And whosoever was not found written in the book off
life, was cast in to the lake of fire.

The XXI. Chapter.
ANd I saw a (...)
new heaven and a new earth. For the first heaven, and the first earth were
vaniszhed away, and there was no more See. And I Ihon saw that holy cite new
Jerusalem come down from God out of heaven, prepared (...) garniszhed for her
huszband. And (...) a great voice from the seat, sayen (...), the tabernacle
of God is with (...) and he will dwell with them. And they (...) his people, and
God himself shall be with the^, and shall be their God. (...)
And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. And there shall be no more
deeth, nether sorrow, nether shall there be any more pain, for ye old things
are gone. And he that sat upon the seat, said: (...)
Behold, I make all things new. And he said unto me: write for these words
are faithful and true,

(...) said vnt^ (...): it is done (...)
I am (...) beginning, and (...) that is a thyrst (...)
I will (...) But (...) and murthurers, and whormongers, and sorcerers, and
ydolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake, that burns with
fire and brymstone, which is the second death.

And there came unto me one of the seven angels, which had the seven vials full
of the seven last plages: and talked with me, saying: come hydder, I will
shewethe the bryde, ye la^bes wife. And he carried me away in ye sprete to a
great and an hye mountain, and he showed me the great cite, holy Jerusalem
descendinge out of heaven from God, having the brightness of God. And her
shynynge was like unto a stone most precious, even a Iaspar clear as cristall:
and had great and hye walls, and had twolue gates, and at ye gates twolue
angels: and names written, which are the twolue trybes of Israel: on the est
part three gates, and on the north side three gates, and toward the south three
gates, and from the west three gates* and the wall of the cite had twolue
foundacio^s, and in them the names of the lambs twolue Apostles.

(...)
And he that talked with me, had a golden read to measure the cite with all, and
the gates thereof, and the wall thereof. And the cite was bylt four square, and
the length was as large as the breadth of it, and he ^^asured the cite with the
read twolue M. furlonges: and the length and the breadth, and ye heyth of it,
were equal. And he measured the wall thereof, an cxliiij. cubittee, after ye
measure of a man, which the angel had. And the buyldinge of the wall of it was
of Iaspar. And the cite was of pure gold, like unto clear glass: and ye
foundacio^s of the walls and of ye cite were garnyszhed with all manner of
precious stones. The first foundation was a Jasper, the second a Saphyre, ye
third a Calcedony, the fourth a Smaragde: the fyft a Sardonix: the sixth a
Sard^os: the seventh a Crysolite, the eight berall: the nynth a Topas: the
tenth a Crysoprasos: the eleue^th a Iacyncte: the twelfte an Amatist.

And the twolue gates were twolue pearls, LORD God allmighty and the lamb is
the temple of it, and the cite has no need of the Son, nether of the moon to
lyghten it. For the bryghtnes of God does light it: and the lamb is the light
of it. And ye people which are saved, shall walk in the light of it: and the
kings of the earth shall bring their glory unto it. Esa. 60. b
And the gates of it shall not be shut by day. For there shall be no night there.
And there shall enter in to it none unclean thing: nether whatsoever works
abhominacion: or makes lies: but they which are written in the lambs book of
life.

The XXII. Chapter.
ANd he showed me a pure river of water Eze. 47. a zac. 14. b
proceadinge out of the seat of God and of ye lamb in the mids of the
street of it, and of either side of the river was there wod of life: which bare
twolue manner of fruits: and gave fruit every month: and the leaves of the
wood served to heal the people with all.

And there shall be no more curse, but the seat of God and ye la^be shall be in
it: and his servants shall serve him: And shall se his face, and his name
shall be in their for heads. Esa. 60. d
And there shall be no night there, and they need no candle, nether light of the
Son: for the LORD God gives the light, and they shall reygne for evermore.

And he said unto me these sayenges are LORD God of the holy prophets sent
his angel to show unto (...) servants, the things which must shor^ly be
fulfilled. Behold, I come shortly. Apoc. 1. ^
Happy is he yt keeps ye saye^ge of ye prophesy of this book. I am Ihon, which
saw these things and herd them. And when I had herd and seen the^, I fell
down to worship before the fete of the angel which showed me these things.
And he said unto me: Apoc. 19.
se thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant and the fellow servant of thy
brethren the prophets, and of them, which keep the sayenges of this book.
Worship God.

Zach. 11. b
He that does evil, let him do evil still: and he which is filthy, let him
be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be more righteous: and he
that is holy, let him be more holy. And behold, I come shortly, and my reward
with me, to give every man acordinge as his deeds shall be. Apoc. 1. b
I am Alpha and Omega, ye beginnynge and the end: the first and the last.
Blessed are they that do his commandments, that their power may be in the
tree of life, and may enter in through the gates in to the cite. 1. Cor. 6. b
Gal. 5. c E^he. 5. a
For without are ^ogges and inchaunters and whormongers, and m^rtherers, and
ydolaters, and whosoever loves or (...).

I Jesus have sent mine angel, (...) unto you these things in the (...) I am
the rote and the generation of (...) and the bright morning star. And the
sprete and the bryde say: Come. And let him that hears, say also: Come.
(...)
And let him that is a thyrst, come. And let whosoever will, take of the water
of life fre.

I testifye unto every man that he areth the words of prophesy of this book
(...)
if any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the (...) that
are (...) in this book. (...) of the words of (...) God shall (...) book of
life (...) holy cit^ (...) tho thing (...) He which (...) Ye I come quyckly
(...) LORD Jesus. The (...) Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

The end of the new testament.
A fault escaped in pryntinge the new Testament.
Upon the fourth leaf, the first side, in the sixte chapter of S. Matthew. Seek
ye first the kingdom of heaven: etc.

Read.

Seek ye first the kingdom of God. etc.

Prynted in the year of our LORD M.D. XXXV. and fynished the fourth day of
October.


