A PRESIDENT FOR YOUNG PENMEN. OR THE LETTER-WRITER CONTAINING LETTERS of
sundry sorts, with their several Answers. Full of Variety, Delight, and
Pleasure, and most necessary for the instruction of those that can write, but
have not the Gift of enditing.

LONDON, Printed by G. Eld, for Robert Wilson, and are to be sold at his shop
at Grayes Inn Gate. 1615.

To the Reader.
IN these latter times every Ballad-maker will be a Poet, as if every Peddler
would seem a Merchant, and every Pettifogger a Lawyer: so he that can scarce
endite a Letter, will take upon him to be a Secretary: For my self, I dare
not be so saucy, as to put such a Title to my Book; only this I have here
written a few Letters, which, I hope, are so composed as will be presidents for
young pen men, and not displeasing to elder years: such as they are, I put them
out into the world to the censure of all: entreating the best to correct what
is amiss, and the rest not to discommend that they cannot mend: and rest as I
have reason.

Your well-willing friend. M. R.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, and my most worthy esteemeed Kinsman ANTHONY HOBART,
of Hales Hall in the County of Norffolke, Esquire, all happiness on Earth, and
the joys of Heaven hereafter.
IN reading of Epistles, written in diverse languages, I find them dedicated to
such Patrones, as could judge of their worth, and would accordingly accept
them: Some to men of great account; other to men of lower Titles of honor, but
in higher esteem of their love: Now finding great men so busy in great
Matters, that I should have great ado with their patience, in troubling their
leisures from employment in more serious affairs, and yet knowing my labors,
in my Letters, worth the looking on, I have bethought me of such a Patron, as
in his kindness will understand my work, and regard my love; which having
found in your many favors, give me leave, with my service, to present my Book
to your Patronage: Each Letter has his Answer; the Subjects are diverse, so is
the manner of their enditing: Hateful I know they will not be to any; good
they may do to many, that can aptly make use of them: and for your self, and
perhaps yours after you, it may be no hurt to peruse them; howsoever, at your
idle leisure they will save time, and perhaps yield you pleasure in reading
them: but loath to be tedious in needless Eloquence, I will leave them to your
kind acceptance, and my love to your like command: and so rest.

Your most loving Kinsman, M. R.

A Table of all the Letters in this Book.
A Letter of request for a kindness. The Answer to the same. A Letter of
counsel to a friend in distress. The Answer to the same. A Letter from a
Nephew to his uncle from the University. The Answer to the same. A Letter of
Love, to a Gentlewoman of good worth. Her Answer to the same. A Letter of
kindness from a loving Father, to call horn an unthrifty son. His Answer.
A Love letter to a fair Gentlewoman. Her Answer. A Letter of coffeehouse to
a Gentlewoman of incontinency. Her Answer. A Letter of reprehension, of
suspected unthankfulness. His Answer. A Letter of counsel from a discreet
Mother, to her Daughter newly married. Her Answer. A kind letter of a Father to
a prodigal son. His Answer. A Letter in a kind of challenge, upon report
of a great abuse. His Answer. A Letter to a Kinsman, a young man toward a
Wife. His Answer. A discontentiue Letter upon the denial of friendship. His
answer. A letter from a friend to a fantastical conceited madcap. His answer.
A biting Letter to a clamorous Gentlewoman. The Answer to the same. A
discontentiue Letter of a coy Mistress. Her answer. A letter written to a
friend in time of great affliction. His answer. A kind of quarrelsome Letter,
upon a frown of a friend. His Answer. A Letter to an Uncle to borrow a
horse. His Answer. A Letter from an old man, to his adopted Son, going from
the University to travail. His answer. A letter of Counsel not to be precise.
The answer. A letter from a Knight of great place, to a Gentleman to attend
him. His answer. A Letter to a Knight for the entertainment of a Steward into
his service. A thankful Letter upon the trial of his Servant. A Letter of
counsel from a Brother to his Sister, upon her going from the Country to the
Court. Her answer. A kind letter to a scholar going from the University to a
benifice in a City. A letter to a worthy Knight beyond the Seas. His Answer.
A letter of counsel to a friend going to travail. His Answer. A Letter
written to a Nobleman, by a Gentleman in distress. A pleasant conceited letter
to a friend in the Country. The Answer. A kind letter to a friend in the
Country from the City. His Answer. A melancholy discontentiue Letter, upon a
frown of a Kinsman. A discontentiue letter of a lover. The Answer. A
comfortable letter to a kinsman, upon the burial of a young Son. The
answer. A Letter to an Hypocrite upon betraying of a Friend. His answer. A
Letter of advice to a friend that was to be married. His answer. A Letter of
unkindness to a Kinsman, upon a report of his abuse. His answer. A Letter of
kindness from a Gentleman to his love, from beyond Seas. Her answer. A most
kind letter from a Lady to her Servant of good worth. His answer.
FINIS.
A Letter of Request for a kindness.
IF you knew my need, you would not deny me, specially knowing the good you may
do me. Your excuse may prove more wit, then love, and, my want, more grievous,
then I hope your good will would me: that which will hurt you little will help
me much, and what my remembrance shall be of your kindness, shall rest in my
thankfulness: If protestations be not idle, you will perform the part of a
friend, to put your will to your power, to pleasure him once that will love you
ever: In Sum, leaving my hopes comfort to your kind answer, I rest:

Yours or not mine own: W. H.

The Answer.
I Will not deny you, though I cannot help you, in that measure of comfort,
that may answer your expectation: for, my purse is not even with my Credit,
though I will not complain of poverty. Come therefore to me, and know me,
that, Truth has no Tricks, and I will not falter with a Friend: as I know my
estate, I must manage my affairs; if I hurt my self, I can not help my
Friends, but since bare words yield little comfort, you shall find better
fruits in my affection: I know you are wise, and hope to find you kind, in
being persuaded of my love, to be as ready as able to perform more then I will
protest: so expecting your presence, in assurance of your patience, till I see
you, and always, I rest:

Your faithful loving friend: H. W.

A Letter of Council to a Friend in distress.
HOnest Will, I Condole with thee in thy discontentments, though I cannot ease
thee of thy sorrows: but though my comfort be little, let not my Counsel
dislike thee, to tell thee what I think, that will not be amiss for thee to
think on: The Traveler must not give over, till he come to his iourneys end,
and till the days work be done, there is no looking for wages: deep waters
are dreadful to them that fear to wet their feet, but, wisdom will through
though she wade up to the Chin; believe it, it is the Evening praises the
Day, and he is only happy that holds out to the end: stand therefore to your
tackling: For though your crosses are grievous, yet surely is your blessing
great, in being so well able to go through them: and therefore fight the good
fight, and your conquest will be comfortable, and if not here, yet in Heaven:
shortly, God willing, I will see thee, and till then, pray for thee, that thy
faith may never fail thee: and that I may find thee in such rest, that I may
joy in thy Resolution: till when, and always, I rest.

Thine, or not mine own: D. S.

The Answer.
Kind Robin, I am sorry you are sorry for me, because it will do you more hurt,
then me, good: yet am I so far comforted in your Counsel, that if I could be
my self, I should be much benefited by your instructions: but if oppression
make the wiseman mad, bear with the imperfection of Fools: and know that when
patience is put to her strength, passion, puts Grace to her Trial, I speak
not this in despair of mercy, for God is all-sufficient as well in Comfort, as
Correction: but, crosses abroad, and crucifyings at home, unkindness of kin,
unfaithfulness of friends, breaches of vows, delaying of times scorns of
beggars, and scoffs of fools, with frustrating of hopes, in prayers of faith
and tears of repentance, have almost broken my heart, which only lives in the
Grape to know an end of my grief: yet will I tarry the Lords leisure, and till
then rest full of grief.

Yours, what mine own.

A Letter from a Nephew to his Uncle from the University.
GOod Uncle you writ unto me, to know what fruit I have made of my study: To
tell you truth, in reading over my Alphabet, I found in all the Cross Row,
the worst letter was, O: especially when I, went before it, and V: followed
after it: For there finding that I o u, and can not yet come out of your debt,
I cannot be agrieued, that you are di^contented, that I o u, and can not help
it, yet thus much I gain by my reading, to find in my conscience, the charge
of my debts, which I will discharge with all the speed that I am able, and in
the mean time entreat my friends to that patience, that shall be nothing to
their disprofit, among whom holding your love in no little account, assuring
you ere long to here from me, and in the mean time not unthankful for your
kindness: I rest.

Your bounden loving Cosen. R. W.

The Answer.
GOod Cosen in your Alphabet you say you find o, the worst Letter, now, with me
it is not so: for I find it rather in h: which I feel not in my Toe, for I am
not so Rich as to have the Gowt, nor in my head, for I thank God, I have
reasonable good health of body, but it is only at my Heart to think of my
unhappiness to have so ill comfort of my kindness: yet, let me not write this
to trouble you, your Debt being but a Trifle; and therefore knowing your
honest heart, I leave the time, to your best ability, and in the mean time
hoping of your love, I wish you not to hurt your self to help me; for though
I am poor I am no beggar, and will not be unkind to them I love: in which, be
you assured, I will rest, during life:

Your loving Uncle: T. M.

A Letter of Love to a Gentlewoman of good worth.
WOrthy Lady, if I could not dissemble I were a fool, but if I would I were
the more fool, knowing your wisdom to know craft to be the greatest folly,
and your virtue to allow only Truth, to be the best Elequence: In plain
Truth therefore, give me leave, to lay the service of my heart, at the feet of
your favor, where if the deserts of my endeavor may not be disdained, your
Honor shall not be embased, where your virtue is honored: so craving pardon for
my presumption, in the Humility of affection, I humbly take my leave.

Your more willing, then worthy servant: B. R.

Her Answer.
SIr I have received your Letter, and by the Contents guess at your content:
but give me leave to tell you that protestations are perilous shadows, and the
Devil never deceiues more then when he comes like an Angel of light: I
speak not this with an ill conjecture to wrong a good mind, but the world is
so full of Treason, that Truth is crept into a little Corner: To honor virtue,
I cannot deny you, and to deserve well I can not dissuade you, but in the
happiness of my favor your hopes may be deceived, though thus far, I
subscribe to your petition, that I will disdain no honorable affection, but
wish I were a more worthy Mistress of so worthy a Servant: and so in that care
of my discretion, that may be no touch to my reputation. I rest.

Your well wishing friend, E. B.

A Letter of kindness from a loving father to call home an unthrifty Son.
THe Pelican kills her self, to feeed her young chickins: an unkindly brood
to be the death of their breeder: the Cuckoe kills the Sparrow that hatched
her: Oh unnatural bird to be her death, that gave her life! and the little
Snakes eat out the belly of their damme ere they come abroad: Oh most hateful
worm to be of so hellish a nature. Now seeing the shame of these, will thou
like a shadow follow their substance? with thy disordinate life to be the
death of thy father? I love thee dearly, and will thou greiue me deeply? do
not so good Son: turn the glass of thy disgrace, to a course of better
comfort: Leave the world and come home to me: I will meet thee half way with
my roabe and with my ring, I will wed thee to my love, and the fat Calfe shall
be killed to make a feast for thy coming: so beseeching God so to bless thee
that I may see the fruits of his grace in thee, till I see thee or hear from
thee, to the Lord of Heaven I leave thee.

Thy most loving father. W. R.

Answer.
MY dear Father, I most humbly thank you for your kind Letter; which has so
wrought in my love, as has almost Metamorphos'd my mind from the humor it was
in: for since that Grace has opened the eye of my understanding, to discern
betwixt good and evil, I find him worse then a Devil that fears not God,
and a Child to be loathed that loves not his Father: pardon therefore what is
past, and fear not what is to come. You inuit me to your house, that am
worthy to be driven from your door, and will meet me half way, that merit
banishment from your presence, and make me a feast that deserves ever to be
kept fasting: but this shows, love descends before it ascend; God came to Man,
ere Man could come to God; your love called me to comfort, before I could come
to receive it: In sum, your kindness has bound my love in an indissoluable
duty, in which I hope shortly to see you, and till then ever to pray for you,
that all happiness may befall you: and so humbly rest.

Your obedient Son:

A Loue-letter to a fair Gentlewoman.
SWeet Creature, if the World did not hold thee fair. I should think my self
blind: and if the wise did not admire thee, I should not so much honor thee:
but since, thy worth deserves more honor then I can give thee, give me leave
only to pray for thee, that no black spot of pride may stain the fair white
of thy virtue: but that, continuing in thy goodness, thou may enjoy the
fullness of thy happiness: and for my self, that in the desert of thy favor,
I may be a Servant of thy command: in which, more hoping in thy virtue, then
presuming of my fortune: I rest.

Thy unworthy Servant: B. T.

Her Answer.
KInd Sir; I would be as loath to be the gaze of the Worlds eye, as the subject
of your fiction: and for the honor of wisdom, it should be rather in the
Heavens then the Earth: for your prayers, I thank you, though I hope they are
more charitable then necessary: and for your service, take it not unkindly,
that I wish you a more worthy Mistress: and so entreating you to give me leave,
to leave you to your self, whom you have most reason to make much off; I rest.

Too unworthy a Mistress of so worthy a Servant: E. M.

A Letter of coffeehouse to a Gentlewoman, suspected of Incontinency.
IF you were as wise as Solomon, yet if you were not more honest, I would not
give a penny for your wit; if you were as rich as Craesus, yet if you want
grace, I would not give an half penny for your wealth; and if you were as
fair as Venus, yet, if you want virtue, I will not give a point for your
painting: Counterfeit modesty, is plain hypocrisy, and to flatter for gain,
is the common course of the world: Babies in gay coats are Childrens sports,
and fools Idols: For my self, I have known you long, and began to love you,
but finding your folly, I have with-drawne my affection; and to play fair with
you, upon even terms. I had rather give over my game with a little loss,
then have a bare stake to set my rest upon: so wishing you henceforth to make
your best match for your advantage, and not deceive your self with hoping
after a fools fortune, meaning as little as I can to trouble my thought with
your idle humors. As I found you, I leave you: and so rest.

Your Friend as I find cause: W. R.

Her Answer.
What you think of your self, I know not, and what your estate is, I care
not: it seems you are well read in names, but lack judgment in applying their
natures: they that fear not God are worse then the Devil, and they that want
grace are in a pitiful taking; for virtue, it is so rare, that think Venus
better fits your humor: for your pence, halfe-pence, and points, they are but
Pedlers ware, and therefore I have nothing to do with such Chapmen. Hypocrisy
mistaken, may take Iealouzie in an idle humor, and as good be a painted Baby as
a peevish Bowby: for your gain, if you be not pleased, you may change your
Card or be content with your fortune, and for your frank play you are so fresh
a gamster, that I think loss of time will be all that will be gotten by you:
and so wishing you to keep your money in your purse, play with children for
Apples, that you may eat your part of them, if you loose: like a white
God-sonne, I will leave you to your mothers blessing: and so rest: till I see
you, which I hope to do, never.

Yours, Ass you mine: M. T.

A Letter of reprehension of suspected unthankfulness.
COzen how kind you have found me, you know, and how unthankful, I have found
you, I would I did not know: to be so long from me, and in your silence to
forget me: in the notes of a good nature, I find no such ill disposition: but
lest I may wrong you, and my self, with a false suspicion of unkindness, not
knowing the cause, that may be excusable, I pray you write unto me by this
Bearer: for if the cause of your silence have bin sickness, I am sorry for it,
if your Letters have been lost, or intercepted, we are both wronged, howsoever
it is something is amiss, which I wish kindly to be amended: not to trouble
you with a tedious Letter, the Contents perhaps discontentiue, till I here
from you, which I expect presently, in the nature of a kinsman and love of a
friend, without great cause to the contrary: I rest.

Your very loving Cosen: R. D.

His Answer
MY good Uncle, how kind so ever I have found you, I now find you contrary,
when in the Construction of dispositions, exprobation, and unthankfulness
make a hard Choice, which is the greater Cut in unkindness: you think it
long, since you heard from me, and I here from you to soon, when, in your
writing, I find you so far from your self: for, could I not be my self, I
should forget you: but, if a Card come cross, shall the game be given up? and
if there fall out a mischance, shall it give suspicion of an ill mind? I hope
not: well the cause known of my silence, I leave so the report of this bearer,
to whom I know you will give trust: and by whom, I send you an other written
long since, how miscarried and returned, being tedious to write, I will leave
to his delivery: so hoping, that when you find where the fault is you will
there lay the repentance, in the true assertion of a Natural kinsman, rather
willing to deserve a good turn, then to here of it: I take my leave.

Your very loving Cosen, N. W.

A Letter of Counsel from a discreet Mother to her Daughter, newly married.
MY good Daughter, thou art now going into the world, and must leave to be a
Child, and learn to be a Mother, and to look to a family, rather then to the
entertainment of a friend: and yet, both necessary in their kinds: find the
disposition of thy husband, and in any wise move not his impatience: Let thy
kindness bind his love, thy virtue his comfort, and thy Huswiferie his
commendation: avoid fatling Gossips, yet be kind to thy Neighbors, and no
stranger to thy kindred, be gentle to thy servants, but not ouer-familiar:
have an eye to the door, and a lock to thy Chest: keep a Bit, for a Beggar,
and a Bone, for a Dog: make much of the Be that brings home the honey, and
loose not the Cock that makes much of his Chickins, take heed abroad of the
Kite, and within of the Rat: pray to God for his blessings to all thy
proceedings, and have a religious care of thy modest government, and rather for
charity then praise give relief to the poor: if at any time thou have need
of any good I can do thee, be assured while thou have a mother, thou have a
friend: so, hoping in thy kindness, thou will take care of my Counsel,
beseeching God so to bless thee that I may ever have joy in thee, with my
hearts love, to his tuition I leave thee: And so rest.

Thy most loving Mother. E. B.

Her Answer.
MY good Mother, you have passed the years of a Child, and know the Care of a
Mother: and therefore, for your kind advice for my carriage I humbly thank
you, and what benefit I will make of your lessons, you shall find in the fruit
of my observation: I am but newly come into the world, and God knows, when I
shall go out of it: and am yet scarce warm in my house, and therefore hardly
know yet how to go through it: for my husbands humor, if he alter not his
Nature, I do not doubt, we shall live as Doves: while care and kindness shall
continue content: my servants shall find me, both a Mistress and a friend, my
Neighbors no stranger, and idle Gossips no companion: thus in the duty of
love, with thanks for motherly care in prayer to the Almighty, to bless me
with his Grace, and to live no longer, then in his love and yours, I take my
leave: for this time, but rest during life.

Your most loving Daughter, E.W.

A kind Letter of a Father, to a Prodigal Son.
MY Son, for thee to spend carelessly, that which with great care I have
gotten, may be as much thy disgrace, as my grief: when I would do thee good,
and shall not be able to perform it, and thou shall do thy self hurt, when I
cannot help it: I can be content to increase thy exhibition, but to maintain
Riotousnes, is to Nurse iniquity: yet let me not be bitter in my reprehension:
but, let my kindness be thy correction: Let me know thy wants, and I will
supply them: but let them not exceed my ability, least I be short to relieve
them: I know thou have wit to consider of my writing, and I hope thou have
Grace to make use of thy understanding: and therefore, to be brief, in the
love of a Father, I leave thee to thy heavenly Father: who, I hope, will so
bless thee, that, I shall have joy in thee: so, hoping to hear from thee, and
that good of thee, that may make me glad to know it, in thee: till I see thee,
and always: I rest.

Thy loving Father: R. B.

His Answer.
MY good Father, your reprehension was to kind for so ungracious a Son, and
yet the mildnes of your Counsel, has so wrought in my love, that the limits
of your direction, shall be the passage of my life: and such shall be
henceforth my care of your comfort, as I shall rather, wish my grave, then your
grief: I have called my wits to account, and in the expense of Prodigality, I
find so poor a reckoning, that the sum will be all in misery, where
sorrow has little comfort: I have cut my finger, but not wounded my hand, and
a little Salve will make all hole: my wants are not great, but I wish rather to
want life, then grace to be thankful to God, for his goodness, and to you for
your kindness: so, in the due and true obedience of love, praying for your
health, and hearts ease: I rest.

Your most loving Son: H. P.

A Letter in a kind of Challenge, upon report of a great abuse.
HOw you have wronged me you know, but how you will right me, I know not:
Patience is a virtue, also would I quit a villainy in a true kind: good words
will hardly excuse ill actions: I know you are cunning, I wish you were honest:
to abuse any man, is but the Badge of an ill mind, but to wrong a friend is a
proof of a vile Nature: which how I can digest you shall find as it falls
out: and least sufferance may be thought Cowardice, let this suffice, give me
a speedy satisfaction, or to have your wages for your good work: and so till
I hear from you, to a better end then I expect: I rest.

Yours as I have: S. T.

His Answer.
IF your rage were not above your reason, I should think to satisfy your
discretion; but let me tell you, the truth, in being to credulous upon report,
you may wrong your self and your friend: I speak not this in fear of your
threats, but to clear my conscience of a false accusation: I know no wrong I
have done you, and how I am resolved to right you, when occasion shall serve
you shall, find what is in me: if you will be at quiet with your self, your
friends will not trouble you, and he that is your servant pay him his stipend:
for mine own part, I am nothing in your debt, but for a few foul words: which
I will bury in oblivion, except necessity of occasion, wherein yet I will
observe a method not to pass the course of good manner: so hoping ere long to
find you in a better humor: I rest, as I have reason.

Yours, as you mine. I. S.

A Letter to a Kinsman, a young man toward a Wife.
GOod Cosen, I hear you are in love, I wish it with all the world: and that
your affection is forcible, I hope it is in virtue, but that it is with a
woman, which makes me to fear your weakness: either in some touch of her
unworthiness or your own: I speak not this to dissuade you from marriage,
for the course is honorable: but if there be a cross to content, it may prove
discomfortable: what ever it be, I wish it, to the best, but let me entreat
you, not to conceal from my Love, upon what ground you have builded the house
of your hopes comfort, that if I like the platform, I may the better pray for
your prosperity, and in the hope of your good husbandry, be glad of your
thrift: I know not your object, but what ever be your subject, make not your
self an object: in brief, acquaint me, I pray you, with your proceedings,
that when you draw your deeds my hand may do you no hurt: so wishing you first
to serve God, and then to look to your self, and to know Diana, before you
be to busy with Cupid, in the hearty love of a true Kinsman, till I here
from thee, and always: I rest.

Your most loving Uncle. T. R.

His Answer.
MY good Uncle, I thank you for your kind Letter, and touching the Contents,
I hope my Answer shall not discontent you, that I am in Love, I do not deny
it, but with all the world I will not confess it, for the Reprobates are out of
the Rule of Charity: that my affection is of force, I grant it, for so had I
rather have it, then fantastic, and with a woman believe it, for shall we
abandon their love, by whom we have our breeding to life? I know it is not
your meaning: for my weakness, in unworthiness, you must leave that to the
blessing of Grace, whereon building the house of my hopes comfort, the
foundation well laid I the less fear the fall of it: in the Subject of mine
Object can be no Abject, when Diana's Cupid knows neither Vulcan nor Venus:
but if Pallas and Mars make a conjunction Copulative, in an Accident
inseparable, the joy may be unspeakable: I write not this out of the Art, but
the heart of love, where there is more hope of faith, then a poetical fiction.
To grow toward the matter, that I know you most look at, let it suffice you,
that shortly I will see you, and then acquaint you with that I hope shall not
dislike you, but to the confirming of comfort, at the hour of conclusion, in
ioining hands unto hearts you will be rather a father then a friend: in hope
whereof, and prayer for which, I humbly rest.

Your most loving Nephew: T. P.

A discontentiue Letter upon the denial of friendship.
IF I were rich, I would be beholding to no beggars, and if wise, I should
trouble no fools: but he that is plagued for his sins must have patience
with his crosses: yet spite of the Devil, God will bless his Servants: when
Christmas comes we shall have Holy days, and though the Lent be long, Easter
follows Good Friday: I know to well you understand me to ill: but having
known you to long, to find that I do in you at last, meaning to trouble you
no more, except with my fight against my will, I rest as I have reason.

Yours as you mine. B. D.

His Answer.
HE is poor whom God hates, and he rich that is contented: he is wise that
knows himself, and he unwise that misconstrueth an other: punishments of
sin are the trials of patience, and afflictions well taken are the tokens of
love: twixt feasting and fasting are days of indifference, and who will not
work must take the profit of idleness. Your knowledge to well may be taken to
ill: but if your presence may be troublesome, let me entreat your absence: so
neither angry, nor well pleased, till I hear better of your humor: I rest.

Yours, as you mine. H. B.

A Letter from a friend to a fantastical conceited Madcap.
IF I know where to find you, I should know how to send after you, for what I
think of you, I should know how to write unto you, but I think you are like a
Bird, to fly up and down, where you list, or like a Cameleon, to change into
all manner of colors: I am sorry to see how your unseasoned brain sets your
wits a wool-gathering: but would you once be your self, your friends would be
glad of you, for there are good things in you, howsoever you make use of them:
If I had not heard of you now, I think I should never have heard of you, for I
could not devise almost what should become of you, very strangely you went from
me, but if more kindly, you would come to me, your welcome should be in better
then bare words: and therefore, if I may entreat you, and not to trouble you,
when you can conveniently, let me see you, that we may speak of something,
that is necessary to be spoken off: be you assured, I will not hurt you, and
what good I can do you, you shall find before I will tell you: and thus with
my hearty commendations to your kind acceptance, in hope shortly to hear
from you, and not long after to see you: till then and ever, to the Lord of
heaven I leave you.

Your assured loving Friend. N. W.

His Answer.
IF you were not estranged from that I left you, I should know how to find
you: but being as you are, I know not what to say unto you: you have not heard
from me a long time, and me thinks to soon at last, considering the comfort I
find in your Commendations: For you would seem kind, and yet in words show
the contrary, when in the manner of your writing, the bitter ouercomes the
sweet: if the good be marde, what should you do with the evil: and if my wits
be out of temper, what should a fool do among wise men: I have no Birds nor
Beasts to figure your fancies, but an Ape is no man, though he be nimble in
his conceits: and he that bites like Diogenes, deserves a name of his Nature,
your hurt I fear not, and your good I seek not: but if I chance to come,
near you, it is a chance, but I will see you, when as I find my welcome, you
shall envy my company: till then, rather to quite your courtesies, then to
move your discontent, in the Answer of your Letter, loath to be in your debt
for an humor: in more love then idle talk, as I was and will be: till I see
you, and always.

Your loving friend. H. T.

A biting Letter to a Clamorous vngentlewoman.
IF all Birds were Nightingales, the Owl would not make such a noise, whose
feature is as ill favored as her Note is unpleasing: yet such deformed things
are in Nature, that perfection may be the better esteemed: her feed is most
upon vermin, except she light on a Bird in her sleep: when having filde her
gorge she falls to pruning of her feathers, til she leave nere a good one on her
back: now if you understand not this figure go no further then your self, in
whom being all that unworthiness that may deserve all unhappiness, in the
same I leave you, as I found you, and so I rest till I hear better of you.

Yours, as you see: W. B.

Answer.
IF all Beasts were Horses, an Ass would not keep such a braying: whose shape
is as unhandsome as his flesh is unwholesome: yet such creatures there are to
serve the use of a Clown, only to bear either burdens, or blows: now if
you understand not my meaning, look but upon your picture, and you shall see
the proportion: in which being nothing, worth any thing, in as little regard as
may be, till I find better cause of liking; I rest as I was, and will be.

Yours as you may conceive. A. S.

A discontentiue Letter of a coy Mistress.
YOur coy looks condemn you for little noise, and your sharp speech of no
sweet disposition: it is pity so good apparel should have so ill lining, if I
had not mine eyes I should worship an Idol, but when it know colors, I can
guess which is in grain to be short, I will give honor her right, and virtue
her Grace, beauty her praise, and wisdom her honor, but where I find
conditions of a contrary Nature, I will regard them accordingly: the best is I
am not the first that has been deceiue^ nor shall be the last that shall be
deluded: and yet though this be no excuse for my folly, it shall be a warning to
my discretion, in the placing of my affection, in which not over boots though
over shoes, not gone so far but I can come home again: I rest.

Yours if you were your own. N. R.

Her Answer.
IF you look for hearts in eyes, you may be out of the rule of love, and let me
tell you that your crabbed writing shows a crooked disposition, for your
apparel and the lining, if I were acquainted with your Tailor, I should the
better know the measure of your meaning: and yet if I mistake not your figure
it goes no further then your self, whose out side is better then your inside:
if you deceive your self, blame no body but your self, and if you deceive
me; I will snap up mine own sorrow: if you have done amiss, know how to
excuse it, or amend it, and when you find a good warning, make your best use
of it: In brief, howsoever you trouble your self, I pray you trouble me no
more: for which kindness, I shall rest in much thankfulness.

Yours as I find cause. B. T.

A Letter written to a friend in time of great afliction.
Kind Anthony, thou writest unto me to know how I do: and though perhaps it
may be grievous to thee to know it, yet being truth, to thy love I will tell
it: if thou ask how I fare? as hard as any man to live, if what I do? shed
tears for my sins and pray for mercy, sigh to think of the follies of my
youth, and sorrow to see the misery of mine age: If how I pass my time? in the
passions of the mind: if where I live, in the ma^e of grief, where till I get
into my grave, I think I shall never get out: if how I live so near the
nature of death, as if one may live dying, I dye living: for may I not offend
the heavens majesty to speak it, I think never course of life came nearer to
the thorny Crown about Christ's head which pricked him round about: so is it
with me; crosses abroad and crucifyings at home, in body and mind, puts
patience to a high point: Oh my torments are innumerable and almost
intolerable, but that his goodness that gave me them, gives me grace to bear
them: for in brief, if want to supply necessities, unnatural kindred,
unfaithful friends, unconscionable Creditors, unquiet neighbors and a most
uncomfortable wife, meet all together to the trial of a heart, whether it will
hold or not, think if thou can, in what perplexity is my spirit: and pray in
thy heart for my ease or end of it: And thus assured, if thou can do me good,
to find it, till I hear from thee, and till death, I rest.

Thine what mine own. W. R.

His Answer.
HOnest Henry, I am sorry in my heart for thy heaviness, and to ease thee of thy
grief could be content to bear part of thy passions: but let this comfort
thee, that thou art not alone in thy calamities; for every man has his cross,
carry it as well as he can: and for my self; though my shoes be finely made,
yet they so wring my toes, that they give me many a twing at the heart: and yet
I must commend my Shoemaker and conceal my pain, because the fault is in my
feet: if we had not our sins we should not have our punishments: believe me
Henry, aflictions are the Badges of Gods blessings, if they be borne without
murmurring at his will: he that keeps a house may have many evil birds
about it, but I must confess within doors the night Raven is the worst, whose
continual croking is many times uncomfortable: but have patience, it is a
spiritual salve, that heals all the sores of the heart, and a Tenure by
which we have possession of our Souls, which gift of grace, God of his
goodness, in his mercy grant me, and thee, and all his servants: deliver us
from our miseries and make the joy of our lives in the feeling of his love: to
which prayer, hoping thou will say Amen, till I see thee, and always: I rest.

Thine or not mine own. R. B.

A kind of quarrelsome Letter, upon a frown of a friend.
AT my last being in your company, your countenance gave me some immagination
of your discontent: if you be angry, I would know with whom, and for what: if
it be with your self, you know how to mend your self, if with me, I know not
why, nor care I wherefore; if it be your nature, I will not seek to alter it,
and if but your humor, I would wish you to purge it, and so wishing you to
satisfy me, if you have any skill in Astronomy, whether we shall have fair
weather or foul: as I hear from you I rest.

Yours, as you mine. T. N.

His Answer.
MY occasions of my countenance are secret to my self: at which, if any take
exceptions I wish me out of their company: your condition I know not, nor
desire greater to be acquainted with: for any hurt that is done the amends may
be soon made; if you be desirous of quarrels you may have your hands full of
mischief, but if you will be at peace with your self, I know no man that
means to trouble you, so loath to be at cost with any Almanacks, to look
into the rules of Astronomy, come what weather will, welcome by the Grace of
God: and so I rest.

Yours as you mine. D. T.

A Letter to an Uncle to borrow a horse.
MY good Uncle, I have occasion to travel some few miles, further then (I
fear) my feet will easily carry me, if therefore I may entreat you to lend me
your horse, for some few days, I will travel him easily, tend him carefully,
and feed him sufficiently: his safe return you shall not doubt, nor my
thankfulness for your kindness: so loath to use needless complements till I here
from you, and always I rest.

Your very loving Nephew. R. T.

His Answer.
IF I should lend you my horse you might think me an ass knowing your
horsemanship, and his quality: but let this satisfy you, three things I will
not lend, nor can I spare: my wife, my horse, nor my sword: the one from my
bed, the other from my stable, the third from my side: the one for my pleasure,
the other for my defense, and the third for my service: but, that you shall not
think I will be altogether unkind, I have sent you herein enclosed a piece of
gold, to hire you a Nagge: so hoping of your discretion, to have patience with
my denial, I rest.

Your most loving Uncle. T. R.

His Answer. A Letter from an old man to his adopted Son, going from the
University to travail.
MY good Son, I find by thy writing that thou art determined to leave the
university, and to look abroad into the world; and being persuaded, that I
have seen something in it, desire my counsel for thy carriage through it:
to satisfy thy request, let this suffice thee in a few words, that I set thee
down for a caveat in all thy courses: if thou be a Courtier, beware of cost,
if a Lawyer of Conscience, if a Merchant of Credit, if a Tradesman of craft,
if a Churchman of error, if a Soldier of blood, if a Trauailer of thy way, and
whatsoever, of thy estate; and that the world may not ouergoe thee, pray to God
so to bless thee, that his grace may ever guide thee, and then have thine eyes
about thee, and fear no hurt to come near thee: but for that all nations are
not of one nature, nor all men of one mind, make use of thy observation,
according to the place of thy passage: avoid grossness, and niceness, least
the one may prove as disgratious as the other displeasing: cloy not thy self
with friends and purchase no foes: take heed of subtle wits and smooth
tongues; for they are the closest pick-pockets in a commonwealth: take heed of
dead bones in nimble fingers, and have no love to play with painted pappes,
least when you look for your stake, you find a bare board: sort with the best
spirits, practice the best excercises, and love the best people: let God be
ever before thee, and his blessing be ever with thee: So, ready in any
kindness, to perform any thing that may do thee pleasure, to the uttermost
of my power, I rest.

Thy most loving father. D. T.

His Answer.
MY good Father, touching your Compendium, for my carriage through all courses,
how kindly I take it, you shall know when I am able to requite it: in the mean
time, I will make that use of it, that in much thankfulness shall make me
think of your kindness: for I find it like Ramus his abridgement of Aristotle's
Logic, where in a little room a man may run over a world: it is a little
nose gay, but full of sweet flowers, and in the sent I find such comfort, that
I will like, semper viuens, have it ever fresh in my memory. While I live I
will keep it as the Apple of mine Eye, and if I live to have a Son, I will
learn it him as a good Legacy: for my self I take it as a portion of much
love, which while I live I hope not to part with: In brief not to use
ceremonious complements, with so judicious an understanding in the thankful
heart of an honest mind: till I see you, and always: I rest.

Your most loving Son. T. W.

A Letter of Counsel not to be precise.
GEntle Cosen, I fear you are more full of conscience then wit: for if you
follow your precise course, you will prove either a silly Ass, or a holy
Beggar: for let me tell you, while we are in the world, we must use the world,
and neither to wish to be out of it, nor to be idle in it: be not of the
Family of Love, without a working Faith, least while you look up to heaven,
you be shut out of Gods house: to be religious I allow you, and commend you ^o
be zealous, but in the music of the Soul go not a Note above Ela, lest you
be quite out of tune: and when your Brain swimmes in Humors, you be drowned in
the depth of errors: were you a Churchman, the commodity of your Altar, might
give you leisure to contemplate: but being in an other predicament, you must
look about you in an other nature: In brief, Gods providence must be no
excuse for idleness: you are commanded six days to labor, not only with the
mind, but all the members: hear then the word of God, and do thereafter: take
h^ed of Hypocrisy, it is the high way to hell: from which God keep you, and
lead you in the way of Truth, that in the patience of your pains, you may see
the fruits of your labors: in which you shall best please God, profit your
self, and be no charge to your friends: So in my prayers for you, hoping to
hear well of you, to the tuition of the Almighty, I leave you.

Your loving Cosen. M. B.

The Answer.
MY good Cosen, I fear you have more wit then conscience, to look more into
the world, then your comfort above the world: we are all Gods Beggars, for who
has any thing that he has not received? and better I hold it to be a silly
Ass, then a subtle Fox, and a holy Beggar, then a hellish liver: you wish
me religious, and commend my zeal, and yet while I am in the world I must be
a worldling: how greeth this together: we cannot serve God and Mammon: Martha
was full of business, but one thing is necessary, and Mary chose the good
part: I confess, want may be grievous, and poverty disgratious in the world,
but the covetous GOD hates: though I be no Chaplin shall I not be of the
Church? and in Gods house I hope we love all one an other: Now for the work
of Faith, can the Spirit be better exercised, then in hearing of the word of
God? and when Meditation helps memory, may not contemplation be comfortable?
Good Cozen deceive not your self, in misdeeming of me, be you as far from
heresy, as I am from hypocrisy, and if your Brain swim in the delight of
Truth, you will never drown in the depth of error: To conclude, have a
charitable opinion of my disposition, and I will pray for your perfection: so
hoping on Gods providence, that I shall be no charge to your purse: wishing
you so clear a sight, that you may have a most happy seeing: in the true Love
of a kinsman, I rest.

Yours, what mine own. C. B.

A Letter from a Knight of great place, to a Gentleman to attend him.
HOnest Henry, now I am come to the place that I have taken upon me, I have
many occasions of employments of many servants, among whom I want one of that
sufficiency that I know to be in thy self, whom I would willingly proferre
to place of good profit: For knowing thine insight into the world, how to
manage businesses, in their best Natures, thou should ease me of much
trouble, and be a mean of thine own good. Strictness of conscience, may be
hurtful in curiousness; and secrecy, with sufficiency make a great proof
of wit. In brief, I know you can understand me, and therefore if you be not
otherwise bestowed, let me know by your answer, how you like of my offer:
which howsoever shall not dislike me, because I know you love me: So wishing
you what you wish your self, till I hear from you, I rest.

Your affectionate friend: M. I.

His Answer.
Worthy Knight, I rejoice in your advancement, and am assured you can not want
fit servants for your employment, more worthy then my self of your preferment:
but in my humble love give me leave to tell you the truth of my opinion: that
there is nothing puts more home to the heart of an honest mind, then to run
any course that may give a wound to the Conscience: which while wit would
excuse, wisdom lays open, when if the soul find grace in Repentance of
sin, the heart cannot but bleed in the sorrow of iniquity: but God is
all-sufficient in all things: and therefore knowing your virtuous disposition,
to his gracious protection leaving your most happy preservation, in prayer for
the same, with the increase of all comfort, in the bounden duty of my loves
service, I humbly take my leave.

Your servant assured in what rests in my power: I. S.

A Letter to a Knight for the entertainment of a Steward into his service.
Worthy Knight; at my last being with you, you spoke unto me to do my best
in helping you to a Servant, that you might employ for your Steward: Now if it
please you at my hands to accept the bearer hereof, believe it you shall find
his sufficiency so fitting your content, that I dare undertake you shall not
need to seek any further: I have known him long, and such every way his
disposition, as may deserve good regard in a very good understanding: he is
honest, and wise, and able to live of his own, yet in donour of your
worthiness desires to follow your favor: for his Truth you shall not doubt
it, and for his behavior, I know you will like it: for his wages I will leave
it to your wisdom in his desert: so with his duty commending my service to
the command of your kind love, till I see you, and always: I rest.

Your very loving Kinsman. T. R.

A thankful Letter upon the trial of his Servant.
MY good Cosen, among many courtesies, I thank you most kindly for my man,
who in my great content, has answered the Contents of your Letter, for such
has been his carriage as has gotten good will, not only of all my house,
but of such of my friends, as have occasion to know his service: less vice,
and more matter worthy love, have I not seen in a man of his sort: yea such
has been his desert of my love, as except for his better preferment, I will
not part with him in have: For in earnest in many true Rules of Civility he
may be an example to good Judgments: In brief, as I never found you to fail
in any kind care of my good, so in this I have great cause to thank you: and
wherein it may lie in my power to requite you, be assured you shall know I love
you: in which, I rest assuredly.

Your most affectionate Kinsman and friend R. S.

A Letter of council from a Brother to his Sister upon her going from the
country to the Court.
SWeet Sister, I hear thou art going from home to a high place, from the
country to the Court, believe it thou will find it a place of danger, for the
preservation of thy best comfort: for there is honor both to be got, and
lost: but for a caveat in thy carriage, read what I here have written unto
thee, and lay it up in thy memory, it will do thy understanding no hurt: Take
heed of the Mewing of Musk Cats for they watch but for a Mouse, and when they
have their prey, they are all gone away: Let not the fading gloss of gay
clothes dazzle the eyes of thy spirit, nor fair tongues rob thee of thy fame:
for a good name is not like a garment: for if it once be broken, it will never
be set together again: there are many hands that will be plucking of
flowers, whose hearts never care how the stalks grow, or wither: but if you
will be your own friend, let no man take the fruit without the Tree: believe
no idle vows, nor vain protestations, for many times the tongue and the heart
are far asunder: when the best words have not the best meanings: Nor let
ambition bewitch thee, for the sin is all one with the Lord or his Lackey:
the Ice once cracked will crack more, and what is the face that has lost the
beauty of the mind? sweet Sister, I write not this that I fear thy
imperfection, but to forewarne thee from evil: And what good is to be gotten,
seek it by that virtue that may keep thy color without stain, when a Maiden
blush is the beauty of modesty: serve God, and he will bless thee: pray to
him, and he will defend thee? love him, and he will keep thee, that no hurt
shall come near thee: be constant in thy Religion, loyal in thy Allegiance,
courteous in thy behavior, and virtuous in thy love, so no doubt but the Court
will grace thee, and the King of Kings will so advance thee, that though she be
no Lady on earth, thou shall be an Angel in heaven: To which happiness in
prayer for thee, to his tuition I leave thee.

Thy most loving Brother. D. H.

Her Answer.
MY most loving Brother, I most kindly take your most loving Letter, which I
will lay up for your sake, and mine own good, not in my pocket nor my Cabinet,
but in the inward Chest of my heart: and will daily read it, as the rules of
true wisdoms direction: but to be a little merry with the answer of your
figures, let Musk Cats Meaw where they will, I hope to be no Venizon for
Vermin, and for the Garden of my favor there shall no hand pluck aflower,
except he take the Root and stalk to his keeping: for the gloss of gay
coats, they may bewitch Babies eyes, but the eye of virtue, looks after no
vanity, and for false hearts and fair tongues, they are easily discerned,
they go so commonly together: betwixt pride and baseness there is a carriage
of civility, which I hope to hit on without touch of dishonor, so leaving
Lords to their Ladies, and their Lackeyes to lower Creatures, beseeching the
Almighty to bless me here with his Grace, and hereafter in Heaven to make
the least of his Hand-maides rather then the greatest Princess on the Earth
with all the pleasures of the world: to which prayer hoping you will say Amen:
in much thankfulness for the care of your kindness: I rest.

Your most loving Sister. E. B.

A kind Letter to a Scholar going from the University to a Benefice in a
City.
GOod Cozen, I understand by your Father, that you are determined shortly to
leave the University: but yet withal that you have bent your mind only to
the study of Divine understanding, and leaving the world, betake your self
wholly to the Church, and in the Ministry of the word to do good unto Gods
people: I commend your determination, but with you, if I might advise you, to
spend some few more years in the University, for your further hearing and
reading, for your better confirmation of your resolution: not that I fear the
blessing of your Spirit, but that it is a function of great charge, care, and
labor. Charge in regard of the Talent, being out of the Treasury of Heaven,
the riches of the Soul, then for care in the wisdom of the use of the same,
to whom, at what time most fitting for his Glory that gave it, and their good,
that shall receive it: and for labor that you be not found idle, when you
shall be called to account to yield up a reckoning of your Stewardship: yet
let me not dissuade you from a good work in respect of your young years: For
John was the youngest of the Evangelists, and Timothy was young in the Church of
GOD; and therefore I fear not his gracious blessings to thy proceedings: In
hope whereof, and prayer for which, I rest.

Your most loving Uncle. T. W.

A Letter to a worthy Knight beyond the Seaes.
WOrthy Knight, I know you expect by this bearer to hear from me: to write you
news into a foreign nation, I know not how my letters may be intercepted:
and then if I should write any thing either false, or unfitting, my hand would
witness against my will: and yet let me say thus much of my observation of the
world, that in these latter times, I find nature in so strange a course, almost
in the carriage of a world of Creatures, that, had not the Creator of the earth
a hand of mercy over it, surely the sins of the Creatures would call for a
new deluge: but what shall I say, my self being as a Cipher among figures, or
a shadow among men, to see the world at such a pass, as that I hold him happy
that is well out of it: but the best is, when night is past, that maskers will
be gone, and when the Sun sends forth his beams, the Owl will not dare to
look abroad: not to trouble you too long with little better then trifles, give
me leave only to Love you, and to wish I were with you, which if your return
be not the sooner, may hap to be ere you be aware: till when, in the service
of my hearts love I rest.

Yours assured at command. T. N.

His Answer.
YOu dare not write unto me in thee, sparts for fear either of your own
mistaking in your writing, or misfortune in the delivery of your letters: but
hap what will I have written to you of the occurents of this time, where
betwixt the Masculine and Feminine Gender, a conjunction copulative is of such
a force as puts down all the speeches of the world, yea there is such
fluttering among these birds, as if every day were Saint Valentines: and
touching the wheel of the world, it runs such a whirlegigge, that if nature
mend not her course, she will be quite out of credit; in the Courts such envy,
betwixt Mars and Apollo, that a song sometime puts a service out of countenance:
in the City such jealousy betwixt Vulcan and Venus, that Mercury has much to
do to save Cupids bow and arrows: In brief all the powers of hell are so
busy in the world, that if God did not bless his servants, the Devil would
have a shrewd day: but he that is gracious has not to do with the vicious;
and he that trusts in God, has no fear of the Devil: to be brief, if thy
leisure will serve thee, make a step over to me, thou shall make thine own
welcome, and thy charge shall be nothing: so longing to see thee?, till I
hear from thee, and always I rest.

Thine or not mine own. R. D.

A Letter of Counsel to a friend going to travail.
GOod Cosen, I understand thou art determined to travail, let me entreat thee
to take heed to thy way: for mountains are laboursome to clime, and a valley
may be of a deadly length, woods may be full of wild beasts, and the high
ways have unhappy holes; the Rivers may have swift streams, the Seas are full
of rocks and sands, and the best ship may have a leake: learn therefore
thy compass before thou run thy course, least if thou light among the
Sirens, thou be drowned ere thou swim: Fortune helps the bold but seldom to
a blessed end; and what a woe is it to wit when had I wist sees the wheel, that
threw him headlong from his happiness: I speak not this to disanimat thee,
for adventures are honorable, so the cause be according, but if immagination
be deceived, how is discretion impaired? I would not yet like a Snaile have
thee live always in a shell, but know thy way and then take thy walk: betwixt
Scilla and Charibdis the Channel is narrow, and he that looks not with both
his eyes, may be dec^iued on one side: but what ever thou do, do all to Gods
glory: Love him above all, and fear nothing at all: but from him only, have
all that is necessary in all: so loath to make a long book of a few lines for
thy instructions, let this suffice that I have written: be wary in thy
passage, and pass not wisdom in those limits: when thou beginnest to read,
in all the letters of the row the Holy Ghost be thy speed: a little token of
my love I send thee, and so with my prayers for thee, to the Lord of heaven I
leave thee.

Your faithful loving Kinsman. T. N.

His Answer.
GOod Cosen your kind Letter I take most kindly, and let me tell you what
answer I make to your admonitions: no man knows his way till he have learned
it, and he that best knows his compass may yet run his course awry, when
sudden storms may wrack the best ship: adventures and labors are the
passages of man's life, and mountains and valleys are the walks of the world:
he that looks to his feet need not fear a hole in the way, and he that
fears a beast is not fully a man: for the rivers, strong Oars will go
against swift streams, and a cunning Pilot will keep the channel, where the
passage is narrow, there is the more need of heed, and if the ship be tight,
there is the less fear of her sailing: for the songs of Sirens they are the
fictions of the Poets, but the figures are good warnings to beware the
mischief of wantonness: he that will wink when he should see, may blame
himself for his blindness, and yet the cleerest eye may be deceived in a
color: Immagination must breed hope, before happiness be attempted, and where
the intent is virtuous, the voyage is like to be gracious: all is in the will
of God, upon the hand of whose mercy, building the hope of my comfort: assuring
my self of your prayers for the prosperity of my travails: till my return
and always: I rest.

Your most loving Cosen. D. T.

A Letter written to a Nobleman, by a Gentleman in distress.
Right Honorable,
When Lords beg of Kings, I hold it the less baseness to beg of
Nobleness: and though this book begging be a disgrace to learning, yet since,
Paupertas non est vitium, and, Honos alit Arts, I hope your honor will rather
releive afliction then rebuke presumption: in the few lines that I here humbly
present your honorable patience, I have written that my heart is burst,, and
yet to set it together again, what I cannot do, if I should dye in not doing
of it: vouchsafe my good Lord to read them, and me in them: and with a few of
your golden Angels, deliver me from a world of incarnate Devils: which with
silver daggers seek to stab the heart of my liberty: which, being a great
part of my life, do a Noble deed to save it: God himself will requite you,
and I shall be bound to pray for you, that all the good, that the heavens
will, and the world can give may befall you: So having long known and ever
loved your Honor, beseeching the Almighty to bless the same, with increase of
aduancements, in the worthiness of true Nobleness, at the feet of your
favor, laying down the service of my hearts love, craving pardon for my
presumption, I humbly rest, during life.

Your Honors: in all humble devoted and bounden duty and service: W. R.

A pleasant conceited Letter to a friend in the Country.
YOu write unto me for News, and me thinks it is News you write unto me:
For not having heard from you thus long, I wonder I have heard from you at
last: And yet though I am merry with your silence your Letter is welcome, for
I rather feared your health then your unkindness: but to answer your
expectation, let me tell you that the occurents of this time are such as are
either false, and then unfit to write: or if true, not worth the writing: only
this I dare tell you, that rich men play with the world, and make a kind of
paradise upon earth, while the portion of the poor is most held in patience:
For my self I am as you left me, neither beholding to friends, nor fearful
of enemies, and for the world I am so far in love with it, that I could wish
I were well out of it, and for your self I wish rather your continuance of
your home loving friends, then to hunt here after fortune a day after the
fair: To conclude, if I come near you, I will see you, where so ever you are
I will love, and so to the Lord I leave you.

Yours, what mine own. N. B.

The Answer.
OLd wagge of the world, I see thou art never out of thy humor: I am glad to
hear from thee, not of thy discontents: but to see now thou setst them down,
which in a manner is as music, when I am sometime melancholy disposed, but
for the rich let them be proud only of their time, for the poor may happen
meet with them at their graves, and prove better men in an other world: For thy
self I held thy happiness greater in thy Contemplation then many misers in
their large possessions: And in brief when thou art weary of the world come to
me, and let us talk of that which all the world shall not hear of: so longing
for thee, till I see thee, or hear from thee, I rest.

Thine, or not mine own. B. S.

A kind Letter to a friend in the Country, from the City.
Kind Anthony, I am sure thou do not marvel a little at my long silence: I
could make sufficient excuse, were it not to tedious to write: But let this
suffice, that a troubled mind is not always in temper: and the world is at
such a pass, that the wise are amazed at it, and for my self, such I do
find it, that as I can not get out of it, so I scarce know what to do in it:
for wisdom is watch't, whether her works be like her faith, and folly is
much in favor, because she pleases the common people: so that I think I
must turn fool, if I will feed on fat meat: and yet it greeth so ill with the
nature of my spirit, that I had rather live as a shadow among men, then be the
substance of a monster: oh my good Anthony how happy a life do you lead? that
may here the Birds sing in your woods, see your Ewes suckle your Lambs in
your fields, catch a fish with a worm, a Cony with a Ferret, and a hare with
your Greyhound, and by the way as you come home, contemplate more comfort then
the earth can give you: for he that has a heart to lift up his eyes, will be
of Senecaes opinion, that the mind of that man is brought into a straight, that
can be contented with earth: and he that were in his right wits would hold it
the greatest misery in man's life to desire to live, though in misery: For mine
own part I wish I were not out of it, but so in it, that I may not love it:
but I will neither hasten my death nor prolong my life in this world, but
attend his pleasure that will call me out of it; and the little time that I
have in it, I would I could spend it in thy presence, not to ease my charge,
nor to charge thee, but that in true worth, I know not a more worthy friend:
and thus till I see thee, which shall he as soon as I can conveniently, in the
affection of an honest heart: I rest.

Thine or not mine own. R. B.

His Answer.
HOnest Robin, thy silence was not so discontentiue, as thy letter was
comfortable, for thou writest not like the world, bare words for matter, but
always like thy self, the fruits of true judgment: thou say well of the
world that it is a strange pass, when, let the wisest heads have the most
honest hearts, yet will the eyes of wickedness, be prying into their
proceedings, while fools craft is soon seen, when they most seek to deceive
themselves: but let the fat Bulies of Bashan, feed with Dives in his delicates,
pore Lazarus will have a time to be far merrier then meat can make them: Oh
Robin the monsters of this age see not their own deformities, and better be a
shadow among men, then so vumanly a substance: while blessed be the spirit,
that hates the course of iniquity: for my happiness I confess it is more then I
am worthy of: but most in contemplation above possession, when the Spirit above
Nature, sees Grace above Reason, showing it a better world then this where it
lives: yet while in this little time we pass the pilgrimage of a few days,
more pleasure is in the least creature of life, then the fairest dead Idol: if
I catch a Trout with a fly, and a Nightingale with a worm, the one serves me
in my dish, the other sings in my Chamber, and are not these comforts more
contentiue, then to hang on friends, and hope of fortunes, while the wits are
dead weary, ere travail find comfort: well be the world what it will, come
thou to me when thou will: and command what thou will, for though I say it,
believe it thou have not a more loving friend, that will approve it: so longing
to so thee, that I may have my fill of discourse with thee, with all the
happiness a heart can wish thee, to the Lord of heaven I leave thee: and so rest.

Thine what mine own. W. R.

A melancholy discontentiue Letter, upon a frown of a Kinsman.
COsen, upon your last looks, I looked a little into my self, where I find it
too true, that he that is cursed in the cradle, can hardly be blessed in the
swaddell, and yet God is too strong for the Devil, while Fortune is but the
fiction of fools: Patience goes against the hear with Nature but yet where
grace guides the Spirit the way is not hard to heaven: the fore-horse goes
straight, because he sees on either side, and the wild goose raze makes more
have then good speed: I know there is a difference betwixt running and
creeping: and yet who is surest footed may take a fall; excuses are more ready
then foresights, and yet the wisest may be overtaken ere he be aware: In sum,
he that cannot be himself, must be subject to others censures, and therefore
to conclude with my cross, this shall be only my comfort: that he that is at
wars with the world shall have peace in Heaven; to which joy after sorrow God
send me, and all his servants, among whom hoping to find your name in the
book of life: in more love then I found in your books, I rest.

Your loving kinsman. B. S.

A discontentiue Letter of a Lover.
WHen you were fair I loved you, for then you were not painted: and when you
were wise I honored you, for then you were not inconstant, but when Art
married Nature, and variety showed but vanity, I was aggrieued at my folly to
have grounded my affection on so little Grace; yet when I see all true Birds
have feathers, I must let them take their flight: but yet rather hear them in
the woods then feed them in Cages: yet will I not shut them out at my windows
nor hurt them, if they come in my house, but regard them in their Natures: and
so hoping that you understand the figure in the honor of your best substance, I
rest.

Yours, more then you are your self. S. T.

Her Answer.
GOod Cosen, do not wrong affection with a false jealousy: Nature is ever her
self, and I will be no changeling: what my looks were I know not, but what
my love is you may know: Curses and Crosses differ much in construction, and
punishments for sin are no plagues unto patience: God is ever good, and will
help his servants while the fictions of fortune, are but the fruits of
idleness: He that builds his hope in heaven, may the better carry his crosses
in the world, which bred in the Cradle, will be blessed in the Saddle: And
therefore my good Cosen, not a little rejoicing in the resolution of your
disposition, command my love, though I cannot command my looks: and wherein I
am my self fear me not to be yours: for poverty is no vice, where virtue
deserves honor: and so wishing thee much good, and ready to do thee any good,
in the best nature of good will: I rest.

Your very loving Kinsman. T. R.

The Answer.
When you were wise I did esteem you, for then you were not humorous, and
when you were faithful, I did love you, for then you were not jealous, but
since imagination marde discretion, and jealousy ouer-topped love, I will quit
you with your own Card that I am sorry in my affection to be so mistaken in a
friend: but since beasts are most of a hair, though not all of a hew, I will
rather look on them in a field then lead them in my hands: and yet will I not
hunt them from my ground: nor drive them from their field: and so hoping that
your skill in Arithmetique will discern a figure from a Cipher: I rest.

Yours so far as I may be my self. M. W.

A comfortable Letter to a Kinsman upon the Burial of a young Son.
SWeet Cosen, I know you are both religious and learned, and therefore hope I
shall need the less reasons to persuade you to that patience that may best
make proof of your disposition: I am sorry for your sorrow, and not your loss
of your dear and worthy beloved little Son: For know this he was but lent
you, till be that has him would send for him: yea your self are not your
own, but only his that lets you have here a being, till he will have you be
in a better place: Good Cosen I know Nature is of great force, yet where Grace
gouernes Reason, all is referred to the will of God. I am assured that you pray
daily that his will may be done, and will you grieve that his will is done?
Far be it from you: you know it is written, and I am assured you believe it,
that whosoever loves Father or Mother, or Wife, or Child more then God, is not
worthy of his love: Take heed therefore not to offend the Creator, with to much
loving his Creature; and loose not your self, in loosing his love, that you
have for his love that you cannot have: he is among the Angels, and would you
have him among men? Yea, he is with God himself, and are not you glad that he
is with him? Furthermore, if you were alone in your grief, you were the more
to be lamented, but when thousands are in your predicament let not passion
exceed Reason, but humble your will to the will of God, to whose heavenly
protection, leaving your most happy preservation: I rest.

Your most loving Kinsman. H. B.

The Answer.
MY good Cosen, I thank you for your kind Letter, in which I have received no
little comfort: but let me tell you that a collop cut out of the flesh puts
near home to the heart, and therefore so far as a man may not offend God,
give me leave to be my self, but yet I beseech him of his mercy, I may not
pass the limits of his love: I read that Jacob sorrowed, for the only
imagined death of Joseph, and shall not I grieve to see my boy in his grave? and
yet this is my comfort, his years were to young to commit any actual sin,
and in the election of love I am assured he was a Lamb of the Lords flock: it
is written, that GOD would have young Lambs for his Sacrifice, and my boy could
not be to good for his Altar: No, let not my soul live, but in the service of
his love: though I loved him on earth, yet would I not wish him from heaven:
for there is no Jewel so safely kept, as that which is said up in the Lords
Treasury: I have read it, that sorrow may tarry for a night, but joy comes
in the morning: then if the night be long there is a time of mourning till
morning, and therefore blame not Nature in being her self, though the power
of Grace shall work in her patience. In sum, I hope so to manage my
affec^ion, as shall not imp^ach my discretion, nor loose his love that is the
joy of my life: to whose gracious blessing leaving our eternal comfort, in
prayer for that patience that may qualify unfitting passion, in much
thankfulness for your careful kindness, wishing with conueniencie to see
you, and often to hear from you, in more affection then protestation: I rest.

Your very loving Cosen. T. W.

A Letter to an Hypocrite upon betraying of a Friend.
TO deny a Friend may be a touch of unkindness, to deceive a Friend a proof
of ill Nature, but to betray a Friend to plain a villainy: Cheaters are set
down in the orders of evil persons: Pandars are base Rascals, and the scum of
the earth: but Traitors are most hateful villains of the world: Among the
twelve Apostles there was but one Judas, and will thou leave the Saints to
follow one Devil? If thou will run his course thou may run to his
confusion: Will thou mistake GOD for Gold, and sell thy Soul for a little
Silver? What will be thy end? Shame on earth, and sorrow endless: What shall I
say to thee? but think what will become of thee, being a horrible Hypocrite,
take thy portion among them: Heaven will abhor thee, and while the world
hates thee, hell stands gaping for thee: but GOD in his mercy, if it be his
holy will, forgive thee: and so never meaning more to look on thee, but to
give all my friends warning of thee, to the will of the Almighty: I leave thee.

Thy never more Friend. I. S.

His Answer.
AN unwilling offense may be an excuse acceptable, what I spoke of a sudden, I
repented at leisure: for believe if no gain could have made me so ungracious:
but yet the occasion of your discomfort, can not but grieve me in
unhappiness, though far be it from my thought to do so wilful a
wickedness: be not therefore so bitter in your inuectiue against my baseness:
For if I were of Judas his Nature, I wish no other then his end: place me not
therefore among Hypocrites, for I hate them in my heart, and desire not to
live, to deserve that imputation: be you assured my grief is greater for you
then I will show, till in the fruit of my labor, I may make proof of my Love,
wherein I will not cease till I have effected something to some issue in your
good, in which you shall see how far it is from me to be so dishonest as I
was unhappy, and how far my evil hap was from the Nature of an evil mind:
and so entreating your patience, so suspend your judgment, I hope ere it be
long to have you write in an other humor: till when beseeching the Almighty
to bless you with health, and my heart with happiness, to be a mean of your
comfort: till then and always I rest: howsoever you esteem me, in the
affection of an honest heart.

Your most faithful friend. E. B.

A Letter of advice to a friend that was to be married.
FRiend William, I hear that you are shortly to take a Wife, or rather to be
taken of a Wife: and that for a little times pleasure you will sell your lives
liberty: but if the matter be not so far gone with you, let me tell you a
little of my mind, to make you look about you: for touching your choice, note
what I say unto you: if your wife be to young she knows not how to make her
ready, and if too old she must have one to help her out of her bed: if she
be fair, she will give you cause of jealousy, if foul, she will be
anoyance to thee: if full of talk she will be troublesome, if sullen she
will be irksome, if of honorable Parents you must make courtsie to all her
kindred, if base you must provide for a generation: If rich she will be proud
of her portion, and he kept accordingly, if pore still calling for necessities
and sometime more then needs: if wise, she will think to govern thee, if
foolish she will disgrace thee, if Barren she will be uncomfortable, if full
of children she will be chargeable: if you trust her not with all you have,
she will grow suspicious of your love to her, if you trust her with all you
have, she will make you a servant to her: if she never loved any, she will not
know how to love you, and if she have loved other, she will not leave all for
one: furthermore, if a man buy a house, or land, he will survey it, ere he
purchase it, and if he do not like it when he has it, he may find means to
part with it: but for a wife he must take her at all adventures, and once had
during life must never part with her: and therefore if thou can fine a woman
neither young nor old, wise nor foolish, rich nor pore, kind nor froward,
honorable nor base, talkattue nor sullen, let me see her, that I may commend
thy choice in her, but til then make stay of the Bells, they may not ring to
thy Bridal: but if thy affection be settled and not to be removed, then in
Gods name, go on with Gods blessing: So till I hear from thee how the world
goes with thee, wishing thee either a good wife or none: in my prayers for thy
prosperity, I rest.

Thine what his own. B. T.

His Answer.
FRiend Samuel, your Caueats to my marriage I have looked over very carefully,
and am sorry to see your course so far short of such comfort: for in the
election of Grace, it is an holy ordinance of God, for the good of his people:
and in the world what companion can equal a kind wife? If I were as nice in my
choice, as you are in your notes, I might have a long dream, and awake find
nothing: but come to your self, when you dye what issue will you leave of your
love? and if you live how ungodly is your course? for my self I am fully
resolved rather to adventure the hope of virtue, then to run a vainer course,
and to nourish mine own family then to feed on another man's trencher: In
brief, when the Bells ring, you shall know what business is at Church: and if
you come to my house, you shall be heartily welcome: till when wishing you as
to my self, I rest.

Your very loving friend. R. T.

A Letter of unkindness to a kinsman upon a report of his abuse.
COsen, I am sorry to hear that I do of you: how you have used me you know,
how I can digest it you know not, I would willingly forget unkindness, but if
my patience nourish your presumption, who deserves to be blamed if one folly
beget another? you are my near kinsman, I would you were not so far from me
in kindness, but I fear the Proverb proves to true in you, to use me more
like a kinsman then a friend: but I can be angry and not sin, or rather be
sorry and not angry: for if you will come to me, and acknowledging your fault
make it a warning to your further evil: the evil past shall not be remembered,
and the good to come not unregarded: and so wishing to see you, and the sooner
the better, till then I rest.

Your loving Cosen. D. H.

His Answer.
MY good Cosen, were I not as near unto you in love as in Nature, I should
reverence your years, but scarce have patience with your humor, and indeed I
should take your unkind Letter as it is written: upon a false supposition to
touch me with an ill condition to wrong him at all, whom I love so much me
thinks goes much against the Note of good Nature: For let me tell you, I
never used you ill, nor will use you but well: and if any man have otherwise
reported, upon his face, whosoever, except your self, I will approve it: I
think no man so dishonest as to devise it, but if it be a woman, though her
wickedness show her weakness, yet I wish her tongue had not such strength
with your ears as to put such an imagination into your heart, to be so
needless a trouble to your mind: to see you I fear not, and the sooner for
mine own satisfaction, that where the fault is found it may be confessed: And
so leaving to your discretion to consider of my desert: in irremoueable
affection, I rest: till I see you, and always.

Your assured loving Kinsman. T. W.

A Letter of kindness from a Gentleman to his love, from beyond Seas.
SWeet Love, how I grieve for thine absence, thy presence when I see thee,
shall make proof: the Seas may separate bodies, but not minds; and there is no
Nation in the world that can alter the nature of love: Mistrust not therefore
my frailty; for, my affection is fixed, and suspect not mine infidelity, for my
vow is ever before me: if my business were over, it should not be long ere I
would be with thee: and be persuaded, so soon as I can I will see thee: in
the mean time, by this Bearer, a token of my love I have sent thee: by whom, I
make no doubt, to hear happily from thee: so praying for thy health, and our
joyful meetings, till then, and ever.

Thine, or not his own. R. B.

Her Answer.
SWeet heart, I have received thy Letter lovingly, thy love kindly, and thy
token thankfully: believe it, if it might be no trouble to thee, the Seas
should not keep me from thee: for, wheresoever I am, my heart is with thee: of
thy love I am not jealous, though I would be joyful of thy company: for me
thinks I live, as a kind of dead body without thee. By this Bearer, I return
thee a requital of thy kindness, and wish my self had as swift a passage to
thy love: In brief, not knowing the trouble of thy business, I will only pray
for thy health, till our meeting make our happiness: and so rest full of
unrest, till I may rest during life, in most faithful love.

Thine what mine own: S. P.

A most kind Letter from a Lady to her Servant of good worth.
MY second self, whom if I could, I should love more then my self, knowing
thy Affection, and being assured of thy Faith, I wonder at nothing more then,
at what keeps thee from me: I expected thee long since, and have now sent to
thee on purpose, to know how thou do, and why I do not see thee: thou
know my Estate, yet am I poor without thee: for under heaven, I have no life
but in thy love: to which I heartily commend the hope of my worlds comfort: let
therefore, all excuses laid aside, thy presence hasten my happiness, and send
me word by this Bearer, when I shall expect thee whithout fail: till when,
holding every hour an year, my mind being desirous to be disburthened of
some matter that I will not commit to Paper: In hope of thy health, and prayer
for thy happiness till I see thee, and ever I rest.

Thy loving Mistress, and most assured Friend: M. W.

His Answer.
MY more then my self, most worthy beloved and honored Mistress, I am sorry
for nothing, but that you should be sorry for any thing: and especially, that
in me should rest the occasion of your discontent; but such have been my
business, as have so crossed me in my coming, as when I have had my foot in the
stirrup, have brought me back from my horse: but the heat is well over which
has troubled my mind, that though I have no disease, yet am I so much
diseased, that finding my heart written over with the Letter Y, and feeling
small comfort in the Vowell O, have only wished for my health, to be with the
blessed Syllable V: Your Estate is your self, upon whom under heaven, is the
stay of my happiness: shortly I intend to see you, and if your messenger make
not the more have, to be with you before him, till when, and during life, I
rest.

Your faithful loving Servant: D. T.

FINIS.

