THREE AND TWENTY SERMONS, OR, Catechisticall Lectures upon the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper:

Preached monthly before the Communion.

By that ^^te able, and painful Preacher, Master John Randall Bachelour of
Divinity, Pastor of Saint Andrews Hu^^^rt in little Eastcheape London,
sometimes Fellow of Lincoln College in Oxford.

Published by his Executor Josh. Randall, as he found it corrected by the
Authors one hand, in his Study, since his death.

1 COR. 11.28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
bread, and drink of that cup.

LONDON, Printed for Fulke Clifton, and are to be sold at his Shop on new
Fishs^^e^^-hill. 1630.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Right virtuous, and truly affected Lady, the Lady
BOYS; Joshua Randall wishes increase of Grace here, and perfection of Grace
and Glory hereafter, through Jesus Christ.
GRacious Madam, your zeal for God, your love to Religion, respect to Christ's
members, practice of charity and respect to my self a most unworthy object,
gives me encouragement to dedicate to your Ladyship by way of thankf^^^esse
these ensuing labors of that able Mini^^^ ^f Christ John Randall, Entreating
your goo^ ^^^^ship to accept the truth of affection, accom^ing this present
expression; The work w^^ praise it self, and commend the Author. I shall
therefore say nothing, though I can say many things both of the work and
Author also; but ceasing solicitude, and shunning prolixitie, committing the
work, your self, and yours to the tuition of the Almighty, I humbly take my
leave, Resting

Your Ladyships to be commanded, IOSHVA RANDALL.

TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader, here is (by a divine hand and providence) through many
difficulties presented to thy view, and committed to thy consideration, the
faithful labors and painful endeavors of that late painful Preacher, and
faithful Minister of Christ John Randall, Bachelor in Divinity, sometime
Fellow of Lincoln Coledge in Oxford, and late Rector of Saint Andrew Hubbart
in little Eastcheape London; whose learning and Religion is sufficiently
declared in these sermons concerning the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: a work
perfected in his life time, found in his study under his own hand, ^all but
two sermons, which in his life time were lent (as is seems) but never
returned, which with much pains at the length by the love of some unexpected
friends are obtained. Other of this Authors works are extant, published by
that late Minister of Christ William Holbrooke: Compare these and them
together, and I hope thou shall find in them a parity and lik^nesse, so that
they will appear children of the same fath^^ ^^ey have been viewed and
approved, and are now pu^or the common good: If thou read with that affection
(...) was carried in delivering, I doubt not but thou she (...) much sweetness
in the increase of grace, and strength (...) with Christ for the fitting thee
for glory, which is the thing in truth of affection I wish to thee for thy
endless and eternal comfort. Thus entreating thee to bear with my rudeness,
and to afford thy earnest prayers to God (...) his blessing upon the work, that
it may profit in the thing intended. I take my leave.

Resting thine in any thing in the Lord for the furtherance of thy Faith,
IOSHVA RANDALL.

THE FIRST LECTVRE UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER, Being an
Introduction to the following Lectures.
THus thorough Gods assistance, we have made our entrance into the work that
we intended; it remains now that we should go on forward, in the way that we
have thus chalked out before us; but I am called away by God to another
business; I say by God, for the time calls me away; and you know that times
and seasons are at Gods disposing; and a just occasion calls me away; now all
just occasions you kno^ (...) Gods occasions. In Luke 22.7, 8. the day of (...)
^^auened Bread came, and Peter and John must lay, aside all other businesses
and be gone to prepare for eating the Passover; that is the business which
for that present dispensation and time Christ himself and all his Disciples
must apply themselves unto. All of us know that the time of our Christian
Passover is now at hand, the time wherein by our account Christ our Passover
was sacrificed for us; a time when all that are of any understanding or
discretion in Religion, do usually receive the Sacrament of the true
Passover, the Lords Supper; the occasion or business is of that consequence,
that whosoever has any hand in it, must see that he be well fitted and
prepared unto it. Being therefore thus called away by God and the time, and the
justness of the occasion, let us follow the example of Christ and his
Disciples, All make ready for the Passover, Let me and you and all of us lay
aside our other business, for this present dispensation, and apply our selves
wholly to this, how we may be prepared, to the Religious, profitable, and
comfortable participation of this blessed Passover.

It may seem somewhat disorderly and out of season, that seeing the Doctrine
of the Lords Supper is one part of the Catechism, I should so abruptly and
suddenly fall into it, before I meet with it in the due place. True, it is out
of season in regard of the Method of the Catechism, but in regard of our
selves and our present necessity and the instant opportunity, it is most
seasonable, and in the very natural place; he (...) ^euer out of his way that
follows God, and see (...) God has by his providence cast in this opportunity
upon us, we must serve his providence, and follow that for the right way
wherein he leads us and goes before us. Neither do I purpose only to enter
upon this Argument now, and so let it rest, but as we have our monthly
Communions, so (if God enable me) I mean to make my digressions and
proceedings into this Argument accordingly; that so I may confine the knowledge
of the Lords Supper to the use of the Lords Supper (for when should we know
what belongs to the Lords Supper?) that our knowledge and our practice may
quote and second one another; our knowledge may direct our practice, and our
practice may exercise and confirm our knowledge, by continual sensible and
lively practice: My course God willing shall be this, every next Sabbath,
before the Communion Sabbath, I will treat of some points or other touching the
Lords Supper, as they shall offer themselves in their due order; some
preparation must needs be made, the week days cannot conveniently be spared,
because of worldly affaries; that which is made the morning wherein you are to
receive, is good, but not sufficient, there is required some time of respite
for Meditation, betwixt your hearing and receiving, therefore it is fittest to
begin the Sabbath day before, that you may have some seasoning, some profitable
matter to feed upon all the week long, whereby if you have any grace in your
Hearts, you may be put in continual remembrance what a great work you are to
undertake the Sabbath following; and so be quickened to examine your selves, and
search your Hearts and lives, and practice your repentance, and stir up your
Faith, and to be earnest with God in Prayer, and to put forth your best
endeavors for your fitting to that heavenly work. After the Sacrament is
received, the same points to be here rehearsed again, that so you may take a
view of your selves, and of your carriage in that Spiritual Banquet; that if
upon this re-view you find, that you have truly endeavored to glorify God in
his own Ordinance, your consciences may have peace, and God the praise and
honor; If you have grossly failed, I say grossly in some palpable and
notorious evil (for who fayles not more or less in his best actions?) you may
judge your selves and repent of your faylings, and entreat mercy for that which
is past, and better grace for the time to come. This course shall be as the
former and latter Rain, for we are all of us marvelous hard hearted to
Spiritual duties, we had need be moystened again and again, before our
Hearts can be mollified and fitted for any goodness: The handling of the
points the Sabbath day before, is as the former Rain to water and moysten our
Hearts, and bring them to some soft temper that they may be apt to receive the
impression of the heavenly Seal, and open themselves to give entertainment to
our blessed Savior: The rehearsal after the receiving, is as the latter Rain
to water us again, that Christ Jesus being received into our Hearts, may
prosper and thrive, and grow in us to a further increase of grace; and so
proceeding and increasing from one Communion to another, we may in time attain
thorough Gods blessing, to some good ripeness for the Lords Harvest.

The Reasons inducing me to this course are many, I will acquaint you with
them, because they will be good encouragements both to you and me in these
proceedings, and will also quicken us and further us to our preparation.

The first Reason is the discharge of my duty; God has made me a Watchman
over you, Ezekiel. 33.7. and what is the office of a Watchman? To hear and to
admonish; to take special notice of the state of their People, and to instruct
them in their duties, and admonish them of their dangers; nothing concerns
your Spiritual state more, then the reverent and worthy receiving of this
Sacrament, no duty more necessary to be taught; no greater danger then the
profanation and abuse of it; I therefore being your Watchman must look into
your state in this behalf, and tell you your duties, that you may prevent
those dangers. The Sacraments are a part of Gods saving Ordinances as well as
the Word, and the due administration of them, is a part of my Ministerial
office, as well as the Preaching of the Word; and it is my duty to labor and
see, that you be worthy Receivers of the Sacraments, as well as profitable
Hearers of the Word; The Apostles practice, 1 Cor. 11.20. to the end, is an
excellent precedent in this case: Many abuses were crept into the Church of
Corinth, other things he lets alone till he come himself, Verse 34. but these
that were in the Sacrament must speedily be reformed, and therefore he
presently dispatched his Epistle, and sends his mind and charge touching the
redress of them. And surely corruptions in such a high part of Gods Worship as
is the Lords Supper, are dangerous Sores, except they be cured with all
expedition, they will fester and wranckle, and quickly corrupt the very Heart
of Religion. In conscience therefore of my duty to God and you, for the
preventing of these evils, I have undertaken this course.

The second Reason is the care of your Souls; They are dear and precious to
the Lord that bought them, and therefore ought to be dear and precious to all
Gods Ministers whom the Holy Ghost has made Overseers of them, and that is it
which the Apostle seems to press, Act. 20.28. Take heed to the Flock over
whom the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, etc. which God has purchased with
his own Blood. I should be loath to be a Minister of Condemnation to any of
you, the power that the Lord has given us is for edification, not for
destruction; if I should administer the Sacrament to you in your ignorance, or
profaneness, or vnpreparednesse; I should be a very unnatural Father, To give
you Stones when you ask for Bread, and a Scorpion when you ask for Fish: Bane
and Poison in stead of Comfort and Food for your Souls, it should but further
your Condemnation. In care therefore of your Souls, I labor to prepare you.
Consider what the Apostle says in the 1 Cor. 11.27.29. He that eats and
drinks unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord: and he
eats and drinks his own damnation. What is it to eat and drink unworthily?
That is, without knowledge, reverence, conscience, faith, and repentance,
without preparation: And what is the sin? Guilty of the Body and Blood of
the Lord: You draw the guiltiness of the Blood of the Lord Jesus upon your
Souls, as the Jews did when they said, His Blood be upon us, etc. You are as
bad as these cruel Murderers that killed the Lord of Life: And what shall be
the punishment? He eats and drinks his own damnation: A fearful, yet a just
reward of such a fearful sin. The manner of the Apostles speech is very
remarkable, He eats and drinks his own damnation: As who should say, while he
is eating and drinking at the Lords table, the Devil is carrying away his
Soul into Hell. Deuteronomy. 22.4. If we see our Brothers Ox or his Ass fall by the
way, we must help them up: Has God such care of Oxen and Asses, and not much
rather of Men's Souls? And shall every Brother lift up his Brothers Beast
being fallen on the Ground, and shall not every Minister much more lift up his
Brothers Soul being fallen down into Hell? My exhortation therefore to you
is, that you would join with me, in the care for your own Souls: To whom
should a Man's Soul be most dear, but to himself? Do not sleep any longer
in your ignorance; shake off your carelessenesse and security; come no more to
the Lords Table for fashion and custom, but for conscience to glorify God,
and to increase in grace; keep your selves from that fearful sin of eating
and drinking unworthily, that ye incur not the fearful punishment of
eternal damnation. Hear and learn and practice such good Doctrines and
Instructions as the Lord by my Ministry shall afford you; and your Souls shall
live.

The third Reason is the zeal I have for Gods glory; God is honored by Men
no way more, then in their public meeting and assemblyes for exercises of
Religion, nor in any of those meetings more, then at this heavenly Banquet; and
therefore if we have any zeal for Gods glory, we must be specially zealous
and careful that God may be honored by us, in the performance of this
business: He will be sanctified in all that come near him, Leuit. 10.3. In
this action we approach nearest to God, even to become one with Christ Jesus,
and hereby to be incorporated into his Body, as Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of
this Flesh, and therefore we must sanctify and glorify God in this exercise
above all other. It grieves me to see the Transgressors in this kind, how
horribly the Lord is dishonored amongst Men, even in this most glorious and
sanctified Ordinance; some coming only for fashion sake, few for consciences,
not one amongst a great many, with that due preparation, that may make their
service herein acceptable to God, and Gods holy Sacrament comfortable and
profitable to their own Souls: In zeal therefore for the Lord of Hoasts,
that his great Name and Majesty may be rightly and truly glorified, in the
right and true use of this his saving Ordinance, I desire to fit you to a
reverent and faithful participation of this holy Sacrament, as not knowing
wherein either I, or you, may honor God more, and do him better service.

The fourth Reason is the preciousnesse of the death of the Lord Jesus Christ,
the greatest, and weightiest, and most invaluable business, that ever was
performed since the Worlds Creation; He, the Lamb undefiled and without spot,
a sinlesse Man, the Holy One of God, his own glorious Son; the Liquor that
is pressed out of such goodly Grapes must needs be a sweet and pleasant Juice;
the Blood that issues out of his blessed Body, and from his sacred Wounds, must
needs be most pure and most precious; every drop of this heavenly Dew, is
worth a worlds ransom; therefore not to be thought or spoken of, much less to
be purposely remembered, and solemnly represented, in the Sacrament, but with
all holy preparation, and affection, and elevation of Spirit. For the deep
impression of the death of Jesus Christ into our Hearts, let us consider
rightly these three things, which will be as so many spurs unto us, to stir
us up, to a more reverent estimation and embracing of this Sacrament. First,
the bitterness of his death to him: Secondly, the sweetness of it to us:
Thirdly, the acceptablenesse of it to God. First, the bitterness of it to
himself: It was exceeding bitter to him, it cost him many a deep sigh and
groan, many tears and strong cryings, Hebr. 5.7. A sore Agony in the Garden,
with a bloody sweat in his Body, Luke 22.44. And a deadly heaviness in his
Soul, Math. 26.38. A hard conflict with the terrors of Death, and the wrath of
God upon him, for our sins: for that grievous trouble spoken of Math. 26.37.
could not arise from any bodily fears or pains, but he was then coping and
closing with the very terrors of God, due to us, but to be endured by him: God
set him as a Mark before him, to shoot at him, and to spend upon him all the
Arrows of his Vengeance, which were prepared for all believing sinners from
the beginning to the end of the World. For many Men have suffered a bodily
death without any such daunting. Christ is of a more valorous spirit then so,
many a sore blow did he receive both from God and Man; Men smot him and
buffeted him, Math. 26.67. They platted a Crown of Thorns and put it on his
Head, and smot him on the Head, Math. 27.29, 30. And all this and a great deal
more came upon him, and yet there was none to pity him, Ps. 69.20. The Lord
from Heaven he smot him, and brake him, and laid upon him, Esaias 53.6.10. as it
were stroke upon stroke, till he had revenged himself to the full upon him.
He did not spare him though he were his own Son, Romans 8.32. For when Christ
was upon the Cross, then he was reputed the common sinner of the World, and so
all the Vials of the wrath of God were to be poured out and emptied upon him.
Was this Death so bitter to him, and shall we be lightly affected toward it?
Shall we come coldly and vnpreparedly to the memorial of it? Shall we see this
bitter Death of his acted as it were in a holy Tragedy before our Eyes, and
shall not we be much moved and yearne in our Bowels at the sight, and thought,
and memorial of it? Put the case we should be condemned to dye, and another
Man in love should take our death upon him for us, how compassionately would
we be affected toward him, and the death that he suffers for us? We would
go into our Chambers, and mourn, and wail, and melt in our selves at the
thought of his suffering for us, and his love to us, and our wretchedness that
has brought him, to such a death: much more should we be stirred up, to a
thorough feeling of the sufferings and death of Christ Jesus, which we wretched
sinners have brought upon him: For it was more that the Son of God should
dye, then if the whole World should dye: The bitterness of his death was
caused by the bitterness of our sins; and therefore the thought of his death
should always stir us up to true repentance, to a hatred and detestation of
our sins, and to look upon the Lord Jesus, with a broken Heart, and a mourning
Spirit, and a wounded Conscience, and a sighing Soul, whom we have so
grievously pierced with our sins, Zach. 12.10. They shall look upon him whom
they have pierced, they shall mourn for him, etc. Secondly, the sweetness of
it to us, it is maruailous cordial and comfortable to us, Gaul and Vinegar to
him, but Milk and Honey to us; his abasing is our exalting; his sufferings are
our victory; his torments our ease; his wounds our cure; his cross our
crown; his shame our glory; his death our life; he dying in our stead; look
how bitter our death was to him, so comfortable is his death to us; look how
much he was disparaged by our death, so much are we aduantaged by his; it was
but one death in it self, but it is double in effect; as our death, that is,
being due to us, so it was a bitter death to Christ; but as his death, that is
to say, as being endured in his Person for us, so it is to us most comfortable;
We were healed by his stripes, Esaias 53.5. He bore our stripes, and thereby are
we healed; we changed states with our Savior, and he with us; he received our
sins, we receive his righteousness; he our misery, we his happiness; he
our death, we his life; a blessed change for us, that in stead of Sin, Death
and Hell thereby deserved, we should find Righteousness, and Life, and Heaven
purchased by the death of Christ Jesus; when the Life, and Blood of Christ
Jesus gusht out of his Body, by his wounds, then were all the Fountains of
Heaven as it were, all the Floodgates of Gods Mercy set wide open, and then
was all Grace, and Comfort, and Life, and Salvation showred down upon all
believers, Math. 26.28. This is my Blood shed for you for the remission of
sins; it was the shedding of his Blood, it is the remission of our sins;
the smart was his, the sweetness is ours; he is wounded, we are cured; he is
punished, we are acquitted; he dies for us, and by his death we are made alive.
Thirdly and lastly, the acceptablenesse to God, it was infinitely pleasing to
God his Father, there is God, and Christ, and Man; Christ enduring the
bitterness of death; Man redeemed and delivered by it; God himself
therewithal infinitely pleased: Man had sinned, and thereby enthralled
himself to Death, and Hell, and Damnation, and except he be redeemed, he
perishes without recovery: God was offended, and his wrath did burn like
fire, against Mankind for their sins, and except he be pacified, they are all
damned without mercy: Christ Jesus came and took our Nature upon him, and
dyed for our sins, and by the bitterness has redeemed us, and pacified God:
His offering himself for us, was a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to
God. Ephesians. 5.2. Always the beloved Son of God, but then best-beloued, if we
may esteem according to our apprehension, when he was performing the highest
and utmost act of his filial obedience, Obedient to the death, even to the
death of the Cross, Phil. 2.8. When is a Child best-beloued of his Father, but
when he is most obedient? The Lord was always well-pleased in him, Math. 3.17.
but then most of all, if we may judge by the effects, when he was upon the
Cross, for then and thereby was the Lord well-pleased thorough him with all
the Faithful, Col. 1.20. the Lord then smelling a savor of rest, whereby, as
in the days of Noah, Genesis 8.21. he was pacified toward the World. Spices are
sweetest when they are broken and pounded, and so was Christ, when his Body was
broken and pounded upon the Cross: And as when Mary brake the Box of
Ointment, the whole House was filled with the favor of it, John 12.3. So when
Christ, who was full of good Ointments, Cant. 1.2. had his Body broken on the
Cross, Heaven and Earth were filled with the sweet savor thereof, and many
reasons may be alleged why it should be so well pleasing to God. First, it was
Gods pleasure and ordinance, that Christ should dye for us, and he ordained it,
in the height of his love to us: God so loved the world, etc. And he cannot
choose but be infinitely pleased, with his own work, specially the work of
his greatest love. Secondly, he delights not in the death of a sinner, but
rather that they should be converted and live; therefore this being the Life
and Salvation of sinful believers, it must needs be delightful and pleasing
to God. Thirdly, it was as it were Gods own Blood, Act. 20.28. For howsoever
God is not as Man, made of Flesh and Blood, yet the Person of Christ, who was
our Mediator, being God and Man, the Blood that came from him as he was Man, by
reason of the personal Union of both Natures in that his own Person, may
justly be said to be the Blood of God; and how can it choose but the Blood of
God, should be infinitely pleasing to God? Lastly, it must make amends for all
the sins of all Believers: now all our sins, even the best of them, are
maruailous filthy, and loathsome before the Lord, our very righteousness is
as a filthy Clout before the pure Eyes of Gods Justice; and therefore, there
being so many Believers to be saved, and every Believer having so many sins,
and every sin being so loathsome and odious before the Lord, it must needs
be a very sweet Sacrifice, that must take away all that filthiness; and that
obedience must needs be infinitely pleasing to God, which makes perfect
satisfaction and recompense, for our infinite sins. Now if it be so sweet and
infinitely pleasing to God, shall we neglect it? Or come like Stocks and
Stones unto it, without feeling and without life, without a lively and a
sensible apprehension of the infinite excellency, of this sweet smelling
Sacrifice? Let us stir up our selves, to esteem reverently of it, as it well
deserves, and to take delight in it, as God delights in it, and accordingly let
us be fitted to the celebration and memorial of it, in this Sacrament. In my
unfeigned affection therefore to the Lord, and our Savior Jesus Christ, and to
his precious Death and Bloodshedding, so bitter to himself, so comfortable to
us, so pleasing to God, that the honor thereof may be rightly and worthily
advanced in our Hearts, as at all times, so especially in the lively
commemoration of it in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, I have undertaken
this task of preparation, earnestly desiring, that the precious death of the
Lord Jesus Christ, may be preciously and graciously entertained, answerable in
some measure to the excellent worthiness of that great Mystery. Let us
therefore labor to make some use of these things: Let us consider, first that
it is one of the greatest parts of our Christian duty, to be well instructed
and furnished for this Sacrament: Secondly, what danger it is to our Souls if
we come unprepared, for then we eat and drink our own damnation: when we are
eating and drinking, the Devil is blind-folding of us, and carrying our Souls
to Hell. Thirdly, let us look withal to Gods glory; Is God most glorified by
this? Then let us be best prepared to it. Lastly, let us consider the
preciousnesse of the death of Christ, the greatest work that ever was
performed since the World began, that Christ the Son of God should shed his
Blood for the sin of Man. It ought therefore to be prepared unto with much
elevation, and with much affection of mind: And when we have it before our
Eyes, and come to show forth the Lords death, we must bring with us all
preparation, reverence, faith, and elevation that we can by Prayer, or any good
endeavor attain unto; and we must further consider the bitterness of the
death of Christ, and must come as if then we were to be crucified with him,
every one of us that look for a part in his death for the forgiveness of
sins, the bitterness of his death must go to our Hearts; we must look unto
him whom we have pierced by our sins, with mourning Eyes, and drouping
Hearts; and then we must consider, how comfortable this his death is to us, it
is the greatest blessing that ever can befall us in this World, Life, Remission
of Sins, Salvation, and what not? It is all in all. Lastly, consider how
infinitely pleasing it is to God, and know that if it be so pleasing to him, if
we profane it, he will be infinitely displeased with us. Let these things
therefore stir us up to a reverent partaking of this holy Mystery. Thus you
have some seasoning before hand, see how you can profit by it in the week; you
have somewhat now to put you in mind, what you are to do the next Sabbath;
let every one think within himself, and make it his whole weeks Meditation,
I must go to the Lords Supper the next Sabbath, therefore I must repent and
call to God for mercy, and steadfastly purpose to lead a new life hereafter:
If I come unworthily, it is as much as my Soul is worth. These things I would
have you to learn, and practice, and the Lord give you understanding in them.

The end of the first Lecture.
THE SECOND LECTVRE UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
THus much I thought good to give you a taste of before hand by way of
preparation to the Communion, the maine matter was the setting forth of the
death of the Lord Jesus, and that is the chief matter of the Sacrament. Now
because the next day is a Communion day, we must proceed in this digression: I
will not speak of Sacraments in general, I will respite that till I come to
speak of them in the Catechism, now we will speak only of the Doctrine of
the Lords Supper.

The whole Doctrine of the Lords Supper may be reduced to these six Heads:
First, the names or titles that are given to it. Secondly, the institution or
ordination of it. Thirdly, the nature of it. Fourthly, the parts of it.
Fifthly, the power of it. And lastly, the use of it.

First, concerning the names or titles that are given to it, I will only
mention those that are found in the Scripture, whereof some are more common to
the whole action; others more proper to the several parts of it. First, I will
speak of those that are more common to the whole action, and the first name or
title that we meet withal is, The Lords Table, 1 Cor. 10.21. Ye cannot drink
the Cup of the Lord and the Cup of Devils; ye cannot be partakers of the Lords
Table, and of the Table of the Devils. The Apostle there is inueying bitterly
against their Idolatrous Sacrifices, their offering to Idols, which he calls
Devils, for they are no better: and the Apostle tells them that if ever they
look to have any benefit, in sitting, and eating, and drinking at the Lords
Table, they must utterly forsake the Table of Devils. It is the Lords Table,
this is a borrowed speech, the Table being taken for the Meat and Drink that
is received at the Table. The word imports many things worthy our
consideration: First, it agrees with the ordinary custom of eating and
drinking, which is usually performed at a Table. Secondly, it carries some
reference to the original institution, which was at the Table, there they did
eat the Passover. Thirdly, it prescribes a decency and a seemly complement,
even of the outward material things that are of needful use, in and about
this Sacrament. Fourthly, it preuents all superstitious conceits of any
holiness in the Table it self, above other Tables, but only so far forth,
as it is separated to this holy use; else there is no extraordinary holiness
in the Table it self. Fifthly, it condemns the practice of the Popish Church,
that make it, and call it an Altar rather then a Table; and their reason is
ready; because they might turn the Sacrament into a Sacrifice; for Sacrifices
are confind to Altars, and Altars to Sacrifices. The second name, it is called
The Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.20. When ye come together therefore into one place,
this is not to eat the Lords Supper. This title imports as much as the other,
an eating and drinking, but this further includes two things more: First, a
specification of the time when it was first instituted, and administered, being
at night 1 Cor. 11.23. The Lord Jesus in the night that he was betrayed, took
Bread, etc. 1 Cor. 11.25. He took the Cup when he had supped, etc. for our
evening meals are our Suppers. And secondly, it has also a reference to the
present action, which at the first institution it was accompanied withal; that
is, The Lords Supper, wherein our Savior and his Disciples did eat the
Paschall Lamb, which was a shadow of this Sacrament: And each of these is
particularly ascribed to the Lord, that is, to Christ Jesus. Now it is called
The Lords Table, and The Lords Supper, not only because our Savior is Lord by
a kind of excellency, but also because he has a special right unto this
Sacrament, and a special hand in it; as our Sabbath is called the Lords day in
the Revel. 1.10. because our Savior had a special right to it, and a special
hand in it either in instituting it himself, or by his Apostles. There are
many other names of which I will speak hereafter, in the mean time we will
seize and insist a while upon these two: And because these two agree very
near together, and are in effect as one, I will handle them both together, and
deliver the matter by way of observation, as I have done before.

Esaias 40.3. compared with Mark 1.3. for the New Testament is an exposition of
the Old, and the Apostles and Evangelists the Interpreters of the Prophets, and
therefore whereas Esaias speaking as a Prophet had only pointed out Christ
somewhat darkely, by this general word, the Lord, Mark speaking as an
Evangelist, expounds the Prophet, and shows plainly that Christ is that Lord
there spoken of, as appears in Verse 1. compared with Verse 3. And so you have
three testimonies in one, the Prophets, the Evangelists, and John Baptists, for
it was his Cry, they are but the reporters of it. If you add hereunto that in
Mal. 3.1. where the same matter is handled, you have a fourth testimony
greater then all the rest, God himself calls him so, And the Lord whom you
seek shall speedily come to his Temple, etc. In Math. 21.3. our Savior sends
two of his Disciples to fetch the Ass and the Colt, and he bids them that if
any Man say ought unto them, that they should say, The Lord has need of them.
There our Savior challenges to himself that very title, for he is the Lord
that had use of them, and this word imports that he is an absolute Lord, and
had an absolute right in them, better right then the Lords and Owners had. Luke
2.11. The Angel calls him so, Unto you is borne this day a Savior which is
Christ the Lord. And so Act. 2.25. compared with Psalm. 16.10. David calls him
Lord, and the Apostle expounds it of Christ. And so the Apostle Peter calls
him Lord in Act. 2.36. and so the whole company of the Disciples call him Lord
in Luke 24.34. which said, The Lord is risen, etc. Here you have a great many
of testimonies together, God, and Christ, and the Angels; David, and the
Prophets, and John Baptist, and the Apostles, and the Evangelists, all join
together acknowledging him to be the Lord, that is, an absolute Lord, and it is
an usual speech in the Apostles writings, to call him The Lord Jesus, or the
Lord Jesus Christ; and this title is so proper to him, that when the other
Persons are spoken of together with him, they oft-times are called by some
other titles, he by this, 1 Cor. 8.6. For there is but one God which is the
Father, and one Lord Jesus Christ, etc. The Apostle calls the Father God, and
Jesus Christ Lord; not but that Christ is God also, and the Father is Lord; but
so it pleases the Holy Ghost to speak of them for causes best known to
himself; and so in the 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. The same Spirit, the same Lord, God
is the same, etc. and in Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. One Spirit, one Lord, one God and
Father of all, etc. Now that none may think this to be a bare title only, it
is sometimes given him with addition of diverse Royalties, such as are peculiar
only to the Lord of Heaven and Earth, as The Lord of Life, Act. 3.15. The Lord
of Power. 2 These. 3.16. The Lord of Glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. Secondly, He is such an
absolute Lord, as that he is Lord of Lords, Revel. 19.16. and he has upon his
Garments and upon his Thigh a name written, The King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, not only as he being greater then they, but also, as they being at his
command, and whatsoever power and authority they have, they have it from him.
Thirdly, He is such a Lord, as that he is the sole Ruler and Governor of the
World, 1 Cor. 15.27. For he has put down all things under his Feet. Math.
28.18. And Jesus came and spoke unto them saying, All power is given me in
Heaven and Earth. Lastly, He is such a Lord, as that he is specially the Lord
and sole Governor of his Church, and of the Faithful, for that is specially
intended in the New Testament, for as they are the special Jewels of the
World, so Christ Jesus, who is Lord of all the World, is by special relation
the Lord over them. Ephesians. 3.14, 15. the Apostle in the fourteenth Verse having
spoken of the Lord Jesus Christ, in the fifteenth Verse he says, Of whom is
named the whole Family in Heaven and Earth; all the Faithful receive their
denomination from him, and therefore they challenge him by particular claim as
their Lord, 1 Cor. 16.23. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you; and
every one of them too as his Lord: So did David, Psalm. 110.1. The Lord said
unto my Lord, etc. And so did Mary Magdalene, John 20.13. They have taken away
my Lord. And in Verse 28, so did Thomas, My Lord and my God. Nothing more
frequent then this: So you see the point is plainly proved by Scripture, the
Reasons are many.

Phil. 2.6. He was God himself as the Scripture shows, and therefore he is
truly and rightly the Lord of Lords: if he had been but the Son of God, the
reason would hold, for if the Sons of Earthly Princes, are Earthly Lords,
then the Son of God who is Lord of Heaven and Earth, must needs be the
Heavenly Lord, the Lord of all Lords: But in that it is said, that he was in
the form of God, equal with God, it takes away all color of exception, and
puts the matter out of all doubt, that he is an absolute Lord.

been most plainly declared to be the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.47.



Act. 2.36. God has made him both Lord and Christ, etc. which is not to be
understood of his Nature, but of his Lordly Office, the Office of his
Mediatorship: and hence he has a large Patent, and an absolute authority
given him, Math. 28.18. All power is given me both in Heaven and Earth: and in
John 5.22.27. The Father judges no Man, but has committed all Judgment to
the Son, and has given him power to execute Judgment in that he is the
Son of Man. And that which agrees most to this in hand, is in Phil. 2.9, 10,
11. Wherefore God has highly exalted him, and given him a name, above every
name: that at the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow, both of things in
Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the Earth: and that every tongue
should confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, unto the glory of God the
Father. He obtained this Lordship by his Mediatorship, and it is such a
Lordship, as all in Heaven, and Earth, and under the Earth do acknowledge.

He bought the Church with his own Blood, Act. 20.28. The reason of the name
Lord is this: when any were taken Prisoners and Captives, he that redeemed and
ransomed them was called their Lord, and they were his Servants. We were
Captives unto Sin, and Hell, and Damnation, and Christ he redeemed and
ransomed us, and therefore he is our Lord, and we are his Servants.

John 6.37. All that the Father gives me shall come to me. And Hebr. 2.13.
Behold here am I, and the Children which God has given me. And hence arises
many relations betwixt Christ and his Church: He is their God, and they are his
People; He is their Head, and they are his Members; He is their Husband, and
they are his Spouse; He their King, and they his Subjects; and he their
Savior, and they his Redeemed.

The Uses are these: Arians imagine, as who should say, He is God indeed, but
yet subordinate and inferior to his Father. But he is an absolute Lord, even
as God the Father is Lord, and whosoever does not so acknowledge him, shall
have no part in him. The Jews and the Turks that do in their kind very
religiously acknowledge and invoke God the Father, do but deceive themselves
and dishonor God: They shall never find grace and mercy with God the Father,
because they acknowledge not the Lord Jesus Christ. The greater is Gods
goodness to us, that has not only so revealed him to us, but also persuaded
us to receive him. It is not a matter of course, but the special working of
the Holy Ghost, but of Faith whereby we are thus persuaded, 1 Cor. 12.3. No Man
can say that Jesus is the Lord but by the Holy Ghost. In word a Man may say as
much, but he cannot in deed and in truth; he cannot come to be persuaded of it;
and to rest in that persuasion, is only from the Holy Ghost.

Mal. 1.6. If I be a Lord, where is my fear? Seeing Christ Jesus is the Lord,
we must fear him and worship him. Psalm. 45.11. He is thy Lord, and reverence
thou him; it is spoken of Pharaohs Daughter, that Solomon was her Lord, and
therefore she must worship him. If this be true in the shadow, it is much more
so in the substance: For behold a greater then Solomon is here, a greater Lord,
and therefore more necessarily and more reverently to be worshipped: Every one
of us should enlarge our Hearts to the furthest extent of reverence and worship
that possibly we can attain unto; whenever we do but hear the name of the
Lord Jesus, it should strike a reverence into our Hearts. Do not the Devils
tremble at the sight of the Lord Jesus? Did not they worship him in the days
of his Flesh? Mark 5.6, 7. How much more then when they behold his glory? And
shall not we be stirred up to worship the Lord Jesus as the Lord, when we see
the very Devils worship him? All the Angels worship him, Hebr. 1.6. Now we are
more bound unto him, in respect of this very title, the Lord, then they are:
He is their Lord as being their Creator, Head, Governor, Preserver; but to us
he is more then all this; He is the Lord our Redeemer, which is the most proper
and most beneficial bond, and this he never was to them; therefore we are to
worship him by duty much more. All Creatures worship him. Phil. 2.10.11. At
the Name of Jesus every Knee shall bow, both of things in Heaven, and things
in Earth, and things under the Earth: and every tongue shall confess that
Jesus is the Lord, etc. Then let us not stand like a dead Center in the midst,
like Stocks and stones, without the sense of the Lordly power and authority
of Christ Jesus, we are to be quickened thereby to worship him, when all the
Creatures round about us in Heaven and Earth do bow and humble themselves,
with all fear, and reverence, and service to his Majesty. There is nothing in
our Savior but if it be beheld with a spiritual Eye, it carries a Lord-like
Majesty in it, deserving and requiring the highest A worship: Not only his
Transfiguration, Miracles, Resurrection, Ascension, and such other works
plainly declaring him to be the Lord, but even in his basest and meanest estate
he was discerned and acknowledged to be the Lord. When he was in the Womb,
Luke 1.43, 44. Elizabeth acknowledged him to be so, Whence comes this to me,
that the Mother of my Lord should come to me, etc. And in the Cratch he was so
acknowledged by the Angels, and heavenly Soldiers, Luke 2.11.13. And after
that he was worshipped by the Wisemen as the Lord, Math. 2.11. And upon the
Cross, even then when he was in the greatest abasement, when it was the hour
and power of Darkness, he spoiled Principalities, and Powers, and showed
himself to be the Lord; and the Thief hanging with him, by the Eye of Faith
discerned him to be the Lord, and so worshipped him, Luke 23.42. Lord remember
me when thou come into thy Kingdom. Even then when he was in the Enemies
hands, when they were taking away his life from him, yet then was he the Lord,
and so showed himself, and was so acknowledged, and worshipped, and called
upon. Now as he is to be worshipped in all other cases, so especially in the
use of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, when we come to be partakers of the
Bread and Wine, and by them of the Body and Blood of Christ, we must be raised
up to the consideration of his Lordly power and authority, that thereby we may
be stirred up to worship him, and honor him, and to bow down the Knees of our
Hearts to him with all humbleness and submission; I say not that we should
worship the Sacrament as the Papists, nor Christen the Sacrament as some of the
Lutherans, but in the use of the Sacrament, as being the special memorial of
him and of his Death: and as we worship him in hearing of the Word, and his
saving Ordinances, we must have our Hearts to be lifted up in the reverent
embracing of these pledges of his love, and in thanksgiving for the benefits
of his Death, and to be cast down in detestation of our sins that has
brought this death upon him.

John 14.1. If ye believe in God, believe in me also, as who should say, ye
believe in God, I being God believe also in me; so Christ being Lord as the
Father is, is therefore to be believed in, the use is as natural and the
reason as effectual: here is the proper object for the Eye of our Faith to be
fastened upon, his Lordly power and authority, Christ-Man is to be believed in,
in some sort, but Christ the Lord, that is the true, and right, and proper
object: here is full hold, and as it were a full handful for the hand of our
Faith to seize upon. We lay hold on him as Lord, therefore all-sufficient to
supply all out wants, to minister all comforts unto us, to fill us with all
abundance, and every way to give us plentiful satisfaction. If we rest on
him as Man only, many fears, and doubts, and suspicions might arise, but
Christ the Lord puts all out of doubt, and gives us full content and security,
here is sure footing for the grace of Faith to rest upon, Christ the Lord is
the Rock that we must build upon, and the Gates of Hell shall never prevail
against us; therefore let us rest in Christ the Lord, and rely upon him, and
cast our selves with all boldness and confidence upon his Almighty
protection.

drown us; against our Enemies it is a sufficient Shield, If the Lord be our
Light and Salvation, whom should we fear? Psalm. 27.1. So in our Prayers, Luke
23.42. Lord remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom; it is such a
patheticall voice, that it works affection, a kind of lively and comfortable
affection in the Hearts of those that have grace to conceive rightly of it.

Zach. 3.2. when it was said unto him, The Lord reprove thee Satan: And in Jude
verse 9. when Michael the Archangell strove with the Devil about the Body of
Moses, he durst not blame him with cursed speaking, but said, The Lord rebuke
thee: he had his arrant, he need have no more said to him; and if it be but
pronounced by Men with a faithful Heart, and assured confidence in God, it is
able to strike terror and astonnishment into the Hearts of ungodly Men: Behold,
the Lord comes to Judgment, etc. And in the 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. The Lord shall
descend from Heaven with a shout, etc. The day of Judgment is a matter of
terror to the wicked, and because it should affright them the more, it is
denounced against them in the Name of the Lord: And alas, though wicked Men be
never so great, what are they when the Lord of Heaven and Earth shall set
himself against them in his fierce wrath and displeasure? The thought hereof
is suffcient to terrify and amaze the most obstinate sinner in the World.

Math. 22.2. and forward, and Revel. 19.9. and 2.7. etc. And according to this
ground it is, that this Sacrament is set forth unto us in the name of a Feast,
that is to say, a Spiritual Feast or Banquet for our Souls. Prou. 9.1, 2, etc.
it is said of Wisdom, that she has killed her Victuals, drawn her Wine, and
prepared her Table: and what is the benefit to be received at this Feast?
Knowledge and understanding, as appears in the 4 and 5 Verses: by Wisdom
there, is meant the Son of God; the preparing of the Victuals and Table is
the tendering us of the means of Salvation, which is performed in a particular
manner in this Sacrament, 1 Cor. 10.26. The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is
it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? And the Bread which we break, is
it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? Now these things cannot be
communicated to us in bodily manner, he being in Heaven and we in Earth,
therefore it must be understood in a spiritual manner, as the Body and Blood
of Christ which is communicated to us in this Sacrament, being a spiritual
Banquet for our Souls, to nourish them up to a spiritual and heavenly life,
Math. 26.28. This is my Blood of the New Testament which is shed for many for
remission of sins. So that the end for which we are invited to drink, it is
the remission of sins; drink Wine, it is for the comfort of our Bodies;
drink the Blood of the Lord Jesus at the Lords Table, it is infinitely more
comfortable to the Soul of a poor Christian that lies groaning under the
burden of his sins, he is thereby refreshed and revived, and cheared up to a
spiritual life, John 6.54. Whosoever eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood, has
eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. The benefit that comes
to us by the Flesh and Blood of Christ, which we eat and drink after a
special manner in this Sacrament, is not a temporal life, but life eternal,
John 6.63. The Flesh profits nothing, the words that I speak to you are Spirit
and life. That which our Faith takes hold upon in Christ Jesus by eating and
drinking him after a spiritual manner, whether in the Sacrament or without it,
is not to make our Bodies fat, but to cherish up our Souls, that his Spirit
may quicken our Spirit, and his life may make us alive to God.

Math. 11.29. You shall find rest to your Souls: It is true indeed, our
Savior has a care of our Bodies too, but his special care is for our Souls,
he is our Souls Physician, but the work he came to perform was this, not so
much to take away the sickness of our Bodies, but the sins of our Souls. It
is not to be denied but that our Bodies also are nourished in this Sacrament,
and that both directly and corporally by the outward Elements of Bread and
Wine, for so it must be, that the proportion may hold and be the more
significant and sensible, and also by way of consequence, and spiritually, as
the Body also partaking with the Soul, in the forgiveness of sins, and the
grace of Salvation: but that which is chiefly and principally nourished in this
Sacrament, is the Soul, which receives and embraces Christ by Faith.

Cor. 6.17. He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit, Therefore this
Sacrament which is a special means of our Communion with Christ to knit us
unto him, must accordingly be a spiritual Banquet.

Luke 22.20. The Covenant or Testament is a spiritual Covenant, the Covenant
of Justification and Sanctification, Hebr. 10.16, 17. Therefore the Seal must
be spiritual as the Covenant is.





nourishment of the Soul; therefore it is plain that this Sacrament is a
spiritual Banquet, wherein the Faithful are nourished to a spiritual and
heavenly life.

He shall be cast into utter darkness. Lastly, our affections must be
spiritual; our Mirth, and Cheerfulness, and Joy, must not be any carnal
Joy, or corporal Rejoicing, as at our bodily Feasts, but we must rejoice in
the Lord, rejoice in the Spirit, rejoice in God, and Christ, and his Salvation.

must learn to discern the Body and Blood of Christ, the spiritual Food for
our Souls; we must lift up the Eye of Faith, and apprehend and take hold upon
Christ, being in Heaven, though we be upon Earth: Our bodily Eyes cannot see so
far, but the Eye of Faith sees into Heaven, and believes that Christ Jesus
sitting at the right Hand of God is here present at the Table, after a
spiritual manner, and so does give and communicate himself unto us: The Eye
of the Body sees the Bread broken, and the Wine poured out; the Eye of Faith,
sees and considers, the breaking of Christ Body, and the shedding of his Blood,
for the taking away of our sins, and this is that which the Apostle presses,
1 Cor. 11.29. about the discerning of the Lords Body; as who should say, That
he that comes without this discerning Eye of Faith, he comes to this Table as
to an ordinary Feast, discernes the Bread and Wine with his bodily Eyes, but
not as to a spiritual Feast, to discern Christ's Body by the Eye of Faith, and
so can have no benefit by it: For as appears in the Doctrine, it is the
Faithful only that are here nourished to a Spiritual life; but as for
unbelievers, they are thereby nourished to eternal death, as the Apostle there
shows.

with these Iunckets God has set before us? Have we had Faith in the Promises
of God? Have we had repentance of our Sins? Have we prepared our selves in
the Inward-Man, for the entertainment of Christ and his Spirit into our
Hearts? Have we been refreshed with the comforts of God? Have we delighted in
the Salvation that hereby is brought unto us? Have we had an inward joy and
cheerfulness of Heart, that we have found Christ the Lord and Master of the
Feast has bid us well-come? That we are better encouraged to go on in godly
duties? More confirmed in the assurance of the forgiveness of sins? And more
thoroughly resolved to lead a new life? That we have well profited in the
state of Grace and Salvation? If we find these things, we plainly show that we
have made it a spiritual Banquet, and that thereby our Souls are nourished to
a heavenly life. If we find none of these things, at least in some measure,
let us know, that we have come like brute Beasts, or at least like carnal
Men, we had better have kept away, if we have come only with bodily, and not
with spiritual Eyes, let us know we have committed a grievous sin against
God; We came here to receive a general quittance for our sins past, and we
have added a greater sin then ever we committed before. Let us therefore
examine our selves, and lay up these things in our Hearts to meditate upon
them, that thereby we may be stirred up, to a faithful endeavor, and unfeigned
labor and travel with our own Souls to be better fitted for the Lords
Table, that next time we come, we may be better Guests, and better well-come.
Amen.

The end of the second Lecture.
THE THIRD LECTVRE UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
YOU may see how it pleases God who disposes of all times and seasons
according to his own will, as being wholly in his own Hands, that the
renewing of this Exercise should fall out upon this day, the next Sabbath being
a Communion Sabbath; and therefore according to the method before propounded;
and hitherto observed, we are to break forth into our digression again, now
to spend our time and labor this Sabboths evening, to fit our selves against
the next Sabbath to the receiving of the Communion. You may remember we showed
that the whole Doctrine of the Sacrament of the Supper of the Lord may be
reduced unto these six Heads: First, the names or titles of it: Secondly, the
institution of it: Thirdly, the nature of it: Fourthly, the parts of it:
Fifthly, the power of it: And lastly, the use of it. We have entered upon the
names and titles of it, we have seen that some are common to the whole action,
and some are peculiar to the several parts of the action: Common to the whole
action that it is called the Lords Supper, or Lords Table, that is the first
title; the Lords Table, that is a borrowed speech, by the Table is meant the
Meat or the Drink that is received at the Table; it is called the Lords
Supper, and there is as much intended as at the Table, eating and drinking; but
withal there is further included both a specification of the time, wherein the
Sacrament was instituted in the night, at evening Meal or at Supper: Secondly
withal, there is a specification of that special action that it was
accompanied withal when it was first instituted (namely) at that Supper where
our Savior Christ and his Disciples did eat the Paschall Lamb which was a
Type and Figure of this Sacrament, each of these are ascribed to the Lord, the
Lords Supper, or the Lords Table; wherein we showed first, that Christ Jesus is
the Lord by a kind of excellency, the only, sole, Ruler, Governor, and
Commander of all. Secondly, we showed it is called a Supper, a Table, whence we
gathered this point of Doctrine, that the Sacrament is a spiritual Feast or
Banquet whereby our Souls are nourished to eternal life. Now there is also to
be handled a third observation concerning this first title for where the Lord
himself does give names, there is some deep reach of wisdom and
understanding in them; Men are but of shallow capacity, they cannot sound the
full depth of things, and therefore the names that are given by Men are but
shallow, and superficial, they are not much profitable, nor much obseruable;
but the Lord that made, and has ordained all things, he sees thoroughly into
the very ground, and bottom of all things, and therefore the names that are
imposed by God himself, as they are always very significant to express the
nature of the things that they are given unto, so commonly they are very
pregnant, and plentiful for instruction of the Sacrament that we are to speak
of. It is termed or called by God himself, The Lords Table, or The Lord
Supper; consider it well and you shall find to arise a third observation
(namely) that the Sacrament which we call the Communion, is by a special
prerogative appropriated to the Lord Jesus Christ, his Sacrament, his Supper,
his Table, the Lords Supper, or the Lords Table. In the former observation you
heard what it is (namely) that it is called a Supper therefore a Banquet. In
this observation now you hear whose it is, the Lords Supper, or the Lords
Banquet, 1 Cor. 10.21. it is called there by the name of the Lords Table: If you
ask why it is the Lords? The Apostle shows it clearly in the sixteenth Verse
(namely) that it is Christ's, The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the
Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, (...) it not the
Communion of the Body of Christ? It is his Cup, whose Blood is communicated in
it; but Christ his Blood is thereby communicated to us, and therefore it is
Christ's: It is his Table, of whose Meat we feed upon; but it is Christ his Body
that there we feed upon, therefore it is Christ his Table, and that by a
special prerogative 1 Cor. 11.20. there it is called by the name of the Lords
Supper. And the Apostle in the 23 Verse of the same Chapter, presently after
speaking of the very same Supper, he shows who is the Lord (namely) Jesus
Christ, it is his Supper, and by a special prerogative, it is ascribed unto
him. Our Savior himself affirms as much with his own Mouth, Math. 26.26.28.
where the same Sacrament is mentioned, in regard of the institution of it,
Christ says, This is my Body, and so the Cup, he says, This is my Blood. I
have a special interest into it, I lay claim to it, as my right; Christ
challenges it for his own, as if he should step forth and say, This is my
right, and I challenge it as my own, by a special prerogative. For the
further opening of this point, we will first speak of certain respective
considerations whereby this truth is cleared, and amplyfied; and then of
certain reasons whereby it is more fully confirmed. First, of certain
respective considerations whereby the truth of this observation is cleared and
amplyfied: First, in regard of the Suppers of Men, Men have their Suppers, but
they are common and ordinary Suppers, but this is a heavenly and spiritual
Supper, the Supper of Jesus Christ. Secondly, in respect of other Suppers that
Christ himself made, indeed, he made many Suppers while he lived here upon the
Earth; but yet this is his by a kind of special prerogative, and right, not
only as being his last, but the greatest Supper, of greatest consequence he
made both to himself and us; that is to say, the Supper of the Lord, was of
greatest consequence to himself, because presently that night he was to be
betrayed, and delivered into the hands of sinners, the next day on the morrow
to suffer death; and so also of greatest consequence to us, because it is most
beneficial to us, and we ought to mind it more then all Suppers besides. A
third respective consideration shall be in regard of those that supped together
with him: It is the Lords Supper, yea, but did not others suppe with him? Yes,
the Disciples did: And therefore why may it not be called their Supper? I
answer, they were but the Guests, he the Master and the prouider of the Supper;
they the Servants, and he the Lord; though they were with him, though they did
partake of it, yet it does belong to the Lord by a special prerogative. Last
of all, in respect of the other Persons of the blessed Trinity, yet still it
is his Supper, the Supper of the Lord, after a special prerogative. But you
will say, was not the Father and the Holy Ghost present there, and powerful?
Yes, they were in some sense, but yet not by prerogative, but it was Christ's
Supper only by a kind of special prerogative, though the Father and the Holy
Ghost were there present and powerful, yet notwithstanding they were not
incarnate, it was Christ alone that was incarnate, and took our Flesh upon
him, and did bodily feed upon it, and therefore not the Supper of the Father,
or of the Holy Ghost, but his by a kind of excellency. Besides, in the
ordinary use of the Sacrament, the Father, and the Holy Ghost they are
present, and powerful to all saving purposes as well as the Son, yet still
Christ has the prerogative in this case, for whatsoever the Father does in
this Supper of the Lord, we must conceive he does it by Christ as his
Committee; whatsoever the Holy Ghost does in making this Supper comfortable to
us, he does it from Christ, as from him being his Deputy; so that in effect it
is Christ that is all in all, it is he to whom this Supper by a special
prerogative does belong. These are the considerations whereby the truth of this
observation is clearly amplyfied. Now we will come to the Reasons whereby it
is more fully proved, why is this the Lords Supper by a special prerogative
belonging to our Lord Jesus Christ rather then to any other Person.

Math. 26.26.28. Luke 22.19. where the institution of it was done by Christ
himself, by his own Person, by his own Hand, and by his own Mouth. So also
1 Cor. 11.24, 25. it is done by Christ, look where the institution of it is
first mentioned, wheresoever it is repeated, still it is attributed to Christ,
he is the Author and Institutor of this Sacrament. We know that if so be a Man
be the Author of any thing, he may justly challenge it as his own: so Christ
being the Institutor of this Sacrament, we may say, and that justly, that it is
his by a special prerogative. The Lord that made Heaven and Earth cannot make
a more right claim and title to the whole frame of the World, then Christ
Jesus to the Lords Supper, because he made it, ordained it, and instituted it.

Paul ministered, is called Paul's Gospel, 2 Timothy 2.8. so the Baptism ministered
by John, is called John's Baptism, Math. 21.25. though it came not from him,
but from Heaven: so seeing that this Sacrament was administered first by Christ,
therefore it may justly be called his Sacrament. The Reason holds good, because
our Savior Christ was not only the Administer of this Sacrament, as Paul was
of the Gospel, nor only the first Administer of it, as John of the Baptism,
but the first Institutor of it too, and therefore with a full force and right
it falls upon Christ to be his. (Beloved) it is worth the noting, that whereas
there are but two Sacraments in the New Testament, and each of them are his, he
carried himself diversely toward them; the one he received, and never
administered; the other he administered, and never received: Baptism he did
receive, that is clear, Math. 3.16. Jesus was baptized, but he never
administered it, John 4.2. He baptized none: But he administered the Supper, as
all the Evangelists agree upon it; but he received it not: Indeed and in truth
the maine end of the Lords Supper, was the remembrance of Christ, and therefore
it was needless that Christ should receive it: Now this must not be thought to
be any disparagement either to the one Sacrament, or to the other: to the one,
that he did not receive, or to the other, that he did not administer; it is a
sufficient honor to each of them, and sufficient warrant for their
institution, and that both are his, that he received the one, and administered
the other.

This is my Body, this is my Blood, etc. we know this amongst Men, that he that
is the Master of the Feast, the Feast is his, Reason teaches this, this is
mine, I pay for it: So Christ may reason much more, the Sacrament is mine, I
have paid dearly for it, it has cost me dearly, even the precious Blood of
mine own Heart, that I might make you this Feast: And therefore great reason
it should be his by a special prerogative.

the very Body and Blood of Christ; it is he himself that is both given and
received in it; and therefore he has a special right to it; well may it be
called his, because he feasteth us with his Body and Blood.

Math. 26. speaking of the Bread, says, Do this in remembrance of me, Luke
22. and so 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. where he applies that clause to both kinds, that
is, both to the Bread and to the Wine. So then the Holy Ghost being the best
expounder of himself, though Christ speak it but of one, yet he intended it
of both: So then it is said to be done in remembrance of the Lord Jesus Christ:
He is the special Mark that we must aim at; Do this in remembrance of me:
therefore he has a special prerogative, and he may lay special claim to it.
If any Friend should leave a Book or a Ring with us, we must take some
special notice of the right he has to them in respect of himself: So seeing
it pleases Christ to leave this Sacrament for a chief remembrance, therefore
remember some lively representation of Christ in this Sacrament, that so we may
be stirred up more specially to remember Christ.

worship is to be clone with all fear and trembling Psalm. 2.11. Serve the Lord
in fear, and rejoice in trembling. All the parts of Gods worship are
reverently to be performed; the greatness of the glorious Majesty of God
requires it, whose business it is; likewise, the excellency of the work
requires it; also, the strictness of the Commandment of God requires it; then
again, the benefit we look to receive by it requires it; yea also, our own
voluntary submission to Gods Ordinance, that also necessarily requires
reverence at our hands; no Man in the World can religiously undertake any part
of Gods worship without promise of due reverence: Therefore this being a
principal part of Gods worship, it should provoke us, and stir us up to
attain to all reverence, humility, devotion, and christian affection that
ever we can reach to, in the participation of this Sacrament. The Feast of
Christ, the Supper of Christ, and the Table of Christ is attributed to him by a
kind of excellency: How should this stir us up reverently to come to him? We
know ordinary manners teaches us, that if we be to come to the Table of a
great Man, we will look to our selves that our Hands be washed, and that our
Clothes, our speech, and whole carriage be reverent, and answerable to the
greatness of his Person with whom we sit: Is it so amongst Men? Then for shame
let Religion teach us to do that at the Lords Table, as ordinary manners
teaches us to do at Men's Table, seeing it is the Lords Table, let us look to
our Hands, and Eyes, but specially and above all, let us observe and look to
our Hearts, and see that all our actions be well composed with due reverence
and devotion fitting the high Majesty of the Lord Jesus Christ. Mark what
Solomon says, Prou. 23.1, 2. When thou come to sit before a Ruler, or a
great Man, consider diligently what is before thee, etc. that is to say, when
thou come before a great Man carry thy self with that due reverence as is
fitting the greatness of his Person, carry thy self with all sobriety. True
indeed that the Lord Jesus Christ whose Sacrament we come to partake of, is not
a captious Ruler, as the Holy Ghost speaks of, that seeks advantage at us;
but yet know, that he is a just and a righteous Judge, a jealous God that
cannot endure any mis-behauiour in his presence, nor that his Victuals should
be wastfully and riotously spent, nor his Table abused, and therefore come not
to the Table of the Lord Jesus without you be furnished with holy sobriety,
and Christian manners, as becomes a Guest of the Lord Jesus. If we could but
see the Lord Jesus to come amongst us bodily in the Lords Table, if we should
see and hear him say, this Table, and this Feast, and this work, and whole
business is mine; If he should come but in bodily presence, and lay claim to
that, we could not choose but tremble at it, and be astonished: Why shall not
our Faith in Christ being in Heaven sitting at the right Hand of God, stir us
up to more reverence and awe, then to behold him bodily with our Eyes? And
therefore knowing this is his Table, his work, and whole business, and that
he lays right and claim to it, then what manner of Men and Women ought we to
be in all manner of holy conversation, as at other times, so especially at this?

Sam. 9.7 David had a purpose to show some favor and kindness to Mephibosheth
for his Fathers sake, now how would he do it, but in making him to eat Bread
at his Table? He could not show his kindness more, nor express it more, then
in bidding him to his Table: So Christ he has a purpose to show favor and
kindness unto us, for our heavenly Fathers sake; now wherein can he express
it more, then in inuiting and admitting us to his Table, to participate of his
heavenly blessings? This should stir up our Hearts to thankful obedience
that seeing Christ is so gracious, so loving and kind to us, as to feast us at
his Table; therefore should we consecrate our selves ouer-to his service, and
exercise that he has ordained us for. Who should have the use, and service and
honor of our strength, but he that gave us our strength, and from whom we
receive it? We receive all from Christ, it is he that feeds us, and nourishes
us, by his Word, and by his Sacrament; and therefore see that our spiritual
strength be faithfully and wholly employed to the honor of Christ. Now to
stir us up to the performance of this more effectually, let us consider and
observe some particulars which may be greater spurs to stir us up to more
thankfulness.

1 First, Consider the excellency of his Person that inuites us; it is Christ
himself, the King of Glory, of Heaven and of Earth, he of whom it is said,
Dan. 7.10. That thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand
thousands stood before him. It is he that makes us his Fellow-guests. O what
thankfulness does this require at our hands!

2 Secondly, Consider the daintiness of the Fare, it is not Bread and water,
and cold commons that we are invited unto, it is not perishing Food, but Food
that lasts for ever, even the Body and Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, that
he here feasteth us withal: What less thankfulness then this can we give to
him, then Body for Body, and Blood for Blood?

3 Thirdly, Consider the benefit of this, we receive not only temporal
comfort, but spiritual, as forgiveness of sins, grace, sanctification, and
life eternal; This deserves therefore eternal thankfulness to be rendered to
Christ, in our lives and conuersations.

4 Fourthly, Consider further who we are that are admitted to this Feast: Why
alas poor base wretches, miserable and damned sinners, not worth the ground we
tread upon, yet Christ admits us as Guests to his Table: We are those spoken
of, that are poor and hault, blind, lame and naked, we are vagrant Persons
that lie under the Hedge, Luke 14.21, 22. that Christ calls and comples to
come to this Banquet. Churlish Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.11. he grudged when David came
and asked him bread and relief in his distress: Shall I (says he) take my
Water, and my Bread that I have provided for my Shearers, and give it to them
that I know not whence they are? But the Lord Christ, he stuck not at a
greater matter, but he gave his own Body and Blood for us, he did not only
bestow upon us his Bread and his Wine, poor wretched sinners, of whom he may
more justly say, then Nabal said of David, Go your ways, I know you not. The
rich Man in Luke 16. would not afford poor Lazarus the crummes that were under
his Table, but the Lord Jesus Christ affords us not only crumbs, but Meat and
Drink, and the full benefit, honor and comfort of his own Table, though we
be fuller a thousand times of sins in our Souls, then Lazarus was of
diseases in his Body, and these sins being much more loathsome to God then
his diseases was to the rich Man: Yet Christ is so rich in mercy, that he
affords us not only the crummes of his Table, but the full benefit of the
whole Table, even to take our fill of the Table. Let us think rightly of this
love, and see whether we have not cause to be dissolved into thankfulness to
him for this so great love. To proceed a little further.

5 Fifthly, Consider the continual access that we thorough the mercy of
Christ, have to the Lords Table: We are not stinted and minted to come at it
once in our life time: though I must tell you, that there be a great many of
poor Christians that would give all that ever they have that they might come
to it as we do. We are not stinted to come once a year, though many thorough
the gracelessenesse of their Hearts, do come but once: But we thorough Gods
mercy, may have access to it from month to month, that the conscionable
Receiver may pass from one Communion day to another in the strength of it, if
he be careful to keep it by Prayer, Meditation and practice. So great a
blessing as this is, so continually renewed unto us, how ought it to stir us
up to renew our thankfulness?

6 Sixthly, Consider further, whom does Christ set us withal? Even with his
own Children, those that shall be glorified in his heavenly Kingdom: We poor
miserable wretches, are set with them, and fed, and feasted with them. Is it
so? How should this stir us up to all thankfulness?

7 To proceed a little further in the last place: We do not come to it darkely
as many do, in blindness, darkness, and ignorance; but the same Lord Jesus
Christ that prouides this Supper, he prouides us light to come to it, the light
of his Word and instruction, that if we be not wilfully blind, we may see how
to feed, and how to behave our selves, that God may have the glory, and we the
comfort.

to Christ: whatsoever we do, look upon him, he indeed is all in all: If we
have an Eye to God the Father, considering has great love to us, still behold
him in Christ, Christ is the subject of the love of God: If we consider God the
Holy Ghost in regard of his power to make it effectual, look upon him, but
how? As the Deputy of Christ: If we look upon our selves, have an Eye to our
selves in Christ, adopted, and reconciled thorough Christ: If we look upon
them that sit at Table, look upon them with an Eye to Christ, Members of the
Mystical Body of Christ, whereof I am a Member: So likewise, if we look upon
the Elements, Bread and Wine; and the actions of breaking the Bread, and
pouring out the Wine, all is his, and he has right to them by a special
prerogative, and therefore let him so be acknowledged and discerned in all
things that belong unto this action.

Cor. 11.23. When the Sacrament had grown to some abuse; what did the Apostle?
Why he would redress it according to the original institution of Christ:
True, the things are out of order in it, but I will tell you what you shall
do: That which I have received of the Lord, that I deliver unto you, tie your
selves to it, as if so be he should say, his authority is uncontrollable,
look what he says that must stand for good, his commandment and his practice
is most perfect and absolute, whosoever does go about to add any thing to that
which Christ has done, he does add that which is superfluous and needless,
and whosoever shall detract any thing, shall make it imperfect; whosoever shall
go about to alter any matter of substance in the Sacrament, as much as in him
lies, he shall make it not Christ's, but his own Sacrament: Whosoever he be
that thus takes upon him to add or to detract, let him know, that the Law has
set him his doom, Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 27.26. Cursed be he that shall add any thing,
and the Gospel it says Amen to it, Reu. 22.19. Whosoever shall add or
detract, not only from the Word of God, but also from the Ordinances of God,
they are so perfect, that whosoever shall do either, they shall endanger
themselves to Gods curse. But herein we must put a difference between matters
of Circumstance, and matters of Substance: There are some things that Christ
instituted in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, that are to be done upon pain
of damnation, but for those things which he did, and not instituted, we may
suppose those to be left to the liberty of the Church: As for example, the
time that Christ instituted it, it was at night, that is a Circumstance, shall
we think therefore that we are bound to administer it then? No. But we
suppose, and that upon good ground, that Christ has left such matters as free
to our selves, as to himself: But for matter of Substance, the things, the
matter to be used concerning the Bread and Wine, and the words of institution,
I say these things they are to be suspended upon the authority of the Lord
Christ Jesus, and not to be altered: nothing is to be changed nor altered, it
is part of his Testament and Will, wherein he has bequeathed Legacies to his
Church, and therefore it must be precisely kept; yea, the Law of Equity
requires that it should not be altered: And therefore that which Christ
instituted in this, is not to be added too, nor detracted from.

Cor. 11.27. Because he is guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord. Judas was
not more guilty in betraying Christ, nor Pilate in committing him to the
Jews, nor others in crucifying of him, then they that receive the Sacrament
unworthily: Every one of us would defy Judas, scorn to be as Pilate, and the
Jews, Why then, scorn this, to come unfitted and unprepared to the Sacrament,
and labor to come fitted and prepared to the Lords Table, and see that we be
in good case when we come to be fed, and come not as many do for fashion sake,
or for fear of Law, because they would avoid the penalty of the Law, and so
abuse Christ and his Sacrament. This is horrible wrong, sin, and injury to
the Son of God. Others, they come to it with a superstitious conceit,
thinking that it is a preservative to keep them from an ill Tongue; but above
all, the Papists excel and sin grievously in this, for if they have any cursed
Plot, or notorious villainy and wickedness to do, they will upon it take the
Sacrament: Here is a Religion in deed, if we do consider this well, this is
sufficient to make us hate their Religion, and to detest Popery; for if they
have any devilish trick to be done, then they will go to the Table of the
Lord: And therefore if there were nothing to prove him Antechrist but this,
this is sufficient. Amen.

The end of the third Lecture.
THE FOVRTH LECTVRE UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
WE are now to turn aside into our digression again, because the next
Sabbath is a Communion Sabbath: and therefore that which we are to speak now,
according to the method which we propounded in the beginning, is to be spoken
concerning that Argument, that we may have some good Lessons, some profitable
and wholesome Meditations, to feed upon all the week long, that we may be the
better fitted to come to the Lords Table. The first of those Heads, whereunto
all might be reduced concerning the Lords Supper, is the names and titles given
unto it; and those we showed were of two sorts, some of them common to the
whole action, and some of them proper to the several parts of the action. We
began in those that were common to the whole action, where first we met withal
this title of the Lords Table, out of 1 Cor. 10.21. The second title was the
Lords Supper, out of 1 Cor. 11.20. which two titles because they do agree
very nearly together, both in name and nature, therefore you see we have
handled them together: Now we must proceed to some other name or title. A third
name or title, whereby the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is described, which is
common to the whole action, is, that it is called a Communion. What Communion?
Why the Communion of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ: for so it is expressly
called in 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the
Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not the
communion of the Body of Christ? Consider I pray you advisedly of the place,
for it is the Text which I purpose at this time (God willing) to treat upon.
The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of
Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of
Christ? Here you see the Apostle speaks of the several parts or kinds used in
this Sacrament, and he gives a several name to each of them, in regard of the
outward sign, and he does affirm several things to each of them, in regard
of the thing signified. First, he begins with the Wine in the former part of
the Verse, The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is not the Communion of the
Blood of Christ? The name that he gives, as you see here, in regard of the
outward sign, is this: he calls it, The Cup of Blessing which we bless: the
thing which he does affirm of it in respect of the thing signified is, that it
is the Communion of the Blood of Christ. So likewise in the latter part of the
Verse, there he speaks concerning the other part of this Sacrament, the Bread:
the name that is given unto it in respect of the outward sign, is, The Bread
which we bless: and the thing that he affirms of it, in regard of the
spiritual and inward grace, is the Communion of the Body of Christ. The
appellations that are here given to the outward Elements, Bread and Wine, The
Cup of Blessing which we bless, and the Bread which we break, are fit to be
handled, among those titles and names, which are proper to the several parts
of this Sacrament, because they are propounded in indifferent terms, and not
under any proper name; but as for the thing signified, each of them here, as
you see, being a Communion. The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is the
Communion of the Blood of Christ, and the Bread which we break, is the
Communion of the Body of Christ: each of them be a Communion, and both of them
one Communion; and therefore this title is given in respect of the thing
signified, it falls out to be handled naturally among those titles common to
the whole action of the Sacrament. All is a Communion you see. That we may
understand the meaning hereof the better, and see how to proceed in it, we will
first consider here the occasion of the words; and secondly, we will show the
meaning of the words; thirdly, the manner, how the thing is here affirmed or
performed in and by the Sacrament; and fourthly, we will proceed to draw some
observations as God shall give assistance. First, concerning the occasion of
these words, you must understand that the Apostle does not here professedly and
of purpose treat of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as he does in the 11th
Chapter, but only he does it occasionally, and as it were by the way: The
occasion was this, These Corinthians that did believe, and were converted, even
after their conversion, they did still reside and converse among the rest of
the Corinthians that were Unbelievers and not converted, and thereby had much
intercourse with them in many affairs, especially in those two affairs which
be most principal, and most dangerous. First, concerning Marriage: secondly
concerning religious Feasts. Concerning their Marriages with them, the Apostle
has delivered his Judgment in the 7th Chapter, and directs them to the full,
how to carry themselves in that business, in marrying with Infidels, whereby
they might keep a good conscience toward God, and to the World. Concerning
their religious Feasts, he delivers his judgment in these three Chapters, the
8th, 9th, and 10th, proving by many reasons, that it is utterly unlawful for
them to communicate in any religious Feast of theirs; one reason among the
rest, is drawn from the maine ground of Christian Religion, from the right
nature and use of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, from the sixteenth to the
one and twentieth Verse, and the Argument stands thus, says the Apostle to
them, You that do profess Christianity, specially you that have proceeded so
far in it, as to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, you have thereby
absolute Communion, you have given your selves unto Jesus Christ, and he has
given himself likewise to you, you are made one with Christ, and he with you,
and with all the Faithful: this is set down in the sixteenth and seventeenth
Verses. On the other side, says he, they that do communicate in their
religious Feasts, that are consecrated unto Idols, they do give themselves
over unto those Idols, and make themselves one with those Idols, and with them
that worship them. That you heard in the 1 Co. 10.20. mark what the Apostle
inferres upon it, It is impossible to be one with God, and one with Idols: One
with God, and one with Devils: For these they are no better then Devils, it is
impossible you should be so; if once you give your selves to the service of
God, ye renounce the Devil; if once you give your selves to the service of the
Devil, then ye renounce God, and all the Faithful; We cannot be partakers of
the Lords Table, and of the Table of Devils, it is impossible that ever you
should be so: And therefore in any case partake not with them in any of their
religious Feasts. Thus the Argument stands, You that are religious, are made
one with Christ, and Christ with you; and therefore it is impossible that ye
should communicate and partake in the service of Idols, or Devils, and in the
Supper of the Lord, that is to say, it can never be done so; the service that
ye perform to God in the Sacrament, cannot be acceptable to him: the force of
the reason stands in this, in the proof of the first point, as many as
profess Christ, believers, and receivers of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
they have made themselves one with Christ, and Christ with them: that is proved
in the 16 and 17 Verses, and for confirmation thereof, he makes them Judges in
it, and he appeals to their consciences, saying, I speak, but unto them that
have understanding, Judge you what I say, The Cup of Blessing which we bless,
is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we breaks, is
it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? (As who should say) I appeal to
your consciences, you know it is so, any Man that knows what belongs to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, knows this to be true: So then, there is the
occasion of the words. Now concerning the meaning of the words: He is to
express what is meant by the Communion, and then what is meant by the Body and
Blood of Christ: The Communion imports in the Original, either the act of
communicating, whereby there is a communion and fellowship made; or else it
imports the Communion it self, which is made by such an act: As for example,
when we speak of a Contract of Marriage, or of a Bargain, the name may
signify, either the act whereby the contract is made, or the contract, or
bargain which is made by such an act: So this Communion signifies the contract
between us, and Christ: So then this Communion is of two sorts, there is a
Communion here meant between Christ, and the Faithful; and secondly, a
Communion of the Faithful among themselves. First, a Communion of Christ with
the Faithful, and that is of two sorts; first, a natural Communion, and then
a spiritual that we have together: The natural Communion that we have with
Christ, is in respect as he is a Man, and as he does take our nature upon him,
as he was made Bone of our Bone, and Flesh of our Flesh, and this is general
to the whole Race of Mankind, there is a natural Communion, between Christ
and the whole Race of Mankind, yet (notwithstanding) the saving benefit and
comfort of it, is proper to the elect Children of God; and hence it is that
this Communion is appropriated to the Children of God, Hebr. 2.14.16. For as
much then as the Children are partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also himself
likewise took part with them, that he might destroy through death, him that
had the power of Death, that is, the Devil: For he in no sort took on him the
Angels nature, but he took the Seed of Abraham, and did communicate in the
whole Race of Mankind, but yet so, as only the Children of God have comfort
thereby: This Communion does arise from us unto Christ: Why? Because our Nature
was first before Christ was incarnate, and he by taking of our Nature upon him,
is made Flesh of our Flesh, and Bone of our Bone, and therefore this Communion
is from us to Christ.

The second Communion is a spiritual Communion, as Christ is our Head and
Mediator, and as we are ingrafted as Members into his mystical Body; Now this
Communion, none are partakers of, nor have any part in it, but only the
Believers; and in this Communion we are made Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of
his Bone, as in the other he was made Flesh of our Flesh, and Bone of our Bone;
so in the spiritual Communion we are made Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his
Flesh. Ephesians. 5.30. the Apostle speaks there of a spiritual Communion,
between Christ and the Church: now this Communion arises from him and by him
unto us, and the other Communion arises from us to him; for the grace of the
Spirit of Life which is in Jesus Christ, is that by which we are ingrafted and
incorporated into Christ. So then you see concerning both the natural and the
spiritual Communion that we have with Christ. Then the second Communion, what
is it? Why, the Communion that the Faithful have among themselves, whereby
they are joined together, thorough the Bonds of Faith, of Hope, Love, and the
Spirit of God, and all of them made Members of one and the same Body, and this
Communion arises from the former. The Communion of the Faithful among
themselves, arises from the Communion of us with Christ; therefore are we
joined together, because all our Members do agree together from Christ our
Head. The Apostle delivers the point, and the illustration of the point
together, in 1 Cor. 12.12. Though the Members be many, yet all the Members
concur together in one Body. That is true, though many Members, yet all of
them concur in one Body, and under one Head, and so is Christ. So stands the
case of the comparison between Christ and the Church, there is a Communion
between Christ and the Church, why so there is a Communion between all that
have fellowship one with another, because they concur and join together
under one Head. So much shall serve to have spoken concerning the Communion:
The next thing that is to be unfolded, is the Body and Blood of Christ, that is
to say, Christ wholly, his Body, his Blood, his Death, his Resurrection, and
all his Merits: For howsoever it be, that the Lord Jesus Christ is tendered unto
us in the Lords Supper, with an eye and respect to his Death on the Cross, his
Body broken, his Blood shed; yet (notwithstanding) that is not all, we are not
to stay there, but it has a further reach; otherwise, those that stood by our
Savior Christ when he was crucified, put the case that one of them had
sprinkled his Body with the Blood of Christ, should he have had a Communion
then with Christ? Certainly no. Therefore our Faith must reach further, and not
stay in the Body and Blood of Christ, but it must reach to the fruit and
comfort that comes thereby to sanctification and eternal life: For so Christ
spoke. Math. 26.28. This is my Blood which is shed for many, for the remission
of sins. Consider of Christ his Death, his Body broken, his Blood shed, we
must have a further reach to discern the saving fruits and benefits of his
Death, as forgiveness of sins, sanctification, and eternal life. So then we
see what is meant by the Body and Blood of Christ, The Communion of the Body
and Blood of Christ.

Now the third point to be spoken of is, the manner of the performing and
accomplishment of those things in the Sacrament or Supper of the Lord. We must
understand it to be thus performed, that is to say, that this Communion with
Christ, or the Communion that we have among our selves, we must not so
understand it, as if it were begun, or made; but so performed as according to
the nature of the Sacrament will reach unto it (that is to say) it is there
confirmed, ratified, and sealed up unto us; the Body and Blood of Christ is
communicated unto us, by the way of Seal, of Pledge, of Ratification; the
Sacraments do not beget Faith in us, but they confirm Faith where it is
begotten already, Romans 4.11. After he received the sign of Circumcision, as
the Seal of the righteousness of Faith which he had when he was
uncircumcised, etc. The Sacrament, that comes and seconds it, and ratifies it
unto us. Then here is the case, at our first conversion, when God gave us an
effectual calling, God drawed us near to himself, and worked Faith in us,
and touched our Hearts by his Spirit, and so makes this holy Communion between
Christ and us, and so makes us one with him, and he with us. Well, Faith being
thus begotten in us, by the preaching of the Word, the Union being thus made,
then God admits us to his Table, to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the
point now in hand: He admits us there, that so this Communion, already made
between Christ and us, might be further confirmed and ratified: The Sacrament
does this not as an efficient cause, but as an outward isntrumental cause: It
is not done by the deed done, as the Papists say, the deed done is not enough
to confer grace, no, it is no such matter, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
is the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ: The means that Gods children
are converted by, and effectually called, is the Word, thereby Faith is wrought
in them, and a holy Communion made between Christ and them: after they are
admitted to the participation of the Sacrament, by which Sacrament, as an
outward isntrumental cause, this Communion, being already begun, and made, is
further ratified, and confirmed: This is the meaning of those words, that it is
the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ. Now we come to the observations
that here arises for our instruction: First, concerning the Communion between
Christ and the Faithful: and then the Communion between the Faithful and
themselves. The Communion that is between Christ and the Faithful, is
confirmed unto us in the participation of the Lords Supper, that is, it is an
effectual Bond, Pledge, and Seal of that holy and blessed Communion, that the
Faithful have with Christ, and Christ with them. In Math. 26.26. the Text
says there, that our Savior took Bread, and gave it to his Disciples, that
is, Christ communicated himself to us in the Sacrament. Now we are to prove
that Christ communicated himself to us in the Sacrament: He gave it to his
Disciples; what freer then the gift? And withal he presses it upon them, and
bids them take, eat, this is my Body: What can be spoken more frankly, and more
freely? And therefore being spoken by him, that never spoke any thing that he
meant not in his Heart, it must needs be a very frank and free bestowing of
himself: Yet (as you will say) here is Bread, and here is Wine, frankly and
freely given; but what is this to Christ his own Body? Yes, that Bread, in a
Sacramental sense, is the Body of Christ, he gives the name of the Sign to
the thing signified; this Bread is his Body; whatsoever he speaks and
performs concerning the one, he does concerning the other. He was not so
frank, free, and liberal in giving Bread, as he was in giving his Body to
feed upon: So the like is concerning the Cup, in Verse. 27.28. First, here you
see then, that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, in regard of the first
institution, is a Bond and Seal of the blessed Communion that we have with
Christ, He gave himself to us. In John 6.51, 52. there Christ tells them, that
He it the living Bread which came down from Heaven, if any Man eat of this
Bread, he shall live. The meaning is, that Christ gave us his Flesh to eat
spiritually. In Verse. 53. it is said, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of
Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no Communion with Christ. But that which is
most pregnant for our purpose, is in Verse. 56. where it is said, He that eats
my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him. What nearer
Communion can there be then this, that we dwell in him, and he in us? Who are
they that partake of this? He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood,
dwells in me, and I in him. And is not this his Flesh eaten, and his Blood
drunken? In the participation of the Lords Supper, is ratified the sweet
Communion that is between Christ and us. I do not say that that in the sixth
of John is understood properly of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, but is
mystically applied to this, of eating Christ by Faith, and therefore justly
agrees with this, of the Lords Supper, when we meditate upon Christ's works in
the Sacrament, or out of the Sacrament, not eating his Flesh, and drinking his
Blood after a spiritual manner, that is in the general there, if we do this
in the use of the Sacrament, we do it in a particular manner: So then it is so
in all our spiritual eating of Christ, and drinking of his Blood, we dwell in
him, and he in us, then much more, in the participation of the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, when our Faith is lift up to Christ, that we feed upon him, more
thoroughly and earnestly; and therefore much more does that place take hold of
our participation with Christ in the Sacrament, that whosoever eats Christ
dwells in him, and he in him, 1 Cor. 12.13. For by one Spirit we are all
baptized into one Body, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit. The
point that the Apostle is there speaking of, is this, The Communion that is
between Christ and the Faithful; He shows first the Author of it, which is
God, by one Spirit; and then he shows the Instrument to the Sign and Seal,
which is the Sacrament, by one Spirit are we baptized into one Body, whether we
be Jews or Gentiles, bond or free: then it holds by consequence in the Lords
Supper, yea, that seems plainly to be intimated, where it is said, having
been made all to drink into one Spirit, a spiritual or a religious drinking,
and therefore it is to be understood (as respectively) in the Lords Supper,
this spiritual drinking cannot respectively be understood of the Lords Supper,
1 Cor. 11.26. As often (says the Apostle) as you eat this Bread, and drink
this Cup, you show the Lords death till he come, or, ye shall show it, that is
to say, The eating and drinking is a testimony between God and you, of a holy
Communion ye have with Christ, and what interest unto his Death, that is, that
you are partakers of the Lord Jesus Christ, that is the meaning of it.

Cor. 11.29. They are Enemies to Christ, they have nothing to do with him,
They that eat and drink unworthily, eat and drink their own damnation. So
then to the unbelievers, it is a Sign and a Seal, that they have no Communion
with Christ, nor interest in him, but are damned wretches: But to them that do
discern the Lords Body, it is a Sign and a Seal of their Communion with
Christ, Christ is one with them, and they with him.



Luke 22.19. And he took Bread, and when he had given thanks he brake it, and
gave it to his Disciples, saying, This is my Body which is given for you, etc.
He took it at the Sacrament, and said, This is my Body, this is my Blood which
is shed for you; giving us to understand, that what Christ did for us upon the
Cross, the same he gives to us in the Sacrament: Christ his Body and Blood was
given for us on the Cross, and the same was given to us in the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper: We know that the Lords Supper is nothing else but a
representation, or a showing forth of the Lords death, 1 Cor. 11. It is a
showing forth of the death of Christ: Look how it was with Christ upon the
Cross, so it is with us in the Sacrament: What was given there for us, is
given here to us.

Do this in remembrance of me.

aside from God, if they consider how powerful the Sacrament is for the
raising up of Faith in them, though not for the begetting of Faith in us, we
cannot choose but acknowledge this a singular mercy and love of God to us in
Christ Jesus. We know we sin daily, and by every sin we know we do as
much as in us lies make a separation from God, and therefore how much need have
we that this Communion that is between us and Jesus Christ should be daily
sealed up, ratified, and confirmed unto us? A Woman that has her Husband
absent from her, and does not enjoy his bodily presence, yet she comforts her
self, in that she persuades her self that he is a faithful Man, and that he
will not break with her: as a Ring after that Marriage is solemnized, that is
given as a token of love, for the further assurance of love one to another,
when she looks upon this Ring, though he be far absent from her, yet this
puts her in mind of his love to her, and so me does solace and comfort her
self in the love of her Husband by this outward pledge: Even so it is between
Christ and the Souls of every faithful Man and Woman, we do not enjoy the
bodily presence of Christ, because he is in Heaven, nay, sometimes he
with-drawes his sensible presence of his Spirit from us, yet we know there is a
Covenant made between him and us, he is our Husband, and we his Spouse; he
made one with us, and we with him; and though he do absent himself from us,
yet we comfort our selves in this Union, because we are converted unto God, and
so this Communion is made between Christ and us; and we know that he is
faithful, and true, and will never break his word: I but in the participation
of the Lords Supper here is a Seal and a Pledge of his love whereby this
Communion is further ratified; when we come there then the Faith which before
lay hid in us, that begins to show it self by the working of Gods Spirit, and
so by that means we begin to comfort our selves, and to be revived in our
Faith and affiance that we have in the love of Christ our blessed Husband,
which is much more then a Ring to revive a Woman in the love of her Husband,
because here are the words used again of the renewing of our Communion, This
is my Body that was broken for thee, etc. This is my Blood that was shed for
thee, etc. The words are most powerful and fit to revive us in the love and
affiance that we have in Christ our Husband, this makes all quiet and sure; and
to conclude, though Christ be absent from me, yet surely I know he continues
one and the same, and this comforts me: we know we make use of this in our
ordinary speech, if any be married, we usually say, God give you Joy. It is
well, oh that there were Hearts in Men to believe and see, and that they had
practice and experience of this to see that at the Lords Table we be
hand-fasted unto Christ, then God would give us much joy and comfort.

Another matter of Instruction is this: That when we are at the Lords Table,
there is a nearer Bond now between Christ and us then there was before; here
is a nearer Bond, at least we are more nearer sealed and tied to Christ, and he
to us, then before: And why? Because it is the Communion of the Body and Blood
of Christ, it is further ratified, sealed, and confirmed; and therefore it is
matter of singular comfort to Gods Children in that it pleases God to
vouchsafe us so much favor as to be one with him: To be one with a great Man,
with the Princes of the World, we esteem it a great matter: but what is it to
have Communion with Christ the Son of God? He to be made one with us, and we
with him? This as it is matter of great comfort, so also it is matter of
obedience, to stir us up to obedience. Is it so that we have been at the
Lords Table, to have our Communion renewed? Then we should carry our selves
worthy of this mercy. Are we made Members of Christ? Then take heed that thou
do not take the faculties and powers of thy Soul and Body, and abuse them to
sin, iniquity, and to uncleanness. It is the rule of the Apostle: We must
consider with our selves, I have been at the Lords Table, and made a Member of
Christ, and therefore now I must look better to my Tongue that I do not
swear nor blaspheme, nor use no vain nor idle speeches; that I must now look
better to my Eyes, that I do not suffer them to be light and wanton Eyes; and
specially to look better to my Heart, to walk with Christ, because he is one
with me, and I one with him.

Another point of Instruction teaches us, that Christ is really delivered unto
us in the Sacrament, but yet notwithstanding spiritually: but verily the Bread
is the Communion of his Body, and the Wine the Communion of his Blood: that is
to say, there is a real Communion to every faithful and spiritual Receiver;
for as the Spirit of God works Faith in our Hearts, so Faith causes us to
believe that Christ has made our peace with God, and that we are incorporate
into his Body, and made one with him. This is the real exhibiting of Christ in
the Sacrament, there is no transubstantiation that the Bread is turned into the
Body of Christ, no, the Apostle says, It is a Communion of the Body of Christ.
A plain exposition of Christ himself, where he says, This is my Body, that
is to say, It is a Communion of his Body. But if this be such a Communion, then
say they, the Bread must be turned into the Body of Christ. I answer, neither
of these, for the Communion is spiritual, it cannot be a corporal Communion,
but a spiritual Communion, there is such a Communion as is made here between
the Devil and them, that worship the Devil which is not a corporal
substance, that is nothing else but a testification that they will serve him,
worship, and obey him. So our Communion is a ratification that we believe in
our Hearts that Christ is one with us, and we with him. True, we are made
partakers of Christ wholly, of his Death, and of his Merits, but still in a
spiritual manner. As for his Body, we have nothing to do with it, that is in
Heaven. And therefore they that say, they eat his Body, they are as gross, as
those in the sixth of John. It is an absurd thing, nay, it is a horrible thing,
for any Man to think that they should eat the Body and Blood of Christ in the
Sacrament.

Mass. I would feign know of the Papists, what is the reason they call it by
the name Mass, seeing it is called in the Scripture a Communion, let them show
us but one title in all the whole Book of God, that it is called a Mass, and
we will yield to them. It is true, the Mass, though it have been ancient
amongst the Fathers, yet it is not ancient in the Scriptures.

Another matter of reproof that here arises, is against the Popish Church
that celebrate this Sacrament in one kind, they give the People the Bread, but
not the Cup, The Cup which we bless, (says the Apostle) is it not the
Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not the
Communion of the Body of Christ? Take this for a rule, wheresoever the Lords
Supper is handled, where it is not handled but by the way, there they are both
used, sometimes it is done by the Bread only, and sometimes by the Cup, but
where it is of purpose treated of, there you shall find that they are both
spoken of.

Blood of Christ; If Christ should enter into us bodily, then we would make us
as clean as we could: And shall we not much more when he comes to enter into
us spiritually? And to say with the Centurion, Lord I am not worthy that thou
should enter under my Roof. So every one of us should make all preparation
to give entertainment to such a Guest. It is noted that when the Passover was
to be eaten and celebrated, that they were to look for a Chamber trimmed, a
clean neat Room: so we when we come to the Lords Table must be fitted and
prepared by Faith and Repentance, and a purpose to lead a new life. We find
that Joseph of Aremathea begged the Body of Jesus when he was crucified, and he
took a clean Linen cloth and wrapr it in, sweet, clean, and neat
entertainment for the fleshly Body of his crucified upon the Cross: then much
more cause have we that receive the Body and Blood of Christ after a spiritual
manner: What need have we to purge our selves of all our filthiness and
uncleanness, and to wrap the Body of Christ in clean clothes, and to lay
him in a new Sepulcher where never Man was laid? And therefore whosoever comes
to the Lords Table, see that you come fitted and prepared.

O Lord give us evermore of this Bread. If we did but consider when we come to
the Lords Table, of this sweet Communion that is ratified between Christ and
us, then we would say, Evermore let us come to thy Table, and as the Apostle
Peter said, Not my Feet only, but my Head and my Hands also, when he knew the
benefit of the washing. So if we knew the benefit of the Lords Supper, we
would not come once a year, nor once a month, but every day if we could. It
is the ignorance of the benefit of it, that makes us come so seldom to it as
we do.

The end of the fourth Lecture.
THE FIFTH LECTVRE UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
WE are now to make digression into the matter of the Lords Supper, and so
according as we began, to pay our monthly tole, as it were to our Lord Jesus
Christ, in remembrance of his death and passion, in preparing our selves to a
worthy receiving of the Sacrament of his blessed Body and Blood, that so we may
be fitted to come, with glory to God, and comfort to our own Souls. The
third name: It is called a Communion, as you have heard out of the 1 Cor.
10.16. The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the
Blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body
of Christ? Where the Apostle entends a double Communion: One, that the
Faithful have with Christ their Head: Another, which the Faithful have
amongst themselves. That which we have with Christ, is double, Natural and
Spiritual: Natural, and that is by his incarnation, as he is Man; and this
Communion, is common to all Men, but yet the saving benefit of it reaches
only to the Faithful, Hebr. 2.14. For as much therefore as the Children were
partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also himself took part with them, that he
might destroy thorough Death, him that had the power of Death, that is, the
Devil. The Spiritual Communion is from Christ our Head to us by grace: The
Natural Communion is from us to Christ. The Spiritual Communion, is from
Christ to us: In the former he is made Bone of our Bone, and Flesh of our
Flesh; In the latter, we are made Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh: as
in Ephesians. 5.30. For we are Members of his Body, of his his Flesh, and of his
Bones. The second Communion is of the Faithful amongst themselves, and this
stands in Faith, and Hope, and Love, and this proceeds from the first: for
therefore the Faithful are knit together amongst themselves as Members,
because they are first knit to Christ their Head. We have spoken of the first
Communion already so far as it concerns this Sacrament: Now we come to the
second Communion which the Faithful have amongst themselves. And that we may
proceed upon a good and sure ground, we must first see, that this second
Communion is here intended by the Apostle as well as the former: For howsoever
the word Communion may be indifferently understood of each; as well the
Communion which the Faithful have amongst themselves, as of that which they
have with Christ, yet if the Apostle does not here so intend it, wharsoeuer we
shall speak of it, though happily true, and fit for the Argument in hand, yet
it may justly be distasted, as not seasonable, because it is not pertinent to
this place: but when we plainly see that it is part of the Apostles reach to
show that the Lords Supper is a Communion of the Faithful amongst themselves,
we shall much better relish and digest those Doctrines which shall be raised
from it. Now that such is the entendment of the Apostle, it appears thus: He
says in Verse 16. The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the
Body of Christ? And so proceeds and says, Verse 17. For we that are many are
one Bread and one Body, because we all are partakers of one Bread. Where you
see it is an next to the former by way of reason: Now ye know that the reason
must be answerable in sense to the proposition that is thereby confirmed:
Therefore except we will make the Apostle to speak absurdly, and without sense
to set down the proposition of one thing, and to render the reason of an
other: It must needs be granted, that look what Communion he speaks of in the
reason, Verse 17. the same Communion he speaks of in the proposition, Verse
16. and so on the contrary, look what Communion he speaks of in Verse 16.
the same he speaks of in the 17, but in Verse 17 he speaks expressly and
distinctly of the second Communion as well as of the first, for when he says
in the latter part of Verse 17. We are all one Bread, there is our Communion
with Christ: And in the former part, We that are many are one Bread and one
Body, there is the Communion which we have amongst our selves: And mark, the
latter part contains the cause of the former, and is rendered as a reason of
it, because we are all partakers of one Bread: showing not only that there is
such a Communion amongst themselves, in and by the use of the Sacrament; but
also how it is effected, namely, because all partake of one Christ, that
thorough the Communion which every one has thereby in the Body and Blood of
Christ, they have also a Communion amongst themselves: And for further
confirmation hereof, he gives instance in two cases of like nature, one in
Verse 18. Israel which is after the Flesh, are not they which eat of the
Sacrifices, partakers of the Altar? As who should say, It is so with those
Israelites that still observe the carnal Rites (as the Apostle elsewhere
calls them) that communicate together in their service; and therefore so do
you in yours. The other instance is in Verse. 20.21. It is so with the
worshippers of Idols, they thereby partake and have communion and fellowship
one with an other: For the very same word which is in Verses 18 and 20.
partakers, and fellowship, is the same in the Original with that in Verse 16.
communion. Now then if Israel after the Flesh, that still observe their carnal
Rites, and if Idolaters, if they in their service and worship have communion
and fellowship one with another, as well as with their Idols, then much more
have we (says the Apostle) in the Lords Supper. We have a Communion amongst
our selves as well as with Christ our Head, which in all these are to be
understood still with this limitation, that it is not then made, but there it
is testified and professed to each other, and to the World, and nourished and
confirmed to our selves. This point being thus cleared, and the way made open
and plain before us, now we are to enter upon such Doctrines and observations
as naturally arises from hence.

Cor. 10.3, 4. but also so long as ever this Sacrament has had any being
either in the Substance, or in the Shadow, it has always been of this very
nature and use here propounded. Consider the Lords institution of the
Passover, Exodus 12. and there we shall find many Ceremonies and circumstances
tending to this end, tending to show and to nourish a loving Communion amongst
the Receivers: First, All were to communicate in it, as we may see Verse.
3.6.47. Joint actions are always intended to be performed with Joint
affections. Secondly, says the Text, if any did otherwise, He should be cut
off, Verse. 15 and 19. that is, whosoever does dissent, and not lovingly
communicate with all the rest in this business, should have no part nor
benefit in or by it. Thirdly, it was to be eaten in one House, Verse 46. the
oneness of the House and place where it was eaten, testifies the oneness of
the Hearts and affections of them that eat it: for where those of a Family are
at iarres, and dissentions, and divisions, one House will not hold them.
Fourthly, If his House were too little for the Lamb, he was to call in his
next Neighbor, as in Verse 4. a pregnant testimony of love and good will as
can be. Fifthly, It was to be done at one and the same time, the same month,
the same day, the same hour, Verse. 2, 3, 6, 8. their general consenting in
the time arguing the general consenting of their Minds and Hearts: And what
time was that? Even the Evening, when they were all in their cold Blood; the
injuries and offenses of the day forgotten and forgiven (for the Sun must not
go down upon our wrath) when their affections were as calm and quiet as the
Evening, then they were to receive it. Sixthly, they were all to be directed in
it by one Law, Verse 49. though it were a Stranger, yet there was but one Law
for both, all of them lovingly submitting themselves under the same Law, and
sweetly consenting together to go all by one and the same direction. Lastly,
It must be eaten without Leaven, Verse. 8, 15, 19. what that is in the Letter,
all of us know by our own experience: But what is the true and spiritual
sense of it? That let the Apostle tell you in 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. Let us keep the
Feast not with old Leaven, neither in the leaven of maliciousness and
wickedness. It is the Leaven of maliciousness which above all Leaven is to be
purged out; Love and charity being specially confirmed to us in this action.
Thus we have seen it in the Institution: Now let us consider it in the
Restitution by Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 30.3, 5. when the Passover had been a long
time intermitted, for it says, Verse. 5. they had not kept it of a great time:
There are many testifications of a loving Communion amongst them; from the
first Verse to the sixth we see, all the People were to come together, into the
same place, at the same time, to keep one and the same Passover, and that
with this special observation, Verse 3. that when they could not keep it the
first Month as the Law required, for want of a sufficient assembly, they put it
off till the second Month: Verse. 12, 13. It is expressly noted that all Judah
came with one Heart, a very great assembly, howsoever there were many Recusants
in Ephraim Verse 10. as there be too many now a days: And so it was done with
great Joy, Verse 21. and doubling the observation of the Feast, keeping it
other seven days, Verse. 22, 23. All which are plain restifications with what
a loving and cheerful Communion they performed this service. So in the
seconding of this Restitution by Josiah; 2 Chro. 35. from the first Verse to
the eighteenth, there we may see, such willing contribution by King and
Princes, such a general assistance of Priests and Levites, such a great
concourse of People from all Judah and Israel, such a great assembly, as that
there was no Passover kept like that since the days of Samuel. All lively
witnesses, as of their zeal for Gods glory, so of a most loving Communion
amongst themselves. If it be so in the Shadow, what is it in the Substance? If
the Passover be a Sacrament of Love and Amity, then the Lords Supper is so
much more? See it therefore secondly in the Substance, The Lords Supper, John
13.4. to the 15. Our Savior being to ordain this Sacrament, does first teach
them by his example, a Lesson of Love, he washes his Disciples Feet: teaching
them that they must so love one another, as that they refuse no servile office
for the good of their Brethren, though it be the washing of their Feet. And
after the Institution, Verse. 34, 35. he presses upon them his Commandment of
Love, as his chief Commandment, and their chief duty to God. Mark this, it
is as if he had said, I will now have you to receive the Sacrament of my
Supper: Well before you receive it, that you may know it to be a Sacrament of
Love and concord, and a Bond or Pledge of your spiritual Communion one with
another, I give you an example of Love to season your Hearts withal before
hand: And that you may continually so esteem and remember it, I will charge
you with my Commandment of Love in a special manner. He prepared them with an
example of Love before, and after gives them a Commandment of Love, to teach
them that this Sacrament is a Communion of Love. 1 Cor. 11.17, etc. the Apostle
being to redress such abuses and corruptions in the Church of Corinth, as had
crept into this Sacrament, does specially tax those that are against this duty
of Love, Verse 18. dissentions, Ver. 21, 22. eating and drinking asunder, Verse
33. not tarrying one for another. The Apostle in the 1 Cor. 10. had called this
Sacrament a Communion, now all these practices are directly opposite to a
Communion; these are breaches and separations, and therefore if ever they will
celebrate this Sacrament aright, according to the will of God, and the nature
of the Sacrament, and for their own good, it must be done with all the offices
of Love that may be. In the 1 Cor. 12.13. For by one Spirit are we all baptized
into one Body etc. and have been all made to drink into one Spirit: To drink
into one Spirit, whether it be meant directly of the Lords Supper as the phrase
sounds, or: the signification of the other Sacrament insinuates, for it is so
in Baptism, that is a means of this Communion, therefore also in the Lords
Supper: Or whether but by consequent, for so it is meant at the least, yet it
proves it, that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is a Sacrament of Love and
Amity amongst Gods Children. Act. 2.42.46. The Church that was there
converted, continued in the Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, and breaking of
Bread, and Prayer; they continue in the Apostles fellowship, as who should say,
that was a fitting of them to the Lords Supper, which is meant by the breaking
of Bread; noting that they which partake of the Lords Supper, there should be a
lovely Communion amongst them.

Gal. 3.26. We are all the Sons of God by Faith in Christ Jesus; and thereby
we become one, Verse 28. Jew and Gentile, Bond and Free, Male and Female, are
all one in Christ Jesus, and when we come to the Lords Table there we profess
it in a special sort that we are the Sons of our heavenly Father. What
nearer natural bond, then to be Children of the same Father? What sweeter name
of Love, then the name of Father? And is it so in Nature, how much more in
Grace, to be spiritual Brethren, and Children of our heavenly Father?
Therefore this is a testification and bond of a most lovely Communion which the
Faithful have amongst themselves. This is the Fountain of our Communion.

Ephesians. 4.15, 16. and from him we receive Life, and Grace, and Spirit, this is
a very near Communion, and very lively testified and expressed in the use of
this Sacrament, where we all eat and drink together of his Body and Blood, as
Members incorporate into his Mystical Body. This is the matter of our
Communion.

Cor. 12.13. We all drink into one Spirit. And this also we profess in this
Sacrament, John 6.63. It is the Spirit that quickneth, the Flesh profits
nothing. And this is the life of our Communion.

Cor. 10.20, 21. This is the Seal of our Communion.







Math. 6. And this is the Sparkles of the holy Fire of our Communion.

Now lay all these particulars together, and then we shall see that they all
conclude it with a general acclamation, that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
is a public Testification, a comfortable Nurse, a mutual Bond, a sure
Confirmation of that spiritual Communion which the Faithful have amongst
themselves. First, We are all Children of the same heavenly Father: There is
the Fountain of our Communion. Secondly, We are all Members of that Body,
whereof our Lord Jesus is the Head: There is the Matter of our Communion.
Thirdly, We ate all partakers of the same Spirit: There is the Life of our
Communion. Fourthly, We are all of one and the same Religion: There is the
Seal of our Communion. Fifthly, We all sit at the same Table: There is the
Badge of our Communion. Sixthly, The actions we perform at this Table: They
are the Exercise of our Communion. Seventhly, The outward Elements used at the
Lords Table: They are the Pattern of our Communion. Lastly, Prayer, is the
Flame or Sparkles of this holy Fire of our Communion.

Math. 24. Love waxes cold, we had need to be stirred up; and seeing this
Sacrament is a means for that purpose, we had need to frequent it. But some
will say, if we have Love before, what need we then come thither to have it
increased? I answer yes, for we have no Grace, but we must increase in it. 1 Thessalonians. 4.9. The Apostle gives the Rule, Concerning brotherly love I need not
write to you, you have love: It should seem therefore needless to write: But
I would have you to increase in the same more and more. You say you have Love,
and therefore what needs the Sacrament? Yes, though you have Love, yet increase
in this Love more and more.

have a sweet Communion even with them in Heaven, and we must think this, we
are here at the Lords Table, and all the Saints in glory have been glad of
this, they which now sit in Heaven with God; and thorough Gods mercy it will
be as beneficial to bring us thither; and though we come short of that blessed
estate, yet let us tread the same steps, and then the time will come when we
shall be in glory as they are. And so in regard of the Children of God in
Earth, it makes us be partakers one with another, though one be in the East,
and another in the West, yet in this blessed Supper, their love is sweetly
confirmed. The benefit is this, when we are in afflictions, we know that they
who lived before were so, and those that are now in our troubles, they mourn
with us; if there be any cause of rejoicing, they rejoice with us; but above
all this, we have this Communion amongst our selves, and with the Saints in
Heaven, that we have interest and right in all their Prayers which they make to
God.

Math. 5.23, 24. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and then remembrest that
thy Brother has ought against thee, leave there thine Offering before the
Altar, and go thy way: First, be reconciled to thy Brother, then come and
offer thy gift. First, be reconciled to thy Brother, get his love, then come
and offer thy Offering, and so it will be acceptable to God, and profitable and
comfortable to thy self. There be many Reasons to stir us up to this duty:
We come to the Lords Table to receive a Pledge and Pawn of Gods Love in
Christ; the Bread and Wine are Pledges of the same; therefore we must come in
love; we come to have our Faith confirmed and increased, how can this be
without Love? 1 Cor. 13.2. If I had all Faith, and not Love, I were nothing. If
we want Love, all is nothing: so we come there to join with the Congregation
in Prayer: If we pray without Love, in wrath and hatred, it is damnable, 1 Timothy
2.8. Again, we come to receive the forgiveness of our sins at Gods Hand,
then we must forgive one another, Math. 6.15. If you do not forgive Men their
trespasses, no more will your Father forgive you your trespasses. Besides, this
Sacrament is a Seal that depends upon the Word; but we cannot profit by the
Word without Love. James 1.20. The wrath of Man does not accomplish the
righteousness of God. That is, when Men are of a wrathful and filthy
disposition, the Seed of the Word will not grow in their Hearts. 1 Pet. 2.1, 2.
Wherefore laying aside all maliciousness, and all guile, and envy, etc. As
newborn Babes desire the sincere Milk of the Word that ye may grow thereby.
If we cannot profit by the Writings without Love, then we cannot profit by the
Seal which depends upon them, without Love. Therefore we must bring Love with
us to this Sacrament, and resolve to maintain it, and not break it for any
thing, especially for trifles. But some will say, I would feign be friends, but
he that is fallen out with me, will not be reconciled. Well, what then? Have
thou tendered it bona fide, and do thou desire it heartily? And do thou for
thine own part forgive freely? Do thou pray that God would turn his Heart?
And do thou take all opportunities, and use all good means to draw him to
it? And art thou willing to humble and disparage thy self rather then fail?
And art ready to embrace him upon any lawful conditions that thou may win
him? And do thou do all this for Gods cause, that he may be honored and
served, and thy Brother cured, and thy self in better case to do thy duty?
Why then though he be at variance with thee, yet thou art at peace and unity
with him: the sin is his, and not thine. I, but what if I have done thus, and
have been reconciled to him, and he breaks forth again, must I seek to him
again, I cannot yield to this? Yes, thou must do it again: our Savior
teaches us that we must do this seven times, yea, seventy times seven times,
though it be never so often thou must seek reconcilement, and not let this
hinder thee from the Lords Table. I but what if I cannot parley with him by
reason of the distance of place, or else he is a great person of great place? I
answer, thou must use either a Letter or Messenger to him, if conveniently thou
may; if not, discharge thy self clearly before the Lord; and if it be a
known jar, then tell them of it that are chiefly acquainted with it, and
make profession that thou would feign be reconciled, and this will discharge
thee. I but what if I cannot dispense with my own Heart? I grant it is my
sin, yet I cannot be at peace with him. Well, then thou can not be saved:
If thy Heart be so hardened against thy Brother that it cannot forgive him,
assuredly the Lord may justly and will harden himself against thee. But
whether am I in such a case to come or to forbear? Many will come and ask
this question of the Minister, and it is a captious question to him: For if he
say, Come, then it hardens them in their malice: If he say, Forbear, then he
hardens them in their profanesse: Each way is a double notorious sin; but in
the mean time it is a foolish and senseless question to them: For whether
they do come, or whether they do forbear, being in that case, they cannot be
saved; for thou have no part in these businesses: None of Gods Ordinances will
save us unless we submit our selves to them, we can tell you no other way to
Heaven, then God has told us; therefore if you believe it, and be aduertized
by it, well, and good; but if thou will none of God (in being ruled by him) he
will none of thee. But our answer is this, that surely of both these evils, it
is best that such a one forbear to come at all: Nay I tell you, if any should
offer to come in this case, if we knew it, we would forbid them; they have no
right to this Sacrament, and therefore are not to be admitted by the Minister;
their forbearance is but hurt to themselves; their coming is an offense to the
Church. But they will say, how shall we do? Why, if thou can not be fitted
to come, thou must not come; if thou will live in thy sin, and rather go to
Hell then forgive thy Brother, then thou must dye in thy sin. The point is
this, we must pull down our proud Hearts, and cast out this Leaven of
maliciousness which makes us unfit to receive any good by this Sacrament, or
by any of Gods Ordinances. But what if I have labored to the utmost of my
power, and yet cannot quite overcome my wretched corruption, but that still I
have some grudge left within me? I answer, there is none that labor so, but
they find some effect of it in themselves: if therefore thou find some working
in thee, and art grieved that there is no more; and if thou do continue in
thy labor, and care, and striving, even to the very death, thorough Christ
Jesus thy infirmities shall be pardoned and cured, and thou shall be a fit
Guest for the Lords Table. But for Christ's sake deceive not thy self, saying
or thinking thou have striuen thy best, when thou have done little or nothing
at all: For if thou have striuen as thou ought, thou shall find some effect
of it. It is a commendable thing therefore, that Children and Servants should
make means to their Parents and Masters for the forgiveness of their offenses
which they have committed against them, with this caution, that it be not done
for form or fashion, but with a purpose and endeavor not to offend so again.
But this is not all, for I would have Men know, that it is not enough to be at
peace with Men when they come to the Lords Table; but this duty of Love
extends it self to the whole second Table; and therefore it is not enough
only not to be in malice, but if thou failest in any other duty of the second
Table, thou want this Love; though thou have no malice in thy Heart, yet if
thou be a dishonourer of Parents, a Thief, or a Liar, etc. thou faylest in
this duty: And therefore when I bid you come in Love, I mean that you should
so love your Neighbors, that you should seek both in thought, word, and deed
to advance them and their estate as your own.

The end of the fifth Lecture.
THE SIXTH LECTVRE UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
THAT which we are now to speak of, is by way of digression into the Argument
of the Lords Supper, to prepare us against the next Lords day, wherein we
purpose if God give us life and grace, to meet at the Lords Table: Some
profitable meditations therefore we are to receive, to prepare and season us
before we come. The first of those Heads whereunto we did reduce this
Doctrine of the Lords Supper, were the names and titles that were given to it:
and some of them we showed were more common to the whole action; and some more
proper to the parts of it: We began with those which were more common to the
whole action, wherein we are to proceed. First, It is called, The Lords Table:
Secondly, The Lords Supper: Thirdly, The Communion: Now follows the fourth
title which is given to it, and that is, The New Testament: For so it is called
by our Savior himself in the first institution of it, as it is reported by
three several Evangelists, Math. 26.28. This is my Blood of the New Testament.
Mark 14.24. There is the same words. Luke 22.20. This Cup is that New
Testament in my Blood. And the testimony of these three Evangelists, is
seconded with the after-witnesse of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 11.25. This Cup is
the New Testament in my Blood. All concur together very plainly, calling
this Sacrament, The New Testament. Matthew and Mark speak plain enough that
he spoke it of the Cup; for so the course of the Text directly entends, Math.
26.27. Mark 14.23. Also he took the Cup, etc. that is plain enough. But Luke
and Paul speak more pregnantly and expressly, that he said, This Cup is the New
Testament in my Blood: they name the Cup. If we will rightly apprehend and
apply this truth, we must receive it with these cautions: First, whereas it is
spoken of the Cup, it is to be understood of the Wine in the Cup: Secondly,
whereas it is affirmed only of the Wine, that that is the New Testament, it is
to be understood of the Bread also: Thirdly, we must not set it on the Rack,
and stretch it further then the nature of a Sacrament will bear it. First,
howsoever it be said the Cup by name, yet it is to be understood of the Wine in
the Cup, by an ordinary figurative speech whereby the thing contained is
signified by the name of the thing containing: I will give you an instance of
the very same nature, time, and place, Luke 12.17, 18. And he took the Cup,
and gave thanks, and said, Take this and divide it among you. Our Savior
sitting at the Passover with his Disciples, gives them the Cup, and bids them
divide it amongst them: What, the material Cup? No, but the Wine in the Cup.
It is the fruit of the Vine, the Wine they were to drink of, as Verse 18. I
will not drink of the fruit of the Vine, etc. And surely it holds by
proportion to the Bread in the Sacrament: For of the Bread it is said, This is
my Body, Math. 26.26. And therefore that which he says of, This is my Blood,
must needs be the Wine. Secondly, howsoever it is spoken of the Cup only by
name, yet it is intended proportionally of the Bread, and so of the whole
Sacrament: For both kinds make but one Sacrament; and therefore the Bread being
as substantial a part of the Sacrament as the Wine, look whatsoever is
ascribed, or whatsoever benefit arises by the Wine, the same also is to be
acknowledged in the Bread; and whosoever shall make the Cup the New Testament,
and not the Bread, does thereby as much as in him lies, dissunder the Body of
Christ from his Blood, and so disanull this whole Testament. Thirdly, the
speech is not to be set on the Rack, and stretched further then the nature of
a Sacrament will bear, This Cup is the New Testament, etc. Not that it is so
in it self, it is not meant that that is the substance of the Testament it
self, but only Sacramentally according to the entendment of speeches in the
like kind in all other Sacraments, that is, This is the Pledge and Seal of the
New Testament. That we may carry the business wholly and plainly before us,
whereas there be four witnesses of this Truth, it is needful and profitable
for us to compare all these testimonies together; for by this means if there
be any seeming difference betwixt them, they shall be accorded, and so the
Scripture shall be justified from contradiction. Secondly, so that which is
defective in the one, shall be supplied in the other. Thirdly, so shall we be
more fully persuaded of the truth hereof, being confirmed out of the mouth of
many witnesses, and so we shall understand the whole mind of God touching this
business. And because the Evangelist Matthew is more copious then any of the
other, his testimony shall be the rule that we will compare and reduce the
rest unto, Math. 26.28. This is my Blood of the New Testament, that is shed for
many for the remission of sins. This, that is this Cup, or this Wine, or this
Sacrament (as we heard the meaning was before) and herein they all agree, Is my
Blood, which if it be grossly and carnally to be understood, as the Capernaits
did understand it, John 6.51. and as the Papists do in this very case, it is
impossible in every Man's understanding, that Christ should give them his Blood
whilst he was alive: but if it were possible, yet the speech is fearful, and
the action savage both on his part and theirs, that he should pour out the
Blood of his own Body into the Cup, and they should drink of it: If they had
so taken his meaning, trembling and horror would have been upon them, even to
death, that they should drink Man's Blood, yea, the natural Blood of their
loving Master, and the Son of God: this had been a savage thing. But
understand it as he meant it, spiritually and sacramentally, then it is full of
comfort, This is my Blood, that is, the Sign, and Seal, and Pledge of my
Blood: as if he should have said to them, If ye drink of this Wine, and
withal lift up your Hearts, and have Faith in my Blood, the Wine shall be
(thorough Gods ordinance, and the lively operation of the Holy Ghost) as
effectual to you to all saving purposes, as if my own Blood were as naturally
or certainly in you as in my self, The New Testament, which is spoken in
opposition to the former Testament. There was a Testament before, but that is
old, this is new: and there was Blood before, but that was of Beasts and Birds,
this is of himself: My Blood of the New Testament. Here is some seeming
difference betwixt them, Matthew and Mark agree, This is my Blood of the New
Testament; Luke and Paul differ from them, Luke 22.20. 1 Cor. 11.25. This is
the New Testament in my Blood; This is only in the manner of the speech, not
in the meaning; the joint entendment of them all, is to show that this Blood is
proper and peculiar to the New Testament, in respect of the full exhibition of
it, whereby it is ordained, ratified, and confirmed, and wherein the whole
force and power of the New Testament consists; as the former Testament was by
the Blood of Bulls and Goats, so this is by the Blood of Christ: and this we may
see Hebr. 9.10, etc. This is the Blood of the Testament which God has
appointed to you. And hereto answers the speech of Matthew and Mark, This is my
Blood of the New Testament which is shed for you; and in Verse 18. the Apostle
says, The Old Testament was not ordained without Blood; and so also the New
Testament is not ordained without Blood: So we see that though the witnesses
differ in words, yet their meaning is one and the same, which is shed. It was
not then actually shed, yet it was effectual then and always from the
beginning: It was the Blood of the Lamb slain from the beginning of the
World. Times break no square with God, for there is no difference of times
with him at all. This is added purposely to show, that it is not simply the
Blood of Christ that saues us, but his Blood shed: And that when we come to the
Lords Table, we come not to celebrate his Incarnation so much, whereby he took
our Blood on him; but his Death, whereby he shed his Blood for us, and for
many: It is not for all the World in general, as some foolishly immagine; but
it is restrained to some: nor yet it is not limited to the Disciples only, nor
yet to the Jews only, as the former Testament was; but to many. If you will
know who this many is, look into the first of John, To as many as received
him, To as many as believe in his Name, even to the whole many of the World
that receive Christ, and believe in his Name; Of all Nations some. The
Evangelist Luke and Paul add one thing further, Which is shed for you: Which is
not meant of the Disciples only, but for the whole Church; for the benefit of
all the Faithful: And it gives us further to understand, that whosoever comes
to the Lords Table, must receive particularly for himself, as if Christ were
there present, and should say unto them, This is for you, and for you. Lastly,
For the remission of sins: there is the benefit of it. I but (will some say)
have we no other benefit by it? Have we not our Regeneration and our
Justification, etc. by the shedding of Christ's Blood? Yes surely, but that is
set down for all the rest. I but have I not remission of sins by his Body as
well as by his Blood? Yes surely, but it is rather said so of his Blood,
because of the Sacrifices of the Law, which were a Type of Christ's Sacrifice,
and were offered by Blood. Secondly, howsoever his Body is available to
remission of sins, yet it is so far forth, as it is crucified, and his
Blood shed: and thus we are to conceive of these things. Now we come to the
points of Doctrine and Instruction that arise from hence. The first thing that
our Savior speaks of is the New Testament, that is the ground of all.

his Testament, and his Testament is his Covenant. Circumcision, though it were
a bare Covenant, not ratified by the death of the Testator, and therefore
properly no Testament, yet it is called a Testament, Act. 7.8. All the interest
that ever any Man had in the free grace and salvation of God, they had it
merely by force and virtue of a Covenant: For Man having nothing but what he
receives from God, he can have no assurance to, nor any good by any thing, but
what he has by Covenant from God: Hence it is that God has always
manifested his good will to Man by way of Covenant: thus he dealt with Adam
before his fall Genesis 2.17. and so after his fall, 3.17. and so to Noah after
the Flood, Genesis 9.9. and to Abraham, Genesis 17.2. and so to the Israelites, Exodus
19.5. and so it is now to us that live under the Gospel, the matter of
Salvation stands by virtue of a new Covenant, which being sealed by the actual
Bloodshedding of our Savior Christ, is most properly a Testament: and so our
state under the Gospel is the state of a new Testament: in Hebr. 1.1, 2, 3.
there it is plainly affirmed that it is so, At sundry times, and in diverse
manners God spoke in the old time, to our Fathers by the Prophets, in these
last days he has spoken unto us by his Son, who has by himself purged our
sins. The Apostle compares the state of the Faithful that lived in former
times, to ours that live under the Gospel: At sundry times God appeared, etc.
at the beginning to Adam, after to Abraham, etc. and in diverse manners, to some
by Angels, to some by Visions, to some by Shadows, by Moses and the Prophets:
but to us by his own Son, he has manifested his Covenant to us by his
Son, who has by himself purged our sins, as who should say, He had sent a
new Couenant-maker to us, and he had made a new and another Covenant with us,
and what is that? Remission of sins, Galat. 4.22, etc. there it is figured
that it should be so: Abraham had two Sons, Isaac and Ismael, by which two
other things are meant, says the Apostle, the two Testaments, the former is
signified by Agar, and what is her condition? Slavish and in bondage. Ishmael,
what is he? Slavish and in bondage too, and borne after the Flesh. Here is the
former Testament, a slavish Testament that tied Men to great bondage, specially
in the Ceremonies, her Children were the Children after the Flesh, that is, as
many as did not spiritually embrace it, that did not spell the Covenant of
Grace under the Covenant of Works, it was to them merely a carnal Covenant,
and they carnal Children. The latter Testament is signified by Jerusalem,
Verse 26. and what is her condition? Above and free. What are her Children? As
Isaac. And what is their condition? Not after the Flesh, but after the
Promise. Therefore we, says the Apostle, that is to say, we that live under
the Gospel or New Testament, are after the manner of Isaac, Children of the
Promise, Verse 28. as if he should say, we are delivered by Christ, from that
slavery of Ceremonies, and from that carnal service, which was a Veil to
them, they did not see that which was hidden under it, we are free from their
bondage, we hold by the Promise, not after the Flesh. In Jeremy 31.31, etc. it
is promised, it shall be so, Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I
will make a new Covenant with the House of Judah and of Israel, etc. where it
is expressly called a new Covenant, and with whom it is made, with the House of
Judah and of Israel, that is to say, with the Church under the Gospel, for
they are the true Israel, the right Jews, that are Jews within, as the
Apostle speaks, and there is set down the substance of the Covenant, and the
parts of it, Sanctification and Justification, Sanctification, by putting his
Law in their Hearts, Verse 32, 33. Justification, by forgiveness of sins,
Verse 34. And that we may know certainly, that these days there spoken of,
are the days of the Gospel after Christ's death, the Apostle himself so
expounds it, and applies it, Hebr. 8.8. and 10.16, 17. and in Luke 22.20. there
it is performed and made good, This is my Blood of the New Testament which is
shed for you: For you? That is to say, As many as living under the New
Testament do embrace it: the original Text is very significant. The New
Testament emplyes a direct reference to that which was spoken in Jeremy 31. as
if our Savior should have pointed it out with his Finger and said thus, You
have heard that God promised it by Jeremy that he would make a new Testament
with his People, believe it, this is that very Testament which there was
promised: Romans 6.14. Ye are not under the Law, but under Grace; there is the
experience of it, that it does and shall hold so for ever: for what is the Old
Testament but the Law? and what is Grace but the New Testament? We that now
live are not under the Old Testament, but under the New: for that which is
there spoken to the Romans is intended generally to all Christians, that is,
to all true believers, that not only acknowledge, but embrace and practice
Christ crucified in true mortification; they are dead to the Law, and to Sin,
and are freed from that bondage, and altogether under Grace, and under the New
Testament.

Gal. 3.21. For if there had been given a Law which could have given life,
surely righteousness should have been by the Law: where ye see the Apostle
says plainly the Law cannot give life: and Romans 8.3. it is impossible that
the Law should justify us; but this Old Testament even by the death of Christ,
and he by the abrogating of the Old, has established a New, for that was some
part of our Saviors meaning, that when he said upon the Cross, It is
finished, the Old Testament is ceased, and the New is established; and surely
if our Savior had not conferred the New Testament, he taking away the Old, had
left us without any hold in God at all.

Behold, as being about the reports of miraculous matters, that God will do
great wonders and strange things and surely it is the mystery of all
mysteries, and there be many wonders in this one work, that a Virgin should
conceive, that the Son of God should become the Son of Man, that God should
give his own begotten Son for us poor sinful wretches, and his utter
Enemies; that God being a righteous Judge, should give his Son to save us
notorious sinners; that one Man should be saved by another Man's righteousness;
that many thousands should be justified by one Man's obedience; that the
Gentiles should be called; that the Spirit should attend upon the Word to open
the Heart to believe it and obey it; that so plentiful a measure of the Spirit
should be poured forth upon all Flesh, young Men and Maids, and so forward: All
these, and many others as strange things as these being incident to the making
and accomplishing of this Testament, show plainly that our Tenor is by a New
Testament indeed, a strange Testament, such as never the like was, or shall be.

Hebr. 9.10. our Saviors suffering in the Flesh, is called, The time of
reformation, as things being out of square and order before, but by his
appearance and suffering set upright again, 2 Cor. 5.17. Old things are past
away, all things are become new: new Laws, new Promises, new courses, new
effects, all new; a new Heart, a new Mind, a new Spirit, a new Life, a new
Nature, a new Creature, all new; for that reformation spoken of, Hebr. 9. is
not spoken so much of the outward face of the Church, but of the inward Temple
of God that is within us.

Hebr. 1.1. as there being no other ever hereafter to be effected.

Peter says of the state of Glory, 2 Pet. 3.13. of a new Heaven, and a new
Earth, is it not affirmed of the state of the New Testament? Esaias 65.17.

Hebr. 9.15. and 12.24. so that we cannot have any hold in God by Christ, but
only by virtue of the New Testament.

live in these days as well as we: but to live under, is to be subject to it,
and to live under the power, and the Laws of the New Testament: So much of
this hold as we have in the New Testament, so much hold we have in God; little
hold in this, and little hold in God; great hold in this, great hold in God; no
hold in this, no hold in God. Ye see what the Testament is, Justification and
Sanctification, therefore examine your selves concerning both: First, for
Justification, what right have you in Christ, for the forgiveness of your
sins? Have you Faith in his Blood? Are ye persuaded that you are fully
satisfied for, in the death of Christ? Or if ye have not this full persuasion,
what degrees or what measure have you thereof? Except you have the truth of
this resolution in your Hearts, you can challenge no part in this Testament.
Then for Sanctification, tell me, you that profess the New Testament, how is
it betwixt sin and you? Has sin dominion over you? Then you are not under
Grace, but under the Law. Is the Spirit of God within you? Do you find him to
live and move in your inward parts? Is the Law of God written in your Hearts?
for that you see is one express part of this Covenant: you have it in your
Ears, and in your Heads, and in your Mouths, but that is nothing except you
have it in your Hearts; and what is it to have the Law of God in your Hearts?
It is to do the will of God, Psalm. 40.8. I have desired to do thy will O my
God, yea thy Law is within my Heart. These things are our Legacy bequeathed in
this Testament, and therefore it stands us upon to know whether we have
received them or not. There be two special marks whereby we may know our
selves to be truly under the New Testament: Softness of Heart, and the
assistance of the Spirit. Softness of Heart, if we find our Hearts to be
mollified, melting at the thought of our sins, relenting at Gods Judgments,
compassionate toward the afflictions of Gods Children, pliable to Gods will,
overcome with the love of Christ Jesus in suffering for us: this is a sure
sign that the promise of the Gospel is fulfilled upon us in some measure,
which is, that he will take away our stony Hearts, and give unto us Hearts of
Flesh. Let every one of us therefore lay our Hands upon our Hearts, and
search, and answer as in the presence of God, whether we find this softness in
us, or whether there be not as great hardness of Heart in us, as there was in
the Jews in the Old Testament: surely our unableness, and unthankfulness,
and wilfulnes, which do generally reign amongst us, do testify to the World
that still our Hearts do continue in an obstinate hardness. Secondly, for the
assistance of the Spirit, for the Promise of the Gospel is the Promise of the
Spirit, and it is proper to the state of the Gospel, that look what the Word
tells us, and bids us, or forbids us, that does the Spirit incline and
persuade our Hearts to believe and obey: do our Hearts therefore tremble when
the Word is preached? When we hear the Gospel say, Believe and thou shall be
saved? Do we find an ouer-ruling power in our Souls, raising up our minds
effectually, and causing us to believe? Can we say truly, that when we hear
the Word, we find the same Spirit working upon our Hearts, Faith and Obedience,
which has enspired those that teaches us? For this is the right state of the
Gospel, Psalm. 18.44. As soon as they hear, they shall obey me, as the very
same Spirit which speaks unto us by the mouth of the Ministers, speaking also
and prevailing with our Hearts to true obedience: Let us therefore labor,
especially for these two things, Softness of Heart, and the assistance of the
Spirit, that thereby we may see we have our right and true enterest in the New
Testament.

The Apostle, Hebr. 12.18, etc. sets forth the excellency of this estate, by
comparing it with that of the Law, and amplyfies it, by that hard condition
that we are delivered from, and the blessed condition that we are advanced
unto, such as if there be any sense of Grace, or care of our own good, it
should raise us up to much cause of rejoicing. Secondly, see it by the longing
and the desire after it of others, many Kings and Prophets have desired to see
the things that we see, and hear the things that we hear, and have not seen
them, nor heard them. O what a blessed turn have we therefore that enjoy such
comfortable things, that such great and holy Men desired, and yet could not
enjoy them. Abraham saw these days, but it was afar off, and yet he rejoiced
at it: We see them with our Eyes, and hear these things with our Ears, and
see them with our Eyes they are not far from us, they are in our Mouths, and
in our Hearts, how should we rejoice in Gods rich mercy to us, and in our rich
Portion we have in him? But you will say, had not they under the former
Testament the same means of Salvation which we have? Yes surely, the same in
substance, Jesus Christ, yesterday, and the same for ever. None were ever saved
but by Faith in Christ Jesus: But because he was manifested to them, darkely,
and sparingly, and carnally, to us clearly, and abundantly, and spiritually;
therefore is our estate so much extolled above theirs. But is the only manner
of delivery sufficient to make it a New Testament? Yes, as John 13.34. the
Commandment is called a new Commandment, though for the substance of it, it
has been from the first beginning, yet because it is pressed by our Savior
after a new manner, that is to say, that we should so love one another, as he
has loved us; therefore it is called a new Commandment. Thirdly, by the
special love that Christ therein has showed unto us, that he should remember
us poor wretched sinners, in his will, long before we were borne, to bestow a
Legacy, such a large and rich Legacy upon us, that the Lord Jesus hanging
upon the Cross pouring out his own Blood, suffering the very pangs of Death,
wrestling with the very wrath of God, and terrors of Hell, and assaulted with
all the infernal Furies and Powers of Darkness, should even then in the
infiniteness of his Divine power and goodness, entend to offer himself for
thee, and me, and every believer, pleading for us in particular by the power
of his death, that we might have our part in it, and in all the benefits
thereof. Fourthly, by the certainty of it, it is by Will, and therefore it is
sure and unchangeable; not by the Will of Man, though that be a stong
Conueyance, and cannot be altered, but by the Will of the Son of God
himself; who, or what can put us by this Legacy, if once we be rightly
instated into it? Never fear it, it shall never be taken from us, Corruption
and infirmity may say unto us, that we are cut off, and the Devil will face
us, that we have no right of Grace, nor Heaven. Tell them that they are Liars,
Falsifiers of the Will and last Testament of Christ Jesus. Fifthly, by the
absoluteness and complete perfection of Christ's Will and Testament, there are
all things concurring in it that are accessarie to the right nature of a Will:
here is First, the Testator, Christ Jesus: Secondly, the Legators are the
Faithful* Thirdly, the Legacies are Justification, Sanctification, and
Glorification: Fourthly, the Evidences, or Instruments, or the Will written,
the Scriptures: Fifthly, the Seal, the Sacraments: Sixthly, the Witnesses, the
Prophets, and Evangelists, and Apostles: Seventhly, the Executor, Gods Spirit,
whose office it is to perform the behests of Christ Jesus: If you ask for an
Ouer-seer, it is God the Father, who by his almighty Providence does
especially ouer-see these businesses: The date of it was from the beginning of
the World: the continuance of it is for ever: and therefore it is called the
Blood of the everlasting Covenant, Hebr. 13.20. the Court where it is to be
proved, is the Court of every believers Conscience here, and the Court of
Heaven hereafter, and that before a most righteous Judge, God himself, even
the blessed Trinity, who will surely see that every one of us shall have our
Legacy which is bequeathed unto us: a happy Testator, and happy Legators, and
Legacies, and therefore happy we whosoever have our portion in this happy
Testament. Lastly, by the ratification of it, which is, by his own precious
Blood, that which is more worth then all the World, that is the price thou art
purchased by, that is the Offering thou art consecrated by, that is the Merit
thou art justified by, that is the Grace thou are sanctified by, and that is
the Power thou art saved by. What assurance may we have of the free and full
forgiveness of our sins, when we see they are all washed away by the Blood
of Jesus Christ? With what boldness may we come unto the Throne of Grace,
since we have entrance unto God thorough Christ's Blood? With what courage may
we fight against all our corruptions and rebellions within, against all the
oppositions of the World without, against all the assaults and temptations of
Satan both within us, and without us? We shall be sure to overcome them all in
the Blood of the Lamb. Let it be all our care to make our selves sure, that we
have our part in this New Testament, thus sealed with the precious Blood of
Jesus Christ, and then our case is most happy, never any thing shall separate
betwixt God and us.

The end of the sixth Lecture.
THE SEVENTH LECTVRE UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
ACcording to our wonted manner we are now by occasion that the next Sabbath
day is a Communion day, to fall into our digression again touching the matter
of the Lords Supper, that there may be some fit preparation of us for that holy
and heavenly duty, something to feed upon all the week long, to quicken us
and to put us in mind what we are to do, and also to stir us up that we may
be fit and welcome Guests to come into the presence of God. We have entered as
you see, upon a fourth title that is given in Scripture to the Lords Supper,
and that is, The New Testament, which howsoever it be set down by Mark, by
Luke, and by Paul yet because Matthew sets it down more at large, as it is in
Math. 26.28. therefore we have made choice of these words to treat upon, For
this is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the remission
of sins. I will not stand to make repetition of that which I have formerly
spoken, because of the ordinary repetition that we have every Sabbath of that
which was delivered the Sabbath before, and therefore to omit the exposition of
the Text which then we did largely insist upon, we are now to proceed to the
matter of observation. We began with one point, namely concerning the New
Testament, showing that all the hold that ever the Faithful have in Christ, is
only by the force, and power, and virtue of the New Testament: That was the
first observation. That being finished we are now to proceed as God shall give
strength and assistance to the other observations that the Text will afford us.
We see that this Text does mainly and directly concern this business that we
have in hand, and therefore it is needful that we should insist so much the
more upon it. Yet I do not mean to make any curious search into every
particular, for that would be too tedious: only I will fix and insist (God
willing) upon such special and needful points as are most natural to the
Text, and material to our purpose. The second thing, the special and
principal point that here is to be spoken unto, is concerning the Blood of
Christ: This is the Blood of the New Testament. The New Testament we spoke of
before, now we are to speak of the Blood: This is my Blood of the New
Testament: Which may be taken as this Evangelist reports the speech of our
Savior Christ: so in Mark 14.24. This is my Blood of the New Testament. Then
the entendment is, that this Blood is proper and peculiar to this Testament.
But if we take it as Luke reports it, Luke 22.20. and as Paul reports it in the
1 Cor. 11.25. This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, etc. then the
entendment of it is this, namely, this Testament is ratified and confirmed by
the Blood of Christ, as by the special Scale thereof, and that the fruit, and
power, and benefit of this same New Testament, does wholly rest upon Christ his
Blood: answerable therefore to this ground we will draw the Doctrine and
observation. Take it thus, namely, that seeing our Savior says, that this is
my Blood of the New Testament, observe this point.

This is the New Testament in my Blood. We will speak first a word or two by
explication to unfold the knot, and so proceed to the proof of it.

Christ, is the Mediator of them both: It is Christ that is the Mediator of the
New Testament, and it is he that is the Mediator of the work of our Redemption.

Yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. All Gods Promises, they are made in Christ, and are
verified in Christ, and have all their force in Christ: and so is this Promise
of the New Testament.

This is my Blood of the New Testament, here the New Testament is perfectly
confirmed, and the work of our Redemption is thoroughly accomplished. And so
much for the explication of the point.

Secondly, For the proof of it, that all the power and efficacy of the New
Testament, and the work of our Redemption is founded and stablished upon the
Blood of Christ, Esaias 53. from Verse 3 to the 12. there the Prophet sets before
us Christ Jesus as our Mediator, and as our Redeemer: He speaks more like an
Evangelist then like a Prophet, he speaks so plain: But for the most part,
all the description that he makes concerning Christ, is concerning his
humiliation, and so speaks concerning the benefits that we have by Christ, as
coming to us by his humiliation; he was despised and rejected of Men, he was
wounded, oppressed, afflicted, broken, and the like: and in Verse 5. it is
said, With his stripes we are healed: the healing of us comes by the stripes
of Christ Jesus: all tending to the Blood of Christ: And in Verse 12. we are
given a portion of God to him, because he has not spared to pour out his
Soul unto the death. The Holy Ghost sets forth Christ as a Mediator of the New
Testament, and of our Redemption, and these things they concern his Blood, and
shows the benefit that we have by him, which is by his humiliation, by his
stripes, and he ceased not to pour out his Soul to the Death. To speak
some-wnat more particularly of the point, because it is a very necessary
point to be spoken of: and though every one of us can speak of it, yet we
have not a true relish of it; we cannot digest it; and therefore I would feign
work the true relish of it into your Hearts. The Scripture does propound our
Savior unto us as the Mediator of the New Testament, and of the work of our
Redemption in sundry particular terms, and generally all of them tend to this
effect, to show that all the power, virtue, and efficacy of the New Testament,
and of our Redemption, is founded and stablished upon the Blood of Christ,
these six particulars especially. First, Christ in his Suffering, or Christ
punished for us. Secondly, Christ in his Offering, or Christ sacrificed for us.
Thirdly, Christ in his Obedience, or Christ humbled for us. Fourthly, Christ on
the Cross, or Christ crucified for us. Fifthly, Christ and his Death, or
Christ dying for us. Sixthly, Christ and his Blood, or Christ killed and slain
for us.

Luke 24.46, 47. Christ speaks there so of himself: Thus it behooves Christ
to suffer, and to rise again: That repentance and remission of sins might be
preached in his Name. The suffering there spoken of is Christ his dying, as
appears by the opposition that Christ must suffer and rise again: there it is
said, that he must do thus and thus, That repentance and remission of sins
might be preached in his Name: giving us to understand, that repentance and
remission of sins, they are not purchased by Christ, nor have no power from
Christ, nor are not to be preached in his Name, but only so, as they come from
Christ suffering and being punished for us: Christ must first suffer, that
repentance and remission of sins might be preached in his Name. 1 Pet. 3.18.
Christ must suffer and dye for sin, that he might bring us to God: So it
appears in the last part of the Verse, that he suffered and was put to death,
faith the Text: And what was it for? Why it was for sin: For the taking away
of sins, and the bringing of us to God: that is to say, the making good of
this new Covenant: that is to say, That God would be our God, and we his
People; that he would forgive us our sins, and remember our iniquities no
more: these have their power, virtue and efficacy from Christ, as he being
punished for us. Hebr. 13.12. Our Sanctification there is ascribed to the
suffering of Christ, that is to say, to the death of Christ: For Christ that he
might sanctify the People with his own Blood, has suffered, or dyed without
the Gate.

Ephesians. 5.2. Christ has loved us, and gave himself for us, to be an Offering
and a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God. He is a sweet smelling
savor to God generally in respect of his sacred Person, and he is a sweet
savor in respect of his blessed Nature, and in respect of his holy life, but
more especially, in respect of his precious death, wherein he gave himself as
a sweet smelling savor to God. Hebr. 9.28. Christ was once offered to take
away sins, insinuating unto us, that Christ was powerful for the taking away
of sins: How, as he was Christ offered, or as he was Christ sacrificed* Hebr.
10.10. So likewise our Sanctification is by the offering of Christ, Christ by
that one offering of his has sanctified us. So likewise in the twelfth Verse,
there is our Justification, and in the fourteenth Verse, there is our
Consecration by one Offering; and in the fifteenth and sixteenth Verses, there
is the New Testament confirmed by name, by the very offering of Christ. So the
Apostle implies the reason by the offering of Christ.

Hebr. 10. from the sixth Verse to the ninth, there you shall find that the
work of the New Testament, and of our Redemption is ascribed to Christ his
doing of the will of God: He took away the first, and established the second;
he put away the Sacrifices of the Law, of burnt Offerings, and established the
New Testament: that is, by doing the will of God, by his obedience and
humiliation: Romans 5.19. For as by one Man's disobedience many were made sinners,
so by the obedience of one shall many also be made righteous. It is the
obedience of Christ that iustifies us, and makes good unto us the Covenant of
Grace: And that we may know, that it was not all the obedience of his life
(which was most holy) that could serve the turn, the Apostle tells us, Phil.
2.8, 9. That he became obedient, even to the Death of the Cross: The lowest
degree of his Humiliation, was the highest degree of his Obedience, and thereby
he became a perfect Mediator.

Coloss. 1.20. Christ has made our peace by the Blood of his Cross; that is
to say, by the suffering that he did endure, specially upon the Cross:
Likewise in Coloss. 2.14, 15. He fastened our sins upon the Cross, and there
tryumphed over the Powers of Darkness (which is the very matter of our
Redemption) And in John 12.31. Now (says Christ) is the Prince of the World
cast out: What speaks he there of his Cross? And if I be lift up, then will I
draw others after me. Now are the Faithful to be drawn unto Christ, after
that he had dyed upon the Cross. It was Christ upon the Cross that vanquished
the Devil, Death, and Hell, and drew the Faithful to him. And in John 19.30.
Now it is finished, says Christ when he was upon the Cross, the last breath
that Christ fetched. When all his humiliation was finished, then the work of
our Redemption was fully accomplished. Hence it is that the joy of the
Faithful is not so much in knowing Christ, as in knowing Christ crucified. 2
Cor. 5.16. I know no Man (says the Apostle) after the Flesh, no not Christ
himself: What not Christ himself? No, not after the Flesh, not as a Man, not
as a holy Man, not as a Jew, not as one of my own Blood, but Christ crucified.
I esteem to know nothing (says the Apostle) but Christ, and him crucified, 1
Cor. 2.2. And indeed this is the very substance of the Gospel, Christ
crucified. 1 Cor. 1.23. We preach unto you (says the Apostle) not simply
Christ, but Christ crucified; and therefore in the eighteenth Verse it is
called, The preaching of the Cross, and suffering of Christ. All this shows,
that Christ in his Cross, and Christ crucified, he is the Person by whom the
New Testament, and the work of our Redemption is established.

Romans 5.10. We are reconciled to God by the death of Christ. There you see our
reconciliation is ascribed to the death of Christ: So also our Sanctification
is ascribed to the death of Christ, in Coloss. 2.22. likewise in Hebr. 3.14,
15. there it is said, That Christ has vanquished the Devil by Death, and has
delivered us from Death, and the bondage that we were in: All this was by the
death of Christ, by Christ his dying for us. So in Hebr. 9.15. it is said, that
Christ is the Mediator of the New Testament thorough Death.

Jews cruelty on the other side, yet so it was, that his Blood was shed, and
the shedding of his Blood is that whereupon the New Testament, and the work of
our Redemption is stablished. Romans 5.9. We are justified by the Blood of
Christ, there our Justification is ascribed to the Blood of Christ; so our
Redemption is ascribed to the Blood of Christ, Ephesians. 1.7. Revel. 5.9. and in
the 1 Pet. 1.19. all runs upon the Blood of Christ, Revel. 1.5. We are washed
from our sins in his Blood, 1 John 1.7. The Blood of Christ cleanses us from
all our sins: The fetching of us within the Covenant of Grace is by the Blood
of Christ Ephesians. 2.13. and so indeed is the whole work of our Redemption
ascribed to the Blood of Christ. You see then how rich and plentiful the
Scripture is in this Argument, all tending wholly to this effect, to teach us
that the very matter whereupon the New Testament, and the work of our
Redemption is founded and stablished; is the Blood of the Lord Jesus. I am bold
to insist so long upon the proof of this point, because the Scripture is so
plentiful in it. We will come now to the Reasons.



Hebr. 9.16, 17.

Leuit. 1.7. and therefore Christ coming to be a Sacrifice for the sins of
the World, he must be killed and slain.





but with the Blood of the Son of God, Acts 20.28. Take heed therefore unto
your selves, and to all the Flock, over the which the Holy Ghost has made you
Quer-seers, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own
Blood. Mark now, this stands with the Justice of God, God was offended, and he
must receive full satisfaction, therefore when Christ came to satisfy, he
could not satisfy but only by his Blood: Nay, I say more, Christ could not
have satisfied, but that it was by the Blood of the Son of God, that the
infiniteness of the Person satisfying, might be answerable to the
infiniteness of the Person offended, and that is the chief reason of the
Doctrine.

The reward of sin is death, and where is no shedding of Blood, there is no
remission; and therefore whosoever comes as a Mediator of the New Testament, to
procure for us the remission of our sins, his Blood must be shed, else our
sins still remain unpardoned. And so much for the Reasons. The Uses.

Cor. 2.2. I desire to know nothing but Christ, and him crucified. And the same
is the matter of our rejoicing, Gal. 6.14. God forbid that I should rejoice but
in the Cross of Christ. The Blood of Christ is the ground and very foundation
of our Faith, Romans 3.25. Through Faith in his Blood, etc. What is it that the
Faith of a believing Man does most properly embrace, but the Blood of Christ?
The Jews revile us because we believe in a crucified God, and the Gentiles
they deride and mock us, because we trust to be saved in him that could not
save himself, but sufrered such a cruel death. Well, howsoever it be, says
the Apostle, that he is to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Grecians
foolishness, yet unto us he is the power of God, and the wisdom of God: He
is the very power of God, without which God cannot ordinarily save a Man: And
the very wisdom of God, without which God will not ordinarily save a Man. It
is a world of heavenly comforts that a spiritual minded Man may gather unto
himself in the meditation and the beholding of the death of Christ, when we
think of Christ crucified, and of Christ shedding his Blood, there you may
see, First, our sins punished to the full. Secondly, there we may see our
sins pardoned to the full. Thirdly, there we may see our sins crucified,
and mortified, and subdued by his Blood, and by the power of the death of
Christ soundly applied to our Souls and Considences, our sins begin to dye,
and to be mortified, and to be crucified in us. Fourthly, in Christ crucified
we may behold the Flesh crucified, Gal. 5.24. we may see our wicked humors to
be mortified and to be beaten down, and crucified within us. Again, when as
we think upon Christ crucified, why there we do find indeed the very
crucifying of our selves to the World, and the World to us, Gal. 6.14. Before
we were carried after the things of the world, after our lusts and corruptions;
but when once we are truly partakers of Christ crucified, then we are crucified
to the World, and the World to us, and then we scorn the things of the World,
the great riches, and high promotion, and the beautifullest things we account
them as Dung of the Earth. Again, when we consider Christ crucified, there we
behold how patient we should be in affliction, even to the death; there is the
picture of our whole life, which must be a continual course of mortification;
and there is the seasoning of our death, looking thoroughly upon Christ
crucified, it is that which seasons our death, that whenever death comes
and seaseth upon us, it shall be a sweet passage to a better life. Again, when
we see Christ crucified, we see all evils turned to good, they are seasoned to
us in the sufferings of the Lord Jesus, and if we have any comforts, we enjoy
them so far forth, as they are seasoned unto us in the Blood of Christ.
Lastly, when we consider Christ crucified, there we find all good things
purchased for us, Grace, and Mercy, and Peace, and eternal Salvation: There
is a World, yea a Heaven of Treasure and riches gathered for us, and that we
are made partakers of by a due view and Faith in the meditation of Christ
crucified, and therefore whosoever would have any true relish of Christ, he
must labor for the relish of the Blood of Christ.



more powerful to destroy us, then the Blood of Christ to save us, then is our
Redemption uncertain: If so be that Death and the Devil which have been
already overcome and trampled under Foot by Christ, if these Principallities
and Powers can recover themselves, and get up in Arms again, and make War
against Christ, and bring him down from Heaven again, and crucify him the
second time, then is our Salvation and Redemption uncertain: But if that be
impossible, then it is impossible that those that have part in this Covenant,
should fail of Salvation and Redemption.

Cor. 6.20. You are bought with a price (says the Apostle) therefore glorify
God in your Bodies and in your Souls for they are Gods. God has esteemed so
highly of you, as to set you at the rate of his own Son: And Christ has
esteemed so highly of you to buy you so dearly; and therefore do not commit
sin, filthiness, and uncleanness, but give your selves to holiness, and
piety, that God may be glorified and honored by you.



counted it an unholy thing, and fell away from God and that holy profession
that they took upon them. Alas, what shall become of them that fall from God?
If their sins be not forgiven them, then they must needs go to Hell and be
damned? Whither shall they fly to have their sins forgiven? And where shall
they plead for mercy? They must plead it in Christ, and in none else. In
Christ they cannot plead it, for they cannot plead the pardon of sin, but in
the Blood of Christ. Christ dyed but once, he suffered and was crucified but
once, and cannot dye again, and therefore as many of us as have taken the
professsion of Christ upon us, look that we do not let go this holy and
heavenly profession, but let us labor to stick fast to Christ, to his Death,
and Blood, and then thou may be sure that the work of thy Redemption is
thoroughly accomplished, and so have part in that Covenant. It is called the
Blood of the everlasting Covenant, Hebr. 13.20. and whosoever they be that have
a true part in this they cannot fall away, to them it is the Blood of an
everlasting Covenant: But as for others that in their own apprehension embrace
Christ, and make great shows, and taste some relish of the Blood of Christ, if
they fall away, there is no more Sacrifice for them, no more Sacrifice for
sin but the Blood of Christ, and he cannot dye again. What then shall be
their portion? nothing but a fearful expectation of vengeance and devouring
Fire, that shall set upon them for their utter mine and destruction. As this is
a comfortable Meditation, the work of out Redemption by the Blood of Christ,
so let us know, that if we shall abuse it, and profane it, and forsake the
sweet communion and fellowship that we have in Christ in the participation of
this Covenant, then there is no hope of mercy, for we have brought our selves
into a forlorn case, wilfully casting away this grace of our Redemption.

The end of the seventh Lecture.
THE EIGHTH LECTVRE UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
BY occasion of the time that the next Lords Day we purpose, God willing, to
come to the Lords Table, we are now to make digression into the Argument of
the Lords Supper. I showed you that one of the titles given to the Lords
Supper, is the New Testament, as it is set down by Matthew, Mark, Luke, and
Paul, and because Matthew is most plentiful in setting down the words of our
Savior, we made choice of his words to speak of, Math. 26.28. For this is my
Blood of the New Testament which is shed for many, for the remission of sins.
And we propounded these three particulars to insist upon: The first whereof is
this, that it is called here the New Testament: and there we showed, that all
the hold we have in God, as many of us as live under the state of the Gospel,
we hold it by force and virtue of a New Testament, as the old being abolished.
The next point was the Blood of Christ, the Seal whereby the Testament is
confirmed. The third follows to be handled, and that is the benefit that
follows of this Testament, and by the Blood of Christ, and that is remission
of sins, for so it follows, Which is shed for many for the remission of
sins, as that being the reach and end of both, both of the New Testament, and
of the Blood of Christ. God is pure, holy, just, and righteous: pure, and
therefore free from sin; holy, and therefore hating sin; just, and
therefore condemning sin; righteous, and therefore a punisher of sin: Man
is full of sin, and therefore unclean, and therefore hateful to God, and
therefore damnable and punishable by the rule of Gods Justice, in so much that
there is no hope nor possibility that ever any Covenant of Love and Peace
should be established betwixt God and Man, except first sin be removed, and
therefore our Savior Christ interposing himself a Mediator betwixt God and
Man, to make such a Covenant, must take such a course, as whereby sin might
be taken out of the way, and sin cannot be taken away, unless it be remitted
on Gods part, and God will not, nor in Justice cannot remit it, without
shedding of Blood; for where there is no shedding of Blood, there is no
remission: Hence it is that Christ our Mediator coming to make this Covenant,
sheds his Blood for the remission of our sins: And this is the right strain
and meaning of these words, My Blood which is shed for many far the remission
of sins. In handling these words, First, we will consider of the phrase or
manner of speech here used, Remission of sins. Secondly, we will remove some
exceptions or doubts. And thirdly, we will proceed to the observation. First,
touching the phrase or matter of speech, Remission of sins, that is,
forgiveness of sins: There are sundry phrases in Scripture, that signify
forgiveness, to cover, to forget, not to impute, to blot out, to wash away
sin: but none either more usual or significant then this, to remit, that is,
to let go, or pass by, or to loose sin: It does most pithily unfold both
the nature of sin, and of forgiveness. Sin has a double respect, First, to
God himself: Secondly, to his Law: I grant that there is but little difference
in the thing it self, for that which is done against God, is done against his
Law; and that which is done against Gods Law, is done against God himself: But
yet for Doctrine sake we distinguish them so in our consideration. First, sin
has respect to God himself: for if there were no Laws made to forbid and
punish misdemenours done against the Kings person, yet if a Subject do ought
against him, he is an offender, and justly punishable, even because the one is
a Subject, and the other a King: so if God had made no Laws at all against
sin, yet if we do any thing against God, we are sinners, and justly liable to
Gods wrath and sentence of his displeasure, even because he is God: Sin is a
wrong to God, for he being our Creator, and we his workmanship, if we should
do him his right, we should give him all our whole service; then when we
sin, we fail of that, and so we wrong God. Now when God forgiues us our
sins, he remits or puts up our wrongs: so sin is a dishonor to God, he
being perfectly holy, and having made us holy too: By holiness we glorify
God, Ps. 50.23. He that offers praise, glorifieth me, By sin we dishonor
him, as being that which is utterly unbeseeming both our selves and our Maker:
when he forgiues sin, he remits and passes by this dishonor. Sin is an
opposition and enmity against God, he being goodness it self, Ps. 51.4.
Against thee, against thee only have I sinned. When he forgiues sin, he
remits or lets go this enmity, not laying it to heart, nor taking notice of
it. Secondly, sin has respect to Gods Law, whereto it also carries direct
opposition, for sin is the transgression of the Law. Gods Law is a binder, it
lays a strait chain or bond of perfect obedience upon every Man, whereby we
are necessarily tied to do all that Gods Law commands, and to avoid all that it
forbids: whenever we fail either in omitting the good, or committing the
evil, we stand bound in the bonds of the Law not performed: when God forgiues
us our sins, he remits these bonds for the time past, and loses us from
them, for so the Apostle restraines it to the time past, Romans 3.25. To declare
his righteousness by the forgiveness of sins that are passed. It lays a
second bond on us by consequence, and that it, that when we have sinned, we are
in bondage to sin; He that commits sin, is the servant of sin, John 8.34.
And how comes this to pass? Merely by the rigor of the Law, punishing sin
past, by a subjection to sin afterward: when God forgiues us our sins, he
remits and loses these bonds also. There is a third bond, and that is the
heauiest of all, the eternal curse of God upon transgresssors, wrapping them
in chains of eternal darkness and damnation, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Cursed be he that
confirms not all the words of this Law to do them: When God forgiues us our
sins, he remits and loses us of these bonds too, in Christ he sets us free
from them, Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, when
he was made a curse for us. To shut up this point, our sins are usually
called our debts, Math. 6. and Gods forgiving, is the remitting or releasing of
these debts: wherein the Lord (as he is rich in mercy) shows himself an
exceeding merciful Creditor, he remits not only the forfeiture and penalty,
which is the curse, but even the whole bond, the principal debt of obedience
it self, for the time past, for that which we did owe unto God, and have not
paid him. Thus much light we have received touching this sweet and heavenly
Doctrine of forgiveness of sins, by the occasion and benefit of this phrase,
Remission, that is, loosing our sins.

Secondly, A doubt or two is to be removed touching the matter it self,
Remission of sins. First, is this the only benefit of Christ Blood shed? Is
this the whole substance of the New Testament? I answer no, it is not: the
Testament contains two branches, Justification and Sanctification: the
remission of sins, and the renewing of the Heart: so the words are, Ierem.
31.31, etc. which is die place where this Covenant is originally mentioned: and
so Christ's Blood is shed for the confirmation of both, but only this named by
a figurative speech in other cases of like nature, yea in this very case in
other places of Scripture, Ierem. 32.38, etc. I will give them one Heart, an
done way, that they may fear me for ever, etc. He speaks that of our
Sanctification, but under that branch is understood and meant the whole
Covenant, Remission of sins too, though it be not expressed. So in Romans 11.27.
which the Apostle quotes out of Esaias 27.9. there is mention made of the
Covenant and he names but one branch of it without the other, Remission of
sins, and not Sanctification, but both are to be understood, and being both
but one Covenant, one may well stand for both; The New Testament, and Christ
his Blood shed, is as well effectual for the one as for the other. Secondly,
here seems to be some contradiction in the words; to shed Blood for sin
entends satisfaction; and remission of sin entends free pardon: How is that
said to be remitted, that is fully satisfied for? And how is that fully
satisfied for, that is freely remitted? I answer, they are so far from
contradiction, that they must necessarily go together: For where there is no
shedding of Blood, there is no remission, which is as much to say, where there
is no satisfaction, there is no forgiveness: God is exactly just, and exactly
merciful; and he cannot show exact Justice, but he must show exact Mercy:
Gods exact Justice requires that sins be fully satisfied for; his exact
Mercy requires that they be freely forgiven: so in respect of Justice they are
fully satisfied for; but in respect of Mercy they are freely forgiven. Again,
consider Christ and our selves: in respect of Christ our sins are not freely
forgiven, but satisfied for; in respect of us they are not satisfied for, but
freely forgiven: It is full satisfaction in him; but free forgiveness to us.
These points being cleared, let us come in the third place to the Doctrine, and
that is this: in that it is here said, Blood shed for the remission of sins.

Observe, that the whole and entire benefit of all Christ's doings and
sufferings for us, is chiefly and indeed wholly and really conferred upon us
in the remission of our sins, Ephesians. 1.7. By whom we have redemption thorough
his Blood, even the forgiveness of sins. By whom; who is that there spoken
of? It is Jesus Christ, of whom in the former Verses the Apostle says, That
all the good we have from God, is bestowed upon us in him. And what has he
done for us? Redeemed us: By whom we have redemption. And how has he wrought
our redemption? Thorough his Blood. And wherein does it consist? In
forgiveness of sins: By whom we have redemption thorough his Blood, even the
forgiveness of sins. So that when our sins are forgiven, then we are made
partakers of the whole work of Redemption, and of the whole benefit of Christ's
doings and sufferings. Act. 2.38. Amend your lives And be baptized every one
of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins. Why, all that
are truly baptized into Christ, are partakers of him, and all his merits and
henefits? That is true: but yet the Apostle bids them to repent and be baptized
in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins. Giving us to
understand thereby, that when we have obtained that, we have obtained all the
rest together with it, Acts 10.43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that
thorough his Name, whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of
sins. It is not the Apostles reach to show that the faithful shall have
nothing else but remission of sins thorough his Name, but contrarily, that
they shall have the whole benefit of all things that belongs to Salvation. If
once we have remission of sins, then we shall have newness of life, the
pledge of the Spirit, all that belongs to Glory and Salvation, Romans 3.15. Whom
God has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in hit Blood, to
declare hit righteousuesse by the forgiveness of sins, etc. The sum of the
Apostles speech is this: God declares his righteousness in saving those that
have Faith in the Blood of Christ, whom he has set forth to be a
reconciliation betwixt him and us, even by the forgiveness of their sins, 2
Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself. How? Not
imputing their sins unto them. Romans 11.27. And this is my Covenant to them,
when I shall take away their sins. Specifying the circumstance of the time,
it proves the point very directly, that then the Covenant is made, when sin
is taken away, then is all made sure betwixt God and us. Ps. 32.1, 2. The
Prophet describes a blessed Man, and sets him forth by both the parts of this
Covenant, Justification and Sanctification. The Apostle, Romans 4.7, 8. quoting
that very place, and handling the same Argument, names but Justification, and
places blessedness in that, as that being in a manner all in all to our
Salvation. If once we get remission of sins, we have right to all the rest of
the Covenant.



Cor. 1.30. He is our Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption.
Is Christ divided?

No surely; and therefore whosoever has part in him for his Righteousness,
has also part in him for his Wisdom, Sanctification, and Redemption

Those whom he iustifies, he sanctifies. If any Man be in Christ, he is a new
Creature, 2 Cor. 5.19. If we be once reconciled to God, whereby our sins are
forgiven, we are new Creatures. So that where there is Justification, there is
Sanctification; and where there is Justification, there is also Glorification.
Romans 8.30. Whom he iustifies, them also he glorifies. There is a necessary
dependence betwixt the matter of Justification, consisting in the forgiveness
of sins, and the matter of our Sanctification, and Glorification: Whosoever
bath interest in one, has also right and interest to all the rest.

He came for sin, Romans 8.3. To save his People from their sins, Math. 1.21.
To sane sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. His Office is to take away sin, and to save
sinners: If therefore our sins are taken away and forgiven, we are interested
into the work of our Salvation: It is made sure unto us, howsoever the Glory
is respited to another World.

Romans 5 10. For if when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the
death of his Son: much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life.

David's case and practice, when he was sick or persecuted, or whatsoever
occasion befell him, still he labors for the forgiveness of his sins: O
Lord be merciful to my sins. This also was the practice of our Savior; some
came to him about one Disease, some about another, the Leprosy, the Palsy,
and the like: His answer is, Thy sins are forgiven thee: Sin no more, etc.
By which tender, he teaches us what we must specially labor for, and chiefly
aim at in the practice of Religion, namely, for the forgiveness of our
sins. But some will say, how shall we come by this? I answer, we must seek
for it, pray for it, and use the means which God has appointed to obtain the
same; hear the Word, and meditate upon it; receive the Sacraments, and labor
to profit by these things, and to get the knowledge of Christ: And this we must
understand, that howsoever we can do nothing to procure the forgiveness of
our sins, but the Lord must first forgive before our works can be
acceptable, yet notwithstanding, God has appointed means wherein he has
promised to meet us: Let us humble our selves before him, and by that means we
shall be made capable of the forgiveness of our sins, let us labor for
Faith, and by that we shall receive forgiveness of sins; let us labor for
newness of life, and so we shall walk worthy of this Grace; let us use the
means wherein God has promised to meet us, and this is to labor for
remission of sins; and doubt not, but he that does this out of a Heart
unfeigned, shall find the blessing of God upon it, But where shall we find
this? I answer, In the Blood of Christ, there this Treasure lies: Dig deep
into his wounds by the Hand of Faith; diue into this everliving Fountain, the
Blood of Christ, by the work of Faith; so shall thou be sure to find
forgiveness of sins; and then though thou be never so loathsome in thy
self, yet his Blood is very precious, and will make amends for all; though
thou be unable to go forward one Foot in the way of Salvation, yet his Blood is
all-sufficient; though thy Prayers be weak, thy desires feeble, thy Faith and
Hope faint, yet his Blood is a strong and a mighty Intercessor that calls for
forgiveness; though our sins be like the Blood of Abel that calls for
vengeance, yet the Blood of Christ speaks better things for us then the Blood
of Abel, it calls continually for mercy for us; though our sins be great
and grievous, as red as Scarlet, deeply dyed by our continuance in them, or by
our relapsing, or by our much hardness of Heart against Gods warnings, yet
diue thou deep into the Fountain of Christ's Blood, and that will put thee
into another hugh, his Scarlet Blood will put down thy Scarlet sins though
never so deeply dyed, and procure thee Mercy, and present thee faultlesse
before the Lord. But how shall I know that I have forgiveness of sins? I
answer, his is the mercy of God, that he not only forgiues us our sins, but
also tells us they are forgiven. To forgive us our sins is a great mercy,
but to tell us that they are forgiven, is a greater mercy. If a Man be never
so well provided for, so that he shall never want, it is well; but yet unless
he know so much, he will still fear and stand in doubt; and therefore because
we should not be thus perplexed, and in despair, he gives us his Spirit to
witness to our Spirits, that he has (in the Blood of Christ) smelt a sweet
Savor of rest; that our sins are pardoned, and we reconciled. Again, we may
know it by peace of Conscience, Romans 5.1. Being instified by Faith, we have
peace toward God: He gives us peace of Conscience when he forgiues us our
sins, all is then pacified; our Consciences which before were like the Surges
of the Sea, tumultuous and raging, are then laid into a sweet calm. I do not
say, that this shall be always so: but we shall know it some times or other,
and find it to be as the pledge of the forgiveness of our sins: and
howsoever by reason of our sin and weakness, that may fail for a time in
our sense, yet the truth of God stands sure for ever. Again, we may know it by
the dying of sin in us; for it is effectual to kill sin: as the shedding
of Christ's Blood was the death of himself, so his Blood is the death of our
sin: This is one sure token that our sins are pardoned, when we find this
bond of sin loosed, and that we are set at liberty.

and condemnation: But when God releaseth him, he delivers him from all these;
he quits him of this bond, and breaks it in pieces, and sets him free from all
danger; and not only so, but he bestows a contrary state of happiness upon
him; as he delivers him from the power of Sin and Satan, so he translates
him into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God: as it is said, Thus shall
it be done to the Man whom the King will honor: So shall it be said of him
whom the King of kings shall honor, whose sins are pardoned in the Blood of
Christ.

lie; For no Man lives, and sins not. If they say, they have sinned; Then I
answer, before ever they can merit any thing, this sin must first be
forgiven; and tell me, can thou merit the pardon of this sin? No, that must
be remitted in the Blood of Christ: for so the Papists themselves will
coufesse: If thou can not fatisfie for one sin, much less for many; and
much less can thou merit newness of Life, Grace, and Salvation: Whosoever
challenges this to themselves, they detract from God, and incroach upon
Christ's Office, and the power of his Blood, which only is meritorious. But if
these two could stand together, yet they debar themselves of the benefit of
Christ's Blood by which comes remission of sins: So that these magnifiers of
the Merit of Man, while they think they go the high way to Heaven, they tread
the high way to Hell and everlasting destruction.

our sins; God in mercy, and Christ in mercy, made it to be a Salve for our
Sores: Our shedding of his Blood by his ouer-ruling Hand, overcame our
wickedness, and was a means to take away our sins, and to save our Souls.

The end of the eighth Lecture.
THE NINTH LECTVRE UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
THAT you may be fitted and prepared for the worthy receiving of the Lords
Supper the next Saboth day, we are now to make digression into the Argument of
the Lords Supper: Let this course not see me tedious to any, nor let it not be
unprofitable to any; for if we labor to be prepared and fitted against those
days, we shall receive that profit and comfort by the Lords Supper, that will
make us amends for all our labors. We have entered as you see into a place in
Math. 26.28. where the Sacrament is called, The Blood of the New Testamens,
which is shed for many, etc. I have showed you first concerning the New
Testament, which is the first thing in nature to be handled: Secondly, have
showed you concerning the Blood of Christ, which is the second thing in nature:
The third particular is the Remission of sins, which is the benefit that
comes by this New Testament, and the Blood of Christ: this point was handled
last. Now remains the fourth and last particular, and that is the Persons that
are made partakers of this benefit, Remission of sins by the Blood of the New
Testament: This is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many, etc.
Here is no particular description of the Persons, by their Place, Quality,
Degree, Nation, State, or any such matter of special note: but only in a
generallitie, by their number, Many. If we confider it well, we shall find that
it carries the force and intendment of a double exception: The first is of
restraint, Not all, but many: The second is of enlargement, Not few, but many.
First, of the exception of restraint; Many, not all to be partakers of this
benefit; this precious Treasure, Remission of sins, is not every Man's portion,
it is not every Man that can reach forth his Hand and take it at this own
pleasure, but it is restrained to some certain sort of Men, as we may say:
Though the Lord be exceeding bountiful and free of his saving Grace, that he
imparts it to many, yet he is not prodigal and lavish of it, to expose it to
all; not every one that lives after the Death of Christ, shall be saved by his
Death; nor every one that knows of the shedding of Christ Blood, shall have
the benefit of it; no, nor every one that us persuaded that the Blood of
Christ is available for the taking away of sin, shall have remission of
sins by it; nay I add further, that not every one that comes to partake, of
this Sacrament, which Christ says, Is his Blood of the New Testament, shed for
many for the Remission of sins, shall be made partakers of the benefit and
comfort of this Sacrament; many of these shall, all shall not; it is restrained
to some certain kind of People, and that is to Believers, on whom God bestows
the Grace of Faith, they and none but they are partakers of this benefit; we
must not think that the Hand of God is shorthed, that he cannot save all Men;
nor we must not think but that the Blood of Christ is in it own worthiness
and power, as sufficient for one as for another, for all as for few, if Christ
had so intended it, and God so accepted it; but this restraint is chiefly to
be ascribed to the Decree and purpose of God, who forgiues and saues whom he
will; and consequently to the Grace of Faith, which God freely bestows on all
those that receive it sauingly; these and none but these are the Many here
spoken of, according to that in the 1 John 12. As many as received him, to them
be gave power to be the Sons of God, even to them that believe in his Name. How
comes it to pass that some believe, and some do not? It must be ascribed to
the Decree of God, Acts 13.48. As many as were ordained to eternal life,
believed. The second exception is of enlargement; though it be restrained to
some, yet it is to no small some, there is many of them; it is spoken and to be
understood respectively: First, of the Disciples; for howsoever, they only
were present at this Action, and to them only these words and mysteries were
then delivered: and howsoever Luke reports, Luke 22.19, 20. that it is a thing
appropriated to them, Which is shed for you, and howsoever it did belong to
them by a special Prerogative, as well because they were the first that ever
did partake of these Mysteries in that kind, as also because they were to be
the Publishers and Ministers of this Grace to others, yet it is not so
restrained to them, but that it is intended and enlarged to many others; as who
should say, Which is shed for you, and for many more as well as you. Secondly,
it is to be understood respectively, of the whole Nation of the Jews; It is
true that it is said, Salvation is of the Jews, Ioh. 4.22. and Christ himself
was a Jew borne, and he himself says, He is not sent, but to the lost Sheep
of the House of Israel, Math. 15.24. Therefore Himself, his Salvation, Word,
Sacraments and all his saving Ordinances, were first to be tendered to them, as
their proper right; and yet not so proper to them, but that at the second hand,
they were to be tendered to many more besides them, even to many of all sorts of
People in the World; according to that in Math. 8.11. Many shall come from the
East and west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the
Kingdom of Heaven. So then this indefinite number gives intimation of an
express difference betwixt this New Testament here mentioned, and the Old
Testament whereto this is opposed; that Testament was made with the Jews
only; for howsoever some Gentiles were then saved, as Job, and others, yet
that was extraordinary; but this New Testament is made with the Gentiles also,
so that hereby the Gentiles are saved as ordinarily as the Jews, without any
difference: So then, it is not enlarged to all, but confined to some; neither
is it confined to a few, but enlarged to many; not to the Disciples only, but
to the Jews; and not to the Jews only, but to the Gentiles, and to many of
the Gentiles of all Nations: This is the reach of this particular. Now because
this last point is of greatest moment in it self, and principally intended in
the Text, we will further insist upon it by way of observation. Take it thus:

Genesis 12.3. I will also bless them that bless thee, and curse them than curse
thee: and in thee shall all the Families of the Earth be blessed. Here God
makes a Covenant with Abraham, and it was this very Covenant of Grace, as the
Apostle shows, Gal. 3.8. where he calls it expressly, The Gospel, for the
Covenant of the Law was not then in being till 430 years after, as we may see
in Verse 17, and this Covenant was then effectually sealed by the Blood of
Christ, though not actually till Christ came in the Flesh. What is the tenor of
this Covenant? That in him all the Families of the Earth shall be blessed? All,
far or near, civil or barbarous, Jew or Gentile. But that is spoken to
Abraham, what is that to Christ? Yes, for it is not spoken of the person of
Abraham, but of the Seed of Abraham, Genesis 22.18. In thy Seed shall all the
Nations of the Earth be blessed. And who is that Seed? It is Christ, says the
Apostle, Gal. 3.16. The Apostle Peter, Acts 3.25 expounds the Covenant so, and
applies it to the Jews; And the Apostle Paul, Gal. 3.8. 14.16. expounds the
very same Covenant so to, and applies it to the Gentiles. Now all the Nations
of the Earth are either Jews or Gentiles, so that it is not restrained to one
Nation, but enlarged generally to the whole Many of the World. Secondly, It was
so prophesied, Esaias 40.5. And the Glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all
Flesh shall see it together. What is the Glory of the Lord? It is the
Salvation of God, Luke 3.6. All Flesh shall see the Salvation of God. And what
is this Salvation of God? It is Christ Jesus sealing this Covenant with his
own Blood. Now when this Covenant is thus sealed by the Blood of Christ, it
shall not be a hidden Mystery, as in former times, or discovered to some few,
but it shall be plainly revealed to the view of the World, All Flesh shall see
it; and that not as spectators only, or bare beholders, but they shall so see
it, as that they shall partake in the benefit and power of it; for so it
appears in the first and second Verses of that Chapter, which is a Preface to
this Verse, Comfort ye, comfort ye my People, speak comfortably to Jerusalem,
etc. they shall so see it, as that they shall receive comfort, remission, and
reconciliation by it. Thirdly, It was so performed by our Savior, Math. 11.28.
Our Savior himself makes this extention, Come unto me all ye that are weary
and heavy laden, and I will ease you. All are invited to come to him that find
any need of him; and all that so come, let them be of what Nation, or fashion
soever, are promised there part in him: So it was sulfilled by our Savior.
Fourthly, The Apostles also witness this euerie-where, Romans 1.16. I am not
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God to Salvation to
every one that believes, to the Jew first and also to the Grecian. The
Apostle makes both a general extent of this benefit to all sorts, Jew and
Grecian, and withal shows the special qualification of such persons as shall
have the benefit of it, Every one that believes, Gal. 3.28. There is neither
lew nor Gentile, there is neither bond nor free, male nor female, for ye are
all one in Christ Jesus. He reckons up not only Nations, but States, and
Sexes, and shows that there is no difference in respect of the Covenant of
Grace: There is a difference in Men by Nation, some are Jews, some Gentiles,
but there is none in the state of Grace; there is some difference in Men in
respect of Condition, some are bond, and some are free; and so there is a
difference in respect of Sexes, some Male, and some Female, but all are one in
Christ; there is no difference at all in Nation, Condition, or Sex, in respect
of the Covenant of Grace, 1 John 2.2. If any Man sin, we have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the Just, and he is the reconciliation for our
finnes, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole World.
Here the Apostle breaks out into more larger terms then all the rest, the
whole World, or Face of the Earth; that is of all Times, Places, degrees;
always provided, that they be so qualified, as the Apostle before showed, Romans
1.16. That they be Believers; for so one Scripture fitly seems to expound
another: For it is to be understood of the World of Believers.

Acts 17.26. and therefore he would not but that some of all sorts should be
saved. It is true, that they being his own Workmanship, he might of his own
absolute will and power, cast away any kind, yea all kinds, and sorts of Men:
For may not the Potter do with the Clay what he will? Specially, seeing all
Men had sinned, he might have done it justly too. Yet the Lord considers, that
all Souls are his, as well the bond as the free, the Male as the Female, and
therefore he forbeares to practice either his absolute Will and Power, or his
Justice on any sort, but has made choice of some of all sorts to be reserved
to taste the sweetness of this blessed Covenant of Grace. For a time he did
that which he might have done for ever, deny the Gentiles generally of all
sorts, the means of Salvation; but he did not so for ever; and that even for
this cause, Because he is their God that made them. It is the Apostles reason,
Romans 3.29. to prove this very Point, God, is he God of the Jews only? Is he
not also of the Gentiles? etc. As who should say, If God confine Salvation to
the Jews only, he is but the God of the Jews; has he not made the Gentiles
also? He is the God of the Gentiles too, and therefore will save the Gentiles
also as well as the Jews: and so Romans 10.12 He that is Lord over all, is rich
unto all, etc. Giving us to understand, that God is Lord over all, both Jews
and Gentiles, and therefore will be rich in mercy unto all that call upon him,
what Nation soever they be of.

Romans 5.12. and the Serpent had deceived the whole World, Revel. 12.9.
therefore Christ coming to take away sin, and to break the Head of the
Serpent, was to extend his Grace and Goodness to all People: That Is the
Apostles reason, Romans 3.22, 23. where showing in Verse 22, the generallitie of
the Righreousnesse of God by Faith in Christ, unto all, and upon all that
believe, without any difference, he gives the reason in Verse 23, For all have
sinned and are deprived of the Glory of God.

Ephesians. 2.13, 14, 15. There was a double breach as the Apostle there shows,
First, a breach betwixt God and Man, by reason of sin, which was as it were,
a wall of separation betwixt them; and Christ has taken away that breach, and
thereby made all whole betwixt God and Mankind. The other breach was betwixt
Jew and Gentile, by reason of that ceremonial worship whereby God required the
Jews to worship him, for which all the Gentiles hated them, and they likewise
hated the Gentiles because they did not sort with them therein; now Christ
Jesus he has taken away this breach too, this wall of partition, and has made
of both one, and slew hatred thereby, and so reconciled both unto God in one
Body.

Jews; Why were the Gentiles called? Because they refused it, as the Apostle
shows, Acts 13.46. It was necessary that the Word of God should first be
spoken unto you; But seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy
of everlasting life, lo we turn to the Gentiles; And Romans 11.11, 12. the
Apostle makes it more plain, where the Apostle uses a double Reason: First,
their refusal, procured our acceptance, the Supper was prepared, the Guests
that were bidden did not come, therefore strangers were fetched in: The
Covenant of Grace was sealed by the Blood of Christ, specially for the Jews;
but they refused it, and God would not have such a work of Grace to be in
vain, and therefore he made the Gentiles partakers of it. And secondly, that
our example in accepting this Grace, might be a provocation to the Jews, and
make them to bethink themselves of their sinful refusal of so great a Grace,
and so be drawn on to accept of it together with the Gentiles.

Jews only; God did reserve the enlargement of it to all, as a special
gratification and prerogative whereby he would honor his own Son in the
Flesh: Christ promised, saved a Jew; Christ exhibited in the Flesh, saues many:
Christ coming down from Heaven in his own person, could not but set the Gate
of Mercy open to all Mankind: Christ coming in the Flesh, taking the whole
nature of Man upon him (for in every particular Man there is the whole nature
of Man) did thereby season the flesh of all Mankind to be capable of grace:
Christ dwelling personally in the World, could not but make all the world fare
the better for him: Christ opening his body and pouring out his blood, did show
and require the opening as it were of Gods Heart toward all Mankind, and
pouring forth his Grace upon all Flesh: Lastly, Christ's doings and sufferings,
his absolute and perfect obedience, could not be recompensed with less, then
with the Salvation of all Mankind.

John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc.
which if we understand of the effectual application of Christ, then that world
is only the believing World, and that love is Gods saving love to the
Faithful: But if we understand it only of the proffer of Grace to the World,
then that World is generally all Mankind, and that love is the general love of
God to all Mankind, that not only proffers Salvation to all, but also makes
some of all sorts to be effectual partakers thereof: The Centurion is said to
love the whole Nation of the Jews, because he built them one Synagogue; so
Gods saving some few of all sorts of Men, it does therefore argue his general
love toward all Mankind.

Adam, Romans 5.15, etc. that if the fall of Adam could prevail upon all Flesh
to condemnation, therefore the righteousness of Christ should prevail much
more to the justification of many. Isaac had but one blessing, and when he had
bestowed that upon the younger Brother, he had none to bestow upon the elder:
but Christ who is the Fountain of all Blessings, has a blessing to bestow
upon the Jews the elder Brother, and upon the Gentiles the younger Brother
too; and that he has bestowed the blessing of the Gospel upon Jacob the
younger Brother, that is the Gentile; when Esaias that is the elder Brother, the
Jews, shall come, though it be late first, even in the last days of the
World, and make their moan, as he did saying, O bless me, even me also
Father: He shall bestow the blessing of the Gospel even upon them also.

Psalm. 19. Romans 10. and the Acts 11.18. when the Jews heard that the Gentiles
were called, they glorified God, saying, Then has God also granted the
Gentiles repentance to Life. They glorified God, their Hearts rejoiced, it did
them good, they did thankefully acknowledge and magnify Gods wonderful
goodness therein, that now all People should be as it were the Jews, all
places as Jerusalem, and the Souls and Bodies of all sorts of Men, as the the
holy Temple of God to dwell in: that as it was prophesied by Malachy, From the
rising of the Sun, to the going down thereof a clean Offering should be
offered up to God in every place. Secondly, and more specially, in regard of
our selves, for we are those Gentiles, Ephesians. 2.10, etc. Consider what the
Apostle says: We were uncircumcision, without Christ, Aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, Strangers from the Covenants of Promise without hope,
and without God in the World? What a miserable case were we in? But now we that
were once thus far off, were made near by the Blood of Christ. We for our
parts may say we are made near indeed, the Gospel being so long, so freely,
and so plentifully preached amongst us; having so many good, and able, and
painful Preachers, as there is scarce any Church under the Sun that can
match us. Let us therefore embrace this saving Grace; let us believe and obey
this Word, which is the power of God to Salvation; let us remember the fall of
the Jews, and take heed to our selves, that by our contempt and
unprofitableness, we do not provoke God to do by us as he did by them:
Hark what the Apostle says Romans 11.20, etc. Thorough unbelief they are
broken off, and thou stand by Faith; be not high minded, but fear; for if
he spared not them being the natural Branches, take heed least he spare not
thee, being but a wild Olive grafted in for them. Let it appear to the World,
and let us find the experience of it to our own Hearts, that there is power in
the Gospel to convert our Souls, and to change our Hearts, and to make us to
become new Creatures: It is not our living under the Gospel, but our
submission of our Hearts to the power of the Gospel that shall save our Souls.

Jews, and to pray for them as the ancient People of God, and still having
them in this Covenant of Grace together with us. Generally we hate a Jew, and
we take it up for a Proverb, when we speak of our hatred against any, we say
we hate them as a Jew: It is a wicked speech, and not beseeming a Christian. In
regard of that foul sin of theirs in crucifying Christ, we hate them justly
(though God out of that evil of theirs did bring much good to us;) but we must
pity them, and pray for them, knowing that toward the end of the World they
shall be joined together with us. Consider first, that Christ himself prayed
for them: Father forgive them, for they know not what they do: And shall not
we pray for them whom Christ prayed for? Peter exhorts even them that crucified
Christ to repent, and be baptized in his Name for remission of sins, and then
all is well. God has extended his mercy to them, and therefore let us help
them with our Faith and Prayers to God, that they may enjoy it: And what Man is
there that has any bowels of compassion, that does not yearne even in
himself, to think, that such a Nation, the peculiar People of God, the only
worshippers of God, for many hundred years together, should be so deprived of
the Glory of God, and be separated from him by such a fearful Apostacy,
that they do even hate the Name of Christ, and of the Gospel? Consider
secondly, that the time was when they prayed for us, Cant. 8.8. We have a
little Sister (say they) and she has no Teets, what shall we do for her in
the day that she shall be spoken for? She being in possession of Gods favor,
see what moan she makes for us, being then but cast-awayes: Therefore we being
in possession of Gods favor, and they cast out, let us take up the same
mournful note in their behalf and say, We have a little Sister, and she has
no Teats; her Teats were once full of Milk, of Gods Word and comfort, but now
they are altogether barren and dry, what shall we do for her in the day that
she shall be spoken for? This is the day wherein she is to be spoken for, even
the last days of the world: Let us speak to God for her, and be carnest in
Prayer that God would take away the Veil from their Hearts, and open their
blind Eyes that they may see the Salvation of Christ, and that they may see the
Salvation of God, and so all Israel may be saved, and they and we may become
one Flock, and be brought into one Sheepe-fold, under one Sheepeheard, Jesus
Christ. Consider thirdly, that we live upon their loss, and are raised up upon
their spoil. If a Man beg of the King the Goods and Lands of another Man's
that is condemned, if he have any grace or good nature in him, he will have
care of that Man's Seed and Posterity, to relieve them as much as in him lies.
We are built up by the ruins of the Jews, and therefore what great cause have
we to pity their Seed and Posterity, and to pray to God that he would call
them home again, and make them once again his own People? Consider fourthly,
that their calling is the only sign not yet fulfilled of Christ's coming to
Judgment: A thing which concerns us all to groan and to pray for, that it may
be speedily accomplyshed and consequently, that they may be speedily called:
And we must not pray for them only, but we must labor to provoke them too.
How is that? By our holiness of life, and upright conversation; we should
shine as Lights unto them, in all good works, that by our good example, we
might draw them to God, and to take hold on Gods saving Ordinances as well as
we. And surely, if the lives of Christians were such as they might and ought to
be, who knows but that they might have been won long ere this? We trade and
traffic with them in many places, and they care not to deceive us, and we
care as little to deceive them: They take hold of this, and other such great
scandals, and that is one great cause of the continuance of their hardness.
God intends this our provocation of them, by giving us the Gospel: For this is
that provocation which the Apostle so much urges, Romans 11. When the Father
offers a piece of Bread to his Child, if the Child be sullen, and refuse it,
the Father will offer it to a Dog, and the Child seeing that, will catch at
it, he will have it himself rather then the Dog shall have it. When our
Savior says, It is not meet to take the Childrens Bread, and cast it unto
Dogs: Is it not a plain intimation that saving Grace is as Bread, the Jews
the Children, and the Gentiles Dogs? God offered this saving Grace to the
Jews, they like sullen Children, refused this Bread, God gives it to us being
Gentiles, and as it were Dogs, that the Children or Jews seeing this, might
catch at it, as being their own Portion, that the Dogs might not have it
from them.

happily not one to a thousand; yet being considered in themselves; they are a
great number, and indeed infinite, as Revel. 7.9. A great multitude that no Man
can number, of all Nations, and Kinreds, and People of the World. But you will
say, Is it so rendered that who will may have it? We answer, It is tendered that
whosoever believes it, shall enjoy it; but to believe is not in a Man's own
will and power; none believe but those that God bestows this grace of Faith
upon; and therefore that conceit of universal Grace, which intends not only a
proffer on Gods part, but also power enough on Man's part to apprehend it if he
will himself, is a peevish dream.

Lastly, This teaches us, concerning this Sacrament, that we are to be
prepared unto, and that our Savior speaks of in these very words, that
whosoever we are, be we wise or simple, be we bond or free, we must come to be
partakers of this Sacrament, the Seal of this saving Grace: Let us bring Faith
with us to apprehend it, and believe it, and then come and well-come. There is
no outward respect of our Nation or Condition whatsoever it be, that debarres
us from it: But be sure that thou have Faith in the Blood of Christ, else thou
art none of the many here spoken of, thou shall not obtain this benefit of the
remission of thy sins. Let us therefore every one examine our selves,
whether we have this grace of Faith, or no: If we have it, we may and must come
to this Sacrament, to have it further confirmed within us; yea, if our Faith be
but weak, and that we have but some beginnings of Faith, let us not be afraid,
if it be true, and from the Heart, God will accept it and us; but if upon due
examination we find that we have no true Faith, let us not flatter our selves,
and presume to come in hope of any good thereby; it shall be so far from
doing us any good, that it shall do us a great deal of har me; It shall be
Judgment to us and condemnation.

The end of the ninth Lecture.
THE TENTH LECTVRE UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
WE are now according to our wonted manner, to turn out of the Catechism, and
to proceed in the argument of our preparation to the Lords Supper, the next
Lords day being a Communion day, wherein we purpose, God willing, to meet
together at the same. We left in Math, 26.28. This is my Blood of the New
Testament, that is shed for many, for the remission of sins; which place, as
I showed you, does most copiously and plainly prove unto us this title, that
belongs to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, namely, that it is called the New
Testament; for that is the head we did reduce this place unto: Wherein we have
showed you, First, concerning the New Testament, the Matter and Subject here
spoken of. Secondly, we have shown concerning the Blood of the New Testament,
whereby this the Testament is confirmed and sealed: This is the Blood of the
New Testament. Thirdly, the benefit both of this Testament, and of the Blood
of Christ: Remission of sins. Lastly, the Persons that are partakers of this
benefit: That is many: The whole World of Believers: This is the Blood of the
New Testament, shed for many. So much then shall suffice to be spoken of these
words, as they are considered absolutely in themselves, so as they concern the
death of Christ. We are now further to consider of them as they are
respectively intended and applied to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, for you
shall understand that our Savior here performed two businesses in one: First,
he shows the redemption of the believing World, by his saving Death: This is
my Blood, shed, etc. This Blood of the New Testament, it is the only procuring
cause of remission of sins, and of the Salvation of you, and of all that are,
or shall be saved: and to this effect tends all that hitherto has been
spoken. The second thing our Savior performs here in this case, is the
confirmation or applycation of this his saving Death, to the Disciples, and the
rest of the believing World, in and by the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: This
is the Blood of the New Testament, etc. That is to say, This Sacrament which I
now have in hand, is a special and excellent means whereby to apply this my
saving Death to you, and to every believing Receiver: And thus, and in this
sense we are now to treat upon it. This is the Blood, etc. As it is spoken
respectively by applycation to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: Thus we must
conceive of it that it is uttered by our Savior, by a kind of majesty, and
special grace of speech: This, these Elements, this Bread and Wine, this
Sacrament, this Action we now have in hand: For indeed it imports an
institution of a new Sacrament, and of a most excellent Sacrament: As if he
should say, All the Faithful that ever have lived from the beginning of the
World, have had some Sacrament or other, as the Cognizance of their profession,
as the nourishment of their Faith, as outward testifications of the mutual
Covenant betwixt God and them: But this, says our Savior, is the Blood of the
New Testament. This is a new Sacrament, such as none of them ever had; this is
a more lively and sensible representation of your reconciliation unto God, then
ever the Faithful before you were made partakers of: This is the Blood of the
New Testament. To make our Savior his meaning plain and perfect to every
Man's understanding, we must supply two Rules that are here implied and presumed
upon: The first is this, That every Covenant betwixt God and Man, must be
confirmed by some outward sign and Sacrament. The second, that there must be a
due proportion, betwixt the Covenant that is confirmed, and the Sacrament, that
does confirm the Covenant. The first Rule, every Covenant betwixt God and
Man, must be ratified and confirmed by some Sacrament and outward sign: God
deals with us herein in great wisdom, and mercy, meeting both with our
Infidelity, and with our Apostacy, our slipperinesse to fall from him: with
our Infidelity, because we hardly will believe him, unless he bind himself
to us, by some outward sign; with our slipperinesse to fall from him, because
we easily start and budge from him, except we be bound to him by some outward
sign, as by a continual remembrancer, calling upon us to hold fast our hope we
have in him, The second Rule: There must be a due proportion betwixt the
Covenant that is sealed, and the Sacrament which ratifies and seals it: Old
and weak Covenants, and well enough if they be sealed with old and weaker
Sacraments: But says our Savior, This is a New Testament, and then here must
be a new Sacrament: An old Covenant, an old Sacrament: A new Covenant, a new
Sacrament. A new Sacrament, and a new Covenant agree: But a new Sacrament, and
an old Covenant are mis-matcht: they must be sorted in their kind, our Savior
gives the Rule, Mark 2.21, 22. which by application may be alleged in the
case: No Man puts new wine into an old Vessel; etc. Old Sacraments do not
agree with the New Testament, let them go with the old: This New Testament,
must have new Sacraments. This Testament, says our Savior, which I come to
make, and to seal with my Blood, Is the New Testament, and therefore here is
also anew Sacrament: The Testament being better then the former, the Sacrament
must therefore be better then the former: And here it is that he speaks with
such a majesty, as if he should say, This is such as never any of the
Faithful had before my coming in the Flesh. And so much for the fitting of
this speech of our Saviors to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: For in the
words there is no difference: Apply them to the Death of Christ, and then the
case is plain, This is my Blood, etc. That is, My Blood of the New Testament
is effectual for the forgiveness of sins. Apply them to the Sacrament, and in
a Sacramental sense, It is the very Blood of Christ, shed for the remission of
sins. We come to such observations as here arise for our instruction, when it
is said, This is my Blood, speaking of the Sacrament: hence observe, that

This is my Blood of the New Testament. Our Savior appropriates this Sacrament
to this Testament only, 1 Cor. 10.21. It is called there by the name of the
Lords Table, which very name proves the point in hand, the Lords Table, that
is, the Table of the Lord Jesus, not only such a Table, as where in Christ was
the Food fed upon, for so he was in some sort in the Sacraments of the former
Testament, but such as wherein the Lord Jesus himself was bodily present in
his Flesh, such as he himself with his bodily presence did speed, ordain, and
institute for a memorial of those things he had done and suffered already,
for the work of our Redemption as a Mediator, and therefore may well be called
the Table of the New Testament, as Luke 22.20. Christ already come, Christ
bodily present amongst us, this belongs to the New Testament, Hebr. 10.7, etc.
Lo I come, In the beginning of the Book it is written of me, etc. He takes
away the first, that he may establish the second. The bodily coming of our
Savior in the Flesh was the establishment of the New Testament, Christ being
bodily present in the Flesh at this Table in the Flesh, because his Flesh was
that only which he was bodily present in, and the Table being spread for a
memorial that he was come, and suffered in the Flesh, is therefore proper
only to the New Testament, 1 Cor. 11.20. It is there called The Lords Supper.
Why is it so called, but because it was instituted at the last Supper which the
Lord in the days of his Flesh made, and which he did appoint as a witness of
his Will and Testament for ever? Now what is the state of the New Testament,
but the state of saving Grace, which the Lord Jesus has brought unto us from
Heaven, when he came amongst us, lived amongst us, dyned amongst us, and supped
amongst us? But that state of saving Grace which he preached and published with
with his own Mouth, in the time of his Life? But that state of saving Grace
which he sealed and confirmed with his own Blood at his Death? But that state
of saving Grace which he as it were in the twy-light betwixt the day of his
Life, and the hour of his Death did ratify and confirm by this Sacrament of
the Supper? This state of saving Grace, is the New Testament, and therefore the
Lords Supper is the Sacrament of the New Testament, 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup of
Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? The
Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? Here you
see the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is the Communion of the Body and Blood of
Christ. In the Sacraments of the Old Testament, his Blood was shadowed: In the
New Testament, it is really communicated. In the Sacraments of the former
Testament, Christ was in some measure really communicated in his Body and Blood
to the Faithful, but darkely, weakly and sparingly: But here he is
communicated unto them clearly, powerfully, and bountifully. In a word, Christ
his Body and Blood was communicated to the Faithful under the former
Testament, in the Sacrament to be broken, to be shed: But here in the New
Testament, his Body as being already broken, and his Blood as already shed:
This belongs to the New Testament, and therefore this is the Sacrament of the
New Testament. In Luke 22.19. Do this in remembrance of me, speaking of this
Sacrament. Now remembrance is properly of the things that are past: Christ has
ordained this as a remembrance of his doings already past, the matter of our
Salvation, as of a matter already fulfilled. This is the voice of the Gospel
of the New Testament, Christ is already come: as the voice of the Law was,
Christ is to come. That I say is the voice of the New Testament: And therefore
the Sacrament of the Supper, is a Sacrament of the New Testament, 1 Cor. 11.26.
As often as you eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup; you show forth the
Lords Death till he come. He says not, you foreshew, that was for the
Sacraments of the Old Testament, but you do show, that is, you declare,
publish, and express the Death of Christ: You celebrate, show forth, and
sensibly act his Death, the thing before acted upon the Cross.

The Reasons of the point are these: Hebr. 9.5. and 12.24. that is, Christ is
the maker good of the Covenant of Grace betwixt God and Man (for to be the
mediator of the Testament, is to make good a Testament) Christ did this by his
Blood, by his Intercession and Redemption; there is the Office of our Savior,
here is his task, here is the business he is to be employed in: He was not
careless in going about his own business; He was not a medler in other Men's
matters; He would not make Laws for others, but for his own; He would not set
his Seal to another Man's Testament, but to his own: This Testament is his, he
made it good, he ratified it with his own Blood: The Sacrament was his,
because he instituted it, this being presumed upon, that he would not meddle
with other Men's matters, make Laws for others, or set his Seal to other Men's
Bonds, and so forth. The Sacrament being ordained by him to be a Seal thereof,
is therefore the Sacrament of the New Testament.

The Covenant of saving Grace, and that is, Hebr. 10.16, 17. I will put my
Laws into their Hearts, and in their Minds will I write them: Their sins and
iniquities will I remember no more. The word whereunto this Sacrament is
annexed, is the Covenant of Grace; such as the word is, such is the Sacrament:
But the word is the New Testament, therefore the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
must be of the New Testament only.

Cor. 3.6. God has made us able Ministers of the New Testament. Such as the
ministration is, such must be the holy things they administer: The ministration
is of the New Testament, therefore the holy things administered, the Word and
Sacraments are of the New Testament. Aaron and his Sonns were Ministers of the
holy things of the Law: Christ and his Apostles are Ministers of the Gospel,
and of the Covenant of Grace. Aaron and his Sons must not meddle with the
Sacraments of the Gospel: Christ and his Apostles must not meddle with the
Sacraments and Sacrifices of the Old Testament. They must keep themselves to
their own: Such as the ministration is, such are the things administered. Our
whole ministration is of the New Testament, and therefore the holy things
administered, as the Sacraments, are proper to the New Testament only.

of the New Testament, they are proper to that, and therefore the Sacraments,
where by it is signed, sealed, and represented, and set forth unto us, must be
of the New Testament: For the Blood is Christ's: This is my Blood, etc. The
Testament is Christ's, he made it good: The Sacrament is Christ's, he ordained
and instituted it, and he does in this speech, annex it to his Blood
inseparably, and withal to the Testament inseparably, and so consequently, he
annexes the Sacrament inseparably to the New Testament: And surely when our
Savior says, This is my Blood of the New Testament, he speaks it as in a
proper sense of the Blood in his Body: so in a Sacramental sense, of his Blood
in the Sacrament, he gives us to understand, that the Sacrament in a
sacramental sense is, the Blood of the New Testament, as the Blood of Christ
in a proper sense is the Blood of his own Body.

The Uses of the Point follow:

and dwelt amongst us. Besides this, he taught them the Doctrine of Salvation,
but it was shaddowed in Mysteries, in a kind of dark Cloud: But we see it in
so clear a Glass, that every Man that runs may read it. Yet farther, God
has given us Christ more fully, the Word and Doctrine of Salvation more fully,
and the Sacraments of the New Testament more lively, senceably, teachable,
spiritual, and heavenly, then the Sacraments of the Old Testament, where they
are more lively representations of Christ, and more palpable and pregnant
figures, of the fruit and benefit purchased by his sufferings: when they under
the former Testament were to spell Christ in the eating of the Paschall Lamb,
it was a hard matter for them so to do: But when, we come to do this, in this
Sacrament, in the breaking of the Bread, and pouring forth of the Wine, where
the words of Institution are added thereunto, as also the Doctrine of
Salvation, concerning the Death of Christ, if we cannot now spell him, our
blindness is horrible. This is that glorious Ministry the Apostle speaks
of, 2 Cor. 3.7, etc. The ministration of the Law was glorious, but the
ministration of the Spirit is more glorious: This is in an other manner, he
gives two reasons for it: The one, It is the ministration of righteousness:
The other, the ministration of the Spirit. The ministration of the Law, by
reason of Man's corruption, was Death: The ministration of the Gospel, is Life:
Here is matter of Righteousness, the free mercy of God in Christ. That was of
the Letter, this of the Spirit. Look what was delivered to them in the Word
and Sacraments, it was done outwardly, there was not that near acquaintance of
the Word and Spirit as now is. It is common to the Gospel to be generally
attended by the Spirit of Grace, and there it is the ministry of the Spirit.
When we are to preach the Word, and to administer the Sacraments, the Spirit
attends upon these Ordinances, to sanctify to the Heart and Conscience of the
Believer, those things are tendered unto him.

Moses, dyed without mercy: And what shall become of us, if we trample the
Blood of the New Testament under our Feet? If we neglect so great Salvation? If
those that contemned the Sacraments of the Old Testament, were in a damnable
case, In what a fearful condition are we, if we defile the Blood of this New
Testament? which we shall do, if we come not with prepared Hearts, with
resolution to serve God, to break off our sins, to be raised up in
consideration of God Promise in Christ, and with a full purpose and
determination for hereafter to become new Creatures, and therefore as we would
not bring Damnation upon us, so let us be careful, that we are not omissiue
herein.



come as the Papists, and think that for the deed done they shall be
justified, and find good will, as if the action of it self were of effect,
that it works Grace, whether they have Faith and Repentance, or no. The
Sacrament of the Supper, is the Sacrament of the New Testament: The state of
the New Testament, requires God to be worshipped in Spirit and Truth, not
formally, but in Faith and Repentance. Thirdly, it reproues those that come to
it uncharitably, such must not come till they have dispensed with their high
stomachs, and are reconciled to their Brethren. This Sacrament is the
Sacrament of the New Testament: The New Testament is a Covenant of Peace, not
only betwixt God and Man, but betwixt Man and Man: Not only glory unto God
on high, but peace upon Earth, good will toward Men: And such as come
uncharitably, they are Usurpers, they meddle with that they have nothing to do
withal. Fourthly, it reproues those that are unregenerate, they conceit with
themselves, that howsoever they understand not the matter of Salvation, though
they have no persuasion of Gods love, yet that the Sacrament may work this.
No, they are deceived, the Sacrament makes us not good, but confirms us in the
state of Righteounsnesse, in that good which God has already wrought in us.
The Word and Spirit makes us new Creatures, the Sacraments strengththen us
already made. This Sacrament is a Sacrament of the New Testament, and therefore
belongs to such as have part in that Covenant of Grace: Such as are
unregenerate, have no interest in the Covenant, and therefore no part in this
business. Lastly, it reproues Pharisaicall and Iustitiarie Receivers, that
stand upon their own Righteousness: This is a Sacrament of the New Testament,
the New Testament is the Covenant of Grace, free pardon, and remission of sins,
through the Blood of Christ: Whosoever then stand upon their own
Righteousness, and think to be saved by the least measure, part, or
contribution of their own works or merits, have no part in the New Testament,
and so have nothing to do with this Sacrament: This is only for such as have
their share in the Testament, that apply and cast themselves upon God: Here I
am a wretched and damnable sinner, I have nothing to say for my self, I have
deserved thy wrath, I cast my self upon thy promises, for the free remission
of my sins, in the Blood of the Lord Jesus, there is my plea. Thus come and
welcome: But otherwise, as Peter said to Simon Magus, thou have no part in this
business. So much for the first point, that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
is proper to the state of the New Testament.

In the second place, whereas in is said, that the Sacrament is of the New
Testament: Hence observe thus much, that

Doct. 2. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is an effectual Pledge and Seal
of the whole work and Covenant of Grace.

We shall not need to seek far for proof, but only to the words of
institution, here and elsewhere used: That which is in Luke 22.20. This Cup is
the New Testament in my Blood which is shed for you, some read it, and so the
original of the Text requires, because of the Particle that: That it is spoken
in reference: to that in Ierem. 31.33. I will put my Law in their inward parts,
and write it in their Hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my
People; I will forgive their iniquity, and remember their sinner no more. This
is the New Testament now administered: He says, not a part of it, but that
whole Testament which the Lord there promised by the Prophet, is conferred unto
us in this Sacrament: So look how far the Testament extends that God made,
so far this Sacrament extends it self. The Testament extends to the matter
of our Justification, that he will forgive our iniquity: And to the matter of
our Sanctification, that he will put his Law into our Hearts: and therefore the
Sacrament being an effectual pledge of that whole Testament, does as well
extend it self to the matter of our Justification, as to the matter of our
Sanctification, in both which consists the Covenant of Grace. And that which
our Savior says, Luke 22.19. Do this in remembrance of me, proves as much.
He says, not in remembrance of my continuance, and works of this and that
act, but of all that ever I have done and suffered for the accomplishment of
your Redemption, in remembrance of whole Christ, as a Man would say. And
whereas it is here said, and likewise by the other Evangelists, For Remission
of sins: This proves the point by the nature of the phrase, and likewise by
the matter it self: By the nature of the phrase, Remission of sin, is but
one part of the Covenant, part being put for the whole, as I showed you in the
opening of the Text: But much more by the matter, for the truth is this, That
God never remits any Man's sin, but he regenerates him: And therefore, if it
be effectual for the one, it is also effectual for the other: If for our
Justification, then also for our Sanctification. Last of all, when it is said
by our Savior, in Mather, Mark, Luke, and Paul, That it is the Testament in
his Blood, it shows that it is a pledge of the whole Covenant of Grace: For
the Blood of Christ is the cause of our Justification, and also of our
Sanctification: The cause of our Justification, Romans 5.9. The cause of our
Sanctification, 1 Pet. 1.2. That according to the foreknowledge of God the
Father, through Sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of
the Blood of Jesus Christ. The Blood is effectual both to our Justification
and Sanctification: The Sacrament in a Sacramental sense, is the Blood of
Christ, and therefore in a Sacramental sense is effectual, as well to our
Justification, as to our Sanctification: It is an effectual Seal of the whole
work and Covenant of Grace.

The Reasons of this are these:

Israel? Of their departure out of Egypt. But was that all? No, it was also a
token, that God would receive them to mercy; that he would not only deliver
them out of Aegupt, but would also bring them into Canaan. The principal thing
we look for in the Sacrament, is not our deliverance out of Egypt, from the
slavery and bondage of sin, but that he will carry us thorough Temptations,
against our Corruptions, Satan's oppostions, the inticements and allurements of
the World, thorough the Red Sea, and Wilderness of this World, thorough all
afflictions, and will not leave us till he has brought us to our heavenly
Canaan, a place of spiritual rest and happiness.



and sealed up in this Sacrament.





And the hardness of his Heart, which makes him further from Sanctification:
And therefore he that comes in Faith, receives both acquittance from the guilt
of sin, which is his Justification; and strength against his sin, which is
his Sanctification.

If any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5. They that are in
Christ, have crucified the Flesh, with the Lusts thereof, Gal. 5.24. Whersoeuer
the Heart is justified by the free pardon and remission of sin, there also is
it sanctified to perform all holy obedience: That we being delivered from our
Enemies, might serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our
life. Redemption there goes before the service of God: And you see that the
Prophet ioynes them together in Ps. 32. Blessed is the Man whose sins are
pardoned, and in whose Spirit there is no guile: Justification in the first
part of the Verse, and Sanctification in the latter. In the first branch is
remission of sins, Justification: In the second, holiness of life and
Sanctification. And therefore let no Man flatter himself, as to think he is
justified, and has found mercy, unless he find some true degree of
Sanctification: God has not forgiven thy sin, unless thou have in some sort
received a Heart and affection to cleave unto him; unless he has given thee a
care and conscience to serve him: and again, if thou do find some measure of
true Sanctification, never doubt but that the Lord has pardoned thy sin, and
has received thee to mercy. Though thy sins be great, and thou see not
that God has forgiven them, yet be persuaded Sanctification is a true effect
of Justification: If thou find a true endeavor to fear and serve him in
all holy obedience, be sure he has had mercy on thee to forgive thee.

of Gods love in Christ, that sin is forgiven, does comfort our Hearts
spiritually a great dealemore: How sweet is matter of Justification? As Wine
refreshes the Heart, so the assurance of the pardon of sin, comforts the
Soul. Here is also Bread, which strengthens the Heart; what greater strength
is there then that, when the Heart is strengthened by Grace, when we are settled
in a steadfast purpose to lead a godly life, when he establishes us with his
free Spirit? The Bread does not so much strengthen our natural life, as the
blessing we receive in this Sacrament, the sanctifying Grace of God, our
spiritual life in the ways of godliness. These things we must raise up our
minds unto; we must not think that these Elements are idle signs, but
powerful to seal many excellent things unto us, if we have Hearts to discern
such excellencies as the Lord therein has treasured up for us. Let us discern
in these Elements, matter of our Justification and Sanctification, matters of
excellent comfort and strength, the true comforts and strength of God, against
our sins, and against the temptations of Satan. Here is Wine to comfort our
Hearts, but God to comfort our Souls much more: Here is Bread to strengthen
us, but the Bread of God to strengthen us much more: The Grace of Justification
to comfort us against sin already committed; the Grace of Sanctification to
strengthen us against sin raging in our mortal Bodies. So then we must
consider with our selves these things, we must be raised up, and prepare our
selves to be quickened accordingly, that we may comfortably receive the things
delivered in this Sacrament of the Supper, the things also shadowed in these
Elements

want I say of this assurance causes many faylings in our state, both of Faith
and of obedience; and the want of preparation that we may be fitted to this
Sacrament, that therein we may discern Christ, and hunger after Grace, and
receive both the matter of Justification and Sanctification, is one cause why
we want this assurance.

Let us therefore go our way (as our Savior says) and sin no more, least a
worse thing befall us. Now we are washed by the Grace of Justification from our
sins, let us not like the Swine, wallow again in the mire of finne: Now we
are loosed from the Fetters and Bonds of sin, from the Intanglement and
Snares of Satan, let us not entrap our selves again; let us not like a
graceless Prisoner (to day delivered) use such courses, as may bring us to the
same condemnation to morrow, but esteem our liberty very dear and precious.
We are reconciled to God, our debts are paid, let us not run in with him again
so much as in us lies, but let us resolve, pray, and endeavor our selves after
the things that concern our peace, thus graciously confirmed unto us; and
avoid all such as may hinder the same. And though we get not the upper hand of
our selves at the first, yet in time we shall find a senceable increase of
Grace in us: Let us know if we be faithful, and follow after these things, God
is faithful, and will make them good unto us.

The Use is this: That seeing God vouchsafes this mercy, that here is given us
a final acquittance of all our debts and sins, seeing he gives us his
Promise and Grace, and puts a pledge into our Hands, that he is our God, that
he will forgive us, and remember our iniquities no more, seeing he has
promised to write his Law in our Hearts, and to put his fear in our inward
parts: let us go away changed from the filthiness of Flesh and Spirit; let us
wait upon God, rest upon his Promises; let us know he is faithful, and what he
has promised, shall be performed; if we believe his good words let us believe
his deeds; if when he says, our sins are pardoned, then much more when he
gives this Bread and Wine, as a sign and pledge thereof. Thus let us labor to
be fitted against the next Lords day: let us meditate on these things, that we
may come preparedly unto this holy Table: let us labor to partake of the
Covenant of Grace: we may say, O Lord how often have we bin at thy Table, and
yet never the better: we never understood it before: we now find this Sacrament
to be of the New Testament, a Seal of the whole Covenant of Grace, of our
Justification and our Sanctification: a pledge unto us that our sins are
pardoned, and that thou will put thy Law into our Hearts, and wilt write it in
our inward parts. These things heretofore we have not considered, let us now
take them to Heart, repent us of our former faylings, and so address our
selves, that we may come with our right Wedding Garment upon us, and so be
welcome into thy presence.

THE ELEVENTH LECTVRE UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
BEcause of the Sacrament the next Sabbath, God willing, to be administered, we
are therefore to spend this Exercise upon such matter as may make for our fit
preparation thereunto, for that is the course which hitherto we have observed,
and which we propounded in the beginning. So that we are to go on, where we
left the last day of preparation, in the six and twentieth of Matthew, and the
latter part of the eight and twentieth Verse: This is my Blood of the New
Testament, that is shed for many for the remission of sins. We have shown
the last day how these words are to be understood, with refference to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and therein we observed, as you may remember,
that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is proper and peculiar to the New
Testament, as here our Saviors words are, This is my Blood of the New
Testament.

Secondly, We showed you, that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is an
effectual Seal and Pledge of the whole Covenant of Grace, that is to say,
both of the matter of our Justification, and likewise of the matter of our
Sanctification. Now we are to speak in the last place, touching the Persons
here mentioned, so far as they have their interest in the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, so as the things themselves, that are here spoken, are intended
in a double sense:

First, absolutely to the Death of Christ it self.

Secondly, respectively to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

So the Persons that are here spoken of, are to be considered answerably in
both these senses:

First, as they have their interest and part in the Death of Christ. And
secondly, as they have their part and Interest in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper.

We have spoken of the Persons in the first sense heretofore, as they have
their interest in the Death of Christ: We are now to speak of them as they
have interest in the Lords Supper, and for to furnish this Text, so far forth
as it makes for our present purpose.

The Persons here spoken of (as you see) are set forth in general terms,
Many: But Luke in his two and twentieth Chapter, and the twentieth Verse,
reports this saying of our Savior, as being spoken with particular reference
and applycation to the Disciples, the Persons only then present at this
business: This is the New Testament in my Blood, shed for you: Matthew says,
for many: Luke, for you: Both one and the same speech of our Savior, and if
we understand them both aright, and expound the one of them by the other, we
shall find a sweet concurring and agreement betwixt the Evangelists themselves,
and likewise much profitable matter, by this their joint testimony, concerning
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

The Sacrament it self, in respect of the institution and use of it, is a
public Ordinance, that is common to many: The whole Church of God, and all the
Faithful from time to time, are to take the benefit, and to make use of it to
the end of the World: and that is one part of Mathew's meaning here, when he
says, for many. But the particular administration of this Sacrament, at that
time when it was first instituted, was peculiar to the Disciples only, as they
only then receiving it; and that is some part of Luke's meaning, when he
says, for you. But yet further also, wheresoever this Sacrament shall be thus
in use, and thus administered, it must be done in an Assembly: Many must be
present at it: And that is the other part of Mathew's meaning, when he says,
for many. On the other side, those Persons to whom it shall be thus
administered, must receive it with particular apply cation: It must be for you:
And likewise by consequent, they must be such Persons, so quallified in some
measure, as the Discipies were: that is to say, They must be Believers, that it
may be truly said of them, as of the Disciples, It is for you: And this is the
other part of Luke's meaning, for you. Take it thus: The Sacrament of it self
in general, is for many, the whole Church of God must make use of it: The
particular administration of it at that time, was for the Disciples, because
they only were the Receivers: But yet further, wheresoever it shall be so
administered, in particular Congregations, there must be many at it, many must
communicate in it, and likewise those many that communicate in it, must be such
as receive it with particular applycation, It must be for you: They must be
Believers, qualified as those Disciples, that it may be truly said of them, as
of the Disciples, This is for you.

This is the strain of our Saviors speech, and this is the according of both
the Evangelists in substance agreeing together; and these be the points, God
willing, we will now insist upon.

The first thing we are to consider, is this, It is for many. I showed you, one
part of Mathew's meaning, was this, namely, That the Sacrament it self, is a
general and public Ordinance for the whole Church to make use of it.

Cor. 11.26. As often as you eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, you show
forth the Lords death till he comes: That is to say: Till he comes to Judgment:
Which is a plain proof that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper was instituted
by our Savior, and left that it might be a perpetual Ordinance of continual
use in the Church of God from time to time to the end of the World.





and those that as yet are not borne; the Lord Jesus intended it to us, as well
as to them that lived in the days of his Flesh; he provided it as the means
even of our Salvation. But this point I only touch as it were by the way.

The second is somewhat more material, and that is this: That it is for many:
that is to say, Not only that many shall have use of it, as of the World, but
that when it is used in a particular Congregation, it must be done in an
Assembly, Many must be met together for this purpose: The point is this:

Cor. 10.16. The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of
Christ? The Wine that we pour out, is it not the Communion of the Blood of
Christ? You see there, the Lords Supper is called by the name of Communion, the
Communion, that is to say, principally of the Faithful with Christ their Head,
but respectively it is intended of that Communion which they have amongst
themselves: Now this is sealed up unto us in this Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, as well as the other, as the Apostle proceeds to show in the
seventeenth verse, where he applies it to this Communion of the Faithful among
themselves: We that are many, are one Bread, and one Body, because we all are
partakers of one Bread. The Bread is one, that is Christ: The partakers are
many, all the Faithful from time to time; but more specially, those that
communicate at the same time in the use of the Sacrament: So that whenever
this Bread is set before us, there must be many present to partake of it: The
words of our Savior, in the first institution of it, enforce it, where be
says: Drink ye all of this: The Rule is perpetual, not only for that
Communion then celebrated, but for all afterward: Drink ye all of it: How can
all be said to drink, if not many there, if not an Assembly at it? In the two
and twentieth of Luke, and the seventeenth Verse, the Text says, He took the
Cup, and gave thanks, and said, Take this, and divide it among you: Now how
should the Disciples divide it among themselves, how should the Faithful also
divide it amongst themselves in the particular use of it, unless there be a
competent Assembly amongst them, that one may divide it to another? Likewise
the Rule of the Apostle, for the reformation of the Abuses in the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, confirms this Point. In the Church of Corinth, many abuses
were crept in, 1 Cor. 11.21, etc. one amongst the rest was this, That they came
together to eat, but yet some did disorder themselves by eating and drinking
before hand, before the Congregation was all come in: The Apostle reproues and
reformes this abuse and corruption amongst them, and wishes them in the three
and thirtieth Verse, That when they were come together, they should tarry one
for another. Why so? That there might be a competent and full Assembly to
communicate together in those holy Mysteries of God: And this the Apostle
grounds upon our Saviors institution, as appears in the three and twentieth
Verse, thereby confirming that which we alleged before, namely, that our
Savior meant so in the institution of this Sacrament, that still when there
was any particular use of it, that many should be met together to communicate
in it. The practice of the Faithful, that likewise gives testimony to this
Truth: For those very Corinthians, though they had much corrupted themselves
in the matter of the Sacrament, yet notwithstanding, they still held this as a
sure principle, that whenever they were to celebrate the Lords Supper, they
were to meet together, as appears in the twentieth Verse: I say, howsoever
when they were met together, they carried themselves not so orderly as they
should, and ought to have done, yet they observed this as a sure Rule, that
there should be an Assembly before they communicated in the Sacrament of the
Supper. In the second Chapter of the Acts, and the two and fourtieth Verse, it
is said, That the Believers continued in the Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship,
and breaking of Bread, and Prayers: Where by breaking of Bread, we are to
understand, the particular use of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as we
shall show more at large hereafter. Now when the Text says, They continued in
the Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, and breaking of Bread: Thereby is
manifestly declared unto us thus much: That the Believers did usually meet
together by whole Assemblyes at the partaking of the Sacrament of the Supper,
as well as at the Preaching of the Word, Prayers, and other holy duties of
Christian fellowship and society: They continued in the Apostles Doctrine,
Fellowship, breaking of Bread, etc. This example we have in hand, is the most
pregnants proof of all. In the first Supper that ever was administered, who
were present? All the Disciples: For they were the charge that our Savior then
had under his hands: The Text says in the twentieth Verse, He sat him down
with the Twelve, he had no more, otherwise they should have been there: He
sat down with the Twelve, therefore they were present: If Judas did slinke
away betwixt the eating of the Passover, and the eating of the Lords Supper,
yet the proofs holds true, that many were present, at the least eleven of
them, and so it is manifest out of the first practice of the Disciples, when it
was first instituted, as also of the Church of God from time to time, in the
Primitive Ages, and so both by the Rule of our Savior, as also of the Apostles
it appears, that this Sacrament is for many, that is to say, that whenever
it is administered, many are to be present, to communicate in it.

The Reasons of the Point are these:

Prou. 9.5. Come, eat of my Bread, and drink of the Wine, which I have
mingled. Which though it be a general call of Wisdom, of the Son of God,
whereby he inuites all to come to the Word, as well as to the Sacrament, yet it
must be understood with particular respect to this Sacrament, it has such a
reference to a Feast we speak of. Lastly, He is most ready to receive many,
even all comers, all that come in obedience and conscience to his Ordinance,
John 6.37. Him that comes to me, I will in no wise east out. And therefore
being such, it requires that many should be present: Whosoever they be that
refuse to come, let them look how they can acquit themselves of forsaking
their own mercy, and of the bounty of the Lord Jesus, for my part I cannot
acquit them.

Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done decently, and in order. Now we know that
where there is not a competent Assembly at an holy Exercise, it is a great
disparagement to the solemnity of it; and surely where there are a sufficient
number of Communicants, it is a great part of the outward solemn observation
of that holy Ordinance.

Luke, and the three and twentieth Verse, The Lord had made a Feast those that
were bid and inuinted, came not, therefore said the Lord to his Servants, Go
out into the Streets and bid the Poor, Lame, Halt, and Blind came in. Well he
did so, and yet there was more room. Then said he, Go out into the Field, and
Hedges, and compel them to come in, that my House may be filled. It is his
delight, his pleasure and good will, that his House should be filled, and
therefore this being his Feast, there is necessarily required the presence of
many at it.

betwixt us? And bind we not our selves so to continue? And as Christ loved us,
so to love one another? And we receive this that we may be nourished in this
love, being more incorporated into Christ, and so one into another. The end of
the Sacrament is the testification of the nourishing of the love of the
Faithful, and how can this be, if they be not present? If but one or two be
present, there can be no more testification of love, but unto them; at least,
they that are absent, can make no testification of it, and therefore the Reason
still holds good, that many must be present.



The Uses of the Point are these:

private because there are but a few present, for many times it is performed,
when there are many People present as beholders; but a private Communion is,
where the Priest that is to deliver it to the People, eats and drinks alone,
and none eats and drinks with him, as usually it is in all places, where the
Church of Rome rules: A horrible profanation of the Lords Supper, and a flat
violating of the practice of our Savior, and a manifest contradiction to the
nature of a Communion, for how can it be so termed, when there be no
Communicants? How do the Faithful here communicate one with another? If there
be any extraordinary worthiness in their Persons, then indeed the beholders
may fare the better; or if there be any extraordinary worthiness in their
Actions; but their Persons or Actions be no more worthy then our Saviors. He
gave it to his Disciples, and bad every one of them eat it for themselves, and
therefore you see a plain violation of the first institution of that
Ordinance, and an abuse of the Sacrament hereby. But they return upon us, why,
have not you your private Communions in England, and in other Reformed
Churches? I answer, we have private Communions, and so have others; but that is
very sparingly, and never but when urgent occasion requires; but besides,
where we have any, it is not as theirs is; the Minister never communicates
alone; as theirs do, but has always some to communicate with him: In case we
go to communicate with the sick, our State inioynes, that there must be many
of us, and therefore not private in their sense, as they understand it: So that
still, whether private or public, there must still be an Assembly, that is, so
many as conveniently may be had. Concerning that matter of private Communion,
as I have observed, the carriage of it has been this, that the sick Man
might receive it, if any were weak, and could no ways come to it, and yet had
a desire to receive, and were fit for it, the Ancient have not stuck to
communicate with them, in the private House, but it was most warily observed:
For this was their usual custom, when the Communion was administered in the
House of God in public, then, and at the same time, the Minister went, and
carried the Communion, privately to the party absent, and so it was but one
and the same Communion; and there is no question, but the party sick, being a
Member of the same Congregation, in Gods acceptance, is a Communicate of the
same, though absent, and so both public and private, is but one and the same
Communion: Thus the private Communion, is the public, for it is not the
difference of the place that breaks off the Communion the sick have with of
the rest of the Congregation, if they desire and thirst after it: But this I
thought good to speak of because the Point leads me to it, and it is provided
by our State, that there must be many.

Another sort of People to be reproved are those, that causelessely absent
themselves from it, they leave the rooms vnsupplyed, and forsake the Lords
Table upon Communion days: I deny not, but sometimes Men may have cause to be
absent, but let every Man examine himself well, let him debate the matter
well, whether he has a good, just, and sufficient cause, or no; for if he have
not such a cause as God approues of, his sin is exceeding great in absenting
himselse. Some absent themselves for the World, Luke 14.18, etc. One said he
had bought a Farm, another a Yoke of Oxen, etc. Sinful Man, shall the World
hinder thee from God? Shall the business of this life, hinder thee from the
matters of thy Salvation? Put the case thou gettest the whole World, by being
at home, and losest thine own Soul by being absent from the Lords Table, O
then what shall it profit thee to get the whole World, and to lose thine own
Soul? Others cannot come, because of their sin, that is to say, because they
have not repented, they are not thoroughly prepared, they are not in charity
with their Brethren, they despair, etc. It is true, here is a just cause that
they must not come, but this is no good cause that therefore they may not come:
A good cause is that which God so approues of in mercy, that though Men be
absent, yet he accepts of them as if they were present, as in other duties,
when he is pleased to dispense with them, because they have such a necessary
hindrance, and so imputes it not as sin unto them. If there be matter of
necessity to withold us, that is a good cause, we may absent our selves
without sin; but if a Man be out of charity, and therefore comes not, here
the cause is as bad, and as they not coming, it is a just cause that he must
not come, but not that he may not come. Simon Magus his Heart was not upright
in the matter of the gifts of the Holy Ghost, and therefore this was a
hindering cause, that he might have no hand in it, but yet this exempted him not
from sin in that case, because the ground was not good. If we be out of
charity, and therefore come not, this is a just cause why we must absent our
selves, but yet this does not free us from the imputation of sin, because our
cause is not good: It is our own fault that we cannot come, and so it doubles
our sin.

inuitation is a charge to come, and therefore we sin if we come not.
Besides, consider in what need we stand of this, we stand in need of comfort,
in need of the sealing up unto us, of the love and favor of God by his Spirit,
of the increase of Grace and Sanctification; these things we stand in need of,
and these things may be had in the Sacrament, if we come obediently: If we be
well prepared, we shall receive much comfort, and shall we forsake our own
good? On the other side, we disable our selves, and make our selves a prey unto
Satan, when we use not those Ordinances whereby we may be fenced against him,
and therefore it must stir us up to look to our selves. The Congregation we
are of, unless we have just cause to absent our selves, let us labor to make
it up a full Assembly, that many of us may assemble together, to celebrate his
Ordinance, to encourage one another in the use of this holy Ordinance.

Luke reports, namely, That it is shed for you. Matthew says, For many; that
is, many shall partake of it, and consequently, that where this shall be
administered, there must be many. Luke he says, It is for you; that is,
wheresoever it is administered, it must be done with particular applycation to
the Parties, and they must be Believers, such as of whom it may be said, It is
for you.

Supper it is to be apprehended with particular applycation to every Receiver:
The words of the institution proves this: Eat ye, drink ye, and do this in
remembrance of me. 1 Cor. 11.28. Let a Man examine himself, and so let him eat
of this Bread, and drink of this Cup. Every Man that comes to the Lords
Table, must examine himself, and so must eat; that is, with particular
applycation, after examination, when he has found himself fit to lay hold on
these Ordinances for his own. The action of the Minister proves the same, his
taking, eating, etc. and likewise his speech to the Receivers, Take this, feed
on him in thy Heart with Faith and Thanksgiving. The action of the Receiver
intends as much, every Man receives for himself, he has Hands of his own,
Mouth, and Stomach of his own; Faith is the Hand, Mouth, and Stomach,
whereby he lays hold, feeds, and digests it. Thus every Man must have a
particular applycation of it to himself, when he comes to receive the Lords
Supper.

whosoever believes in him, shall not perish; that is to say, Every particular
Man. Now the Sacrament, that comes to seal up that promise, and therefore must
be received with particular applycation: All Men must lay their hold on Christ
for themselves, and answerably must communicate in the Sacrament.

and therefore if the Sacrament be to be given to all the Faithful, then
every particular Faithful is to receive it with particular applycation.

I baptize thee. And though here be many together, there but one;
notwithstanding, it is as well to be administered with particular applycation,
as that of Baptism: The nature and use of the Sacraments is alike.

they eat and drink unworthily, therefore they eat and drink Judgment to
themselves; and therefore by consequent it holds, that the benefit that comes
to the Faithful that eat worthily, it comes by their particular applycation of
it to themselves; yea, the want of this particular applycation is that which
makes them eat Judgment to themselves, 1 Cor. 11. For they are guilty; not
because the Lords Body is not there tendered, but because they discern it not
by and for themselves.

things shall be sufficient refutation of them. I ask them, Can a dead Man
eat, and drink, or receive benefit by eating, and drinking? No: And much less
by the eating of others. And again, when our Savior bids them eat, it is flat
against this error; the benefit is to them that eat, and therefore, if the dead
can eat, they may have benefit; if otherwise, they can expect no good in this
business.

that goes betwixt the Faithful Soul, and our Savior, or the Spirit of God
in this case. This is the meditation we must bring with us.

This is for you. In the 1 Cor. 11.28. you know the Apostle says, And so let
him eat: that is, after examination, as he finds Faith in his Heart. In the 1
Cor. 5.11. Eat not with such, etc. It is a prohibition, that we should not
communicate with ungodly Men, much less then in the Sacrament if we can avoid
them: But the prohibition stands for the parties themselves, that being such as
is there mentioned, they should not therefore come to eat with Gods children in
the things they have nothing to do.

Judas present, and yet he not a Believer?

Drink ye all of this: though he was not a Believer, yet he was a Professor,
and made as goodly a show, as the best of them (as we know Hypocrites are not
behind-hand with Gods Children in that point) and without question Judas did
this, as appears by the Text, when our Savior said, One of you shall betray
me. Judas as well as the rest, answered, Is it I? So said all the rest of the
Disciples, amongst which, Judas was one: Though all forsake thee, yet will not
I forsake thee. So that he was a professed Believer, though not a true
Believer; we cannot see the Heart: If they make profession, and we see nothing
to the contrary, we are so to esteem of them.

Judas was a Devil, John 6. John 13. why then did he administer the Sacrament
unto him amongst the rest?



The Reasons of the Point are these:

They that believe, shall not perish: And therefore none ought to communicate
but Believers.

Mark 16.16. Acts 8.39. Philip said unto the Eunuch, If thou beleeuest, thou
may be baptized: At the least a profession of Faith is required.

Israelites, to partake in it.





you? Do you find the fruits of Faith in holiness of life and conversation?
Then come and welcome. If otherwise you find not this, more or less, assuredly
you have no part nor portion in this business. Many scorn to be examined,
specially the elder sort, they are loath to have their infirmities, their
weakness, insufficiency, and ignorance to be known. Proud Hearts, they had
rather go to Hell, then to have their infirmities discovered. But all in
particular must examine themselves: and because they that are not of the
Ministry cannot so search themselves as we can, therefore they must come unto
us, and if we upon trial say unto them, Now you are fit, then they may come
with cheerfulness; Gods Messenger upon the conference had with them, has bid
them come, and therefore they may come with much more cheerfulness, and
certainly shall find much more profit. But what measure of Faith is required,
will some say? Surely this I will speak; no measure of Faith that Man can
attain, will serve in Gods Justice, but any measure shall serve in the
acceptance of Gods Mercy; If true Faith, though never so little and weak, be
of good cheer, it shall save thee; Let it proceed from a good cause, and yield
good fruit within thee, and then as I said, though weak and small, yet it is
accepted of God in Christ. It was the case of these Disciples at the same time:
Were they Men of great Faith? No, of small Faith: for the most part were
ignorant, at the least, doubting of the Resurrection of Christ, without which
all Faith is in vain, at the least, they were not so thoroughly persuaded as
they ought to be, and yet well welcome, in those beginnings and rudiments of
Christian Faith: He administered the Sacrament unto them. And therefore let us
look our Faith be true, and let us desire and groan after more, and then
though it be mixed with many doubtings and failings, yet the Lord will accept
it, and in mercy will cover our infirmities in the obedience of Christ, and so
we shall find the fruit of saving Faith in the use of this Sacrament: He shall
make it good unto us for all saving purposes. (*)

The end of the eleventh Lecture.
THE TWELFTH LECTVRE UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
WE are now to divert and turn aside into the Argument of the Lords Supper,
specially against this season of the year above all other, wherein not only
those which are sincere in Religion, but even those that are counterfeit in
Religion, pretend a kind of conscience to come to receive the Lords Supper:
The fist head that we reduced all those things which we purposed to propound
concerning the doctrine of the Lords Supper, were the names and titles that are
given to it, we have showed four of them, namely, the Lords Table, the Lords
Supper, the Communion, the New Testament: now we are to proceed to a fifth name
or title that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is styled withal; that is, the
memorial or remembrance of Christ's death: though the Sacrament be not
expressly and in so many terms so called in any one place of Scripture; yet
it is very necessarily and directly gathered both from the words of our Savior
himself, as also from the words of the Apostle Paul: from the words of our
Savior, Luke 22.19. Do this in remembrance of me: but much more plainly out
of the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 11.26. You show forth the Lords death till he
come: the eating of this bread and the drinking of this cup is the showing or
setting forth of the Lords death till he come: And these are the words that
we purpose, 1 Cor. 11.26.
God willing, to insist upon for our proceeding in this business, 1 Cor.
11.26. For as often as you shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, you show
the Lords death till he come. You know that names are justly given unto things,
according to the nature of the things named: what is the nature of this
Sacrament? the Apostle shows here, that to eat this bread and to drink this
cup, is to show forth the death of Christ by way of remembrance till he come:
therefore this is a fit and proper name to this Sacrament, the memorial or
remembrance of Christ's death. Now because as you see this Text spends it self
wholly in this very argument, therefore we will take it whole before us: and
first we will show the consistance of the body of the Text in it self:
Secondly, the meaning of the words; and thirdly, the parts of the Text, and so
proceed to the doctrines.

First, consistance of the whole body of the Text stands thus: These
Corinthians to whom the Apostle writes this Epistle, were newly converted to
the faith of Christ by Paul's ministry, and they made profession of this their
faith by the use of Gods saving ordinances, particularly by the use of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper: Satan according to his wonted malice when he saw
he could not utterly deprive them, nor keep them from the use of this notable
means of grace, he labors cunningly to infect and stain it, with sundry
corruptions, thereby to defile them in the use of this Sacrament, and so to
make it unprofitable to them: and surely in a short time he prevailed greatly
on their weakness herein, and brought in much disorder and abuse amongst them;
yea such gross abuses, that they poisoned their holy assemblies, verse 17.
they came together not for profit, but for hurt, whereas this Sacrament was
ordained for their profit and good, by this means it turned to their hurt; such
gross abuses they were as brought down Gods sensible Judgments upon them,
verse 30. for this cause many are weak and sick amongst you, and many sleep:
such as in a manner nullified the Sacrament to them, verse. 20. this is not to
eat the Lords Supper, you do so corrupt and stain it, that in effect you do
not eat it: one special corruption amongst them was this, verse 21. that they
tarried not one for another, that so they might communicate together, but did
prevent one another, they came to the Lords Table as to a scambling Feast,
first come, first served, a horrible abuse in the holy and religious feast of
the Lords Supper. The Apostle so soon as he heard of these abuses, in zeal
for Gods glory, in conscience of his own duty, and in a holy jealousy for the
pure use of the Lords Ordinances, and in a fatherly care which he had over
these Corinthians, whom he had lately begotten to the faith, presently takes a
course to reform and redress these abuses: and as the nature of all right and
true reformations does require, that when things are out of square, they are to
be refined and renewed, according to the first original: so the Apostle being
to redress the abuses of the Lords Supper amongst them, he brings them back
to the first institution, to the first Lords Supper that ever was, and by that
pattern frames his reformation: and there he rehearses the institution, verse
23. This bread is my body, etc. and this cup is my blood, etc. there is the
repetition of the institution: the application for reformation is in the 26.
verse, For as often as you eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, you show
forth the Lords death till he come. The sum of all, so far as it concerns
our present purpose is briefly this; as if the Apostle should have said to
these Corinthians; O you Corinthians, you are much to blame that you suffer
your selves to be so stained with so many corruptions in the Lords Supper, by
name this is one, that you tarry not one for another to communicate together,
but one prevents another, the rich eat before the poor come, as if we had
more care of our bellies, than of Gods Religion and Christ's sufferings, this is
a gross abuse, it was not so in the beginning: In the first supper that Christ
instituted, then all the Disciples were present, and did lovingly communicate
together, and therefore if ever you look to celebrate the Lords Supper with
comfort and benefit to your own souls, you must do as they did, reform this
error, and tarry one for another: Consider more particularly what a special
Item the Lord Jesus gave them then, Do this in remembrance of me, verse 23,
24. whereby he enjoynes all that come to the Lords supper, that their hearts
and minds be taken up, and wholly set upon the consideration of the death of
the Lord Jesus, and all their passages in and about the Sacrament must show
forth and carry a relish of it; you must not mind your meat and drink, and
hunger and thirst, as this abuse proves you do; No, no, your minds must be
wholly bent on Christ's death, and surely if you be spiritually affected, and
mind that soundly as you ought, you will have little mind of your bellies,
but you will mind the body and blood of Christ, and show forth his death till
he come, therefore reform your selves, and purge out this corruption: This is
the consistance and dependence of the Text.

The second thing is the meaning of the words themselves, For as often as you
shall eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, you show the Lords death till
he come: There is no great difficulty in the words, yet for plainness sake we
will go over them with some familiar and easy exposition: whereby also we
shall make way to our observations. These words in the 26 verse are Paul's own
words, and not Christ's; the words before verse 26. and 25. are Christ's own
words, but these are Paul's; in the former verse it is said, Do this in
remembrance of me; as Christ himself speaking it: but here it is said, You
show the Lords death, as Paul speaking this concerning Christ: neither is this
any wrong to our Savior, that Paul's words should be sorted and joined with
his; because they both proceeded from the same Spirit, which was in Christ, as
also in Paul, though not in the same measure; yet in such a measure even in
Paul also, as that he was infallibly guided and freed from error thereby in
all his writings that are extant among us: Paul's speech is here added to
Christ's speech, not as any new or diverse thing, but first, to confirm it, and
give testimony to the truth of it; secondly, to expound it, and make it plain
for their understanding; thirdly, to apply it to them, and consequently to all
the faithful, as being so meant by our Savior himself, and not to his
Disciples only, and so he performs the office of a faithful Minister of
Jesus Christ, which is to confirm his words as a witness, to expound them as
an interpreter, and to apply it to them as a messenger sent to them for that
purpose. It is said here in the first place, as often as you eat, which
contains an intimation, that they did often communicate, and withal an
admonition that it is a necessary duty to communicate often; it is spoken of
here as a matter commendable in them, and therefore imitable in us: for he
would never have enjoined a second duty upon it, but that he did approve the
first: They must not think it enough that they have done it once, and that
shall serve for all, nor to say they will do it hereafter, though they omit it
now, but as often as they do the one they must do the other; as often as they
do receive, they must think upon the Lords death. But some will say, What are
we never to remember Christ's death, but then when we communicate? Yes, this is
not spoken by negation, as if we should never remember him but then; but by
affirmation, that we must specially remember it then above all other times, as
that Sacrament being instituted and sanctified specially for that purpose: next
it is said, So often as ye shall eat, etc. ye shall show; where you see the
Holy Ghost presses it upon every one for his own particular, showing thereby
that it is not enough that the Minister show forth the Lords death for all them
that be there present, but every one is to show it forth for himself: Further
it is said, Shall eat this bread, etc. you see here he speaks of the
Sacrament, and he describes it by the use or the actual participation of it;
thereby showing, that the benefit of this Sacrament does not consist in the
seeing, or the having of it, but in the use and communicating in it. And note
here further, that the Apostle calls it bread even after the words of
consecration; it is bread still, and yet it is the body of Christ; in regard of
the use it is altered, and is the body of Christ, but in regard of the nature
of the creature it is bread still. Consider yet further, that he names not
only the eating of the bread, but the drinking of the cup together with it; he
says not, Or drink this cup, but, And drink this cup: whereby we may see
that they who separate the cup from the bread in the use of this Sacrament, as
the Papists do, they do wickedly put asunder that which God has joined
together: and this being spoken directly to the people, does extend the words
of our Savior, when he said, Drink ye all of this, as well to the people as
to the Ministers: next it is said, You show forth the Lords death, that is to
say, you set it forth after a special and eminent manner; you show it forth by
your practice, for all they that truly receive the Lords Supper, do as it were
act the death of Christ, as a holy Tragedy, upon a holy and spiritual stage;
the word may either be expounded affirmatively, you do show forth, or
imparatively, as enjoining them that they must show forth; both tend to the
same effect, that this Sacrament is the very showing forth of the Lords death:
the word in the original entends a showing forth in the highest degree, with
much seriousness and earnestness, as prescribing a zealous and affectionate
setting forth of Christ's death in the use of this Sacrament. It is said
further, the Lords death, which we must not understand as if it were meant
barely of his dying, or of his crucifying, but his death, together with the
benefit and fruit of his death: and whereas he calls it here the Lords death,
it may seem some contradiction: For if Christ suffer death, how should he be
Lord, or if Christ be Lord, how should he dye? but if we consider it well, we
shall find that it is a sweet medley that the Apostle here makes, when he
says it is the Lords death: Christ dyed as being man, but Christ even in his
death showed himself to be the Lord that had the power over death. And
because he that dyed was the Lord, thence it comes that his death is
beneficial unto us. As it is said, Acts 20.28. God has purchased his Church
with his own blood: as his blood being therefore effectual for the purchasing
of the Church, because it was the blood of him who being man is God also.
Lastly, it is here said, till he come, that is to say, in bodily presence to
judge the world: Therefore he is now absent in body even from the Sacrament: if
he were bodily present at the Sacrament, as the Papists say, then what need a
memorial of him till his coming? Hereby we see also that so long as we are
here we need the helps of Sacraments to strengthen our faith, and God has
provided that we shall have them so long as we need them, even till the end of
the world; but when he comes then we shall have no further use of them; and
therefore then they shall cease: all things are for us and for our good, so
long as we need them we shall have them; but the things that are the
Sacraments, Gods saving ordinances, shall utterly cease to be, when we shall
have no further use of them. So much for the meaning.

The third point is the parts of the Text: first, an action to be performed, in
the former part of the verse: secondly, a caution or condition, in the latter
part: First, an action to be performed, the receiving of the Lords Supper;
wherein the Apostle offers to our consideration these things: First, the parts
of the action; secondly, the frequenting of the action; the parts, eat and
drink; things diverse in themselves, yet both together making up one and the
same action of receiving; as in our ordinary suppers we eat and drink, and
each differs from other, our eating is not our drinking, nor our drinking is
not our eating: yet in the general both make but one action, the taking of our
supper: Secondly, the frequenting of this action, often, as this action is to
be performed and done, so the doing of it is to be frequented, as often, etc.
we must not make an annual thing of it, to be performed once a year, a
profane thing amongst Christians, but there must be an often frequenting of
it. In the latter part of the verse is a caution or condition that we must
perform in receiving, wherein principally is to be observed, first, the
caution it self; show forth the death of Christ: secondly, the frequenting of
it, which is to be borrowed from the first part of the verse, as often as you
eat, show forth the Lords death, etc. for this is a particle common to the
whole verse, and serve each part alike, as who should say, As often as you eat
this bread, and drink this cup, so often you shall show forth the Lords death.
Lastly, here is the continuance of this caution or condition, till he come. How
long is it to continue? even so long as the world stands, till the Lord come to
judgment. Whosoever thou art, thou must show forth the Lords death in
receiving this Sacrament till his coming, that is for the parts of the verse.

Now we come to the Doctrines: For as often as you shall eat of this bread,
and drink of this cup, you show forth the Lords death till he come: Where you
see that this speech of Paul is inferred by way of reason, from the words of
our Savior, verse 25. Do this as often as: do it in remembrance of me: the
conferrence of both these speeches together ministers this profitable
observation; namely, that the true and right remembrance of our Savior JESUS
CHRIST is our affectionate and religious remembrance of the death of our
Savior Christ: Remember me, says Christ, verse 25. that is, says Paul, the
Lords death, verse 26. Remember it so, that you show it forth, that is,
religiously and affectionately. Zach. 12.10. I will pour upon the house of
David, and upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace, etc. there
is a promise of the Spirit to be poured down on the faithful under the
Gospel; and one principal effection of it there mentioned is this, that they
shall look on Christ, that is, they shall remember him, and meditate upon him.
Well, what is the principal object in Christ, that they shall set their
meditations upon? his piercing, that is, his death and sufferings, when he was
pierced with thorns, and nails, and Spear: and how shall they be touched
with this remembrance of him? Surely very religiously and affectionately,
grieving and lamenting as for their first borne. Here then is the right
remembrance of Christ, that is our affectionate and religious remembrance of
the piercing and death of Christ: Rev. 13.8. Christ Jesus is the Lamb of God
that takes away the sins of the world. But how do the faithful whose names
are written in the Lambs book of life apprehend him? Not simply as a Lamb,
but as a Lamb slain, that is, in his death and crucifying, that is the true
and right apprehending of him. Genesis 3.15. The seed of the woman, etc. when the
Lord himself first published the Gospel, he propounds the seed of the woman
to be believed in, that is, CHRIST, but with special reference to his death,
for that is the very bruising of the Serpents head: CHRIST on his Cross
spoiled principalities and powers, Col. 2.14. and the bruising of his heel
there spoken of, is an intimation of the death and sufferings that the Devil
and his Instruments should bring upon CHRIST; and yet these very sufferings of
Christ shall break and destroy all their power: this was Adam and all the
faithful to believe of Christ, and this is their true and right remembrance of
Christ. This was shadowed in the sacrifices before the Law, as in the
Passover, Exodus 12.6, 7. they should kill it, and strike the blood on the two
posts, etc. what is the meaning of this? we must carry the streams of our
meditations on Christ toward his killing and death and blood: And so under the
Law, Heb. 9.22. almost all things are by the Law purged with blood: What is the
meaning of this? That all that believe in Chritst, are thereby admonished still
to have the eye of their minds settled on the meditation of the blood of
Christ; if ever they look to be purged from their sins by Christ, they must
be purged by the blood of Christ: so the Prophets set forth Christ in this
manner, Esaias 53. from the first to the seventh verse, he that of all the
Prophets spoke most plainly of him, sets him forth principally in regard of his
death, as he was wounded, and broken, and oppressed, and afficted; the Prophet
leaves them the best memorial of Christ, and therefore he acquaints them with
the death of Christ. The Apostles observed the same rule, 1 Cor. 17.3. First of
all I delivered unto you how that Christ dyed for our sins, no doubt but he
would teach them Christ so as he might work a most affectionate impression
and remembrance of Christ in their hearts; and how does he this? By teaching
them Christ's death first of all, as the chief and maine ground of all the
rest. And look how he taught them, so he practiced himself, 1 Cor. 2.2. I
esteemed not to know any thing amongst you, save Jesus Christ, and him
crucified: for his knowledge he esteemed to know nothing else; and so Gal.
6.14. for his rejoicing, God forbid that I should rejoice in any thing but in
the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; and both these are spoken by way of
exclusion, disclaiming all other knowledge and rejoicing in comparison of that,
because that is the rise and ground of all the rest. To conclude, the Word and
the Sacraments are purposely fitted to work this remembrance in us. 1 Cor.
1.18. the word is called the preaching of the Cross, that is it the Minister
must specially preach, and the people learn. Gal. 3.1. the Apostle taught
Christ and his death to them so plainly, as if he had been crucified amongst
them; and so the Sacraments are fitted to this end, first, Baptism, Romans 6.3,
4. we are baptized into his death, and buried with him in baptism, and so the
Lords Supper as you see here is to set forth the Lords death, etc.

The reasons: First, Christ in his death was most pleasing to God; and wherein
should we, or can we be better affected with the remembrance of Christ, than
in that state wherein he was most pleasing to his and our heavenly Father; God
cannot properly be said to be pleased with his Son at any one time more than
another, but we speak it after the manner of men, and by way of supposall, if
ever God could be better pleased with him at one time than at another, it was
at his death, Ephesians. 5.2. then he was an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet
smelling savor to God. I but you will say, then God was most angry with him,
pouring on him his fierce wrath and vengeance from heaven? True, he was most
angry with him in regard of our sins which he beheld on him, and punished in
him, but in regard of his own decree thereby accomplished, and Christ his
perfect obedience therein yielded; and the absolute satisfaction for our sins
there made by his precious blood, even then God was best pleased with him, we
feel it through Gods mercy, for we are sure it was his death and blood that we
are reconciled to God by, and that God was pleased with us for, and therefore
Christ himself must needs be most pleasing to him in that estate.

Secondly, therein Christ showed his greatest love and affection to us, and how
shall we remember him with our best affections, but in that state wherein he
showed most love and affection toward us? John 15.13. Greater love than this
can no man show, than to give his life for his friend: this love Christ has
showed us, he gave his whole state for us; he spared not his precious body, his
precious blood, his precious life, his precious soul for us, all these are
precious, yea infinitely precious in themselves; yet he thought nothing too
precious to give for us, but exposed them all in his death to the wrath of God
for our redemption; whosoever thou art that can thus remember Christ, thou
have many strong bonds and motives to bind thee fast to thankfulness, and
love, and obedience to God in Jesus Christ, and that is to remember him as thou
should remember him, he that can once speak by experience in his own
heart, as the Apostle does, Gal. 1.20. that Christ has loved me, and gave
himself for me, will empty himself also, and say as the Apostle did, I live,
and yet not I now, but Christ Jesus lives within me; his love to us in dying
for us, stirs up our love to him in dying with him, and as the nature of true
love is, to transanimate or transform the lover into the thing loved, so we
are turned as it were into Christ, we live not, but he lives in us; and surely
we can never be persuaded to give over our selves thoroughly to God service, till
we be brought unto it by the through meditation and remembrance of Christ's
death.

Thirdly, therein Christ has been most beneficial to us, and wherein is he
most worthy of our remembrance, but in that whereby we have most benefit by
him, and that is his blood or his death? We have reconciliation by his blood,
Romans 3.23. Redemption by his blood, Heb. 9.12. and forgiveness of sins by
his blood, 1 John 1.7. all good things temporal and eternal are purchased to
us by the merit of his death, and contrary all evil things are thereby turned
away: Why do we remember Christ? Not because of any good that he receives
from us, but because of the good that we receive from him; now his death is
that whereby we receive greatest good from him, yea in some sort all the
benefit that ever we enjoy by him, his Incarnation, Resurrection, Ascension,
are so far forth beneficial unto us, as they have reference to his Death,
and therefore except we remember Christ in his death, howsoever we remember him
otherwise, it is no true remembrance of him at all.

Lastly, therein he showed himself most powerful and victorious over his and
our enemies: Heb. 2.14. He has destroyed through death him that had the power
over death, that is, the Devil. 2 Col. 14, 15. He has nailed our sins upon
the Cross, and there has spoiled principalities and powers, how can we
remember him better, than in state wherein he gave the utter overthrow and
deadly stroke to all our enemies? he told them that it was then their very
hour and power of darkness, and it is true to do what they could, but not
what they would, for that was but as it were a mock to them, for indeed it was
their very hour to be destroyed, and his very hour to triumph over them, as
our Savior himself speaking of his death, shows plainly, John 12.31. Now is
the judgment of this world; now shall the Prince of this world be cast out: If
there were a Champion that should undertake a combat for us, and overcome our
enemies, we would not consider so much other circumstances of his person or
state, but specially his carriage and behavior in managing our combat, and his
act of overcomming. Christ our Champion has overcome all our enemies in his
death upon the Cross, and therefore that is the fittest object for our hearts
to be set upon in the remembrance of Christ.

The Uses: The first use serves for reproof of those that are so nice and
dainty, that they cannot endure to meditate on Christ's death; the matter of his
resurrection, and ascension, and glorification, are pleasing unto them, but the
matter of his death that is harsh and distasteful: all of us could be content
to go with Christ to Mount Tabor where he was transfigured, that we might see
his glory; but we are loath to go with him to mount Calvery where he was
crucified, to taste of his sufferings: the Jews bewrayed this humor in the
corrupt nature of man, when they said, Let him come down from the Cross, and
we will believe in him: If Christ could be separated from his cross and
sufferings, and from his death generally all would be forward enough to take
hold upon; but let us know, that except we have our part in Christ crucified,
we shall never have our part in Christ glorified; the cross of Christ was his
way to glory, and our due meditation and participation on his Cross, is the
only way for us to come to the participation of his glory. But some will say,
to think upon Christ crucified, and slain, and murdered, and tormented, these
be bloody thoughts, how should we digest them? I answer; First, it is needful
for us that we should be possessed with such bloody thoughts, that thereby we
may be brought to see and take notice of the ugliness and fearfulness of our
sin: but secondly, we do not dwell in the gross and carnal meditation of
his wounds and bloodshedding, as the Papists do; but we are spiritually
minded in the meditation of his death and therein we behold Gods decree, in
giving his Son for our redemption, and his wrath against sin, and his mercy
to us in the forgiveness of our sins, and this is it that makes our
meditations and thoughts of Christ's death to be most comfortable and heavenly
thoughts.

Secondly, this teaches us that we should labor to be skillful and well
practiced in the meditation of Christ's death, and to have our eye continually
upon Christ crucified: That which our Savior said to Thomas, John 20.27. Put
thy finger here, and see my hands, and put it forth, and put it into my sides,
though it were spoke there of his material wounds, yet every one of us must
take it spiritually to be spoken to our selves: we must put our fingers and
our hands into the holes of his sides, we must dive deep by our meditatio^s
into the secret mysteries of his death, that thereby we may become his true
believing Disciples: the death of Jesus Christ is of all other things most
serviceable, and profitable, and comfortable to us even in respect of all the
parts of Religion: Would thou behold the love of God toward thee, and know
how dearly he loves thee? See it in the death of Christ; God has given his
Son not only to become man for us, but even to dye for us, and to endure the
greatest extremities for us that ever could be thought upon; here is a clear
glass wherein we may behold the height, and the depth, and the length, and the
breadth of Gods love toward us: touching the forgiveness of our sins, every
one would feign be persuaded of it; but we can never attain to any sound
persuasion thereof, till we search and see thoroughly into the death of Christ.
Gods wrath against sin is infinite, and it passes all our apprehension to
conceive how he being so just and righteous can possibly forgive a sinner,
till by our through acquaintance with the death of Christ, we find therein
infinite matter of satisfaction to Gods infinite justice: so in our hatred to
sin, we can never loath sin as we should do, but by looking into the death
of Christ, where we see that it was so loathsome and so odious to God, that it
did kindle Gods infinite wrath even against his own Son, having taken our
sins upon him: when we consider this right, then we begin to fall out with
sin, and to hate it, and to defy this cursed brat of the Devil, that has
brought the Son of God to such a cursed and shameful death: so in our
mortification, we can never attain to any true measure of it, till we have
toyled our selves in the due meditation of Christ's death; when we see and
consider that Christ himself has suffered such things, afflictions,
temptations, infirmities, death it self, then we begin to dispense with our
own minds, and are contented to suffer together with him, and to mortify our
flesh, and to crucify the old man, and with patience to undergo and endure
all the fiery trials. It is the Apostles rule, 1 Pet. 4.1, 2. so in the matter
of temptation, the best help and strength we have is Christ crucified: Rev.
12.11. they overcame Satan in the blood of the Lamb. When the Tempter comes,
our faith presently takes hold upon the blood of the Lamb, upon the death of
Christ; we know that by that Satan was overcome, and so by that we have comfort
against temptation; we consider we have crucified Christ by our sins already,
and therefore we will not harken to him to crucify him the second time; we
consider that all the promises of God are sealed up unto us in the blood of
Christ, and thereby we stand fast striving, and suffering, and waiting upon
God in faith and patience, and so we overcome the enemy in the blood of the
Lamb: so in our expectance of any good thing to come from God, first, we are
persuaded that Christ died for us, that God spared not his own Son, but gave
him to death for us, and thence we do comfortably conclude, how shall he not
with him give us all things also? Romans 8.32. In the matter of our perseverance
we still are fearful, and feign we would be comforted how we should persevere:
Meditate soundly upon the death of Christ, and there thou shall have sound
comfort for thy perseverance. Romans 5.9, 10. If God reconcile us to himself by
the death of Christ when we were his enemies, much more now being reconciled by
his blood we shall be saved by his life: the Lord that has showed us so great
mercy as to bring us out of the state of sin and damnation when we were his
enemies, will surely so uphold us being reconciled unto him, that we shall
never finally fall into that cursed state again. Lastly, for the matter of our
repentance, we can never truly repent till we meditate soundly upon the death
of Christ. Zach. 12.10. They look upon him whom they have pierced, and then
they lament and be sorry as for their first borne; when they see him pierced,
and consider that they have pierced him, then they shall lament. In that Sermon
of Peter, Acts 2. whereby so many were converted unto God; though many
powerful and profitable instructions were delivered, yet they were never
thereby stung till he tells them in verse 36. This is Jesus, whom you have
crucified; this went as a dagger to their hearts, for presently they were
pricked in their hearts, and cried out Men and brethren, what shall we do?
verse 37. here begins repentance, when they see they have crucified the Lord
of life, and so it is with us, when once the Holy Ghost takes us along into the
meditation of Christ's death, and presses it soundly upon our hearts, that we
be they that have crucified the Lord of life, then we are astonished and at our
wits end, and then we repent and forethinke our selves of the evil we have
done: we can never understand what a broken heart is, till we find our own
hearts broken with the meditation of the death of Christ; when we consider
advisedly with our selves concerning Christ's sufferings, what an agony he
endured in the garden where he sweat water as it were drops of blood, and was
feign to be comforted by the Angels, and when we think with our selves that we
hear him complain as though we were present with him; My soul is heavy unto
the death; when we consider him how his hands, and feet, and sides were
wounded, and nailed, and pierced upon the Cross, and how tender his precious
body was; one goring to him in his sinlesse body being more to him than many
thousands to our bodies that are hardened with sin; and when we consider what
a fearful complaint came from him in the anguish of his soul, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? how can we choose if we have any tenderness of
bowels in us in the world, but melt and be broken in our hearts, and spend
our spirits, in the compassionate meditation of such a woeful spectacle: but
then if we consider further that all this was endured for us; Innocent Lamb,
he had done nothing amiss, but it was all for us and for our sins: This
should make us more broken hearted at the thought of these things; yea if we
had but good nature in us; for who is there among us, who being condemned to
dye, if any other should take our death upon him, but we would be wonderfully
moved in the thought of his death; how much more then ought we to be
compassionately moved at the thought of that cruel and shameful death which
the Son of God endured for us; I say if we had but good nature in us: But
consider lastly how that he has not only endured these things for us, but that
we in a despitefull manner have brought all these things upon him, and see if
we have not just cause to break our hearts asunder with grief at the thought
of Christ's death; the Jews hands were the outward instruments, our sins the
actors, they cried out on earth to Pilate, Crucify him, crucify him, but our
sins cried our in heaven to God much louder, Crucify him, crucify him, and
that was the voice that prevailed and brought him to that shameful death; when
the sinful soul considers this with it self, I have crucified the Lord of
glory, I have killed the Lord of life, then the heart melts and relents, and is
gored and pierced with these thoughts as sensibly as our Saviors body was with
the nails and spear; and the blood did not more freely gush out of his sides
and body, than bleeding tears do gush out of a broken heart and wounded
spirit of a poor wretched sinner, thus affected with the meditation of the
death of CHRIST.

Lastly, this teaches us what manner of remembrance of Christ's death it is we
must labor for, it must be both religious and affectionate; the Jews
remember Christ's death, but not religiously, they do it in scorn and hatred
of him; Hypocrites remember Christ's death, and that as a matter of religion as
they profess, but it is without affection, and without truth; but thou that
desire to remember Christ rightly and savingly, thou must labor and see that
thou remember him religiously and affectionately; remember it with
thankfulness to God, with compassion to Christ's sufferings, with hatred to
thine own sin, with faith in Christ's precious blood, and with a true desire
and endeavor to be like to him in his death by thy mortification; how
wondrously do men err, touching this duty, they will say we remember that
Christ dyed for us all, and so pass it over as a slight thing: some will go
further, and meditate upon it once a year, or upon Good Friday somewhat more
than ordinary; alas this comes far short of the right remembrance of Christ's
death; whosoever thou art that look to be saved by the death of Christ, see
thou make it thy daily and continual meditation, and labor to grow acquainted
with it every day better than other, and take this for the conclusion of all,
so much as thou do meditate religiously and affectionately on Christ's death,
so much interest thou have in Christ, and in his salvation.

The end of the twelfth Lecture.
THE THIRTEENTH LECTVRE UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
IN 1 Cor. 11.26. it follows, For as often as you shall eat this bread, and
drink this cup, you show the Lords death till he come: This being the portion
of Scripture which through Gods direction we have already entered into for our
preparation to the Lords Table, and the next Sabbath (God will (...) we purpose
to communicate in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: therefore according to our
wonted manner we are now to consider of some meditations, whereby we may be
the better sitted to the holy participation of that saving ordinance of Jesus
Christ: We have entered, as you may remember, into these words already, and have
showed the drift of them, and the dependence of them with that which went
before; we showed you the parts of them, that this verse consists of two
parts; as first, an action performed in the former part of the verse, As often as
you shall eat this bread, and drink this cup: Secondly, a caution or
condition, that this action is to be performed withal, is the latter part of
the verse, Ye show the Lords death till he come. I will not make my repetition
of that which I have spoken before, we spoke only of that which concerned the
coherence and dependence of this verse with the former, that whereas our
Savior says in the verse going before, Do this in remembrance of me, the
Apostle says here, As often as you do this you show forth the Lords death till
he come.

Now then we are to come to the handling of the parts of the verse, and first
to begin with the action in the former part of the verse; wherein we are to
consider these two things: First, the parts of the action, The eating of this
bread, and drinking of this cup; whereby the Apostle describes the Lords
Supper. Secondly, the frequenting of the action, As often as you shall eat this
bread, and drink this cup: the parts of the action are the eating of the bread,
and the drinking of the cup. To begin with that, there be sundry other actions
of much use and significancy in and about the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as
namely, the blessing of the bread, the breaking of the bread, the distributing
of the bread, and such like; but because that this here, the eating of the
bread, and drinking of the cup, because this action is the accomplishment of
all the rest, (for all that is done besides in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, the blessing of the bread, the breaking and distributing of it, tends
to this, namely, that the receiver may profitably eat and drink, and
comfortably communicate in these holy mysteries) therefore the Apostle makes
mention of this action only, as this I say being the accomplishment of the
rest; even the eating of this bread, and drinking of this cup: we are here
therefore to consider of some particulars; and the first particular that here
we are to consider of is this, that the Apostle being here to describe the
Sacrament of the Lords supper, he does describe it and set it forth by a matter
of action, or a matter of use: He describes the Sacrament it self by the use
of the Sacrament, by the eating of the bread, and the drinking of the cup.

of this doctrine, understand, that the Sacrament is then said to he in use,
when it is used, administered, and received according to Gods own ordinance,
then is the Sacrament in use, so long as the Sacrament is thus in use, so long
it is in the nature of a Sacrament, and so soon as this use cease, so soon
cease the nature of the Sacrament in that particular: So for the benefit of
it, the Sacrament being thus used there is much benefit to be received by it,
but without this use there is no benefit to be had by it at all; it is true,
the benefit of the Sacrament to the faithful receiver continues with us after
the receiving of it, and we find benefit, and comfort, and sweetness by it,
but because the benefit does arise wholly and only from the use of the
Sacrament, therefore the doctrine stands firm, namely, That the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, as well in regard of the nature of it in it self, as also in
regard of the benefit of it to us, does wholly and altogether consist in the
participation and use of the Sacrament; the Apostle speaking of the Sacrament
both in the nature and use of (...) he speaks of a matter of use, So often as
you eat this bread, and drink this cup, you show the Lords death till he come:
It is not only to have it, but to eat it and drink it: For proof of this
point, take Christ his example; Matthew. 26.26. Jesus took bread, etc. there was
bread there, and there was wine at the feast of the Passover; but the bread
and the wine did not make it the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: no, says the
Text, Jesus took it, blessed it, brake it, and distributed it, saying, Take,
eat, this is my body: So likewise he did the cup. This was matter of action on
his part, then likewise matter of action on the receivers part; questionless,
as he gave it them, so they received it of him, and as he bade them eat it
and drink it, so they did eat it and drink it; this is clear in Mark
14.23. concerning the cup (he says) They did all drink of it: and the same is
to be understood proportionably concerning the bread: here then is all matter
of action and doing; whereunto if ye add, that Christ says, This is my body,
and this is my blood, and so no doubt but they did so believe it in their
measure, and accept of it; here still you see is all matter of action, both on
Christ his part, saying, and doing, blessing, breaking, and distributing; and
on the receivers part, they took it, they eat it, they drank it, and were
thankful to Christ for it; this matter of action and use it was that gave it
the nature of a Sacrament in it self, and made it beneficial to them.
Agreeable to Christ his example was his command, Do this in remembrance of me,
Luke 22.19. what is it that here Christ enjoynes his Apostles? why, surely the
whole work of the celebration of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, that they
should do that which they had seen him do, to the end of the world, they and
their successors should from time to time observe it as a perpetual ordinance,
for so our Apostle expounds the words; whereas Christ says, Do it in
remembrance of me, the Apostle explaines it and says, Do this as often as you
do, etc. giving us to understand, that it was not a matter that only
concerned that present action wherein Christ and his Disciples were employed,
but that it is an action that concerns both Minister and receiver to do in
every Sacrament to the worlds end: mark upon what terms he does commend that
to them, still he puts it in a matter of action, let this be your use and
practice, the bread and wine must be taken, blessed, broken, and distributed,
eaten and drunken, or else it is no Sacrament in it self, nor any benefit to
you: so in 1 Cor, 10.16. The bread which we break, is it not the communion of
the body of Christ? the cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
communion of the blood of Christ? It is not the bread that is the communion,
etc. but the breaking of the bread, and such other actions as do accompany the
Sacrament, that Christ has appointed; and the Apostle in the seventeenth verse
says, For we that are many are one bread, and one body, because we all are
partakers of one bread; still what he says concerning the Sacrament, he
speaks it in regard of the use and participation of it: so in verse 21. You
cannot be partakers of the Lords table, and of the table of Devils: still he
describes the Lords Table by the use and participation of it, and so generally
throughout all the Scripture: and in the eleventh Chapter, the Apostle here
says, verse 20. When you come together therefore into one place, this is not
to eat the Lords Supper: do you think it is to be made partakers of the
Sacrament, for one to eat, and not the other? no, this is not to eat the Lords
supper: It is not the Lords Supper except it be eaten and in use, as the Lord
himself has ordained it. Act. 2.42. And they all continued tn the Apostles
doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking of bread: there you see the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper is still described by a matter of action and of use, by
breaking of bread.

But not to stand upon that. Put the case it were so, that their Sacraments
were shadows, and ours the substance, the reason holds much more strongly: for
if it were so then in the Sacraments that were but shadows, that they
consisted altogether in action and use, then much more our Sacraments that are
in substance: those Sacraments that have more action and use about them, are
commonly most lively and powerful; the more action and use a Sacrament has,
the more life and power usually is in the Sacrament to the receiver: unless
therefore we will make the shadow to have more life and power than the
substance, the Sacraments of the old Testament must not consist in action more
than the Sacraments of the new; if they yield that the nature of them stood in
the action and use of them, then ours must do so much more: so then the reason
holds very strong, that the Sacraments of the former Testament consisted
altogether in the use and participation of them, and therefore so must ours.

use of it, the water is not Baptism, though it be never so hallowed, as the
Papists say; but the washing of water, and the use of it, that is Baptism; if
so be that there should be water, and that water should be consecrated, as they
call it, yet if there be not a receiver, or one to be baptized, or if there
were a party to be baptized, and a Minister to baptize, yet without he be
actually baptized, it were no baptism: Well, that the Papists grant in the
matter of Baptism, but it is not true in the Sacrament of the Lords supper
(say they:) Baptism consists only in use; but says the Council of Trent,
It is a great prerogative that God has vouchsafed to the Sacrament of the
Lords supper, that whereas all other Sacraments have their nature and benefit
by the use of it, yet this Sacrament of the Lords supper has this prerogative,
to retain the nature and benefit of it, when the use of it cease. This they
say, if they could prove it; but they cannot show us any such prerogative out
of the word, thus to advance the sacrament of the Lords Supper above the
sacrament of Baptism. We know this, that in each of these sacraments every
faithful believer does receive Christ and all his benefits, I say, in
Baptism, as well as in the Sacrament of the Lords supper. Gal. 3.27. By
Baptism we put on Christ: and what can we do more in the Sacrament of the
Lords supper? Likewise by Baptism we are incorporated into Christ, into the
death and resurrection of Christ, Romans 6.3, 4. What can be done more in the
Sacrament of the Lords supper than this. By Baptism we are washed and renewed
by the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. What can be done more in the sacrament of the
Lords supper, than is in Baptism? Therefore if so be that the Sacrament of
Baptism be of no force nor benefit without the use, why should the Sacrament
of the Lords supper be of force and benefit to us without use? Again, if the
sacrament of the Lords supper be of force without use, why then should not the
Sacrament of Baptism? There can be no reason given of it, it is nothing else
but a fancy or dream of theirs, in thinking that Christ is bodily present in
the Lords supper, and that drives them to speak many strange things contrary to
all reason and religion.

they advance it above the death of Christ, because that is not in force, but
so far as it is in use and action.

yet notwithstanding if it be not used, and eaten and drunken, it has neither
the nature of a sacrament, nor the benefit of a sacrament to any of us.

a curse causlesse (says Solomon) flies like a Bird in the air that leaves no
impression behind it: so their curse upon us being causeless, we are never
the worse for it. But for their doctrine, that is false and damnable, that the
sacrament of the Lords supper continues to be a sacrament when the use is
finished. There is no warrant, nor color of warrant for it from the Word;
never any Papist did, nor can allege any argument or tittle out of Scripture
to prove this: we for our parts have proved it by many places of Scripture,
that the sacrament is a sacrament merely in the use of it; and the nature and
benefit of it consists in the use and participation of it; we find the
Scripture never speaks of it otherwise but as an action and use, and therefore
see whether they are the sheep of Christ, or we: My sheep hear my voice, and
follow me, etc. we have the word of God to go before us, Christ and his
Apostles say so. That the nature of a sacrament consists in the matter of
action and use, thus we rest satisfied and go no further; we will not hearken
to the voice of strangers, that go farther and define what it is after, to say
that it is beneficial as well after as before: see if they deserve not that
curse they pronounced against us. So much for their opinion. Now for their
practice grounded upon this doctrine, to give you a taste; first, in showing of
the sacrament; the sacrament after it is consecrated, being lifted up by the
Priest, and beheld by the people, oh this is a great part of Gods worship with
them: It is a strange thing that men should be so besotted.

Secondly, they keep it, and reserve it usually in a box till it be moldy and
unsavory, and yet still they hold it to be the Lords body, and (as they say)
they do many miracles with it.

Thirdly, they do not only thus, but they carry it about with them, when they
travel in the streets and other places, as a preservative against sickness
and other evils: these and such other like fopperies are used in the Popish
Church, upon this false ground, that being once dedicated to the use of the
sacrament, as they suppose, it must needs always have the same force and
power, so long as it continues: we may refer it to the judgment of any
indifferent understanding man to judge, whether he thinks they or we do
come nearest to the meaning, and true institution of Christ. We are sure that
Christ took bread, and commanded us so to do, to take the bread, to bless
it, break it, and distribute it; but we are sure that he never commanded it
to be carried about, for any such superstitious uses as they do. I do not
doubt but there be many that have occasion to travel into places where these
and such like superstitions are used, if they have any understanding, or any
taste of Religion, they will grow into a greater hatred and detestation of
Popery in seeing that which they do, than we do, or can do by the hearing
of these things: and therefore if any shall come to see any such things, labor
to be fenced with this preservative; let us know, the sacrament is excellent in
the use of it, otherwise it is of no force after the use, but to put any
superstitious holiness in it: that it is in force afterward, we have no
warrant for it from the Word, and therefore let us hate it as an abominable
superstition.

that God has promised a blessing to his own ordinance, but yet with this
condition, that we use them in their own kind, and so as he has appointed
and ordained them; but if we apply them not, or use them otherwise than God
has appointed, he is freed of his promise, neither can we expect any blessing
from God.

to matter of action in the use of the Sacrament, that we stir up our minds
and scules to an actual believing, an actual discerning, and an actual
receiving of Christ and his merits, and an actual applying them to our poor
souls: then shall we be sure to have the benefit of the Sacrament: still know
the benefit and nature of the sacrament consists in the use of the Sacrament,
and therefore the more we stir up our selves to those actions that accompany
it, the more benefit we shall receive by it: And this is that that makes many
that come here to the Lords Table, and that are made partakers happily of the
nature of it, yet (notwithstanding) they fail of the benefit of the Sacrament.
What is the reason? Surely the fault is their own, because God has appointed
it to be a matter of action, and doing, and they perform not those actions that
God has enjoined them unto, they do not apply Christ to them by faith, they
eat, and drink, and yet do not actually discern the Lords body. So much of
that first particular that is to be considered, namely, That the Apostle
describing the nature of the Sacrament of the Lords supper, he describes it in
regard of the use and benefit of it.

The second point that we are to consider, is this, (namely) that whereas the
Apostle here in this speech makes mention of the outward elements in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the bread and the wine, he calls them by their
own proper names, eat this bread, and drink this cup, that is, this wine;
he calls them, I say, by their own proper names, that is, by the names of the
sign, not by the names of the thing signified: he does not say, As often as
ye shall eat this body, and drink this blood; but, As often as ye eat this
bread, and drink this cup; and this he does after the blessing and
consecration to this sacred use, and that appears by the circumstance of the
Text: For look what bread our Savior spoke of in the former words, that the
Apostle speaks of here, seeing he inferres it by way of reason. Now that which
Christ spoke of in the verse going before, was bread, after it was blessed and
consecrated, bread, in the use of the Sacrament, and so the Apostle calls it
bread still: and so likewise it appears plainly by the whole drift of this part
of the chapter: where the Apostle speaks of the bread in the use of the
Sacrament, namely, after consecration.

nature of bread after consecration: the Apostle does not call it so here only
once in this chapter, but three several times, 26, 27, 28. verses: if so be he
had spoke it but once, we might have thought it to be an improper speech: but
speaking so of it often, this shows it is the true name and title that is due
unto them, and that they are the very same creatures as they were before: And
the Apostle does not only call them so here, but elsewhere, as in 1 Cor.
10.16.17. The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ, etc? mark, he calls it bread even in the breaking, or in the use of the
Sacrament: It is blessed before it is broken; and it is bread when it is
broken: The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? therefore it is bread after the blessing. Now the Apostle goes further,
and says in the seventeenth verse, For we that are many, are one bread, and
one body, because we are all partakers of one bread: The Apostle does not only
call it bread, while it is in the Ministers hand, but when the people receive
it, and partake of it, he says, you are partakers of bread: still it is bread,
notwithstanding the blessing. And though by the blessing and institution of
Christ, and the promise of God, it be consecrated to a holy use, it still
continues bread, and loses not the nature and substance thereof. It is strange
to see how miserably the Papists do shuffle and shift to avoid this very
argument in this place, because the Apostle is so plain and express that it
is bread. To give you a taste of it, because it is a matter of great
controversy between us and the Church of Rome: they would avoid the force of
this reason, therefore you shall see how they expound it: This bread, say some
of them, (I will not tell you of the meanest, but some of the best and greatest
Champions amongst them) it is called bread, not because it is bread, but
because it was bread, by a trope and figure, because it was made of Bread.
Mark, it is called so by a trope and figure: Understand thus much, when as we
say that the words of Christ, saying, This is my body, are to be understood
figuratively, they exclaim against us for it: What (say they) will you have a
trope and a figure in the Sacrament? that is ridiculous: and yet to serve their
own turn they will have tropes even in the Sacrament. But to go to the sense
of their answer: This is called bread (say they) because it was bread: as Mat.
11.5. The blind receive sight, the halt go; mark, say they, they are called
blind, though they receive their sight, because they were blind before; and
they are called the halt, because they were so before, though they go now: so
this is called bread, because it was bread before, but not so now, but merely
the body of Christ. Take it so: apply this exposition to this place, and then
see what a speech they will have the Apostle to make; As often as ye eat this
bread, which before was bread, but now is not, you show forth the Lords death
till he come, it was so, but it is not so: why then should the Apostle tell
them it is bread? The comparison is very unlike: they were called blind,
because they were blind before; but that blindness which they had before is
taken away, and so they are said now to see. If they can show us that the
substance which was in this bread before, is utterly destroyed by the words of
consecration, then we shall believe that it is called bread, because it was
bread; but else we must believe that as it was bread before, so it is bread
still; and is so called here by the Apostle, because it is now bread in regard
of the present state of the thing. Again, they say this bread is called bread,
because it is like bread, not because it is bread, because it has the form
and fashion of it: As the brazen Serpent was called a Serpent, though it was
but in the form of a Serpent: whereby they make the Apostle to say thus: As
often as you shall eat this bread, which indeed is no bread, only it has the
outward form of bread: is not this a senseless speech? They give another
answer; It may be called bread (say they) after the Hebrew phrase, because it
is food; for they call all food by the name of bread, because bread is the
principal food. I answer, they call temporal food by the name of bread, but
let it be showed that they call all spiritual food by the name of bread, for
they say it is spiritual food which the Apostle here speaks of: but the cup
being here mentioned as well as the bread, does clearly answer this exception.
Lastly, John 6. does not Christ (say they) call himself bread? and I hope that
is not meant of ordinary, but spiritual bread. It is true, Christ calls
himself bread, but withal he gives other titles, whereby to know it to be
heavenly bread: as where he says, I am the living bread, or, The bread that
came down from heaven: but this is not so, because it was such as they did
eat in their own meals, and at their own Tables: there he speaks of
himself as the heavenly and spiritual bread: But this the Apostle speaks of
here, is of the bread of the Lords Table: He that eats of that bread shall
never dye, John 6.50. but a man may eat of this bread, and yet dye for ever,
as verse 29.



the thing signified, requires as much: What is signified by the bread and
wine? the body and blood of Christ; and they have an active power and virtue to
cherish and nourish our fowls to eternal life: and therefore the bread and
wine must be such in the Sacrament as has power also to nourish the body to a
temporal life; but if only the show of bread and wine were there present,
then there were no power to nourish, for it is the substance of the bread that
yields power by the blessing of God to sustain life; the maintenance of our
life arises from the substance of our food; and therefore it follows, that as
the outward form must needs be there present, so the substance of the bread
must be there also in the very true being, or else it is no true Sacrament.

taste, and relish, and comfort of the bread and wine, our souls may be
lifted up by faith to meditate of the thing signified, and so to feed upon the
body and blood of Christ, and find comfort in them: That we may truly say,
Look, the bread and wine comforts my body, thus, thus does the blood of Christ
comfort my soul, and by faith I am assured of the forgiveness of my sins by
the blood of Christ, as by sense I feel the benefit of those outward elements.
Thus the Lord vouchsafes to lead us on by the hand, as it were, by that which
is done outwardly in this Sacrament, to that which is to be done spiritually.

This is my body, and this is my blood, presently (say they) the substance of
the bread and wine is vanished away, and in comes the body and blood of Chirst,
for this they hold, that two substances cannot be in one place together, and
therefore, say they, if the body and blood of Christ come in, then the other
substance goes away. We need no other place against this dream of theirs than
this in hand, that the Apostle calls it by the name of bread after
consecration. And this should teach us much more to hate and loath that gross
practice of theirs in adoring the Sacrament; and indeed it comes from this
Transubstantiation: Transubstantiation is the mother of adoration: because they
think the body of Christ is there bodily present, therefore they adore it:
horrible Idolatry! the Apostle calls it bread, and they make it their God: and
therefore judge you whether we do not justly challenge the Papists, that they
worship a breaden god: that which the Holy Ghost calls bread, that they worship
as God, and therefore they worship a breaden god: this is fearful Idolatry, and
this is a main matter of their religion. An Idol (says the Apostle) is
nothing in the world: and surely this is a great Idol of theirs, and yet it is
nothing, that is, nothing that has any true being: Here is bread, but no true
God, as they fondly imagine: this is nothing but a fancy of theirs, to think
that Christ is there bodily present; they fondly imagine such a thing to be
there that is not, and therefore they adore and worship that which is not. True
it is, that Christ is there really present to all saving purposes in the use of
the bread and wine to every faithful receiver, and it is the comfort of our
souls that he is present by the power of his Spirit, to make good unto the
faithful the work of our Redemption: But that he is there bodily present, we
have no warrant.

This is my body, to expound them sacramentally and in a spiritual sense: This
is my body, in a sacramental and spiritual sense, that is, this bread to
every believer that partakes it in a true manner, believing in me, and being
raised up by this to a consideration of the breaking of Christ his body for the
forgiveness of their sins, and so find the benefit of it to themselves: it
is made actually and really (yet spiritually) the body of Christ to every true
believer, if ye will receive it. This is Elias, says our Savior; what
therefore should the Apostles conclude that therefore John Baptist was Elias;
that his body was turned into his body; no such matter; but take it as it is
meant; this is Elias, not that John Baptists was Elias, that his body was
turned into his body: but so he was called, because he came in the spirit of
Elias, to do that which he did: So, this is the body of Christ, not that the
bread is turned into the body of Christ, nor the wine into his blood, but if
you will receive it, this is my body and my blood: to every faithful receiver
the Spirit of God is at hand to make good unto them the body and blood of
Christ, and all his merits: the same Spirit that was in Christ when he
performed the office of our redemption, is in and at the Sacrament, to make
Christ really present (yet spiritually) to every faithful receiver, by the
power, merit, and virtue of his body and blood, for all saving purposes, as the
nature of the Sacrament requires. These things if we could understand them, and
set our hearts upon them, and live by faith, we should rest more solid in
them. It is want of faith that makes the^ dote upon the bodily presence of
Christ; whereas if they could be persuaded that the Spirit of God does perform
effectually all saving purposes, as if Christ were bodily present, if they did
but consider and believe this, it would make them renounce the doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and therefore we that are the people of God, and know that
as God is a Spirit, so he will be worshipped in spirit and in truth: we must
labor to walk in the spirit, and to live by faith: we must believe that
Christ is really present, yet spiritually to every faithful receiver, to make
them truly to partake of his body and blood, and so by his Spirit is made
wholly ours.

The end of the thirteenth Lecture.
THE FOVRTEENTH LECTVRE UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
WE are now to make our digression into the argument of the Lords Supper, for
our better and fitter preparation unto the participation of that holy Sacrament
the next Sabbath day. 1 Cor. 11.26. For as often as you shall eat this bread,
and drink this cup, you show the Lords death till he come. You may remember we
divided this verse into two parts: First, here is mentioned an action
performed, the receiving of the Lords Supper, in the former part of the verse,
As often as you shall eat this bread, and drink this cup. Secondly, here is a
caution and condition that it is to be performed withal, in the latter part of
the verse, You show forth the Lords death till he come. Concerning the action
we noted two things: First, the parts of it; and then the frequenting of it:
the parts of it, to eat this bread, and drink this cup; the frequenting of it,
So often as you eat it, you show the Lords death till he come. We have begun
with the parts of it already, and therein we have showed how that the Apostle
describing the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, sets it forth by the use of it,
not by having of it, or by having access to it, but by having the use of it,
by eating the bread, and drinking the cup. Thence we noted That the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper consists in matter of action and use. Then again we
noted in the second place, That whereas the Apostle here speaks of the
elements of bread and wine, as they are in use in the Sacrament, he calls them
by their ordinary names, the bread by the name of bread, and the wine by the
name of cup: from hence we gathered this doctrine; That even after the words of
consecration and blessing, still the bread and the wine for their nature and
substance are the same as they were before, still they remain bread and wine.
So far we proceeded. Now we are to proceed further. Thirdly, then we are here
to consider, that the Apostle here speaking of these elements of bread and wine
as they are in use in the Sacrament of the Lords supper, he sets them forth by
a note of excellency, this bread, and this cup, for by the cup is meant wine,
as often as you eat this bread, and drink this cup, he sets them forth by a
note of excellency.

As in all things we must keep a mean without going too far, or coming too
short, so specially in matters of religion we must be sure to keep on the
right way, without turning either to the right hand, or to the left; we must
take all matters of Religion in that very precise and true strain that the
Lord himself has set upon them: we are apt enough to err as well on the one
side as on the other, as well on the right side as on the left, and to err on
either side is alike dangerous. So it is in other matters of Religion; and so
it is in our estimation of these elements of bread and wine that are in use in
the Lords Supper: some do err on the right hand in their estimation of them,
thinking too highly of them, as the Papists do, that the bread is corporally
the very body of Christ, that the wine is corporally the very blood of Christ:
on the other side, others there be that err on the left hand in their
estimation of them, they esteem too meanly and basely of them, as the profane
people of the world, they generally esteem the bread and wine at the Lords
Table, no better than the bread and wine at their own table. To meet with both
these errors, and so to keep our hearts upright in the profession of Gods
truth herein, the Apostle in this short speech gives us a good caveat and
preservative. And first that we may not think too highly of them, and so err
on the right hand, as the Papists do, the Apostle still calls them bread and
wine, showing that in the nature and substance of them they are the same as
they were before: next, that we might not err on the left hand, and think
too meanly and basely of them, as the profane people do, he extolls them by
a note of excellency, this bread, and this wine; though the bread be but bread
in it self, and the wine be but wine in it self, yet he speaks with a kind
of grace and majesty of speech, this bread, and this cup; as singling them out
by a note of difference from ordinary bread and wine, because they are
dedicated to a sacred and holy use, whereby they are advanced above all other
bread and wine whatsoever; As often as you eat this bread, and drink this cup,
says the Apostle, you show the Lords death till he come.

The doctrine hence to be raised, is this, namely; That howsoever it be that
the elements of bread and wine that are used in the Lords Supper are in nature
and in substance the same creatures as they were before, yet notwithstanding,
in respect of that same sacred and holy use that they are consecrated and
dedicated unto to be made parts of the Sacrament, in this respect they are
things of far greater excellency than all ordinary things of that kind are:
this bread is far more excellent bread in respect of the use of it, than any
other; and this wine is far more excellent wine in respect of the use of it,
than any other; this is the reach of the Apostle, in that he speaks so
emphatically, this bread, and this cup. Mark the doctrine; howsoever it be
that the elements of bread and wine that are used in the Lords Supper, are in
nature and substance the same creatures as they were before, yet
notwithstanding in respect of that sacred and holy use that they are
consecrated and dedicated unto to be made parts of the Sacrament, in this
respect they are far more excellent than any other ordinary creatures of that
kind; this bread is more excellent than any other bread, and this wine
dedicated to this use, is far more excellent than any other wine: We shall
not need to go for proof of this doctrine any further than this Chapter: This
Chapter affords us very pregnant proofs of it. If we mark the Apostle, he
points out here three differences between our ordinary food that we have at
our meals, and this extraordinary food that we have at the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper.

The first is in the 20. and 21. verse, When you come together therefore into
one place, this is not to eat the Lords Supper, for every man when they should
eat, takes his own supper before, and one is hungry, and another is drunken.
Our ordinary food is our own food, our ordinary supper is our own supper, but
this extraordinary food is not our own food, but the Lords food, it is not our
own supper, but the Lords Supper: When we come to eat of this bread, and to
drink of this cup, it is the Lords Supper: as if the Apostle should say, Look
how much difference there is between that which is your own, and that which
is the Lords, so much difference there is between your own bread and wine,
which you have at your own Table, and that bread and wine which you have at
the Lords Table; and look how much you prefer that which is the Lords,
before that which is your own, so much you must prefer the bread of the
Lords Table, before your own bread; yea, the bread and the wine in the
Sacrament, if it be not received with this reverent acceptance, that it is the
Lords bread, and the Lords wine, surely they are not the Lords unto us, but our
own; no more benefit comes to us by them, than by our own bread and wine at
our own table: and this is the reach of the Apostle in these two verses: there
is the first difference, this is the Lords, and the other is our own; and as
we prefer that which is the Lords, before our own, so we must prefer the
bread of the Lords Table before the bread of our own table.

The second difference which the Apostle points at, is this in the 22. verse,
Have you not houses to eat and to drink in? despise you the Church of God,
and shame them that have not? As if he should say, the ordinary food which you
have, why, you have it in your own houses; but this food you have it in the
Church of God, your bread and your wine is home-food, but this bread and this
wine is Church-food; your bread and your wine is for your children, servants,
and family, but this bread and this wine is for Gods children, for his house,
and family. I hope there is none of you but do esteem more highly of the
house of God than you do of your own houses, and therefore by that learn to
esteem of these mysteries, the bread and wine in the Church of God, above that
which you receive at your own houses.

The third and the last difference is that which is in this 26.27. and 28.
verses: where the Apostle calls it this bread, and this cup, the cup of the
Lord; it caries an implication: I say that there is great difference between
this bread and other bread, between this wine and other wine: other bread and
wine they are but natural or artificial things, serving only for the work of
nature; but this bread and this wine that is in use in the Sacrament of the
Lords supper, over and besides that natural and artificial face that is set
upon them, over and besides that which they have in nature, these have a
supernatural condition imposed upon them from above, whereby they are advanced
above any other bread and wine, and made serviceable for the work of Grace.

So then you see, the Apostle having pointed out these three differences, it
makes the Doctrine very clear, That the bread and wine which is in use in the
Sacrament of the Lords supper, is far more excellent than any other bread and
wine whatsoever. To confirm this, let us add to the words of the Scholar, the
words of the Master, Luke 22.19, 20. it is said there, that our Savior took
the Cup, and said, This Cup is the New Testament in my blood. See how fitly
Paul the scholar imitates and follows Christ his Master. Christ himself had
said, This Cup is the New Testament in my blood: Paul calls it This bread, and
this Cup. This Cup (says Christ) is the New Testament in my blood. We must
take notice that our Savior was then at supper; I, not at an ordinary supper,
but eating the Passover: that supper being ended, he says, This Cup is the
New Testament in my blood. He took the same Cup, and being to dedicate it to
the use of the Sacrament of the Lords supper, says, This Cup is the New
Testament in my blood. Giving us to understand, that the bread and wine which
are in use in the Sacrament of the Lords supper, they are far better, and of
far greater use and excellency than any of our ordinary food, yea better then
the bread and wine that we have not only at our own feasts, but even at any
other feasts of the Lord. Therefore well might the Apostle say, this bread, and
this cup, advancing it by a note of excellency above all other bread and wine
whatsoever.

Whosoever eats this bread, and drinks the cup of the Lord unworthily,
shall be guilty of the body and blood of Christ. He changes his style, and
whereas he calls it This cup, here in the 26. verse, and so afterward ver.
28. he calls it verse 27. The cup of the Lord: giving us to understand, that
therefore it is this bread, because it is the Lords bread: therefore it is this
cup, a cup of excellency, because it is the cup of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Generally we do esteem things to be so much the more excellent, according
to the excellency of him that ownes the^, or that they belong unto. Why Christ
is far above al excellencies, principalities, powers, and dominions whatsoever;
we must needs therefore acknowledge, that this bread and this wine is far more
excellent then any other in regard of the owner of them. It is true indeed,
that Christ is the owner of all the Creatures, they are his, because he made
them; it is very true: yea, but yet we must take notice here of a further, and
a special owing of these creatures, whereby they belong to Christ Jesus, and
that in many respects: First, besides that they are his creatures as other
things are; these are Christ his own by institution, because Christ has
instituted them by his own Word, and likewise by his own fact, that they
should be a part of his own saving Ordinance. Secondly, they are his own by
representation, for as they are a part of his Ordinances, so they are a lively
picture of Christ Jesus, whereby he represents and tenders to the eye of every
faithful believer all that ever he has done, and suffered for them. They are
his own by representation, as Caesar's picture is his, because it carries his
resemblance; so this Bread, and this Wine is Christ's, because it has the
picture of Christ, and represents unto the faithful Christ Jesus, and the
whole work of our redemption. Thirdly, they are his own by communion, because
the bread and wine in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, are as it were the
Lords agents, whereby Christ Jesus does communicate, and convey, and work
himself through the lively operation of the Holy Ghost into the hearts of
every true believer, that does receive him worthily, I Cor. 10.16. The Cup of
blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? the
bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? So then
you see, the bread and the wine in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is Christ
his own by a specialty, by way of communion.

Mark, 14.22. says, that he gave thanks; Matthew says, chapter 26. v. 26. He
blessed them. What shall we say, do these differ one from another? In the
general both agree, though in manner of speech there be some difference: It is
true, the main actio^ that our Savior was then employed in, the blessing of the
Creatures, was invocation, and thankesgiving; and thence it is said by Mark,
He gave thanks: yet it was not barely a thankesgiving, but such a
thankesgiving, as whereby he procured a blessing upon them, that they should be
effectual not only for nourishing purposes, as at our own meals, but eve^
for saving purposes to every faithful receiver: It was such a thankesgiving,
by which they were dedicated, and consecrated, as outward parts of Gods worship,
to his own immediate service; and thence it is said by Matthew, that He
blessed them. And that we may know it was more then ordinary, the Text shows,
Matthew. 26.26, 27. that he having blessed or given thanks for the Bread, he
gave thanks also for the Wine, pronouncing a several blessing upon each of
them; whereas ordinarily our bread, and our drink are both blessed together by
one and the same giving of thanks.





He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation:
The reason is, because it is this bread, and this cup: these matters being so
holy and sanctified and dedicated to such a sacred and holy use: whosoever
discerns not these things, but takes them as they are in their own nature, he
eats and drinks his own damnation, and is guilty of the body and blood of
Christ; it is not as to eat bread at home, for that being moderatly taken does
not hurt a man, though oft-times it does him little good: but he that eats
this bread, and drinks this cup, and discernes not the body and blood of
Christ, he eats and drinks his own damnation, and is guilty of the body and
blood of Christ; he is not only guilty of the spoil of so much bread and
wine, but of this bread, and this wine; he is guilty of the body and blood of
Christ.

this bread, and this wine, dedicated to this holy and sacred use. Let no man
think in his heart, it is but bread, and it is but wine, and what gteat matter
can you make of it? I answer to them as Moses did to those in the 16. of
Exodus verse. 15. speaking of Manna, they seemed to make light of it, What is
this? Moses says unto them, This is the bread that God has given you to eat,
that you might live. So, though this be but bread and wine, yet this is the
bread, and this is the wine, that GOD has given us, to eat, and to drink,
and to feed not our bodies only as Manna did, but even our souls to eternal
life.

2 Then again it teaches us, not to stay there in the admiration of these
things, as many do, but know that you must go on, and as you esteem
reverently of it, so likewise earnestly and fervently to desire it. We know
for our parts, that the best things we most of all desire, specially in the
matter of our diet; the best, the finest, the whitest, and the wholsomest
bread: so for wine the best, the quickest, the neatest, and the richest wine is
desired most. Oh that we were as wise for the diet and welfare of our souls,
as we are for the diet of our bodies. This bread is the best bread, the
finest, the whitest, and the wholsomest bread that ever man did or can eat:
this wine is the best, the quickest, the neatest, and the richest wine that
ever any man did, or can drink: therefore how should we be stirred up with an
earnest and fervent desire after this bread and this wine.

Mark and mind that of the Apostles, in John 6.34. Christ had told them, verse.
33. that the bread of God is he which comes down from heaven, and gives
life unto the world: then they said unto him, Lord evermore give us of this
bread. That was spoken of Christ absolutely in himself, but this is spoken of
Christ in a sacramental sense; let us therefore follow their example, and let
the consideration of the excellency of this bread stir us up to desire it
earnes^^y, to pray that God would evermore give us this bread: and this would
make us not come once a month, but every day if it were possible: our little
coming to it, shows our little desire of it.

But to go further; we must not only reverently esteem of it, and earnestly
desire it, but also labor to be worthy receivers of it. Whenever we come to
the Lords Table, let every one of us see we bring a pure soul and a clean
heart, purged from the leaven of all maliciousness, and cleansed from the
sinful humors of our own nature, emptied of the filthy and noisome
corruptions of the world and of the old man. Let us come with a pure heart, and
a sanctified soul, a clean vessel to put this holy and sanctified food
into. For otherwise, if thou come as an unworthy receiver, all will be marred,
that is to say, both the bread, and the receiver; the unworthy receiver defiles
this sanctified bread unto himself; and this sanctified bread shall condemn
the unworthy receiver: so both shall be marred. But when as there comes a sweet
vessel for this sweet food to be put into, then these will sweetly agree
together.

As there is a mark of excellency set upon the bread and the cup, it is this
bread, and this cup, that is to say, sanctified bread, and a sanctified cup: so
there must answerably be a mark of excellency set upon the receiver; thou must
be this receiver, that is to say, a sanctified receiver, a prepared receiver, a
worthy receiver. And when these things shall thus meet together, then there is a
sweet meeting; then is this bread, and this wine well bestowed upon this
receiver, and then this receiver is well refreshed and well comforted, with
this bread, and this wine. Dogs and swine, that is to say, they that continue
in their sins and filthiness, they are not to come to be made partakers of
these holy things, and precious pearls of God.

Lastly, we must not stay here neither, but we must go one step further. As
we must reverently esteem of it, and earnestly desire it, and worthily receive
it; So likewise we must in the last place thankfully acknowledge the goodness
of GOD, and magnify his great love toward us, that is pleased to invite and
admit such unworthy guests as we are, to such precious bread and wine as this
is. Bless GOD the Father in thy heart, that has sent thee this bread, and
this wine. Bless GOD the Son, that has given thee this bread, and this cup.
Bless GOD the Holy Ghost, that is always present with the believing receiver,
by the continual assistance of his power and grace, to make this bread, and
this cup through his lively operation to be the bread of spiritual strength,
and the wine of spiritual comfort, the bread and wine of life, and of
salvation, to every faithful receiver. So much shall serve to have spoken of
this third thing.

It follows, As often as you shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, you
show the Lords death till he come. Mark here, the Apostle speaking of the
administration and participation of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, couples
both these together, the bread and the wine, the eating of the bread, and the
drinking of the wine: he does not say, As often as you eat this bread, or drink
this cup, as if they might be divided one from the other; but, as often as you
eat this bread and drink this cup, joining these inseparably together in the
use of the Sacrament.



The institution of the Sacrament by our Savior yields us a double proof of
this doctrine, each of them very sufficient, and each of them very clear; the
first is our Saviors practice, and the second is our Saviors commandment.
First, concerning our Saviors practice, it is said in these places, Matthew. 26.
Mark 14. and Luke 22. that our Savior took the bread and the wine, and gave
it to his Disciples. Our Savior himself he administered it not in one kine
only, but in both kinds. Now the rule is this, that our Saviors example in
all matters of substance, in all his ordinances must be the rule that we must
follow: this is a matter of substance concerning this saving Ordinance of the
Lords supper, and therefore his example in this is to be followed, that
himself did administer the Sacrament in both kinds; and his example must be
our rule, therefore we must do so too.

The second proof is from his Commandment, for how soever it be that Matthew
and Mark mentions it not, yet Luke chap. 22. and Paul here mentions an
express commandment, that Christ gave charge that they should do this in
remembrance of him; as he says of the bread, so the same he says of the wine:
that is, whatsoever you see me do in matter of substance, the same you must do
as long as the world stands: Christ did so, and therefore commands them to
do so: our Saviors commandment is a yoke of obedience unto us; seeing he
commanded it, we must do it; and therefore it is clear in regard of Christ
his commandment, and his practice, that it is so to be administered in both
kinds, in the bread, and in the wine both together. The Papists that are the
maine professed adversaries of God and of his truth in this case, they seek
out many shifts to avoid the force of this argument: All that they say may be
reduced to these three heads.

First, say they, you allege the example of Christ, that holds in regard of
the bread, but not in regard of the cup.

Secondly, if it do hold for the cup, yet it is to be administered only to the
Clergy, and not to the ordinary people.

Thirdly, if to the lay people, yet it is a matter arbitrary to us of the
Ministry, or to the Church; we may do it if we will, but there is no
necessity in it that we must do it. These are their exceptions that they take:
First, it holds, say they, for the bread, but not for the cup, and. if so be we
understand the institution of our Savior rightly, it will clear all these
mists.

For the first exception in particular: it holds say they, for the bread, but
not for the cup. No? why Christ administered the bread and the cup, without any
such difference at all; without preferring any of them one before the other: If
the commandment and example of Christ bind to the one, why not to the other?
Christ administered and commanded both, and yet they will not have both. If our
Savior had made any exception of the cup, it had been another matter; but
Christ administered it in both kinds, as well the wine as the bread, and
therefore it holds in the one as well as in the other.

Secondly, for the second exception. Put the case it holds for the bread, and
not for the cup too, yet it holds not, say they, that it should be administered
to the laytie, and common people, only to the Ministers and Clergy men. I,
but our Savior delivered indifferently to all that were present, the very cup
as well as the bread, and speaks more of the cup than he does of the bread;
for he says not, eat ye all of this bread, though no doubt but that was his
meaning; but coming to the cup he says expressly, Drink ye all of this;
whosoever comes to the Sacrament see he do that.

But the Papists take exception against this, Drink ye all of this, that is
they say, only the Disciples, Apostles, and men of the Clergy; that he meant,
for they only were then present, and therefore it holds for the Clergy, and not
for the Laytie. This is a very silly shift.

But to answer this, first, howsoever it be indeed that there was none present
but Ministers; yet notwithstanding ask the^ this question, If there had bin any
there present that had not bin of the Ministry, can any man think that our
Savior would have turned away the cup from him, and not have given him the
wine, and so have turned them without? It were a graceless, and senseless
imagination: certainly he would have been as ready to have administered the cup
to them, as the bread. Again, these Apostles, howsoever they were of the
Ministry, yet they were but receivers then, they were not Ministers in that
case. For example, if we have some two or three Ministers at our Communion that
are receivers, besides him that delivers it, though they be Ministers by
Calling, yet there is no difference in this action between the^ and other
receivers: So likewise the Apostles, though they were Ministers, yet being then
to receive the Sacrament, not then to administer it, but to receive it
administered by the hand of our Savior Christ; therefore they differed nothing
from ordinary people in that case.

Thirdly and lastly, if so be that it be so, that this rule does not hold for
the cup as well as for the bread, that it should not be given to the Laytie: I
would fain know of any Papist in the world, what warrant he has for the bread,
that the bread should be given to the Laytie? Surely nothing from our Saviors
institution, for they were only Ministers also, to whom he delivered the
bread, as well as the cup.

Thirdly for the third exception, that though it do extend the cup to the
Laytie, yet it proves not that the ordinary people must have the cup of
necessity. Why not of necessity? I would feign know, is there any necessity by
the institution, practice and commandment of Christ, that the Laytie should
have the bread communicated to them? then there is as much necessity for the
other; for our Saviors practice is the same, his commandment is the same, as
well for the one, as for the other. The commandment, the practice, and
institution of our Savior is the same, and therefore there is the same
necessity; if it be of necessity they should have the bread, then it is of
necessity they should have the wine too. If Paul may be taken to be the Judge
of this controversy between them and us, and to be the interpreter of our
Saviors meaning, then he will make the matter clear on our fide.

First, whereas they say it is true, it holds for the bread, and not for the
cup, you see the Apostle joins them both together in these verses, and besides
that in the 24. verse, When he had given thanks he brake it, and said, Take,
eat, this is my body; and after the same manner in the 25. verse, He took the
Cup, saying, This Cup is the New Testament of my blood: he made no difference
between them, but after the same manner, says the Text, that he did
institute, take, and deliver the one, after the same manner he did the other,
and so ought we: If it hold for the bread, then surely after the same manner it
holds for the wine.

Secondly, say they, it holds not for the Laity, but only for the Clergy:
But the Apostle says here, As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup,
that is spoken to the Church, not to the Ministers only, but to all the
people. And verse 28. Let a man therefore examine himself, which is a general
rule for all receivers of this Sacrament, of what state or calling soever they
be.

Thirdly, put the case it be so, that the Laity may have the cup, yet (say
they) there is no such necessity that it must be so: But the Apostle gives us
a clear rule for that in the 23. verse, where he says, I have received of
the Lord, that which I also have delivered unto you. That all the rules that
the Apostle gives to the Church of Corinth, concerning the Sacraments, might be
understood to be of a commanding power to bind their consciences, he commends
them as Gods own ordinances. So then, that which he received of Christ, he
delivered unto them; That which he delivers unto them, is the ordinance of the
Lord Jesus Christ, verse. 23. but he delivers it to then, that the ordinary
people should drink the cup, as well as eat the bread, verse. 26. Therefore
this is the very ordinance of Christ himself, and therefore of absolute
necessity.

It is worth our observation here, that the Evangelists Matthew and Mark did
speak nothing of our Saviors command, Do this in remembrance of me: and S.
Luke he speaks it only concerning the bread: But the Apostle Paul a
faithful Interpreter of Christ, speaks it not only of the bread, but of the
cup too, verse 24. Take, eat, this is my body, which is broken for you, This
do in remembrance of me: So the very same commandment he does use concerning
the cup, verse. 25. The same commandment that is for the bread, the same he
gives for the cup, and therefore the same necesitie that there is for the one
to be administered to the Laity, the same there is for the other.



some drink, as well as bread, else it is but a dry feast, as we say, if
there be no drink: and many a poor and dry feast have the people amongst the
Papists, who only have bread at the Lords Table, but not a drop of drink with
it: but the Lord has been more merciful and bountiful to us then so: he
makes us a feast at the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Is it against the nature
of a feast, to have bread only, and not wine? Does not the necessity of a
feast require that they should have both? Then the Sacrament of the Lords
supper, being the Lords feast, must be furnished with the cup as well as with
the bread.

So in regard of our disposition, and of our necessity, every one of us that
know how sweet the Lord Jesus Christ is, cannot but both hunger and thirst
after him. Whosoever relisheth the body of Christ, will hunger after the body
of Christ: and whosoever relisheth the blood of Christ, will thirst after the
blood of Christ. And our Savior does propound himself unto us, that he is
not only bread to satisfy our hunger, but water of life also to satisfy our
thirst: this is Christ in regard of himself, as he is our Redeemer and
Mediator, we come to the Sacrament, there to behold Christ, to worship Christ,
to apprehend him, and to receive him, as our Mediator and Redeemer: and
therefore the Sacrament must not only afford us bread to satisfy our hunger,
but wine also to satisfy our thirst.

Use. First it serves to reprove them in the Popish Church, that deprive the
ordinary people of the cup. It is a great sin in them, for they make
themselves in that case wiser then the Lord Jesus Christ, changing his
ordinance at their own pleasure. They say, they must not have the cup for fear
of shedding his blood. Cursed hypocrites! that make themselves more jealous of
shedding the blood of Christ, than Christ himself did. Besides that they do
maime the Sacrament, and make it imperfect, in that they do take away one
material part of the Sacrament, so also they do exceedingly wrong the people
in that they deprive them of the benefit and comfort that they might have by
the blood of Christ; as much as in them lies, they deprive and defraud them of
it. If we being at the Sacrament, there should come in a mad man, and steal
away the cup from us, would we not say that he is a sacrilegious these, and
spoils Gods ordinances, and robs the Church? So, do not they maime the
Sacrament, and wrong and rob the people in the church of Rome of that which is
their due by Gods ordinance, by keeping back the cup? But they have a
distinction, they have a shift and device that they think will salve all.

The Body say they, does contain the blood too, they have the blood in the
body; for the body contains his blood by way of concomitancie. But this is a
very sorry shift, quite contrary to the practice of our Savior, and contrary to
the nature of the Sacrament. We come to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, to
celebrate the memorial of his body by it self, and to celebrate the memorial
of Christ's shedding of his blood by it self. And Christ instituted that
Sacrament of purpose not only to remember the death of Christ in the bread,
but Christ commended himself unto us in the Sacrament, as his body being
severed from his blood, and his blood being out of his body, so his body to be
a sacrifice, and his blood to be a sacrifice, and so has appointed several
signs answerable to each of them. And this meets directly with this foolish
conceit of the papists. We receive the body of Christ as a severed thing from
his blood, for they were then severed the one from the other.

Again, the next Use. It should put us in mind of the love of God toward us,
in delivering and bringing us out of the hands of these robbers, that have made
a prey of the Church of God, and do make a prey of it, keeping back the
people from receiving that part of the Sacrament. This should teach us also to
magnify the bountiful goodness of God to us, that bidding us to his table, he
does not scantle us to a morsel of dry bread, but with the bread he gives us
wine; He reaches forth the cup to us, as if Christ should say, Here, here,
thou poor hungry and thirsty soul, take wine to thy bread, and eat and
drink, and be merry, and take thy fill upon thy Savior Jesus Christ, and
cheer up thy heart in feeding upon whole Christ for thy comfort, and life, and
salvation, Ps. 22.26. The poor shall eat and be satisfied, and their hearts
shall live for ever. It is spoken generally to all the Saints of God that
believe in him. It is performed and made good in this parcicular. God gives us
to eat to the full at his table, whereby we may be fully satisfied, that our
hearts may live for ever. Pro. 9. It is the voice of the Word, which says,
Come and eat of my meat, and drink of my wine. Christ he is the true Wisdom
there spoken of. It is he that calls us to eat and to drink of his meat and
his wine. And this is expressly fulfilled in the act of receiving the sacrament
of the Lords supper: consider this with thankful hearts, consider the fatherly
care of God toward us, that meets us at it were at every turn. He gives us the
bread to signify Christ his body broken for us; and the wine to signify the
shedding of his blood for us. Is any of us distrustful that Christ's body is
not enough for us? here is his blood too. Have we tasted of the bread, and of
the body of Christ, and found little or no relish in it? the^ the Minister
comes presently to give us the wine, that by the presence of the wine he may
quicken us to the better sense of the bread.

Lastly, do we find joy and comfort in the bread? bless God for it. But
that's not al; seeing we find this comfort in the bread, he gives us the wine
too, that so our joy may be full in every respect to our hearts desire. This is
the bountiful goodness of Christ Jesus, that has given his body to be
crucified upon the Cross, and his blood to be shed for our sins; That he has
given us his whole body, his body and blood, that so there may be nothing
wanting to give us full contentment and satisfaction, that our Lord Jesus
Christ is an all-sufficient Savior, and a plenteous Redeemer.

The end of the fourteenth Lecture.
THE FIFTEENTH LECTVRE UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
THAT we may be prepared to the worthy participation of the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper the next Sabbath day, we are now to meditate upon some argument
fitting for that purpose; and to proceed in that Text we began in, namely, 1
Cor. 11.26. For as often as you shall eat this bread and drink this cup, you
show the Lords death till he come. The Text, you may remember, we divided into
two parts. First, here is an action to be performed, in the former part of the
verse, The receiving of the Lords Supper. Secondly, here is a caution that this
action is to be performed withal, and that is in the latter part of the verse,
ye show the Lords death till he come. Concerning the action in the former part
of the verse, we noted two things: First, the parts of the action, to eat this
bread, and drink this cup. Secondly, the frequenting of the action in this
clause, As often as you eat this bread, and drink this cup, etc. It is to be
done, and it is to be frequented or done often. Of the parts of this action, we
have spoken before; wherein we noted, first, that the nature and benefit of the
Sacrament consists in the use of the Sacrament, because the Apostle describes
the Sacrament, by the use of it. Secondly, we noted that the bread and wine,
the elements that are used in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, they are
called by their own name after the words of blessing, and therefore for
substance they are the same creatures as before. Thirdly, they are (as I
showed) set forth by a note of excellency, this bread, and this wine; though in
regard of their nature they are the same, yet in regard of their use they are
more excellent than any other. Lastly, he couples them together; As often as you
shall eat this bread, and drink this cup: thence we noted, that the Sacrament
is not to be administered in one kind only, but in both, in the bread, and in
the wine, and not in the bread without the wine, nor in wine; without the
bread. And so much of the parts of this action. The other branch follows,
namely, the frequenting or often performance of the action, in these words, As
often as you shall eat this bread, and drink this cup: whereby is given us to
understand, that as this action of receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
is to be performed, so it is to be frequented and often performed: we must eat
this bread, and drink this cup, and that oft-times.

It may appear by the circumstances of the Text, that this Church of Corinth
to whom the Apostle writ this Epistle, that they did usually in most of their
Church Assemblies and meetings, (if not in all) communicate in the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper: for the Apostle in the 17. and 18. verses tells them of
things generally amiss in the Church: and in the 20. verse he gives instance
in this particular, namely, in the matter of the Lords Supper: Mark the words;
When ye come together therefore into one place, this is not to eat the Lords
Supper. The words do sound to this effect, that usually when the Corinthians
came together in the Church Assemblies, they did eat the Lords Supper,
howsoever they did much misdemeane and miscarie themselves in this holy action,
that they did not carry themselves so to Gods glory, norwith reverence to his
ordinance, nor with that profit and comfort to themselves, and love to their
brethren as they ought to do, because they received it disorderly one before
another, yet notwithstanding for the matter of receiving that was usual
amongst them: The Apostle took this for a thing granted, that when they came
together they did eat: else the consequence had been to no purpose: but
speaking generally of their assemblies and Church-meetings, he speaks of the
eating of the Sacrament, as a thing usual in most of them, if not in all: and
this is the reason why the Apostle falls into the mention of the frequenting of
this action; As often as you eat this bread, and drink this cup, etc. which yet
we must take heed that we understand it not only as a bare mention of a thing
done by the Church of Corinth, that they did eat and drink often: as if he
should say, They did so indeed, but whether it were well done or ill done it
makes no matter; the circumstances of the Text give us better light to see by
for our resolution herein; and we may therein discern these three things:
First, that it was not a thing amiss that they did so; yea further, that it
was well done; yea thirdly, that it is a duty of necessity, for them and all
the faithful to communicate in.

First, that it was not a thing amiss among them, for if it had, certainly the
Apostle would have reproved them for it, as he did for other abuses, especially
seeing he took upon him to reprove and reform such abuses as were crept into
the matter of the Sacrament; they doing this, and often frequenting the
participation of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, if so be that it had been
a thing amiss, (the Apostle of purpose reproving things amiss) he would have
reproved this, but seeing he reproved it not, therefore it was not ill done.

Secondly, the Text makes it clear that it was well done, and it is spoken by
way of commendation; for the Apostle builds a precept upon this practice of
theirs; So often as you eat this bread, and drink this cup, you show the Lords
death till he come. The precept is, they must show the Lords death: and that
precept is built upon this their practice, their often receiving of the
Sacrament; and this is a general rule, that God never builds any precept but
upon a good ground and foundation, the foundation must be his own, as well as
the building, else he never builds upon it: but the Lord builds a precept upon
this practice, and therefore their practice is good, and indeed a matter that
God approves of; so that you see that the Text makes it clear that it is a
commendable thing; and if we should go further to speak of the last clause of
the verse, Do it till he come, that also shows that it is a matter
commendable, because it must continue to be done to the worlds end.

Lastly, it is a matter of necessity that they must do it, it is an admonition
to a necessary duty: for the rise of this speech of the Apostle, is fetched from
our Saviors own words in the institution, verse 25. now that is spoken by way
of command, Do this in remembrance of me: Mark it, here you see that our
Savior plainly does deliver this by way of a command unto them, Do this as
often as you do it in remembrance of me: he delivers it, I say, in the nature of
a commandment, as also by and by we shall show more plainly. Now if so be that
Christ commanded it, therefore it must needs be done, and it is a matter of
necessity: the Commandments of God are not arbitrary to us, to do them or not
to do them, but every Commandment imports a necessity, that therefore it must
be done, because it is commanded: And where it is said, You show forth the
Lords death, etc. that clause shows that it is not once to be done, that will
not serve the turn, but often; the continual repetition of it is necessary from
time to time, even to the worlds end. So then this is the thing that here we
are co seize upon, that the frequent receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper was a common and continual use.

Luke 22 19. Do this in remembrance of me, (says Christ:) which words of our
Savior, Paul in the 25. verse of this Chapter rehearses thus; Do this as often
as you drink it, in remembrance of me. Paul knew well the meaning of our
Savior, therefore he sets it down in these plain terms. So then when our
Savior faith, Do this in remembrance of me, these words of his they carry in
them the force of a double charge or command: First, of a thing antecedent or
going before, that is, the receiving of the Sacrament: and secondly, of a thing
consequent, that this is to be done in remembrance of me, see you remember me
always in the performance of this work; the Apostle adding this clause by way
of explication, Do this as often as you do it, in remembrance of me; he makes
it clear, that surely each of these are to be performed, and that often: Do
this; that is, receive the Sacrament often: remember me, that is, remember me
often: by this clause Christ shows his meaning, that both of them is to be done
often; the Sacrament often to be received, and the death of Christ often to be
remembered; and surely the necessity of the consequent does infer the
necessity of the antecedent: the necessity of the often remembrance of Christ,
inferres the necessity of the often receiving the Sacrament, because the
Sacrament is ordained for the memorial of Christ: if we must remember Christ
often, and that in the Sacrament, then we must receive the Sacrament often.

Now those words of our Savior as they be applied in that case to the
Disciples, though they are in effect the same with these words of my Text, yet
they are a more clear and a more exceptionlesse proof of this doctrine than
my text is: for some cavil at the words of my Text, thinking them not
sufficient to prove that the frequent use of the Sacrament is necessary for
Christians; for the Apostle, say they, does but mention it as a thing done; or
if he do commend it, that is all, it proves not the necessity of it: the
Apostle says not, that they must do it, but speaks of it as a thing already
done by them. Well, put case it be so here; but when Christ spoke to his
Disciples he said to them, Do this as often as you do it in remembrance of me:
now they had never eaten of this bread, nor drank of this cup before, and
therefore it could not be spoken as of a thing usually done by them: therefore
our Saviors words cannot be so eluded, as they would elude the words of my
Text. Now seeing Paul's speech and our Saviors go together, as both containing
one and the same thing, therefore when Christ says, do this in remembrance of
me, and when Paul says, As often as you do this, you show the Lords death till
he come, both these testimonies prove this, namely, that it is a matter of
necessity that the death of Christ is often to be remembered, and that the
Sacrament is often to be received. And surely in all ordinary understanding, this
clause here, where the Apostle says, As often, etc. must necessarily imply a
necessity of eating it often: as if so be this, I should say to a Christian
friend, whenever you pray, pray for me; or, as often as you pray pray for me;
if I should think that such a one would pray but once in his life time, or but
very seldom, then I would not say, As often as you pray pray for me; but, If
ever you do pray, pray for me: So if the Apostle had had an intent to give
liberty to them to receive it often if they would, or seldom if they would not,
then he would have said, If ever you receive it, then do it in remembrance of
Christ: but in faying, As often as you do this, that shows it is a matter of
necessity; there is a necessity employed as well in the often receiving of the
Saerament, as well as a necessity of the often remembering bring of the death of
the Lord Jesus Christ. The other proof is the practice of the Church, (which
ratifies and continues this,) besides the practice of this Church of Corinth,
Act. 20.7. there Paul and other of the Disciples being at Troas, going to
Macedonia, the text says, verse. 7. They being come together to break bread
the first day of the week, Paul preached unto them: The first day of the
week; what is that? that is the Sabbath day, the Lords day: What is the
breaking of bread? what is meant by that? why, the receiving of the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper: The Disciples being come together, that is to say, after
their usual manner, the first day of the week to break bread, Paul preached
unto them. The manner of speech declares that it was their practice, their
usual and ordinary practice at their coming together in their Christian
assemblies, to communicate in breaking of bread. And it appears to be so also
by other circumstances there mentioned, as namely, the company, many Disciples,
verse 4.5. being then in a strange place, at Troas, and in their journey
traveling by the way. If they did it abroad when they were traveling, then
much more would they do it when they were at home, and at rest; and therefore
these circumstances of the Text make it clear that it was an usual practice
of the Church so to do.

Act. 2.42. there it is said of them that were converted, that they continued
together in the Apopostles doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking of bread, and
prayers: by breaking of bread we are to understand the participation in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper: They continued in breaking bread; Mark what the
Text says, they continued in it, not once or twice, but they continued in it,
they made it their daily and continual practice.

And see with what holy exercises it is ranged withal, They continued together
in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, breaking of bread, and prayers: as
who should say, it was as usual and familiar with them to receive the
Sacrament, as to hear the word, and to meet together in prayer; and the
ranging of this duty amongst other holy exercises seems to give some secret
intimation of a reason why they made this their ordinary and usual practice;
because when these duties are performed together, they are mavelous helpful
one to another, one seconds and backs another: they continued in the Apostles
doctrine, in fellowship, love-meetings, breaking of bread, and prayer. If we
should look into the state of the Church in succeeding ages, we shall find by
stories, that still the nearer the Church lived to the time of the Apostles,
the more frequent and more usual was their practice in the receiving of this
Sacrament often: in so much that in some places it was every Sabbath, in others
at least every month: the doctrine then is clear, both by the Commandment of
Christ, and also by the practice of the Church.

hold the death of Jesus Christ, and the memorial thereof most brightly and
plainly, and therefore that is often to be received. That the death of Christ is
often to be remembered, I hope no Christian will deny, the death of Christ, a
matter so weighty in it self, the greatest business that ever was acted since
the world stood, the death of Christ being a matter of so great consequence to
Mankind, that every man and woman so far forth is saved or damned, as they
have their portion, or have not their portion in the death of Christ; the death
of Christ being so comfortable to the faithful, that it is the very life of
all the good that they have here, or shall have hereafter, and can we ever
remember this often enough? and can we omit any occasion of the remembering of
Christ his death, without sin, and without much dishonor to God, much wrong
and indignity to Christ, and damage to our own souls? sturely we cannot. I,
but some me will say, I can remember the death of Christ, though not by
receiving the Sacrament; I can remember it in the word, for there Christ is
crucified before me, and in my prayers, and in all my good and holy
meditations, and in other things as well as in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper. It is true thou may, and it is true thou must, yet notwithstanding
we must conceive that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is instituted of
purpose for this mere end, to remember the death of Christ; and therefore if
thou can meditate profitably upon the death of Christ in other exercises,
then much more thou may do it in this, yea we may be bold to expect a better
blessing from God upon our remembrance of Christ's death by the receiving of
this Sacrament, than by the hearing of the word, and other good exercises,
because this Sacrament is ordained and instituted merely as it were and of
purpose for that end, and God will most bless his own ordinances to the same
end whereunto he has so nearly fitted and appointed them. Besides that, in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper there is a most sensible occasion offered unto
us, to remember the death of Christ; the death of Christ is as it were acted
before our eyes, by the breaking of the bread, and the pouring out of the wine,
whereby we may fitly, and must of necessity be stirred up to remember with our
selves, how freely the Lord Jesus Christ gave his body to be crucified, and his
blood to be shed for the taking away of our sins. If therefore the death of
Chris must be remembered, then the Sacrament wherein we behold the death of
Christ as in a glass, must needs be often received and participated in.

continual supply of bodily food; so our weak souls because we are weak in
faith, and apt to unbeleefe, and distrust, through our own corruption of
heart, and Satan's remptations; our souls I say being so weak in faith,
therefore the strength of it must be continually relieved and supported by a
continual supply of spiritual food, which is ministered unto us especially in
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; so much more in it than in the word, by how
much more the assurance is given to the truth of an evidence by the seal, than
by the writing without the seal: a writing without a seal shows that such a
thing is done, but if the seal be set unto it, then it confirms it unto us
the more: God tells us in his word that we are reconciled to him in the blood
of Christ; it is true, we believe this, and this begets and strengthens our
faith: but having the seal of it, which is the Sacrament, here is a more
sensible fastening of this truth upon us; this strengthens our faith much more:
we do pray to God to increase our faith, do we think that God will increase
it without means? that is preemption: but we pray to God to bless the means
unto us, that it may be powerful to increase it: but do we pray to God to
bless the means without our frequent use of the means? that also is
presumption too: we must make use of the means that God has appointed tor the
increase of our faith: now the Sacrament of the Lords Supper being such a
special means whereby the faith of Gods children is strengthened, therefore a
special care they must have to frequent the same often.

of the pardon of our sins is the very life of God in our hearts) and
therefore to be careful of the frequent use of the means by which this
assurance may be confirmed unto us, and that is by the participation of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, for that is the special means by which this is
most sensibly fastened upon us. I have heard that it was the worldly wisdom
of a Treasurer in this land in Queen Elizabeth's time, that he would never be a
fortnight or a month at the most, without his Quietus est, that whatsoever
changes and alterations might come, yet he might be in that respect in some
good security. See how wise men can be for the matters of the world, and how
foolish they are for the matters of heaven: every man that will address himself
to come into Gods presence, at his table, and prepare himself by faith and
repentance, he may have this Quietus est, and receive an actual acquittance
from God, and God shall tell him by his Spirit, that his sins are pardoned
and forgiven, and he reconciled to him in Christ: we have this opportunity
offered unto us once a month, and yet such is our dullness and backwardness
in matters of salvation, that we are most of us careless of this: if we were
so careful for our souls, as he was for his body, we would come every month
to receive our acquittance, because changes and alterations may come, we may
dye before the next day come, or tentations may assault us, and such like, and
therefore let us labor to have our Quietus est from God always in a
readiness.

our selves to the power and work of sanctification, and we to betake our
selves wholly to his obedience: thus I say is the covenant of Gods children
renewed with God especially in the matter of receiving the Sacrament, and
therefore it being our duty daily to renew our covenant with God, therefore we
ought to have access to it, and to receive the sacrament often, because in it our
covenant is spccially renewed.

Levit. 6.13. that must never go out of the hearts one of another. Fire we
know will go out if it be not kindled and supply^ed with fuel: so the fire
of love in the hearts of Gods children is ready to be quenched: many occasions
of worldly matters, and other businesses there are that breed such differences,
that it makes love many times cold, and turns it into contention, yea even in
Gods children, and therefore we must use the means whereby it may be kindled
and kept still alive; but there is no better means to kindle it, and keep it
alive, than the participation of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; there is no
such bellows to blow up the fire of love in their hearts as this when they
come to the Lords table to eat of the same bread, no such fuel to maintain
this fire of love in their hearts, as the spiritual food they participate of
at the Lords Table, and therefore if we would have the love of Gods children
kindled toward us, and ours to them, and not go out, then let us use this
most effectual means, namely, the often communicating and participating in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper.





Many Minisers are negligent in this duty, either, forsooth, because they would
spare their own pains and labor, or elfe because they are careless of the
flock of Christ committed unto them, they have not that regard of them as they
should: hence it comes to pass that they let the people settle themselves upon
the lees of their sins: either they tender it not often unto them, but happily
once, or four times a year; or if they do tender it often, yet they suffer
the people to absent themselves without any just occasion: great is the
negligence of many in this case; and surely it is a fearful sin, and a
heavy account have many to make for this sin. It is our duty (that are
Ministers) to spread the table before you, and to call, warn, and invite you
to come, and to seek this to the utmost of our power, and then if you come not
often, you shall perish in your sins and negligence, but we shall deliver our own
souls: but if we be negligent in this, and do not call upon you often, you
shall perish in your sins, and your blood shall be required at our hands; and
therefore it stands us upon to look unto it, not only in regard of our own
souls, and our own good, but in regard of you, and in love to your souls,
that we should tender you the Lords Supper ofttimes, and call upon you often to
come unto it: how many good and holy opportunities have we offeted unto us to
remember the death of Christ? to confirm and strengthen the faith of them that
are weak, and to cherish love in the hearts of Gods children, and to increase
in them the grace of sanctification, by the often use of this Sacrament? How
many good opportunities are daily omitted and neglected in this land, and in
this City, merely through the Ministers negligence in this duty? many souls
there be that perish because of this negligence in Ministers, and therefore it
is our duty to be stirred up, and to labor to reform our selves. The Apostle
gives us the rule, when he says, Thou that teach another, teach not thou
thy self.

But in the second place, the negligence of the people is more convenient for
this place to be reproved thereby: when the Table is spread, when God says to
them, Come, when the Minister says All is ready, and their brethren say, Come,
too; when they are thus warned, called, and invited to come, and then they
refuse, or if they do come it is very sparingly, it is not often; this is a most
graceless and retchlesse practice. If we were scantled of this great means
and blessing either by persecutton, or by the iniquity of the times, or by the
profaneness of the Magistrate, or by the gracelessenesse of the Minister,
then we would cry out, we cannot have that we would have, and that we are
wronged, and debarred of the saving ordinance of God, and that the door of the
kingdom of heaven is shut against us, and that we cannot partake so often as
we would. But now that through Gods mercy, we have the Sacrament often tendered
unto us, and that we are called, and warned, and invited to communicate, if we
refuse now to come, or if we come sparingly, what is this, but to despise the
bountiful, and rich mercy of God toward us, that the Lord offers us so many
heavenly excellencies and comforts with one hand; for in this one action is
Christ Jesus and all his merits offered to us: what is this but to despise God
that offers so many blessings of heavenly comfort, Christ Jesus, and all his
merits, and we turn our backs upon him, and say we will none of this heavenly
Manna. And surely without this be reformed, it cannot but be recompensed of
God, with extremity of Justice in some notorious judgment upon us, specially
by taking away such rich and precious treasures from such base wretches as we
are, that so meanly esteem of them; or else that God should cry quittance with
us, and turn his back upon us when we pray (as we have turned our backs
upon him when he called) and will not hear us. As also when we are sick, and
when we lie upon our death beds God will not regard us, go whither we will;
and at the day of Judgment, he shall say Depart from meye cursed, I know you
not, I offered you such and such means of salvation, and that oftentimes, but
you would none of it, and therefore I have no salvation for you. We know how
God dealt with the Jews when the mysteries of salvation were tendered unto
them, and they rejected the same, he then turned to the Gentiles, to them that
would bring forth better fruit: when those that were bidden to the Feast would
not come, the Lord said, go into the high ways, and as many as ye find, bid
them, etc. A notable example we have in the first of Hester, and 3. Abashuerosh
the King made a great Feast, and he bade his Nobles, and the Queen Vashti, and
in the 12, verse she refused to come to the King, and therefore in the 19,
verse she is divorced, she shall never come more into the Kings presence: shall
we think that he tendered his temporal glory, more then God does his
infinite glory: if God tender himself in his feast, and spread his table, and
call us as the King called her to eat and to drink of that which he has
prepared, if we refuse to come as she did, what can we expect, but that there
shall be a divorce made between God and us, I will not acknowledge you for my
spouse, (will God say) you shall have no more my ordinances nor Oracles amongst
you. Let us I beseech you rightly consider of these things, and so far as we
are guilty, labor to reform them in our selves, and according to our power in
others. It is strange to see, and to hear what, strange alligations men make
to color themselves in this their negligence, it is strange to see how witty
men are to color these things, and to deceive their own souls, it is the
Devils wit, he puts it into them: now the true ground and reason why they come
not often to the Sacrament is, because they contemn Gods ordinance, and are
unthankful to the Lord Jesus Christ for his infinite love; and withal also it
is a kind of sluggishnesse that is in them, that they are loath to put
themselves and their hearts to such examinations and trials, and provings, and
siftings, and rippings up; to such denying of themselves, and such faithful
promises to God of new obedience, as every one that comes as a worthy receiver
must have, they are loath to put themselves to this hardness, and therefore they
communicate not often in this Sacrament, and this is the true reason why they are
loath to come to it, they say it is a toil to come so often: it is true, it is a
toil to the flesh, and to corrupt nature, but no toil to a child of God, but
joy and comfort to him.

Yet further you shall hear what they will allege and pretend besides, some
of them say there is no such necessity that we should receive it so often, and
they give you some reasons for it; as first, why say they? the Sacrament of
Baptism is a Sacrament of good use as well as the sacrament of the Lords
Supper, and that is to be communicated in but once, and why then should we
communicate so often in the sacrament of the Lords Supper?

I answer, baptism is ordained for our admissio^ into the Church and house of
God, and there can be but one admission into if; but when we are in, then we
must grow further and further to be incorporated into Christ, and that is by
the sacrament of the Lords Supper: our baptism gives us our admission and
entrance, though the power of baptism continues to our lives end, and
whosoever feels not the power of his baptism in the course of his life, that
man was never truly baptized: though the outward action of baptism be not to
be reiterated, yet still it continues in being to our last end, still we are
baptized into the death of Christ, still we must labor to be that which we
are baptized to be, to be like to Christ, and to follow him. So then you see
there is great reason why baptism must be but once because that is the
admission of us into the Church, but this is our going forward in the Church,
and in the work of grace; therefore we must not stand still, but proceed
forward in this exercise continually.

Again, another reason that they allege is this, I but, say they, was not
the Passover in the former Testament a sacrifice answerable to the Sacrament
in the new Testament, and that was celebrated but once a year, and why then
should this be often?

I answer, there is great reason; the time of the celebration of the Passover
was a ceremony, and so a part of Gods worship to the Jews, the Passover was
commanded to be celebrated once, and but once in the year, and they should have
sinned if they had celebrated it more then once, but the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper is to be celebrated often, and we sin if we do not. Besides that,
the Passover was but for one temporal deliverance from the Egyptians, and
from the hand of Pharaoh; and that one deliverance was but once wrought; but
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper resembles unto us our eternal deliverance
from sin, Satan, hell, death, and damnation; and this is not only wrought
but daily running on, and all Converts are still daily plucked out from hell,
and the jaws of Satan. The work of our redemption is every day after that
we are thoroughly converted; still the old man is crucified, and the new man is
repaired in us: and therefore howsoever it were sufficient that the passover
was once celebrated, and but once; yet this sacrament crament of the Lords
Supper is often to be received, because it is the celebration of our eternal
and everlasting redemption and deliverance, a thing that is continually in
working.

Lastly, if so be that that were a good rule, then it follows, that as the
Israelites were to celebrate the Passover that day only that they were
delivered our of Egypt, then it follows, that we should receive this
Sacrament, but only upon good Friday, and no time else, but they themselves
confess, that that is Jewish; and therefore by their own confession, this can
be no just reason against the often participation of this Sacrament.

Another reason that they have, that there is no necessity in receiving it often,
is the example of our Savior Christ; we need not to be more careful say
they, then Christ, and he never received it but once in all his life time, and
therefore we need have it but once. I answer, Christ to the time of his death
was under the Law as he was man, and so was to behave himself and conform
himself to the ceremonies of the Law, and therefore he was not to have a hand
in this Sacrament of the new Testament, till the time came that the old was to
be abolished.

Besides that, we must understand that he was rather an Institutor then a
receiver of this Sacrament, and therefore he was to make choice of the fittest
time when it was to be done, and that was as near to his death as could be,
and therefore he spoke of it as a thing past, This is my blood that is shed for
you: so that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper must be as near to his death as
may be, and therefore it was fittest to be instituted by him the night before
he suffered.

Last of all, if they say so, then they must conclude by their own rule, that
they must never receive the sacrament, but when they are ready to dye, if that
reason hold good; But as I said before, our Savior Christ was the Institutor
of the sacrament, and therefore he chose that time that it might be the fresher
in memory. Another thing they allege, is a matter of inconveniency: oh say
they, if we should come often, it would be tedious to us. I surely, matters of
God are tedious to worldly and carnal men, tedious to flesh and blood, to put
it self to such examination and trial, to such sifting, and ransacking, and
rippings up, and denying of our selves, this is tedious; but must we refuse to
come to the sacrament of the Lords Supper for this tediousness? No surely, the
old man must be trodden down under our feet, and scorned, that God may have the
honor of his own ordinance: many maysay so, for hearing of the Word, that it
is a tedious thing to hear twice a day, so also for prayer, it is a tedious
thing to pray twice day, morning and evening, so faith the Devil so says the
old man, and the natural corruption that is within us, but must swallow down
all his hardness, and the old man must be crucified and mortified, if ever we
look to be saved, and to come to heaven; we must dispense with, and we must
devour many of those tediousnesses; if ever we look to have any portion in
Christ, tediousness must not fright us from that which God commands, but if
God command, we must obey, whatsoever flesh and blood allege to the contrary.

Again, another exception is this, if we come often, say they, we shall
degenerate into a kind of formality, and make it a matter of fashion. I, that
comes from the carnality and hypocrisy of thy heart; we cannot be conversant
in any holy duty, but in time we settle upon our lees, and grow into a kind of
formality: alas, if we did consider our selves, we had need to be ripped up
daily, and if we should put our selves daily to this duty, we should be freer
from this formality than those that use it so seldom. Is this it that makes us
do it formally, because we do it often? No surely. As in die matter of prayer,
because we pray daily, do we therefore pray formally? No. For if we do it
conscionably it will make us far from formality, for the frequent use of it
brings us into that awe, dread, and reverence of Gods Majesty that it will
make us call our wits together, and ransacke every corner of our hearts, that
so we may be fitted to come into the presence of God at all times. Some other
allegations they have, but I will not now stand upon them.

The last Use is this: It teaches all of us thankfulness to God, that live
here in this Land, and in this place, where through Gods mercy we have
opportunity, and may have access to come to this Sacrament at least once a
month to feast our selves, and to make our selves merry with this spiritual
food, the body and blood of Christ, it is a thing that if we had it not we
would give all we have to enjoy it, and therefore having it let us make use of
it, and reverently esteem of it, and neglect no good opportunity to come to
it: if we knew the benefit of it we would desire to receive it not only once
a month, but every Sabbath, yea every day if it were possible: and the reason
why we do frequent it no oftener, not thirst after it, is because we know not
the benefit nor sweetness of it. Let us not lay any impediment to hinder us
from it, for none will serve the turn to be justifiable before God, but those
that God lays upon us; I say, we having just occasion and opportunity to come
to the Lords Table, being members of this Congregation, without we can give
some good reason to the contrary, (for it is not enough to say I am not
prepared, nor I am not in charity, these are no sufficient nor just occasions
to hinder us) were to sin grievously therein against God, and against our own
souls.

The end of the fifteenth Lecture.
THE SIXTEENTH LECTVRE UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
WE are now to proceed through Gods assistance, (because the next Sabbath is a
Communion Sabbath) in that very business that we have in hand. 1. Cor. 11.26.
For as often as you shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show forth the
Lords death till he come. You heard even now the division of this Scripture
into two parts: the former part shows an action to be performed, the
receiving of the Lords Supper: the latter part prescribes a caution that this
action is to be performed withal, You show forth the Lords death: As often as
you eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show forth the Lords death till he
come. We have finished the former part, that which is contained in the former
words of the verse, namely, the action here to be performed. We are now to
proceed to handle the latter part, namely, the caution or the condition that
this action is to be performed withal, Ye show the Lords death, etc. Wherein
first we are to consider the caution or the condition it self, that is, the
showing forth of the Lords death. Secondly, we are to consider the frequenting,
or the often observing of this caution. For though it be not said here, you
often show forth the Lord death, yet that is necessarily employed: for the word
(often) used in the beginning of the verse, is common to the latter part of the
verse as well as to the former: as if the Apostle should say, As often as you
eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, so often you show forth the Lords
death. Then here is lastly the continuance of it, how long this caution or
condition is to be observed, surely so long as the world stands, till Christ
come to judgment: As often as you eat this bread and drink this cup, you show
the Lords death, etc. or show ye the Lords death till he come. First, to begin
with the caution or condition, it self, you show forth: wherein first consider
the matter that is to be remembered, it is the Lords death: Secondly, you must
consider the manner how it is to be remembered, by a showing of it forth, by a
kind of lively representing and expressing of it, ye show forth the Lords
death till he come: this is our remembering of Christ his death: for Christ
says in the former verse, Do this in remembrance of me; and Paul in this
verse shows how, that is, by showing forth the Lords death till he come, or by
a lively expressing of it.

First, therefore to begin with the matter that is to be remembered or showed
forth, and that is the Lords death. Wherein first when the Apostle here names
death, we are to understand hereby these two things: first, the act of death
in respect of Christ himself: secondly, the benefit of Christ his death in
respect of us; we must remember the Lords death, that is, the act of his death
in respect of himself: we must remember and show forth his sufferings in his
soul and in his body, his agony, his obedience, his woundings, his nayling to
the Cross, his shedding of his blood, his giving up the ghost. Secondly,
withal we must understand by the death of Christ, the benefit thereof arising
unto us, the forgiveness of our sins, the satisfaction of our punishment,
our reconciling unto God, the perfect and absolute redemption of our souls and
bodies from that miserable and damnable estate that we were in; this is the
death of Christ, and the right remembering of his death; remember Christ dying,
the act of his death; remember Christ dying, the benefit of his death to us;
and this is the right remembering of Christ his death which is tendered unto us
in the Sacrament of the Lord supper. But yet withal when it is said remember
his death, we must not take it so as if therefore we should neglect or forget the
remembrance either of that which went before his death, or of that which came
after his death, we must remember them also; we must remember that which went
before his death, as his birth, his life, his meannesse, and other parts of his
humiliation: also we must remember that which followed after his death, namely,
his resurrection, his ascension, and other parts of his glorification: for
Christ is given wholly unto us in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and
therefore we must receive him wholly, for all the passages of our Savior
Christ before his death, in his death, and after his death, they all make up
together one and the same work of our redemption, and therefore all these
passages must be wrapped up together in one and the same apprehension of ours.
We must remember the death of Christ especially in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, but yet under the comprehension of the death of Christ, we must
meditate upon those things that went before his death, and those things that
came after his death, every thing in their kind, and in their place and order:
this we are to understand by the death of Christ.

Next, it is faid here, the Lords death. By the Lord we are to understand the
Lord Jesus Christ, who is Lord over all, blessed for evermore. Christ is the
Lord by nature and being: as the Father is Lord, and the Holy Ghost Lord, so
also is Christ the Lord by nature and being: But yet Christ is entitled to the
name Lord, by a kind of excellency, and specialtie in regard of his office of
Mediatorship, whereby he is Lord over all; but especially Lord over his Church.
And we must understand, that our Savior Christ is more usually called Lord at
the time of his Death and Resurrection, and afterward, then he was before.
The Reason of it is this, because howsoever our Savior Christ was Lord
always, and even in the days of his flesh, did many ways show forth himself
to be Lord, yet notwithstanding at his death, and afterward, he did then
especially and most certainly prove himself to be the Lord; and then he did
most manifestly show and declare himself to be the Lord, by doing that then,
which never any could do but the Lord himself. What the things are shall be
showed (God willing) by and by.

The Lords death! some may say, this seems to be a strange speech. Here are
but two words, and yet they seem to imply a flat contradiction one to another.
If he be the Lord, how could he dye? And if he dyed, how could he be the
Lord? Could the Lord dye?

For answer hereunto, we must consider, that our Savior Christ consists of
two natures, God and Man: he is perfectly God and Lord, and withal, he is
perfectly Man: and by reason of the union of these two natures, his Godhead and
his Manhood in one and the same Person Christ, there arises a certain
communion of the properties of both these natures, whereby that which is proper
unto Christ as he is God, is yet affirmed of him; even as he is Man: and
whereby on the other side, that which is proper unto Christ, as he is man, is
affirmed of him, as he is God. It is a deep mystery of our faith, and yet a
necessary point to be known; for without the knowledge of this, we cannot
rightly know Christ.

I desire to make it plain. Christ I say, is perfectly God or Lord, and
perfectly man: and because that these two natures his Godhead and his manhood
are so nearly united into one and the same person of the Son of God, hence it
comes to pass that there is a communication of properties, that is to say,
those things that are proper to him as he is God, are affirmed of him as he is
man, and those things that are proper to him as he is man, are affirmed of him
as he is God. To give an instance of the first: those things as are proper to
Christ as he is God, are affirmed of him as he is man. John 3.13. For no man
ascended up to heaven, but he that has descended from heaven, even the Son
of man which is in heaven: Our Savior Christ speaks it of himself, even the
Son of man that is in heaven: when our Savior Christ spoke these words he
was upon the earth, and not in heaven as he was man, and yet there it is said,
the Son of man that is in heaven, as though then he were in heaven at that
instant, even as the Son of man. How can these stand together, he being man
was on earth and yet in heaven at that instant? The doubt is clearly answered
thus: Consider Christ consisting of two natures, God and Man, perfectly God,
and perfectly Man, and then you shall find by reason of this union in one
person, that well may the properties of the one be affirmed of the other:
Christ the Son of man is also the Son of God: and as God, so he was then and
always in heaven; and because God and Man in Christ are but one person,
therefore Christ the Son of man is said then to be in heaven: The Son of God
was then in heaven; Christ the Son of Man is the Son of God; therefore Christ
the Son of man was even then in heaven. One thing must be observed for the
right understanding of this mystery, and that is this, namely, that those
properties that belong to God are affirmed of Christ as he is man, and so on
the contrary: but we must understand it of the person of Christ, and not of
the natures of Christ, that is to say, for the person of Christ, to speak of
Christ in his person it is a true and a necessary rule, the property of Christ
as he is God is affirmed of him as he is man, but in regard of the natures it
is contrary, that that which is proper to the nature of man is not to be
affirmed of the nature of God: to say that the Godhead dies, that is blasphemy;
but to say that the manhood dies, that is true: If Christ should have said, Ioh.
3.13 my manhood that in heaven; that had been an untrue speech, for that was
not then in heaven: but that he in regard of his Godhead, and the union of the
two natures, was in heaven, that is a most true and holy speech: The reason why
we must put this difference, is, because Christ has but one person, his
manhood has his subsistence in the person of the Son of God; so that Christ
both God and Man is but one person: but the natures, that is to say, his
Godhead and his manhood, are still distinct and several things,
notwithstanding the union of the person.

Now on the other side, that which is likewise proper to Christ as he is man,
the same is affirmed of him as he is God: As for example, Luke 1.35. That which
shall be borne of thee shall be called the Son of God. That Christ should be
borne of the blessed Virgin, in respect of his Godhead, is blasphemy to
imagine; but because Christ in respect of his manhood was borne of the blessed
Virgin, and the same Christ man was also Christ the Son of God, therefore by
reason of this near union of the two natures in one and the same person of the
Son of God, it is truly said that Christ the Son of God was borne of the
blessed Virgin.

Acts 20.28. there it is said that God purchased his Church by his own blood:
if a man should speak this of himself, it might seem blasphemy, but God
spoke it, and therefore it is true, it is spoken of Christ, for it is he alone
that has purchased it; and it is a proper thing to purchase it as he was man,
but not as he was God; for man has blood, God has none: yet notwithstanding
by reason of the union of these two natures it is said that God purchased his
Church by his blood, because the same Christ that is man is also God, and
therefore truly may it be said, God has purchased it, etc. So here, the Lords
death, says the Text: that Christ dyed, this is a proper thing belonging to
him as he was man, but as he is Christ the Lord it is not so proper; yet it is
affirmed to be the Lords death, that is by reason of the near union of these
two natures, and therefore that which is proper to Christ as he is man, is
affirmed of him as he is God, this is a deep mystery; and yet notwithstanding
it may reasonably well be conceived of us: it agrees with the whole current of
the Scripture, and therefore we must hold it as an undoubted truth: the matter
being thus clear concerning the Lords death, let us come to the Doctrines that
hence arise for our instruction, the death of the Lord, the doctrine hence to
be observed is this:

Acts 2.36. Let all the house of Israel now know for a surety, that God has
made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus I say whom ye have crucified. Mark
it, he speaks there of Christ in regard of his death, This Jesus whom ye have
crucified; and in that state he calls him Lord, God has made him Lord, even
this Jesus whom ye have crucified; so that Christ was Lord even when he was
crucified. See how the Apostle lays these terms together, the Lord, and
Christ, and Jesus. Some man may say, It may be he was the Lord before his
death, but not in his death, or else after his death: but the Apostle shows
that he was Lord even in his death: so long as he was Christ and Jesus, so
long he was Lord, but he was Jesus and Christ in his death, and therefore he
was Lord in his death. Acts 3.15. God has glorified his Son Jesus whom ye
betrayed and denied; ye have killed the Lord of life whom God has raised from
the dead. He speaks there of Christ in the state of his death; he calls him
the Son of God, that is to say, he was the Lord when he was betrayed, when
he was denied, and when he was killed, yet he was the Lord still in all that
mean estate. When they had him in their bloody clutches, yet still he was the
Lord; when they killed him, yet still he was the Lord of life: Ye have killed
the Lord of life, says the Apostle: 1 Cor. 2.8. Which none of the Princes of
this world have known, for had they known him they would not have crucified
the Lord of glory. Mark, the Text says, they have crucified the Lord of glory,
though they knew him not to be the Lord of glory, yet God knew it that he was
the Lord of glory whom they crucified; he called him the Lord of glory even
when he was crucified. Mark it, glory and shame are most directly contrary one
to another, even as the East is to the West, or Heaven to Hell: to be crucified
is the greatest shame that ever can befall man; to be the Lord of glory is the
highest and the greatest degree of glory that ever can be conceived of God.
Christ being crucified was the Lord of glory even in that low, and base, and
mean estate, in that shameful state of his, still he was the Lord, the
glorious Lord of heaven and earth, and so he showed himself to be the Lord of
glory: which is the next point, and the other branch of the observation, and
now to be proved. For proof of that look into Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. there the
Apostle tells us that Christ whilst he was of no reputation, whilst he was in
the form of a servant, whilst he humbled himself to the death of the Cross,
all this while he was equal with God, he was the Lord all this while, even in
all the time of his crucifying. In the ninth, tenth, and eleventh verses, there
you shall see he showed himself to be the Lord of glory: wherefore the Lord
has given him a name above all names, that at the name of Jesus should every
knee bow, both of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the
earth: and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord unto
the glory of God the Father. As Christ was the Lord when he was crucified, so
he showed himself to be the Lord when he was crucified: for then was that
done by Christ in regard of his obedience, by which, and for which he did
obtain a name above all names, and he did justly deserve to be acknowledged a
Lord of all Lords, a glorious Lord, that at the name of him should every knee
bow, and every tongue should confess that he is the Lordunto the glory of God
the Father: So that Christ did do that upon the Cross, whereby he showed
himself to be Lord. Romans 1.4. there it is said that Christ was declared
mightily to be the Son of God. He speaks there of our Savior Christ, and
calls him the Son of God, that is to say, the Lord. He says, He was declared
mightily to be Son of God: and how, I pray you? By the spirit of
sanctification, by the resurrection from the dead. Now this you must
understand, that the power whereby Christ raised himself from death, was in
him whilst he was in the state of death, and whilst Christ lay in the grave,
then was this power in him to raise up himself; now by this power he showed
himself to be the Son of God, to be the Lord; and it is a mighty
declaration of him to be the Son of God, and therefore Christ declared
himself mightily to be the Lord, even in the state of his death. Luke 23.42.
the Thief he gives testimony to this truth: our Savior being upon the Cross,
he says, O Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom. Those that
crucified him did not see nor take notice that he was the Lord, but the poor
Thief did see him to be the Lord, and did know that he was the Lord, and he
believed in him, and called upon him as the Lord; we never read that ever he
did know before that he was the Lord; nothing brought him to know Christ to be
the Lord, but that which he discerned in him upon the Cross. So the Centurion
in Matthew. 27.44. the Text says, that the Centurion and others that saw those
fearful things that came to pass at the death of Christ, Of a truth, say
they, this man was the Son of God. The Centurion, for ought we know, did
never know nor take notice that this man was the Son of God, till he came to
behold his death; but when he came to behold him on the Cross by the eye of
Faith, he saw such evident signs of him to be the Lord, that he persuaded
himself and takes his oath of it, and says, Of a truth, this man is the Son
of God; howsoever it is that they killed him, yet of a truth this was the Son
of God. In the 51. and 52. verses, those fearful accidents that are mentioned
there, as the veil renting, the Rocks cleaving asunder, the graves opening,
and many of the bodies of the Saints that slept arose, what did all this show,
but that Christ did clearly manifest himself, and prove himself to be the
Lord even in his death, that the dead and insensible creatures were sensible of
it; the earth, the stones and graves discerned it, and the bodies of the Saints
that were dead discerned it, and did acknowledge it in their kind? What a
fearful upbraiding to the Jews was this? that either they did not see Christ
to be the Lord, or would not see him nor acknowledge him, when the very stones
and other insensible creatures were sensible of it. So then you see the
Doctrine is clearly proved by Scripture, that Christ Jesus, howsoever he was
shamefully crucified, and put to a most cruel and ignominious death, as ever
any man could be putunto, yet (notwithstanding) even in that state of his death
he was the Lord, and showed himself to be the Lord, the glorious Lord of
heaven and earth.

The Reasons of the Doctrine are these: so showed himself to be; for then
indeed by his death he did purchase and redeem his Church, he bought his
Church; then the faithful were his own by actual redemption. You know that
those things which a man purchases and buys at a dear rate, and gives for
them as much as they are worth, they are his own by a true title. If so be
that any man do redeem a man out of the galleys, he is truly his Lord, in the
right kind of owning; and the other is his servant. Christ when he was upon the
cross, then did he purchase and buy his Church by his blood, and then therein
he showed himself in a most right sense to be the Lord of his Church: then
were they his own by actual redemption: and this is that which the Saints did
acknowledge, Revel. 5.9. Oh worthy art thou to take the Book, and to open the
seal thereof: and why is he worthy more than any other? Because thou wast
killed, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood; and therefore thou have a
true interest into us, and thou art surely our Lord, and worthy art thou so to
be acknowledged. And our Savior gives some intimation of it in the 18. of
John, If I were lifted up from the earth, says our Savior, I would draw all
men unto me: What is meant by lifting up? that is to say, his crucifying: If I
were crucified I would draw all men after me. The reach of the place is this;
That Christ by his crucifying, and his death, draws all men, and gathers all
his Church to himself; he purchases them, and makes them his own by
redemption, that he may be acknowledged their Lord, and they his people, and
servants: and surely as Christ did gather all believers from the beginning of
the world, by the power of his word, and death, and blessed Spirit, so
specially in the actual performance of his suffering, then chiefly did he draw
all men unto him: for then his Lordship, after a special manner was advanced,
and the territories of his kingdom were much enlarged; and now no longer was
it to be bound, and to be contained within the borders of Judea, but to have
dominion from sea to sea, unto the worlds end. Oh what a mighty Lord did he
show himself to be even in his death!

Psalm. 110. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit at my right hand till I make thine
enemies thy footstool. Here is a true and a right Lord, when he can subdue and
trample his enemies under his feet. Christ being upon the cross in his death,
then (indeed) did he especially vanquish and trample his enemies under his
feet, Satan and all his instruments. Then he took them down to their greatest
shame, to their irrecoverable loss, and utter ruin for ever. See how the
Apostle speaks of it, Coloss. 2.15. He has spoiled Principalities and
Powers, and has made a show of them openly, and has triumphed over them in
the Cross. What be the enemies that our Savior Christ has? why, they are
Principalities and Powers; he has vanquished them all, the Devil and his
Angels, not only as a man would say petty Devils, but Beelzebub himself,
Principalities and Powers: and if there be any stronger, and mightier, and
greater than the rest, Christ has subdued them all. And how has he subdued
them? He has spoiled them, says the Text; he has subdued them even as a man
should take away all that a man has; so Christ, he has spoiled these
Principalities and Powers, he has taken away their weapons, their forces, and
power from them, yea and their hearts too in some sort; they know they shall
never overcome Gods children. He has spoiled Principalities and Powers, and
made show of them openly. It is speech that is drawn from a Conqueror, and has
been in war, and gotten the victory, and coming into the City, he brings
thofe that he has taken captives with him, and he rides in great jollity up
and down, as who should say, these are my captives that I have overcome: so
has Christ spoiled Principalities and Powers, and made show of them openly,
and triumphed over them, says the Text: he has gotten himself agreat
victory. Christ did not only overcome them, but he triumphed over them; that
is to say, he trod them under foot as a base thing, never able to rise up
again. But where, how, and when, and by what means, was all this done? Why,
upon the Cross, says the Text: So then Christ showed himself to be a Lord in
his death upon the cross. Consider the state of the business as then it was;
consider Satan, and all the powers of darkness; they were then in the greatest
hope that could be, as they thought; when they had once gotten Christ upon the
cross the greatest possibility that ever they had against him. On the other
side, Christ was in the most unlikeliest condition to overcome, and to deliver
us, and most likeliest to have been overcome, and to be made a prey unto them.

Consider again in the next place, the Devil and his instruments were in the
height of their malicious pride and power; as Christ says, Now is the very
hour and power of darkness: and Christ on the otherside, he was in the
deepest of his insirmitie forsaken of God, in his apprehension, forsaken of all
the world, made a prey to his enemies, no way to acquit himself, or to raise
up himself, his soul being heavy even to the death: consider these things (I
say) they being in this fair hope, and upon the top of their pride, and Christ
in the deepest of his misery: now that Christ should free himself from them
all, so that not a bone of him was broken, nor a hair off his head did perish,
and not only so that he should so acquit himself from the Devil, but should
acquit all Gods children; and that this he should do to the utter breaking of
the power of Satan; for all those that have true right and interest into the
death of Christ; oh what a glorious Lord did Christ show himself to be, when
he was upon the Cross, there he did break the Serpents head. Judges 16.12,
13. when the Philistimes had gotten Samson, and had him in their power, that
they could do with him what they list, and had plucked out his eyes, and
insulted over him in that miserable desolation; now were the Princes of the
Philistims in their greatest jollity: the servant of God, (at least for that
business he was the servant of God) what does he in this case? He said unto
the servant that led him by the hand, Lead me that I may touch the pillars
that the house stands upon, and that I may lean to them; and after his
prayer, he bowed himself with all his might (says the Text) and the house
fell upon them all, and so they were slain, and he killed more at his death,
than in all his life. So Christ, he was in the hands of Satan and his
instruments, and they had him upon the cross, they mocked and scoffed at him,
and did unto him as they would; but then he bowed himself upon the Cross, and
yielded up the ghost, and brought destruction upon them all, and those that he
slew at the hour of his death were infinitely more than those whom he overthrew
all his life time.

Act. 2.24. mark what the Text says, He loosed the sorrows of death, because
it was unpossible that he should be holden of death. There is no creature in
the world that is subject to death, that can possibly be rid of death; but
Christ being subject to death, cannot be held of death, and therefore he was
Lord even in his death. Heb. 2.14. Christ through death has overcome him that
had the power of death, that is the Devil. Hosea 13.14. O death I will be thy
death. 1 Cor. 15.54. Oh death where is thy sting? Mark the triumphing of Christ
upon the cross; by his death that he suffered upon the cross he overcame
Death; none can overcome Death, but the Lord of Life: Death and Deaths sting,
that is sin; Death and Deaths master, that is the Devil: Christ has overcome
them all together upon the cross, and triumphed over them, through the power
of his humiliation.

alone? It is a part of his office to redeem us, and deliver us out of the
power of damnation; except he had been the Lord he could not have done it; who
can redeem us but the Lord? to deliver himself out of that great extremity
that he was in, was more than the work of a man: but if he could have rid
himself as being a man of extraordinary grace and strength to pass thorough
such pikes as never any other man could, yet he could not have been our
Redeemer, by delivering himself to deliver us, without he had been God: there
must be infinite knowledge in the Redeemer, that he may take notice of all the
Saints of God from the beginning of the world to the end thereof, this cannot
be in any but in God only. Again, there must be infinite mercy in the
Redeemer to forgive sins, there must be infinite wisdom in him to make all
the redeemed wise to God and to their own salvation; in the Redeemer there
must be infinite grace effectual to call all those that shall be saved; also
there must be in him infinite power to save our souls; to save any one soul
is a matter of infinite power, and therefore much more to save so many thousand
souls as are from time to time called and converted unto the Lord. Lastly,
there must be infinite dignity, infinite worthiness and merit in that blood
that must redeem all those that God will save, this cannot be but by the blood
of the Lord, that God which has purchased us with his own blood. None of all
these infinities can be found in any but in God only, therefore the REDEEMER
must be LORD.

The use first that shows us that God does often times work by quite contraries
in the matter of salvation, as who should say, he sets one contrary against
another, and brings the greatest good out of the greatest evil: Christ is the
Lord in his very death, in his most cruel and shameful death; he was much
magnified when he was most debased, the Lord of life and glory when he was
killed and crucified: thus it was with Christ, and so it is in the members of
Christ: it was so in him, that we may expect this in our selves, and so we
find it by experience how God works with many of his, children: are they not
ofttimes most glorious in their greatest abasement, and most comfortable in
their greatest afflictions? and are we not then often times most near to God,
when we think our selves far from God? are we not most spiritually and
heavenly minded even in the most hellish temptations of Satan that we are
exercised withal? those that are in the state of grace know this to be true:
this is not sensible to the natural man, nor yet to the spiritual man many
times for the present, yet afterward he sees it, and can say, Surely the Lord
is with me, and I was not aware. Look but into an example of Paul in the like
temptation: 2 Cor. 12.9, 10. the Apostle prays against the temptations of
Satan, the answer of God to him is this, My grace is sufficient for thee, my
power is perfect in thy weakness: and thereupon the Apostle sers his rest, and
says, When I am weak, then I am strong. Here you see that in matters of
salvation God oft-times works by contraries, showing himself a strong God in
a weak man: a strange thing that God should perfect his strength in man's
weakness: a man would think he should perfect his strength in our strength,
but he does it in our weakness: My strength, says he, is perfect in thy
weakness: So in the case of Stephen, in the matter of persecution, Acts 6. the
last verse, when he was there before the Council, they that sat in Council
looking upon him, they beheld his face as the face of an Angel, they admired
him in that state of his baseness, as a glorious Angel. It is not
unseasonable for God so to work by contraries, for it magnifies the great and
almighty power and wisdom of God, that can work by contraries; and it
magnifies the great mercy and goodness of God, that he will do so for us,
that when we are weakest, then we are strongest, that God commands light to
shine unto us out of darkness, and makes our greatest misery a mere step to
our greatest glory.

Psalm. 2.1. Why did the Heathen rage, and the people murmur in vain? their
hope is but vain, the Lord from Heaven laughes them to scorn, says the
Prophet: they get nothing by it, when they have done all they can, but
derision; and therefore let not wicked men boast of whatsoever hope they have
to do hurt to Gods children, for their hope is but vain; neither yet let Gods
children be cast down with it, but comfort themselves in this, that the wicked
when they are in their greatest hopes, they are nearest to their fall and
destruction.



yet it is not sufficient to believe in Christ crucified as man, for whosoever
believes in Christ as a crucified man, if he stay there, and if his faith go
not one step further, to say I believe in the Lord crucified, he is in a most
miserable and damnable case. When once we come to relish the Lord in the death
of Christ, then is his death most sweet and comfortable unto us; this will make
a great many of living springs of waters to rise up in our hearts, when we
meditate upon the death of the Lord Christ, that we can say, the Lord has died
for me; this will work reverence and devotion in us, and therefore we must
highly esteem of it, not as the death of a man, but as the death of the Lord:
the Lord dyed for me, Oh, how thankful ought I to be to the Lord for this
great kindness! what am I poor sinful wretch, that Christ the Lord should
dye for me! this will teach us to love the Lord; Oh, how should we love the
glorious Lord of heaven and earth, seeing the Lord of heaven and earth has so
loved us as to dye for us! Also it teaches us patience, seeing Christ the Lord
has dyed for us, therefore we must not think much to suffer temptation and
affliction, yea death it self; Christ the Lord has gone through these before,
and therefore no doubt but he will bring us through the like, with joy and with
comfort. Christ the Lord has dyed for us, this will breed and work faith and
boldness in us; we may be bold to hazard our souls upon Christ, knowing that
our salvation is sure and firm: it is the Lord that has wrought it by his
death, and it is not all the Devils in hell can disanull that salvation which
the Lord has wrought for us. Again, it ministers matter of rejoicing, that we
do not only believe in Christ crucified, but we rejoice in Christ crucified.
Gal. 6.14. God forbid that I should rejoice, but in the cross unto me, and I
unto the world: this Cross I oppose against all my fears, afflictions, and
temptations, and persecutions, against all that ever can come: I am crucified
to the world, and the world to me, because the Lord has dyed for me. Lastly,
this is a matter of excellent comfort to Gods children, for hereby we may
discern the infinite worthiness of the death of Christ, and the infinite
preciousnesse of his death: Why was the death of Christ so precious? why,
because it was the death of Christ the Lord; not the death of Christ as he was
man, but of Christ the Lord of life and glory. When we consider that so many
thousand shall be saved, we think with our selves, how shall these be saved;
why, the infinite blood of the Lord is sufficient for us al: this death, being
the Lords death it must needs be of force and power, and virtue and merit, to
procure mercy, and grace and forgiveness of sins to all those that have a
true faith, and do earnestly endeavor and desire to be conformable to this
death of Christ.

The end of the sixteenth Lecture.
THE SEVENTEENTH LECTVRE UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
NOw we are to proceed, as God shall enable us, in the handling of the 26.
verse of the 11. chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, because this
afternoones exercise we must spend in the matter of preparation against the
next Sabbath, for the receiving of the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.26. For as often
as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show forth the Lords death
till he come. We divided this Scripture, as you may remember, into these two
parts: first, an action to be performed, in the former part of the verse,
namely, the receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, set forth here by
the name of eating this bread, and drinking this cup. Secondly, the caution
that this action is to be performed withal, that we have in the latter part
of the verse, ye show forth the Lords death till he come. In this caution in
the latter part of the verse, we observed the caution it self, namely, to show
forth the Lords death: secondly, the often using, or the often observing of
this caution: For though that be not here expressed, yet it is to be supplied
out of the former part of the verse, and is in common understanding to be read
thus, As often as ye shall eat this bread and drink this cup, so often ye
show forth the Lords death till he come. Thirdly and lastly, here is the
continuance of it, how long this is to continue, why till the end of the world,
till the day of Judgment, till the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; ye show
forth the Lords death till he come.

In the caution, first we observed the matter that is to be remembered, that is
the Lords death: then secondly, we told you here we must consider of the
manner of the remembering of it: how must it be remembered? by a showing forth,
by a lively and a kind of sensible expressing of it, ye show; forth the Lords
death till he come. Concerning the matter to be remembered, namely, the Lords
death, there we showed you first what is meant by the death of the Lord,
namely, both the act of his death in respect of himself, and likewise the
benefit of his death in respect of us, for that also must be remembered in the
receiving of the Sacrament. Then when as it is said here, it is the Lords
death, I showed you that howsoever Christ as he was Lord could not dye, yet
notwithstanding the death that Christ did suffer is rightly called the death of
the Lord, because Christ being man was also God and Lord: yet by reason of the
union of both these natures in one and the same person, therefore that which is
proper to Christ as he is man, is rightly affirmed of him as being God and Lord.

And thence we drew this observation, in that it is here called the Lords
death, namely, that howsoever Christ Jesus was cruelly and shamefully crucified
and put to a most cruel and ignominious death upon the Cross as ever any man
could be put unto, yet notwithstanding even in that state of his death he was
the Lord, and showed himself to be the glorious Lord of heaven and earth. It
follows now that we are to go on: We have spoken hitherto touching the Lords
death as it is considered absolutely in it self, we are yet further to speak
of the Lords death by way of application, or by way of reference of it to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; for so you see here the Apostle speaks of it
respectively unto this Supper, As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink
this cup, ye show forth the Lords death till he come: where by it is plain,
that look what the Apostle speaks here concerning the Lords death, the same
is confined expressety to the reference of the Lords death, to the Lords
Supper: we must always remember the death of the Lord Christ Jesus; every one
of us that look to have any part, or to have any benefit by it, must remember
it at all times; but yet when as we come to communicate in the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, then there is required of us a more special meditation thereof
than generally at other times. Again, even in the participation of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, we must meditate upon whole Christ, Christ
borne, Christ living, Christ dying, Christ buried, Christ risen again; for
Christ was given wholly for us upon the Cross, and Christ is given wholly unto
us in the Lords Supper, and therefore there we must receive Christ wholly, and
meditate upon whole Christ. I but yet in this case when we come to receive the
Sacrament, then we must more meditate, and our hearts, and our minds must
more run upon the death of Christ than upon any thing else that ever Christ
did or suffered for us: it is the death of the Lord that we must take special
notice of in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

Luke, at the 19. verse our Savior being instituting and administering the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, takes the bread, and breaks it, and gives it to
his Disciples, saying, This is my body which is given for you, do this in
remembrance of me: it is not enough for us when we come to the Sacrament, to
meditate upon Christ his body, as being the body of a living man: but This is
my body which is given for you, do this in remembrance of me: we must meditate
upon the body of Christ as it is given for us, as it was broken for us, as it
was crucified for us, as it was put to death for us, and this is the right
remembrance of the death of Christ in the sacrament of the Lords Supper: and
likewise concerning the other part, namely, the cup and the wine, it follows
in the twentieth verse, This cup is the New Testament, or this is my blood in
the New Testament, which is shed for you; this is my blood which is shed for
you. When we come to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, we come to
receive the blood of Christ spiritually, sacramentally: we do not receive the
blood of Christ there as being a living thing within Christ, we do not receive
the blood of Christ as it is contained within the vessel and veins of his
body; but we receive the blood of Christ that is shed for us, that he poured
out for us, for the remission of our sins, that is the right object that the
hand of the faith of every true believer does seize and lay hold upon in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, not the body, but the body broken for us, the
body given for us; not the blood, but the blood shed and poured out for us; not
simply Christ, but Christ dying for us; it is that which is the principal
matter of the Sacrament. 1 Cor. 10.16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is
it not the communion of the blood of Christ? the bread which we break, is it
not the communion of the body of Christ? The Apostle likewise speaks there of
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: What is it that the Lord does communicate
unto us in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper on his part? the body and blood of
Christ; that is to say, the death of Christ. What is it that we do communicate
in? that we receive from God on our parts the very same thing that God gives
unto us, the body and blood of Christ, that is to say, the death of Christ. Why
then it is the body and blood of Christ, that is communicated unto us, (which
cannot be communicated unto us without it be broken and shed) that is it I say
which we receive in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and that is the thing
that is chiefly therein to be respected. 1 Cor. 11.29. He that eats and
drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation. All of us are
unworthy receivers of this Sacrament: who is worthy of such great things as
these are? we bring with us many failings and imperfections to the Lords table:
the best of us all let us prepare our selves as well as we can, yet for these
failings of ours we are to be humbled before the Lord, and to strive against
them: but though we have these failings, yet if so be we discern the Lords
body, that is to say, if our faith does rightly seize upon the death of Christ
in the Sacrament, here is the principal matter that is to be looked unto: I
say, if we rightly apprehend the death of Christ in the Sacrament, then the
principal is whole, our failings and our imperfections the Lord will
graciously pass by them, and he will pardon them in mercy: and though we be
unworthy in respect of our selves, yet the Lord will accept us as worthy in
Christ Jesus. I, but on the other side, if we do not discern the Lords body,
if when we come to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, our hearts and
our faith do not rightly lay hold upon the death of Christ, why then we fail
in the very principal of the business: and though we should bring other
graces with us, as knowledge of God, sorrow for sin, and the like, yet all
these shall not help us, but still we are unworthy receivers: so we are in our
selves, and so we shall be still reputed of God: we shall be so far from
having any benefit, that on the contrary it shall turn to our judgment and
condemnation, because we discerned not the Lords body; that is to say, because
we do fail in the principal matter that is tendered unto us, namely, the
death of Christ. Those places shall suffice for the confirmation of this point
out of Scripture: now to confirm it further by reason, the Reasons of this
Doctrine are many.

that brought his beasts, his Bulls, and his Goats to be sacrificed for sin,
that rested in them as if they were Sacrifices powerful and effectual to take
away sin: no, says the Apostle in the 10 to the Hebrews, it is impossible
that the blood of beasts should take away sin; and that the faithful knew
well enough; but yet they submitted themselves to those ordinances, because
they were Gods laws, but still the principal matter that they aimed at in all
their sacrifices, was the death of Christ, the death of the Messiah that was to
be slain for the sins of the whole world, for the perfect purging away of
sin: And so in the Sacrament of the Passover, there was never any true
believer that did eat of the paschall Lamb, but still he had an eye to the
true Lamb of God that was slain from the beginning of the world; that as that
Paschall Lamb was a memorial of the deliverance of the children of Israel
out of Egypt, and from the hands of Pharaoh, so the true Lamb of GOD, namely,
the Son of God, he should come and deliver us from hell, death, and
damnation: now if so be that it were so in the Sacrifices and Sacraments of the
Old Testament, it must needs be so in the Sacraments of the New Testament too:
if it were so with them that lived before the death of Christ, that had but the
shadow in respect of us, how much more must it be so with us that live in the
clear light, Christ having already suffered in the flesh. I grant, we have no
sacrifices propitiatory for sin, as they had: Christ Jesus himself the only
true propitiation for our sins, being once sacrificed on the Cross, there is
no further place or use for any other propitiatory sacrifices whatsoever: but
yet seeing our Sacraments are as much to us as both sacrifices and sacraments
were to the Jews, still the reason holds that if the sacrifices and sacraments
of the Law tended chiefly to the meditation of the death of Christ Jesus the
Messiah, as that being the chief object that they were therein to lay hold
upon; then certainly the principal and chief matter in the Sacraments of the
new Testament, and so particularly of the Lords Supper, must be the death of
Christ Jesus.

Cor. 1.18.23. We preach Christ crucified unto the Jews even a stumbling
block, and unto the Grecians foolishness. And the Apostle in 1 Cor. 2.2.
says, I esteemed not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him
crucified: or as we may expound it according to the original, I esteemed
nothing worthy to be known, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. What?
nothing else worthy to be known? is not the rejecting of the Jews a matter
worthy to be known? is not the calling of the Gentiles a matter worthy to be
known? is not the resurrection of the dead a matter worthy to be known? Yes,
all these are worthy to be known, but nothing worthy to be known in comparison
of Jesus Christ and him crucified: there is the chief matter, there is the
substance of the Gospel: now if so be that it be so in regard of the Gospel,
then it is so in the Sacraments too; for the Word and the Sacraments as they
must go together, so they tend to one and the same thing: that which the Word
tells us, the Sacrament seals unto us. If it be so therefore in the Word, it is
so in the Sacrament: and this we must know, as the letter of the word being
only written or read, can never profit us to salvation, without we have the
sense and the spirit of the word, which is Jesus Christ crucified: so the bread
and the wine in the sacrament profits nothing to salvation, without Christ be
seized upon and apprehended in our hearts, all the other is but a shadow
without this: we have not the substance, if we have not Christ crucified.

Romans 6.3. Know ye not that all we which have been baptized into Jesus Christ,
have been baptized into his death? What are we baptized into? into the death
of Christ; there is the substance of our Baptism: what is it that we are
washed by? by the death of Christ, or the blood of Christ. Our Savior says in
the 16. of Mark, and the 16. verse, He that shall believe and be baptized,
shall be saved; but he that will not believe, shall be damned: he that does
receive the Sacrament, and in or by the Sacrament does apprehend Jesus Christ
crucified, and does therein believe to be washed and cleansed from his sin,
he shall be saved, says our Savior: there is the outward element in
Baptism, as water; there is an outward action, as sprinkling; but the outward
element and action is nothing, without Jesus Christ do wash us with his own
blood: So it is in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; the substance of it is
the death of Christ Jesus; the bread and the wine are the elements; and they
do no more good of themselves, than the water does in Baptism. But the death
of Christ being discerned in and by this holy mystery, thus it comes to be a
saving ordinance of God. The reason stands thus; The death of Christ being the
substance of Baptism, it must also be the substance of the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper; for Baptism we know enters us into that estate which the Lords
Supper confirms us in; and the Lords Supper confirms us further in that holy
estate, which Baptism enters us into: now we must not enter into one estate,
and be confirmed in another: Therefore the substance of each Sacrament must be
one and the same; and so consequently, the death of Christ being the substance
of the one, it must also be the substance of the other.

of the Testator. That the Sacrament is the Testament of Christ, it is our
Saviors own speech in the 26. of Matthew. verse 28. For this is my blood of the
new Testament that is shed for many for the remission of sins: there is the
Sacrament called by the name of the new Testament; it is not properly the new
Testament it self, but it is not called, because it is a sign and a seal of
the new Testament: now likewise that the Testament is not of force, but by the
death of the Testator, that the Apostle Paul confirms, in the 9. to the
Hebrews, the 14, 15, 16, and 17, verses, by the example of men's Testaments,
and applies it to the Testament of Christ Jesus: says he, The Testament of man
is not of force till he be dead: Lay all this together, and mark it well;
Christ Jesus himself is the Testator, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is his
Testament, the Testament cannot be of force without the death of the Testator:
and so you see the whole force of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper consists in
the death of Christ Jesus, and therefore that is the chief matter in the
Sacrament.

Matthew. 26.28. For this is my blood of the new Testament that is shed for many
for the remission of sins. Remission of sins is the benefit; there is no
remission of sins but only by the blood of Jesus Christ: as it is in the 1.
of John 11.7. It is the blood of Jesus Christ that cleanses us from all our
sins. On the other side, in Hebr. 9.22. Where there is no shedding of blood,
there is no remission of sins: then consider of it, there is no purchasing of
remission of sins by Christ but by his blood; there is no obtaining of
remission of sins by us, but only by participating or by communicating in
the blood or death of Christ Jesus: the death of Christ Jesus is not
communicated unto us in the Sacrament, except we partake of it, and seize upon
it by faith in the Sacrament: therefore the chief and principal matter in the
Sacrament, is the death of Jesus Christ, if so be that in the receiving of the
Sacrament we come with our hearts sprinkled with the blood of Christ Jesus by
the Spirit of God; why then we are sure to be made partakers of the whole
benefit of the Sacrament, remission of sins: but if we do not come with the
blood of Christ so sprinkled in our hearts by the Spirit of God, we do not
seize upon the death of Christ, we have no benefit in the Sacrament; if there
be not shedding of blood, there is no remission of sins: Christ himself
could never have redeemed us from death, without his blood had been shed for
us; and so we can never have any benefit by his redemption, without his blood
be sprinkled in our hearts, and we take fast hold upon the death of Jesus
Christ. The Uses of the doctrine are these.

Lord Jesus Christ; they come to the Lords table, but they know not what they
come about. Alas, as Solomon says, Eccles. 4.17. Such men do but offer the
sacrifice of fools. they do not know they do evil; they do but offer the
sacrifice of fools, because they do not know what they do; that is the
meaning of the place, that they do not hear or learn, they do not
understand, they are not well taught what it is that they must principally
meditate upon when they come to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Sily men and
women that so come to the Lords Table, alas they know not that they do evil,
they know not that they profane the Sacrament, in that they do not receive
the holy things of the Sacrament, that is, the death of Christ; they know not
that they make themselves guilty of the blood of Christ, in that they receive
not the body and blood of Christ by faith: Christ he is tendered unto them, but
they know not that they do eat their own damnation, in that they apprehend
not the death of Jesus Christ which is the chief matter that is there tendered
unto them, and that the Lord calls them unto: they offer the sacrifice of
fools, they know not that they do evil. I will give you a comparison. If so
be that a man should go into the market to fetch such and such commodities
that he stands in need of, he makes himself ready, and goes forth, and makes
full account to bring them home with him, but the foolish man never considers
the price of these things, what they will cost him, and so he takes no money
to pay for them, when as the price is the chiefest thing to be respected in
that he goes about, but he never considers that: Is not this a ridiculous man?
is not that man like to come home as foolish and as empty as he went out? It
is so with many of our Communicants; many here come to the Lords Table; for
what, forsooth? to furnish themselves with such and such commodities, for to
receive the holy Sacrament, the body and blood of Christ, for to receive
remission of sins, and grace, and comfort, and such like; these they come to
receive, I but they do not consider the price of these things: what is that?
the death of Christ, for these things cost Christ Jesus his most precious
blood: they do not bring faith in their hearts, whereby to purchase and get
these things for themselves, therefore such men go away as foolish and
ridiculous, and as empty of grace as ever they were before; yea they are so
much the more damnable, because they come thus unfurnished. It is with many of
us as it was with the Jews that the Apostle speaks of in the 2. to the
Corinthians, chap. 3. verse. 14, 15. Their minds are hardened, for unto this day
remains the same covering untaken away in the reading of the old Testament,
which veil in Christ is put away: but even unto this day, when Moses is read,
the veil is laid over their hearts. They could see the outward things, the
sacrifices, the ceremonies, and the letter of the old Testament, as the Apostle
speaks; I, but says the Apostle, they could not look unto the end, they
could not look unto the substance of those things that were tendered unto them
in this outward shadow, that is to say, they could not look upon Christ, that
is the substance of all; no, says the Apostle, there is a veil over their
hearts, and to this day they continue in their hardness: so I say it is with
many among us, we come here unto the Lords Table, we can see these outward
things well enough, the bread and the wine; I but yet many of us do not look
to the end of these things, to the substance that is tendered unto us in these
holy mysteries, namely, to the death of Christ; we do not discern the Lords
body; there is a veil over the hearts of many of us, a covering of blindness
over the hearts of many of us, therefore though we do come often, this month,
and the next month, yet still we continue in the hardness of our hearts: we
are never the better till this veil be taken away, as the Apostle speaks of
the Jews; till this veil be taken away by Christ, till Christ Jesus do take
away this veil of blindness, and show them his death, and present his death
unto them, and cause them to look upon him whom they have pierced, till such
time that this veil be taken away, and that he present his death to their
hearts by his Spirit, they shall never be the better for it, they do continue
in their hardness, and they shall continue in their hardness for ever.
Therefore, beloved, let us not deceive our selves, to think that we are more
holy and religious receivers than indeed we are: let us try our selves when we
come to the Lords Table, examine our selves upon this point, what apprehension
we have of the death of Christ, what portion we have in the death of Christ,
and accordingly as thou find some measure of this grace within thee, so
come, and so expect a blessing from God: but if thou have a veil before thee,
and thou can not see and behold the death of Christ, that is to say, Christ
Jesus crucified for the taking away of thy sins, surely thou art not in case
to come to the Table of the Lord.

God: if we could but consider the benefit of Christ Jesus crucified, all
grace and all glory belongs unto us by the death of Christ: lastly, if we could
but consider the glory of Christ crucified, Christ was most glorious upon the
Cross, when he was in the height of his obedience, and so God beheld him, and
then indeed did he procure most glory to us: as it was his glory, so it is our
chiefest glory: I rejoice in nothing but in Christ crucified, says the
Apostle: If we could soundly taste of these things, the worthiness of Christ
crucified, the necessity of Christ crucified, the power of Christ crucified,
the sweetness of Christ crucified, the benefit of Christ crucified, the glory
of Christ crucified, we would hunger again and again after the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, after the death of Christ therein tendered unto us: it should
whet us on to a spiritual appetite to this heavenly banquet.

This teaches us in the second place, what be the graces that every one of us
must be furnished withal when we do come to the Lords Table: What be the
special graces? why, all graces that are any way respective to the death of
Christ; it is the death of Christ that there we come to celebrate; now because
every grace is in some sort or other respective to the death of Christ,
therefore every one of us should come furnished in some measure or other with
every grace: but yet there be some graces that be more proper and nearer
respective to the death of Christ than others are, and these we must all be
furnished withal when we come to the Sacrament; they be so necessary, that if
we come not with them it is damnable for us to come at all. There be many, I
will but touch these five; Knowledge, Faith, Love, Obedience, and
Thankfulness. The first grace is knowledge; we must be endued with knowledge,
the knowledge of God generally, and likewise of all other matters that be
necessary to salvation; but more specially the knowledge of Christ Jesus
crucified: we must know the story of his crucifying, the benefit and power of
his crucifying; but yet more particularly we must know Christ Jesus crucified
in reference to the Lords Supper; there is the particular knowledge required of
us, the presence of Christ in that Sacrament, the power of Christ in that
Sacrament, the benefits of Christ in that Sacrament, these be the things that
we must be well acquainted withal, except we know these things wecome in a
miserable case. I showed you that the death of Christ must be meditated upon
in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; here is the eye whereby we do discern
Christ crucified in these holy mysteries, even the knowledge of Christ
crucified in reference to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; and therefore as
ever thou look to have any benefit by the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
whosoever thou art, see that thou be experienced, and well seen, and well
grounded in the knowledge of Christ crucified, be not to seek of this when
thou do come, see that thou have this knowledge before thou come; he
that has his money to seek when he should pay for his meat, is like to fast;
so if we have not this knowledge before we come to the Lords Supper, if we be
not well experienced in this grace, we are like to fast, we are like to him
that has his weapons to seek when he should go to fight, he is like to be
beaten.

Secondly, we must bring Faith with us, that is the second grace; faith to
apprehend the death of Christ, to apprehend Jesus Christ crucified, and this is
as it were the hand whereby we do apply and lay hold upon Jesus Christ; for it
is but in vain for us to know Christ crucified, except we do apply him to our
selves, the eye of knowledge cannot save us, without we do apply him with the
hand of faith: by faith we do as it were lay hold upon Christ in the
Sacrament, and lay his death upon our sores, as a plaster to cure them, and as
a cordial to our souls to comfort them.

Thirdly, there must be Love in us; love to God, love to Christ, and love to
our brethren for Gods cause, for the death of Jesus Christ being first well
known and understood, then secondly, well believed and applied by faith,
works in us a kind of sensible feeling of the love of God toward us in
Christ Jesus, and thereby kindles in us a love to God himself and to Christ,
and then consequently to our brethren: if God has so loved us, we must also
love him; and if Christ have so loved us as to give himself for us, how ought
we to love Christ, and to love one another for his sake? This is the heart, as
a man would say, whereby we do give entertainment unto Jesus Christ crucified,
whereby we do embrace him within us: and surely whosoever can come to this,
that our hearts be seasoned with a love to God, and to Christ, and to our
brethren for his sake, out of question the Lord Jesus Christ dwells in us, and
lives in us, and we dwell and live in him.

The fourth grace is Obedience, even obedience to the whole will of God; here
comes in the whole duty of a Christian, as well repentance as new obedience.
This is a grace specially respective to the death of Jesus Christ; Jesus Christ
he was perfectly obedient in his death; and whosoever we are that have our
hearts rightly seasoned with the death of Christ, why surely it will work a
conscionable obedience to the will and commandment of God, to be sorrowful
for our sins past, to deny our selves, to mortify the lusts of the flesh, to
dye to sin, these be the natural effects of the death of Christ in the
hearts of believers, these we must bring with us, to be conformable to the
whole will of God, as Christ was in his life, and specially at his death. I am
come, says he, to do thy will O God: and thus does the death of Christ frame
the hearts of every one of us to true obedience: I am content to do thy will O
God; this is as it were even the practicing of the death of Christ crucified,
namely, in our obedience to God, denying our own selves, in mortifying our
own sinful lusts and affections; for we must know that these meditations
must not be dead meditations, but such as must be lively and operative to
quicken us up to obedience to Gods will.

The last grace is Thankfulness, to acknowledge all honor and thanks to be
due unto God for this great work of our Redemption by the blood of Jesus
Christ, this is a chief grace that we must chiefly bring with us to the Lords
Supper, to give God the praise and glory of it: and this is our rejoicing in
the death of Jesus Christ: it is not possible that a man should know Christ
Jesus, or that a man should love Christ for his death, or that he should obey
Christ, but he must also rejoice in the death of Christ: and how should we
rejoice in the Lord, but by giving him thanks, and singing of praise to him for
this great benefit, every one must bring these graces in some measure, or else
he is not fit to come to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: Now if so be the
Lord should come among us, and make an inquiry, and rip up every one of us,
alas how should he find every one of us to be empty of these graces, or else
full of imperfections in every one of them: well, yet though we have failings,
still let us labor for these graces, let us pray to God for these graces, and
let us never doubt if we do pray and labor for them conscionably, but that
first God will give us in some measure every one of them; secondly, if we come
with a true desire, God will graciously accept of our desire, as if we had
possession of the graces themselves: but the chiefest matter is this, that that
which we have, and that which we want of these graces, the Lord will supply
them all out of the fullness of Christ, who is full of grace and truth, and of
whose fullness we all receive grace for grace, therefore let us seek for these
graces, and labor for them, and use the means, and let us put our selves to
the mercy and leisure of God, and let us not doubt but that the Lord will be
merciful unto us, and he will give them us so far forth as shall suffice for
the saving of our souls.

Another matter of instruction is this; this teaches us what it is that we
must especially look after when we come to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
that which is specially tendered unto us, the death of Christ. I showed you
first there must be hungring and thirsting; and secondly, what graces we must
bring with us; now what is the chief matter that we must aim at? the very
death of Jesus Christ, to discern it: and here we must enlarge our thoughts to
many considerations. First and for most we must consider with our selves that
Christ dyed for us, that he suffered a shameful and a cruel death; then when
we have considered of that, we must consider that Christ's death is a sufficient
ransom for man's redemption. I, but I must go further, and say that I am one
of the persons that shed Christ's blood, though it were the Jews act, yet it was
my sin: and then further, that that blood which I have spilt, the same shall
be effectual through Gods rich mercy, for the saving of my soul: and then
withal I must tie my self to obey the death of Jesus Christ, and to be made
like unto it, and conformable thereunto.

The last Use: It should teach us what is the strain, the highest strain, the
highest pitch that a man should reach at in the receiving of the Sacrament: We
must so discern the death of Christ in the Sacrament, that we may be made
partakers of Christ's death: First, to be swallowed up of it with an holy
admiration and a fervent meditation thereupon: and secondly, to be more and
more incorporate into it by a holy kind of union: thirdly and lastly, to be
saved by it, as by the all-sufficient price of our redemption. First, we must
come to meditate, and so to partake of it, as that we be swallowed up with the
meditation of the death of Jesus Christ; the death of Jesus Christ is a
bottomless depth, man cannot reach it, the Angels cannot reach it, and we
cannot comprehend it, and therefore the best way is, when we have considered
all the occurrences of it that we can, let us lay our selves wholly into the
hands of God, to be swallowed up with that holy meditation of the death of
Christ, and to be comprehended of that which we are not able to comprehend.
Secondly, to be more and more incorporated into it by a holy kind of union,
every man that is a true believer, that is converted unto God, is already
incorporated into Christ his death; so then when we come to the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, we must partake the death of Christ, so, as that we may be
the more incorporated into it, that is, to be made more and more one with
Christ in his death, than ever we were before, more crucified and more
mortified than ever we were before; there is no way whereby we can have part
in Christ but by union, and there is no way whereby we can have unio^ with
Christ, but by being incorporate into him by the power of his death; and there
is no better way to make us more incorporate into the death of Christ, than the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper is; and therefore when we come to this, let this
be our strain, not only to be swallowed up with the meditation of the death
of Christ, but labor to be more and more incorporate into the death of Christ
thereby.

Last of all, let us so labor to be made partakers of it, that we may be
saved by it, as being the all-sufficient price of our Redemption, for by the
death of Jesus Christ the wrath of God is appeased, the Law of God is
fulfilled, there the Justice of God is satisfied, for there our sins are
pardoned, there our ransom is paid, there is all performed whatsoever is
necessary for the salvation of mankind, and therefore as at all times, so then
especially when we come to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, let us labor to
be so made partakers of the Lords death, and of that infinite benefit that
arises by it, that we may be saved by it, as by the all-sufficient price of
our Redemption.

The end of the seventeenth Lecture.
THE EIGHTEENTH LECTVRE UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
WE are still to proceed, God willing, in the handling of this Text, by
occasion of the next Sabbath being a Communion day; so that now we are to go
on where we left. I showed you that in the latter part of the verse there is
contained a caution, that the receiving of the Lords Supper is to be performed
withal, the showing forth of the Lords death: wherein I noted to you in the
caution it self these two things; first, the matter that is to be remembered;
and secondly, the manner of the remembering of it. The matter that is to be
remembered, is the death of the Lord Jesus Christ: the manner of the remembering
of it: how is it to be remembered? why, by a kind of showing forth, by a kind
of lively or sensible expressing of it. We have spoken of the matter
heretofore, and even now we made repetition of that which was last spoken
concerning this caution, namely, concerning the death of Jesus Christ. Now as
God shall enable us, we are to handle the manner: the manner how this death of
the Lord Jesus Christ is remembered in the Sacrament, is a showing forth, says
the Text, a setting forth, or a showing forth, for so the words signify, that
is to say, a kind of lively and sensible expressing of the death of Christ, is
in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, one translation comes a little short of
the power of the word in the original, which is worthy to be known; we read
it hence we show the Lords death, the original word intends two things very
material to our present purpose, for it is a Compound word (...), and the
simple verb it self is very significant, but the preposition that it is
compounded withal, adds somewhat more to the significancy of it, and makes it
more pregnant, and more full to the matter we have in hand. First, the simple
verb it self signifies to show, to publish, or to declare, not simply, but to
show and publish by way of a message, or as it were by way of a lively voice.
In the Sacrament of the Lords Supper there must be certain speeches, and
certain words that are to be used, there is a message that is to be published
whenever the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is rightly administered. If you
ask what that message is: I answer, it is the very message of the Gospel, the
very doctrine of the Gospel, free remission of our sins by the blood of
Christ; that is the substance of the Sacrament, that is the doctrine of the
Gospel: and our Savior himself when he did institute the Sacrament, as it is
in Matthew. 26.28. there he says, This is my blood of the New Testament that is
shed for many for the remission of sins: Here is the very preaching of the
Gospel, published in the administration of the Sacrament, free remission of
sins by the blood of Jesus Christ. And surely the very same word that
signifies the Gospel in the original, is derived from this simple verb that
here is used; giving us some intimation, that the message that is to be
published is indeed the message of the Gospel. Why then in the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper Christ must be published by way of message, or by way of
lively voice: But secondly, the preposition that it is compounded withal, that
adds somewhat more: what is that? It must be done thoroughly, it must be done
earnestly, for so the word signifies in the Original: as if ^^e would say,
there must be a vehement publishing of it, a vehement showing forth: It is not
only a showing that will serve the turn, much less a slender and a careless
showing of the death of Christ; but it must be showed thoroughly and earnestly:
as the matter it self is a matter of great weight and moment as ever was, so
likewise the showing forth must be answerable thereunto: It must be showed most
seriously and most affectionately; and this the word signifies in the
original. Ye show forth the Lords death by way of a message, and that
earnestly, till he come. And whereas some read it positively by way of
approbation, You do show the Lords death till he come; and others do read it
imparatively by way of command, See ye show the Lords death; or, You shall show
the Lords death; both these in substance tend to one and the same effect. And
indeed the one of these does consequently infer the other: For if we read
it positively, Ye do show the Lords death, then this being a matter that is
commended in them by the Apostle; it does imply that it is a duty, and must be
performed: then if we read it imparatively, (Ye shall show) or, (See you show
the Lords death till he come,) then it is employed that all the faithful that
will conform themselves to the ordinance of God, they do perform this, they
practice this at the receiving of the Sacrament, they do show forth the Lords
death till he come. If we read it positively, it intends thus much, namely,
that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is a fit occasion, or a fit means, in
and whereby we come to show forth the Lords death: If we read it imparatively,
ye shall show forth the Lords death, it imposes a duty, (that whenever we
meet together at the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, we must be showing forth of
the Lords death;) there is little difference between them, and in effect they
are the same: and because I am loath to vary from our own translation, but upon
good occasion, and because our translation comes nearest to the original,
because the original does naturally sound to this effect, you do show the
Lords death, rather than ye shall show forth the Lords death, therefore I will
not change our own translation, but take it positively as it is propounded,
that you do show forth the Lords deathtill he come: so we will take it, that
the Sacrament is a fit subject or means in and whereby to show forth the Lords
death: and this is the principal matter that this Scripture does aim at, and
this does confirm directly the very point that we made choice of this
Scripture for, namely, to prove that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is a
memorial of the death of Christ: The Text says plainly, As often as ye eat
this bread, and drink this cup, ye show forth the Lords death till he come;
or remember, or express in a lively manner the Lords death.

As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, etc. as if he should
say, that if it be rightly administered, and instituted, and received according
to Gods own ordinance, then it is a lively representation, and a right showing
forth of the Lords death. Consider the whole frame and institution of this
Sacrament made by our Savior both for matter of circumstance, and for matter
of substance: you shall see that both of them do confirm this truth.

First, for matter of circumstance: there be three circumstances that may be
alleged to this purpose. One, is the time of this institution, the night when
he was betrayed: another, is the action that this institution did ensue upon:
and the third is the carriage of our Savior immediately before he instituted it.

First for the time: the time when he instituted it, when was it? the night
that he was betrayed; as it is in the 23 verse: the Apostle does not note the
time, but upon very just occasion. Mark it, overnight our Savior instituted
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, for the expressing of his death; the next
day our Savior suffered that death which was in and by that Sacrament to be
expressed. How could our Savior devise to have served himself better upon the
advantage of the time, to make the Sacrament to be a fresh and a lively
representation and memorial of his death, than by respiting the institution of
the Sacrament so near as near might be to the time of his death: the one was
done overnight, and the other the next day.

We know that such things as have some near dependence one upon another in
nature, look how more nearly they are performed in time, so much the more does
the one give the better help to the remembrance of the other; whereas if one be
done long before the other, they will not meet so readily and freshly in our
memories: for example, the eating of the Passover, which was a type and
memorial of the deliverance of the Israelites out of Egypt, was of purpose
respited to the night before their departure (they were to eat the Passover
overnight, and the next day to depart) that whenever afterward they were to
eat the Passover, it might renew upon them a more fresh memory of their
deliverance out of Egypt; whereas if they had had the Passover a year or two
before, and a year or two after been delivered out of Egypt, then there would
not have been such a joint concurrence of them together in their minds, the
Passover would not have been such a palpable and present memorial of their
deliverance as it was: so likewise Jesus Christ he instituted the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper overnight, he suffered his death the next day, that whe^soever
after, we come to receive the sacrament of the Lords Supper, the time wherein
his death was suffered following so presently upon the institution of the
Sacrament, the one of these might help forward the other, that so the
Sacrament might be the more lively remembrance of his death, the circumstance
of the time of the institution being so near the time of his death, proves
unto us that Christ had a full intent to make the Sacrament a fresh memorial
of his death.

The second is the action that this institution did ensue upon, what was that?
why that was the eating of the Passover, as appears in the 14. of Mark 22.
And as they did eat, Jesus took the bread, and when he had given thanks, he
brake it, and gave it to them, and said, Take, eat: this is my body, etc. They
were then eating of the Passover, so says the Text, as they were eating,
Christ took the bread and gave it to his Disciples, etc. The Passover it
self was as I have showed you heretofore, a Type and a memorial of the
deliverance of Israel out of Egypt by Moses, but principally of their
deliverance from sin and Satan by the death of Jesus Christ, and yet
notwithstanding immediately upon the eating of this Passover did our Savior
Christ institute the sacrament of the Lords Supper, as if our Savior should
say unto them, well; now you have eaten the Passover; this Passover did not
only signify your deliverance out of Egypt, but principally your deliverance
from sin and Satan by my death; for indeed I am that true Lamb of God, slain
and eaten, and signified in this Passover; but yet howsoever that did signify
my death unto you, yet it was but somewhat darkly and obscure, you could not be
so sensible of my death by that; but now I will give you a Sacrament that shall
express my death, and your deliverance most clearly, and that is the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper. The very strain of the story in Matthew, Mark, and Luke,
etc. being well considered, does afford us this collection, That our Savior
presently after the eating of the Passover, did institute the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, as if that were not clear enough, but this should be most
clear for that purpose.

Thirdly, the carriage of our Savior immediately before the institution of the
Sacrament, as it is in the 13. of John 16. to 22. we shall find there that
our Savior did teach unto his Disciples many good lessons, he taught them
humility, and charity, both by example, and by doctrine: moreover, then he did
foretell them of his death, and told them covertly who should betray him: he
quoted a place of Scripture for it: and all this was done upon the instant of
the institution; his teaching them humility and charity, his foretelling them
of his death, his putting them in mind of these things, and raising them up to
the consideration of his sufferings beforehand; all these concur together by
way of circumstance, to teach that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is a
manifest showing forth of the death of Christ, and the use thereof: for Christ's
own humbleness and love which then he showed by his practice, are matters of
special note in the death of Christ: and our humbleness and love, which then
he taught us, both by his doctrine and example, are special fruits and uses
of his death in us. Now to the substance of it, whether we respect: the signs
used in the Sacrament, or the actions, or the words in the Sacrament.

First, concerning the signs; the very signs they show forth the death of the
Lord; the bread shows forth the body of Jesus Christ, expressing it lively,
the bread is a sollide substance, so is the body of Christ; the bread is the
food of our bodies, the strengthening of our hearts, the staff of our life in
the state of nature; here is a lively representation to spiritual minded men,
that the body of Jesus Christ is the spiritual food of our souls, the
strength of the hidden man of our hearts, it is the staff of the life of God
in the state of grace to every true believer; and so likewise the wine shows
forth the blood of Christ, the Wine is a liquid substance, so is the blood of
Christ, but principally the sweetness of the smell of the wine, the
pleasantness of the taste of the wine, the comfortable cheerfulness of the
wine, whereby it does glad our hearts, this is a most lively expressing unto us
of the blood of Christ Jesus, this shows unto a spiritual minded man, if this
wine be so sweet and pleasant, and comfortable, oh what a sweet savor has the
blood of Jesus Christ, oh what a pleasant relish is there in the blood of Jesus
Christ, oh, what comfort and cheerfulness is there in the blood of Jesus
Christ to every distressed and believing soul, that can find and feel these
things within himself; this they do single, each by it self: now put both
these together (as both of them are tendered together to us in the Sacrament)
then here is a full refreshing set forth unto us: that there is a full
refreshing to every believing soul in the death of the Lord Jesus Christ: so
much for the signs.

Secondly, concerning the actions in the Sacrament, both on our Saviors part,
and likewise on our our part: on our Saviors part, he took the bread and
brake it; what is that to say, but as if our Savior should say, Do you see
me break this bread, thus, thus is my body broken for you; so for the cup:
when he took the bread and brake it, he distributed and gave it among them;
here is a manifest showing forth of the extension of the death of Christ, that
the Lord Jesus Christ is the common Savior of all them that believe. He took
the bread says the Text, and he gave it unto them; and so of the cup. Then
again here is an action on our part, as our Savior bid them to take it, so
we do take it, we take the bread, we eat it; we take the cup, we drink
it; what is this but a showing forth of the death of the Lord, except our hands
belie our hearts, except we be otherwise then we seem to be, when we take the
bread and eat it, when we take the wine and drink it, we openly profess that
we are of the number of them that take hold on Jesus Christ, and do apply him
particularly to the comfort of our own souls.

He took the bread and brake it, and bid them to take and eat; here you see
first he bids us to take it, to show us he intended that his body is ours, and
that his death is a sacrifice to God for us, whereby our sins are satisfied
for, and whereby we are reconciled to God; then he says, This is my body: he
speaks demonstratively, and he speaks it by way of an essential predication;
he says, this is my body; as if our Savior should say to every spiritual
minded man and woman, This Sacrament is as lively a representation of my death,
as if my body and blood were here crucified and shed before your eyes: and so
likewise it follows, this is my body which is given for you, and my blood
which is shed for you for the remission of sins: here is a full showing forth
of the Lords death, here is the Gospel preached at the administration of the
Sacrament, that the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all our sins. It
follows in the last place, Do this in remembrance of me; as if our Savior
should say, do this in remembrance of my death, for so the Apostle expounds
it, he had repeated our Saviors words in the verse going before, Do this in
remembrance of me; and he comes and expounds it here, Do this in remembrance
of my death; as if our Savior should say, consider well, and advisedly of this
Sacrament, for this Sacrament is in it self a remembrance, and a lively
memorial of my death, and so you must esteem of it, and so you must make use
of it, and so to every believer it shall be made good for all saving purposes.

Thus you see the doctrine is proved, both by the circumstances, and the
substance, and the whole frame of the Sacrament, that the Sacrament being
administered and received according to Gods own ordinance, is a fresh and a
lively memorial, a sensible representation, a through setting forth of the
death of the Lord Jesus Christ: the reasons of the doctrine are these:



Again, Sacraments we know, are teaching signs; fignes ordained of God that
they may be teachers unto us: and teachers you know must speak plainly, they
must speak teachably, they must deliver the matter with a lively voice, so as
it may be best known, discerned, and understood, and work instruction in the
hearts of those that it is to be learned by; the Sacraments are teaching
signs, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is a teaching sign, the lesson that
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper teaches, is the death of Jesus Christ, and
therefore the Sacrament of the Lords Supper must teach the death of Jesus
Christ lively, and clearly, and so must be a through showing forth of Christ's
death.

Gal. 3.1. Oh ye foolish Galathians, who has bewitched you, that ye should not
believe the truth? to whom Christ Jesus was before described in your sight, and
among you crucified. The Galathians they never saw Christ crucified in their
lives, but yet Paul did preach Christ crucified so plainly, and so effectually
to the Galathians, that he did as it were present Christ crucified before their
bodily eyes, he did so work by the operation of Gods spirit in his ministry,
that they had a more sure and plain apprehension of the death of Christ within
them, then many of those that stood by and saw him crucified: if it be so in
the word, it is so in the sacrament: if the word do so lively represent him,
the sacrament does it much more, for the sacrament is a visible word, that is
to say, look whatsoever the word sounds unto us in our ears, that the
sacrament presents and exhibits before our eyes; the sacrament is a visible
word, now that which I see to be done before my face, is more lively
represented unto me, than that which I hear with my ears, therefore if the
Word describe the death of Christ lively, then does the Sacrament much more.

Do this in remembrance of me, says he; therefore it is a lively
representation of his death: and except we will impeach either the power, or
the goodness of Christ Jesus, as who should say, he could not make a lively
representation of his death, or else he would not, we must needs confess that
this Sacrament is as lively a memorial of his death as ever could be devised.
I might add other reasons, as namely, concerning the state of the New
Testament. The state of the new Testament requires that all things should be
most clear, and most plain, and especially the death of Christ, that that
should be most clearly represented unto us. Zach. 12.10 I will pour forth my
Spirit upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and I will make them that they shall
look upon me whom they have pierced: that is, behold me as it were with their
bodily eyes. Now the meaning is, that he shall deal with them to this effect
by his Spirit: but yet collaterally it reaches also to the Word and Sacraments:
for if he do deal with them so by his inward Spirit, then the outward means
must be answerable: so then, the reach of the place is to teach us that in the
time of the Gospel Christ Jesus shall be represented before our eyes, and this
shall be by the Spirit of God in our hearts; but still it must be understood
that the Word and Sacraments must be answerable hereunto, and therefore the
Word and Sacraments must represent Christ Jesus unto us, as clearly as if he
were nailed upon the Cross before our eyes.

to the Lords Table we come to behold Christ here before us, as it were with
our bodily eyes, in the outward signs, and with the eyes of our minds, under
and within those veiles: therefore every one of us must labor so to be fitted,
and so prepared before we come hither, that we may be worthy and profitable
beholders of Christ crucified, and worthy receivers of the mysteries and
benefits of his precious death: Take this for your rule, and remember it well,
and let this be practiced, if not in the same kind, yet in the like;
whenever we have a purpose to come to the Lords Table, let us still have our
hearts meditating upon Christ's death all the week long, but especially
overnight, and that morning that we are to receive, let us labor carefully to
endue, and inform our selves with the thoughts of the death of Jesus Christ.
How should that be? why read some good book of that argument, especially
read the Book of all Books, I mean the Book of God: if thou can not
read, get another to read it to thee: read the 53. of Esaias, there we may see
how lively he sets before us the death of Christ, long before Christ himself
felt the smart of it: and so proceed to read the story of his death in one of
the Evangelists, as Matthew, Mark, Luke, or John, as all are very pregnant for
that purpose: and we know, that howsoever there be some men that have set
forth this argument very worthily, yet all of them come far short of one line
of the Holy Ghost: one chapter in the Book of God being well understood, shall
do us more good, being seriously meditated upon, than all other Books besides.
I say, read the Chapters of the story of the death of Christ, and as thou
read them, take them to heart, and pause deliberately upon them, and
consider of them well, and pray to God to imprint the same into thy heart by
the finger of his Spirit; and if thus thou do from one Communion to another,
thou shall find through Gods blessing, that whenever thou come to receive
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, thou shall there see thy Savior most
clearly: but if thou be not careful thus to meditate of Christ beforehand,
thou shall be but an unprofitable receiver, and beholder of these mysteries. I
will make the matter somewhat clear by a comparison. If there were a Martyr to
suffer for the profession of the Gospel, two men (having known him before)
go together to see his death; the one of them knows him but a little, and has
heard of the cause only in some general terms, but the other has more near
acquaintance with him, and has better informed himself of him, and was by
when he was arraigned, and heard his arraignment, and his indictment, and all
the passages of the business, and what was alleged against him by his
accusers, and what he answered for himself, and why the sentence of death was
passed against him: which of these two men shall be most affected with the
death of this Martyr? Out of question he that was so lately acquainted with
his arraignment, and his indictment, and with the whole cause of his death; the
death of that Martyr shall strike much into this man's heart, and work soundly
upon him; whereas the other man which knew of him but in general, shall be
moved with it but little or nothing at all: So it is in this case; when we
come to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, we come to behold Jesus Christ
executed and put to death to every spiritual receiver, in a spiritual manner;
to read the story concerning the death of Christ, and to meditate upon those
things conscionably and religiously, with a desire to profit by them; it is as
if so be a man should have stood by when Christ was arraigned and indicted, and
heard what was spoken against him, and what sentence was passed upon him. For
when the Holy Ghost pens a story he will pen it thoroughly, and if we lay
down our hearts to be wrought upon by the power of the Word, we shall find
such a powerful working by it, that it shall be more effectual to us than it
we had been there present to have seen the death of Christ. So then by
reading the story beforehand, we being as it were present with him at his
arraignment and indictment, think with your selves whether this will not be a
notable means to make the death of Jesus Christ effectual unto us in the
Sacrament, and if we look for any benefit by the Sacrament, let us come with
this preparation beforehand. John 13.19. Christ says, I tell you these things
beforehand, that when ye see these things come to pass ye might believe. He
speaks there partly concerning his death: the words that Christ spoke
concerning his own death, he puts upon his Disciples beforehand, that when
it did come to pass they might believe; this would be a means to cherish
faith in them, and to make them believe it the better: so if we come to the
Sacrament, read the Word of God, that part of the Word that principally
concerns the death of Christ, and meditate upon that which Christ has told us
of beforehand, that so we might believe it, and this will be a notable means
through Gods blessing to make us that we shall believe that the death of Christ
is ours, and that it is effectual for our redemption.

The second Use for instruction, is this: Is it so, that the Sacrament is such
a lively representation of the death of Christ, then this teaches us, that the
public carriage of the whole business of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
must be framed and fashioned so as it may make most for the lively setting
forth of the death of the Lord Jesus Christ: and herein are many duties
required of us. The first duty of all is this: the Word is to be preached, that
so the people may understand and know that which belongs to God, and to their
own salvation, else it will be but a blind Sacrament: but especially the
Gospel; the voice of the Gospel, namely, the free remission of sins by the
blood of Jesus Christ, that is to be pressed upon them again and again, that
they may be stirred up in their affections to esteem and receive it
graciously: it is a course that God has used in all Sacraments, still to join
together with the Sacraments the Word preached: Before the sacrament of
Circumcision was administered, the Word was taught: so likewise the Passover,
as is clear in Exodus 12.35. It is noted there, that when their children should
come to ask what was this Passover; Tell them, says God, that this is the
memorial of the great deliverance of their fathers many hundred years before
out of the bondage of Egypt. So likewise Christ says in the Sacrament of
Baptism, Go teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, Matthew 28. He does not say, Go and baptize, and let
teaching alone; but, Go teach; there is the ground and foundation; and then he
builds upon it the administration of the Sacrament, Go teach, and baptize in
the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. If teaching be not
joined with the Sacrament, it is but a dumb sacrament: if men should come here
to the sacrament of the Lords supper, and be not taught what it means, and
what belongs to it: it should be with them as it was with the Israelites, Exodus
16.15. That saw Manna like Coriander seed; the Text says, they knew not what
it was, but when Moses came and said, This is the bread that God gave them from
heaven: now they come to relish it. So when we come to this sacrament, and see
the bread and the wine, except we be endued with the knowledge of Christ, and
we understand Christ and him crucified, and know the nature of the sacrament,
we shall not know what to make of it: but if the Word be preached, then we
begin to grow to some understanding, and some life in the business: and to
relish this Sacrament as the spiritual Manna, the heavenly food of our souls.

Secondly, as the word must be preached, so likewise confession of Faith ought
to made. Generally here amongst us, we make confession of our Faith by the
tendering of our bodies, but indeed the confession of our faith ought to be
published before the receiving of the Lords supper; this is a right showing
forth of the Lords death. Mark it, the Apostle says, ye show forth the Lords
death, he speaks not to the Ministers only, but to the people, ye show
forth: therefore they should make some public confession that they believe in
Christ Jesus. And this is a matter that tends much to the setting forth of the
death of Christ.

Thirdly, Prayers are to be made: for therein likewise we show the death of
Jesus Christ. First, there must be confession of our sins, and we must search
into our hearts, and lives, narrowly, and thoroughly; and the more we search
into them, the more clearly we shall see Christ his death.

Together with confession of sins, we must use supplication and petition,
calling earnestly upon God, for Christ his sake, which thus was crucified for
us, that he would forgive us our sins in his blood: and this will give great
light to the setting forth of the death of Christ, and then also thankesgiving
must be given to the Lord, we must thank and praise God that it has pleased
him so to set his love upon us, as to give his Son to die for us cursed and
miserable sinners as we are, and to save us by condemning him. Fourthly, there
is another duty required, the words of the institution must necessarily be
rehearsed, and this is a matter that gives wonderful light to the death of the
Lord Jesus Christ in the sacrament, for when we hear the minister make
rehearsal of the same words of Christ, then we do esteem highly of the
sacrament, as if Christ were personally among us, speaking to us with his own
mouth, and delivering his body and blood unto us, as it were with his own
hands; this is a notable means to set forth the death of Christ. Lastly, it is
a Christian duty and a needful duty about the time of the sacrament, to show
forth both our thankfulness and our cheerfulness, even by singing of Psalms.

It is true indeed, there is no Psalm amiss, because all were penned by the
holy Ghost, yet some are more fit and seasonable then others; the fittest
Psalms are either teaching Psalms, or psalms of thanksgiving: if we will
have Psalms of thanksgiving, there is specially the 103 Psalm, and the 116,
full of good meditations to this purpose; but if we will have teaching Psalms,
teaching us the death of Christ, for that is then most seasonable, that
teaches us the matter of the death of Christ, then take the second Psalm, for
that teaches us concerning the death of Christ, as it is applied by the holy
Ghost, Act. 4.25. and so the 22 Psalm, as it is alleged 27 of Matthew. for there
are three several places quoted out of that Psalm, singled out, applied
expressly unto the death of Christ; and therefore they are most seasonable to be
used, and it is necessary that we make choice of the most seasonable Psalms
that are fittest for that purpose.

as often as you eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show forth the Lords
death till he come; the Popish Church does flatly cross this rule, diverse
ways:

First, in their half Communions, they have the bread, but not the cup, is
this to show forth the Lords death? no, it is but to show forth half the Lords
death, this is horrible wrong to the people, and disgrace to the Sacrament, and
dishonor to God; has God given us a great light to see Christ by, and shall
men scantle it to half a light? has God given us both the bread and the wine
to discern the Lords body and blood by, and to show forth the Lords death by;
and shall we have the body, and not the blood? shall we have but one half,
and be deprived of the other? Again, many times in the Popish Church they
have their Masses as they call them, without any preaching at all, many times,
and usually it is so with them. I cannot say that by this they overthrow that
very mass of theirs from being a Sacrament; I will not stand upon it, but yet
I say that practice of theirs is a wicked and a graceless practice, directly
against this doctrine of God, you show forth the Lords death, how should it be
showed forth but by preaching and teaching? but they have little or no
preaching or teaching amongst them; but chiefly the words of institution they
are to be rehearsed: oh, but say they, we have these words of institution
rehearsed, and therefore you cannot but say, that we have teaching. I answer,
though they have the words of institution, yet the Priest mumbles them to
himself, and the people hear him not. Secondly, if they do hear him, it is
in an unknown tongue, they understand him not. Thirdly, when he rehearses
them, he turns his face from the people, as of purpose to suppress the right
showing forth of the Lords death; and therefore this practice of theirs shows
that they would not have the people discern the Lords death in this Sacrament;
These are fearful abominations, and this lies heavy upon those people of God
that live under Antichrist: and therefore we should with great thankfulness
enjoy and use these blessings that God has bestowed upon us, in the clear
exhibition of the death of Jesus Christ in the Lords Supper. I but say the
Papists we show forth the Lords death more then you, for we lift up the Host:
is this to show forth the Lords death? no, this is to show forth their own
Idol, their own breaden-God that themselves have made.

The end of the eighteenth Lecture.
THE NINETEENTH LECTVRE UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
NOw we are to proceed as the occasion requires for our preparation to the
Sacrament the next sabbath, in the handling of that Scripture which we have
made choice of out of the 1 Cor. 11. and the 26. verse. For as often as ye shall
eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show forth the Lords death till he
come. We have showed you the two general parts of this Scripture an action to
be performed in the former part, the receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, and a caution that this action is to be performed withal in the
latter part of the verse, the remembrance, or the showing forth of the Lords
death til he come; we have handled the first part of the verse wholly, we have
entered into the second part, where we showed, that there is first to be
considered the caution it self, the showing forth of the Lords death.
Secondly, the frequenting of this action, or the often using of this caution to
be supplied out of the former part of the verse, as often as ye eat of this
bread, and drink of this cup: for that particle often, serves indifferently
for the whole verse, as well for the former as the latter part, as if the
Apostle should say, as often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, so
often ye show forth the Lords death till he come. Thirdly, we showed you here
the continuance of the observation of this caution, how long it must be kept,
why till Christ Jesus come to judgment, to the end of the world. The caution
it self, the showing forth of the Lords death, of that I have spoken already;
now therefore we are God willing, as the Lord shall enable us, to speak of
the second thing, namely the frequenting, or the often using of this caution,
the often showing forth or remembering of the Lords death, as often as ye eat
this bread and drink this cup, so often ye show forth the Lords death till he
come: which words we must not so understand, as if so be that the remembrance
or the showing forth of the Lords death were precisely confined and limited to
the use of the sacrament of the Lords supper; as if the Apostle should say,
that then only the death of Christ is to be remembered when the Sacrament is
to be received and not else, that is not the meaning, but we must take the
words to be spoken with implication of a further exte^t of this duty, namely,
that therefore so often as we receive this Sacrament, we must remember and show
forth the Lords death after a special manner, that thereby we may be fitted
and enabled to remember the Lords death, at all other times both by preparation
before, and by continual meditation after: for thus we are to conceive of the
present business, the death of Jesus Christ must never be out of the minds of
those that do believe in him, their hearts must becontinually running upon the
thoughts of him and of his death; now because all of us are dull of
understanding, dead and cold in affection, weak in memory, that either we do
not understand the death of CHRIST, or not affect the death of CHRIST, or not
remember the death of CHRIST as we ought, therefore the Lord has appointed
the sacrament of the Lords supper, as a principal means to releeve us in this
case. In that sacrament the Lord teaches us the death of Christ, that we may
understand it; in that sacrament the Lord expresses the death of Christ unto
us lively that we may be affected with it; in that sacrament likewise the Lord
tenders unto us the death of Christ, that so we may the better retain the
memorial of it, and that it may stick the faster and the closer by us, not
only for that present time whilst we are receiving, but also for all times
afterward, for as it is in our bodily repast, we eat and drink at some one
set time or other, as namely, at dinner, or at supper, not that our bodies
should be refreshed and comforted then only for the present whilst we are
eating, but because by that strength which then we receive our bodies might
also be refreshed and comforted afterward when we are to be employed in the
duties of our calling, so likewise in our spiritual repast, we sanctify the
sabbath and keep it holy unto the Lord, we do not keep the sabbath holy,
because we would be holy only upon the sabbath, but because that that
holiness which we attain unto by meeting God in his own saving ordinances
upon the sabbath day, that the same holiness might season us and strengthen
us, and continue with us, and thrive in our hearts all the week following, and
all our lives following; so likewise it is in this particular in the receiving
of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the death of Christ is remembered and
showed forth very lively and very freshly, not that we should be endued with
the thoughts and affections of the death of Christ only for the present
whilst we are receiving, but that thereby we might be brought to make it to
be our continual meditation always after; and this as it is employed in this
second clause, so often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, so
often ye shall show forth the Lords death: so it is further and more plainly
enforced in the third clause, so often as ye eat this bread, and drink this
cup, so often ye shall show forth the death of the Lord till he come, which
injoynes the continuance of it; for it is as if the Apostle should say, Your
remembrance, your lively and sensible remembering of the death of Christ in the
participation of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, must not only serve you
for the present time, but it must frame and fashion your minds to the habit of
this grace, that is to say, to the continual remembering of the death of Christ
Jesus, that you may make it your practice day and night, every day and every
hour of your life; so it is with you says the Apostle to the Corinths, and
not with you only, but so it must be with all the faithful, from age to age,
till Jesus Christ shall come to judgment. And this I take to be the right
strain of the Apostles speech in this verse, (so often as ye eat this bread,
and drink this cup, ye show forth the Lords death till he come) touching the
remembrance of Christ's death simply in it self, yet with raising it from this
ground, namely, from the remembrance of Christ's death in the participation of
the sacrament, the death of Christ is always to be remembered in a lively
manner in the participation of the Sacrament, that so it may be fresh in our
memories at all other times so long as we live.

Zach. v. 10. where God promises to pour out his Spirit upon his people, the
spirit of grace and of compassion, and they shall look on him, whom they have
pierced, and they shall mourn for him as one mourns for his first borne, or
his only son.

That Scripture shows the ordinary and continual practice of the faithful,
when once they are effectually converted unto God. God poures out his spirit of
Grace and compassion into their hearts, and so converts them. And what do they
then? Then they do ever after look upon him, whom they have pierced, they
have their eyes, and their minds altogether fixed upon Christ pierced, upon
Christ crucified, or upon Christ's death. And this is no slender remembering, or
no short remembering of the death of Christ, but it is a very affectionate
remembrance, and it is a lasting remembrance, it is an affectionate
remembrance, as being joined with sorrow and grief, and much lamentation, as
there the Text says: And this sorrow it is a lasting sorrow, and so this
remembrance a lasting remembrance; He shall mourn, as one sorroweth for his
first borne: A man that has lost his only son, mournes and sorrows, and
he never forgets him; so they shall never forget the death of Christ. The
sense of the death of Christ is so foundly fastened upon them by the Spirit in
the act of their conversion, that it sticks deep within them, and cleaves
close unto them; for ever after they make it their continual meditation. The
Apostle in 1 Cor. 15.1, 2, 3. admonishes the Corinths that they should
continue and keep in memory those things that he had preached and delivered
unto them, and that they had received, that is in the first and second verses:
in the third verse he shows what the things are that he delivered unto them,
the death of Jesus Christ. Why then, the death of Jesus Christ must be
continued in, as it must be received, so it must be continued in, and it must
be kept in memory. Mark the words of the Apostle there, whereby you are
saved (says he) if you continue and keep in memory those things, except ye
have believed in vain. As if the Apostle should say, they that are saved by
the death of Christ, they continue in the death of Christ, they keep the death
of Christ always in memory, otherwise they believe in vain, they profess
faith, but it is but a show of faith, without this there is no true saving
faith in them at all.

In 2 Timothy 2.8. The Apostle charge Timothy Remember (says he;) What should
he remember? that Christ Jesus made of the seed of David, was raised again
from the dead, according to the Scripture. The Apostle covertly and jointly
under the name of Jesus Christ his Resurrection, presses upon Timothy the
remembrance of the death of Christ, Remember (says he) Christ crucified. The
Apostle had exhorted Timothy before, that he should suffer affliction like a
valiant soldier, that he should look to his ministry, and fulfill that with
a good conscience: but whatsoever he did, or whatsoever he suffered, still
he must remember Christ's death, and his rising again from the dead. And see
what a preparative the Apostle gives to Timothy in the Verse going before,
Consider, what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. By
that preparative that he gives to Timothy in the seventh verse, he would
raise him up to a more serious remembering of the death of Christ in the eight
verse, as that being the weightiest duty of all other, the Apostle Paul gives
himself for example in this case, both in his preaching, and likewise in his
practice; see it in his preaching, 1 Cor. 2.2. I esteem to know nothing save
Christ Jesus, and him crucified: as if the Apostles heart and mind where wholly
possessed, and wholly swallowed up with the thoughts of Christ crucified, or
with the thoughts of the death of Jesus Christ, that his tongue could run
upon nothing so readily as upon that; and so likewise in his practice: In the 2
Cor. 4.10. Every where (says the Apostle) we bear about in our bodies the
dying of the Lord Jesus Christ. The Apostles remembrance of the death of CHRIST
was not such as ours commonly is, a bare contemplation of him, a bare thinking
of his death, but it was such as ours should be, a practical feeling of it, a
practical remembering of it, certain sensible effects in his body by
affliction, or by persecution, still minding him of the death of Christ; We
bear about in our bodies (says he) the dying of the Lord Jesus; and this was
not only for a time, but it was continually so with them, so says the Text,
Every where do we bear about in us the dying of the Lord Jesus. The word in
the original signifies altogether, that is to say, at all times, and in all
places; in all places wheresoever we come, still we bear about in our bodies
the dying of the Lord Jesus Christ: Every day and hour that goes over our
heads, still we bear about us the dying of our Lord Jesus: that shall suffice
concerning the proof of this out of Scripture. Now let us come to handle some
Reasons of it; the Reasons of it are these.

Exodus 28.12. there you shall find, how that the two Onyx stones, wherein were
written the names of the Children of Israel, they were to be put upon the
shoulders of Aarons Ephod, the Text says, in remembrance of the Children of
Israel, because that Aaron did bear the names of the Children of Israel
always in remembrance before the Lord. That was a type and a shadow; here is
the substance. Christ Jesus is our Aaron, the true High Priest there spoken of,
that has all the names of the faithful written always in his memory, and
carries them always as it were upon his shoulder, still presenting all his
chosen before the Lord: He always remembering us, remembering us in his whole
life, remembering us specially at his death, for then he paid dearest for us,
and now that being gone away from us in regard of his bodily presence, yet
still he remembers us, and makes continual intercession for us before the
Lord: Shall our vile persons being so graceless, always be remembered by the
Lord Jesus Christ, and shall not the Lord Jesus Christ, and his precious death
be always and continually remembered by all of us? Hearken what the Spouse
says in Cantic. 2.6. compared with Cant. 1.12. in Cantic. 2.6. the Spouse
there, speaking of Christ her welbeloved, says, that his left hand is under my
head, and his right hand does direct me. Cantic. 1.12. My beloved is as a
bundle of mirr he unto me, he shall lie between my breasts. This Spouse is
every believing soul, every true believing soul.

When once we do enter into a due consideration how dearly we are beloved of
our Husband Christ, that he lays his left hand under our heads, and embraces
us with his right hand; that he still remembers us, and nourishes, and
cherishes us, then do we presently fall into a holy resolution, that surely
we will be kind to him, seeing he is so kind to us; and he being so kind to
us, as always to cherish us, and remember us, therefore we will remember him,
he shall rest and lie between our breasts, we will always make his death our
continual meditation and remembrance. If an ordinary man should die for us,
that we by his death might escape, and be acquitted from death, would not our
hearts in common and natural kindness evermore be running upon this man's
death? Surely it would: Why then, seeing the Lord JESUS CHIST has interposed
himself in our stead, and dyed for us, and by his death has acquitted us from
that death which we should have suffered; why should not our hearts and minds
be always running upon him, and upon his death? Some may say, May I not
remember Christ aright though I remember not his death. I answer, thou can
not remember Christ, except thou remember his death, for he has purchased his
Church by his death, and look what interest thou have in him, or he in thee, it
is only by the death of Christ, and therefore thou can not remember him
savingly, without thou remember his death, and have it graven within thy heart.
Can a woman forget her Child that she has traveled for, and endured so much
pain for? Can the Lord Jesus Christ forget us, that has endured so much pain
for us, far greater then the travel of a woman? No, it is impossible; Christ
Jesus cannot forget us at any time; therefore seeing Christ Jesus ever did
remember us, and ever does, and ever will, and it is impossible that he should
at any time forget us; this should, and must persuade us to make the death of
Jesus Christ our continual remembrance.

him; neither can he be said properly to remember one thing more then another,
because he cannot forget any thing. But yet to speak according to the manner
of man, God may be said, and God is said to remember things done, yea, some
things more then others; because he testifies and shows by his outward
proceedings more respect unto some things, then unto other; thus may God be
said to remember the death of Christ, and that more, and above all things else,
because he shows in his outward proceedings more respect to the death of
CHRIST, then to any thing else. Whatsoever God does in the administration of
the world, he does it respectively to the death of Christ; let it be to the
preservation and salvation of the faithful: It is respectively to the death of
Christ, because they have their parts in him, and he in them. Let it be to the
destruction of the wicked, it is respectively to the death of Christ, they have
no part in Christ: whatsoever dangers thou escapest, thou escapest them by the
power of the death of Jesus Christ: whatsoever benefits thou receivest, it is
by virtue of the death of Christ: whatsoever grace God gives thee, he gives
it thee only in the remembrance of the death of Christ: whatsoever sin God
forgiveth thee, he forgiveth it thee merely in the shedding of Christ's blood.
Is the death of Christ so precious, that it is worthy always to be remembered
by the Lord himself, how much more then is it to be remembered by us?

continual use of the death of Christ, and therefore we must have it always
in continual remembrance, we must always have it in a readiness about us; we
have continual need and use of the death of Christ, great need, as much as our
bodies, and our lives, yea, as much as our souls are worth; our faith that
requires daily to be strengthened: why, our faith that is stablished in the
blood and death of Christ, so the Scripture speaks, Through faith in his
blood; as the blood of Christ, or the death of Christ, being the very chief
foundation that the faith of Gods children is rooted in, and settled, and
stablished upon: we must pray continually; every body knows that it is the
express commandment of the Apostle, Pray continually; we can never put up any
the least pleasing petition to God, but the eye of our faith must be fixed upon
the death of Christ, and therefore we must always remember it; we are tempted
daily to sin, no sound resistance of any temptation but in the death of Jesus
Christ: Rev. 12.10, 11. If we ever overcome the accuser, it must be by the
blood of the Lamb; sin must be mortified, the death of Christ is the only
sword to mortify and to slay sin within us. And last of all, we sin daily
and therefore we have need of the forgiveness of our sins, and
reconciliation, and peace to be made with God continually; no hope of
forgiveness of sins, and of reconciliation, but only and merely by the
blood of Jesus Christ; now ordinary wisdom and reason teaches us, look what
we know we have continual use of, wheresoever we go, we will be sure to
carry that about us, be it money, or strong waters, or the like, we will
always have it about us: we have continual use and great need of the death
of Christ, even as much as the price of our life and soul is worth, therefore
let us always have that in our hearts, always in a readiness about us,
because we have continual use of it.

Heb. 12.24. the Apostle says there, that the blood of Christ Jesus that
speaks better things, then that of Abel; the intendment of that Scripture is
this, we sin daily against God, the sins that we do commit, do cry out
daily to heaven for vengeance to be poured upon us, even as the blood of Abel
did cry for vengeance to be poured upon Cain, but the blood of Christ Jesus
that steps in for us, and that speaks better things than the blood of Abel,
and calls to God for mercy and for forgiveness, and so prevails against the
cry of our sins, and procures mercy and forgiveness at the hands of God.
Heb. 10.19, 20, verse. there the Apostle calls the blood of Christ the new, and
the fresh, and the living Way. Well, what is the meaning of it? the meaning is
this, that whereas we do sin and offend God daily, the blood of Christ
Jesus that daily makes our peace; the death of Christ, that is as it were day
by day fresh and bleeding anew in the sight of God, and so makes our peace with
God. It is true indeed when Christ offered himself upon the Cross, that then
his blood was actually shed and never else, yet it is as true that the blood of
Christ bleedeth anew effectually in the sight of God, when any sin is
forgiven any soul. The death of Christ thus working and traveling for us,
shall not we remember it continually? We must never forget those that work and
labor for us, and for our good, and shall we not always remember CHRIST
JESUS, especially in his death, whereby he does effect our greatest good.

within us: In this state of humiliation that we are in, there is nothing so
powerful and effectual to kill sin as the death of Jesus Christ; in this
state we must be fitted still and prepared to the glory that shall be revealed;
the thoughts of the death of Jesus Christ continually meditated upon, are an
excellent preparation for us to glory; for if we remember the death of Christ
affectionately as we ought, we suffer with him, and therefore we shall be sure
to reign with him; we are dead with him, and therefore also shall live with
him: these thoughts being so suitable and agreeable to our present estate,
therefore the remembrance of Christ's death must always be present with us.

The uses of the doctrine are these, sorrowful for them, they cannot endure
them: take a man that lies wholly in his sin, he had as lieve think upon
hell, as upon the death of Jesus Christ soundly and seriously as he ought to
do: but let such graceless wretches know, that for this they shall never be
had in remembrance before the Lord for any mercy, because they do not remember
the death of Christ, wherein alone mercy is tendered to mankind.

remember it, this fire should never go out of our hearts, it must glow and
burn within us night and day: It is fit that Gods children should have some
set time when they should enter into a serious meditation of the death of
Christ, and yet not to think our selves acquitted, if we do it only then:
but that that should prepare us to remember it ever after, as we showed before
in our bodily repast.

A second use of this doctrine is this; and mortification and reconciliation to
GOD: and likewise if you have these thoughts or the like at night when you go
to bed, this is a certain evidence that your souls are seasoned with the
death of Jesus Christ; again, when we are in the duties of our calling, all
the day long we must still have our hearts lifted up and settled upon the death
of Christ; and our thoughts must be running upon our justification, and our
sanctification, and our conformity to the death of Christ; yea in our very
mirth, we must still prefer Jerusalem; when we are in our greatest mirth, in
our honest recreations (for those that are unhonest there is no hope of any
spiritual comfort in them) but in our honest recreations; do we prefere the
death Jesus Christ before all those things that we for a while do solace our
selves withal, especially in the use of the means of salvation, in the
hearing of the Word, and the receiving of the Sacrament? When we come to hear
the Word, do we find in our selves a desire to be drawn on to see Christ
crucified before our eyes? When we come to the receiving of the Sacrament, is
it our chief practice to remember Christ crucified affectionately, and to have
our hearts thoroughly seasoned with the power of his death? these be undoubted
signs and assurances unto us that we have our part in the death of Christ.

with some matter concerning Christ crucified, it was almost the whole doctrine
of the Apostle, still to preach Christ crucified, but the use does concern all
both Ministers and people, therefore this should stir up every one of us both
Ministers and people, that we should labor to make the thoughts and the
remembrance of the death of Christ, to be ordinary with us, to be familiar
with us, still make that as familiar with us as ever possibly we can: in all
our courses let us remember the death of Christ; if we remember that soundly,
then it shall go well with us, whatsoever befalls us: that we may be the
better enabled, and the more quickened to the performance of this duty; First, I
will give you a taste of the means whereby we may attain to make the death
of Christ so familiar to us; and then I will show the benefits that we shall
receive hereby, if we conscionably travel in this course. The means of it are
these in few words: If we would have the death of Christ familiar unto us, we
must be sure that we do never pass it over with a slight meditation, but let
it be soundly taken to heart; do not think upon it as an ordinary common
thing: but conceive of it as a matter that does concern us, and our good most
of all: let us think upon the death of Christ in that which he suffered and
endured in his soul and body for our sins, how hard it went with him in the
Garden when he sweat water and blood, when his soul was heavy even unto
death: and how much more harder it went with him when he was upon the Cross,
when he said, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? That he that was in
singular favor with God, should be made the very mark of Gods wrath to light
upon; that he who was the worlds Redeemer, should be exposed to the obloquy
and reproach of the whole world; that he who was the Lord of heaven and earth,
should be now in the hands of the powers of darkness, we should yearne in our
very bowels, and be much troubled in our inmost affections at the thoughts of
these things.

Secondly, we must be frequent in the use of the means, in the hearing of the
Word, in the receiving of the Sacrament, and prayer, for by this means, we
shall make this death of Christ our own; there God tenders unto us the death
of Christ, let us come thither with hearts desirous, ready and willing to
receive it, and there we shall be sure to have it. Let it be our reach in all
these duties to have an eye upon the death of Jesus Christ, seeking to have
that soundly fixed and fastened upon us, whatsoever we fail in else, still let
that above all other stick most close to us. Then again we must labor to
work the remembrance of Christ's death into our affections, this is the right
memory of heavenly things; when the heart affects them, the heart will surely
remember that which it does much affect: When I see any thing that causes
deep affection within me, either much sorrow, or much joy, or the like; I will
remember that soundly, then let us labor to work the remembrance of the death
of Christ into our affections; let it still work love in us because Christ
loved us to die for us, and let it work hatred in us against sin, because it
was sin that brought him to his death; and let it work sorrow in us, that he
should be so cruelly murdered and put to death for us.

And let it work rejoicing in us, that we for our parts by his death are
saved, and by his stripes are healed: Let the death of Christ work these
affections in us, and then it shall be our own, never to forget it.

Lastly, let us put our selves to the power, and the rule, and the directions
of it, let us suffer our selves to be swayed by the death of Jesus Christ, in
all our courses, let it bear rule with us, the counsel that our Savior gives
in the like case, John 7.17. If any do my will, the same shall know my
doctrine; any Christian that labors to be well acquainted with any duty, the
best way to be acquainted with it, is to labor for the obedience to that
duty; so if we would remember Christ his death, then let us labor to submit
our selves to the power and obedience of it.

Whatsoever we do, let us examine it, whether it be agreeable to the death of
Christ, if it be not, then to say with our selves, we will not do it though
we may gain all the world by it: these are the means whereby we may attain
to the habit of this grace, namely, to the continual remembering of the death
of Christ Jesus, a saving remembrance.

The other point is the benefits that hereby will arise unto us. If we
remember continually the death of Christ in our hearts, we shall have many and
great blessings. The first blessing is this, Philip. 2.5, 6. that shall be
sufficient to teach you humility, and meekness, and obedience. Heb. 12.1, 2,
3. Look to the author and finisher of your faith, who for the joy that was set
before him, endured the Cross, and despised the shame, etc. consider him
therefore that ye faint not. Would you learn love to the brethren? John 3.16.
If Christ so loved us, that he laid down his life for us, then how ought we
also to lay down our lives for the brethren. Lastly, Pet. 4.1, 2. Christ has
suffered in the flesh, that we should not live to our selves but to him; and
this is a lively teacher: if the death of Jesus Christ be soundly laid up in
thy heart, it will both teach thee the duties to be performed, and also enable
thee to perform them.

A second benefit is this, by this means. Our sins they accuse us, our
consciences they accuse us, the devil he accuses us daily before the Lord; O
but if thou have a remembrance of the death of Christ in thy heart, there is a
Supersedeas for them all; that pacifies and appeaseth them all, and that is a
general release and acquittance from all that ever they can charge thee
withal.



from sin; that howsoever thy corruption draws thee on, and Satan he tempts
thee, and the world that allures thee, the flesh that provokes thee; How
should thou stand against all these enemies? Oh, if thou have the death of
Jesus Christ, and the remembrance of it soundly in thy heart, then all these
speakers to thee, they shall speak unto thee as to a stone-wall, to a deaf
man. Gal. 6.14. The Apostle faith there, God forbid that I should rejoice in
any thing save only in Christ, and him crucified, whereby the world is
crucified to me, and I unto the world. Let the whole world set upon me to
tempt me, yet it shall not prevail: for the whole world is crucified to me,
and I unto the whole world, by the Cross of Christ; I am as a dead man unto
the world. A man that has the death of Christ soundly seated in his heart, he
cannot wittingly and willingly sin against God. Indeed, this light may be,
and is sometime darkened in us by the mist of corruption and temptation, and
then we may be, and are oft-times over-taken with sin: but so long as this
light is clear within us, sin shall never be able to overcome us. There is
such a strong stay against sin, in the serious thoughts of the death of
Christ, that so long as that these are within us, sin cannot prevail against
us.

parties that have crucified the Lord of life and of glory: and yet cheerfully,
as resting upon the merits and death of Jesus Christ for our reconciliation.
And howsoever it be that we find many infirmities and imperfections in our
prayers, and think with our selves that therefore God will not hear us, yet
let us comfort our selves in the remembrance of the death of Christ: this being
in thy heart and conscience, be of good cheer, the Lord Jesus Christ he makes
continual intercession for thee, and he takes thy prayers and puts them up,
and presents them unto God in thy behalf in his own name, and so makes thy
prayers acceptable before the Lord.

of mortification, who has his heart broken for sin, and that has his
lusts, and affections, and rebellions in some good measure mortified and
crucified within him: I say, death is nothing so tedious and irksome to such a
man, as it is to another. We see this by experience in the case between
Christ and the two thieves that were executed with him, John 19. The manner of
their death was thus; They were to be crucified and nailed upon the Cross,
and then to hang till they dead: we cannot say of any one thing, that it
should give them their deaths wound; but the custom was, that when they were
crucified they should have their legs broken, thereby to make an end of them:
the Text says, that they came to the thieves, and brake their legs; but when
they came to our Savior Christ they brake not his, for he was dead already; he
had none of those rebellions, none of those resisting lusts within him to
strive against the ordinance of God as the other had, but he did sweetly yield
up the ghost in obedience unto God, and therefore Death had nothing to do with
him so much as with the other. So likewise we find it with men of
mortification.

Thirdly, by this remembrance of the death of Christ continually, we see all
the evils and all the harms of our death taken away in his death, and so
there is no cause to us to fear it at all.

Fourthly, we see by this that Christ himself who is our Lord, and Master,
and Head, he has undergone this before us, and therefore we are content in a
holy resolution to undergo that which he has done: shall the members fare
better than the Head? No surely.

Fifthly and lastly, by the continual remembrance of the death of Christ, we
see and behold that it was a full and final end of all his afflictions, and
that thereby he entered into glory: we consider from thence, as it was with him
so it shall be with us; when death comes it shall put an end to all trouble and
affliction; and the consideration of this should quicken us up to desire death,
to desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. O beloved, when a man comes to
lie upon his deaths bed he would give all that he had to be fitted for death,
and to be sure of comfort. Oh let us make the death of Christ therefore our
continual meditation: and this is that which will yield us such a gracious
preparation for our death, as that nothing in the world shall do the like
besides; and therefore let these considerations stir us up to a reverent and
conscionable performance of this duty of the remembrance of the death of Christ
Jesus; so much good, and so many benefits as are to be reaped by it, why surely
we are utter enemies to our own good, if we do not travel conscionably in
the faithful practice of this duty; let not the difficulty of this duty in it
self, let not the distastfulnesse of it to flesh and blood, nor the loss of
carnal pleasure and worldly profit, nor let not the harsh censure of the
graceless people of the world, nor let not the bent of our natural life which
is utterly against it, make it unpleasant to us, let none of these, nor all
these hinder us from being set upon this duty, but let us break through them
all in an holy zeal, and set our selves soundly to meditate upon the death of
Christ, in hope of these heavenly blessings, that the meditation of this duty
will bring us unto, therefore still remember the death of Christ, and as ever
thou desire to have a living teacher within thee, remember the death of
Christ; as ever thou look to have comfort from God, so look that thou
remember the death of Christ; as ever thou look to have spiritual growth
and increase by the Word and Sacraments, still look to the death of Christ; as
ever thou look to have a strong bridle to restrain thee from sin, so
still let the death of Christ be thy continual meditation; as ever thou
desire to come before God cheerfully and with comfort in prayer, remember the
death of Christ; as ever thou desire to be fitted and prepared to dye,
remember the death of Jesus Christ; as ever thou desire and love any one or
all these blessings together, remember the death of Christ, and that
continually, let it never go out of thy mind.

The end of the nineteenth Lecture.
THE TWENTIETH LECTVRE UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
WE purposing God willing the next Sabbath to be partakers of the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper; we are therefore according to our ordinary course, to make
preparation thereunto by this Sabbaths evening Exercise, that so we may come
with better grace in our hearts to that heavenly Table.

1 Cor. 11.26. For as often as ye shall eat this bread and drink this cup, ye
show forth the Lords death till he come. Which Scripture contains as you have
heard these two parts, an action to be performed in the former part of the
verse, the receiving of the Sacrament, as often as ye eat this bread, and
drink this cup. Secondly, a caution that this action is to be performed
withal, in the last part of the verse, the remembrance, or the showing forth
of the Lords death till he come. We have fully finished the former part, and
through Gods mercy we have proceeded in the handling of the latter part, to the
last clause of all, till he come: ye show forth the Lords death till he come. I
showed you that this latter part of the verse contains the caution, that the
receiving of the Sacrament is to be performed withal, it ministers unto us
these things to be considered of; First, the caution it self, namely, the
showing forth of the LORDS death; wherein we showed you what it was that was
to be remembered, the death of the Lord Jesus Christ; and also the manner of the
remembrance of it, by a showing forth, or by a setting forth, by a lively or a
sensible expressing of it. Secondly, it does commend unto us the frequenting of
this caution, that the death of the Lord Jesus Christ must be often remembered,
for though that particle often be only named in the former part of the verse,
yet by all common understanding it is also to be understood in the latter part
of the verse, As often as ye do receive the Sacrament, so often ye remember
the Lords death. Thirdly and lastly, here is the continuance of this caution,
the continuance of this duty, take it so, how long is it to continue? why, till
he come, so long as the world stands: till Jesus Christ shall come to
judgment. So then, here we are now come to the last clause of all, containing
the continuance of this duty, let this be done til he come, till Christ come to
judgment; in which clause there be two things offered to our consideration,
the first is the continuance of this duty it self; and that is directly and
expressly affirmed, ye show forth the Lords death till he come. That this duty
must be continually, and must never cease to continue in the Church so long as
the world stands. The second thing is covertly employed, yet plain enough too,
if the words be well weighed and considered, and that is the end or the reach
that we must aim at in the performance of this duty, namely, the fitting and
the preparing of us to the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ unto judgment, for
so the very same particle (till) is used in the very same sense.

In the 1 Cor. 15.25. where it is said that Christ must reign till he have
put all his enemies under his feet; till he have put all his enemies, the
meaning of it is this; First, that Christ's reigning shall be continual till
the very end of the world. Secondly, and the end of Christ's reigning is this,
the utter destruction of his enemies, and the trampling of them under his feet,
so it is in this case, Do this duty till he come, that is to say, this duty
must be continued till Christ come to judgment: and the end and the reach that
we must aim at in the performance of this duty is, that we be fitted and
prepared for his coming. We cannot understand this clause clearly and fully
except we take it with these two explications; the first is this, that
howsoever this duty is imposed by name upon the Corinthians only, ye show the
Lords death till he come: yet notwithstanding it is proportionably implied to
all the faithful by succession, from time to time to the end of the world: for
the Apostle knew very well that the Corinthians in themselves in their own
persons should not live till Christ should come to judgment, and therefore it
was impossible that they should keep this commandment till he come: but the
Apostle imposes upon the Corinthians this duty for their time, that they must
observe it so long as they live; and likewise imposes the same duty upon the
succeeding Churches, from age to age to the worlds end, that they must observe
this duty so too: so that is the first explication; the second explication is
this, that howsoever this clause be here expressly referred only to the latter
part of the verse, to the caution, to the remembrance of Christ's death, Ye
remember Christ's death till he come; yet it is employed and intended to belong
also unto the former part of the verse, to the action it self, the receiving
of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. For as that particle of frequenting the
word often is used only in the former part, yet it extends it self in sense
to the latter: so this clause of continuing till he come, though it be named
only in the latter part, yet in sense it does extend it self to the former
part of the verse; so that both the remembrance of the Lords death, and also
the observation of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, both these are to be
continued till Jesus Christ shall come to judgment, for so the Apostle here
expounding pounding our Saviors meaning in the words going before, when he
says, Do this in remembrance of me; he adds this rule of continuance, do it
till he come: now each of these were joined together by our Savior Christ,
namely, the remembrance of the Lords death; and likewise the receiving of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, therefore each of these must also be employed
together by the Apostle. Concerning the continual remembrance of the death of
Christ we have spoken the last day, where we handled the frequenting of it;
now therefore we come to speak concerning the continuance of the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper to the end of the world, which is the first point, that which
is directly and expressly affirmed.

Luke 19.13. there is a parable, A Noble man went into a far Country to
receive a Kingdom for himselse, and so to come again, he calls his ten
servants and gives them ten pieces of money, saying, Trade you till I come. The
Nobleman that there is spoken of in the parable, is our Savior Christ, he went
into a far country to receive a Kingdom for himself in heaven, and so to come
again at the day of judgment. By the servants there we are to understand
chiefly Gods Ministers, as they being particularly employed about the holy
things of God, the Word and the Sacraments, and such like, whereby the Lord is
especially served and worshipped. By the pieces of money that there are given
unto the^, we are to understand all such gifts which the Lord Jesus does bestow
upon his Ministers, for the preaching of the Word, and the administration of
the Sacraments, and for the discharge of the whole work of their Ministry,
these gifts and these indowments of theirs, must all these servants employ and
trade thriftily till Christ come, that is to say, till Christ do come to
judgment. That it is meant of the day of judgment appears plainly out of v.
15. because it is said, when he did come again and called his servants to
account; now the day of account is the day of judgment. Then you see here, the
gifts of their ministry, the direction of their ministry, the exercise of
their Ministry, they must continue until Christ's coming to judgment, their
labors and their endeavors in their ministry, they must continue til Christ
come to judgment. Trade all these things till I come; therefore the holy things
of God, the word and the Sacraments which they do thus trade and labor and
endeavor in; they also must be perpetual ordinances to be continued til Jesus
Christ shall come to judgment. 1 Timothy 6.13, 14. I charge thee before God (says
Paul to Timothy) that quickens all things; and before Jesus Christ, who under
Pilate witnessed a good confession, that thou keep this Commandment without
spot, and unrebukable, until the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ. The
Commandment that there the Apostle speaks of, is and does extend it self to
the whole charge that Paul had given unto Timothy in and for the work of his
ministry; all his gifts, and directions, and exercises of his ministry; all
this whole command that Paul gave unto him, must be kept without spot, and
unrebukable, duly and religiously it must be observed by Timothy till the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. But you will say, Timothy could observe it
no longer than his own time, and he was not to live till Christ was to
appear in judgment, how could he observe it till then? I, but the Apostle
sets forth the nature and the condition of these saving ordinances, the Word
and the Sacraments and the work of the ministry, namely, that they be
perpetual ordinances to be observed duly and conscionably, without spot, and
unrebukable so long as the world stands, til the appearing of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and therefore Timothy he for his time and his part must look that he do
co^scionably observe the^ so long as he lives; I, and he must take order, and
do the best that in him lies that the succeeding Churches from age to age
shall embrace these saving ordinances, until the very appearing of the Lord
Jesus Christ. To prove the point yet more specially, for that is only more
general: to prove it more specially Matthew. 28.19, 20. Go, says our Savior
to his Disciples, teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father,
of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you, and I will be with you always to the end of
the world. Here is a command, and here is a promise; a command that they on
their parts should teach them to observe all that Christ commanded them; a
promise on his part, that he will be with them and assist them in the work of
their ministry to the end of the world: the command is, that they should teach
and baptize, and administer the Sacrament; for though but one Sacrament be
there named, yet the other must be proportionably understood, that they were
to administer the Sacraments both of Baptism, and also of the Lords Supper,
accordingly as Churches should be planted for ever: and that which follows in
the twentieth verse, takes hold very directly upon the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, teaching them to observe whatsoever I have commanded you; now you know
that our Savior commanded the Apostles in the administration of the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, Do this in remembrance of me; therefore they were to
teach them to observe this Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and the people they
were to observe and to follow it. But how long must that continue? look into
the promise, and that will tell you, it must continue always to the end of the
world: Christ promises his assistance and his blessing in these labors and
endeavors of theirs, in their preaching and administering of the Sacraments,
and in all these actions to continue always, says the Text, to the end of the
world; therefore the Word and the Sacraments, the preaching of the Word, and
the administration of the Sacraments shall continue always to the end of the
world: Where this blessing is promised that it shall continue to the end of the
world, this endeavor of theirs must also continue to the end of the world too:
so then you see the sacrament and the administration of it, is a perpetual
ordinance: you see it so in special; one place yet more in particular, and so
I end. Luke 22.19. that which is the ground of this text, our Savior in the
institution of the sacrament, says, Do this in remembrance of me; here you
see that our Savior lays a charge upon his Apostles, that they should do
this; what? administer and receive the sacrament in remembrance of Christ:
well, shall we think that our Savior would have his Apostles that they only
should remember Christ; or was it not our Saviors meaning that all the
faithful should remember Christ to the end of the world? why surely it is the
meaning of our Savior that all the faithful should remember Christ from time
to time to the end of the world, as well as the Apostles; and this is the
Apostles reach in these words; for having made rehearsal of our Saviors words
in the 25 verse, presently he says, Do this in remembrance of me; and then he
adds again, if ye do this ye show forth the Lords death till he come: the
Apostle builds this very doctrine upon this very exhortation, because Christ
says, Do this in remembrance of me, therefore the Apostle concludes, that the
sacrament of the Lords supper is a perpetual ordinance, and must be observed
in the Church till his last coming to judgment; and therefore the Apostle did
esteem the words of Christ a pregnant proof of the continuance of this
sacrament, and he builds it plainly thereupon. So much shall suffice for proof
out of Scripture, now let us see what reasons may be added for further light:
the reasons are many.

Exodus 12.14. This is a holy remembrance to you, a holy feast to be kept among
you throughout all generations, ye shall keep it a holy feast for ever; the
Passover was so in the former Testament, therefore the sacrament of the Lords
supper must be so in the new Testament; that was to last for ever, and
therefore this to last for ever. The grounds of the Reason are these two:
First, the sacrament of the Lords supper answers to the Passover; and indeed
unto us it does succeed in stead and in place unto the Passover, as we have
showed partly before, and God willing shall show more hereafter. The Sacrament
of the Lords supper answers to the Passover; the Passover was to last for
ever, and therefore the sacrament of the Lords Supper must last for ever too.
The other ground of the reason is this, The Passover was a Sacrament for the
time of the Law, which was only a time of shadows; the Gospel is a time of
substance; shall we say that the shadow shall be served with more durable
things than the substance is? except we shall say that the time of the Law was
served with more durable things than the time of the Gospel, surely the
Sacraments of the one must be as durable as the other. And therefore seeing
the Passover is to be kept for ever, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper must be
observed for ever too. And whereas the word for ever may admit of two good and
holy interpretations; which way soever you take it, yet still the force of this
reason holds. If we expound that for ever, in that sign, or in the type, that
is to say, till Christ his first coming, or till Christ's coming and suffering
in the flesh, for that is the for ever that usually is spoken of concerning the
Sacrifices and Sacraments of the former Testament, namely, the coming of
Christ in the flesh, or Christ's suffering in the flesh; he is the very term
and the very end of the Law, as the Apostle shows in Hebr. 10.1. If ye take
it I say, in this sense, yet the force of the reason will necessarily follow,
If the Passover were to last for ever till Christ's coming in the flesh, then
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper must last for ever till Christ come to
judgment. Secondly, expound it for ever, that is, not in the sign, but in the
substance; that is, in Christ, that is to say, for ever and so long as the
world stands, and the fruit of it to all eternity, expound it so, for so the
Sacraments of the former Testament they do stand good, and are good for ever
in Christ the substance of them; take it in this sense yet the reason holds
well; for if so be that the Passover should last till the end of the world in
Christ who is the substance of it, why then the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
which is ordained of our Savior to be a more lively resemblance of his death
than the first was, that must continue for ever also.

Luke 22. 20. This it the new Testament, (says our Savior, speaking of this
Sacrament) in my blood; it is a sacramental speech whereby that is ascribed to
the sign which indeed is proper to the thing signified: the new Testament in
my blood, says our Savior, that is, confirmed or sealed by my blood, or by my
death, and so it is his last Testament: the Sacrament of the Lords Supper it is
the new Testament, the last Testament of Jesus Christ; a man's last Testament is
utterly irrevokable and unchangeable; this is Christ's last Testament, therefore
this can never be altered: Gal. 3.15. the Apostle gives the rule there; a man's
will when it is once confirmed, then it is never abrogated nor disanulled: when
is a man's will confirmed? the Apostle tells you in Heb. 9.17. when a man is
dead; a man's will is confirmed by his death; here is the Lords last Testament,
this is the new Testament in my blood, says our Savior, speaking of this
Sacrament; it is confirmed by the death of Christ, which is the Testator, and
therefore never to be abrogated nor changed, nothing to be added to it, nor
detracted from it. Heb. 13.20. the Apostle mentions the blood of the
everlasting covenant; speaking there of the blood of Christ, he says, It is
the blood of the everlasting Covenant, the Covenant or the Testament that is
everlasting; the blood whereby this Testament is sealed, is the blood of Jesus
Christ that is everlasting, therefore this Sacrament whereby this Testament is
further confirmed and sealed unto us in an outward manner, this must be
everlasting too: the blood everlasting, the Testament everlasting, and so the
Sacrament everlasting.

Hebr. 1.1. Gods in sundry times spoke by his Prophets, but now he has spoken
by his Son in these last days: these be the last days of the world; the
Apostles reach is this, to show us that this is the last time that ever he will
speak to his Church, because he has spoken by his Son; he has none other
to send after him: now these are the last days that shall be; that which is
last established, there is nothing comes after that; these being the last
days, the Word and Sacraments are established in; the time of the Gospel
being the last change about the passages of the Church that ever shall come:
they shall never be altered, but they shall continue to the end of the world.

Cor. 13.9, 10. in general: We know but in part, we prophecy but in part, but
when that which is perfect is come, then shall that which is imperfect be done
away: our knowledge now is imperfect, all our graces are imperfect; indeed if
we could attain to any perfection in this life, then happily this sacrament
might be taken from us, but there is no perfection to be attained unto, but so
long as here we live so long we shall continue in need of this help, and
therefore this help must be continued unto us so long as we live here. In the
12. verse of that chapter, Now, says he, we behold in a mirror, or through a
glass darkly, but then we shall behold face to face. It is true indeed, when
perfection comes we shall see perfectly, we need no glass; but now so long as
the Church is upon the face of the earth, we had need to look upon Christ in
a glass: Is not the sacrament a glass wherein we may behold Christ? seeing
then the Church still needs such a glass, and it does not stand with the
wisdom of Christ to suffer it to want any needful help; therefore during
all the time of this our imperfection, that is, so long as we live here, this
Sacrament must continue.

Ephesians. 4.5. where he says, There is one Lord, one faith, one baptism: if
the faith must continue one and the same, then the Sacraments must continue one
and the same, one and the same faith must continue to the end of the world;
therefore one and the same Sacraments must continue to the worlds end.

none can establish a better Sacrament then this is, nay none can establish the
like, but Jesus Christ himself, that which Christ will do in this case, he
has done already, and he is unchangeable, he will not take away this and
ordain another; and therefore this Sacrament is a perpetual Sacrament of
Christ to be observed by all the faithful to the end of the world; The uses of
the doctrine are these:

our souls are worth, and yet we to turn our backs upon this Table, as who
should say we will have none of this; how can the Lord take this at our hands?
In Luke 14.24. the King made a feast and sent forth his servants to call those
that were bidden, and they began to make excuses, one said I have bought a
farm, and he must go and see it; another had bought five yoke of oxen, and
he must go prove them, and another made an excuse that he had married a wife,
and therefore he could not come; what says the great King in this case? Well
go forth, call in the poor, those that lie under the hedges: for I tell you
that never a one of those that were bidden shall taste of my Supper: Is it so?
have I so graciously provided for them, and invited them, and are they so
careless in coming? Well, I will be eaven with the^, I tell you that never a
one of these shall hereafter taste of this Supper. It would be as fearful a
found as ever sounded in our ears, if God should tell us by a voice from
heaven, Well, seeing you have neglected this saving ordinance of mine, seeing
ye have refused to come to this Supper of mine, ye shall never be partakers of
it in time to come; and therefore take heed of this, and let every one labor
to reform one, and amend this negligence, and let us hereafter come with zeal
and true devotion, come with godly desires and affections, truly endeavoring
to honor God in the use of his own saving ordinance in that kind as he has
institute it.

Secondly, here is matter of reproof for those that do any manner of way
alter any thing in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; for seeing that it is
thus set upright by Jesus Christ, such a complete ordinance of God, wanting
nothing, therefore it is a grievous sin for any that shall lay hands upon it
to alter it or to add any thing to it. The Popish Church is guilty highly of
this sin, and of the wrath of God for it; how many ceremonies have they
defiled it withal, as by the cross namely, which as it is in use in the popish
Church, is as abominable an Idol as ever was erected amongst them: It is in
some use amongst us after the Sacrament of Baptism, but to us, there is no
Idolatry in it at all: and howsoever it be free, and far from all Idolatry
amongst us, yet surely if it had crept within the Sacrament of Baptism; as it
did creep within the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, I make no question, but
our State being religious and wise, would have utterly cast it out from the one
Sacrament as well as from the other. But I say they stain this Sacrament by
admitting of the Cross into the Lords Supper: but that is not the worst, they
go further, they maime this blessed Sacrament, they make this Communion but
half a Communion, they deprive the people of the cup, let them have the bread,
and much good may it do them, but they shall have no wine; but our Savior
says, Eat this bread and drink this cup, he gave them bread and wine to eat
and to drink, and thus did he leave this ordinance to be observed by them: now
if the Papists shall come and deprive the people of one half of this
Communion, the servant shows himself to be envious, where the Lord has
showed himself bountiful; the Lord has given them both kinds, and the
Papists give them but one: Nay what will you say if they overthrow this
Sacrament utterly? surely they do; for they turn the nature of the Sacrament
into the nature of a sacrifice, for with them this sacrament is a sacrifice: it
is a Sacrament in the institution of our Savior Christ; but they will have it
a propitiatory sacrifice for quick and dead; this is to overthrow the nature
of the Sacrament: they spoil it also with horrible Idolatry another way, in
that they keep it but in one kind, that is, in the bread; and that very element
of bread that Christ has separated to holy use, they have turned into a
profane and gross Idol, they hold it verily to be a God; and if this be not
to overthrow the nature of the Sacrament, I know not what is.

not in that sense as they charge us withal: the Church is sometime so
obscured and eclipsed, that it is invisible, that is to say, that the world
cannot see it and take public notice of it, but yet is it never so darkened,
but that one professor knows another, and they do meet together, though
sometimes happily but two or three, or a few, in the use of Gods saving
ordinances; God never wants his Church in one place or another; the gates of
hell shall never prevail against it.

the Church is the Spouse of Christ, and Christ is her loving husband, loving
it most dearly, most tenderly, and most affectionately; and therefore he has
not only provided means of maintenance for the time he lives here upon
earth, but now also that he is absent, that he is dead, and gone from them,
still their maintenance that continues. He is a faithless hous-keeper that
provides only for his family so long as he is with them, and lets them sterve
or shift for themselves when he is gone, he is worse then an Infidel, as the
Apostle speaks, that provides not for his family: but our Savior is more
faithful then so, he provided bountifully for his Church and family whilst
he was here among them upon earth; and now that he is gone from earth to
heaven, from among them, yet still he leaves them the same liberal portion
to nourish and cherish their souls as they had before. Christ would have us
take notice of this his great care and love toward us. Mark. 13.13. The Son
of man is like unto a man going into a strange Country, leaves his house,
etc. So Christ left his house, that is, his Church for a time, that is, in
regard of his bodily presence; but he never left it in regard of his gracious
providence: but he gives authority to his servants, and leaves to every man
his work, and commands the porter to watch: see here how the Lord before he
departed took order for the welfare of his Church and people, that it might be
as well with them after he was gone, as it was before. John 14. c. 16, 17, 18,
verse. I will pray the Father, says our Savior, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of truth whom
the world has not known: and so he proceeds and says, I will not leave you
comfortless. The Apostles they were much daunted and dismayed in themselves
when they heard that our Savior would go from them; alas what shall become of
us, when the shepherd is smitten, the sheep will soon be scattered: our
Savior would not have them discouraged, and therefore he says, Well, be of
good comfort, when I am gone, I will pray to the Father, and he shall give you
another Comforter, and be shall dwell with you for ever, though I be gone from
you, yet he shall not. What Comforter is that? why, the Spirit of Truth that is
in you, and dwells in you, and is among you: and so he proceeds and says, I
will not leave you comfortless, that is, Orphans or fatherless children,
though you poor souls think when I am gone, you shall be like children
without a father, yet be of good comfort, I will not leave you comfortless, I
will provide you as good a father as my self, I will send you the Spirit of
truth to comfort you, and he shall do you as much good, as if I were present
with you. The Apostles and the Disciples of Christ, when Christ was present
here, they had the Word and Sacraments, and Christ his bodily presence with
them; the Churches after our Saviors time they had the same Word and
Sacraments; and though they had not his bodily presence, yet they had the
Spirit of Christ, who was as willing and ready and as able to do as much for
them as ever Christ did: and therefore is not the estate of the Church as good
now in every respect as before it was? so it was then, so it is now, and so it
shall continue to the worlds end.

Another duty that here we are instructed in is this, it should stir us up
the more to thankesgiving, that we should give thanks to God that he has
ordained this comfortable means of our salvation, still to continue to the end
of the world. More generally it teaches us, that we should be thankful to God
for the whole Church living upon the face of the earth, that they and we being
respited to live in these last days, these perilous times, as the Apostle
calls them, 2 Timothy 2.3. verse. and these sinful days, as our Savior foretold,
when iniquity shall abound, and the love of many shall wax cold: yet the Lord
Jesus Christ has been pleased to afford us his own saving ordinances, the
same helps and means to keep us in the right way, and to build us up to the
Kingdom of God; to us I say, that live in this Iron age of the world, that the
Apostles had and did enjoy in the Golden age of Christ himself. It is not the
profanation of this Sacrament by our forefathers, nor the abuse of it by our
selves: It is not the cry of the sins of the world for this sixteen hundred
years; it is not any one of these, nor all these that have or ever shall or
can deprive the Church of God of this grace and mercy, surely if it could, long
ere now bad this gracious light been extinguished and taken from us, but
blessed be God, that has, and daily does stop his ears against the cries of
our sins; and still though our sins cry for vengeance, yet the Lord is
pleased to continue these comfortable and saving ordinances unto us, these
heavenly helps of our salvation, as Isaac said concerning Jacob, Jacob have I
blessed, and he shall be blessed. Such is Christ his resolution touching his
Church, the Church has been blessed, and she shall be blessed; it has my
Word and Sacraments, and shall have my Word and Sacraments continued to them to
the end of the world: no profane Esau shall ever get it from them.

Secondly and more particularly, it should stir us up that live here in this
Land, in this City, and in this congregation, to more thankfulness, that it
has pleased the Lord to admit us to be members of this Church, and so to admit
us to participate in this Sacrament; we have it, and we have free access unto
it through Gods mercy, and we have it duly observed among us, and rightly
administered unto us without any gross corruption, or any material change from
our Saviors own original institution, a blessing and a mercy that many of
Gods people in many places of the world would purchase with the loss of all
their goods, and the hazard of their lives too, if so they might procure it;
but blessed be God, we have it, and do enjoy it with much peace, and with a
full hand; let us take notice of this great mercy of God to us, and let us
acknowledge this mercy of God, and esteem of it and that highly, and let us
give unto GOD the due honor and praise that belongs to him for the same.

The last duty that here we are instructed unto is this, Is it so that God has
appointed this Sacrament to continue to the end of the world? why then every
one of us should labor, and do the best we can to the uttermost of our power
for the continuance of it, and for the continuance of the rest of Gods saving
ordinances to the worlds end; and not to say only, Let there be peace in our
days, and let the Gospel flourish in our days, let us have access to the
sacrament while we live; but to labor that the people of God that shall live
in time to come to the end of the world, may have them and enjoy them as well
as we. But you will say, we can but look to it for our time, how can we do
it for the time to come? I answer, whilst we live here, and while we have
these things, let us highly esteem of them, and reverently embrace them, and
make a conscionable use of them. This is one means whereby we shall procure
men to love them, and may procure from the Lord the continuance of these his
ordinances to our posterity. Secondly, let us not only so do, but labor to
countenance these things, to plead for them, to fight for them, and to strive
for them, to the utmost of our power. Thirdly, and not only so, but let us
call upon others that live among us to come to the house of God, and to make
use of his saving ordinances: Let us not be such graceless wretches as to
suffer others to neglect such a gracious salvation as the Lord tenders unto
them, let us charge them, that they charge their posterity to do the like.
Fourthly, we must yet go further, and walk worthy of them, worthy of those
saving ordinances of God: if we have the light, let us walk as children of the
light; if we have the Gospel, let us walk worthy of the Gospel; if we have
the Word and Sacraments, let us show forth the fruit and power of them. Revel.
2.5. Repent and do thy first works, or else I will come against thee, and
remove thy candlestick: I, it is just with God to remove the candlestick from
a place, if the people there do not labor to walk worthy of their light, and
show forth the power of it in their lives and conversations: yet further, we
must not only do this, but also as much as in us lies do what we can while
we live to further Gods ordinances to those that shall live after us; leave
some good monument behind us to that effect. If God have given us riches, let
us give something to maintain Gods ordinances to the end of the world. It is
an excellent thing when God has given any man abundance of wealth, and has
given him withal a heart to part with some of it for the maintenance of Gods
ordinances to the worlds end; yea if occasion so require, let us seal Gods
truth with our blood, this is the best monument of all. Lastly, and so I end;
all man's power being nothing of himself, God being all in all: we must
therefore pray to God while we live here, not only that he would continue his
Word and Sacraments to us, but pray that he would continue the same to our
posterity after us, to many generations, yea even to the end of the world, if
it be his blessed will. In 1 King. 8. Solomon when he built the Temple, he
did not only pray for that time, but for the time to come: Then whenever
hereafter thy people shall be oppressed with the sword or famine, or such like,
and shall pray to thee in this Temple, hear thou in heaven, and be merciful
unto them. So we must labor not only to pray to God to fence his Church, and
plant his Vineyard, and nourish those plants that are in it already, but that
he would still continue to make a supply of such plants, so long as the Sun and
Moon shall endure: and this would testify a true zeal that we bear to the
glory of God. We know (beloved) in regard of our own businesses, if we
purchase lands for our selves, or our children, we desire that it may continue
for ever to our childrens children: What, shall we not be as zealous for Gods
glory, as we are careful for our own children? yes, we ought much more, and
therefore we should be stirred up still to labor as much as in us lies, by
prayer and all other good means, for the continuance of the Word and
Sacraments, and all the saving ordinances of God, not only unto us, but to our
posterity, to our childrens children, to the Church of God even to the end of
the world.

The end of the twentieth Lecture.
The One AND TWENTIETH LECTVRE UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
THE first to the Corinthians, Chap. 11. verse 26. the last part of the verse,
till he come: For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup,
ye show forth the Lords death till he come. You may remember how we divided
this Scripture into two parts: we showed that in the former part of the verse
there is an action performed; in the latter part of the verse there is a
caution that it is to be performed withal: in the former part of the verse is
the receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: The caution that it is to
be performed withal, in the latter part of the verse, is the showing forth of
the Lords death till he come. Not to trouble you with repeating of many things:
In this latter part of the verse we observed unto you, first the Caution it
self, the showing forth of the Lords death: secondly, the frequenting of the
Caution, that it must be often done; for howsoever this word often is not used
in the latter part of the verse, yet in all common construction and
understanding, it is to be supplied out of the former part of the verse, As
often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, so often shall ye show
forth the Lords death: and lastly, I came to speak of the continuance of this
whole duty, the whole that is here spoken of, how long must this continue; till
Christ come, that is to say, as long as the world stands, till Jesus Christ
shall come to Judgment. We are entered upon this clause already: I showed you
that this clause does offer unto us two things for our consideration; the first
is the continuance it self of this duty, how long it shall be, to the end of
the world; that the observation of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and the
remembering or the showing forth of the death of Christ must continue among the
faithful, and be duly observed by them, to the very end of the world; that is
directly affirmed here as you see. I showed you that there is another thing
that is here covertly employed, and yet plain enough, if we consider and weigh
the words aright, namely, the end or the reach which the performers of this
duty aim at, or which we must aim at in the performance of this duty,
namely, to fit us and prepare us to the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ unto
Judgment. We have spoken of the former part already; now as GOD shall enable
us we are to proceed to the latter part, and so to finish up this Scripture at
this time. Therefore here secondly, we must consider that which is covertly
employed, namely, the end or the reach that these actions or these duties aim
at, or that we must aim at in the performance of these duties, to fit us and
prepare us to the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ unto judgment: that the
doctrine that hence we are to raise may appear to be built upon a firm and a
sure ground, we must show these two things:

First, that this particle that here is used, till, has the same use in the
same sense elsewhere in the Scripture, not only to signify the continuance of
an action till that time, but withal to signify that that continuance is such
a preparation. to such an action.

Secondly, we must show that it is so to be understood here; for it is not
always in the Scripture so meant, therefore there must be some special
inducement alleged why it must be so taken here.

Concerning the first, that this particle is used in the same sense, elsewhere,
I gave you one instance in the opening of the Text, in the 1 Cor. 15.25. where
it is said, that Christ should reign till he had put all his enemies under his
feet. For there is the same particle that is used here, and it signifies not
only that Christ should reign till his enemies should be destroyed, but by
his reigning, his enemies should be destroyed. Take another instance or two for
better confirmation, Gal. 4.19. My little children, says the Apostle, of whom
I travel in birth till Christ be formed in you: there is the very same
particle also: In those words, the Apostle as you may see compares himself to
a spiritual mother, he is always in pain and in travel in the spirit, and
in the work of the ministry, till such time as Christ should be formed and
fashioned in the hearts of these Galathians, till that time, there that same
word (till) intends these two things; First, that the pains and the travel of
Paul in this spiritual childbirth did endure with in him till such time as
Christ was formed and fashioned in the hearts of the Galathians: and moreover
that those very pains and travel of the Apostle in that very spiritual
childbirth, were a means whereby Christ was so formed and framed in them, for
so the comparison does necessarily enforce from a natural mother, we know a
natural mother has continual pains and throes ever and anon till the child
be ripe to the birth, and brought forth into the world, it continues with her
all that time. I, and besides, those pains and those throes of hers are a
means whereby the child is so made ripe to the birth and brought forth into
the world, and so it was with Paul in his spiritual childbirth, the pains
that he did bear in this his childbirth, it is to be understood that they
did continue with him till that work was effected; and moreover, that they
were a means whereby it was effected; Another instance Phil. 1.6. I am
confident that the Lord that has begun this good work will perform it till
the day of the Lord: there is the same particle in the very same sense; the
Apostles meaning is this, that he is persuaded, that as God had given them the
light of his Gospel, and wrought faith in them, so he would give them the light
of his Gospel, he would still teach them and keep them in the faith, till
the day of the Lord Jesus Christ. And moreover, that by this teaching and
keeping of them in the faith, he would make them fit and ready for the day of
the Lord; so much for the first point, namely, that this particle which here is
spoken of, till, is so used in this same sense, that we do now speak of it,
elsewhere in Scripture.

Secondly, we are to show what inducement is there to prove that it is so used
here; why the circumstance of the text affords it clearly, these words that I
have here, you fee they are added as a reason of the words that went before,
for so the inference is, for as often as ye shall eat this bread and drink
this cup, ye show forth the Lords death till he come. The words that went
immediately before are the words of our Savior, Do this in remembrance of me:
the Apostle gives the exposition of these words, by way of a reason, for as
often as ye shall eat this bread and drink this cup, ye show forth the Lords
death til he come; and so the exposition of the Apostle makes our Saviors
words, and our Saviors meaning to be clear, as if our Savior should say,
Do this in remembrance of me till I come, or against I come, as who should
say, see that ye do duly observe this same Sacrament of the Lords Supper
till I come; see that ye do duly and affectionatly meditate upon my death
till I come, that when I do come then ye may be fitted and ready for my
coming; ye may be prepared by these means to give me the better
entertainment, and I seeing your faithfulness and your constancy, and
readiness in observing my ordinances and my directions so duly, I may then
when I do come, give you a comfortable portion, Do this in remembrance of me,
till I come, or against I come, that so you may be fitted and prepared for my
coming. This is the very strain and reach or the Text; we are to understand
one thing further, and that is this, that howsoever this is here intended
particularly of these two duties of the receiving of the Sacrament of the Lord,
and of the meditation of Christ's death, yet notwithstanding by way of
proportion, and by way of consequence, the same is also to be affirmed
concerning all duties in religion whatsoever, all other outward means; yea all
other means of grace, whether outward or inward: for they all must join
together in one and the same final end: This being the final end of these two
duties, to prepare us to the day of the Lord Jesus Christ, except we will make
a disproportion in religious duties; as if some of them should tend to one end,
and some to another; we must consequently understand that all the duties of
religion they tend to this end, to fit us and prepare us to the coming of
Jesus Christ unto judgment. The grounds being thus laid, the doctrine arises
plain, Do this till I come, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper duly observed,
and the effectual meditation of Christ's death, and consequently all other
duties and exercises of religion, and all other means of grace both inward and
outward, they are so many serviceable means and instruments and helps unto the
faithful, whereby they are fitted and prepared for the coming of the Lord
Jesus Christ unto judgment.

Where I named the receiving of the Lords Supper and the effectual meditation
of Christ's death, that is clear in this text, concerning all other duties,
other Scriptures do serve to make that clear, and give plentiful witness of
it. Matthew. 25. from the first to the thirteenth, there is the parable of the
ten Virgins, five were wise, and five were foolish; they went all out to meet
their Bridegroom, five had oil, and five had none; the Bridegroom comes,
they were all awake, as they were asleep before: the wise they had their oil,
they went in with the Bridegroom; the foolish they had none, and they were
kept out: in a word, the meaning of the parable is this; Those Virgins are the
visible Church here upon earth, the wise Virgins they are true believers, the
foolish Virgins they are hypocrites: their Lamps that they have all of them, is
the outward profession that they make of religion in the use of the outward
means, the Word and Sacraments, these be the Lamps, these be common both to
the foolish and to the wise; the oil they have in their Lamps is the inward
graces of Gods Spirit in their hearts, faith and repentance, and such like; and
these only the wise Virgins had, the foolish have none at all: all these
Virgins they go forth to meet the Bridegroom, as in the first verse: the
Bridegroom is the Lord Jesus Christ, the coming of the Bridegroom, is his
coming to judgment, and so their meeting of the Bridegroom, it is their
fitting, and their preparing of themselves for the coming of the Lord Jesus
Christ unto judgment: well then you see all these Virgins, the whole visible
Church, the foolish as well as the wise, the wise only in truth, the foolish
in show, they as well as the other make use of their lamps; of their communion
in the Word and the sacraments: to what end? to fit the^ to Christ his coming,
for that is their pretense; the wise they make use not only of their lamps,
but also of their oil too, that is, of their inward graces: to what end, to
fit them to meet the Lord Jesus, that when the Bridegroom does come they may
be ready to enter in with him; the case you see is very clear, all the duties
of religion that we do perform either outward duties, or inward graces, they
be as so many serviceable helps unto us, whereby we are fitted and prepared
for the day of the Lord Jesus Christ: our Savior in the 13. verse of that
Chapter by occasion of the excluding and shutting out of the foolish Virgins,
because they had no oil in their lamps, no grace in their hearts, he therefore
gives us an exhortation, Wath therefore, why watch? because ye know not when
the Son of man shall come. As if our Savior should say; Certainly the Son
of man shall come to judgment; if he do come and find you unready, you shall
be in a most woeful and miserable case: watch therefore, see that ye have
your lamps ready in your hands, especially see that you have oil burning in
your lamps, that so when the Son of man shall come, ye may be ready to give
him gracious entertainment; and so our Savior confirms it by that exhortation
that he gives them, watch, etc. that all these means and exercises of
Religion, what are they? why they be serviceable helps to fit us to the coming
of the Lord Jesus Christ unto judgment, Luke 12.35, 36. Let your loins be girt
about you, and your lights burning: and ye as men that do wait for the coming
of their Master, that when he comes, and knocks, they may open unto him
immediately. In the girding of our loins, in the burning of our lights, in our
watching, in all the duties of religion both outward and inward, that we
perform, we must carry our selves as men that wait the coming of our Master
from the wedding, as men that expect the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ to
judgment; that whenever he does come and knock, when our Lord and Master
shall come and knock, what may we do? we may open to him, that is, we may be
ready to give him gracious entertainment, and that immediately, without any let
or hinderance, without any delay, as being fitted and prepared thereunto by
these duties and exercises before hand. Luke 21.36. Watch therefore and pray
continually, that ye may be counted worthy to escape all these things, and
that ye may stand before the Son of man. What good shall our watching do us,
what good shall our prayers do us, what good shall all our religious exercises
do us that we do perform here in this life? what good says our Savior?
why, they shall do thee this good, that they shall make thee to escape the
terrors of the day of judgment, and shall make thee to stand with joy and with
comfort, when the Lord shall come to judge the world: Watch and pray
continually, that ye may escape and stand before the Son of man. Titus 2.11,
12, 13, verses, The grace of God that brings salvation to all men has
appeared, teaching us that we should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and
that we should live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present evil
world, looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of the mighty
God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ. The saving grace of God that there the
Apostle speaks of, teaches us two things, as the Apostle shows. It teaches
us first, the good duties that we are to perform, to deny ungodliness, and
unrighteousness, and our selves, and to live godly and soberly in this present
world; and it teaches us a second thing, what it is that our eyes and hearts
are to be fixed upon in these duties, even the appearing of the Lord Jesus
Christ, looking for that blessed hope, still have your eyes upon that, looking
for the appearance of the mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ. The
Apostle Peter he goes one step further, for whereas the Apostle Paul he had
said there, looking for the blessed hope, so manage all your businesses that ye
may have a gracious eye to the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. The Apostle
Peter he goes one step further, in 2 Pet. 3.11, 12. Seeing that all these
things must be, what manner of persons ought we to be in all holiness and
godly conversation, looking for and hastening unto the coming of the day of the
Lord in the performance of the duties of holiness and righteousness: we must not
only have our eyes fixed upon the coming of the day of the Lord, but hasten to
it, that is to say, we must so carry our selves in the managing of these duties,
that in every good duty that we do, still we may be fitted and better
prepared for the coming of the day of God, and nearer to it than we were
before, looking for, and hastening unto the coming of the day of God. You see
these places prove the doctrine directly, for all religious duties: now for
these two in particular, I will give you a proof for each, and so come to the
Reasons.

First, concerning the performance of the duty of receiving the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, that is a serviceable means, and a good duty to fit us to
the day of Jesus Christ; our Savior would give us to understand so much in
Matthew. 26.29. Henceforth I will drink no more of this Vine, till I drink it
new with you in my Fathers kingdom: our Savior used that speech immediately
after the Passover; and after that he had instituted the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, immediately, he makes a kind of a sweet allusion between the
drinking of the wine in the Sacrament, and the drinking of wine in the kingdom
of heaven. Now you must consider, that by drinking of the wine in the Kingdom
of heaven, we are not to understand that we shall drink wine there, but that
there we shall have a Communion with Christ in his heavenly kingdom, which he
by way of allusion calls the drinking of the wine new in his heavenly
kingdom: thereby our Savior gives us to understand that the conscionable and
the religious receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the conscionable,
and religious, and spiritual drinking of the wine in the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, is a special means whereby we are furthered, and fitted, and
prepared to drink new wine with Christ in the kingdom of heaven, that is to
say, to the participation of that glory that Christ shall make us partakers of
in heaven: for the other, that the death of Christ effectually remembered does
so too: look Heb. 9.28. So Christ was once offered to take away the sins of
many, and the second time he shall appear without sin to salvation: The
Apostle there makes a kind of comparison between Christ and us in two things,
his death is compared to ours, and likewise his judgment to ours; we dye, and
we come to judgment; Christ Jesus he dies, and he shall come to judgment
too; he to judge, we to be judged; and we must make use of our death for our
judgment, and we must make use of the death of Christ with reference to his
judgment: not to meditate upon it as once suffered for us all, as who should
say there to stay, but so to meditate upon it, as that we should have a
piercing eye to look upon him for his second coming, wherein he shall appear
to salvation.

The reasons of the doctrine are these: mark the doctrine: the receiving of
the sacrament of the Lords supper, the effectual meditating of Christ's death,
and consequently all other exercises of Religion, all other means of grace,
both inward and outward, they are serviceable helps and means whereby the
faithful are fitted and prepared to the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ to
judgment.

Matthew diverse times the visible Church is called the kingdom of heaven,
because that in the visible Church Gods little ones they are hatched up in the
time of their infancy, in the time of their nonage to that inheritance in the
kingdom of heaven, which God has appointed us to be heirs unto in and with
Jesus Christ: the Church is the nursery of the kingdom of heaven: why now
consider all that is done by the parents, or by nurses, in nursing and in
bringing up their children, all that is done by the^ it is not done so much unto
them in regard of the maintenance of their childhood, I say, not for their
childhood it self, but it is done to us in this respect, that thereby we might
be fitted to riper years, to our better strength, to our manly age, that so we
may be able for such employments and offices in the Church or Commonwealth as
we shall be called unto: this is their reach and aim, that we may come to be
men, and bear office in Church and Commonwealth: So it is likewise in this
case, the visible Church it is the nursery for the kingdom of heaven; here
Gods little children they are nursed and brought up, here we suck the milk of
the Word, here we are washed and cleansed with the water of Baptism, here we
feed upon bread and wine in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and so upon the
body and blood of Jesus Christ; here we grow in grace, here we are ingraffed
into Jesus Christ, here we believe, here we love, here we hope, here we watch,
here we pray, here we lead a godly life, here we endure temptation, here we
suffer fatherly chastisements and afflictions that our heavenly Father lays
upon us; all this is done not so much for the maintenance of our present
spiritual estate, but principally and specially that by all these means we
may be forwarded and fitted; for what? for the obtaining and enjoying of a
better life in a better world, for the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ to
judgment; which is the reach and the end of all this. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. God has
give^ gifts, some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some
Pastors, and some Teachers; what to do? for the gathering together of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry; till when? till we all meet together in
a perfect man, the fullness of the age of Jesus Christ. God bestows upon his
Church Ministers, God bestows gifts upon his Ministers, and he puts it into
the hearts of his children, that they should make use of his Ministry, and of
these good gifts that he has bestowed upon them; to what end? to hatch them up
to heaven, till we all meet together in a perfect man: howsoever some do
expound it concerning this present life, yet because there is mention made of
the state of perfection, which cannot be attained in this life; and because it
is there said, till we all meet together, which cannot be fulfilled but at the
day of judgment, therefore, I take the circumstances of the text to be plain,
that it is to be extended to that day; so then you see, the Church being the
nursery for the Kingdom of heaven, all that is done in the Church, the Word
and the sacraments, and all good duties are so many helps and means to
further, and to fit us to Gods Kindgdome.

perform, are serviceable helps and means and instruments for the bringing in
of that last action which is the principal of all the rest: receiving the end
of your faith, says the Apostle, even the salvation of your souls; 1 Pet.
1.9. The salvation of our souls, there is the end, that is the upshot of our
faith, and consequently of all our good duties: Now when is this salvation
bestowed upon us, never before the second coming of Christ. Heb. 9.28. He
shall appear the second time, says the Apostle, unto salvation. He has
satisfied for our sins, and so has made way for our salvation already, but
the bestowing of it upon us is reserved and respited till his second coming.

In the way that we go in any journey every step and every foot that we go,
makes us so much nearer to our journeyes end, if we go on in the right way.
Is not Religion the way? is not the end eternal life? Our Savior makes it so,
Matthew. 7.14. Strive to enter in at the narrow gate, etc. he makes religion the
way, and eternal life the end of this way and journey. Now then if every step
and foot bring us nearer to the end of our journey, then every good duty that
is done in religion brings us nearer to eternal life. In a marriage; before the
marriage is performed, are there not suings, is there not wooings, is there not
a contract, a trimming and a decking up of the Bride? Why, to what end is all
this? why it is all for the marriage day, that she may be a pleasing spouse to
her husband, and that she may be fitted every way for the wedding. Is not the
coming of Jesus Christ our marriage day, when the marriage shall be fully
accomplished between him and all the faithful, when we shall be perfectly
handfasted to Christ for ever? it is so called in the Rev. 19.7. and there it
is said, This is the day of the marriage, and the Bride has trimmed up her
self, that is, as who should say, all that ever Gods children do in the life
of grace, while they are here, it is as the trimming and the fitting up of
themselves against the wedding day that shall be accomplished at the coming
of Jesus Christ to judgment. The husband man he sowes his seed; what, for the
seeds sake? no, for the harvests sake: Is not the last coming of Christ our
harvest? and is not this life the seed time? Gal. 6. chap. and the 8, verse. the
Apostle makes it clear, He that sowes to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap
corruption: but he that sowes to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life
everlasting. Certainly the good duties that we do in matters of Religion, they
be as so many seeds of eternal life. What is the end and reach of all? that
we may have a full and comfortable harvest at the day of judgment.

second coming of Christ; the rule holds strong because Christ is the
substance of all Sacraments both in the old and in the new Testament, and his
coming in some sort puts an end to all Sacraments, and all Sacraments are to
fit us to his coming, the former Sacraments must fit us to his first coming,
therefore the Sacraments of the new testament they must fit us to Christ's last
coming.

Luke, You that have continued with me and endured temptation, I will take you
up, and you shall eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom. Here we have a
table, here we eat and drink, our happiest estate there is to have a Table to
eat and to drink in a spiritual manner. Again, this Sacrament is called the
Supper of the Lord, so is that too. Rev. 19.9. There we shall enjoy Gods
presence, the presence of Christ, the presence of his Spirit. Does not every
believing receiver spiritually enjoy the same at the Lords Table? There we
shall have the Angels stand about us: do not the Angels stand about us here
in the receiving of this Sacrament? we are sure there to have the Saints to
accompany us: so likewise we have here. Lay all these together, and see if
heaven be not here tendered to us upon earth, a resemblance in the Sacrament
to our state at the second coming of Christ.

The uses of the doctrine are these: to a little, from a little to much, and
from much in the end to perfection; this is the great and the wonderful
wisdom of God toward us; understand there be three special ascents as a man
would say, or three special degrees in the state of religion, whereby we do
aspire to our perfection in Religion; the first ascent, or the first degree is
the outward means of grace, the Word and the Sacraments. The second ascent or
degree is the life of grace wrought in our hearts by this means. The third and
the last ascent and degree is the perfection of glory that we attain unto at
Christ's coming; these be the three ascents whereby we attain perfection in
Christ.

The first step and ascent is this, the outward means of grace, we have the
Word and the Sacraments, we receive the Word and the Sacraments, we conform
our selves to these outward duties: these be some degrees of perfection; yet
they be but a very low degree, so low that many come to this degree, and yet
never come to heaven, and yet they are very material, and so material, as
that none ordinarily can come to heaven without these, this is the beginning of
our Religion, this is as it were our A. B. C. as a man would say, and when we
come to know these, we come to know a little, and to smatter a little about the
matter of our perfection: these be the first degree.

The second ascent is the life of grace which is wrought in the hearts of Gods
children by these outward means effectuated, and seconded by the Spirit of God
within us; our new birth, faith, repentance, new obedience and humiliation, and
such like; this is the life of grace wrought within us, these now be somewhat
a nearer degree to perfection, these be the next steps to it, now we begin to
seize upon Christ, to seize upon heaven, and to seize upon perfection: when we
have these graces, then we begin to have a feeling of Jesus Christ in our
souls, this is as it were to spell perfection, and to spell Christ, and to
spell heaven, for now we do not only know the letters as we did in our A. B.
C. but now we know how to put the letters and the syllables together, and how
to make it up: in these very things, that we do believe here, that we hope
here, that we love here, that we perform and obey God in here, in these very
things we do as it were spell Christ, and spell heaven, and spell perfection;
yet we are not come to the reading of them.

There is a third ascent or degree in religion, and that is the state of
perfection, when Jesus Christ at his second coming shall invest us, and put us
into full possession of all that ever he has purchased for us, a matter that
we are incapable of here in this world, therefore it is respited to be revealed
at his second coming; and when once we come to be made partakers of that
second coming, then we come to be ripe and perfect scholars, then we begin to
throw away our books, to throw away the Word and the Sacraments, we have no
further use of them, they shall then all cease; now we have our lesson
perfect, we can see Christ clearly, we can read Christ easily, we can
understand Christ fully, we are ripe and perfect scholars; and that is the
state that we are advanced unto when Christ shall come to judgment. A
resemblance of this threefold estate was given unto us in the very frame of the
Tabernacle, in the 25, 26, and 27. chapters of Exodus.

In the Tabernacle there were three divisions or rooms; there was first the
Court, then there was the holy, and then the holiest of all, or the holy of
holies: The Court that was for the people, as well as for the Priests; the
holy, that was for the Priests only to come to do the service of the Lord in
it; and the holiest of all, that was for the high Priest only to come into,
and that was but once a year; the first ascent, the outward means, the Word
and the Sacraments, they are as the Court of the Tabernacle of God, there come
the Priests, and the people, there all communicate together, many wicked and
many ungodly and profane persons, few in deed and in truth, yet making a show
of religion; all that while we are never the nearer to heaven; I, but when we
come to the second division, then we come to the holy; and that is when we are
effectually called into the state of grace: and in this state it is, that we
perform all Gods service that he requires; as the Priests did in the holy:
Here we pray, here we offer up our selves and our souls and our bodies, and
all our spiritual sacrifices to God in Christ: here we exercise the power and
the life of grace that God indues us withal. There is yet a higher division,
that is the holiest of all: and that is heaven, Heb. 10. there is our state of
perfection, if so be that we stay in the Court, we are never the better for
the Tabernacle: but if so be that we proceed to the second division to go to
the holy, then we have true interest in the Tabernacle; so if we stay at the
Word and the Sacraments, we are never the nearer to salvation. I, but if we
have the life of grace in us, then we shall be sure to be made partakers of the
holiest of all, the Kingdom of heaven. God might, if it had pleased him,
bestow this perfection upon us without any such degrees, without any such
risings or ascents; but God deals with man according to the reach and capacity
of man, he deals with his creatures, according to the capacity of his
creatures, and therefore it is the infinite wisdom of God, that we being so
unable and so incapable of matters of heaven, that the Lord is pleased to raise
us up by certain degrees, till at last he has brought us to be perfect men
and women in Jesus Christ: let us see and discern the wisdom of God in it,
and let us admire it, and let us submit our selves to it. Every man would
desire to come to the holiest of all, and then they think all would be safe
with them. Look not to it without good cause, for before thou come to the
holiest of all, thou must come to the holy; before thou come to the holy,
thou must come to the Porch; before thou come to heaven thou must have the
life of grace in thy heart, and before thou have the life of grace in thy
heart, thou must make a conscionable use of the Word and the Sacraments, and
whosoever thinks to come to heaven without the conscionable use of these, he
does not use the means to come thither: And therefore let us submit our selves
to the wisdom of God in this case; and therefore let us try and examine our
estate, how far we have proceeded in this state; and therefore let us examine
our selves whether we be them only that can know our letters, or spell, or
read.

John says of himself, Ioh. 3.8. He was not that light, but he was sent to
bear witness of Christ. The Word and the Sacraments they are not the
salvation that we look to have, but they are tendered to us of God, to bear
witness of that perfection, to bear witness of Christ, and to bear witness
of heaven: and therefore this should serve to reprove those that do foolishly
and vainly and presumptuously boast of their outward estate, because they live
in the visible Church, as though they should surely go to heaven; many will
conclude, if they can come to Church, hear the Word, and receive the
Sacraments that they are in a good estate; that is not the matter though it be
a means to help us forward to heaven, yet they are not the substance of our
salvation.

Whosoever they are that do presume upon this means, do but show me any one
thing in the Word and the sacraments in the outward means of grace whatsoever,
and I will show thee a Reprobate that has had the very same thing that thou
have had, and lies scorching in hell at this day: they have heard the Word,
and received the Sacraments. The Pharisee paid tithes and fasted twice a week,
and yet a cursed firebrand of hell, and therefore let no man think the better
of themselves for this, without thou can come to see what benefit thou have
made of those, unless thou can come to see that the life of grace is wrought
in thy heart by these meanees: as for example, if so be that a man have clothes
heated at the fire for him, if they be never so warm, and they put upon his
body, yet it is not the warmness of the clothes that he shall live by, but the
warmness of his body; so ought we having the Word and the Sacraments, and they
being powerful, yet they shall not profit us without we have grace in our
hearts. It is not the Wine and the Sacraments that shall save us; it is not our
clothes but our bodies that shall warm us, without we have this grace we shall
not be the nearer to life.

Secondly, I showed you that the things themselves they are not the substance
of our salvation, not our faith, nor our repentance, but a means of our
salvation. 1 John 3.2. We know that we are the sons of God, but we know not
what we shall be; a strange thing, we are here already the sons of God, this
we know, but we know not what we shall be; as who should say, that the state
of Gods children in heaven does so far exceed all the state of grace here,
though they know this, yet they do not know that: therefore rest not in thy
faith as it is in it self, but rest upon God, that promises to justify thee
by faith; God set his love upon us, God adopted us, yet that is nothing. There
is a sweet proportion between the life of grace here, and the state of glory
hereafter; and to say the truth they do agree in this, the substance of the
truth is one and the same, so far forth as we are capable of them, here in
this world; but yet in circumstance they differ, but in substance they are the
same: first, the persons they are the same, they that are made partakers of the
state of grace here, shall be sure to be made partakers of the state of glory
hereafter; all that are partakers of heaven, shall be made partakers of grace
here also, the objects, and things, the same God, the same Christ, the same
blessed things that we do enjoy.

And lastly, the right is the same; all the right that we have to grace in this
life, all the glory that we shall have in the world to come, is through the
mediation of the Lord Jesus Christ, Christ Jesus yesterday and to day, and the
same for ever; Christ Jesus in the state of grace, and in the state of glory;
but yet there is difference between them, they differ in circumstance of
grace; grace is managed here upon earth, and glory in heaven: again, there is
difference in the time, matters of grace they are managed only for a time, for
the present dispensation of this life; matters of glory they last for ever:
again, they differ in the manner, because matters of glory are apprehended
here by faith, and then they shall be apprehended by sight and appearance; we
believe now only, we then shall see that which now we do believe. Lastly,
there is difference in the measure, and in the degree; grace, I must needs say,
it is some beginning of glory, but it comes far short of glory, it is nothing
to glory; now we are in part, then we shall be perfect; then we shall know as
we are known; now we see but darkly, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. but then we
shall see face to face: great difference in regard of the degree and measure,
here we have them only in part, there we shall have them in full; here we
have them only in a dark glass, as a man would say, but there we shall have
them in a clear glass: That speech there of the Queen of Sheba, 1 King. 10.7.
may very fitly be compared to this: the Queen of Sheba had heard of the
wisdom of Solomon, she made a journey, and came to see it, and when she had
seen it, she gave this report, Well, I have heard a great report of thee, but
I have not heard the half of that which now I see: there was a great deal
more that she beheld, or that she heard of: And so likewise may we say
concerning the state of grace and the state of glory, We know a great many
things that God has treasured up in heaven for those that do believe in him,
as glory, happiness, and blessedness: when we come there we shall utterly
disclaim all those kinds of knowledge; I, we shall behold a thousand times
more than ever we knew of these things before.



1 Pet. 1.24. This is the word that we do preach unto you; there the Apostle
shows plainly, that howsoever we perish, and all things else perish, yet the
benefit of the Word, and the comfort that we receive by the Word, it shall not
perish, but it shall last for ever; it is an immortal seed; Mary has chosen
the better part, that shall never be taken from her; holiness in Jesus Christ
shall be taken from her, the preaching of Jesus Christ shall be taken from
her, but the benefit of the preaching of Jesus Christ shall never be taken
from her, it shall last for ever to all eternity; if she get life wrought in
her heart by the powerful preaching of the Word, that shall never dye.

John 6. and therefore hear it, and hearken unto it, and consider of it
reverently as thou ought to do, as thou should be judged by it as the
last day: and so likewise in the receiving of the sacrament. Oh if we would
consider with our selves, when we come to lie upon our deathbed we shall have
need of comfort, if we had never so much comfort and grace at the day of death,
and at the day of judgment, we shall have need of all; there is no comfort to
be had but by our faith and repentance, and gracious courses that we have
walked in in the time of our life, and in the time of our death: therefore let
us look to these things, still let us labor to perform them in our daily
conversation, that so we may be fitted for Christ's particular coming to us,
or else his general coming to the whole world. You have heard of the foolish
Virgins: get it in time, have it always burning, and then we shall be sure:
specially make use of the receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: this
should teach us in the receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; we
should so address our selves, and so carry our selves every way, and so go
away with such hearts, and having such meditations in them, as that we may be
fitted every way for the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ: Oh that our hearts
were so fitted, oh how reverently would we carry our selves in the practice of
it; with what conscience would we perform it, to glorify God, and to please
God, with what singleness of heart? We know that when Christ shall come to
judgment there shall be no hiding of any thing, out every thing shall be
naked before him, and there will be no smoothering up of any thing. He that
has best profited by receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, whosoever
he be that is thereby best fitted to the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ to
judgment, he desires it more earnestly, waits for it more diligently, rejoices
in it more cheerfully, and hastens to it more willingly and more comfortably.
Oh when a man has been at the Lords Table, and there has found and felt the
sweet communion of Gods blessed Spirit in his heart, assuring him by his spirit
within him, assuring him that his sins are forgiven him, assuring him that
now he is fully and perfectly reconciled to God: when he can enjoy this
communion with Jesus Christ, then he may go home to his closet and say, Oh now
Lord Jesus come quickly, now thy servant is in some poor measure ready and
fitted. Oh there is a worthy, and a profitable, and a ready Communicant. This
profit is to be found in this sacrament by the conscionable using of it; here
God tenders it, and it is to be found of us, and therefore let us not deprive
our selves of such a gracious and precious blessing that here is: if we will
submit our selves to the gracious ordinance of God, we may be made partakers
of it: the time will come that thou whosoever thou art that art negligent in
coming to it, or unprofitable in the participation of the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, the time will come when thou come to lie upon thy deathbed,
especially when thou come to judgment, then thou will rue this folly of
thine with unspeakable woe and misery: I, then you shall cry out, and shame
your own souls and your own bodies, because you have not been profitable
participators in this Sacrament, and profitably performed it, to the comfort of
your own souls.

The end of the one and twentieth Lecture.
The Two AND TWENTIETH LECTVRE UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
WE are still to continue in the Argument of the Lords Supper, for our
preparation against the next Sabbath day, when we purpose, God willing, to be
made partakers of this Sacrament. We have gone over many names and titles that
are given to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which very fitly and lively
express the nature of it: some of which names common to the whole action, some
to the several parts of it; we have already reckoned up five names or titles
that are all common to the whole action; as namely, the Lords Supper, the Table
of the Lord, the Communion of the body and blood of Christ, the New Testament
in his blood, and the memorial of Christ's death: I might add to these some
other names, that are common also to the whole action, as namely, the
Eucharist, the Christian Passover, a Love-feast, and such like; for such names
and titles are applied to this Sacrament by many of the Ancients, and approved
by some later Divines; and that not unaptly, nor without some probable warrant
out of Gods word: But yet because I do not find in the Scripture that any of
these names or titles are expressly and directly affirmed of this Sacrament, I
will pass them by; and now proceed to the second sort of names, that are more
proper to the several parts of this Sacrament: For whereas the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper consists of two parts, the bread and the cup; the Scripture by
the Figure Synecdoche, putting a part for the whole, does sometime comprehe^d
this whole Sacrament under the name of bread, and sometime under the name of
the cup: I will give you an instance in both: And first to begin with the
bread; look into Act. 2.42. and there you shall find this Sacrament called
the breaking of bread; and that is the Scripture that God willing we will treat
upon for this argument. Acts 2.42. And they continued in the Apostles doctrine,
and fellowship, and breaking of bread, and prayers. All the contents of this
verse do in some sort concern the matter of the Lords Supper; for not only
the breaking of bread, but the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and prayers,
are matters of necessary use, in and for the right receiving of this Sacrament;
and therefore let us take this verse wholly as it lies before us. This verse
and the next immediately going before, set forth the gracious and happy
success of that excellent Sermon that Peter made, after the sending down of
the visible gifts of the Holy Ghost on him and the rest of the Apostles: The
sending down of the gifts of the Holy Ghost is showed in the 1.2. and 3.
verses: the power and effect of them is showed partly in all the Apostles, all
being filled with the Holy Ghost, verse 4. to 13. specially in Peter, who made
a pithy, piercing, and powerful Sermon on that occasion, verse 14. to 40. The
success of which Sermon is partly touched verse 37. where it is said, that
they that heard it were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter and the
rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do? and it is more
enlarged in many particulars from the 43. verse to the end of the Chapter. But
the sum of all is briefly comprised in this verse and the next going before:
in the verse before it is showed how the Church was thereby increased: in this
verse it is showed how that they being increased were afterward employed: their
increase is there called their adding to the Church: for though Church be not
expressed in the original, yet it is to be understood; as in the 47. verse, and
the Lord added to the Church, etc. their increase is their adding to the
Church: here is their increase; And this is set forth partly by their number;
partly by the means of their adding. Their number, three thousand souls; a
plentiful harvest of so little seed; three thousand souls at one Sermon! The
barrenness of our times is such as we may make three thousand Sermons, and
happily not win three souls; but the fruitfulness of those times were such,
that Peter at one Sermon did win three thousand souls: this was the glory,
and prime and first fruits of the visible gifts of the Holy Ghost. The means
whereby they were gathered to the Church, and admitted to be of the Church,
are set down in these words, and they that gladly received his word; there is
the means of their gathering: and were baptized; there is the means of their
admission: Peter he preached, and many heard him, and so many as gladly
received the word were baptized, and thus they were added to the Church: now
being thus encreast, in this verse it is showed how they were afterward
employed; they continued in the Apostles doctrine, etc. they went on as they
began; they began religiously, and they went on religiously: they had the
Apostles doctrine, and were called by it; and they continued in the Apostles
doctrine, and. The reach of the Holy Ghost here is this, to commend to us the
religious practice of religious professors; and so to set before us the right
form of a true visible Church, and he sets it down in these few words most
pithily and most plainly, that this example of this primitive Church might be a
president and direction to all succeeding Churches to continue to the worlds
end.

The parts of the verse are two; first, the duties they did perform; secondly,
their carriage in performance of them. The duties are in number four; Apostles
doctrine, fellowship, breaking of bread, and prayer: These duties though they
be in number but four, yet they are of that nature as whereunto we may reduce
all other Christian duties whatsoever; so that when it is said here, that they
performed these four, it is intended that they were careful also of all other
duties belonging to their profession; but in these they labored especially, as
those that were the chief and heads of all the rest.

First, the Apostles doctrine, that is, the word of God, and doctrine of
salvation that the Apostle preached unto them; Indeed it is the doctrine of
Jesus Christ himself: Yet it is called the Apostles, because they were the
messengers and ministers of it: no other teachers would they acknowledge but
the Apostles only; nor receive no other doctrine but that which they taught
them. They had not the whole doctrine of the Apostles as yet revealed to them,
for most of them were but newly converted; how could they continue in it then?
The meaning is, that that which they had learned, every one more or less did
faithfully continue, and remain steadfast in.

Second duty is fellowship: the word in the original signifies communion, for
which cause some understand it of the Lords Supper; but yet because, first, the
word is never so used elsewhere in Scripture without addition, (with addition
it is, as in 1 Cor. 10.16. the communion of the blood of Christ, etc.) and
secondly, because the Lords Supper is significantly expressed in the next words,
breaking of bread: therefore I rather understand it according to our
translation, fellowship; that is mutual communion and participation in all
duties and offices of Christian love and concord one toward another; whereof
three particulars are specified in the verses following, verse 44, 45, and 46,
they had all things (that is, all worldly goods) common: those that had any,
communicating freely to the use of those that had none; here was Christian
fellowship indeed, they laid all their goods and possessions together, and made
a common stock for the maintenance of the whole Church; and secondly, verse.
36. they continued together daily with one accord in the Temple; here is
Christian fellowship, to consent and join all together as one man in Gods
worship: thirdly, and breaking bread at home; here is Christian fellowship, not
only in Gods Temple, but even at their own private houses; not only at the
Lords Table, but at their own ordinary meals, they met lovingly together, and
drank together, and were Christianly merry together; for so are the words,
with gladness of heart.

Thirdly, breaking of bread: the phrase does sometime, and indeed most
properly, signify the receiving of their natural and daily food; as in Luke
24.35. compared with verse 30; and there is good reason for that phrase,
because bread is the staff of our life, and the chief of all our food;
therefore all our food is usually and fitly comprehended under the name of
bread, and breaking of bread; a matter specially in use among the Jews, for
they made their bread into Cakes of thin Loaves, and so they might, and
ordinarily did break them with their hands, they were not so thick or tough
that they needed any knives to cut them; and from this their ordinary practice
is the phrase borrowed, and applied to the receiving of their spiritual food
in the Lords Supper, and that very fitly and significantly, there being a
breaking of bread after a special manner: The bread there broken is a special
bread, that is to say, separate for a special use, and a special breaking of
bread, being a lively and teaching sign of the breaking of Christ's body, and
so it is called too, Act. 20.7. And the first day of the week the Disciples
being come together for to break bread, Paul preached unto them; where it is
meant of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: and that it is so meant here, it
appears to be clear, because of the other religious duties that it is sorted
withal, for they would not put in the receiving of their natural food amongst
these things: and again, that is put in afterward in 46. verse. and he calls
it their breaking of bread at home in opposition to this. Neither yet is it to
be understood, that because one part of the Sacrament is here only named, that
is, breaking of bread; that therefore they were denied the other, that is,
drinking the wine, as the Papists would bear us in hand, but a part is put for
the whole; the naming of one part in right reason, certainly presupposing they
had the other; as we see in 46 verse. in the receiving of their natural food,
only bread, no drink is named; and so it will follow by the Papsits rule,
that they had no drink at home neither; a gross inference; but if it be
ingenuously and understandingly considered, we cannot but conceive the drink
too, and that the naming of the one does certainly presuppose the other too:
specially being things so usually and naturally joined together; so it is
likewise in the sacrament, the naming of the bread does certainly presuppose
the wine.

Fourthly, prayers which is specially to be understood of public prayers; no
doubt but every one had their private devotions and prayers, for many of their
own private and particular necessities, and no doubt but they were frequent in
them too; but yet the other three being public and common duties, this is to
be presumed to be so too, and indeed it is the special reach of the Evangelist
here, to show their care in public and common exercises; here are the duties
which they did perform, which is the first part of the verse.

The second part is their carriage in the performance of these duties, they
continued in them: our translation comes far short of the force of the
Original, for that signifies not only that they continued in them, (though
that be a great commendation) but that they continued in them with much
diligence, and with strong patience; they did not (as many of us do) intermit
them at their own pleasures, and use them as their own case of worldly
business would give them leave; but they continued with much diligence, al
other things laid by to give way to these exercises, in their season. Nor yet
were they dismayed with the scoffs and reproaches of the world, nor with the
opposition of Satan, (as no doubt they had very many) but strongly and
patiently went through them all, and still continued their godly courses: This
is the fullness of their commendation; the duties themselves are excellent
duties, and their carriage in them is as excellent. Good exercises slightly
performed are not praiseworthy, no not amongst men; but such excellent duties
as these, The Apostles doctrine, etc. so excellently carried as they are here,
continuing in them, these have praise, and that of God. Lay al these together,
and see what a comfortable spectacle here is in these Christians to a religious
beholder: They had the Apostles doctrine, there is their faith and knowledge;
They had fellowship amongst them, there is their love and obedience; They had
breaking of bread, there is their remembrance of the death of Christ; They had
prayers, there is their zeal and devotion; and they continued in all these,
here is their constancy and perseverance. First, they had the Apostles
Doctrine, that is the ground and substance of their religion. Secondly,
Fellowship, that is the fruit and life of their religion. Thirdly, Breaking of
bread, that is the seal and bond of their religion. Fourthly, Prayers, that is
the sinews and strength of their religion. And lastly, They continued in all
these, that is the grace and beauty of their religion. It being the reach of
the Holy Ghost to set before us (as I showed before) the right form of a true
visible Church in these professors: We may see here what a glorious form of a
true visible Church is here presented unto us. So much of the reach of the Holy
Ghost, and of the parts and meaning of these words.

Now we will proceed to the observations, and the first is from the reach of
the place: And first, in that the Holy Ghost does here set forth these
religious Professors unto us by their practice of religious duties; hence the
observation is this, namely, that it is or must be the practice of all true
Professors of religion to be daily conversant in the exercises of religion,
both in the duties of the first and second Table, piety toward God, and love
toward men; both these are here specified; The Apostles Doctrine, breaking of
bread, and prayer, and their continuance therein are duties of the first Table;
Fellowship or Christian love, and continuance therein, are duties of the second
Table. The whole tenure of the Book of GOD, both in the old and new Testament
tends directly to the proof of this Doctrine. I will cull out some few, and
first I will give you a place or two for the general; of all duties together,
both of the first and second Table; and then I will come to the particulars.

First, for the general: Matthew. 28.19, 20. Go therefore, and teach all
Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you,
etc. In the 19. verse there is their commission to plant Churches throughout
the world; and how must they plant them? by teaching and baptizing; and how are
these Churches to carry themselves after they are thus planted? verse 20. they
must observe and do all those things that the Lord Jesus commanded his
Apostles: now Christ Jesus he is a perfect Lawgiver, an exact Teacher;
instructing his Apostles no doubt in all duties both of the first and second
Table; and therefore all that profess to be of the Church, must be daily
conversant in the practice of all good duties, both toward God, and toward
men: Tit. 2.11, 12. The grace of God that brings salvation to all men has
appeared; and teaches us that we should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts,
and that we should live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present
world: The saving grace of God is here compared to a Schoolmasters or Teacher,
and consequently professors thereof to Scholars: now what is the lesson that
this Master teaches to all these Scholars? To deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and to live soberly, and righteously, and godly: that is, to abstain
from every sin, and to do every good duty to God, and men, and our selves,
all the duties both of the first and second Table. Philip. 4.8, 9. Furthermore
brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things pertain to
love, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue or any
praise, think on these things; which ye have both learned, and received, and
heard, and seen in me, these things do, and the God of peace shall be with
you. These Philippians were much furthered in the profession of the Gospel by
Paul's ministry; many heavenly lessons had they received from him by word,
writing, and example; and this is the last of all his exhortations in this
Epistle, as containing the sum of all the rest; and here he reckons up all
sorts of good duties; Whatsoever things are true, etc. and he presses his
exhortation with a serious obtestation, If there be any virtue, or if there be
any praise, think on these things: as if he should say, You profess the
things that are true, think on the things that are true, and do them, and the
God of peace shall be with you: you profess the things that be honest; think
on the things that be honest, and do them, and the God of peace shall be with
you: you profess the things that are just; think on the things that are just,
and do them, and the God of peace shall be with you: you profess the things
that are pure; think on these things, and do them, and the God of peace shall
be with you: you profess love; think on love, and practice love, and the God
of peace shall be with you: you profess things of good report; think on them,
and do them, and the God of peace shall be with you: if ever you look for
peace with God, see that you think on, and do the good things that you
profess: ye profess religiously; think and do religiously, and certainly
the God of peace will be with you. Here is a most serious exhortation as any is
in the Book of God: that is for the general. Now for the several duties of
the first and second table: and first of the first table; in the 1 Thessalonians. 5.16.
to 21. Rejoice evermore; pray continually; In all things give thanks; quench
not the spirit; despise not prophesying. Joy in God; prayer; thanks;
cherishing the spirit and good motions; embracing the Word that Gods Prophets
and Ministers bring unto us: these and such like, are duties of the first Table
which we must be exercised in.

And so for the second table, Tit. 3.8. this is a true saying, and these things
I will that thou should affirm, that they which have believed in God, might
be careful to show forth good works: as many as believe, as many as profess
the faith of Christ Jesus, must be careful to show forth all good duties that
are profitable to men; which specially are those of the second Table: if we
take a view of all true professors that are approved in Scripture; we shall
find them all well experienced in the practice of the duties of both tables: it
is true they had their failings, but yet this was the ordinary bent of all
their courses.

The reasons why we must do thus? there are many reasons.

The first reason is this: because the practice of these duties is the grace of
our profession: the grace of all moral virtues consists in the actions of
virtue; and the grace of every trade consists not so much in the knowledge of
the trade, as in the well managing of that trade: our Christian profession is a
virtue and a trade: a spiritual virtue and a heavenly trade, therefore the
grace of it stands in our well managing of it, by the practice of all religious
duties; godly carriage in servants, the meanest that profess religion, and
consequently in all, does adorn and beautisie and grace the doctrine of God
our Savior, Tit. 2.10. not that we can add any grace to religion in it
self; no, in it self, and of it self it is most gracious; so that it need
not, nor cannot, receive any grace from our doing; but that thereby we grace it
before men, our friends that like us the better for it; and our enemies that
are put to shame and silence by it; yea and oft-times are forced to speak well
of our Religion for our practice; and we also procure a more reverent
estimation of our profession generally in the world: When we take this holy
profession upon us, it graceth us; and when we prastice hereby answerable to
this holy profession, we grace it; therefore this we must do.

Secondly, this is the life of our faith: it can live no longer then it is
exercised in good duties; as Rachel, Genesis 39.1. said to Jacob, Give me children
or else I dye: so likewise says faith to the soul of a Christian, give me
children, let me bring forth fruits of piety toward God, and charity toward
man; else I dye and have no life in me. The Apostle says as much, James 2.26.
Faith without works it dead: and Revel. 3.1. God tells the Church of Sardis,
That she had a name to live, but was dead; because her practice was not
answerable to her profession, verse. 2. her faith and religion was ready to
die; how so? I have not found thy works perfect before God; there was a great
failing in the practice of Religion; when good exercises dye amongst us, says
dies amongst us; when they decay within us, faith decays, it lies a bleeding:
but when they are well practiced, that says works by love, that is, both to
God and man, then our faith lives and thrives within us: therefore we must
practice good duties both to God and men, else faith cannot live within us.

Thirdly, it is the end of our calling: 1 Thessalonians. 4.7. For God has not called
us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness; that is, to the practice of holy and
religious duties: when a man is called of purpose to do a work, shall he
come, and not do that which he is called to, and come for, this were a
shameful and a senseless thing: either let him not come when he is called, or
when he is come, let him do that which he is called unto. The maine matter
that Christians are called unto is holiness, therefore if we do not practice
holy and religious duties, we go quite beside the mark, and to the
profession we aim at.

Fourthly, it is one maine condition that is intended on our part, when we are
first admitted to the profession of Christianity; it is so required by God, 2 Timothy 2.19. The Lord knows who are his, and let every one that calls on the
name of Christ depart from iniquity: And it is so undertaken by us in baptism,
that we will renounce the world, the flesh, and the Devil, and become dutiful
Children unto God in the practice of all holy duties which he requires: This
then being our condition in Christianity, therefore we must practice it or else
we shall never come to heaven.

Lastly, God scorns and hates all Professors of his name, that will not obey
his will, he utterly renounceth them and their profession to be none of his;
so he does here in this world, and so he will do hereafter: so he does here,
as we may see, Psalm. 50.16. But unto the wicked says God, what have thou to
do, to declare mine ordinances, that thou should take my covenant in thy
mouth? Lay this to heart, and see if God say not thus to every one of us here
present. What have thou to do to come into my house, and to profess my name,
seeing thou will not obey my will, but hate to be reformed? And so he will
scorn and deny them hereafter, Matthew. 7.23. Then will I profess to them, I
never knew you, depart from me, you that work iniquity; though they profess
never so much, yet if their practice be not answerable, God will scorn and
hate and renounce them here, and so he will do hereafter.

The Uses are these: First, this serves for matter of reproof, of diverse
sorts, indeed of all sorts: For who is there here among us, yea what professor
living upon the earth, that is not rightly taxed and reproved for the breach of
this doctrine? what professing man or woman in the world, can say, My heart is
clean in this kind? Every one is faulty, some more, some less: let our own
courses be our own accusers: The whole Land professes Gods Religion, as being
a national Church; but how few be there in the whole land, that are daily
conversant in the exercises of Religion? either they do not perform them at
all, or else if they do them, yet they do not make conscience of them; but
they do them overly, and for fashion: at least, they do not make it their
daily and continual practice; but only now and then when they list
themselves: Who is zealous for the Lord of Hosts? Who stands up to maintain
the cause of the common good? but every man is for his own good: nay, who is
it that is sincerely earnest for the saving of his own soul? We know that the
word of God is scarce in many places, in all places it is little set by;
Christian fellowship is banished from amongst us; the Sacraments much abused;
public prayers condemned of some, contemned of others; and by some turned into
mere babbling: The field of this land has been plentifully sown with the
seed of Gods word, but where are the fruits? Thistles, and thorns, and weeds,
great store; sins and corruptions, and oaths, without number: ignorance,
profaneness, oaths, blasphemies, oppressions, deceit, and all manner of
evil reigns and rules amongst us; but good fruits are very few, or none at
all: every one of you knows this to be too true; and if you were asked in your
consciences, you would acknowledge and say as much your selves. Then marvel
not, beloved, that the Lord is incenst with anger against this Land; marvel
not that so many judgments are inflicted on us; marvel not that such great
floods of waters do now make havocke of the commodities of the earth, the
corn and the grass; marvel not at this; but rather marvel that the Lord
shows not forth his wrath upon us to the utmost, and that he that has most
justly drowned our grass and corn with floods of waters, has not also poured
forth the floods of his everlasting wrath, and drowned us souls and bodies in
hell. There is just cause for all this; for the Lord has made choice of this
Land as his own Vineyard, as it is in Esaias 5. and has planted it with the
best plants, and has dug it, etc. and looked for grapes, that is, godly and
religious duties; but we have brought forth wild grapes, sins and
rebellions, and abominations of all sorts; but no pleasing fruits unto God. To
come nearer; this City professes as well as any City in the world, I may
safely speak it; none professes a more holy and sound Religion, nor would
seem to be more forward in it; but where is the life and practice of Religion?
Is it in our Churches? there indeed it should be; but is it there? we tender
indeed oft-times our bodies there, when our minds are abroad on the world, or
here set upon some present vanity. Is it then in our houses? the hard dealing
of masters to their servants; the nice education of children in wantonness and
idleness, without Gods fear, and without any ordinary calling, too too common
through this whole City, and the children of our greatest Citizens rue it
daily; and our neglect of private catechizing and prayer, witnesses against
us, that it is not in our houses: If it be not in Gods house, nor in our own
houses, is it then in our shops and warehouses; indeed there it is most
needful, but there it is least used. Lying, and swearing, and deceiving, and
overreaching is there more gainful to us, and therefore are the more
practiced. Is it then in the streets? no, they are very stages of naughtiness
and vanity. A thousand baits are there to allure our eyes and ears to some
evil or other, not one to goodness: religious practices dare not show their
heads in our streets. If we look into the City it is bad, if into the Suburbs
it is worse; if we look into our selves, or wives, or our children, or our
diet, specially into our apparel; all these testify against us, that we
practice nothing less than the Religion we profess.

I said before, no City in the world goes farther in profession than this City;
I say now, No professing City in the world is of less or worse practice than
this is: professing Cities, said I? nay, those that never professed Religion,
Sodom and Gomorrah, we may compare with them; the pride, and fullness of
bread, and idleness, and abominable filthiness, and uncleanness of this
City, cries out in every corner for fire and brimstone to be poured down from
heaven upon us.

To come nearer to our selves; look into our own Parish and Congregation; I
cannot but grieve, and am ashamed, that by my weak labors, and the labors of
so many my good Brethren and assistants, so long continued in this place, so
few are brought to be duly conversant in religious duties: One is given to the
world, another to his pleasure, another to drinking, another to pettishnesse,
another envies at his brothers prosperity, another is selfe-willed, another is
a swearer, another a prophaner of the Sabbath, another thinks much of an hour
or two spent in Gods service on the Lords day: all of us profess Religion, yet
this is our irreligious practice: some of you happily make some conscience of
the duties of the first Table, hearing, praying, and some other parts of Gods
worship; but are not so conscionable of the second Table; either you neglect
your ordinary calling, or are unjust in your dealing; an exception too common
and too just against many great professors. On the other side, some are
careful of the duties of the second Table, they are just in their dealing, and
will wrong no man wittingly; and so think that is Religion enough to be saved
by. Oh my brethren, you are deceived on both sides; it is true that both these
kind of duties be good, but so as they be both practiced together, 1 John
3.23. This is Gods commandment, that we believe in his Son, and love one
another: where all the duties of the first Table are commanded under the name
of faith, and the second under the name of love; God commands both, and we must
practice both: Thou that art careful in the duties of Gods worship, if thou be
not withal careful in good duties toward thy self and men, thy faith shall
never save thee: On the other side, thou that art careful of good duties
toward thy self and men, if thou be not withal careful of the duties that
belong to God, thy love shall never save thee.

Second Use: It serves for trial, it will bring every one of us to the true
touchstone, whereby we may prove our profession to be sound and good, we all
profess Gods holy religion, if our hearts and lives be able to speak for us,
that we be duly conversant in the practice of holy and religious duties, we
may boldly conclude, that we are true and sound professors: but if our practice
be naught, this our profession is nothing worth to us; our Savior himself
sets the matter before us in those very terms, Matthew. 7.24.28. If we hear
Gods Word and do it, we build upon a rock, and whatsoever comes we shall
surely be saved; but if we hear, and do not, we build but upon the sand, we
are foolish builders, we and our building shall fall, and our fall shall be
great, even down to hell. And the like touchstone does the Apostle bring us
to, Ephesians. 4.21. to 24. Many learn Christ, but none learn Christ as the truth
is in Jesus, that is to say, none are endued with any saving knowledge of
Christ, but those that have put off the old man, and put on the new, that is to
say, those that practice Christ Jesus, as well as profess him.

Last use is for exhortation; let us therefore be as we seem to be, let us do
as we say, let us practice as we profess; if ye know these things says our
Savior, oh blessed are you if you do them: If you live in the spirit says
the Apostle, then let us walk in the spirit. The good things we know and
profess let us meditate upon them, and do them, and the God of peace shall be
with us, with us here, and with us hereafter.

The end of the two and twentieth Lecture.
The Three AND TWENTIETH LECTVRE UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
Upon the occasion of our receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper the next
Sabbath, we are now to turn aside from the Catechism, to the matter of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Act. 2.42. They continued in the Apostles
doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking of bread, and prayer. The reason why we
made choice of this Scripture for the matter of this sacrament, was because the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper is here called by the name of the breaking of
bread: that being the first thing we entered upon, that is, the names and
titles whereby this Sacrament is called: we showed you that this, and the verse
going before, contains the success of the sermon that Peter made immediately
upon the coming down of the visible gifts of the Holy Ghost. In the former
verse he shows how they were increased: In this verse, how they are employed;
They continued in the Apostles doctrine, etc. We showed the parts of this verse
to be two: first the duties they were conversant in, the Apostles doctrine,
fellowship, breaking of bread, and prayer: Secondly, the manner of performance
of these duties, they continued in all these: or they did strongly and stoutly
against all oppositions, and yet with all patience, go on in the performance
of these duties: One part of the reach of the holy Ghost in this place (I
showed you) was to commend unto us the religious practice of religious
professors. Another part of his reach herein was to set forth unto us a true
form and pattern of a true visible Church. From the first of the reach of the
holy Ghost in this place, we have observed this doctrine: That all that
profess Religion, their life and practice must be answerable to their
profession; they must be daily conversant in the practice of religious duties
both of the first and second Table. Now we are to come to the other part of the
reach; that is, that the holy Ghost sets before us the pattern and example of
a true visible Church in these Christians; and that this is one part of his
reach appears plainly by this, because he does so precisely and exactly set
down and describe the carriage and behavior of these Christians after their
calling and gathering together; which he would not have done, but that he had
a purpose to set before us a true pattern of a visible Church; That these were
a Church, it can be no question, for they are expressly so called, verse. 47. the
Lord added to the Church, etc. And that they were a true Church, it is no
question; for if there were ever any, this was one; the Apostles themselves
being their teachers, and the people being so effectually called immediately
after the sending down of the visible gifts of the Holy Ghost. And that they
were a visible Church, it is no question, because they made open profession of
that Christian faith which they had received: and therefore this reach and
drift of the place rightly considered, it is as if he should say, these
Christians thus receiving the Word, and being thus baptized, as verse. 41. were
now a true visible Church. And this is the state and condition that they were
grown into and settled upon; they continued in the Apostles doctrine, and
fellowship, and breaking of bread, and prayer; and so have a right form of a
true visible Church. For the better understanding of this point, we will first
consider of the holy Ghost in taking this course; and then secondly, we will
come to the instructions: First, let us consider the wisdom of the holy
Ghost, in taking this course, and that we may discern in these two
particulars; first in that he thought it needful, that there should be some
exact pattern of a true visible Church extant in scripture, that all succeeding
Churches were to be examined by and conformed unto; secondly, in that he made
choice this Church, as a most fit pattern for that purpose. First we are to
consider of the wisdom of the Holy Ghost, in that he thought it needful,
that there should be some exact pattern of a true visible Church extant in
Scripture, for all succeeding Churches to be examined by and conformed unto:
The Lord saw that it would be a matter of great consequence; he knew on the one
side, that many congregations would pretend themselves to be a true visible
Church, when indeed they are not so; and on the other side, he saw that those
which are true Churches indeed, would be called into question about their
state, by their enemies slandering them, and traducing them as false Churches:
And therefore he would have some absolute pattern of a true visible Church to
be found in Scripture, whereby true believers might justify themselves, and
their own standing; and convince all false Churches whatsoever: As a straight
rule shows both the crookedness of that which is crooked, and the
straightness of that which is straight; So a true pattern of a true visible
Church, serves as well to discover the falsehood of a false Church; as to
confirm the truth of a true. The Lord knew that many Christians would be much
offended at the manifold differences that from time to time would arise amongst
professors, touching the state of a Church; and so stand in a mamering not
knowing what Church to join themselves unto; and therefore for their sakes he
thought it fit and needful, that such a pattern should be set before us, as
that we may be resolved which Churches we may safely and boldly enter into,
and stand in communion withal: And howsoever this also might be and is
sufficiently taught in the Scripture by certain precepts, rules, and
directions, yet one example and pattern does more sensibly work upon us, and
swayes us more in our understanding, judgment, affections, and practice, than
twenty precepts: examples are strong perswaders, and pregnant and lively
teachers; and therefore here is the wisdom of God that he does thus furnish
us with a true pattern of a true visible Church in Scripture: secondly, herein
the wisdom of God does also appear, in that he makes choice of this present
Church, as a most sensible and fit pattern for that purpose: for this was the
first Church that ever was after Christ's ascension, and the visible coming
down of the gifts of the Holy Ghost; and we may call it the very prime of the
Primitive Churches: and where shall we have a fitter pattern of a true
visible Church, than that which is fetched from the first visible Church after
our Saviors ascension. Usually Gods ordinances are best at the first
institution, when they are fresh out of Gods hands, spick and span new as it
were: In time when they come into men's handling they are degenerate and
corrupted; but at the first when they come out of Gods handling, then they are
most pure and sincere. Marriage is the ordinance of God; and the first marriage
that ever was, was the best marriage that ever was; and that is the pattern
that all other are to be examined and fashioned by; as our Savior shows,
Matthew. 19.4.5. the Lords Supper is Gods ordinance; and the first that ever was
was the best that ever was; and that is the pattern which all other Suppers of
the Lord are to be framed by; as the Apostle shows, 1 Cor. 11.23. So this
being the first Church after Christ's ascension, was in best case of all other
Churches; and therefore that was a fit pattern for other Churches to be tried
and censured by. But some will except, and say, What, is this the best Church
that ever was? What say you of the particular Churches that were soon after?
as of the Church of Rome, and Corinth, and Ephesus, etc. I answer, they were
goodly Churches, and had some more outward complement than this had; but they
had no more for substance than this had; yea, they had many failings and
corruptions that this as yet was free from. Others will except and say, But
what say you of the Church when our Savior himself lived and was personally
present, and preached on earth: I answer, first, That even in respect of
Christ's own personal presence, yet this is nothing inferior to that; for now
after the sending down of the Holy Ghost he is present with them by his
Spirit; and this presence of his by his Spirit, is as effectual for all saving
purposes as his bodily presence was; as our Savior shows, John 14.16, 17, 18.
Secondly, I say, that setting only Christ's personal presence aside, that was
not comparable to this; for then the Church was not so thoroughly furnished with
gifts as now it was; yea then the Apostles themselves had not received that
fullness of power from on high as now they had. Take it thus, Christ Jesus by
his life, and preaching, and miracles, did as it were plant the Church; Christ
Jesus by his death and resurrection did as it were water the Church; Christ
Jesus by his ascension and sending down of the Holy Ghost, ripened his Church,
and furnished it with all sufficient gifts, and brought it to perfection.
Besides, that Church was only a provincial Church, consisting of Jews only
within Judea, but this is a more general Church, gathered out of all the Jews
and Proselites of any nation under heaven, as verse 5. And indeed this Church
is the womb of all other Churches from thence to the end of the world; all of
them issuing and proceeding out of this, as so many streams out of one
fountain. Rome pretends and challenges it self to be the mother Church, but
falsely: this, this is the true mother Church of all true visible Churches: And
therefore as the proverb is in another case, Ezekiel. 16.44. As is the mother, so
is her daughter: so in this case, such as this Church is, that is the mother;
such are all her daughters, such are all true visibly Churches: So we see the
wisdom of the Holy Ghost, in setting down this Church as a pattern to all
true visible Churches whatsoever.

Now secondly we are to proceed to the instruction that hence arises: The
doctrine is this: In that the state of this Church is set before us as the
pattern of true visible Churches, by this, that they continued in the Apostles
doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking of bread, and prayer: Observe, that
wheresoever the Word is truly preached, the Sacraments rightly administered, and
the duties of prayer to God, and love to our brethren religiously and
conscionably practiced, there is a true visible Church of God: I name the
manner of performance, together with the duties, because it is said in the
Text, they continued in them; which intends that not only they had such
duties, but also that they were duly and rightly practiced: and the doctrine
holds, and so is here meant reciprocally, that is to say, both ways; as thus;
first, wheresoever these duties are, there is a true visible Church; and
secondly, wheresoever is a true visible Church, there are these duties. For
proof of the first, that wheresoever these are there is a true visible Church,
look in the 10. of John, the 4. and 27. verses: in the fourth verse our
Savior says, He goes before his sheep, and they follow him, for they know
his voice: and in the 27. verse he says, My sheep hear my voice, etc. Christ
goes before his sheep, that is, in the use of his own saving ordinances, the
Word and Sacraments, leading them along thereby in the ways of salvation: for
by the voice of Christ there mentioned, is directly meant the Word preached;
and under that the Sacraments are comprehensibly understood, which do always
attend upon the Word, as the Seals upon the Writing. And the same voice of
Christ commanding the exercises of prayer, and of love, does consequently
include them also: and when it is said is the 27. verse, They hear his voice,
and follow him; there is set down the practice of these duties: So then if one
should ask us who are the sheep of Christ, the answer is ready; they that
hear his voice, and follow him: which is as much to say, If any ask which is
the true visible Church? the answer is ready; there where is the ordinary use
of the Word and Sacraments, and prayer, and love to the brethren: Matthew. 28.19,
20. Go teach, etc. The business that there the Apostles are employed in, is
the planting of visible Churches in the world; the means whereby they are to
plant them, are teaching and baptizing; that is, the Word and the Sacraments:
and what must they teach them, but to observe all that Christ commanded? now
Christ had instructed them specially in prayer, teaching them what, and how to
pray; and gave them also a special charge to love one another, as that being
his own special commandment, John 15.12. therefore where these things are
thus in use, as Christ commanded them, there is a true visible Church.

Secondly, wheresoever there is a true visible Church, there the word is truly
preached, the Sacraments rightly administered, and prayer to God, and love to our
brethren religiously and conscionably practiced: I do not say they are there
in their height, but in some decree; I shall not need to prove this, for all
the Churches commended to us in Scripture for true Churches, had these; as
Corinth, Ephesus, and the rest, as might be proved either directly or by
necessary consequent in them all; no nor any instance in the Scripture to the
contrary: so the doctrine is proved.

The Reasons are these: First, where these things are thus used, there is the
promise of Christ's special presence and blessing; Matthew. 18.20. Where two or
three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them, says
our Savior. What is it to be gathered together in his name? but to join
together in the true use of his own saving ordinances, in the Word,
Sacraments, Prayer, Fellowship, and such holy duties? Therefore where these
are, there is Christ's saving presence and promises: now Christ's saving promises
are peculiar to the Church; he is the head, the Church is the body; the head
has no life to communicate to any but to its own body, therefore there is
Christ's true Church. Now the Congregation there spoken of is a visible
Congregation, as appears in the 17. and 18. verses; where he speaks of
excommunication, and such like; therefore where these are, the Word truly
preached, Sacraments rightly administered, prayer to God, and love to the
brethren, religiously and conscionably practiced, there is a true visible
Church. And this might further be enlarged in every one of these particulars
here mentioned; where the word is truly preached, there is a promise of Christ's
presence and blessing, and so where the Sacraments are rightly administered; as
we may see in Matt. 28.18, 19. Go teach all nations, baptizing them, etc. and
lo I am with you always until the end of the world. And so for prayer; the
Lord has promised his saving presence and blessing to those that are
conversant in religious prayer: Matthew. 18.19. If two of you agree in earth upon
any thing, whatsoever they shall desire, it shall be given them of my Father,
etc. And so for love to the brethren, God has promised his blessing to be
there for ever where this love is, Psalm 133. the last verse: If God promise
then his saving presence and blessing to every one of these in particular; then
where all these meet together there is a promise of his saving presence and
blessing much more; now Christ's saving presence and blessing being peculiar to
his Church, then where these are there is a true Church.

Secondly, where these duties are truly practiced, there is true saving faith,
at least in outward profession. Now what is a true visible Church, but a
company of those that openly and jointly profess the true saving faith;
therefore where these are, there is a true visible Church: Let men profess
what other Faith or Religion they will, though never so plausible a Religion,
and never so zealously professed; yet only the profession of this Faith and
Religion makes a true visible Church; yea, where these duties are practiced,
there is true saving faith indeed; at least in some, though not in all; for
they are the means to beget and confirm faith; that is, the Word and
Sacraments; and Gods blessing always attends on the ordinary use of these
means, to make them effectual to some for salvation: And there also are the
special exercises of saving faith; prayer to God, and love to the Saints; and
it cannot be, at least charity forbids us to think otherwise, but that though
many amongst them, yea most of them should be Hypocrites, yet some perform
those exercises in the truth and singleness of their hearts, and so there is a
true Church; if it should so fall out that all should be Hypocrites, yet
professing and outwardly practicing these duties, they are a true visible
Church, in regard of the truth of the visibility of it. But because always in
such congregations there are by the blessing of God some true believers,
therefore they are true Churches visible in regard of the truth of a Church
among them. And I take it, this is the proper sense of the speech, when we
speak of a true visible Church; that there be some true believers amongst
them, that make profession of the saving faith, for whose cause they and others
that join with them, are rightly called a true Church visible; and not only a
true visible Church: but that they are as truly a Church as they are truly
visible.

Thirdly, there be the true and right causes of a true visible Church: as
first, the efficient, God in the ministry of his word: James 1.18. Of his own
will begat he us by the word of truth. Secondly, there is the material cause,
Saints by calling, 1 Cor. 1.2. Thirdly, there is the formal cause, their joint
and open profession in the use of Gods saving ordinances. Lastly, there is the
final cause; the glorifying of God in the embracing of his saving Faith and
Religion: now where these causes are, it is impossible but there should be a
true Church; except the Lords own labor be in vain, which cannot be.

Lastly, there be the true constituting parts of a true visible Church; there
is Christ the head, as we showed in the first reason; and there be the
members, Ministers and people; The Ministers preaching the Word, administering
the Sacraments: instructing and persuading to the duties of prayer and love:
And the people conscionably obeying and practizing those duties; therefore
there is the whole body of a true visible Church.

The Uses:

First use is matter of reproof of sundry Adversaries: first of those that
oppose the first branch of the doctrine; Some congregations say they have
these, and yet are no true visible Churches: but let them show me any such
Congregations, where these are in any true measure; and then let them show me
any just cause why these should not be a true Church: They may be heretical
Churches, and yet true Churches; and they may be schismatic Churches, and
yet true Churches, except they overthrow the foundation; and if they overthrow
the foundation, then the Word is not truly taught and received amongst them,
nor any other of these duties religiously practiced.

Secondly, it is for reproof of those that oppose the other branch of the
doctrine: Some Congregations say they are true visible Churches, and yet they
have not these things yes, they have them in some measure, more or less, or
else they are no true visible Churches: at least they have the Word truly
preached amongst them, which does inclusively comprehend the other duties. The
state of a true Church is rightly to be weighed and considered, and accordingly
these things may be affirmed of it. There is a beginning Church that has the
beginnings of these things: and there is a flourishing Church, and that has
all these things in some good beauty and perfection: and there is a Church in
persecution, and that has these things, yet with many oppositions and
interruptions: there is a decaying or a dying Church, and that also has these
things though decaying and dying, as we may see in the Church of Sardis, Rev.
3.1, 2, 3.

Thirdly, it reproves those that pretend themselves to be the true Church, and
yet are destitute of these things. As the Popish Church, I mean the faction of
the Pope and Cardinals and Jesuits, which challenge to themselves, to be the
only, or at least the chief visible Church on earth; and yet are far to
seek in the practice of these duties: For first; the Apostles doctrine that is
amongst them, is mingled with men's traditions; and mastered by the Popes
interpretation; and subdued unto the censure of their Church; and so upon the
point, it is their own doctrine, not the Apostles. Then for the Sacraments of
God, they have them indeed, yet sorted with the Sacraments of men, and
corrupted with many prophanations and superstitions; and foully stained with
men's inventions. And concerning brotherly love and fellowship, herein they
would seem to excel all other; oh say they, we are full of Alms, and good
works. And no marvel: For which of us would not give all he has to the
poor, if he were thoroughly persuaded that he should merit heaven by it. But
what is their practice of love? to get all to themselves: for look in all
places where Popery has reigned, and tell me if they have not encrocht, upon
the greatest, or upon the richest and fattest part of the Land; if they do
part with any thing, it is to uphold the Popes crown, or the Jesuits faction.
And if they did build hospitalls, or give alms, they did it with opinion of
merit, which marres all to themselves; or to be seen of men, and then they
have their reward: happily the poor fare the better for it, but they
themselves perform no true service to God in it; nor yet can receive no true
comfort by it. So for prayer, many of them spend a great part of their time in
prayer, but they pray to Saints, as well as to God; yea they do not pray to
God, but by the intercession of Saints: and all is done usually in an unknown
tongue, without understanding; they know not what they ask; and what comfort
can they have in such prayers? So then howsoever they pretend, and say we have
the Church, we have the Church; yet it is but as the Jews said, The Temple of
the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; when indeed they were destitute of the true
worship of the Lord. I doubt not but that there live under that government,
many true believers, that worship God in some measure in spirit and truth. But
how that popish faction may be called a true visible Church, that I refer to
the censure of this doctrine.

The second use is for application, to this present particular Church of
England that we live in. First, here is matter of confirmation, that we have a
true visible Church, and that our standing in it, is warrantable, safe, and
good; and if we walk conscionably and uprightly therein, we are in the ready
way to heaven; for to live in a true visible Church is not a thing so
comfortable for it self, but for the greatness of the consequent, because if
we are in a visible Church, and live accordingly, we are in the ordinary way to
salvation, else not. Therefore it stands us much upon, to to look well to our
selves herein: if therefore any of us be scrupulous in our selves, or any other
of our adversaries deny us to be a true Church, or call us in question about
it, here is a sure evidence to confirm and secure us in it; we have through
Gods mercy the Apostles doctrine amongst us truly preached; the Sacraments
rightly administered; the duties of prayer to God, and love to the brethren by
many of us religiously and conscionably practiced; therefore we are a true
visible Church. And this we dare to hold out as a flag of defiance against all
our opposites and slanderers, the Papists on the one side, and the Separatists
on the other: let them say and do their worst to disprove us in it; we do not
justify any abases or corruptions amongst us, God forbid we should; no, we
abhor them; and mourn and groan under the burden of them, and pray to God
against them; and use all the lawful means so far as in us lies, for the
reformation of them. But for the true being of our Church, being impugned by
our adversaries, we must justify Gods ordinances amongst us. I say therefore
again, and I speak it with confidence, and comfort, and glory to God, we have
the Word truly preached, the Sacraments rightly administered; the duties of
prayer to God, and love to the brethren in some good measure amongst us
religiously and conscionably practiced, therefore we are a true visible Church.

The Papists lay hard at us, you the Church, say they! no, you are a company of
heretics, and no true Church. We answer, we embrace the Apostles doctrine,
the written word, wholly and only; that, and nothing but that for matter of
faith; and if this be heresy, we are content to be called heretics: and we
say further with Paul, Acts 24.14. After the way that they call heresy, so
worship we the God of our fathers: we believe the Word of God, and all that is
written in it, and desire to live by that rule; let these men call it heresy,
or what they will, we know we worship God in it aright, therefore are no
heretics as they charge us to be.

The Separatists they charge us also that we are no true Church; you a true
Church, say they! no, you are a limme of Antichrist. An uncharitable speech and
a heavy slander, and till it be substantially proved, the burden of the
slander lies on themselves, and the Lord forgive them, or rebuke them for it:
hear is our shield again, to ward off this fiery dart too: if the Apostles
doctrine, and fellowship, etc. be Antichristian, then let us be taken for
limbs of Antichrist; but if these be true Christian duties; then we that in
the truth of our hearts labor the practice of these duties, are a true
Christian Church. But say they you fail in many things, you have not the
discipline of the Church, and therefore are no true Church. I answer, some
discipline we have, though not that which they pretend: But what then, if we
have not that discipline which they pretend, are we therefore no true Church:
by the same reason this Church here mentioned, may be proved to be no true
Church neither: for the discipline which these men pretend, was not in use, nor
in being, nor in name, when this Church was in this glorious beauty; for as yet
there were no deacons at all, as is plain in Chapter 6: and yet they are the
first and most exceptionlesse Church Officers, next unto the Apostles that the
Scripture speaks of: I but say they, the discipline which was presently after
established, was to be used in all other succeeding Churches for ever. I
answer, it is true, that the same discipline that was established by the
Apostles for all succeeding Churches, is to be retained and used in them all:
but that one and the same discipline in every particular is so established in
the Word for all Churches, that rests to be proved. I say in particular; for
in the general, we confess discipline, and we have discipline, though not
that particular which they urge; yea they must not only prove that there is
such a discipline in particular, but also that it is essentially or inseparably
necessary to the true being of a true visible Church, else their argument
against us is of no force at all, (You have not such a discipline, therefore no
true Church.) Now, for our parts we do acknowledge discipline necessary for
the beauty and well being of the Church; but not essentially or inseparably
necessary to the truth and being of it; for if it were so, then Christ should
be the head of diverse Churches differing in essence and nature: and that this
Church that had not this discipline did differ in essence and being from the
succeeding Churches that had it; which is false and impious to affirm.

Secondly, it should teach us thankfulness to God, that we of this Nation
which once sat in darkness and in the shadow of death, that were first
drowned in Paganism, and after in Popery, that now we should have this great
light shining amongst us; that we should have the Word and the Sacraments, and
the duties of prayer to God, and love to the brethren in some measure
conscionably and religiously practiced amongst us; this we are to be thankful
to God for; we do not justify any corruption that is amongst us, they are
our own; but these good things are Gods, and therefore he is to have praise
and thanks for them.

Thirdly, it should teach us to live and rest in the communion of this Church;
harken not to whisperers and seducers that would entice you from us, and say,
Come to this Church, go to that Church, etc. they are like unto those that our
Savior forewarns us of in these last times, Mat. 24.23. that say, Lo here is
Christ, and lo there is Christ, (for he that tells us of a new Church, may as
well tell us of a new Christ) but believe it not, says our Savior: so say I
unto you, Give no ear to them, go not after them, stand fast in that
Christian resolution of Christ's Disciples, John 6.68. Christ asks them in the
67. verse, What, will you also forsake me? they answer him very graciously and
resolutely, Master, whither or to whom shall we go? thou have the words of
eternal life: our Church has through Gods mercy the Apostles doctrine, the
words of eternal life; and therefore whither or to whom should you go from us?

Fourthly, it should teach us to make use of these duties, by frequenting the
preaching of the Word, and the Sacraments, and Prayers, and joining together in
love-duties; let us labor to walk in the light of the word, and to profit by
it, while we enjoy it, lest it be taken from us and given unto those that will
bring forth better fruits than we have done: And seeing we tender our selves
monthly to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, let us take heed how we
come to it; let us not come hand over head to the receiving of it; but let us
bring our wedding garment, Faith and Repentance with us; that so we may be
welcome guests to the Lords Table.

Lastly, let us pray to God for the continuance of these means amongst us;
pray for the peace of Jerusalem; wish her prosperity* let us do all we can to
procure her wealth; and if there be any abuses or corruptions amongst us, let
us pray to God to reform them; and let us not go beyond the compass of our
callings; for we have no means to use for redress herein, but prayer to God,
that he would be pleased to remove all abuses, and to continue these means
unto us, that as he has made us a true visible Church; so he would continue
unto us his Word, and other his saving ordinances, that we may be a true
visible Church every day more purer than other unto the worlds end.

FINIS.

