THE TRVE ART OF LIVING WELL.

THE RIGHT USE OF things indifferent.

THE PLAIN FOOT-PATH to the Paradise of God.

Three Sermons preached at Cambridge, Westminster, and Worcester, by JOHN
RACSTER Minister of the word, and Preacher.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Clarke, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
churchyard at the sign of the Angel. 1605.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE, AND to the Reader.
outline of shield DEO ECCLESIAE TIBI.


THree words in one escouchion displaying three virtues in one man, toward God
godliness, to his country charity, and goodness to thee, Deo, patriae,
tibi, to God, his country, and to thee, does Master Lambert dedicate his
book. Which invention of his* sorting well with my desire, though my desert be
far short of his, I will, God ^illing, in this act of dedicating this
wo^thlesse work of mine, try my skill how I can use his instrument, contenting
my self, as welt I may, to be his second. First, Deo, to God, as to my author,
I the writer dedicate these my labors, my self, my whole life, and all my
actions as God shall give grace. And this dedication brancheth it self out two
ways. Hallclu-iah, the dedication of praise, and Hosanna, the dedication of
prayer. It becomes us well in all humility with thanks and praise to dedicate
our works to God, we being thereunto instructed by nature it self. All rivers
pay tribute unto the Ocean, thereby acknowledging their head, because the sea
fills them all, and supplieth all their wants: so must all souls give praise
unto God, acknowledging in him the fountain of their essence or being, and the
well of their being and doing well. Nam de plenitudine eius omnes bibimus, Of
his fullness we all have drunk: all our wants are supplied from him, all our
diseases are cured in him, al our goodness is procured through him, all our life
is guided by him, all our happiness and salvation comes of him, Omne datum,
etc. Fuery good giving and eueric perfect gift is from above, and comes down
from the father of lights. This always with all thankfulness we do
acknowledge, most mightle, most merciful, most glorious God and Father. And
this is our Hallelu-iah, our dedication of praise unto the Lord. Our Hosanna,
our dedication of prayer, is Ana Domine, Salua obsecro; Ana Domine, da
successum obsecro: Prosper thy king O Lord, O Lord prosper thy kingdom here
with us: prosper every word and work tending to the advancing of thy kingdom,
our king, thy Christ, our Lord and God. Prosper O Lord this word and work of
me thine unworthy servant, that being of it self but granum, a very small
thing in it self, but a grain, it may through thee be made semen, a seed,
that is, of an esfectual quality, where it is but of a contemptible quantity.
And bless the growth of this seed by being present with us, as thou have been
with thy former servants of old, that every one of us, knowing thee to be the
chief and true husbandman, may pray and say unto thee: Let my words O Lord
drop as the rain, and my speech distill as the deaw: as the shower upon the
herbs, and as the great rain upon the grass: so let thy doctrine in my mouth
make fruitful the hearts of all that hear it. Thus does praise and prayer
commend this cause unto the Lord. In the next place, next unto God, is the
Church of God; which being a vine will afford a shadow to such as gather
grapes; being an house ministers a covering to the Ministers that be under her
roof; and being the mother of us all, does charitably accept the meanest
offerings and devotion of the meanest of us all. These be the arguments that
assure me, that albeit, as in the material tabernacle, so likewise in the
spiritual building of the spiritual temple, some bring gold, that is, works
of greater moment, others bring silver, things of brighter and finer show,
others bring brass, matter of more strength, and others there be that bring
blew silk, purple, scarlet, and fine linen, that is, dainty devices,
delectable, curious, and costly: yet is it my hope still, that my poor
endcuors, my homely stuff, whether hair or skins, or whatsoever else they
shall be thought to be, will serve for some use or purpose in the Church: and
my willing mind to do good (though attended but a little, and extended in
effect but to a few) shall not be condemned, though it deserve but slenderly to
be commended. First in all our actios is God to be remebred, next the Church,
thirdly some principal man in the Church, and lastly the good of every common
Christian in this case is to be intended. The third point therefore is two
fold: Tibi, to thee the patron of my pains, and Tibi to thee the reader of my
books: the reading also being different, the one requiring an Emphasis, and
the other including an Antithesis. First Emphatic^s, and principaliter,
emphatically and principally, putting a difference between the protector and
the partner, between a father and a friend. Tibi to thee thou painful pillar,
and stout sta^derd bearer of the Church: tibi to thee thou chiefi prelate of
this our province: tibi to thee thou most famous Bishop of a most fertile
country and faithsull people: tibi to thee, to thee, I say, thou reverend
father, the learned Bishop of worthy Worcester, to thee I commend and dedicate
these whatsoever labors of mine, laboring much in my mind, how to make known
unto the world, and your Lordship, how much, as well in the behalf of my poor
Church, whose case Itender as mine own, as also in regard of my wretched
self, formerly beyond all deserts favored, I stand in all duty bound to
honor your Lordship: but I have been too forgetful of my duty herein. I do
also confess my weakness and unworthiness herein: and even this is one of
the degrees of happiness: primus foelicitatis gradus est non delinquere,
secundus delicta agnoscere; it is the first and chiefest point of happiness
not to offend, the second is, to acknowledge our offenses; says S. Cyprian.
Now therefore as a faithful messenger of a grateful mind, Tibi to thee I send
this sunburnt child of mine, it has the maintenance of truth from the father
of goodness; O let it, let it have the countenance of authority from your
fatherly goodness. This Tibi to thee is with difference and with pre-eminence:
there is another without difference, and without exception: for he that
publishes any thing can forbid none, but commits his writings indifferently
unto all without any exception at all. Tibi to thee that art learned, or art
unlearned: Tibi to thee that art godly, or art ungodly, Tibi to thee that art
good, or art bad: to thee that art sound of heart, or art not sound: Tibi to
thee, that love learning, and Tiburn to thee that love not learning: Tibi
to thee, that have money, and Tibi to thee, that have it not: Tibi to thee that
buyest, and Tibi to thee that borrowest this book: Tibi to thee, that passest
by, and Tibi to thee, that come in* to every one severally sparing none, but
plucking them secretly by the sleeves: Tibi to thee belongs to harken unto
the doctrine of truth. Tibi to thee that printest, that they may be sold: to
thee that sellest, that they may be bought; to thee that buyest, that thou
may read^; to thee that read, that thou may understand; to thee that
understand, that thou may believe* to thee that beleeuest, that thou may
practice; to thee that practisest, that thou may continue: to thee that
printest, sellest* buyest, read, understand, ^eleeuest, practisest,
continuest, and perseuerest in the word of truth, is this work of truth
committed. And thus we commit all to God, our selves with all. God save
England, and the King* and people thereof: God bless Worcester, and the Bishop
thereof: God send us all his grace. Suckley in Worcestershire: (...) Nouemb.
the 6. Anno Dom. 1604.

Yours in all duty and true love, John Racster.

THE TRVE ART of living well.
MATTHEW. CHAP. 10. VER. 16. Be ye therefore wise as serpents, and innocent as
doves.
IN the second Epistle to Timothy, the third Chapter and first verse, the
Apostle prophecieth of our times: This know (says he) that in the last days
shall come perilous times. There is none that doubts, but that these,
wherein we live, be the last days, and therefore it is more then certain that
these be the perilous times: wherein (as says Nazianzen) especially to men of
our profession, (...), there be whole labyrinths of cares, whole faires of
affairs, whole seas of troubles, whole worlds of wickedness which daily
oppress us. (...). All goodness ebbing hides it self; all naughtiness
barefaced blusheth not. (...), that is (...), our ship, that is our soul
saileth in the night. (...), Christ is asleep, if not in the ship, yet in the
souls and consciences of men.

In the 29. of Genesis Rahel, that is ouis a sheep, bears Benjamin, that is
lupum rapacem, a ravenous wolf, in the 49. of Genesis: but it cost her her life
for her labor; the sheep died in travel with the wolf: Genes. 35. But in
the beginning of this verse, the words immediately going before my text there is
a greater danger: not partus, but, pugna luporum, not the birth of one, but the
battle of many wolves of your souls. Ecce ego mitto vos, Behold I send you,
tanquam oues, as sheep in the midst of wolves: which could not be without
danger of death. And therefore as a wise captain, in these words he warns
and armeth us and them against the dangerous conflict in this perilous time.
Estote igitur: Be ye therefore wise as serpents, but innocent as doves: where
there is not a word that has not suum pondus his weight: nay every word is
pondus, it is a weight; for without this every man has his Tekel, that is,
every one is weyed in the balance, and found too light. Dan. 5. 27. But if
wisdom be in the one scale, that is, in our understanding, and innocence or
simplicity in the other, that is our will, we shall weigh somewhat in the
balance, that is in the estimation of Christ our Savior. The one is the
weight of judgment: Be ye wise as serpents: and the other the weight of
justice: and innocent as doves.

And as we see in a case of weights, all of them be contained one in the other,
so likewise the parts of this text stand like weights one within another. For
first here be two precepts or commandments: Be ye wise as serpents: this is
the first precept; And innocent as doves: this is the second. And these two
precepts have two virtues in them: the first is wisdom, prudentes, wise as
serpents. The second innocence, innocents, innocent as doves. And these two
virtues have two examples: Sicut serpents, as serpents; this is the first
example or pattern: Sicut columbae, as doves, this is the second pattern or
example. Two precepts, two virtues, two examples, all of them one within the
other waight-wise. For first, for the former precept, there is Estote, Be ye;
this is the precept, then prudentes, wise, here is the virtue: and then, sicut
serpents, as serpents, here is the example. Again for the later precept,
first we must repeat Estote, Be ye, and this makes the precept, then
innocents, innocent, that is the virtue: and then sicut columbae, as doves,
this is the example. Be ye therefore wise as serpents, and innocent as doves.
Estote, Be ye. To every commandment there be annexed two estates (...), and
(...), the commanding and commanded estates: and these two estates require two
conditions: the one is (...), authority in the commander: and the other is
(...), ability in the commanded, and these two jointly together make good
every commandment: potestas, authority in the superior to command; and
potentia, power in the inferior to do that which is commanded: and these two
be comprised under this one word Estote, Be ye. First for potestas the
authority of the commander, it is Christ that says Estote, Be ye, and he is
their and our Lord. Ioh. 13. Ye call me Lord and master, and ye say well, for
so I am: and therefore he has good authority to command. Nay he is silius the
son of God, and in this regard he says, Mat. 28. Data est mihi omnis
potestas: all power or authority is given me, both in heaven and earth.
Secondly for potentia, the ability of the Apostles and all true Christians to
obey this commandment: Estote prudentes, Be ye wise: that also is taken from
their master: for the words of Christ are able to make men wise: nay they are
able to make the sons of men the sons of God: Ioh. 1. 12. As many as
received him to them he gave power to be the sons of God. And therefore all
they that hear the word of God and believe it, have power also in some sort to
do it. For Christ's commandment is not Dictum, a mere word, but it is Dictum
factum, a word done, it gineth ability of doing to all those that hearken unto
it: (...), his word and his deed goes together. And therefore no doubt this
very word Estote, Be ye, was his act to make them wise. And he continues the
same in the 20. of John: for to those that in this place he says Estote, Be ye
wise: to those in that place he says, Accipite, Receive the holy Ghost: and
with him Tetigisse is Docuisse, if the holy Ghost do but touch the heart, it
teaches it wisdom, and all goodness. Thus you see the equity of this
Estote, this commandment, for so I had rather call it, then an exhortation,
consists in two things: in the authority of the commander, which is Christ
the son of God, and in the ability of the Apostles, who are enabled by
Christ and the holy Ghost. And from the equity of this commandment we may
learn to know the iniquity of all other commandments that swerue from this,
which consists likewise in two points: either in usurpation, in coming to
authority; or in tyranny in using it: when he commands that ought to obey,
or that is commanded that can not be done. And from hence all that be in
authority either in Church or commonwealth, or have any place or calling in
either of them both, may learn to examine themselves, both in the cause and
effect of their calling. First whether they have Christ's commandment, Christ's
call for their calling: whether he said unto them, Estote, Be ye: Be ye
Bishops, be ye Magistrates, be ye Ministers, or else they crept unto it by
corruption. But if they be so blind that they cannot see this simply in it
self, then let them look unto it in the effect, let them consider how they
fit their place and calling, how able they are to go through with the works of
God: for whosoever is called of God, is enabled of God; for they that have from
him Estote, have Accipite also: to whom he says, Be ye, to the same he says,
Receive ye: Be ye, that you may receive: Receive ye, that you may be able to be
such as he wills you to be.

Estote, Be ye: thus much of this word single by it self: now as it is joined
to the rest of the words of my text.

Estote, Be ye: not sicut serpents, as serpents, for the serpent is not to be
imitated of us in all things, not in the poison of the serpent, but in the
wisdom of the serpent: Estote prudentes, Be ye wise as serpents, not first
sicut serpents, Be ye as serpents, and then prudentes, wise: for then the
poison should bear sway, and the wisdom would be corrupted: but first
prudentes, be ye wise, and then sicut serpents, as serpents, and so the
wisdom prevails, and the poison which is our corrupt nature, is purged and
sanctified by that heavenly wisdom.

Estote igitur prudentes: Be ye therefore wise. This is the virtue, not that
which Aristotle makes the form of all moral virtues, but which Christ makes
the ground of Divine politiques. Estote prudentes, be ye wise. Some divide all
Divinity according to the threefold use thereof into these three kinds: the
one is school divinity, and that is in special request amongst the Papists:
the other is preaching divinity, and that is wholly studied by the Puritanes:
the third is politic divinity, and that is put in practice amongst all, but
especially in the Popes palace and college of Cardinals; where you shall have
some, that when they are good neither for the school, nor for the pulpit, yet
because they can lay a plot for a living, and plot a piece of knauerie, of
policy I should say, as well as any of Machiuel his scholars, have gotten
great place in the Church, and are highly esteemed of for their government;
which government of theirs is pure policy: but as for poor Divinity, they
seem either not to have it, or care not for to use it. O say they, it is not
good in policy, when their conscience tells them it is good in honesty.
These be wise men but without learning or honesty. And I assure you, beloved,
when I consider the course of the world, what plots, policies, and
circumuentions be in the world, then I think men be too wise: but when again
I behold the want of religion, and the fear of God which is the beginning of
wisdom, as the Scripture says, when I see they want the beginning of
wisdom, then I begine to think that they are not wise at all: then say I to my
self, Surely Policy has smothered Divinity: this policy that is accounted
the wisdom of the world is the devils policy, to steal from man the
wisdom of God. For this I dare avouch, that Machiuel his policy, is as good
as Achitophels divinity: but Christ's divinity is better policy. For this
contains the purity and quintessence of all, without any dross or dregs at
all. Divinity, disputing, preaching, practicing has here the right use: and
this makes the good Christian, right professor, and true Protestant. Let us
therefore now hear and learn this:

Estote igitur prude^tes: Be ye therefore wise.
Now I beseech you understand and consider that this heavenly wisdom, to
which we are in this place invited, is of diverse kinds, or rather has diverse
degrees. The first is providence, whereby we do prospicere, look before us, and
whereunto we are stirred up: Prou. 6. Vade ad formicam o piger: Go to the
pismire o thou sluggard, she prepares her meat in summer, and gathers her
food in harvest. And in the 10. of the Proverbs, verse 5. He that gathers in
summer is the son of wisdom: but he that sleeps in harvest is the son
of confusion. An example hereof we have in Joseph, in avoiding spiritual evil
in the case of Potiphars wife, and in storing and hoording up temporal goods in
the place of Pharaos officer: Genesis 41.

The second kind or degree of this prospicere, to look before us, but on
every side of us: the definition is cautela contrariorum vitiorum, a diligent
heed of avoiding contrary vices; and the work is to order the affections. To
beware of contrary vices, it behooves us to be circumspect, lest in shunning
covetousness we fall into prodigality, or in avoiding rashness we become too
fearful; and therefore it is wisdom to be circu^spect, that is, to look
round about us, and to order all our affections. And to this purpose the holy
Ghost speaks: Prou. 4. Omni custodia custodi cor tuum, Look to thine heart,
and the affections thereof, with all diligence; being about to say Custodi,
keep, he first says, Omni custodia, with all diligence keep thine heart;
least thou shut the doors on this side of the heart against thine enemies, and
open the gates unto them on the other. This kind of wisdom they have not, who
do so shun poverty or other present evil, that they fall into eternal evil;
not unlike unto starting horses, which starting and shunning shadows, plunge
them selves into true danger, from whence they cannot get out. And this kind or
degree of wisdom, is commended unto us in the first of Ezechiel, in the
similitude of a wheel that did run round about, and in the similitude of the
rings in the wheel, which were round in a round; but especially in the eyes in
the rings: and their rings were full of eyes: the mind of a circumspect man is
like eyes in a ring, and rings in a wheel, which be round, see round, and
run round.

The third kind of this heavenly wisdom, is discretion: and the work hereof
is not only as the first kind prospicere, to look before us; nor as the
second, circumspicere, to look round about us: but it is introspicere, to
look into matters. And this work of discretion introspicere, to look into
things, is of two sorts: the one is general, to look into all things, and
discernere, and to discern between virtue and vice, between bad and good:
and the other is more particular; to look into the good, and pretium rerum
aestimare, to esteem of every thing as it is worth. The first work of
discretion is to discern between good and bad: for there be certain vices,
that bear the face of virtues. Crueltic is covered with the name of justice,
remisnes called lenity, covetousness is clothed like thrift, pride like
liberality; so that a man may be deceived in them: but he that is so discreet
as to discern between good and evil, shall never incur the danger of the
curse, Isa, 5. Woe be unto you that call evil good, and good evil; darkness
light, and light darkness. And he that is thus wise shall see and acknowledge,
in the abundance of te^porall commodities great want, in the joy of earthly
pleasures much sorrow, in the inioying of worldly glory much ignominy, in the
glory of fleshly beauty great deformity. And this is the first work of
discretion. The second is the good being separated from the bad, pretium rerum
aestimare, to judge of the good as every parcel is worth; and this also is an
high point of wisdom, to know the price of things, and requires the whole
knowledge of all divinity, for there is none can prize any thing without the
knowledge of the thing; and there is no true knowledge but in divinity. And
therefore that we may know truly how to prize all things, we must have the
knowledge of all Divinity; and that is set down by S. Augustine in two words
or syllables: Nouerim te, nouerim me: Give me grace, o Lord, says he, that I
may know thee, that I may know me. Nouerim te, that I may know thee to be the
creator of heaven and earth: Nouerim me, that I may know my self the work of
thy hands, and may in discretion demean my self toward thee as one of thy
creatures: Nouerim te, that I may know thee to be the redcemer of mankind:
Nouerim me, that I may know my self to be a grievous sinner, and thereupon in
discretion make means to be redeemed by faith and repentance. Nouerim te,
nouerim me, that is, nouerim te in me: that is, Give me thy grace o God, that I
may know thee and me, that I may know thee in me, that is, that we may know the
gifts of God that be in us; that we prize not our selves at a lower rate then
God has set of us. God has given us immortal souls, which be more worth
then all this transitory world besides, he has promised us eternal life which
is better the^ many worlds; nay he has bought us, and putchased all this for
us with his most precious blood, every drop whereof is worth ten thousand
worlds. And therefore seeing he has paid so dear a price for us, let us in
discretion learn to know our own worthiness, and neith^r sell our selves for
nothing as did Ahah, who sold himself to work wickedness in the sight of God:
neither let us sell our heritage, to wit, everlasting life, for a thing of
nothing, a temporary commodity, a momentarie pleasure, a mease of pottage, as
did Esau. But let us with S. Paul, account all things as loss and doung in
comparison of the cross of Christ and the benefits thereof. And so we shall
rightly look into and judge of the price of things, if we thus discreetly
look into matters. For the mind of a discreot man, is like the beasts that
were about the throne, that had eyes ante and retro, before and behind, Reu. 4.
6. nay like the bodies of those beasts, that were full of eyes within, Revel.
4. 8.

The fourth and last degree or kind Plato speaks, that that directs all
the rest, which determines, what, when, where and how any matter is to be
brought to pass: and it shall be called by me Direction, because it directs
all the rest. And this kind bears the name of the Genus, and is divided by
Tully in the second of his Rhetorickes as the whole, into these parts:
Prudentiae tres sunt parts, there be three parts of wisdom: memoria,
intelligentia, prouidentia. Memoria est, per quam animus repetit illa quae
fuerunt. Memory is that by which the mind recalleth those things that are
past: Intelligentia, per quam ea prospicit quae sunt, Understanding or insight
is that whereby the mind spieth those things that now are. Prouidentia, per
quam futuri aliquid videtur antequa^ factum est, Providence is that whereby the
mind descrieth a thing to come long before it be done; and all these says
Seneca, when they be in course and order, be the work of direction.
Praesentia, ordina, order (says he) things present; futura provide, provide
for things to come: Praeterita recordare, remember things past. And what is
this but the work of direction in every one of these? Order, remember, provide,
things present, past, to come: me thinks that I hear the voice of a master
of a family, giving direction to his family. S. Bernard sets out this
matter most elegantly by three particles: vnde, vbi, and quo: whence, where,
and whither: and all this is brought in with a Considera, consider, which
implies discretion. Considera vnde venis, consider whence thou come, and
erubesce, and blush for shame: vbies, where thou art; and ingemisce, and sigh
for sorrow: quo tendis, whither thou go, and contremisce, and quake for
fear. Quake for fear, when thou considerest of the desolation of the grave,
whither thou go; sigh for sorrow when thou hear the wickedness of the
world where in thou art: blush for shame when thou see the baseness of the
earth from whence thou art taken: the earth that bare thee, breeds worms to
devour thee; the world that keeps thee, keeps wolves to destroy thee: the
grave that expects thee, has darkness to cover thee: of our selves we can
sing no other song then that that has been sung already, though toanother
tune and in another case, (...), Miser, per miseru^, a misero, ad miserum:
Miserable man, goes from the miserable earth, by the miserable world, to the
miserable grave: neither is there any remedy to be found for all this, but in
the house of wisdom, neither have we any wisdom but by direction; neither
is there any better direction in the whole Scripture then in this place.

Estote igitur prudentes sicut serpents:
Be ye therefore wise as serpents. For here you have heard the commandment of
wisdom, Estote, Be ye; and the virtue it self, prudentes, wise, and now you
shall heat the example and see the pattern. Sicut serpents, As serpents.

Not Estote serpents, Be ye serpents, nor estote sicut serpents, be ye as
serpe^ts in all things, nor, estote malitiosi, or venenosi sicut serpents, be
ye malicious or venomous as serpents: no nor estote astuti, be ye subtle to
deceive as serpe^ts: but, estate prudentes sicut serpents, be ye wise as
serpents: where in there be three circumstances, quid, a quo, quomodo. Quid,
what we must learn, and that is, bonum serpentis, that which is good in the
serpent, to wit, his wisdom, chose the good, and leave the evil. A quo, of
whom we must learn, a serpente, of the serpent the betrayer of man; we must
not be ashamed to learn good of our enemies, nay learn good of the evil if
they have any, nay of the devil him self if it were possible. Thirdly,
quomode, how we must learn this wisdom of the serpent: sicut, as: sicut, eue^
as, this is the means how to do it, if we conform our selves to the wisdom
of the serpent; and that is to be done in three points. This sicut is of three
sorts. The first (according to S. Hierom) is, that the serpent, for the
sauegard of his head, does expose his whole body to danger, winding in and
covering his head with his whole body beside, (...). So we likewise for our
head Christ Jesus ought to neglect our own lives, and all that is ours, to
undergo any calamity either in body or goods, so that we may, as the Apostle
speaks, (...), hold fast the head unto the end by a lively faith in Christ
Jesus, who is our head, which we must strive to hold fast by the hand of faith,
what danger soever befall us. If we be Christ's sheep, let the worlds wolves, in
Gods name, take our fleece, and tear our carkas, so we have this wit with the
serpent to keep our head, we shall not lose by the bargain.

The second wisdom of the serpent stops her ear at the voice of the
charmer, charm he never so wisely, as it is in the Psalm; the charmer seeks
for a certain poison in the serpents head which is medicinable: and the
serpent to prevent him, and not be beguiled by his enchantments, stops one
of his ears with the earth, and the other with his tail: so wise and holy men
do stop one ear with the remembrance of death, and the other with the
consideration of their own frailty, weighing diligently by what and how many
ways they may perish, lest they should give ear unto the suggestions of the
devil. For this is both a spur and a bridle, a spur to goodness, and a
bridle from wickedness: Whatsoever thou tekest in hand, remember the end, and
thou shall never do amiss: Eccles. 7. the last verse.

The third wis^dome of the serpent S. Augustine, Sicut serpens exuuias deponit,
it a nos veterem hominem exuamus: As the serpent strippeth off his old skin* so
let us put off the old man, if we will be wise as the serpent. Deponite vos,
put off says S. Paul, concerning the conversation in times past, the old man:
Ephesians. 4. 22. Wherein there be two special points to be paralleled in a
Christian life. The one is, Foranimis angustia, the straightness of the hole:
for if the hole be wide, the serpent creeps in without any great ado, and
passes through also to no purpose, for he carries his skin with him, although
heleaue the place or hole behind him: and therefore he choseth a straight or
narrow hole. The second is, Loci stabilitas, for though the hole be narrow, yet
if the place be not firm it is to less purpose. For as if the hole be too
wide, he carries his skin with him: so if the place be not firm, he carries
the hole with him; both the place and his skin goes with him, and so his
burden is increased: and therefore he chooses a narrow hole, there is
angustia, and a narrow hole in a rock, there is stabilitas, firmness or
stabilitie: and these two are to be imitated of us. First for angustia viae,
the straitness of the way: Luke 13. 24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate;
strive to enter, there is difficulty in the action; at the strait gate, there
is viae angustia, the hard passage, and the reason why we should strive is set
down Matthew. 7. 14. Because the gate is strait, the may narrow that leads to
life, and pauci inueniunt, and few there be that find it. The gate is strait,
no passage for 2. men at once, the old man and the new man can not enter in
together; but the old man must be cast off, and then the new man may get in at
this strait gate. The gate is strait, yea and the way is narrow too, it is
hard for a man that is heavy laden, to get over a narrow bridge, but if he
will go over, he must lay down his burden, and so pass over himself. And so
we, must cast off us the burden of sin by repentance, if we mean to walk in
this narrow way: the gate strait, the way narrow, and pauci inueniunt, and
few there be that find it: it is no common road highway, wherein the blind
and the lame do walk, but pauci inueniunt, few there be that find it. He must
have his eyes in his head, that is the eyes of his understanding, enlightened
with true wisdom; and his feet sound, that is, a good conversation, that
enters in with few into this gate, and walk in this way: for this is porta
salutis, and via vitae, the gate of salvation, and the way of life.

Secondly, besides the straitness of the way, there is required in the life of
a Christian, stabilit as petrae, the firmness of a rock, that his ground may
be good: for many of the heathen walked in a strait way, and kept a strict
course of living: Crysippus very continent, Fabritius very abstinent,
Aristides very just, Socrates very patient, but because their ground was not
good, though their way was strait, all their good actions were nothing else,
but splendida peccata, sin in silken apparel. And therefore the true
Christian, that means to lead a new life, must manner in stabili proposito,
having his whole soul by faith settled and grounded upon Christ, who is the
true spiritual rock, 1. Cor. 10. 4.

And this is, sicut serpents, as serpe^ts: as serpents cover your head in the
day of battle, that the serpent slay you not: as serpents, stop your ears in
the time of danger, that the serpent entrap you not: as serpents, strip off
your old man, that the old serpent outstrip you not. Be ye therefore wise as
serpents, because the serpent is your enemy. And this shall suffice, of the
first precept, the first virtue, and first example.

The second precept, because it is not explicit, expressly set down with an
Estote, Beye, as the former: but implicit, infolded in this conjunction (...),
and, therefore you must conceive, that it was likewise implicit, infolded in
enfolding the former, and so leaving this, as painters do their pictures to be
considered on the other side of the table, I come to the virtue and example,
which be specified in my text.

And innocent as doves.
But first a word or two of the coherence of both these precepts implied in the
first particle (...), and. There is great affinity between doing good and
eschuing evil, and therefore both our Savior Christ here, and S. Paul
elsewhere, joins them together as inseperable companions. S. Paul in the 16
to the Romans, verse 19. both expounds this place, and makes the self
same connection that is here. Volo vos sapientes esse in bono: I will that ye be
wise in that which is good, that is, be ye wise as serpents. Simplices vero in
malo: But simple in that which is evil, that is, and innocent as doves. Paul's
volo, and Christ's estote is the same, but that the one is set down in the
object, and the other in the subject. S. Gregory in his pastor: cap. 25.
alleging this very place says, Valde in electorum cordibus debet astutiae,
serpentis, columbae simplicitatem astruere, and serpentis astutiam columbae
simplicitas temperare; In the hearts of the elect the subtlety of the serpent
ought to uphold the simplicity of the dove; and the simplicity of the dove to
temper the subtlety of the serpent.

Estote prudentes sicut serpents, ad intelligendas frauds: Be ye wise as
serpe^ts (says Chrysostom) to understand their deceit: simplices sicut
columbae, ad ignoscendas iniurias, and simple or innocent as doves to pardon
their injuries. Nazi^nzen, he will have the medley of these virtues to make a
mixture: and this AND to be the physicians Ana. Be ye wise as serpents, AND
innocent, this And is Ana: that is, take as much innocence as wisdom: ana,
of both alike; and then the whole dosis, the whole receipt he makes in this
sort (...), Goodness mingled with knowledge. Now it is plain, that (...),
that is, knowledge or understanding, is in the former virtue in wisdom, and
is contained in this: Be ye wise. And therefore it is certain, that (...)
goodness is in this later, in innocence; contained in this, Be ye innocent.
And I will show and prove unto you, that this is a principal virtue, more
principal then justice it self: And first to begin with the furthest degree
of simplicity.

Some there be, that because they see vis and ius to have neither more nor
less, but the self same letters: therefore they think the things also to be
neither more nor less, but just the self same: if they might, they think
they have right to do as they list, and to have what they like. These have
neither part nor portion in this virtue: but yet this I will say for them, they
come nearer to it then the hypocrites: for the sins of violence be simple,
that is, single: but the sins of deceit be double, both the sin and the
deceit. This is the one kind of naughty goodness, that are good to none but
themselves. This is the first and worst kind of simplicity, the simplicity of
sin, which is, simpliciter malum, simply evil.

The second kind of simplicity is, simplex malum, a simple evil, yet is it
not malum simpliciter, an evil simply, because I take it to be malum poenae,
not culpae; a punishment that is laid upon them, rather then any fault of their
own.

The third degree of simplicity and Neminem laedere, as Tullie says, to hurt
no body. And here simplicity or innocence enters into the degrees of
goodness; it is a step to goodness to have this conseience, and to bear this
mind, that thou will hurt no body neither by thought, word nor deed.

The fourth degree is propulsare iniuriam,

The fifth and last is, vince malum bono, Overcome evil with goodness, Romans
12. 21. which is better: nay, not only not to do injury, and to defend against
injury; but to do good, that is, to be beneficial, and that to thine enemy,
to do good against evil. To do evil for good, is mere diabolicum, mere
devilish; for so did he, in slandering, and transgressing against God who
created him good: to do evil for evil is mere belluinum, mere brutishness,
for so do they which hurt and goare one another: to do good for good is mere
humanum, mere humane; for so do we, for this is common courtesy amongst men:
to do good for evil, is mere diuinum, mere divine; for so did Christ when he
prayed for his enemies. And this is the true pattern of perfect innocence:
which makes David to appeal unto the Lord for judgment: The Lord be judge
between thee and me, when he had done good for evil. 1. Sa. 24. This was
David's innocence, and this was Christ's innocence, and this innocence is
goodness, and this goodness is better then righteousness, for it goes a
degree beyond it: Romans 5. 7. Doubtless a man would scarce die for a righteous
man, but for a good man it may be one durst die: where (...), a righteous man,
is he that does no injury, but deals uprightly with all. But this (...) is
(...), which is the nearest to (...), a good man is he that does good to all,
to his power. And this (...), this good man is Christ's (...), as Nazianzen
implies, and as the word it self may seem to implie: for (...), whose simple
is to compound, is a compou^d word, and yet it signifies a simple man; which
implies thus much, that this simplex, is not a simple simple man, but a simple
man, and a good man, that lives in all singleness, integrity, and sincerity
of life: and this is the weight of our Savior his words in this place, (...),
and innocent. Now follows the last point, the pattern or example of the
later virtue.

Sicut columbae, as doves.
The holy Scripture attributes unto Doves, both arguments of praise, which the
godly lay hold on, and matter of dispraise, which the ungodly follow. The
arguments of praise be, that they fly most swifily, lack gall and
bitterness, feed not on dead ca^kasses, love clear waters; all which be
proportionably answered in the quality of Gods children. But one thing is
worthy the reprehension in them, that they are easily deceived: and in this
one thing the ungodly be like unto the^: Ose 7. 11. Factus est Ephraim sicut
columba seducta: Ephraim is like a done deceived. But all is nothing to this
place, but the innocence of the done. Be ye innocent as doves. And that
consists in two points, (...), and (...), the dove is without any violent
passions, and without any great hurt. For the first, S. Hierome writing upon
the seventh of Osee, says, that other birds when their young ones be taken from
them, do fight before, and mourn after they be gone; but the dove when her
young ones be taken, non dolet, no^ requirit: and so must thou, if thou be
the child of God: though thy children, that is, whatsoever is dear unto thee,
be taken from thee, non dolere, not to be sorry, for the saurum habebis in
caelo, Thou shall have treasure in heaven: non requirere, neither must ye make
any great ado to get them again, for dabitur vobis, it shall be given unto
you, full measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over.

For the second, (...), they are without hurt. Theophilact upon this my text
writes, that Doves, though they leese their young ones, yet they return ad
cosdem dominos, to the same masters that robbed them: ad easdem aedes, to the
same houses that betrayed the^: nay, ad eosdem nidos, nay they hatch again in
the same nests that their other young ones were killed in, still enriching those
that still spoil them. And so ought we by our Lord and masters commandment:
to him that smites us on the one Cheek, turn the other: and he that would
take away thy cloak, give him thy coat also. And this is the sense of this
place, Be ye innocent as doves.

The sum of all that has been delivered, is expressed by the Orator in two
words unawares: Ars viuendi: it is the art of living well, which exceeds all
other arts in the better part. The principles of all other arts be true only,
but the level of life, or the art of living is both true and good. This is ars
architectonica, the mistress art of all others: all other arts be but
instruments of this art of living. The grounds of Grammar, the arguments of
Logic, the persuasions of Rhetorike, the delights of Music, the numbers of
Arithmeticke, the measures of Geometry, the motions of Astronomy, be but
instruments and inventions of men, to perfect the understanding. All manuarie
arts serve especially for the body, as the art of plowing and tilling the
ground, for the use of the belly: the art of spinning and weauing, for the
clothing of the back: but this art of living makes use of all other arts as
instruments, and it furnishes both the body and the soul with good and
profitable things. It governs the mind with wisdom, knowledge and
discretion; and this is the first Estote, Be ye wise. It rules the body by
temperance, abstinencie, sobrietic and chastity; and this is the second Estote,
Be ye innocent. It persecteth the^ both, by the fear of God, and love of our
neighbors; and this is both the first and second, both wisdom and
innoconcie. This is Christian ethics, the very art of living: so that
whosoever has not taken out this lesson, lives by chance and not by art,
because he has not the art of living. For he that is not wise, is carried away
with every company, upon every occasion, unto all naughtiness. And he that
cares not to be innocent, with the drunkards plaieth the good fellow, with the
swearers is a forward gentleman, with adulterers is a companion, with thieves
he is a sharer. And that you may see evidently that he lives by chance, the
Scripture says plainly of such a one, that a wavering minded man is unstable
Iam. 1. 8.
in all his ways.

But he that is sapiens and innocens, wise and innocent, is quadratus, four
squared. Take a four square stone, and toss it, tumble it, and cast it which
way you will, and it falls always alike* there is no alteration, but still
there will be four corners above, four beneath, and four on each side: so
take a godly man, that is wise and innocent, and turn him from adversity to
prosperity, and from prosperity to adversity again, and he will be still
the same, still quadratus, four square. Above, that is in prosperity, he has
four corners; thankfulness to God, friendlinesse to his neighbors,
pitifulness to the poor, gentleness to all men. Beneath, that is in
adversity, he has four likewise; patience without grudging, meekness
without repining, hope without envying, faith without wavering; and these be
they that make a man innocent. On both sides, that is, in both estates, he has
four: providence, circumspection, discretion and direction; and these be they
that make a man wise: and these be they that never can be moved, what storm of
trial soever shall arise.

Estote igitur, etc. Be ye therefore wise as serpents, and innocent as doves.
THE RIGHT use of things indifferent.
1. Cor. 10. 23, 24. 23 All things are lawful for me, but all things are not
expedient: all things are lawful for me, but all things edify not. 24 Let no
man seek his own, but every man another wealth.
THE general doctrine of these three Chapters, the eight, ninth, and tenth
Chapters, is for the most part a direction for us, in rebus medijs and
externis, in matters indifferent and external things. For although God, who is
a spirit, Ioh. 4. will be worshipped in spirit and in truth, yet it is very
material and auailable to Christianity and true religion, that the Church be
rightly ordered, and reformed in these outward, temporal, and indifferent
matters: partly in regard of our selves, that we by these outward exercises
may be drawn into the meditation of heavenly things: and partly in respect of
God, who will have nothing to be done fainedly or counterseitly. And therefore
they are greatly deceived, who do so greatly boast of the integrity of the
soul, that in external and outward affairs they think all things to be
lawful unto them, and thereby apply themselves to the wills and dispositions of
all men. The particular doctrine is concerning the right use of meats, how
far they be lawful, and when unlawful. But the especial point of these
three Chapters which concerned the Corinthians especially, was the reproof of
the abuse of diverse straying Christians amongst the^, who although they had
given their names to Christ, yet did they keep company with idolaters, they
did eat and drink with them even those meats which were the remainders of
beasts sacrificed to idols: whereby the weak consciences of many of their
brethren were grievously offended.

We will stand upon that doctrine which shall be agreeable to our times, and
most profitable for this auditorie, following the general doctrine in my
exposition, touching all indifferent things, and external, which compriseth
under it the particular doctrine of meats, and the special, as concerning
things sacrificed to idols: and this exposition will be most profitable for you
to hear, and most easy for me to speak of. Now therefore (that I may come to
my text) these two Verses contain two rules; the first is, lex veritatis, the
law rule of truth, in the 23. verse: the second lex charitatis, the true rule
of charity, in the 24. verse. More plainly thus; first here is a directive
explication or a direction, by way of explication, which sets down verum
the truth, in the 23. verse; then here is an exhortatiue application, or an
exhortation to apply rightly the directions unto our selves in the course of
our lives, and squaring of our actions accordingly, which implies verum bonum,
both true, and good. In the direction there be two parts, the first a maxima,
or general rule, Omnia mihi licent, All things are lawful to me: which
although it be simplex, single, and but one in deed and sense, yet verbis
duplex, it is twice iterated in this place, Omnia mihi lice^t, sed non omnia
conducunt, All things are lawful to me, but all things prosite not: and
again, Omnia mihi licent, sed non omnia adisicant; All things are lawful to
me, but all things edisie not. Secondly a caution or limitation of this
general rule, and that is two fold. For although all indifferent things simply
in themselves considered, without regard of circumstances, be simply lawful,
yet if either in regard of our selves they be not expedient, or profitable to
us; or in respect of our neighbors and brethren they tend not to the
edification of our brethren, but rather to their hurt, then be they to us
unlawful: Omnia mihi licen, sed non co^ducunt: But al things be not profitable
unto me: this is the first caution: Omnia mihi licent, sed non omnia adificant:
But all things do not edify: this is the second. So thatin these indifferent
matters, which may be either done or not done, we must briefly consider these
two points: First, whether it be expedient for us to do the^ or not: secondly,
whether they tend to the edifying of our brethren or not: if both these
concur, then are they to be done; if both or either repugne, then are they
not to be done, but to be avoided.

The rule of charity by way of application, both in regard of the matter and
manner is two fold. For the matter, it either respects our selves or our
neighbors: for the manner, it is either affirmative or negative: it regards
our selves negatiuely: Nemo querat quod suum est: Let no man seek that which is
his own: it respects our neighbor affirmatively: Sed quisque quaerat quod
alterius est: But let every man seek that which is another.

Omnia, All things.
First for removing of all doubt, and clearing of my text in all points from
all ambiguitie, this question comes even now into my mind: how this may be,
that all things should be lawful, seeing that many and almost innumerable
things be altogether unlawful and utterly forbidden. If this were the rule,
and thus roughly to be understood, then were it lawful to swear with the
swearer, to drink with the drunkard, to steal with the thief, and to be a
partaker with the adulterer, and such like. To this I answer, first that we
must learn of this our author, to make account of unlawful things as of
sin, privative, priuatiuely, and not positive, positiuely, calling sin
(...), a transgression of the law, or as Anselmus defines original sin, to
be nothing else but carentia originalis iustitia, a want of original justice:
so is all sin nothing else, nor all unlawful things any thing else, but a
want of justice, a mere want, and therefore a mere nothing: and so Iustine
Martyr tells us, (...) for evil and unlawful things, says he, by an evil,
and unreasonable use, and not by nature, are made evil: and if they be nothing
in nature, then are they worse then nothing in grace. All unlawful things
therefore, and all sins, quatenus and quamdiu, so far forth, and so long as
they are such, both in nature, law, and grace, they are nothing.

Secondly I answer, that it is a common rule, well known in schools,
vniversals voces non esse vltra terminos causae de qua agitur extendendas,
that is, no universal voices or words are to be stretched beyond the confines
of their causes of which they are spoken: and so in this place, in that he
says, that all things are lawful unto me, the meaning is thus to be
understood and not otherwise, all days, diets and meats, all indifferent
things are lawful to me. This is the state of the things: now follows the
case of law.

Licent, are lawful.
There is a licet necessitatis, a licet of necessity, and a licet libertatis,
a licet of liberty. For things may be said to be lawful either absolutae
necessitatis, of absolute necessity, and these include but one part of the
contradiction, as to honor thy father is lawful, but not to honor thy father
is unlawful: to worship God is lawful, but not to worship him is altogether
unlawful. On the other side, not to steal lawful, and therefore to steal
unlawful, etc. Or else things are called lawful permissiuae libertatis, of
liberty permitted, and these include vtramque contradictionis partem, both the
parts of the co^tradiction, both the affirmative and negative part: as to
observe, and not observe a day is both alike, to eat meat is lawful, and not
to eat meat is not unlawful; to wear some kind of apparel is lawful, and
not to wear some kind of apparel is likewise lawful, etc. And this is the
licet, which our Apostle speaks of here, the licet of liberty of permission,
or permitted liberty in matters indifferent. This is the privilege of the new
Testament above the old; liberty above law, and law above law; the law of
liberty above the law of fear. The Law says, to touch a dead carkas defiles
a man, and makes him unclean, Deuteronomy. 14. But liberty says, Omnia munda Nu,
19. 1
mundis: All things are clean to the clean: Tit. 1. 15. The law of fear
says, as the minister of grace tells us, touch not, taste not, handle not,
Col. 2. 21. But the law of liberty says, Arise Peter, kill and eat, Act. 10.
13. The things that God has purified pollute thou not, Act. 10. 15. The old
Testament says, many things are unlawful, in so much as to wear a garment of
woollen and linen, and to plow with an ox and an ass is unlawful, Deu. 22.
10. 11. and that many beasts, many fowls, many fishes are (...). 11.
unlawful to be eaten. But the new Testament (as here you may see) tells us,
that Omnia mihi lice^t, all things are lawful to me: I know and am persuaded
through the Lord Jesus, that nothing is unclean of it self: Romans 14. 14. Non
quaero quo vescaris, sed quo delecteris: I demand not what thou do eat, but
wherewith thou art delighted (says S. Augustine.) And S. Paul reports unto
us, that the Jewish ceremonies be (...). 4. 9.
now impotent and beggarly rudiments: and that one word, which is, Domino, to
the Lord, will serve for all; so all be done in the Lord, and to the Lord, all
is well. Romans 14. 6. He that observes the day observes it to the Lord: and he
that observes not the day, observes it not to the Lord: He that eats eats
to the Lord, for he gives God thanks: and he that eats not, eats not to
the Lord, and gives God thanks.

And this In Domino, in the Lord, or to the Lord, as it requires our obedience
with joy, and our joy with thanksgiving, and all things in good order, and our
order to be subalterne to the ordinance of God: so does it ipso facto exclude
all co^trarietie, and subcontrarietie to God, that our law case may always
have a reference to our lawgiver. Wherefore we must take heed that we be not
contrary to the Lord, in doing any thing opposite to the express word of God,
neither be subcontrarie unto him in resisting the substitute of God, who has a
commission from God, for the right ordering of these matters under God; for
here goes out the date of this license.

Omnia mihi licent, All things are lawful for me.
This was a common saying among them, which they took unto themselves, as a
special warrant of Christian liberty, from the chief Justice of peace Jesus
Christ, who has made peace between heaven and earth, God and man. And indeed
it seems to be (...) spoken of all external indifferent things, as to eat,
to drink, to wear this or that apparel is lawful for me, yet is it not
(...), universally to be understood. True it is, Omnia licent, but yet not
omnibus personis, omni tempore, and omni loco: all things are lawful, but not
to all men, at all times, and in all places; neither yet, which is a principal
matter omni modo, in every form or manner. As for example, to eat flesh is
lawful, but not in time forbidden by the law of our country: for si adres
medias praeceptum Pet. 2. 13
accedat, fiunt necessariae: to buy and sell is lawful, but not in the Church:
(...)t 21. 12 (...)ut 6. 13 (...)od 20. 7
to swear is lawful, but only before a Judge, to end some controversy: to
sleep is lawful and natural, but not in (...) 20. 9.
the Sermon time: to wear apparel not forbidden; but for a Minister to go like
a ruffian, or not to use decent habiliments in the Church, is a thing offensive
and not so lawful; neither is the manner always allowable, as animo
contradicendi, with a gainsaying mind and purpose, to feast on good Friday,
and fast at Christmas, which thing is reproved by Calvin himself. Not that
Instit. lib. c. 19. sect
either he or we, put or place any religion in the things themselves, either in
observing of a day or not, in eating or abstaining from flesh, in wearing or
not wearing of this or that kind of apparel, or such like: but because, as one
says: Sunt in homine veluti mundi duo, quibus and varij reges, and variae
leges praeesse possunt: Two worlds as it were, be in a man, one resembled in
the soul, the other in the body, two kings over these two worlds, Christ, and
Christ his deputy the lawful magistrate; two kinds of laws correspondent to
all the rest, Civil or positive law of the country from the king thereof;
spiritual and eternal of the Church, from Christ her head. The spiritual
kingdom of Christ yielding unto the politic or civil kingdom of the
Lieutenant of Christ, some authority here on earth, for ordering and governing
the Church in these indifferent and external things, and omitting some matters,
willingly as of purpose to be ordered by him; although in elementis, in the
elements or simples of our profession, and in the infancy of the Church, being
at that time a mere Church separated from the body politic, Beda his rule
is both true and certain, licita tractanda erant non praescripto legis, sed
consilio charitatis, Lawful things were to be urged not by the strictness of
the law, but by the counsel of charity, yet in mixtis and co^positis, in the
mixed and compound, the states being incorporated, and the commandments
compounded in the flourishing and established state of the Church, the Kings
commandment being backed and seconded by God himself, and his Church being
committed unto him, there is even in these indifferent things some conscience
to be made, and some religious order to be observed. Neither think I that any
man ought so stiffly to stand or stick upon Christian liberty herein, whereas
there being but three parts of Christian liberty, the last and least of all
the rest consists and is in (...), in things indifferent: and a plain rule of
the Apostle is broken, and a manifest commandment of God contemned, in
resisting Romans 1 Exodus 2
authority even in these indifferent matters. This therefore was the error of
the Corinthians, which the Apostle propounds in his own person, and taxes
them for by a concession, that they thought that this was Christian liberty,
that they might at all times, in all places or occasions, use or not use these
indifferent things. And this is a point of discretion in the Apostle, that he
does not by an inuectiue sharply reprove them, but speaking in his own person,
he most wisely teaches what they should do in these cases. But in that he
doubleth it, Omnia mihi licent, All things are lawful to me: and again, Omnia
mihi licent, All things are lawful; the reasons may be th^se, either because
they did oftentimes rehearse this saying, that all things were lawful to them:
or else because of the double damage which happened unto them hereby. First in
that they provoked the Lord Gods displeasure against themselves, in that they
were partakers of the table of devils. Secondly, in that they hurt and
destoryed the weak consciences of their brethren, and strengthened the hand of
the wicked in their idolatry, by this their indiscreet action and fact, and so
offended against our Apostles divinity principle in another place, Let al
things be done to edification: and this is our Apostles meaning and sense in
this place.

Omnia mihi licent, All things are lawful for me.
In the fourteenth chapter to the Romans the twentieth verse, this part of my
text joined to the part following, has a commentary; All things indeed are
pure says he there: that expresses what he means by all lawful things
here. All things are lawful, that is, there is not now under Christ as there
were under Moses, many things impure; but all things are now indeed pure
emphatically: But, says he here, but says he there; but yet say we, therefore
this doctrine i^ not thus to be left thus unlimited; there is a further matter
to be considered. Wherefore it follows here: But all things are not
expedient. Which the commentary in that place expresses in more plain words:
but it is evil for the man which eats with offense: so that a man may use
things, or rather abuse things lawful in them selves to the hurt of himself,
that is, when things indifferent are done with offense: for this has a vae, a
woe denounced against it by Christ himself: vae homini per que^ Math 18. ^
scandala: woe be to that man by whom offenses come. Wherefore for a further
commentary of this commentary, you shall take the old distinction as it is
commonly used: there is scandalum acceptum, an offense taken: and there is
scandalum datum, an offense given. But as for scandalum acceptum, an offense
taken where none is given, neither is there any vae, any woe denounced against
it by Christ, neither is it the evil spoken of by S. Paul: for even our
Savior himself (who was without sin, and therefore without evil) had
notwithstanding this scandal, this offense taken at his words, which were the
words of truth, and at himself who is truth it self, Ioh. 6. It is therefore
scandalum datum, a scandale or an offense given, which causes the woe to him
that brings it, and brings the evil to him that causes it. To show and
illustrate this point in the matters that we have in hand, as also to be a
further commentary to both the former commentaries, take the sixth Chapter of
this Epistle, verse 12. the tenure whereof be these: Omnia mihi licent, sed non
omnia conducunt, etc. All things are lawful for me, but all things are not
expedient: all things are lawful, but I am not brought into subjection of any
thing: which place teaches us, first, that which this place also does, that
our licent must have a conducunt, our lawful must be profitable to our selves
and others, or else our liberty without restraint, will be nothing but the
abstract of licet, licentia, a mere licentiousnes: secondly, that in this our
liberty, we are put in mind of our service to God, in that he says in that
place, that he is brought into the subiectio of nothing. For this is the
liberty of the servants of God, that they must serve him only, and not be
subject to any other thing, neither to principalities nor powers, to Angels
nor Archangels, much less to the elements, the baser things of this world.
This disableth the authority of the things over man, and enfranchiseth or
sets man at liberty from the things; but it does not disable the authority
of man over the things, or discharges man from the authority of man
commanding a decent order to be kept in the right use of the things.

Now then seeing that these lawful things whereof the Apostle makes mention
in this place, be partly the bounds of Christian liberty, and this liberty is
but the liberty of servants: therefore as we see here among us, those servants
deserve especial commendation, that be first profitable themselves, and then
stir up others to become good servants: so they do especially use their
Christian liberty well, who first regard (...), whether the thing lawful be
profitable, and then (...), whether it edifieth or not. For he only is the
good and faithful servant of God, who in all things seeks to advance the
kingdom of God: and therefore our Apostle Paul in another place says of
himself: Omnia omnibus factus sum: I am made all things to ^ Cor. 9. 22
all men: there is the practice of this Omnia licent, all things are lawful.
If you ask him to what end: he will answer, (...): That I may win, that I
may save, both in one verse; both words of profit, which is the first
limitation: the first exercise of conducere to profit, is lucrefacere to
gain: the next is saluos facere, to save or keep safe. If further you
demand, what he would win or save, his answer is nonnullos; vt lucrefaciam
infirmos, vt saluos faciam nonnullos, that I might win the weak, that I might
by all means save some: there is the second point of this place, to wit,
edification.

What greater help under God to all this in these indifferent things then
conformity, where brethren go hand in hand, and all draw one way, and all
follow one course? What greater hurt then confusion, where the minds being
distracted, the workmen are disturbed, and the work is dissolved? Let this
therefore be the trial who gives the scandale or offense, he that conformeth
himself, that jointly with his brethren and fellow laborers he may set
forward the work; or he that separateth and secludeth himself, for small
matters, left at liberty to be done or not to be done (saving only that herein
we are tied to the ordinance of man, as the authority appointed by God)
thereby breeding confusion and disorder in the Church, thereby making a breach
amongst brethren, thereby laying a stumbling block in the way of the weak,
thereby laying open a gap to the enemy, and thereby bringing hinderance to the
work of the Lord.

Thus much of the maxima and the two limitations thereof jointly, now severally
a word or two of either of these two limitations. The first limitation that
restrains liberty that it becomes not licentious, is conducunt, if they
have an eye that they use not their liberty in any thing that shall not be
expedient or profitable.

Bonum autem expediens, is of diverse sorts; for either it is (...), which
causes profit, or (...), which is profitable, in keeping that which is gotten,
or (...), which signifies and shows us that which is expedient: for as in
the state of our body we say, that in one respect medicina is sana, physic
is healthful, because it causes and procures health; in another respect we
say, that cibus is sanus, our diet is healthful, and exercitation sana, our
exercise is healthful in that it preserves our health, in another vrina est
sana, the water is a sound or healthful water, in that it shows the party
whose urine it is to be both healthful and sound: so likewise in our souls,
the spirit and word of God is the health of our souls, in that by these
blessings our souls health is procured and preserved to us. But our words and
works they be (...), they also may be said to be sound and healthful, as far
forth as they be signs of the soundness of the heart, and fruits of the
spirit working by love. And in the whole church and government thereof, as
confusion and disorder be signs of distempered humors, so conformi^i^ and
good order be, in these indifferent external things, manifest signs of the
eucrasie and good heal^h of the Church. Neither only are these (...), signs
in us of the grace of God, but they may be (...) in others by the good spirit
of God woorking together in their hearts: Let your light so shine before men,
that they seeing your good works may glorify your father which is in heaven.
Thus is your licet to be limited with co^ducit, your lawful to be accompanied
with profitable. I might set out this point by another similitude of the
getting, keeping, and showing forth of riches: As first the (...), the
efficient cause of riches is the gift of God: The blessing of God makes rich;
the (...), the keeping of them is in the wisdom of man by the blessing of
God: but the sign of riches, be liberal actions and works which show and set
forth the riches of any man, both inwardly and outwardly, more then any
bragges or boastes of riches whatsoever: and the holy Ghost seems in the
Scripture to have an aim at this similitude, where he says, Be rich in 1.
Tim. 61
good works, that is, as S. James advises us to show or set forth faith by
works, that James 2. 1
they may be both expedient to your self in the growth and increase of faith,
and profitable to others to stir them up to newness of life, and
edification, which is the second point toward which I haste; only thus much
by the way, Caiphas took a wrong course, that applied lic^t to expedit, it is
lawful because expedient, when rather he should have limited licet by expedit,
first have considered whether it were lawful that one man should die for the
sins of the people, and then have brought in his plea of expedit, it is
expedient that one man should die that the whole nation perish not. The like
impious sentence was that of the Pope of Rome, when he adjudged the Templars to
sudden destruction: Etsi non licet per viam iustitiae, licet aute^ per viam
expedientiae. Although (says he) it be not lawful by the way of justice to
destroy them, yet notwithstanding it is lawful by the way of expediencie; a
most senseless sentence, and altogether not beseeming his holiness, as though
any thing could be expedient, that is not just and lawful: many things are
just and lawful which are not expedient, not any otherwise. But I come to the
second limitation.

Sed non omnia aedificant: But al things edify not.
This is the second limitation, and it raises the state of Christianity a
step higher, for licet, without expedit, lawful and not profitable, is good
law, but naughty policy, expedit, without aedificat, profitable and not
edifying is good policy, but naughty divinity: licet, expedit, aedificat,
lawful, profitable, and edifying, is good law, policy and divinity. So that
the true Christian, must neither let his cause hang in licet, the common pleas,
where is all law, and not so great respect of conscience, nor in expedit, the
Kings bench, where is both law and profit, but small regard of religion; but
he must bring it to aedificat, the court of conscience or Chancerie, where both
law and profit be tempered by charity.

I might also compare these three words to the three parts of the Bible, the
Law, the Prophets, and the Gospel, licet est legis vocabulum, lawful, is a
law term, expedit est Prophetarum vox, profitable, is the Prophets voice, but
aedificat, but edifying is the Gospels speech: but this may suffice of this
point: only I will add this, that aedificat, edification is both finis legis
veritatis, the end of the law of truth, in this verse; and also principium
regulae charitatis, the beginning of the rule of charity, in the next: that as
words of truth must tend to edification, so all works of charity begin from
edification; and therefore upon this principle of truth, is grounded and
follows this precept of charity: Let no man seek that which is his own,
but every man another wealth.

Nemo quaerat quod suum est, etc. Let no man seek that which is his own.
This 24. verse I said was regula charitatis, the rule of charity, and that I
will now prove by conferring the two parts of this verse with two other places
of Scripture. The first is in the 13. Chapter of this first Epistle to the
Corinthia^s: Charity seeks not those things that be her own: what else
says the Apostle here: Let no man seek that which is his own; but only he
applies that here by particular exhortation, which before he delivered in
universal doctrine. The second place is in the first to the Corinthians. 8. 1.
Charitas aedificat, Charity edifieth. What else means he in this place by
the affirmative p^^t, when he wills us that every man should seek that which
is another, but that we should endeavor to edify one another?

Nemo quaerat quod suum est. Let no man, etc.
This lesson is too much and yet not enough learned of worldly men; too much in
one sense, in that there be some kind of men, that because the Apostle
forbids every man that he should seek his own; and no man can call any
thing suum, properly his own, but sin, transg ession, corruption, and shame;
sua peccata, sua fraus, suum scelus, sua iniquitas: their sins be their own,
their deceipts, their wickedness, and their iniquities; therefore they will
hudwinke them selves wilfully that they may not see and seek to find out their
own sin and wickedness, that they may heal them: these mistaking the mark
do ouer-shoote it on the left hand. But if you do dextre intelligere, rightly
understand it, the whole world comes short of it. Let no man (to wit, in the
use of Christian liberty) seek his own, that is, quod ipsi licet libet: for
as it was the speech of an incestuous mo^ster, si libet, licet, to make lust a
law: so quicqu^id licet, libet, to do whatsoever we may do by law, is the part
of a libertine Christian. We must sometimes decedere de iure nostro, depart from
our own right, even as Christ Jesus being the son of God did humble himself,
^il 2. 7.
sub forma serui, unto the state of a servant, for our sakes.

Sed quisque quaerat quod alterius est. But let every man seek another
wealth.
This part also is too much followed of some in the wrong sense, and too little
of all in the true: for to seek other men's commodities to draw them to
themselves, to seek other men's goods for their own use, is so common a
practice, that it seems that men have no need to be instructed in this point:
but to seek other men's wealth so that they will do nothing that may give just
offense to the least, and will do any thing that may edify the most men,
herein they are such dunces and non proficie^ts, that men will not learn, no
though they be instructed by the spirit of God.

Quod alterius est, That which is another.
This word alterius, another, makes the action of seeking to be a relative
action, and this relation of all our actions and endeavors in things
indifferent unto the good of others, is to be considered either in common, or
in several. In common, every man is bound to maintain with all might and
maine, nay to prefer, the common good of Church or commonwealth before his
own private gain or commodity. The heathen Oratouis instruction is worthy
the attention of Christians in this point: As we are not borne of our selves,
so we are not bo^ne to or for our selves alone: one part of our life our wives
and children will take up, another part our friends and kinsfolk, and the
greatest part of all our country and commonwealth does challenge of duty to
belong unto it. And as this is the part of every man, so more chiefly of those
whose persons are fitted to this purpose; public persons must seek the
public commodity before others, and the common good before their own and
proper welfare. The public persons office and good is in some sort described
by the heathen Philosopher: Omnium somnos illius vigilantia defendit, omnium
otium illius labor, omnium delicias illius industria, omnium vacationem illius
occupatio: His office and care preserves the estate of al, and procures the
good of all; all men's sle^pe his watchfulness, all men's ease his labor, all
men's delights his industry, all men's vacation his occupation. These public
persons be of two sorts: the Magistrate, and the Minister. An example of a good
magistrate we have in Moses, whose zeal for the common good of Israel was so
great, that for their sakes he desired to be razed out of Gods book. Exodus 32.
33. An example of a good Minister we have in Paul, who for the benefit of his
brethren could wish to be separated from Christ, Romans 9. 3. Thus is this
relation, or relative action of seeking another good to be considered in
common: and again in several it has three combinations, or relative
coniugations. One another, may be either the superior to his inferior, the
equal to his equal, or the inferior to his superior, and every one of these
have several duties which be his own, and pertaining unto him, and ought of
duty to be performed unto him of the other: the inferior to his superior must
give reuerentiam and obedientiam, the equal to his equal supply, auxilium
and consilium, the superior to his inferior must repay custodiam and
disciplinam. A word or two of either of these, and so an end. The duties that
the inferior owes to his superior, be reverence and obedience; reverence, as
the homage of his body in all outward behavior, as well in action, as to rise
up to him, and use some action of submission, as in word, not to speak without
due regard to whom he speaks, and that the countenance be void of all proud
and disdainful looks; and in a word, that all his iesture and outward
behavior be so ordered, that the superior may have no exception against the
carriage of his inferior toward him. But yet this is not all, for obedience
binds the inferior more nearely to his superior, for it tieth his soul in
subjection unto him: (...) Let every soul (says our Apostle) be subject to
the superior power. If thy better, to wit, the Magistrate, thy master, thy
father, or any that is in authority over thee, command thee any thing, so
thou do it, thou think thou have discharged thy duty; but I tell thee
whosoever thou art, if thou do it mutteringly or unwillingly, thou had
as good not do it at all, for thou owe obedience, that is souleseruice, unto
thy superior, but thou can not serve in soul but by the will, and therefore
he that is unwilling does not obey.

What account the^ think you make they of the Apostles rule, who are so
indifferent in these indifferent matters, that they will not in any case yield
unto the authority of their superiors herein? Wherein (I pray you) consists
their obedience? wherein their charity? wherein seek they the edisying of the
Church, in procuring and seeking the good of others? Forsooth in this, in
maintaining that doctrine which formerly they have taught, in disobeying
authority in these matters of indifferency. Yea but what if they ought not to
have taught it, for who is he that ought to teach the doctrine of disobedience?
And surely if the Prince directed and advised by the learned and grauest men,
and men in authority in his realm, has not power in his hands to command
all the Ministers in his land to keep a decent and comely order in their
minist^rie, I know not wherein his supremacy does consist: Let every man, I
mean every Minister, be Pope in his own Parish. But yet constantia causae,
they most go on where they have begun. This were well if there were causa
constantiae, constancy of the cause where there is cause of constancy is
good. But tell me, I pray you, what cause of constancy where the cause was
never good, and the^fore never good for constancy, which as it is always
good, so must it always have a good cause: for error in principio an error in
the beginning, grows oftentimes to be an heresy in the end. My advice
herein I refer unto the next point, which is the second combination.

The duties of the equal to his equal be auxilium and consilium, counsel and
help: if thy neighbor that is thy equal be distressed, and thy help may in
any matter relieve him and stand him in stead, thou art bound by Christian
duty to put too thy helping hand: if at any time he err and be deceived, the
same duty binds thee to counsel him. The best counsel and help that I can
give unto my brethren, as concerning the cases now in hand, which also I
promised in the former point, is this, poenitentia nunquam sera, si seria.

The third and last relation is, of the superior to the inferior; and the
duties thereof be custodia and disciplina, custody and discipline, the
inferiors are the charge of the superiors, and they ought both to keep them
from harm by custody, and in order by discipline. The Magistrates duty is,
to preserve the innocent people from the injury of the oppressor, and to
punish the guilty by the rod of discipline: and so the Minister is to keep
his flock from ravening wolves, and separate the scabbed sheep from the sound
by the rod of discipline, and so in all others. In regard of which two duties,
of keeping and ordering of the people, the word of God resembles a good king
unto a diligent pastor or shepherd, and a careless Prince unto a negligent
shepherd, 1. King. 22. 17. Then he said, I saw all Israel scattered upon the
mountains, as sheep that had no shepherd: and the Lord said, these have no
master, let every man return to his house in peace. Where the people are
kept, that is, duly fed and kept in order, that is, disciplined aright, there
be both sheep and shepherd: but where they be either not at all, or not in
order kept, there be sheep without a shepherd. From hence blind Homer
borrowed some light, and seems to see somewhat, whose king and chief
magistrate is entitled and called (...), the shepherd of the people, whose
fold is custody and whose dog is discipline.

Now if some man shall say, that he is so base that he has no inferior, to
him I answer plainly, there is no man so base but he has an inferior, if not
amongst others, yet in himself: first in the whole man, the body is inferior
to the soul, and the godly have performed in themselves these duties to their
bodies: Set a watch, o Lord, before Psalm. 141
my mouth, says the Prophet David; there is custody. And in another place
(...). I tame my body and bring it into subjection, says S. Paul 1. Cor. 9.
27. there is discipline. Again in the soul, the unreasonable part is
inferior to the reasonable, the affections unto reason: and therefore the
Preacher speaking of the heart, the seat of affections, gives us this
counsel, Omni custodia custodi cor tuum, Look to thy heart, and the
affections thereof with all diligence, let reason rule them. And even in reason,
in the understanding and will of man* nature, corrupt nature ought to be
subject to grace. For that we may instare in proposito, to seek our own, and
to neglect another wealth, is the part of a carnal and natural man, although
he be well instructed in the knowledge of truth. Contrariwise to seek another
good more then our own pleasure or profit, is the property of a man endued
with the spirit of Christ, and true charity. God for his infinite mercy
grant that his grace may rectify our reason, our reason may reform our
affections, and our reformed affections may so govern our bodies, that we may
grow up into perfect men in Christ lesus: to who^ with thee o Father, and thy
holy Ghost, be all honor, glory, thanksgiving and praise, now and for ever.

Amen.
THE PLAIN foot-path to the paradise of God.
Matthew. 21. 5. Ecce, rex tuus venit tibi mansuetus. Behold thy king comes unto
thee meek.
OUR Savior Christ coming into the world, always and at all times loved
poverty and humility: as in his birth, in his life, in his death, and after
his death. In his birth, for he had an humble and poor mother; in his life,
for he had poor companions and fellows: in his death, for he had a strait
bed, to wit, his cross, which was so narrow and strait, that it affoorded
not place for both his feet, but that the one was feign to be nailed upon the
other: after his death, for he had a poor sepulcher, for he was not laid in
his own sepulcher but in another man's. And yet for all this we ought not to
think the more basely of him, but rather the more highly to esteem him:
because as S. Augustine says, Humilitas virtutum est sublimitas, humility is
the height of all virtues: and therefore our Savior Christ, though he was
humilis, yet is he not vilis, though humble, yet not base. As also this place
enforces to us, mansuetus, he was meek, there is humility: Rex tuus, thy
king, there is sublimitie. Rex tuus, thy king, there is the height of his
estate: Mansuetus, meek, there is the lowliness of his heart. And these two
be two parts of this text: the height of his estate, and the lowliness of his
heart. And the third part is between these two, and is the use and application
of both these unto us. Venit tibi, comes to thee, says our Savior speaking
to the Church, the congregation of the faithful. Say he is a king, that is his
glory: say he is meek, that is his virtue: but say as he says here; that he
is thy king, and comes unto thee meek, and that is thy comfort. Is he a king?
then is he to be feated. Is he meek? then is he to be loved. Is he thy king
and comes unto thee meek? then is he to be reverenced, that is, both to be
feared and to be loved of thee. These be the parts: of these in their order.

The first is the height of his estate; Rex tuus, thy king: but here me
thinks I miss a word not spoken of in my division. Ecce, Behold: behold thy
king. It is true indeed: but yet we did not forget it neither: for it belongs
to the height of his estate. For as we see high states, great personages have
their gentlemen-ushers go before the^ to make them way: so before Rex tuus, thy
king, goes Ecce, behold thy king comes; to prepare way for this high estate
in the hearts of men, whither this king means to come: so that this Ecce, in
this place, as it is in most other places, is the gentleman usher word,
preparing way in the heart, for greater matter following. So that, as when so
ever you see any gentleman-usher, you know that he is some great personage that
comes next: so when so ever you see this word Ecce, Behold, you may be sure
that it is some great matter that follows next after it. And as this Eccc, is
a preparatiue word, so is it in this place a peaceable word. For Behold in this
place is as much as be bold: for he is not a traitor, but he is a king: and not
a strange king, who perhaps is now in league with thee, but may hereafter do
thee a displeasure, if now he see where thou art weakest; but he is Rex tuus o
Sion, that will build up the breaches of Sion, and repair the decayed places
of Hicrusalem: he it is that comes, and therefore Ecce, Behold, that is, be
bold to let him enter in. Attollite portas, List up the gates, says David in
the Psalm. and introibit rex gloriae, and the king of glory shall come in:
Ecce, behold, says our Savior here in the Gospel, Behold, that is, be bold to
lift up the gates of thy heart: venit rex tuus tibi: thy king comes unto thee:
so that this Ecce, behold, has a double office, outwardly and inwardly.
Outwardly, to prepare the cares, which be the first gates, that Christ by the
preaching of the word passes thorough to come into our hearts: and also it
has an office inwardly, and that again is of two sorts: to prepare the
understanding to know his greatness, that he may be reverently receiucd,
because he is a king: and again to prepare the will to be willing to
acknowledge his kindness, that he may be most lovingly entertained and embraced,
because he is thy king, but so that as his kindness in that he would be ours,
says, Behold, I do not dlsdaine: so his greatness, in that he is a king,
says, Behold, do not you presume: Behold, his goodness says he is thine,
and therefore be bold: Behold, his greatness says he is a king, and therefore
be not too bold. Greatness and goodness begot this child of admiration, Ecce,
Behold: Behold, thy king.

But now leaving these circumstances, let us come to the substance of the text;
wherein first we must consider what manner of king this is, and how it comes
to pass that he is ours. Iustine Martyr taxes the Jews as gross headed, and
earthly minded, for expounding all the promises of the Messiah to be meant
visibly and grossly of some great worldly Prince, mighty potentate, or glorious
captain and warrior, who should subdue all nations, and bring them in
subjection unto the Jews: when as the might, power and authority he used at
his first coming was says he (...), a secret virtue and power, not pompous,
plausible, or visible to the eyes of the world: and this he proves to be
paralleled before in the destruction of Amelech: (...), for with a secret hand
or might God fights against Amelech: spiritually Amelech is Satan. You may
therefore understand, that the secret virtue of God was in Christ crucified:
whom the devils do tremble at, and all principalities and powers in the world
do fear. And this power of God in Christ, as without all show of pomp it did,
and does work the destruction of our enemies; so in like sort secretly and
covertly does it work our salvation by ruling us inwardly, not with glorious
shows, but with his truth. There is indeed a specious and flourishing kind of
government ordained of God, which is regnum inter nos, the kingdom that is
amongst us: but that whether it be civil authority is disclaimed by our
Savior in the case of the two brethren: no not Iudex inter nos, not so much as
a Judge, much less Rex inter nos, a king among us. Or else Ecclesiastical, in
his subjection to the high Priests authority is not stood upon; and yet Rex,
yet was he a King by the testimony of the heathen, both wise men, vbi est
ille, qui natus est rex Iudaeorum? where is he that is borne king of the Jews?
and mighty: Jesus of Nazareth the king of the Jews. This kingdom therefore
being not in sight, must needs be that (...), that secret Luke 18.
power, not regnum inter nos, but intra nos: not the kingdom that is amongst
us, but which is within us. And this as it is, with less noise and show, so is
it with greater majesty and power then that other. All the authority of the
kings in the world, let them try the uttermost they can do, either by
threatenings or promises, love or fear, cannot pluck one of these subjects
from God, or remove a true Christian from Christ: witness Joseph in the
prison, Jeremy in the dungeon, the three children in the furnace, Daniel in
the Lio^s den; and all the Apostles, S. John in will, the rest in deed: and
infinite Martyrs in the primitive Church even in death it self. T ertullian
stands upon this point against the heathen; Justin Martyr builds upon this
ground against the Jews, but S. Paul is very marvelous in this case against
all the world. Romans 8. 38. 39 For I am persuaded (says he) that neither death,
nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to
separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord: Take the
particulars and know the reasons, Romans 14. 17. For the kingdom of God is not
meat nor drink, but righteousness and peace and joy in the holy Ghost; these
be they that uphold the kingdom of Christ in us, not meat and drink: for the
Apostles rule is surely true: meats 1. Cor. 6*
for the belly, and the belly for the meats, but God shall destroy both it
and them: howbeit, the kingdom of God, and the good that there is never shall
decay. Indeed all other kingdoms without, besides, or contrary to Christ;
take away these things from them, let them have no meat and drink, and they
will soon come to nothing: but the kingdom of God, when all meat, all men,
all the world, and all the kingdoms in the world, are overthrown and
consumed, then shall it flourish in the perfect beauty: for righteousness,
peace, joy in the holy Ghost, and such like spiritual fruits of the kingdom
of Christ, they be (...) as Iustine Martyr speaks. This then is the first
point in this king to be considered, the manner of his kingdom. Hereunto are
to be added three other: to the manner of the kingdom, the nature of his
subjects, the coronation of the king, the glory of all, both of king,
kingdom, and subjects, is to be annexed. For the nature of the subjects,
understand that the two kinds of kingdoms, internos, and intranos, have two
kinds of subjects, delivered under two similitudes, of two kind of sons in
two promises unto the patriarchs. The one similitude resembling one kind of
sons or subjects is delivered in that promise, as the dust of the earth: Genesis
13. 16. 1. Sam. 13. 5. (...), as the sand on the sea which is innumerable. The
sand on the sea side says Iustine Martyr, as it is innumerable, so is it
unprofitable and unfruitful too, for no fruit grows thereon: this
innumerable and unprofitable seed of Abraham, was the children of Abraham
according to the flesh: of this seed the Pharisees were, and bragged thereof to
our Savior Christ, We are the seed of Abraham, Abraham is our father. Ioh. 8.
39. Another kind of subjects, children and seed of Abraham, are delivered in
another promise, under another similitude, and in another place: sicut stellae
coeli: Genesis 26. 4. and in the 15. of Genes. he wills Abraham to look up to
heaven, and to tell the stars if he could, and says: sic erit semen tuum.
And these are the seed, children, and subjects which our Savior Christ himself
speaks of, when he rejects the Pharisees as the bastard brood of Abraham: If
you were the sons of Abraham, you would do the work of Abraham: Ioh. 8. 39.
40. 41. Stellae coeli, the stars of ^om. 4.
heaven says the promise: the sons or citizens of heaven says the practice.
Nostra conuersatio est in coelis, Our conversation is in heaven, says S. Paul
Phil. 3. 20. These be the attendants, and this is the attendance that this king
requires: not the dust of the earth, for they were the Pharisees: but the stars
of heaven, for they be the faithful; and yet both the seed of Abraham.

The next point that comes in and offers it self to be considered in this
place, is the coronation of this great king: wherein a principal matter (as
you know in every coronation it is material) is, vnctio, the anointing of
the king: this anointing is described unto us in the 45. Psalm, verse 7.
first in the author and act of anointing: because God even thy God has
anointed thee: and secondly in the quality of the oil; with the oil of
gladness: and thirdly in the quantity thereof: above thy fellows. In all
which points is pointed out unto us nothing else but the spiritual anointing
of Christ with grace, which is there called the oil of gladness: and that the
oil of gladness is grace, and signifies grace in that place, it is plain by
the effect which is set down in the first words of that verse, to be the love
of righteousness, and hatred of wickedness; and all this is the work of
grace. And that Christ was and is anointed with this spiritual oil, the
special grace of God, that is plain both by his conception, Luke 1. 35. The
holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most highest shall
ouershadow thee: and also by his life, Luke 2. 40. And the child grew, and
waxed strong in spirit, and was filled with wisdom, and the grace of God was
with him. And further that he was anointed with spiritual oil, the special
grace of God above his fellows, that is easily declared in three points. The
first grace of God, that Christ had above all his fellows, all the children of
God, is gratia capitis, he has grace to be the head, whereof the whole Church
is the body: Ephesians. 5. 23. Col. 2. 19. The second grace that Christ has above
all his fellows, is gratia originalis tustitiae, the grace of original
righteousness: we all are conceived and borne in original sin, but he without
sin, in original holiness and righteousness; and therefore he is called in
the first of S. Luke (...), that holy thing which shall be borne of thee, borne
holy, and does live holy for ever: in which sense he is called by David: Deus
iustitiae, the God of righteousness: and of Paul is he said to be, Homo
iustitiae, 1. Cor. 1. 30. who of God is made unto us wisdom, righteousness,
and sanctification and redemption. The third wherein Christ surpasses all his
fellows, all Christians, who through his grace are made also the children of
God, is gratia hypostaticae vnionis, the grace of his hypostaticall union,
whereby God and man are made one Christ, having united in one person the two in
some respect, otherwise contrary natures of the Godhead and the manhood. Phil.
2. 6. 7. Gratia capitis, in the grace of the head, gratia originalis iustitiae,
in the grace of original justice, and gratia hypostaticae vnionis, in the
grace of hypostaticall union: in these three annointings, in these three
graces, Christ excels all Christians; and all kings, Christians and others.
And the reuersion of these three graces, and the overplus of these three
ointments of Christ adds or implies three essential points in the office of
all kings. First as Christ is the head of the Church, so under God the king is
supreme head of his kingdom in all causes. Secondly, as Christ has original
justice, so all the offices of justice, all the ministers of justice, and all
the acts of justice in the whole realm, be originally in the king, and come
originally from the king. Thirdly, as in the person of Christ both the natures
be united: so in the office of the king both estates be combined, and he
himself being the Lieutenant of God in his office, after a sort may justly be
said to be joined unto God. The second thing that is done at the coronation of
this king, is the proclamation, or title proclaimed: and that is not Rex
Franciae, the king of France, nor Rex Asiae, the king of Asia, nor Rex terrae,
the king of the whole earth: but Rex magnus super omnes Deos, a great king
above all Gods: Psalm. 95. 3. Rex regum, Dominus dominantium, that is blessed
and Prince only king of kings, and Lord of Lords. 1. Tim. 6. 15. Nay, when he
is crowned, the trumpets of heaven, nay the Angels of God, nay the Spirit of
God gives him this title, Rex gloriae, the king of glory, and Dominus
exercituum, the Lord of hosts: Psalm. 25. There be two gifts of God which in a
sum or in an epitome do set down unto us all God his gifts: the one is the
gift of God his grace, the other of his glory. Grace is present at the
coronation of Christ our king, but glory is the crown it self which lasts
for ever. Now if any desire to know this and to see this, he desires an
excellent thing: but let him not be too busy for sear his eyes be dazzled, and
for fear of presumption, and so of confusion. One there is that seems to set
down twelve things or marks whereby the greatness of the glory of the Saints
in some sort may be understood, but we will acknowledge our own weakness,
shallownes and unworthiness, and not seek to be wiser, or seem to see more
then the Apostle Paul (though caught up into the third heaven) could ever
attain unto: for he confesses, the things which eye has not seen, neither
ear has heard, neither came into man's heart, are, which God has prepared for
them that love him. And if for all them that love him these incomparable good
things be prepared, then how much more for his own only begotten Son, in whom
he is well pleased, be these infinite, incomprehensible, glorious, good things,
not prepared only, but also powered out upon: and this in general, though what
they be, our shallow brain and weak capacity cannot comprehend, is the crown
of glory fitted to the king of glory, and by him bestowed likewise upon the
vessels of gloric. Iustine Martyr, rather telling what it is not then what it
is, in four privative words, does, as near as another, set out this crown of
glory, (...), the first depriueth us of passion, the scond of corruption, the
third of sorrow, and the fourth of mortality. For this letter (...), is (...),
a privative in every one of these words, but yet a privative of our priuations,
which is an excellent infinite good thing, we being infinite evil and corrupt,
to be deprived of all our priuations, and to be refined from all our
corruption, is an invaluable benefit and blessing of almighty God: and not
only this our evil shall be taken from us, but also this, his goods shall be
bestowed and conferred upon us: and this is that, that infers the next
point, in the next word: Tuus, thine: that appropriateth this king unto us, to
every one in particular: Rex tuus: thy king: for what was said to Sion, as to
the whole Church, that is said to every citizen of Sion, every member of the
Church in particular.

Eccerex tuus: Behold thy king.
We are his, and therefore he is ours: he our God, we his creatures; he our
redeemer, we his redeemed; he our Lord, we his servants; he our king, we his
subjects. Quod sumus, that we are, we are of him: Quod sumus filij, in that we
are sons, we are it in him. If thou have any grace it is his gift; if thou
have any goodness, it is his grace. Nam de plenitudine eius omnes bibimus, for
of his fullness we all have drunk. What then? is his fulness ever a whit the
emptier because all have drunk thereof? not at all: for in him is plenitudo
sontis, the fullness of the fountain, in us there is plenitudo v^sis, the
fullness of a vessel: and therefore according as in other, nay infinitely
above the nature and excellency of all other fountains: though all the vessels
be filled with grace from the fountain, yet is the fountain of grace never a
whit the emptier. Thus have thou possession in him, and yet he full of power in
himself notwithstanding: thus has he bestowed a benefit upon thee in that he
is thine, and thou do owe a duty unto him, in that he is thy king, which
requires thy obedience, and that in such sort as he is thy king. To him that
is the king of our country, we must do such service as our country laws
command us: to him that is our spiritual king, we owe spiritual obedience:
and to him that is our heavenly king, we must perform that d^tie that is
required of all those that shall be made citizens of the kingdom of heaven:
that is, inwardly to serve God in spirit and in truth. Yea but he speaks but
to Sion only, Tell the daughter Sion, Behold, thy king; and therefore it
seems that none but the Jews had this interest in him. Yea but this title
was written over his head at his death, Jesus of Nazareth king of the Jews, in
three languages. Hebrew, Greek and Latin, to signify, that as well Grecians,
and Romans, or any nation else that trusts in his name, have this interest
in him as well as the Jews, that he will be their king: For he is not a Jew
that is one outward, neither is that circumcision that is outwardly in the
flesh, but he is a Jew that is one within, and Romans 29.
that is circumcision that is inwardly in the heart, as the Apostle Paul
witnesses. Yea, but how could any have this interest in him seeing he is God?
To this a certain ancient divine answers, that, fuit in eo sublimit as
diuina, cum infirmitate humana, divine excellency, with humane infirmity: he
is Rex, the king, in that he is the great God: he is tuus, thine, in that he
was made weak man.

Whereby we may see, that we may prepare the way to the next point, how far
Christ humbled himself, that he might be ours. Below the nature of God is the
nature of Angels, below the nature of Angels is the nature of man, below the
nature of man is the punishment due to man's nature perverted and depraved.
First therefore Christ humbled himself below himself, below his divine
nature, in that he was made less then himself: Phil. 2. again he humbled
himself below the Angels in that he could suffer, which the Angels can not: and
therefore it is said in another place, Minuisti cum pauso minus Angelis: Thou
have made him a little lower then the Angels. Thirdly he descended lower then
the nature of man, in that he was a reproach among men, vermis sum and non
homo, I am a Psalm. 22
worm and not a man: Esa. 53. 2. Non est ei species neque decor: He has
neither form nor beauty. Fourthly he humbled him self even unto punishment.
Now there be three degrees of punishments: there is poena valde ignominiosa, a
very shameful death, as that of hanging, which belongs to malefactors,
there is poena valde laboriosa, a very painful death, as to be fleyed, as was
S. Bartholomew, or to be broiled, as was S. Laurence: and there is poena, a
punishment, that is both these, both very shameful and very painful, and
this is the death of the cross, both shameful as being the death of thieves,
painful as tormented in the most neruous and sensatiue parts. Will thou now
try thy state in him, and see his estate in him self: then must thou ascend
unto him by the same steps or degrees by the which he has descended unto
thee; he is thy punishment removed because he bare the punishment due unto
thee; he is thy man, in that he was made man for thee; he is thy Angel, in
that he is the messenger of God for thy salvation; he is thy God, in that he
made thee; he is thy king, in that he is thy God: thy punishment, thy man, thy
Angel, thy God, thy king. Thy punishment, to free thee from pain, thy man to
shield thee from shame, thy Angel to bring thee unto God, thy God to guide
thee with his grace, thy king to give thee of his glory. And thus much of the
first point, which is the height of his estate; now follows the second, which
is the lowliness of his heart.

Mansuetus, meek.
This is the very receptacle and vessel whereinto God uses to power all his
graces: Humilibus dat gratiam, God gives grace to the humble: Iam. 4. Sicut
enim aqua ad loca ima, ita gratia ad corda humilia currit, says S. Augustine,
as the water runs to the lower places, so grace flows to the lowly heart.
And in his tenth book De verbis Domini speaking of Marie Magdalene, he says,
Quanto humilius sedebat, tanto amplius capiebat, the lower that she sat, the
more was her receipt of grace: at our Saviors feet she received more grace
then in the kings throne. Jacob, when he was lowest, even on the ground; and
when he was weakest, even disarmed of al his senses by sleep: then was he
greatest in Gods favor, for then he saw a ladder reaching from heaven to
earth, and the Angels descending and ascending the^upon, Genesis 28. Confluit aqua
ad humilitatis conuallem, the water flows to the lowly valleys; and therefore
high places are dry when low are full of water: light things of no worth, as
feathers, mount with the wind; but things that have substance and be of value,
as gold, lie still below on the ground. The best ears of corn bow down their
heads, but they that have nothing in them stand starting and staring bolt
upright: and the Pharisey amongst men, that braggeth of himself, is of lesser
estimation with Christ, then the Publican that beats his breast. S. Gregory
in his Pastorals, says, that pupilla oculi nigra videt, albuginem tollerans
non videt, the apple of the eye that seems black, does see; but that which
has a white filme over it, that has a pearl in it, sees not: so is it with
the eye of the soul, as it is with the eye of the body: that mind that
seems black in it own sight, that seems dark, vile and ugly of it self
to it self, that mind sees it self: if thy understanding naturally seems
dark unto thee, thy will deformed, thy affections vile and base, and thy whole
natural man ugly and corrupt in thy sight, then is the ball of thine eye
black, then see thou. But if all seem pleasant, fair and goodly, and
nothing in thy sight is amiss, then have thou a white filme drawn over thine
eye, the^ have thou a pearl in thine eye, and this precious eye with a pearl
in it sees not at all, neither it self nor any thing else, as it is in deed,
and as it ought to see it. And therefore Ptolomie well says, that inter
sapientes, sapientior qui humilior, amongst wise men, he is the wiser that is
the humbler: and the wise man says: Pro. 11. Vbi humilitas ibi sapientia,
Where there is humility there is wisdom. Scalpon the Philosopher writing to
Alexander has these words, Praesto est Deus tibi dare sapientiam: God indeed
(says he) is ready to give thee wisdom, sed non habes vbiteneas eam, cum
superbia plenus sis: but thou have not wherein to put it, seeing thou art full
of pride. And therefore Isidore he says, Descend vt ascendas, descend that
thou may ascend; be humbled that thou may be exalted: for he that
extolleth himself shall be abased, and he that exalts himself shall be
brought low. And here I pray you mark three degrees or steps of humility: the
first is subdere se maiori, nec praeferre se equali: to submit our selves unto
our betters, and not to prefer our selves before our equals, and isle, and
this is necessary to salvation. The second is subdere se aequali* nec se
praeferre minori: a man to submit himself to his equal, and not to prefer
himself before his inferiou^s, and isle, and this is abundans, this abounds.
The third is yet one d^gree further: subdere se minori, in quo esi omnis
iustitia; to submit himself to his inseriour, wherein consists ail justice.
But to come something more near to this point that we have in hand: other do
otherwise distinguish the works of humility, into these sour steps or
degrees. The first is spernere mundum, to despise the world; this is the first
step to humility: the second is* spernere nullum, to despise no man: the third
is, spernere seipsum, but to think basely of himself: the fourth is, non
spernere seipsum sperni, not to scorn that he is scorned, not to despise that
he himself is despised: and this indeed is the proper work of meekness,
which is defined by the ancient divines: Tranquilitas animi nullis molestus
irritati, Me^knesse is the quietness of a mind, that can be provoked by no
troubles to disquietnesse; and this is non spernere seipsum sperni: not to
scorn that he himself is scorned: for many can bear other troubles, as
poverty, sickness, imprisonment patiently, and some can bear reproaches and
not revile again; but he that can be contented to be contemned and scorned in
this world, he that scorneth not this, he sure is built upon a sure rock, he
has that quietness of mind that can not be disquieted; he is meek: and such
was this king, that despised not when he was despised: nay he came into the
world that he might be scorned: and yet being a king he did not destroy, but
purchased a pardon with his own heart blood, even for those that scorned him.
And such shall we be, if we humble our selves under his hand that humbled
himself for us, even unto the death, and that the death of the cross for us:
Phil. 2. 8. Mansueti dicuntur quasi manu assueti: They are said to be meek
says the Philosopher, that are brought up by the hand: and therefore repentant
sinners are said to be meek, who leaving their fierceness and naughtiness,
are converted to come unto the hands of the Lord of mercy.

Now there be two ways whereby sinners are made meek. For Albertus says,
that there be some beasts and birds as Faulcons and such like, which are made
tame, and return to the hand of their master, when they perceive and feel
some benefit, receive some meat from the hand of him that called them: and so
Christ, willing to convert sinners unto himself, leaves not off to offer his
benefits unto them, and to feed them with his own flesh and blood; and thus
he comes meek. But there be some that will not be made meek or tame, but by
blows, by whips and punishments: For the Philosopher says, lib. 8. de
animalibus, that the Elephant being taken is beaten of his rider, that he may
obey him, and thus they do tame him; his two former feet are tied hard
together until such time as he becomes tame, and quiet; and then ever after
he becomes as obedient and familiar as any dog. Now then beloved, if we be of
the nature of Elephants, stubburne and proud, and will not be tamed but by
blows, so that God to tame us is even driven as it were, to send famine, the
sword, and pestilence: the fault is not therefore in God, for he is meek; but
the fault is in our selves, for we would not regard him when he sent us his
benefiets, of peace, plenty, and health, neither would we be made tame or
become meek thereby. If therefore now in stead of peace he shall give us
war, in stead of plenty he shall send a famine, and in stead of health such
sicknesses and diseases as have not been heard of in any ages: yet is he no
changeling, but we will not be changed: O that yet ye would repent and return
unto him, and you shall try him, even yet also to be meek and gentle, to
forgive you all your sins, and to receive you into favor: and thus much of
the second part, the lowliness of his heart.

Now follows the third part, which is the use and application of both the
other, and therefore is placed in the midst between them both.

Venit tibi: Comes unto thee.
If he be a king, and be not our king, what is that to us? If he be our king,
and be not meek, what comfort is that to us? If he be a king, our king, and
meek; and yet come not unto us, what benefit have we by all this? And
therefore this venit tibi, comes unto thee is the use of all: for this causes
both our king and his meekness to be good unto us.

Venit tibi: Comes unto thee.
That is, ad vtilitatem tuam, for thy profit, he comes to thee: for thy
profit, to suffer death for thee. See here the exceeding love of our Savior,
joined with our infinite profit: Greater love has no man then this, that a
man should lay down his life for his friends: John. 15. For whereas there be
four signs to manifest our love by, the last and greatest of all is this, as
you shall see by their several examples. First love is made manifest by words,
as by signs; for when the heart is full of love, then the mouth is full of
words of love: Luke 6. Ex abundantia cordis os loquitur, Of the abundance of
the heart the mouth speaks. Secondly love is made manifest by benefits
bestowed, and this is greater then the first: for many will speak good words
and full of love, which will not perform the like in action. And therefore S.
Gregori^ says: Probatio dilectionis exhibitio est operis, the proof of a man's
good will is the bestowing of a good turn. Thirdly love is made manifest by
personal obedience, if any man for love in person does service; and this is
greater then the former: for many would be content to supply in love the want
of their friends, but not to serve in person: but Jacob served Laban seven
years for Rahel, Genesis 19. because he loved her. Fourthly, love is made
manifest by suffering adversity for the thing loved: Multi enim darent
personam suam ad seruiendum, qui non darent anima^ suam ad moriendum; says
one; Many would give their bodies to serve, who never will giu^ their lives to
die for love: and of this sign of this love, the Apostle Paul, the true
disciple of Christ speaks, 2. Cor. 12. 15. I will most gladly bestow, and
will be bestowed for you: but Christ the master of Paul and all Christians,
he has showed all these signs of his love unto his spouse, which is his
Church. For in the time of the Law and the Prophets, he showed his love by his
words: Baruch. 4. Beati sumus Israel: We are blessed o Israel, because those
things that please God are manifest to us. Secondly he showed his love by his
benefits bestowed, both in the law, before the law, and after the law: he has
given us both temporal, corporal, and spiritual blessings, and he has
promised us also celestial and heavenly benefits: Mat. 6. Thirdly he came in
person and served for us, not seven years, as Jacob did, but thirty years;
in forma serui, even in the form of a servant: Phil. 2. 8. But principally in
this place his love is set down, where he is said to come unto us, not to dine
with us, but to die for us, not to suppe with us, but to suffer for us. And
what did he come to suffer? Dura verba, duriora verbera, durissima crucis
tormenta: He came to suffer hard words, harder stripes, but the most hard and
cruel torments of the cross. Wherein as he takes infinite pains, so he does
exceeding good. For first in that he comes, he must of necessity mouere,
move toward us, and Christus est primum mobile Die, the first moveable goods
of God; and as Christ moves, so move all the spheres of the grace of God,
whether spiritual or temporal, for our good, according to our Savior Christ
his own speech in the Gospel: Primum quaerite regnum Dei, First seek the
kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and all other things shall be
cast unto you. Secondly, in that he comes unto us, he must needs remouere,
remove all those things that make a separation between him and us; for eiusdem
est remouere, cuius est mouere, it belongs unto the same to remove whose
property it is to move: as we see in the fire, it has a property to move
upward, and it has an ability to remove those things that hinder it from
moving upward, as straw, wood, stone, or whatsoever comes in the way when it
moves, by burning it remoueth: and so Christ coming unto us, that he might
move the better unto us, he has removed and broken down the partition wall of
sin, that made a separation between him and us, by dying he has taken away
the sting of death, and by descending into hell, he, the true spiritual
Sampson, has broken open and borne away the gates of hell, that he might come
unto us. Look how far the East is from the West, so far has he removed all
evil from thee, by moving, that is, by coming unto thee, if thy heart be
prepared by faith and repentance to receive him. Thirdly by coming unto us, he
does not only mouere, move over us by his protection; nor yet remouere, remove
evil from us by his power: but he does also promouere, promote, and set
forward the grace of God in us by his mercy; for therefore is he called Rex
tuus, thy king in his journey toward thee: Behold thy king comes unto thee,
that like as a king prefers his servants, so Christ prefers all
Christians that are truly so called; that is, all those that not only in name,
but in nature also resemble Christ. It is accounted in the way to preferment,
to be admitted to come to the king, and to have access unto him: but if the
king vouchsafe to come unto thee, thou shall have worship in the sight of all
the people: but if the king will vouchsafe to be thy king, and then come unto
thee, what can thou want, that thou shall not have at his hands; when he
himself is thy portion and thy possession, and comes unto thee as thy
possession for evermore?

Even so Lord Jesus come quickly. Amen.

